Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Fifth installment of Foreign Minister Josef Moravcik's </F>
"Report on the Fulfillment of Tasks of the Slovak Republic's 
Foreign Policy" presented to the Slovak parliament on 2 
February: "Slovakia in the World"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  2.4 Relations With Asian Countries </H5>
  From the viewpoint of the foreign policy interests of the 
Slovak Republic, Asia constitutes an important region with a 
growing economic potential and rising international prestige. 
The dynamic economic development of countries associated in the 
Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) opens the way for the 
formation of a dominant center of world economy in this region 
in the near future. 
  The foreign policy of the Slovak Republic in 1993 proceeded 
from this realization. Its main objective was to establish 
prerequisites for the development and a higher level of 
Slovakia's bilateral relations with major Asian countries 
(Japan, PRC, India, Republic of Korea, and the ASEAN countries), 
with emphasis being placed on the creation of suitable 
conditions for the expansion of economic cooperation and the 
influx of capital investments to Slovakia. 
  The independent Slovak Republic is a new entity in the 
international arena, one that is unknown to many Asian 
countries. Therefore, our activities at various levels were also 
aimed at creating a truthful image of the Slovak Republic, its 
foreign policy, economic orientation, and internal development 
among representatives of the Asian countries. 
  The entrepreneurial circles of Asian countries need a 
political signal to launch their activities in another country. 
In the endeavor to improve the Slovak Republic's bilateral 
relations with individual Asian countries and promote the 
activity of their entrepreneurial circles in Slovakia, we made 
use of the opportunity to organize visits at the level of the 
minister of foreign affairs, the ministers of other government 
departments, and at the parliamentary level to the countries of 
primary interest, as well as visits by representatives of these 
countries to Slovakia. 
  The foreign affairs minister of the Slovak Republic visited 
the Republic of Korea, Thailand, and Japan and the region of the 
Middle and Far East was also the destination of parliamentary 
delegations, the minister of economy, and representatives of 
financial, banking, and entrepreneurial circles. 
  Visits by Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar to the PRC and 
India 
are being prepared and should take place in 1994. 
  With a view to establishing suitable conditions for the 
expansion of economic cooperation and the influx of capital 
investments to Slovakia, we have been trying to update and 
complete the existing contractual basis, particularly in the 
sphere of agreements of economic nature (agreements on the 
protection and support of investments and on the prevention of 
double taxation). The Ministry of Foreign Affairs initiated 
with the Ministry of Finance, which acts as the coordinator of 
this type of agreements, the expeditious signing of these 
agreements with the Republic of Korea and Thailand. We are 
waiting for the Japanese side's response to our draft of an 
agreement on the support and protection of investments. A trade 
agreement with the PRC is ready to be signed. Cooperation with 
Australia developed in interaction with our expatriates [living 
in Australia]. 
  Some positive results have been achieved in relations with 
Japan, the country of the Slovak Republic's primary interest in 
the region: 
  -- the Slovak Republic was granted benefits under the 
General 
System of Customs Preferences (GSP) (April 1993), 
  -- an agreement was concluded on succession to the agreement 
on a $200 million loan in support of restructuring the economy 
of the former CSFR, of which $70 million are for the Slovak 
Republic (January 1993), 
  -- discussions took place on the provision of a Japanese 
government loan (of approximately $200 million) to finance the 
construction of ecologically compatible sources of heat and 
electricity for the Presov-Kosice area, as well as on a $33 
million loan in support of small and medium-sized businesses. 
It is expected that both loans will be granted, 
  -- cooperation between Japanese firms and Slovnaft 
Bratislava, Tesla Prievidza, and other companies in establishing 
joint ventures is developing. 
  A more effective realization of our plans in Asia would be 
aided by the completion of the network of the Slovak Republic's 
representative missions in the region, including the selection 
of high-quality staff and the appointment of ambassadors. 
  Overall, it is possible to state that the implementation of 
the Slovak Republic's foreign policy plans laid down for the 
Asian region in 1993 was successful, considering the 
possibilities available to us. The realized contacts with 
representatives of countries of our primary interest in the 
region, along with the general foreign political activities, 
contributed to the presentation of Slovakia as a stable and 
reliable partner, to the development of bilateral cooperation, 
to greater interest in Slovakia among Asian businessmen and 
investors, and, in a wider context, to reinforcing Slovakia's 
international prestige. Important political and economic 
contacts were established, including the export of special 
products to designated countries. 
  The present level of the Slovak Republic's bilateral 
relations with major Asian countries and their interest in 
Slovakia establish good prerequisites for their further 
development and diversification in 1994. 

<H5>    2.5 Relations with Middle Eastern and African States </H5>
  In the first half of 1993, main attention was paid to laying 
the foundations for a network of representative missions, 
establishing material and technical conditions for the operation 
of individual offices, and to the practical implementation of 
dividing the property of the former CSFR. We have succeeding in 
securing that our embassies are at least minimally staffed. In 
view of the economic potentials of the Slovak Republic, steps 
have been taken to establish representative missions in only the 
most important countries of the region. 
  In the political sphere, we have achieved diplomatic 
recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations with 
practically all Arab countries, with the exception of Saudi 
Arabia and Bahrain. Of the 46 states of sub-Saharan Africa, 18 
countries have recognized the Slovak Republic thus far, most of 
which are the more important countries of the region. 
  We have been developing relations with the countries of the 
Middle East and Africa in the context of the present foreign 
policy priorities and with a view to asserting our economic and 
commercial interests in this region. The realization of tasks 
associated with recovering the Slovak Republic's claims, which 
we register in a number of countries of this region, is in its 
initial stage. The Ministry of Finance is acting as the 
coordinator of this task. Several meetings of heads of 
government departments were held but it is necessary, in the 
interest of boosting our economic relations, to continue 
developing a regular political dialogue and to intensify 
contacts at government level. Toward the end of the year, we 
therefore prepared a visit by the minister of foreign affairs of 
the Slovak Republic to Israel, which will take place in January 
1994. We also regard as important the establishment of contacts 
with Egypt, which is one of the most influential states in the 
region and, at the same time, our traditional partner. 
Analogous agreements with other countries are in the 
preparatory stage and we are also establishing contacts in the 
sphere of culture and the arts. 
<H5>  2.6. Relations with the States of Latin America </H5>
  The Slovak Republic's entry into the awareness of the 
political and economic circles in the countries of Latin America 
was complicated, to a certain extent, by these circles' 
perception of the Slovak Republic as the initiator of the 
breakup of the CSFR and by the problems faced by the 
representative missions of the Slovak Republic in this region, 
particularly in the first months of the year, with regard to the 
competent presentation of the new statehood. The development of 
the Slovak Republic's relations with the countries of Latin 
America is also adversely influenced by the fact that there is 
no ambassador of the Slovak Republic operating at any 
representative mission of the Slovak Republic in Latin America 
or accredited to any country of Latin America. 
  One of the consequences of the tendency to concentrate all 
resources of the Slovak foreign service on the European region 
is the low level of diversification of our external relations. 
  It is possible to state that Slovak foreign political and 
commercial activities vis-a-vis Latin America as a whole, as 
well as vis-a-vis individual countries, have led to the 
establishment of basic contacts, which, in the period to come, 
could create realistic conditions for more intensive political, 
economic, and commercial cooperation. 
  The highest level of relations has been achieved in our 
relations with Mexico, a contribution to which was made by the 
visit paid by the minister of foreign affairs of the Slovak 
Republic to Mexico in October 1993. An honorary consulate in 
Guadalajara was opened on this occasion. 
  In the second half of the year, political dialogue with 
Brazil and Uruguay started to develop more dynamically. 
Bilateral activities have established realistic prerequisites 
for the realization of a visit by the minister of foreign 
affairs to these countries. Argentina and Chile have declared 
their interest in more intensive cooperation. The realization 
of a visit by the minister of foreign affairs of the Slovak 
Republic to Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay would raise 
the qualitative level of the Slovak Republic's relations with 
the aforementioned countries and, consequently, with the entire 
territory of Latin America. 
  The opening of honorary consulates in Brazil and Argentina 
is 
in the final phase of preparations. Negotiations on the 
conclusion of trade agreements with Cuba and Brazil are about to 
be wound up. 
  The building of a network of the Slovak Republic's 
representative missions in Latin America has not been completed 
this year and a certain makeshift arrangement persists in this 
area. A possible further restriction of our diplomatic 
representation in the Latin American region would reduce the 
volume of our political activities and cause a decline of 
commercial and economic cooperation. 
<H5>  3. Cultural Activities Abroad </H5>
  Cultural activities abroad are presently one of the key 
elements in creating Slovakia's image in the world. Therefore, 
they should become an integral part of the strategy of asserting 
the foreign political interests of our state. 
  Following the division of the premises of CSFR 
representative missions and Cultural and Information Centers, a 
vacuum in the sphere of culture and information came about, 
which is felt also by institutions and citizens in the countries 
of their operation. It is expected of us that we follow up on 
the positive traditions of our cultural activities as soon as 
possible. Therefore, our efforts in 1993 were aimed, on the one 
hand, at establishing comprehensive relations in the spheres of 
education, science, and culture and, on the other, at reviving 
the activity of Slovak cultural centers. The Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has worked out a concept for building cultural 
centers abroad, which should be put into practice in the years 
to come. Four Slovak cultural centers were in operation in 1993 
-- in Budapest, Sofia, Warsaw, and Bucharest. The cultural 
center in Budapest, in particular, is an example of the active 
and positive influence of culture on bilateral relations, even 
in a tense political situation such as prevails in relations 
with Hungary. 
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been active in preparing 
cultural agreements with individual countries that show interest 
in such cooperation and in expanding the possibilities for 
cultural, educational, and scientific exchanges. With a number 
of countries (such as Spain, Greece, Republic of South Africa, 
some Arab states, and the states of Latin America), we have been 
developing more intensive relations in these areas than in the 
political or economic spheres. 
  Societies of friendship with Slovakia operate in a number of 
countries, which also contributes to mutual knowledge and 
understanding and helps establish a good atmosphere in mutual 
relations (this applies, for example, to the Scandinavian 
countries). 
<H5>  4. The International Legal Dimension of Foreign Policy </H5>
<H5>  4.1 Sphere of International Law </H5>
  The priority task of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Slovak Republic in the sphere of international law in 1993 was 
to secure the process of the Slovak Republic's succession to 
contractual documents, to which the CSFR had been a party on 31 
December 1992. The basic condition of talks on the Slovak 
Republic's succession to bilateral international treaties was 
the attainment of agreement on which treaties would remain valid 
without modification, which would be modified, and which would 
expire without substitution. 
  Talks on succession to bilateral agreements have been wound 
up with Poland, Austria, Russia, Slovenia, Romania, Japan, 
Finland, and Norway. Talks with France, Canada, Switzerland, 
Turkey, Hungary, Bulgaria, Ukraine, and Luxembourg have been 
initiated. Talks with the FRG concerning the FRG's succession 
to treaties concluded by the former GDR are in a preparatory 
stage. 
  With regard to succession to multilateral contractual 
documents, succession to conventions concluded within the 
framework of the UN, UNESCO, the International Labor 
Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the 
International Organization for Intellectual Property, the The 
Hague Conference for International Private Law, as well as 
conventions in the sphere of international humanitarian law 
deposited in Switzerland has been comprehensively notified 
[notifikovana]. The Council of Europe has recognized a 
comprehensive succession to conventions concluded within the 
framework of this organization, the contracting party to which 
had been the CSFR. 
  The Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic, within the 
framework of its powers, has confirmed the Slovak Republic's 
succession to international documents concerning the claims and 
financial liabilities of the former CSFR. 
  Another task of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Slovak 
Republic in 1993 was the preparation of bilateral political 
treaties with Italy, Ukraine, Romania, and Russia. All these 
treaties have been signed in the course of the year. The Treaty 
on Good Neighborly Relations and Friendly Cooperation between 
the Slovak Republic and Ukraine and the Treaty between the 
Slovak Republic and Italy on Friendship and Cooperation were 
ratified by the National Council of the Slovak Republic in 
November 1993. Prerequisites exist for all the aforesaid 
treaties to go into effect in 1994. 
  In the course of the year the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
the Slovak Republic participated in the preparation of 
presidential and governmental contractual documents that were 
coordinated by other government departments. This concerns, in 
particular, the readmission agreements with Poland, Ukraine, and 
Romania [concerning the deportation of illegal immigrants], the 
treaty on state borders with Ukraine, treaties on the prevention 
of double taxation, on the support and protection of 
investments, and on trade and payments, treaties concerning road 
transport and aviation, and the like. In cooperation with other 
government departments, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Slovak Republic also participated in the preparation of the 
Slovak Republic's accession to the Council of Europe Anti-Doping 
Convention, to the European Convention on Archaeological 
Heritage, to the European Charter on Sports, or to the European 
Convention Against Spectators' Improper Conduct at Sports 
Events. In cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic 
participated in the signing of the General Convention on 
Climatic Changes and the Convention on Biological Diversity. In 
the process of preparation of international treaties by other 
government departments, the International Law Section of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic attends to 
their formal legal aspect and to their conformity with the norms 
of international contractual law. 
  One serious issue to which Slovak diplomacy has been forced 
to pay increased attention from the first days of the Slovak 
Republic's independence, and to which it must still pay 
increased attention, are the problems concerning the 
Gabcikovo-Nagymaros system of hydroelectric power projects. The 
two sides have agreed to submit the dispute to the International 
Court of Justice, the United Nations' supreme judicial body. A 
special department for the International Court of Justice has 
been set up at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The conclusion 
of a special agreement was officially announced on 2 July 1993, 
which initiated the court proceedings. A team of highly 
experienced and distinguished foreign legal experts has been set 
up to defend the interests of the Slovak Republic in this legal 
suit. In spite of the ongoing court proceedings, the Slovak 
Republic allows for the possibility of the settlement of the 
dispute on the basis of a joint agreement. 
<H5>  4.2 Consular Sphere </H5>
  In the first year of existence of the independent Slovak 
Republic, basic attributes [atributy] were laid at the Consular 
Section of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak 
Republic for a professional consular service. Basic norms 
governing the execution of consular activities were drafted and 
finetuned in this period -- the Consular Order and procedures 
for its enactment, documents that are essential to secure a 
uniform execution of consular activities at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and at representative missions of the Slovak 
Republic abroad. 
  Based on the foreign policy interests of the Slovak 
Republic, 
the main principles and orientation of visa policy were drawn up 
in 1993 (and approved by Slovak Government resolution No. 732), 
on the basis of which proposals for the modification of visa 
relations with specific states were initiated in the course of 
the year. The proposals were submitted with a view to 
preserving good political and economic relations as well as in 
the interest of developing commercial activities with specific 
states. 
  Proposals for a modification of visa relations concerned the 
following states: South Korea, Israel, Iran, Chile, Argentina, 
Cyprus, Slovenia, Croatia, Russian Federation, Belarus, Ukraine, 
Lithuania, Estonia, Hungarian Republic, and Romania. 
Negotiations with some of these states have already been 
concluded, as a result of which new agreements on visa-free 
travel have been signed (Cyprus, Slovenia) or are expected to be 
signed in the near future (Croatia). Negotiations with the 
Hungarian Republic, Lithuania, and Estonia have also been 
concluded and proposals for the conclusion of agreements on 
visa-free travel have been submitted to the leadership of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Government of the Slovak 
Republic for approval. Negotiations with the other states 
continue. 
  A document concerning the establishment of a network of 
honorary consulates of the Slovak Republic abroad was drawn up 
in 1993 and submitted to the Government of the Slovak Republic. 
Last year the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak 
Republic started building this network, in particular, in 
advanced countries, as well as in third world countries where 
the Slovak Republic does not maintain a representative mission 
and where good prospects exist, in view of traditions and actual 
potentials, for the development of cooperation in trade, 
tourism, and other areas. In addition to the two previous 
honorary consulates (Calgary and Limassol), in 1993 an honorary 
consulate was established in Guadalajara (Mexico) and nine more 
honorary consulates have been approved: Hamburg, Bombay, 
Calcutta, Drammen, Alexandria, Mestre in Italy, Barcelona, 
Vaduz, and Port Said. These consulates have not yet commenced 
their activity because they still require the other side's 
approval. In the course of December, proposals for the 
establishment of additional honorary consulates were submitted 
(Montreal, Winnipeg, Vancouver, Toronto, Reykjavik). 
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic has 
on 
record specific candidates for the post of honorary consuls. 
The selection is made in cooperation with the relevant 
representative mission. 

