BFN 

  [Text] The entire negotiations process that led to the 
transfer of power to the South African Communist Party has been 
directed by the Americans. American Ambassador Princeton Lyman 
tried -- up to the very last moment -- to remove obstacles from 
the negotiations and transfer of power. Whenever stumbling 
blocks were encountered in talks between the National Party [NP] 
and the ANC; between the NP, ANC, and the Freedom Front [FF]; or 
between the Freedom Front and the ANC, he intervened personally. 
  The agreement reached in the middle of December between 
General Viljoen, Roelf Meyer, and Thabo Mbeki regarding the 
Freedom Front Council [as received] could just not get signed. 
Gen. Viljoen asked the ANC, and then the NP, when it could be 
signed, but Roelf Meyer and Thabo Mbeki always had excuses. The 
one would suit Mbeki and not Meyer, and the next Meyer and not 
Mbeki. This had obviously been arranged. 
  Eventually Gen. Viljoen contacted Lyman to ask whether the 
ambassador couldn't do anything to save the agreement on which 
so much -- for America as well -- depended. The day was 
Wednesday, 22 April. 
  Within an hour both Meyer and Mbeki's secretaries rang Gen. 
Viljoen to inform him that the agreement could be signed the 
next morning. And so it happened. 
  From this small event four things can be deduced, observers 
say. 
  First: It is not a good omen for Gen. Viljoen ever getting 
his Homeland Council implemented. Mandela and a half a dozen of 
his assistants have often and categorically said there was no 
chance whatsoever that the ANC would cooperate to bring about an 
Afrikaner volkstaat [homeland]. What they have said about a 
volkstaat has to be taken at face value. "Over my dead body," 
were Mandela's words on more than one occasion. The NP, from De 
Klerk to Tertius Delport, has also expressed similar sentiments. 
  Second: It proves how significant the agreement on 23 April 
is regarding America's plans. Volkstaat or no volkstaat, the 
maximum of Afrikaner voters had to be drawn into the election. 
  Third: It proves how healthy the relationship between Lyman 
and Gen. Viljoen is. 
  Fourth: It shows how the negotiations process was directly 
handled and directed by Lyman. Just one word from him, and both 
Mbeki and Meyer obey at once. 

