Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Stewart Tendler and Ronald Faux: "Operation </F>
Begonia Nets Record Haul: Customs Team Seizes &pound;50 Million 
Cocaine Cargo"] 
  [Text] Customs and police investigators yesterday seized 
250kg of cocaine worth &pound;50 million which was hidden in a 
consignment of fresh flowers. 
  In a classic "sting" operation, undercover officers are 
understood to have posed as British buyers for the drug and 
travelled to Colombia. The Colombians also sent negotiators to 
meet them in Britain. According to one report, Greater 
Manchester police borrowed &pound;2 million to show the 
Colombians 
that the undercover men were acting in good faith. 
  The cocaine arrived from Amsterdam last week and is the 
largest single importation of the drug by air. Its seizure at 
Manchester airport marked the end of a four-month customs 
operation codenamed Begonia. 
  The haul was found in six boxes among a cargo of flowers. 
Neither the exporter nor the importer of the flowers knew what 
they concealed. Once the consignment landed, armed police and 
customs officers moved in to a warehouse and arrested two 
Colombians. 
  A national intelligence drive is currently monitoring 
possible Colombian drug infiltration. The national criminal 
intelligence service in London has established a database of 
suspicious sightings in Britain with the help of local police 
forces, immigration officials and customs officials. 
  Pat Cadogan, an assistant chief investigator, said 
yesterday: 
"We have broken an attempt by a major cocaine importer to set up 
a distribution network in the North West of England. We must 
have destroyed their credibility in the UK and a seizure of this 
kind must be a major setback for them." 
  The drugs came originally from traffickers based in Cali, 
which has replaced Medellin as the powerbase of the Colombian 
cartels. Customs investigators say the consignment was intended 
to be the first shipment on a regular new route. 
  Manchester is a key market for illegal drugs in Britain. 
Police and customs officers have been warning for some time that 
the Colombian gangs are testing western Europe in search of new 
markets because the United States has become saturated with 
cheap cocaine. 
  Last night, the two arrested men were being questioned by 
police and customs officers. 
  --West Country police are hunting for the source of a batch 
of tainted heroin sold on the streets of Bristol which killed 
two men and injured another four. 
  Paul Hicks, 30, died on 27 December and Reginald Phillips, 
40, collapsed last Thursday. Both suffered agonising convulsions 
and died within minutes of injecting the drug. Last weekend, 
four more drug users were rushed to hospital. 

