CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Fernando Botero Zea, principal adviser and </F>
strategist for the Samper campaign: "Why Ernesto Is Going To 
Win"] 
  [Text] It would be difficult for the overwhelming majority 
of citizens to conceive something more confusing and complicated 
than presidential elections. With what the traveling, the 
alliances, and the speechmaking, voters easily get lost amid the 
hubbub of the campaigns. When the smoke of the electoral battle 
clears, however, it becomes obvious that campaigns, here, there, 
and everywhere, boil down to three elements: party affiliation, 
the candidates' image, and their platforms. In the case of 
Colombia, an analysis of the three variables leads to a simple, 
inexorable conclusion: Ernesto Samper will be the next president 
of the republic. 
  Party affiliation: Belying all forecasts, the current 
campaign has been conducted along distinctly party lines. Carlos 
Lleras de la Fuente's entry into the Liberal primary and Alvaro 
Gomez's support for Andres Pastrana's Conservative candidacy are 
effects rather than causes of this development. In this regard, 
being the sole candidate of the Liberal Party carries a huge 
advantage. The Liberal Party encompasses almost half of the 
electorate (46 percent) and has an admirable track record of 
reforms to help the weak, young people, and women, and it has 
now set the stage for Colombia to benefit from the 
internationalization of its economy. The Liberal Party has been 
the driving force behind the major political and economic 
reforms of recent years, and another of its assets is the most 
successful and popular president in the country's recent 
history. In contrast, Pastrana's position is extremely weak. 
With the millstone of the minority party on his back, he has had 
to resort to a supraparty strategy that does not enjoy 
credibility among the public. The inadequacy of the program 
"Liberals with Andres" and the difficulty of finding a prominent 
Liberal as a running mate reflect this harsh fact. 
  The Candidates' image: Pastrana has clearly deployed all of 
his artillery in the image battlefield. Will it be enough to win 
the election? Although I am not unaware of the positive image 
that the Conservative candidate may have, there are obviously 
major obstacles to his winning the big prize this way. The polls 
and the "group sessions" are starting to point up the artificial 
streak in Pastrana's image. The transition from a former 
president's son to a supraparty candidate and the sudden 
transformation from a newscaster and rock-and-roll promoter to a 
man of substance and ideas smack of an artificiality that the 
public is readily noticing. People are increasingly of the 
opinion that Pastrana is too green to take up the most important 
job in the country. Moreover, Mayor Pastrana's image has been 
tarnished somewhat as people grow increasingly aware of two key 
blunders during his administration: the city's heavy borrowing 
(people are saying that Pastrana bankrupted the city) and 
blocking the construction of the Bogota subway. Samper has not 
devoted his life to polishing his image and therefore finds such 
an effort more difficult. In spite of the above, Samper is known 
as an experienced man who has devoted much of his public life to 
the economic and social issues that are keys to this election. 
Moreover, at this political juncture, concern for people is 
going to be a crucial factor, and in this regard Samper's social 
sensitivity, warmth, and why not come out and say it, sense of 
humor are invaluable assets. 
  The platforms: Essentially, Samper is well positioned in 
terms of his platform. He supports President Gaviria's policies 
but says that more must be done by moving from the purely 
economic phase of liberalization to the social phase. He has 
focused his campaign proposals on the issue of jobs and on 
raising the income of Colombians. These factors make Samper part 
of the worldwide trend that has recently won elections in 
countries as dissimilar as the United States, Costa Rica, 
Canada, and Chile. The difference between him and Pastrana is 
enormous. The Conservative candidate's diffuse platform 
identifies him as an extremist on liberalization; jobs do not 
have a central place in his platform, and his social proposals 
have all the overtones of the old welfare-state policies that 
are discredited around the world. In this regard Pastrana seems 
out of place and behind the times. The Conservative candidate 
has tried to correct these shortcomings in recent weeks with 
belated proposals for jobs and mass transit. The underlying 
point is this: even if Pastrana takes up Samper's issues as his 
own every time that the polls tell him to, public opinion 
believes in the Liberal candidate because of the concrete 
results that he has achieved on economic and social issues in 
settings as diverse as ANIF [National Association of Financial 
Institutions], the Senate of the Republic, the Ministry of 
Economic Development, and our embassy in Spain. 
  I have some final thoughts about political strategy. At this 
point, the big difference between Samper and Pastrana is the 
cards that each has yet to play in the electoral poker game. The 
fact is that Pastrana has used up almost all of his weapons, 
whereas Samper is holding his gun powder in reserve, dry and 
ready. Samper is still seeking the nomination, whereas Pastrana 
already has it. Samper has the Liberal Party Convention and his 
nomination as the single candidate ahead of him, whereas 
Pastrana has already been nominated by the Conservative Party. 
Samper has not yet launched his publicity campaign, whereas 
Pastrana's advertising has been on the street for a month. 
Samper has not undertaken the much needed reorganization of the 
Liberal Party or selected his vice president, whereas Pastrana, 
who has barely recovered from the setback of Alvaro Gomez's 
support, has huge difficulties ahead of him in making sure that 
his running mate is a Liberal. So when the political battle 
intensifies, Samper will have a large reserve of ammunition, 
whereas Pastrana has, in essence, used up most of his weapons. 
  For all of the above reasons, this election is, as the 
Liberal candidate's publicity proclaims, simultaneously the 
people's day and Samper's day. 

