BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Miladin Khadzhikonstantinov: "How Our Border </F>
Became Diplomats' Favorite Place"] 
  [Text] If silence was golden, the Foreign Ministry's safes 
would look like the Bulgarian National Bank vaults. 
  A strange bustle of foreign diplomats has been evident along 
our southern border in the last months. They like the Arda 
River bed and the location near Ivaylovgrad most of all. 
  At various times and for various reasons this beautiful 
Bulgarian corner was visited in only one year by former U.S. 
Ambassador Hugh Kenneth Hill, British Ambassador Sir Richard 
Thomas, several French diplomats, and Erduan Odabash [name as 
transliterated], Turkish consul in Plovdiv. 
  The record holder is perhaps Funda Tezok [name as 
transliterated], Turkey's general consul, who knows all the 
mayors in the area. 
  Sometimes, the diplomats travel with the necessary permits 
from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Internal Affairs. 
However, sometimes it appears that they have never heard about 
such documents. 
  The problem, as all problems, has several aspects. First, 
one must note the habits of the foreign diplomats who undertake 
the shuttle along the border, especially those of the 12 EC 
states, who are not used to border bureaucracy. The word border 
is alien to them. It does not appear in their modern 
dictionaries, and they cannot imagine the concept of a border. 
Sometimes they err precisely because of their habits. 
  Perhaps such was the case with the French military attache 
in 
Sofia and two companions, who were accidentally stopped by a 
police patrol prior to entering Ivaylovgrad. 
  The French are certainly fans of the excellent Ivaylovgrad 
wine. Perhaps, they were also enchanted by the wonderful 
landscape and headed off for a weekend without the necessary 
permits. This is normal, and the fact that the French citizen 
in question was a military attache could be accepted as 
accidental. 
  However, is it normal that our Foreign Ministry did not say 
a 
single word about the unexpected visit to Ivaylovgrad? This was 
more than two weeks ago. 
  According to the 1961 Vienna Convention, foreign diplomats 
who want to visit restricted border areas must have special 
permits from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Internal 
Affairs. 
  Greek Military Attache Stelos Kastrandos [name as 
transliterated] obtained such permits prior to his visit to the 
Momchilgrad border unit. However, precisely when the Greek 
diplomats was talking with the unit commander, Colonel Angel 
Krivorov, the French culture attache, Jean-Jean Paysan, was 
roving near Benkovski village. He was there for a normal and 
logical reason -- the Muslims celebrated their Ramadan-Bayram. 
  This is fine, but why were the authorities not informed 
about 
the distinguished guest's visit? Neither Mayor Menderes nor the 
police knew about Mr. Paysan's visit. 
  Since there are relevant international agreements and the 
visits of foreign diplomats are subjected to certain 
regulations, it is logical to ask whether a law has been 
violated. 
  If there is no violation, the Foreign Ministry must calm 
everyone and officially announce that the diplomatic visits to 
the border regions are normal goodwill visits that do not 
threaten the country's security. 
  However, if this is an inadmissible interference in the 
country's internal affairs, why is the Foreign Ministry keeping 
silent? The normal interpretation of this should be that if the 
Foreign Ministry is keeping silent it means that nothing unusual 
or irregular has happened. Simply, the Vienna Convention has 
become an obsolete and expendable bureaucratic remnant of the 
Cold War. 
  In addition, if there is nothing irregular, then why did 
Khaskovo Oblast Administrator Tenyu Delchev request the 
Presidency and the government to announce that every visit of a 
foreign diplomat along the border must be accompanied by a 
representative of the local administration? 
  The request has been supported by the oblast administrators 
of Plovdiv, Ruse, and Lovech. 
  The silence, called diplomatic tact at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, has often caused us troubles. Let us recall 
the silence that facilitated the tearing down of the 100-year 
old Bulgarian school in Istanbul. And let us not mention the 
Euro-observers along our western border, who were accused by our 
border guards of "collecting illegal information regarding the 
protection of our border." In other words, the Euro-observers, 
frankly, were spying. The Foreign Ministry kept silent for a 
while, and then conveyed a protest note to the Euro-observers. 
  If we could rely on the tradition, we must admit that when 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs keeps silent a blunder is behind 
this silence. 

