Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sanaa, Feb 26 (AFP)--Southern troops are preparing 
for a major offensive to capture the strategic town of Qa'tabah, 
a spokesman of the northern General People's Congress (GPC) 
Party charged Saturday. 
  "The YSP (Yemen Socialist Party) has massed troops and heavy 
weapons near the former border," which used to divide the former 
North and South Yemen republics before they united in May 1990, 
the spokesman told AFP. 
  "Their forces are getting ready to capture the strategic 
town 
of Qa'tabah, whose occupation would allow them to enter Ibb," a 
city deeper inside the northern region, he charged. 
  The YSP "seeks to trigger a full-blown war," he charged. 
  President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih's GPC -- which ruled the 
former North Yemen -- and Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid's YSP 
-- which ruled the South -- decided to share power upon 
unification, but they have not merged armies. 
  The GPC spokesman accused the YSP of sending several tanks, 
37 Russian-made armoured vehicles and nearly thirty 36 
millimeter (1.44 inch) guns to 'Awabil, Shi'b al-Khanaq and 
Jahaf provinces, adjoining the former border. 
  The southern party on Friday distributed 3,000 light weapons 
to its militiamen in these provinces, he added. 
  The YSP has also bought from Bulgaria several fighter 
aircraft that landed in the past few days in the southern 
airports of Aden, capital of the former South Yemen, and 
al-Rayan, he said. 
  Tens of tons of military uniforms, tents and blankets were 
unloaded lately in the airport of Hadhramaut Province, 500 
kilometers (300 miles) north east of Aden, he said. 
  Salih and al-Bid have been locked in a political showdown 
since August, when al-Bid refused to take up his duties as vice 
president in the capital Sanaa, in the north, demanding major 
economic, political and security reforms. 
  A reconciliation agreement signed on February 20 by Salih 
and 
al- Bid in Amman has failed so far to end the crisis as nearly 
20 soldiers have been killed in clashes between rival army units 
since then. 
  Yemeni Minister of Defense Haytham Qasim al-Tahir, a 
southerner, on Friday said the military commission in charge of 
implementing the security measures agreed upon in Amman has 
failed to stop escalation. 

