Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by XINHUA reporters Wang Haizheng (3769 3189 1767) </F>
and Li Pei (2621 3805): "Walk Out of the Basin To Join in the 
Orderly Flow -- Sichuan Deputies Freely Discuss the `Wave of 
Laborers'"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 17 Mar (XINHUA) -- Last year, 5 million 
peasant laborers from Sichuan remitted more than 5 billion yuan 
to the "land of plenty" after a year's hard work. 
  Xie Shijie, secretary of the Sichuan Provincial Party 
Committee and a deputy to the Second Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress [NPC], told the reporters: Premier 
Li Peng's government work report stated: A rational flow of 
labor is an objective requirement for and an inevitable trend in 
economic development. We should actively steer this flow and 
strengthen our management in an organized and step-by-step 
fashion. Premier Li Peng's remarks are amply correct. A 
rational and orderly flow of labor, rather than a haphazard and 
unrestrained one, will not only satisfy the demands of 
economically developed regions but will also help people in less 
developed regions cast off poverty and become well-to-do. 
Sichuan is a densely populated farming province with 93 million 
peasants. In carrying out rural work, Sichuan should develop 
village and town enterprises and export labor services while 
stabilizing grain output, increasing revenue, and making 
structural readjustments. What we need to do is to provide 
active guidance and intensify our efforts to manage and serve 
the labor market. 
  In recent years, the massive flow of surplus rural labor to 
the cities turned into a "wave of laborers," gradually becoming 
one of the hot topics of concern to people in all circles. Some 
deputies from Sichuan said: The "wave of laborers" has indeed 
created strong pressure for railways, public security, 
communications, and labor departments. However, this is a 
problem that has surfaced in the course of reform and 
development and should therefore be solved through the means of 
reform and development. We should provide guidance through such 
measures as speeding up communications and urban construction 
projects, developing small towns, and improving rules and 
regulations governing labor markets and related matters. 
  Sichuan Governor Xiao Yang said: Large labor-exporting 
counties that each provide more than 100,000 laborers and earn 
100 million yuan have sprung up in Sichuan Province. Every 100 
outbound laborers can help one village cast off poverty. Rural 
laborers working outside the province can save grain, earn 
money, and even "be educated" in that they bring back technology 
and information; some of them even set up enterprises after 
returning to their hometowns. Regions that bring in such 
laborers gain even more benefits because the laborers help fill 
the "gap" in their work forces, lower production costs, and 
accelerate economic development. This is the "third wave" of 
rural labor migrating to other regions since the promotion of 
the household contract responsibility system with remuneration 
linked to output and the ascendancy of village and town 
enterprises. Some deputies maintained: Compared to the 
"journey to the Northeast" and the "trip through the western 
gateway of the Great Wall," today's "wave of laborers" is no 
longer a flight from famine to eke out a living elsewhere but an 
"offensive" launched of the laborers' own accord in the quest 
for a comparatively comfortable living standard. Deputy Zuo 
Mingzhong said: "Peasant laborers, peasant laborers! They have 
contributed to reform. [no closing quotation marks as received] 
In dealing with the "wave of laborers," we should follow the 
example of Li Bing [an ancient water conservancy expert] and his 
son in repairing the Dujiang Weir, properly steering the wave to 
ensure that it will become a rational and orderly flow, rather 
than a haphazard and unrestrained one. 

