BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sulayman Nimr and Muhammad 'Allam: "Sanaa Accepts </F>
Arab Mediation, With Conditions"] 
  [Excerpts] Riyadh, Sanaa, Aden, Cairo -- The war between 
Yemen's two armies turned yesterday into a war of positions, 
despite the statements issued by the two sides, which are both 
claiming advances. Independent sources say that the fighting is 
now taking place in Abyan Governorate and on the fringes of 
Lahij Governorate. Efforts to resolve the crisis have now moved 
to the political level as a result of the military deadlock, as 
Sanaa has for the first time openly announced its acceptance of 
Arab mediation, "provided it is based on respect for 
constitutional legitimacy." 
  Latest reports received from the Yemeni capital said that 
fierce fighting is taking place in al-'Anad, some 50 km from 
Aden. 
  In the framework of political moves, Shaykh 'Abdallah 
Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar, speaker of the Yemeni House of 
Representatives, and Development and Planning Minister Dr. 
'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani arrived in Riyadh yesterday, while 
Foreign Minister Muhammad Salim Basindwah went to Cairo. The 
Arab League has announced its willingness to send a delegation 
to Sanaa. 
  Al-Iryani told AL-HAYAH that his country is not turning down 
any Arab mediation to stop the ongoing fighting in Yemen. He 
said that "Sanaa is not turning down Arab mediation, but it 
rejects any military intervention or the dispatch of Arab 
disengagement forces." He pointed out that "an acceptable 
mediation must recognize existing constitutional legitimacy in 
Yemen" -- a reference to the necessity to recognize President 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih's leadership of unified Yemen. Asked 
whether the Yemeni leadership is willing to engage in a dialogue 
with the Yemeni Socialist Party leadership in south Yemen, Dr. 
al-Iryani said: "We are willing to engage in a dialogue with 
them, provided they recognize constitutional legitimacy, 
existing constitutional institutions, and a unified command for 
the Yemeni Army." 
  He pointed out that "the current problem lies in the 
existence of two commands for the Yemeni Army, hence two armies 
in one country." He said that "the ruling leadership in Yemen 
has no objection to an Arab mediation with the other party to 
the Yemeni crisis, but within the framework of recognizing the 
legitimacy of the current ruling executive authority, which was 
elected in accordance with constitutional foundations in the 
country." On the dismissal of Prime Minister Dr. Haydar 
Abu-Bakr al-'Attas, Dr. al-Iryani said that the prime minister 
has not been dismissed. He has been suspended in accordance 
with Article 111 of the Constitution. He pointed out that 
"dismissing the government or its head requires legislative 
measures in the House of Representatives, and the legislature, 
the House of Representatives, has -- as a result of current 
conditions -- authorized the executive authority to take 
appropriate measures to deter the separatists." 
  He reemphasized that the "legitimate and constitutional 
leadership in Sanaa is willing to engage in a dialogue with the 
other side and to make contacts with it. But we want that side 
-- before anything else -- to recognize the existence of a 
unified leadership for Yemen and the Yemeni Army." 
  He denied that his statement means a change in the position 
of the Yemeni leadership in Sanaa, as it -- through President 
'Ali Salih -- had turned down Arab mediation. He said that his 
government agreed to receive an Arab League delegation, "which 
is on its way to Sanaa" to hold talks with the legitimate and 
constitutional leadership. He pointed out that the rejection 
was of a mediation and dialogue based on the existence of two 
legitimate leaderships in the country. [passage omitted] 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Dali, member of the YSP Political 
Bureau, has said that referring the Yemeni crisis to the 
Security Council is now left to the states concerned and their 
assessment of the deteriorating situation and its threat to 
world security. He pointed out that "military operations have 
negated the belief that the crisis is an internal affair." 
  In a statement to AL-HAYAH in Cairo yesterday, al-Dali urged 
the Gulf states "to intervene to secure a cease-fire in Yemen," 
and the brothers in the north "to return to the negotiating 
table." He accused Arab states of sending elements to fight 
alongside northern forces. 
  Al-Dali, who, because of military operations, has been 
forced 
to stay in Cairo, welcomed the call by President Mubarak and his 
Yemeni opposite number, Salih, to halt haphazard attacks on 
innocent civilians. He stated that the YSP will refer the 
matter to international and human rights organizations. He said 
that "the YSP has informed Arab states of the attacks on 
innocent civilians, urging their leaders to intervene." He 
added that "northern forces have shelled villages and civilians 
in al-Dali' area with Howitzers." He stressed that "the YSP 
will not keep silent. It will refer the matter to the 
international community and international human rights 
organizations." 
  Al-Dali urged the brothers in the north "to stop the 
bloodshed and return to the negotiating table." He also urged 
Arab and Gulf states to play a role in ending the crisis. He 
said: "As the fighting is still continuing, mediation has not 
been overtaken by events. The Gulf states still have a role to 
play." He stressed that "with the breakout of fighting, the 
issue is no longer an internal affair." Foreign influences on 
military operations "negate the belief that the crisis is purely 
a Yemeni affair." [passage omitted] 

