CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of interview with Silvije Degen, president of the </F>
Party of Socialists of Croatia, by Jovo Paripovic; place and 
date not given: "Tudjman Is Not Croatia, Nor Is Milosevic 
Serbia"] 
  [Text] Silvije Degen, president of the Party of 
Socialists of Croatia [SSH], is said in Zagreb to be one of the 
most charismatic figures on the Croatian political scene. He was 
a candidate for president in the recent elections in that 
republic. His involvement on all sides is more important than 
that. As a lawyer he seems not to have missed a single important 
trial in the former Yugoslavia. A fighter for human rights and 
freedom of public speech, he refers to the law-governed state as 
his basic objective, and from that follows the social welfare 
state, but not the one in which there is absolute equality of 
all people, but a legal and social equality within which every 
member of that state can achieve equal rights with equal work. 
  Silvije Degen is a descendant, as he likes to say, of a 
woman nostalgic for Austro-Hungary, and he comes from a family 
of "traditional urban leftists," so that he too is today on the 
Croatian left, but some people are inclined to say that he is a 
member of the so-called "fundamental left." Such people like it 
that his socialist ideas date from before Bolshevism and 
nationalism. That is why we began our interview with the 
question: What are the chances of the left in Croatia? 
  [Degen] The greatest need of the Croatian state as a whole, 
but likewise of every one of its citizens individually (except 
those who like things the way they are), is to finally bring 
about a more just society, true democracy, the rule of law, 
order, and security. That alone is sufficient for the conclusion 
that the left has great opportunities. 
  According to our assessment, a strong and clearly defined 
leftist party would today have no particular problem getting 30 
percent of the electorate. In its actions the present Croatian 
Government is doing everything to increase that percentage. Not 
only has it cast on the backs of the people who live from their 
wages and pensions, that is, from their labor, the entire burden 
of financing the war, but it has also made it possible for a 
small group of people from within the country and abroad to 
become rich at their expense. 
<H5>  The Disunited Left </H5>
  [Paripovic] Do you mean that life is difficult in Croatia? 
That the state is the one that in a sense is plundering its 
citizens? 
  [Degen] A foreign journalist recently asked me how people 
can 
survive at all with that kind of income. I replied that in 
Croatia people are not living, but merely surviving. He then 
asked me whether people are selling the "family silver" to buy 
food. I replied that the state has taken away from its citizens 
the "family jewels," that is, the economy, which was built over 
decades and is now being sold off for a song to the new rich, 
and then they call it privatization. That cannot be justified in 
terms of the war, nor the displaced persons, nor the threat to 
the Croatian state of the Serbian rebellion. Quite the opposite. 
This will in fact be demonstrated in the very next election in 
Croatia. 
  [Paripovic] There is ferment on the left, and there have 
been 
various games. How much will all that help, and how much will it 
hurt the Croatian left in taking its place on the political 
scene, which in your assessment offers exceedingly good 
opportunities? 
  [Degen] In Croatia today the left organized in parties is 
weak and disunited. I personally think that the ferment you 
mentioned (and those who wish can even refer to it as games) has 
been extremely worthwhile. It results in clearer definition of 
the parties, with each passing day it is becoming clearer who is 
for what, and that is making it easier for people to make a 
choice. This is a normal consequence of the changes and of the 
stratifications that have occurred in society. The party in 
power has define itself as the party of primitive accumulation, 
that is, as the advocate of the stratum that is enriching itself 
without any restraint and without any concern for the victims. 
The left must also defined itself from scratch. The worst-case 
scenario would be for everything to remain as it has been up to 
now. 
  [Paripovic] Mika Tripalo is spoken of as a man who would 
stand at the head of a united left. He himself sees the problem 
of how to create that united "left-wing bloc." How do you look 
on that? 
  [Degen] That problem has been overcome. We tried to unite 
all 
the left-wing parties -- I personally worked very hard on that 
--but without success. We were thwarted along the way by certain 
personal interests (usually referred to as "interests of 
leaders"), but also objectively by differing views of the policy 
which should be conducted. That is the reason for a certain 
polarization within the SDP [Party of Democratic Reform] 
(Racan's party -- author's note) and within the SDU [Social 
Democratic Union] (Horvat's party -- author's note). As things 
stand now, there could be a rallying of a substantial portion of 
people around the SSH, which I head. That is also the choice of 
Mika Tripalo, an honorable man, I repeat, who has great 
intellectual power and an indisputable reputation, who has been 
and has remained a true leftist regardless of his difficult 
experiences in life and politics. His commitment will help many 
people in Croatia to make a choice. 
<H5>  The Traps of Nationalism </H5>
  [Paripovic] If there is a unification of the left headed by 
Tripalo, what is the fate of Racan and the SDP? 
  [Degen] The Croatian voters will answer that in the next 
election. In the first election in 1990, in spite of all the 
communist baggage, the SDP got almost 30 percent of the vote. 
Two years later, it got between 5 and 6 percent. But that did 
not impact them in such a way as to change their timid policy of 
a "self-denying opposition" -- that is Racan's expression 
--which guards the government from itself, instead of fighting 
for the interests of its voters. I think that true leftists and 
sober people, and there are many of them in the SDP, have good 
reason to fear the next election. 
  [Paripovic] Socialists who have declared themselves to be a 
"left-wing force" are in power in Serbia. How willing are you to 
talk with those left-wing forces? What in general is your view 
of a linkup of left-wing forces on the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia? 
  [Degen] The Serbian "socialists" are a party of war, of 
conquest, of blood and soil, and I do not see what I would have 
in common with them. In their arrogant plundering of their own 
citizens, they are much closer to the party in power in Croatia. 
I do not know Slobodan Milosevic's wife and her party, and I 
have no desire to. I am not willing to talk to them, at least 
not on terms of a leftist with leftists. In any case we have 
good and strong relations with many socialists in the world as 
well as with the Socialist International. We also have constant 
contacts with left-wing parties from the states which were 
formerly parts of Yugoslavia, for example, with the Bosnian 
Social-Democrats. We will certainly have contacts with the 
Serbian parties when the war ends, when there is mutual 
recognition (including internationally recognized borders), when 
the displaced persons are returned to their homes, and when real 
left-wing parties appear on the scene in Serbia. 
  [Paripovic] Croatia is having a hard time ridding itself of 
certain symbols which remind the objective observer of an 
unpleasant past, and fanatics are justifying themselves in terms 
of tradition and everything else. How do you look on the return 
of the kuna, the obstinacy concerning the Square of the Victims 
of Fascism, the renaming of streets, and the building of the 
"Altar of the Homeland" on Medvednica? 
  [Degen] In phrasing the question, you fell into a trap and 
equated Croatia with the party in power, or, more accurately, 
with the radical nationalistic segment of that party and with 
President Tudjman. They are not Croatia, just as Milosevic and 
his group are not Serbia. However, they are still strong enough 
to impose their will. But even when it comes to symbols, we 
should not fall into the traps of nationalism with the opposite 
sign. Croatia should not give up the checkerboard flag because 
it was flown by the ustasha criminals in a horrible period (not 
just "unpleasant"). Nor, certainly, will Serbia give up its 
historic crest because many chetnik crimes have now been 
committed under it. There is another thing in the examples which 
you have mentioned. I will repeat what I said in the speech at 
the citizens rally in Zagreb commemorating Victory Day (9 May). 
I referred to taking away the name of the Square of Victims of 
Fascism, 8 May Street (the date of Zagreb's liberation), the 
destruction of antifascist monuments, and so forth, and I quote, 
as "a barbaric act of the primitives in power." In speaking 
against the kuna [marten], I said in figurative terms that it is 
the "smallest but bloodthirstiest mammal on the globe." What 
else did you mention? The Altar of the Homeland? Let's get 
serious. The Croatian public is horrified at that and is 
laughing at it. 
<H5>  [Box, p 9] </H5>
<H5>  The HDZ Spirit Will Not Last </H5>
  [Paripovic] The Social Democrats are in power in Europe, 
from 
Sweden southward through the continent. Will Social Democracy 
take advantage of the opportunity, or will the forces of the 
nationalistic bloc succeed in taking the people to the other 
side once again? 
  [Degen] It will not succeed. That is clear even now in 
Croatia. Provided of course that the state of war really comes 
to an end and the feeling of the national threat really 
diminishes. But even now there is a fierce stratification taking 
place. Even on the Croatian right they are divided over the 
question of whether introducing the law-governed state can be 
postponed until internationally recognized Croatian borders are 
established. "And what will there be until then? the HDZ 
spirit?" That was the reaction of one of the leaders of the new 
party that has arisen in the bosom of the HDZ [Croatian 
Democratic Union]. Croatia of course has the well-known problems 
of freedom of the media, equality of parties on the public 
scene, the election law -- but all that will not stand in the 
way of the changes which are inevitable. 

