BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Arben Karapici] </F>
  [Text] [Announcer] Radio Tirana has today received a 
press communique from the Greek Embassy. Regarding this, our 
reporter Arben Karapici has prepared the following report: 
  [Karapici] Three days after a hostile incursion of Greek 
military forces into the barracks in the village of Peshkepi, 
which resulted in two Albanian officers being shot dead and 
three wounded, the Greek Government has tried to convey only 
regret for the victims. This is expressed in a press release 
distributed today by the Greek Embassy in Tirana. 
  In a totally unacceptable way, the document rejects the full 
responsibility that the Greek Government bears with regard to 
this act of anti-Albanian state terror. The Greek press release 
pretends that the executive power in Athens has only Albanian 
protest notes, which it claims are insufficient to verify the 
facts and reach a conclusion. 
  Formulating the only official stance issued so far, the 
document distributed by the Greek diplomatic representation adds 
that its government is not prepared to accept any accusations 
and considers them as baseless. The communique is silent about 
the fact that it is now accepted in Athens that there exists a 
terrorist organization acting under the name of the Northern 
Epirus Liberation Front that carried out the anti-Albanian 
terrorist attack last Sunday. This was made known by 
ELEVTHEROTIPIA itself, one of the largest and most widely read 
newspapers in Athens. 
  Anyway, the criminal hand of the Greek state's terrorist 
acts 
against Albania and the Albanian people should be cut off, and 
only the government of Andreas Papandreou can do this. 
  The members of the terrorist group who violated Albanian 
territory and shed Albanian blood were wearing Greek Army 
uniforms. In the same uniform there are a commander, a chief of 
staff, and a defense minister. Together with and alongside them 
stands the clergy of (Fanar) and Hellenistic (Asfavi) [not 
further specified], because, according to the Constitution of 
the Republic of Greece, the church and the state are one and 
indivisible. 

