BFN 

    [Editorial report] Tripoli Voice of Greater Arab Homeland 
in Arabic at 1140 GMT on 29 May broadcasts a 
four-and-a-half-minute item on a recent AIDS report published by 
the World Health Organization, about the number of people 
infected worldwide and saying that 40 million people will 
contract the disease by the end of this century. The report 
recalls Libya's proposal to the United Nations to set up a world 
fund to combat AIDS. It says the United States has the highest 
number of AIDS cases, giving the number of cases and deaths 
there. 
  Hence, the extent of the danger of this disease on human 
life 
in general becomes clear. It is a disease that has resulted 
from secret bacterial tests conducted by the CIA on a number of 
prisoners. Soon after, the disease spread all over the world 
and human beings were dying without any hope of halting its 
spread or eliminating it. Many studies and reports have proved 
this crime, which the CIA committed against humanity when it 
interfered in the science of genetics and tested the results of 
its research on those prisoners. Some of the prisoners died and 
others left prison and carried the epidemic to the streets where 
it later found its way to the whole world. 
  In order to get rid of the consequences of this crime, the 
United States claimed that the disease had come from Zaire and 
other African countries, while in reality it has been an 
American disease from the start. 
  Some sources have revealed that the United States founded a 
laboratory in Maryland in 1977, where bacterial tests were 
carried out on prisoners. The first case of AIDS was recorded 
in 1979. Three years later, similar cases appeared in Europe and 
Africa. 
  Hence, on the threshold of the 21st century, humanity finds 
itself facing a fatal disease that has no known treatment 
because of U.S. manipulation in the science of genetics and 
toxic bacteria. 
  However, and despite all this, the project that the Great 
Jamahiriyah presented to the United Nations brings a glimpse of 
hope for humanity in order to intensify its efforts to confront 
this epidemic, relinquish armaments and destructive arms 
arsenals owned by the great powers, and pay attention to this 
danger that is threatening its sons and humanity as a whole. 

