Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rolando Fernandez] </F>
  [Text] Baguio City -- Former rebel priest Conrado Balweg 
has agreed to return all firearms issued by the government to 
the Cordillera People's Liberation Army [CPLA] but he stood firm 
in his position that any integration of his group in the 
military or police should be within the law. 
  Balweg, who heads one faction of the CPLA, held marathon 
meetings here Wednesday and yesterday with Interior Secretary 
Rafael Alunan III and military officials in the region. 
  "I am willing to integrate as long as it is within the 
context of Executive Order [EO] 220," said Balweg. 
  EO 220, which was signed by President Aquino in July 1987, 
created the Cordillera Administrative Region. Among other 
things, it mandates the creation of a regional security force to 
help in the defense and security of the region. 
  Balweg said this provision of the law has not been 
implemented. 
  A group that split from Balweg early this year has started 
training in Camp Aquino in Tarlac for integration in the 
military as a part of the Civilian Armed Forces Geographical 
Unit (Cafgu). 
  The splinter group is headed by lawyer Joel Obar, head of 
the 
Cordillera Bodong Administration and Mayor Mailed Molina of 
Bucloc, Abra. 
  But Balweg questioned the formation of the group, saying 
that 
"it was outside the law and was only creating confusion and 
disunity in the region." 
  According to him, of the 303 supposed CPLA men training in 
Camp Aquino, only 17 are active members. 
  "Kung may kaguluhan ngayon, ang may kagagawan niyan sila. 
(If there is confusion now, they should be the ones to blame)," 
he said. 
  Balweg agreed to return all firearms issued to his group 
when 
it broke away from the New People's Army [NPA] and signed a 
peace agreement with the Aquino Government at the Mount Data 
Lodge in Bauko, Mountain Province, on 13 September 1986. 
  He said he was waiting for the list of CPLA men who were 
given firearms. 
  "I told Alunan that they should give me the list so I can 
help them locate these. Dahil malinaw naman sa akin na hiram 
'yan (It's clear to me these firearms were loaned to us)," he 
said. 
  Balweg said 50 Armalite rifles were donated to the CPLA by 
the Aquino Government in 1988 as a commitment to the 
implementation of EO 220, specifically on the formation of the 
regional security force. 
  In 1989 when the NPA intensified its armed attacks against 
the CPLA, Balweg requested for additional 200 Armalite rifles. 
But he said when the 200 firearms were delivered, only 100 were 
individually given to CPLA men in the field. The 100 firearms 
included M-14 and Garand rifles, he added. 
  "Ang gusto kong malaman kung 200 o 100 ang naibigay sa CPLA 
(I want to know if 200 or 100 were given to the CPLA)," Balweg 
said, adding that he has instructed his men in the field to 
return all firearms issued by the government. 
  Balweg earlier threatened to go back to the hills when the 
government insisted that the CPLA return the firearms loaned to 
the former rebels. 
  On the request for his group to vacate the Cordillera House 
here where he and the Cordillera Bodong Administration hold 
office, Balweg said Alunan had agreed to allow them to stay. 
The Cordillera House is across the Mansion House, the 
presidential summer residence. 

