BFN 

<F P=106> [Discussion from Tokyo Experts' Symposium organized by </F>
YOMIURI SHIMBUN attended by Sophia University Professor Shoichi 
Watanabe; Nomura Research Institute Director Yoshio Suzuki; 
Takeshi Noda, Liberal Democratic Party Diet member; Keio 
University Associate Professor Heizo Takenaka; and International 
Christian University Professor Roger Buckley; moderated by 
Broadcast Education Development Center Director Hidetoshi Kato; 
held at Aoyama Gakuin University Research Institute on 20 April: 
"What Should the United States and Japan Reform?"] 
  [Text] [Kato] Both the United States and Japan are 
approaching turning points in many different areas such as the 
economy, politics, government, and education reform. Domestic 
and bilateral issues for the United States and Japan will be the 
main subjects of our discussion here. But, the U.S.-Japan 
relationship will undoubtedly have an influence on other 
countries in the world. Keeping that point in mind, I would like 
to encourage our discussion. 
<H5>  Consideration Must Also Be Given to "Security" -- Roger </H5>
Buckley 
  [Buckley] From an outsider's point of view, I would like to 
make three short proposals, or policy suggestions: 
  First, to think from a historical perspective. Second, to 
have greater political insight. Third, to have vision on a 
global scale. 
  We must first consider everything from an historical 
perspective. As for the discussion on U.S.-Japan relations, a 
disproportionately large amount of interest is being paid to 
such issues as the latest trade statistics, economic news, 
finance, and so on. 
  I am afraid that a clear understanding of the origin and 
development of their relationship is totally missing in both 
countries. Even students at the International Christian 
University (ICU) and Tokyo University, where I teach, have very 
little understanding and recognition of the development of 
U.S.-Japanese relations. We should be worried and concerned 
about such a lack of knowledge. If people do not recognize how 
things evolve, we risk the danger that some specific interest 
groups could capture the heart of the masses. Needless to say, 
the responsibility of the mass media and educational systems in 
both countries is vitally important in this regard. 
  Second, I want to suggest that people think matters over 
with 
greater political emphasis. They should not just be concerned 
about trade friction but should think in terms of the larger 
framework, that is security. 
  It should be recognized, especially in the United States, 
that the U.S.-Japan relationship is basically the product of the 
Cold War, and beyond that, the pacific war. The security aspect 
has always been at the center of the alliance relationship. And 
today, when the international environment has drastically 
changed, leaders must be able to prove that it is still correct 
to continue this relationship. To do that, substantial thought 
and political will must be present in both countries. 
  Third, I propose that thinking be on a global scale. This 
alliance relationship casts a great influence over every country 
in the world. And, I am worried this is not fully recognized. 
The European Union (EU) is extremely apprehensive that, when 
bilateral negotiations between the United States and Japan take 
place, third parties may be shut out and not given equal 
treatment. In Northeast Asia, U.S.-Japan relations will have a 
great effect on the Korean peninsula. Recently, I heard from 
many Korean scholars that the Korean economy will be gravely 
affected unless the United States and Japan somehow manage 
issues which lie between them. The current U.S.-Japan 
relationship may be said to have been constructed after the war 
by U.S. Secretary of State Dulles and Prime Minister Yoshida, 
but it was modeled on the Anglo-Japanese alliance concluded in 
1902. The Anglo-Japanese alliance collapsed a generation later. 
The United States and Japan must somehow transcend the past. 
  [Suzuki] What is the problem with the Japanese economic 
policy? A very high savings rate is characteristic of the 
Japanese economy. The personal savings rate is about 15 
percent. This is exceedingly high among developed countries. 
Five percent is spent on housing investment and the remaining 
10 percent is kept as excess savings. During the high-growth 
period, enterprises borrowed these excess savings for use in 
modernization investment. 
  When the high-growth period ended, business investment 
declined and savings went up. In the latter half of the 1970's, 
a large amount of deficit-offsetting national bonds were issued 
and absorbed these savings to prevent recession. 
  Then the fiscal imbalance worsened greatly, so that by the 
early 1980's, even the public sector no longer could absorb 
domestic savings. Then, the only remaining channel for excess 
personal savings, which is as much as 10 percent of the gross 
national product (GNP), became the overseas sector. That is the 
fundamental reason why Japan started steadily running up a 
current account surplus from the early 1980's. 
  The exchange rate which was Y [yen] 240 to $1 at the time of 
the Plaza Accord (1985) is now Y103 to $1. Even with the 
appreciation of the yen to such a degree, the surplus has not 
decreased. Based on surveys of savings motives, it is clear 
that people are saving for specific purposes such as "housing," 
"living expenses in old age," and "education and wedding funds 
for children." 
  They save because they feel uncertain about their future. 
The money saved is not spent within Japan, so the current 
account surplus accumulates. Because the surplus accumulates 
the yen keeps appreciating, and a recession which is caused by 
the high yen occurs. Uncertainty about unemployment and 
bankruptcy appears. The Japanese industries shift their 
production bases to overseas, and industry faces the danger of 
hollowing. The people save even more because they feel 
uncertain. An economic policy with the definite intention of 
pulling the Japanese economy out of this vicious circle was 
needed, but this realization came extremely slowly. 
  However, the Hiraiwa Report submitted by the "Economic 
Reform 
Research Council," a private advisory body to Prime Minister 
Hosokawa, of which I was a member, finally focused on that 
point. Just what is wrong with the Japanese economic system? 
To the United States, it seems that policy is in fact 
determined in a closed room by close-knit politicians and 
bureaucrats. Or all sorts of regulations exist in the name of 
administrative guidance and that is why U.S. businesses cannot 
get into the Japanese market. This is the basis of their 
demands for deregulation and market opening in Japan. 
  When I calculate it, according to the current exchange rate, 
the Japanese gross domestic product (GDP) is 40 percent higher 
than the U.S. level. Why then, is our standard of living lower? 
  First, the purchasing power parity of Tokyo and New York is 
Y168 for $1, so our per capita GDP is 10 percent lower than that 
of the United States. Moreover, housing costs are several to 
ten times higher in Japan. The main purpose of saving is to 
purchase housing. That is why everybody tries so hard to save. 
Third, because regulations are stringent, the choices for the 
Japanese consumer are very limited. Finally, Japanese capital 
investment on infrastructure such as sewerage, parks, and roads 
is less than that in the United States. 
  To correct these four points, we must first achieve 
deregulation. We would promote competition and reduce the 
domestic and overseas price gap. Housing costs would also go 
down as the result of deregulation. Second, we would broaden 
"new business frontiers" such as information media. When these 
measures were taken, the domestic investment rate would go up. 
And finally, the government should issue more national 
construction bonds and make investment in infrastructure and new 
social capital. Consequently, the savings rate would go down. 
The private investment rate would go up, living standards would 
rise, and at the same time, the current account surplus would 
shrink. Also, the lack of transparency in the Japanese economic 
system and its strong regulation would be corrected. 
<H5>  Some Excessive Changes in the U.S. -- Heizo Takenaka </H5>
  [Kato] As for housing, what are the other key deregulations? 
  [Suzuki] One is the Land and House Rent Law. In the recent 
revision of the law, a fixed-term land-lease contract was added. 
As a result it became possible that, for example, a Y50 million 
apartment could be made available at Y30 million if it were 
accompanied by a fixed-term land lease. I wonder if, in the 
future, fixed-term house leases or fixed-term contracts for 
already existing contracts may be added. If such deregulation 
takes place, Japanese housing costs and land costs would change 
quite a bit. 
  [Takenaka] The February Clinton-Hosokawa meeting ended 
without agreement, but the United States advocated so-called 
managed trade and raised the demand that Japan should increase 
imports in a manner which would disrupt the market mechanism. 
That was clearly the wrong policy, and Japan was correct in 
having said "No." For the United States, the real issue is 
whether it can maintain its past standard of living today and in 
the future. Such an economic issue has surfaced as a social 
issue -- that is important. 
  One generation before the current baby boomers, people in 
their forties were, before they reached the age of 30-40, able 
to double their real income as the beneficiaries of economic 
development. But the baby boomers could only raise their income 
level at that by 35 percent. People in their twenties today, 
who are sometimes called the "busters," might have a lower 
standard of living than their parents. Such long-term economic 
decline has emerged as a concrete social issue. 
  The Clinton administration is seriously trying to reduce the 
fiscal deficit, unlike past administrations. But fiscal 
reconstruction means the reduction of government spending or a 
tax increase, so in the medium to long-term a deflationary 
effect will definitely be felt. At that point, the unemployment 
issue, stagnant income growth, and the standard of living issue 
will really become full blown. 
  The U.S. Government needed a policy to cancel out its 
deflation. For that, in fact, there was no other course than to 
pursue overseas demand -- exports. So the United States sought 
a "frontier" for the first time in 100 years. The target of 
this frontier had to be set in the Asia Pacific region, where 
the growth rate was the highest, and in Japan which was at its 
center. 
  The United States is now trying to make many changes, but 
there are facts they must really keep in mind as lessons of 
history. There was, in fact, a period which was called the "era 
of change," in U.S. history. It was roughly a 20-year period in 
the early 20th century. The Federal Reserve Board (FRB) was 
created in this period, too. Also measures to ensure 
competition with government intervention, such as the antitrust 
laws, were established for the first time. 
  But during the era of change, policies that were clearly 
excessive were also implemented. A typical example is the 
Prohibition Law. The Immigration Law, which banned immigration, 
is another example of excess. As a result, the U.S. population 
did not increase. When population does not increase, 
consumption does not go up, in particular, housing investment 
does not go up. The stagnation of housing investment led later 
to the Great Depression. There is a possibility that such 
excessive reforms could also be carried out today, reforms which 
would not be viable in the long run. I wonder if managed trade 
is a typical example. Initially, the argument of managed trade 
in order to protect domestic employment sounds good, but such 
managed trade would drive the economy to become smaller, size, 
albeit balanced, and would ultimately bring about unfortunate 
results, not only for the United States but also for the entire 
world. 
  What should Japan do under such circumstances? First, the 
United States needs a frontier in order to carry out its fiscal 
reconstruction. The frontier could have a great effect on the 
United States and Japan should become an attractive frontier. 
By continuing to be a vibrant, attractive market, Japan could 
have the power to prevent excessive U.S. change, particularly 
managed trade. Second, to become the frontier, Japan must 
elevate its standard of living through deregulation and by 
expanding social overhead capital. 
  Finally, if we consider savings to be a "claim for future 
consumption," then such accumulation is national wealth. We are 
making great efforts to accumulate such national wealth, but we 
have been making a terribly risky investment in the United 
States with an important portion of this national wealth -- 
moreover with dollar-based "paper money." The dollar has now 
dropped and national wealth is decreasing. Making such a poor 
choice is unthinkable. When a Commerce Department economist 
asked me what kind of strategy for national wealth Japan had, I 
could not answer. I think we should reexamine the strategy for 
national wealth. The concrete substance for it should be 
deregulation and accumulation of social overhead capital. 
  [Kato] By the way, when I was watching an American TV news 
show the day before yesterday, I noted that Vietnam was whited 
out, and the reporter was saying that here was a frontier. 
<H5>  Political Reform Has Not Been Completed -- Takeshi Noda </H5>
  [Noda] As one of those responsible for political reform, I 
would like to talk about this and also talk further about Asia 
and U.S.-Japan issues. It has been almost five years since 
political reform became the main subject of Japanese politics. 
Because the Recruit scandal broke out and we were in the midst 
of political mistrust, reform tended to be cast mainly in terms 
of preventing corruption. In addition, it was understood that 
reform could not be carried out unless the electoral system was 
changed. There were many faults in the medium sized electoral 
district system. But what led to selecting the single seat 
electoral system was, first of all, that an electoral system 
which would permit an immediate switch over of the government 
when scandals occurred, would also give a stronger sense of 
alertness to behavior for both government party and opposition 
parties. 
  Lead by Tsutomu Hata, Masaharu Goto, and others, we have 
been 
tackling the situation. But before the electoral system was 
changed, the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] government ended and 
a change of government took place. Therefore, the argument 
arose that, without changing the system, a change of government 
had been accomplished, and some people felt we received whiplash. 
  On the contrary, I feel thankful that a new meaning has 
emerged. Since the war, we have been living in a middle position 
where the pull from both East and West magnetic poles was 
strong. There was a difference of thinking, not only in the 
security aspect, but also regarding economic and political 
systems, and both East and West poles functioned as strong 
magnetic fields. 
  But when one pole disappeared, the other pole followed. The 
existence of strongholds for conservatism and reform--the LDP 
and the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ]--were no longer 
needed. In other words, we were thrown into a situation where 
there was no magnetic field. That is the political situation 
today. As I think this over, I have come to realize that 
historically, it is very rare for a strong magnetic field to 
come into effect which covers the world and even transcends 
religious differences. I think that what will be notable in the 
future is fragmented regional, religious, and national 
identities in international society. In Japan also, there are 
many divisions. It has become very difficult to keep people in 
the framework of a political party. If nothing is done, we will 
have the era of many small parties, similar to the Italy of the 
past. 
  I think that the single-seat electoral system adopted this 
time will achieve the function of preventing parties from being 
divided into too many small groups. Otherwise, without the 
single-seat system, the situation would develop into a state of 
drift: We would not know where the government was heading. My 
feeling is that for a while, a number of small parties in 
combination would form a government. 
  It was unfortunate that originally, political reform began 
as 
a result of the Recruit scandal. But, if the politicians 
themselves and the political system are not trusted by the 
people, no policy can gain support and there can be no will to 
make decisions promptly. In that sense, just four bills have 
passed, but political reform has not been completed. We must 
also ask the voters themselves to reform their consciousness. 
We must start changing the local election systems. Reform by 
the politicians themselves is also necessary. 
  Next, on the U.S.-Japan relationship. The Japanese people 
have been caught up by the economic relationship alone. It is 
as if a trade war were going on, so much emphasis has been 
placed on this issue. I am worried about whether it might 
foment a hate-the-U.S. consciousness. U.S.-Japan security is, 
as Professor Buckley stated, not only a bilateral issue. It is 
necessary to recognize how much positive influence the existence 
of the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty system has on Asia. The 
U.S.-Japan Security Treaty is the great premise for Japanese 
foreign policy toward Asia. Therefore, we must give enough 
thought to how not to tie the economic issue to the security 
issue. The only saving grace is that there is no such movement 
to link trade and security right now in the United States. 
  Ichiro Ozawa, the Shinseito secretary general, is not a 
nationalist, but an enthusiastic internationalist. He is an 
internationalist who places great importance on the United 
States. Of course, the relationship with the United States is 
vitally important. But, at the same time, the one with Asia is 
also important. We must remember what happened in our past 
history, not only as a debt which we have to pay back, but also 
as a lesson which we must learn. We need to develop foreign 
policy from a position as an Asian nation. If we forget this, 
Japan may start drifting. Extreme caution is needed for setting 
our foreign policy. 
  Japan must behave with pride and modesty in its foreign 
relationships. 
  [Watanabe] Many definitions are given for the English word 
"people," such as "persons, masses, populace," etc. But I read 
a novel recently and felt that "people" in the United States had 
to be translated as "everybody," as that term is used in Japan's 
rural society. Among the "people" there is no one with a 
superior position. Among the people who first emigrated to the 
United States, clergymen, judges, prosecutors, and any other 
positions were selected by everybody. 
  The opinion of the "people" is absolute. For instance, in 
the United States, judges who are trial specialists do not have 
the right to give the verdict of guilty or not guilty. It 
belongs only to the people. If the jury of 12 people who are 
nearly randomly chosen say not guilty, the judge cannot render a 
guilty verdict. 
  As for the president too, when one is elected, the "people" 
will follow him. But there is the absolute certainty that 
ultimately the "people" are above him. What Japan should worry 
about is how the American "people" regard Japan. And we must 
devise a way to appeal correctly to the "people." 
  Prime Minister Hosokawa went to the United States and said 
that "we will not accept managed trade." That was a just 
argument. But just what percent of the American "people" 
understood "managed trade"? Prime Minister Hosokawa should have 
used language the "people" would have understood. 
  He should have said "managed trade means the Japanese 
Government is to order business enterprises to buy so much of 
such and such an item, and we cannot do that," and further "the 
Japanese per capita purchase from the United States is $417, and 
the American from Japan is $445, nearly parity" (based on MITI 
figures). The American "people" have come to believe that Japan 
was unfair, tricky. Then, U.S. politicians and bureaucrats who 
curry the "people's" favor make a move, and people such as U.S. 
Trade Representative Kantor make unreasonable demands on Japan 
in order to pacify the "people." The "people" understand 
fairness and unfairness. Specialists will easily be swayed by 
the "people." 
  At the time of World War II, we should have made public the 
Hull note, given to us at the end of November 1941, and we 
should have appealed to the American people saying "this is a de 
facto declaration of the breaking of a diplomatic relationship." 
  I think it is a dangerous situation that the United States 
feels it no longer has a frontier. When the frontier in the 
West was gone, it proposed we should jointly manage the South 
Manchurian Railroad which Japan captured right after the 
Russo-Japanese War. In the end, Japan turned this proposal down. 
After the refusal, the U.S. policy toward Japan changed 
completely because they felt "Japan has closed our frontier." 
  Therefore, the United States does not know how Japan could 
become the American frontier. Moreover, every American feels 
that the trade deficit with Japan is due to Japanese unfairness. 
There is no valid basis for such beliefs, but it will not do 
any good telling this to the American bureaucrats and the 
President. We must tell the "people." 
  I think it is necessary to send two ambassadors to 
"people's" 
countries such as the United States. One is the sort of 
ambassador who is currently in place. He will be exclusively an 
administrative ambassador. The other is an "ambassador to the 
people," to whom the American "people" will want to listen; it 
could be an attractive actress. Or we could have a poll 
conducted by a U.S. opinion survey organization to find out 
which Japanese the Americans want to meet today, and appoint 
that person as ambassador. 
  That person should appear constantly before the mass media 
and repeat: "U.S.-Japanese trade has already achieved parity, 
and the balance of trade that the President advocates means that 
a Japanese person should buy twice what an American is buying: 
We cannot accept such unfairness." Thus we could eliminate a 
dangerous element in U.S.-Japanese friction. 
  [Noda] By and large I agree with the deregulation Suzuki 
advocated. But how will deregulation lead to economic recovery? 
  Looking at it from the U.S. point of view, the Japanese 
distribution structure is certainly complicated. Once one 
becomes a part of this structure, sales go very smoothly because 
the end users do not have any choice. The problem is sales to 
enterprises. Let us say, for instance, one tries to sell some 
research equipment components. The seller receives a good 
response from the initial contact person in charge and thinks 
this will "fly." But at the last minute, the president of the 
bank that enterprise has dealings with complains. The existence 
of business groups known as keiretsu makes entry by a new comer 
into the field very difficult, even among Japanese. They form 
unions, associations, and other societies of their own in each 
field. 
  Such bodies are not necessarily officially sanctioned by the 
government; they exist de facto. How can we punch a hole into 
such a situation? We tend to think that once we achieve 
deregulation, everything will go well. But I wonder if what is 
really necessary is to put a knife into our society. 
  [Suzuki] Naturally, there are bright and dark sides to 
deregulation. Deregulation promotes competition. So, as the 
result of severe competition, enterprises which supply goods at 
fair prices to the consumers, the Japanese people, will grow. 
Enterprises which fail in such an effort will fall. It is a 
hard world where all responsibility rests on oneself. 
  Not every enterprise which existed before the implementation 
of deregulation has grown: Some went bankrupt. As Noda pointed 
out, deregulation also has some aspects which worsen business 
conditions, and we might see an increase in the number of 
enterprises that go bankrupt. But at the same time, a low-price 
revolution would occur, and real purchasing power would go up. 
This would result in stimulating business conditions. In some 
aspects, the Japanese distribution system is protected by 
regulations. We must change the system so that Japanese and 
foreign enterprises can compete and supply goods on a global 
scale at good prices for Japanese consumers -- this through some 
additional deregulation. 
  By abolishing unnecessary regulations and by making existing 
regulations transparent, foreign enterprises would know why and 
where the regulations exist. 
  But everything will not be solved. That is because there is 
a difference in thought patterns among Japanese, Northeast 
Asians, and Europeans and Americans. For instance, Americans 
try to maximize business profit during the President's tenure, 
by half-term or half year. They judge fairness by spot dealing. 
The Japanese think in longer terms, so network dealing such as 
in keiretsu becomes important. Such differences of thought and 
consciousness stem from cultural differences which cannot 
transcend deregulation. We have no other way than to try to 
understand each other. 
  [Kato] Do you have any opinions about Watanabe's idea of 
sending two ambassadors? 
  [Buckley] It is certainly a problem that knowledge of Japan 
is very shallow in the United States. I wonder if one out of a 
million Americans would know who the Japanese ambassador is. I 
think only the elite would know who he is. So I think it would 
be a monumental job to let the "people" know. 
  [Watanabe] Anyway, things are in a crisis stage now... if it 
comes to that, I even think we could ask the crown princess to 
be the "people's" ambassador. Because the "people" think Japan 
is unfair, unreasonable proposals such as the one on Motorola 
have been made. 
  [Takenaka] The Japanese economy has been driven to the point 
where we have no choice but to implement deregulation, even if 
it is accompanied by short-term pain. 
  There is a perfect double structure in Japan; one sector 
which boasts world scale productivity, represented by 
automobiles and consumer appliances, and another sector which is 
protected by strong regulation. For example, there are the 
Y100-to-a-dollar industries, in other words, industries which 
could manage even with the exchange rate of Y100 to a dollar, 
and industries which would not be internationally competitive 
even at Y200 to a dollar. 
  The Y100 industries have made great efforts to raise their 
productivity. Those very industries with high productivity are 
now in a truly difficult situation. Toyota and Nissan will push 
their overseas production bases in an all-out manner, so they 
can survive. But in Japan itself the employment issue will come 
to the surface, and in the end, only the Y200 industries might 
remain. 
  It is not only employment and unemployment issues. The yen 
will come down rapidly again. I think the high yen will go on 
for quite a while, but in the very long term, the yen will 
decline. 
  Japan has already imported all sorts of goods and is 
depending on foreign countries for supplies, so when the value 
of the yen goes down, inflation will begin. The scenario of a 
"hard landing," where unemployment and inflation occur 
concurrently, would be possible with the backdrop of the 
Japanese double structure. 
  Therefore, unless we carry out deregulation, even at the 
cost 
of substantial short-term pain, and make the Y200 industries 
competitive, we will not be able to escape the current vicious 
circle. 
  The amount of per capita imports Watanabe cited is an 
important point. But several years ago, economist Robert Reich 
wrote an interesting thesis, "Who Are We?" The United States 
has become so much more diversified, and it has become difficult 
to tell who the "people" are. Under such circumstances, 
economic friction is generated inside the Washington, D.C., 
Beltway. Unfortunately, the uncompromising theories of 
specialists have become stronger. 
  There is only one way Japan can counter such a situation. 
That is for the consumer to make a stronger effort. The 
consumer could start a boycott movement against enterprises such 
as Motorola, which entered the market through strong-arm 
tactics. They could stage demonstrations demanding 
liberalization against government offices which have 
regulations. Because there is no such movement in Japanese 
society, the U.S. and Japanese governments have collided. The 
final justification lies in consumer interest. 
<H5>  Society at a Turning Point -- Hidetoshi Kato </H5>
  [Kato] We live in an information society. But only 
exchanges between government offices in Kasumigaseki and 
Washington are reported. We think we know the United States, 
but in fact, I think we do not know the "people" Watanabe is 
talking about. The same thing can be said about American 
journalists. They gather information around Nagata-cho, 
Kasumigaseki, and Marunouchi, and report "they say such and such 
in Tokyo." From reading MAINICHI SHIMBUN's daily reports, I 
feel they tend to make judgments on the U.S.-Japan relationship 
based on every comment made by high-ranking U.S. Government 
officials. 
  We would now like to take questions from the floor. 
  [Unidentified attendee] As for deregulation, to what extent 
is deregulation necessary? 
  [Suzuki] As it is stated in the Hiraiwa Report, regulations 
are roughly classified as being economic or social regulations. 
As for economic regulation, in principle, we want to totally 
liberalize. Only if the economic structure would not function 
if total liberalization were carried out do we want to keep 
regulation as an exception. Those regulations should be set 
with clear reasoning and in a transparent manner. As for social 
regulations, we would continue to keep regulations in place 
through providing clear reasoning -- if we are not to neglect 
the maintenance of social order, for instance, medical and 
pharmaceutical goods, the environment, and others. It is hard 
to say which of the regulations numbering 20,000 would be 
liberalized. But we would classify and deal with each case by 
case. 
  [Unidentified attendee] Under the single constituency 
electoral system, do you not think that, in Japan, political 
ideology and policy would be concentrated in a single center? 
  [Noda] That is what the voters will determine. But the 
political parties have become more diversified. I expect that 
the concentration and breaking up of power will be repeated 
several times in the future. It could occur once or twice this 
year. I think the power structure will be settled for the most 
part after repeating such a process. 
  [Kato] Both Japan and the United States are in a transition 
stage in every area of society. A question was raised from the 
floor about the qualities demanded for future leaders in various 
fields. Including that point, I would like to ask the panel's 
opinion. 
  [Buckley] I feel the European view is being listened to 
less and less, both in Washington and Japan. The United States 
and Japan are forming a kind of "new club." The Europeans 
generally take the view that Japan and the United States 
together are unjustly dividing every field. I think this must 
be corrected. To make matters more difficult, Europe is not 
fully united. 
  I draw a somewhat pessimistic conclusion, but Japan and the 
United States seem to ignore what the European countries have to 
say. If they are not careful, Europe could end up gradually 
pushed to the outside internationally and be left there. 
  [Suzuki] Japanese economic policy and the economic system 
have now come to the stage where they must be reformed. The 
fundamental reason for reform is that we have been pursuing an 
economic system and policy of catch-up and pass Europe and the 
United States since the Meiji period. 
  When we did catch up, the high growth period ended and the 
excess savings in the country remained. So the criticism has 
arisen that a too stringently regulated system is not good. 
  There, the move to change began. There are three important 
qualities needed by our leaders concerning economic reform, as 
Buckley pointed out at the beginning: 1) They must have a 
historical perspective, in other words, understand the theory of 
Japanese historical stages. 2) They must able to place things 
in a global setting. 3) They must be economists who understand 
the political field. These are the qualities that are needed 
now. 
  [Takenaka] Japan is still in the most fortunate position in 
the world. In other words, both Russia and the United States 
are facing the situation where they must lower their standard of 
living for the present in order to improve the future situation. 
It is the opposite for Japan: To adopt various policies to 
elevate the Japanese people's standard of living will be 
ultimately beneficial for the world. 
  What we must keep in mind, rather than leadership qualities, 
are the following: 1) We must participate in world issues. 2) 
We must be open-minded to accept the "idea of fairness" by 
societies that are different from ours. 3) We must possess a 
caring mind toward people in different, less fortunate positions. 
  [Noda] Those three concepts can be applied also in the world 
of politics. Especially in the international environment where 
the magnet of East and West does not work, decisiveness and also 
insight would be necessary. 
  [Watanabe] If we could hold the personal income tax at 10 
percent and the business tax under 20 percent, the wealth held 
by the private sector would grow. Deregulation would not be an 
issue. I want to place my hopes in a person who could do such 
things. In the world of education, the quality of a non-local 
currency, in other words, people who can function at any 
university, even overseas, are desired. Also, fundamentally, 
unless we renounce the historical view of the Tokyo Tribunal for 
war crimes, in the long run, we will not have a proper Japanese 
education. 
  [Kato] As for the leader's quality, I just remembered the 
last chapter, the "Golden Person," in Mitchner's novel 
Hawaii. The person who is always open-minded and can 
get along with others from different circumstances is the 
"golden person." 

