Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, February 26 (XINHUA) -- A number of 
deputies to the National People's Congress (NPC), China's 
legislature, today expressed satisfaction with the operation of 
China's new tax system, instituted at the beginning of the year. 
  NPC Standing Committee Vice-Chairmen Chen Muhua, Buhe, Li 
Peiyao and Wu Jieping, together with deputies, listened to a 
report by Jin Xin, deputy director of the State Taxation 
Administration, on the reform of the tax system. 
  Jin described the tax reform as a "major measure" to 
facilitate the establishment of a socialist market economic 
structure in China and an important part of the country's 
overall economic restructuring. 
  The reform is designed not to decrease government revenues 
or 
increase tax burdens of businesses because it entails the 
readjustment of the tax structure, he told the deputies. 
  A number of businesses will bear heavier tax burdens as a 
result of the reform, he said. 
  These businesses are required to offset the adverse effects 
of the reform by transforming their operational mechanism, 
tapping their production potential and increasing their economic 
returns, he said. 
  Moreover, the government has formulated and is preparing to 
formulate necessary measures to help these businesses offset the 
adverse effects, he added. 
  Jin Xin also assured the deputies that the new value-added 
tax and consumption tax collected following the tax reform will 
not result in price rises because they involve only a change in 
the type of previously existing taxes. 
  The new tax system will also improve the government's 
capabilities to exercise macro-economic controls, while 
eliminating the previous excessive tax exemptions and 
reductions, he said. 
  The director said: "The new tax system has been operating 
successfully and normally over the past two months, without 
causing sharp rises in commodity prices." 
  The new system has not produced any adverse effects on 
production and circulation, he said. 

