BFN 

<F P=106> [By Roberto F. Campos] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 24 Apr (PL) -- The tourism industry will 
occupy the top place in economic importance this year because of 
its upsurge and the attention given to it by the state, an 
official of the recently created Tourism Ministry said here 
today. 
  At a news conference held in Havana's Hotel Nacional as part 
of "The Nation and the Emigrants Conference," Juan Jose Vega, 
one of the organizers from that ministry declared that growth in 
the sector averages about 30 percent a year. 
  He added that last year 70 percent of the products consumed 
by tourists were of national origin. He also stressed an 
increase in business with foreign companies, above all hotel 
management, which allowed -- he said -- the improvement of 
quality and service, as well as an increase in the number of 
tourists. 
  Other tourism directors, representing all the major chains 
and tour operators of the largest island in the Antilles, also 
attended the meeting. 
  Enrique Rodriguez Manzano, vice president of the Gran Caribe 
hotel chain, noted the great efforts made to achieve the quality 
required in the vacation industry. He said Cuba is gaining 
experience in this field and reinforcing it through instruction 
in schools that teach tourism. 
  On the other hand, Rodrigo Garcia, the representative of the 
Gaviota Group, Inc., emphasized the state's interest in 
promoting a new image of Cuba, stressing the family and 
children, as opposed to tourism based on sex. 
  On this issue, he added that steps were being taken to 
prohibit entry to "persons lacking the proper moral requisites 
into rest areas, as is normal in any other tourist center in the 
world." 
  Regarding this issue, Garcia said those social risks are 
lessened by the enormous expectations for tourism, which offers 
huge benefits for the Cuban economy. 
  It was indicated that, in actuality, only 544,000 
vacationers 
entered the country in 1993, based on actual immigration 
records. The previous figure of 626,000 had been based on the 
sale of package tours. 
  An estimated 800,000 tourists are expected to visit the 
island this year, and tourism is expected to reach 1 million 
visitors in 1995. The speakers at the conference said that to 
date 22-25 percent of visitors to the island were here on a 
return visit. 

