Nickel-Hydrogen 
   EV Battery 

<F P=102> 94FE0228G Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 26 May 93 p 
24 -- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0228G </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] The Tohoku Electric Power Co. has started to develop 
a large-capacity nickel-hydrogen battery to see if it can 
increase the distances electric cars are able to travel. Its 
goal is to achieve twice the energy density per battery weight 
of conventional batteries, and to increase the distance an 
electric vehicle can travel on a single recharge to more than 
200 km. No company has ever manufactured a large-capacity 
nickel-hydrogen battery, so one has never been used in an 
electric vehicle. Tohoku Electric says it will first manufacture 
a nickel-hydrogen battery for driving distances of 120 km, and 
present that battery at the Tokyo Motor Show in October. 
  The nickel-hydrogen battery that Tohoku Electric will 
develop 
will be made from a nickel-based hydrogen occluded alloy. As far 
as performance, its goal is to achieve a battery capacity 
between 200A-300A, energy density per liter between 120W-150W, 
and energy density per kilogram between 60W-80W. It will be 
almost twice as powerful as the conventional lead storage 
batteries being used in electric cars. In developing the 
battery, it will be working jointly with the Furukawa Battery 
Co., Ltd. 
  Though development of the battery is targeted for completion 
in 1994, one of the first steps will be to put a somewhat less 
inferior prototype of the battery into a hybrid electric vehicle 
called the WAVE, and present it at the Tokyo Motor Show in 
October. 
  A nickel-hydrogen battery is a rechargeable battery that 
uses 
a hydrogen occluded alloy for the negative pole and nickel for 
the positive pole, and because of characteristics such as high 
energy density and low-temperature operating capabilities, it is 
suitable for use in those electric cars used in cold areas such 
as the Tohoku region of Japan. Another advantage of the 
nickel-hydrogen battery is that there is no worry about cadmium 
pollution, which is one of the major concerns of nickel-cadmium 
batteries. 
  One of the problems with a nickel-hydrogen battery, however, 
is the difficulty of making a large-capacity battery. The only 
nickel-hydrogen batteries that have been used commercially so 
far have been the triple dry-cell types used in home video 
cameras and cellular telephones. 
  In 1991, Tohoku Electric succeeded in making a prototype of 
a 
large-capacity 200A nickel-hydrogen battery, but the energy 
density of this battery was less than that of a lead storage 
battery, so the distances that an electric car or vehicle using 
this battery could travel on a single recharge were rather 
short. Following that, it set its sights on developing a 
high-density nickel-hydrogen battery by improving the 
performance of the hydrogen occluded alloy and devising a new 
electrode manufacturing technique. 

