BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" AL-BILAD report] </F>
  [Text] Contrary to all the press reports indicating the 
failure of Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat's visit to Amman 
last week, AL-BILAD sources stress that the opposite took place. 
  These reliable sources asserted that the understanding shown 
at the Jordanian-Palestinian summit reaffirmed that bilateral 
relations are strong and that the option chosen by the Jordanian 
and Palestinian sides is correct. This summit also revived the 
coordination issue in a stronger and wider manner which, at the 
end of the talks, resulted in crystallizing the work of the four 
joint bilateral committees, the Jerusalem, refugee, economic, 
and administrative committees. The work of these committees is 
related to the transfer of authority and powers to the 
Palestinian authority's institutions on the territory from which 
the Israelis will withdraw. 
  King Husayn received Abu-'Ammar [Yasir 'Arafat] with 
fraternal warmth reflecting Jordan's decision to stand firmly 
alongside the PLO and its options for several reasons, according 
to King Husayn. 
  King Husayn also said: We share the same fate, suffering, 
and aspirations. We are looking forward to the success of your 
endeavors, exactly like you are doing. The triumph of the 
Palestinian position and the removal of occupation are a 
strength for Jordan and a protection for its internal security. 
The more stable the region, whose basis is Palestine, the more 
stable our internal situation." 
  Continuing to address his Palestinian guest, King Husayn 
said: We also share looking forward to Jerusalem. This is 
because our loss of Jerusalem is a loss of future visions and a 
pain felt in our heart. Thus, we share with you looking forward 
to achieving a victorious return for you and ourselves for the 
sake of Jerusalem. 
  Therefore, brother Abu-'Ammar, let no information be borne 
in 
your mind that may point to the opposite of what I am saying. 
This is because tendentious parties are trying to infiltrate 
into the sources of our information in order to instill doubts 
and suspicion between us. In view of facts, developments, and 
the current balance of powers, the source of our strength lies 
in mutual understanding between us. 
  The other party still tries to undermine our belief in what 
we feel is just and correct. This is taking place through two 
known ways: Pressures and temptations. Pressures are declared 
and tangible, and God is helping us endure them, while 
temptations have effects which are no less important than those 
of pressures in terms of canceling debts, extending aid, and 
other temptations. The demand is clear, and is represented by 
two headlines, namely, a peace treaty with Israel before Israel 
pays the requisites of peace to the Arab side, particularly the 
Palestinian side; and changing the agenda signed in Washington 
by addressing the easier issues before the more difficult ones. 
They [the Israelis] want to reach an understanding on 
environmental, trade, and other issues before reaching an 
agreement on substantive issues such as the territories, 
borders, water, and refugees. Therefore, we still reject this. 
  In his remarks, which were made in the presence of the 
members of the Jordanian and Palestinian delegations, King 
Husayn continued: You reached the Oslo agreement without our 
knowledge. The same can be said of the Cairo agreement, the 
Security Council resolution [No. 904], and other developments. 
However, despite our reservations, we supported you in the Oslo, 
Washington, and Cairo agreements, as well as Resolution 904. 
Our sole objective in all that is to spare you any problems, 
show that the Arab front is unified, and to support the 
Palestinian interpretation of the agreements. Therefore, it is 
preferable if there is prior understanding, coordination, and 
consultation. 
  He added: We understand that coordination, understanding, 
and consultation should take place before agreements are reached 
with the other side. Our institutions, archives, and expertise 
are at your disposal, so you can attain the best results. We 
seek coordination, understanding, and consultation so you will 
hear our point of view, but not necessarily adopt it. If our 
point of view proves sound and you adopt it, this is good; if 
not, no harm will be done, God willing. 
  King Husayn said: Regarding the media, I have heard that you 
are upset. So are we, but we cannot abandon our democratic 
option. It is part of our domestic security. It protects us. 
Therefore, we should be patient and accept the price. See if 
brother Abu-Samir [Jordanian Prime Minister 'Abd-al-salam 
al-Majali] can do something about the media, with which I 
personally expressed dissatisfaction. 
  I am looking forward to the creation of joint committees or 
the activation of the existing ones in the hope that they 
specify the mechanism for dealing with joint responsibilities 
and daily affairs. 
  With his known frankness, King Husayn told the Palestinian 
president and delegation: We receive worrisome reports about 
you and your fears. But rest assured, we pay no attention to 
such reports. It is in our joint interest not to let doubts 
creep into our souls. I have informed the Syrian and other 
brothers that we have no interest in weakening the PLO. Rather, 
it is in our interest to support and strengthen the PLO. 
Weakening it will impose on us an unbearable responsibility. 
The Palestinian people and their representatives should choose 
the way that will safeguard the Palestinian people's rights, 
interests, and aspirations. 
  Concluding his remarks to President 'Arafat, king Husayn 
said: Brother Abu-'Ammar, we appreciate your efforts and 
sacrifices. May God support you. It is God who grants success. 
  A senior Palestinian official who took part in the meeting 
said the Husayn-'Arafat meeting reflected hope and aspiration 
for a better future for the coming generations. He said: 
Abu-'Ammar emerged from the meeting more confident about what 
should be done. The official stressed that the 
Jordanian-Palestinian summit meeting will be reflected 
positively on the joint committees' performance, and that its 
positive results will appear soon. 

