BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Marat Zubko: "Finnish Nuclear Alert Exercise </F>
Alarms Russia"] 
  [Text] Helsinki -- The Finnish mass media report that 
exercises designed to eliminate a potential accident at the 
nuclear electric power station in Loviisa, a city on the south 
coast of Finland, were interpreted in Vyborg and St. Petersburg 
as a real disaster and thus caused alarm to the authorities and 
considerable panic among the population. 
  "People in Vyborg," Helsinki newspapers report, "were so 
convinced by these rumors of an accident in Finland that the 
local radio and television advised the population on ways to 
protect themselves against radiation. Residents were urged not 
to go out into the street while people already outside were 
advised to wash their clothing thoroughly." Finnish television 
claims that similar appeals were made in St. Petersburg, too. 
  How could the disaster rumors have developed? The Finnish 
Ministry of Internal Affairs has given the following 
explanation: One of the things that was checked out as part of 
the exercises at the Loviisa nuclear power station was the 
emergency radio communications system, and conversations via 
that system could have been heard in neighboring areas of Russia. 
  The exercises were held last Wednesday [18 May], but the 
Finnish authorities did not learn about the disquiet across the 
border until Friday evening when businessmen arriving from 
Russia bombarded the police with questions about what had 
happened at the Loviisa power station and whether it was safe or 
not to travel on to the west of the country. These reports 
appeared in the press on Saturday. 
  The Finnish authorities, as the local television service 
reported, informed the Russian side that all was calm in 
Loviisa, that nothing had happened there, and that the radiation 
situation in Finland remains normal. Nevertheless, I hope that 
two small conclusions will be drawn from this episode. 
  Conclusion number one: Since the alarm was raised in Vyborg 
and St. Petersburg when the radio conversations at Lovisa were 
intercepted, this means that there is a danger alert system in 
operation there, which can only be good news. 
  Conclusion number two: It would be a good idea if countries 
which hold such exercises were to notify neighboring states in 
good time, especially if they are going to go on air and talk 
about disasters. 

