CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Renate Koecher: "Germany Is Growing Old--Who </F>
Is Concerned About It?--Tomorrow's Elderly Are Scarcely Bothered 
About the Future"] 
  [Text] Germany is getting older, but those who will have to 
deal with this fact hardly seem to care. All in all, only 
one-third of the population has taken note of the problem, but 
the elderly of the future -- that is, those who are under 45 
today -- have not. Only a few people realize how dramatically 
the demographics of the population have changed during the 
course of this century and how dynamically this trend will 
continue over the next decades. 
  In 1980, one German out of five was over 60. By the year 
2000, one out of four will be, and in 2030, 37 percent of the 
population are expected to be over 60. 
  Thirty years ago, the ratio between Germans over 65 and 
those 
under 20 was 10:25. By the year 2000 the two age groups will be 
about equal, and by the year 2030 the ratio will be just about 
10:6. A backward look at the year 1871 demonstrates how 
historically unique the present situation is. In 1871, the 
corresponding ratio was 10:94. In other words, society was 
fantastically young, by current standards. 
  Although hardly anyone has taken a hard look at these 
statistics, most people are aware of the fact that the 
consequences will be serious indeed. Seventy-seven percent 
expect old age insurance premiums to rise, 69 percent believe 
the retirement age will be moved up, and 67 percent think social 
security payments will be cut. They are convinced that the final 
outcome will be lower minimum government compensations which 
will have to be augmented by private pension plans. Sixty 
percent expect health insurance premiums to rise as well. 
  The aging of society is viewed by people primarily as a 
fiscal problem which calls for a reordering of the generational 
contract and of the social insurance systems. This realization 
does not mean that such a restructuring would come easy. When a 
debate took place earlier this year on whether pensions would 
have to be cut as net incomes decline--a logical consequence of 
tying pensions to net wages--it became clear that the population 
did not want pensions to be tampered with in the foreseeable 
future. At the time, two-thirds were in favor of uncoupling 
pensions and net wages whenever wages decline. In essence, 
however, people are aware of the fact that the social insurance 
systems will not survive in their present form when more than 
one-third of the population will be 60 years of age or over. 
People are similarly skeptical about their own security in old 
age. Only one out of every four people believe they will be able 
to maintain their standard of living when they are old. Twenty 
percent expect to have to cut down, but do not believe they will 
be short of money. One-third of the population expects to have 
to cut down a lot. These are speculations for the most part. 
Only a small minority is genuinely well informed about their own 
pension rights and only a few are able to foresee at all 
accurately how their own financial situation will develop over 
the next few decades in terms of savings, housing purchases, and 
inheritances. But skepticism clearly does cause people to think 
of the future. Security in old age has become an increasingly 
important incentive for savings. 
  The levels against which the retirees of the future measure 
their own expectations are high. Over the past few years 
material satisfaction has increased most markedly in the over-60 
age group. At this time, 80 percent of all retirees are 
satisfied with their financial situation--84 percent in western 
Germany and 64 percent in eastern Germany. In the future, it 
will only be possible to maintain these levels of satisfaction 
with the help of private retirement plans. 
  In addition to individual retirement plans people pin their 
hopes on family policies which might counteract the aging of 
society. Support for families with children is viewed as the 
best family policy. Few people are in favor of immigration as a 
way of rejuvenating the population. A mere 10 percent are for 
and fully 70 percent are against even partially compensating for 
demographic trends by means of targeted support for immigration. 
Only a minority believes that the demographic changes might lead 
to a labor shortage which could solely be resolved with the help 
of foreign workers. 
  Aside from the prospect of additional costs for the social 
security systems only a minority of the population has a clear 
idea of what the consequences of the aging of society might be. 
If at all, people anticipate generational conflicts, due above 
all to redistribution struggles as the social contract between 
the generations is restructured. Forty-two percent are afraid 
that tensions between the young and the old generation will 
arise--although there is nothing to indicate that this fear is 
justified at present. As of now, relations between the older and 
younger generations are good, better in fact than they have been 
for decades; and as long as family ties are as highly valued as 
they are, there is hardly any reason to believe that 
generational conflicts over material issues will arise. 
  Only a small number of people expects the generational power 
structure to change at the expense of the young generation. 
Eighteen percent believe that political life will be pegged 
increasingly to the needs of the older generation, and 17 
percent believe that the influence of the young generation is 
continually declining. 
  In essence, the impact of the older generation on election 
outcomes will increase more significantly than the demographic 
changes might lead one to expect, since the number of young 
voters has markedly declined in the eighties and nineties, 
whereas the number of over-60 voters is 17 percent greater today 
than that of voters under the age of 30. This trend works to the 
particular advantage of the Christian Democratic Union/Christian 
Social Union [CDU/CSU] which most people view as being 
supportive of the older generation. forty-five percent of those 
over 60 feel that the CDU/CSU champions the interests of the 
older generation more than other political parties. Only 23 
percent feel that these interests are best served by the Social 
Democratic Party [SPD]. 
  As in the case of the restructuring of the generational 
contract, most people do not believe that the older generation's 
growing influence on political life will lead to conflict 
between the generations and a one-sided dominance of the older 
generation's goals and values. 
<H5>  May Opinion Poll: Optimism Is Back </H5>
  The SPD is losing ground. In early April, 40.6 percent of 
the 
voters were prepared to vote for the Social Democrats on their 
second ballots. In early May, it was only 36.3 percent. The 
party has been harmed above all by the debate about its taxation 
plans. In western Germany, the SPD's losses are benefiting the 
Greens, and in eastern Germany, the CDU and the Free Democratic 
Party [FDP]. The CDU has been gaining ground in the new laender 
for the past 4 months. 
  By now, 26.8 percent of east Germans are prepared to cast 
their second ballots for the CDU/CSU in the Bundestag election, 
i.e. 5 percent higher than in February. The SPD, on the other 
hand, has lost more than five percentage points in eastern 
Germany over the past four weeks. Hopes are waning that the SPD, 
with the Greens, will win the Bundestag election. As of now, 
only 46 percent in western Germany or 6 percent less than four 
weeks ago still believe that will happen. In the new laender 48 
percent or 9 percent less than a month ago still believe the SPD 
and the Greens will win. 
  As of now, only one out of five west Germans has doubts 
about 
the leadership qualifications of the government as against one 
out of three last January. In the new laender only 15 percent 
feel this way as against 22 percent early this year. Chancellor 
Kohl's policies are finding greater favor. Approval of Scharping 
is also increasing, but his lead has shrunk still further: in 
the old laender from 6 to 4 percent and in the new laender from 
15 to 8 percent. The population is taking careful note of these 
figures. In early April, 44 percent of west Germans viewed 
Scharping as the favorite as against only 26 percent for Kohl. 
Now, 38 percent still believe Scharping is in the lead, as 
against 32 percent who give Kohl the nod. 
  Germans in general, and west Germans in particular, are 
growing more optimistic with time. Forty-one percent of west 
Germans now expect the economy to recover within the next six 
months as against 27 percent in early April. In eastern Germany, 
31 percent, or 8 percent more than a month ago, now believe 
things will change for the better. Only 23 percent of the 
population are afraid there will be another recession. Thus, the 
results of the poll reflect positive economic expectations for 
the first time since November 1992. 

