BFN 

<F P=106> [Roald Fedorov article: "What Danger Threatens Us?"] </F>
  [Excerpts] I recalled the stubborn buttercup when I heard 
Doctor of Biological Sciences I.V. Filyushkin's story about the 
effect of various physical and chemical environmental factors on 
living things. The effects of radiation in particular. Igor 
Vasilyevich runs the Biophysics Institute laboratory at the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Health. The work done by I.V. 
Filyushkin's laboratory involves studying the effects of low but 
constant doses on organisms, the mechanisms whereby these doses 
are administered, and also the level of danger involved. 
[passage omitted] 
  An analysis of data accumulated in specialist scientific 
literature has convinced I.V. Filyushkin that nervous health 
disorders similar to those noted in the descendants of those who 
survived the A-bomb hell of Hiroshima and Nagasaki can be caused 
by other nonradiation-induced factors. For example, similar 
aftereffects lie in store for children born to alcohol-abusing 
mothers. A significant increase in the frequency of congenital 
illnesses, first and foremost of the nervous system, and second 
of the immune system -- which show up particularly noticeably in 
children in the form of various types of allergy -- is linked to 
an increase in environmental degradation in industrial cities, 
primarily those where chemical production facilities are 
concentrated. 
  The similarity between the results of radiation and chemical 
exposure has made it easier to construct a theoretical model of 
the phenomenon. This was how the picture looked to Igor 
Vasilyevich: In addition to the cells of the embryo developing 
in the mother's womb, these harmful agents' main targets are the 
embryo's neural, immune, and endocrine systems. These represent 
a kind of "control center" which sends out signals determining 
the growth and specialization of all the organism's cells in 
accordance with its genetically determined development plan. 
But the impact of harmful agents results in the distortion of 
these signals. Cell growth is retarded and certain deviations 
from the genetic plan occur. At this stage, cells which have 
changed their properties send back signals to the "center" 
saying that its commands cannot be carried out. At this point 
internal restructuring of the "center" itself becomes a 
necessity. The endocrine system plays the most significant role 
in the formation of the three regulatory systems -- after all, 
this is the system which is primarily responsible for carrying 
out the organism's genetic development plan. If this system is 
impaired, the nervous and immune systems are more or less 
suppressed from the outset and remain underdeveloped from the 
embryonic stage. This is the cause of the corresponding 
congenital illnesses which occur when intrauterine development 
seemingly reaches a successful conclusion. 
  The truth of I.V. Filyushkin's theoretical model has been 
confirmed by experiments carried out in his laboratory. Small 
but constant doses of radiation applied to pregnant laboratory 
animals and similar doses of other environmentally harmful 
substances -- heavy metal salts and other kinds of toxic 
chemicals contained in food and drinking water, specific 
contaminants in inhaled air, alcohol, and a number of medicines 
-- produced similar effects on the health of these animals' 
young. No externally visible body defects were observed in the 
laboratory animals' offspring. However, a decreased capacity for 
learning was noted in comparison with identical animals born in 
environmentally normal conditions. Their immune defense system 
also turned out to be weaker. 
  I.V. Filyushkin's work offers convincing evidence of the 
similarity and unity of effect of radioactive and chemical 
contaminants on living organisms. Of course, these results 
certainly do not imply that small doses of radiation are 
absolutely harmless. But they are not the only danger 
threatening us nowadays. Other contaminants in our external 
environment, just like our disregard for our own health, can be 
even more dangerous. This is the basic solution to the problem 
of resettling inhabitants of areas that have suffered 
radioactive contamination in some way or other. Before 
resettlement takes place, we should compare the level of 
contamination and the attendant risk factor with the risk of 
moving to other areas designated for resettlement that are clean 
from the point of view of radiation but which may be 
environmentally dangerous in other ways. We should also bear in 
mind that the stresses associated with resettlement and actually 
waiting to be resettled could prove to be even more detrimental 
to health than exposure to small doses of radiation. 
  However, the research that has been conducted so far should 
be regarded merely as the start of a major task. The laboratory 
workers are preparing for this task with soundly based 
scientific research programs in this sphere. But there is no 
money -- for the equipment, the expensive chemical reagents, or 
even to buy and keep laboratory animals. 
  I.V. Filyushkin's research is directly linked to many 
people's health in a number of industrial regions and other 
environmentally degraded areas. Extensive, profound, and 
intensive research is called for. Otherwise.... At this point 
it seems apposite to recall the following lines by Aleksandr 
Blok: "We will be cursed for centuries by our sickly 
descendants." 

