Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] National health sector authorities contemplated the 
historical and social importance of the Workers Hospital, one of 
the first medical centers that continues to serve the poorer 
sectors of the population, and which has recorded yet another 
anniversary since its founding. 
  Some 30 planned surgical operations are performed at the 
Workers Hospital on a daily basis, with an additional six on an 
emergency basis. Last year there were 6,485 surgical 
interventions performed there, ranging from minor up to the most 
complex pathology (kidney and cornea transplants, cardiac 
surgery, laparoscopy, oncology, microsurgery of the ear, and 
ophthalmic neurosurgery, burn reconstruction, trauma, 
orthopedics, and others). 
  In 1992, 36,116 patients were recorded for 225,290 
laboratory 
examinations, an average of 700 examinations per day. A total of 
83,902 external consultations were performed and each year an 
average of 10,000 patients are admitted. In addition, that 
hospital has progressed greatly with respect to diagnostic 
equipment such endoscopy, radiology, angiology, and others. 
<H5>  Integral Training </H5>
  But the Workers Hospital's greatest concern is the integral 
training of its human resources, from highly specialized 
professionals to service workers, for which reason it 
periodically sponsors medical conferences, seminars, workshops, 
refresher courses, and other educational activities prepared by 
the Department of Teaching and Research. 
  Internally, medical seminars are held annually, with a view 
to disseminating knowledge and scientific experience. 
<H5>  Background </H5>
  Yesterday the Workers Hospital in the city of La Paz 
celebrated 38 years of life and service to the country's 
insureds and beneficiaries. 
  The primary hospital center was founded in 1955 during the 
administration of Victor Paz Estensoro, for the purpose of 
providing public services in internal medicine, surgery, 
rehabilitation, laboratory, and external consultations. 
<H5>  Body of Work </H5>
  The health facility currently has 500 beds and 800 
employees, 
including professionals, paramedics, and administrative and 
service workers, of which 160 are high-level specialists, who 
rose to their positions of responsibility in merit of their 
qualifications. 

