BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nairobi, April 28 (AFP) -- Fighting raged in 
Rwanda on Thursday [28 April] as a cholera epidemic threatened 
the central African nation swamped in ethnic bloodletting and 
relief officials launched impassioned pleas for aid. More than 
40 orphans, half of them seriously wounded and some with arms or 
legs hacked off, were flown to Italy on Thursday after being 
rescued from an orphanage by aid workers. 
  The headquarters of the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front in the 
capital Kigali came under intermittent mortar and artillery fire 
Thursday. But the exchanges were shorter and less intense than 
on Wednesday, said a UN spokesman speaking by telephone from the 
capital Kigali. 
  The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) meanwhile warned 
that cholera was likely to sweep Kigali, strewn with rotting 
bodies, some half eaten by dogs. Much of the capital is without 
water and the situation in the rest of the country is equally 
catastrophic, UNICEF's Peter McDermott said. "I'm sure there 
are already cases of cholera," McDermott told AFP on his return 
from Kigali on Thursday. He said fighting had prevented medical 
teams from assessing needs. 
  Two tonnes of chlorine flown in by UNICEF were stuck in a 
warehouse at the airport which was hit by a shell Wednesday, 
though 40 tonnes of food and emergency supplies have been partly 
distributed to needy civilians, McDermott said. 
  Relief agencies meanwhile launched impassioned pleas for 
international aid for Rwanda, where the UN has slashed its 
peacekeeping force from 2,500 to 270 because it feared for their 
safety. [passage omitted] 
  "Half the population urgently need help," said Philippe 
Gaillard, the Red Cross chief in Kigali. Rwanda's population is 
estimated at seven million. Gaillard said that before the 
fighting, a million Rwandans displaced by the three-year civil 
war already depended on food aid. Another million have fled 
their homes since April 6, he said. "The international 
community must not forget Rwanda, even if it has to be concerned 
with Gorazde and South Africa too," Gaillard said. "It's the 
heart of darkness in Rwanda," Red Cross spokesman Tony Burgener 
said. 
  Unable to work safely in Kigali, aid agencies are organising 
relief operations from border towns in neighbouring Uganda, 
Zaire, Burundi and Tanzania. 
  They bring in food and medicine, and evacuate casualties. 
  Red Cross workers went to the north-eastern town of Gisenyi 
on Thursday to see 350 orphans who may also need to be evacuated 
to Zaire. 
  In Kigali, for the first time in two weeks the Red Cross was 
able to get 13 wounded people to hospital without being harassed 
at the numerous roadblocks manned by militiamen, soldiers or 
rebel guerrillas. 
  The Red Cross had stopped evacuating casualties after 
militiamen murdered six wounded people being driven to hospital 
in a Red Cross vehicle two weeks ago. 

