BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, April 28 (TANJUG) -- Yugoslavia 
(Serbia/Montenegro) should insist that the first stage of easing 
U.N. sanctions should include the lifting of the export ban in 
order that fresh money might be obtained for reviving 
production, says Yugoslav economic expert Oskar Kovac. 
Unstopping of the inflow of foreign exchange is the best way to 
financial consolidation, Kovac said in an interview to TANJUG, 
specifying that part of the revenue would be used to replenish 
the foreign exchange coffers, and the rest for investments. 
  The exporters will be grappling with difficulties even after 
the lifting of the sanctions, however, because countries like 
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and the Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Slovenia have already taken the advantage 
of the anti-Yugoslav sanctions to seize a good part of the 
Western European market which had belonged to the Yugoslav 
exporters before the sanctions, Kovac warned. The U.N. Security 
Council clamped the sanctions on Yugoslavia in May 1992 for its 
alleged involvement in civil war raging in neighbouring 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The biggest difficulty after the sanctions will be to regain 
the international financial markets, said Kovac and explained 
that the basic precondition for this was a sharing of the assets 
of the former Yugoslav federation with the breakaway republics 
and the creditors' estimate of Yugoslavia's credit rating. As 
for the future foreign borrowing, it will, whether we want it or 
not, depend primarily on the repayment of old debts, said Kovac. 
He explained that the later stage of the lifting of the 
sanctions would set in motion debt rescheduling talks with the 
Paris Club of creditors and the commercial banks. With the 
already high foreign indebtedness, future foreign borrowing 
should be kept at the minimum, Kovac believes. 
  In order to put the domestic economy back on its feet, 
Yugoslavia should think of seeking a combined structural 
adjustement and financial adjustment loan from the World Bank 
which offers rather flexible conditions, Kovac stressed. 

