Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["False Reports of U.S. and South Korean Media About 'Food </F>
Shortage' Refuted" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, January 10 (KCNA) -- A spokesman for the 
DPRK State Agricultural Commission answered a question put by 
KCNA today concerning the rumor of "food shortage" in North 
Korea spread by some U.S. and South Korean media recently. 
  He said: 
  Some time ago, the Voice of America and the U.S. paper WALL 
STREET JOURNAL set afloat false reports that North Korea was 
suffering "a serious food shortage" and it was in "an extreme 
food crisis". 
  Meanwhile, South Korean press went so far as to spread the 
unfounded rumor that North Korea asked some one to supply rice 
and would send a delegation to a certain country to request an 
emergency food aid. 
  The fuss made by some U.S. and South Korean media about our 
"food shortage" is nothing but a dastardly farce invented with a 
view to tarnishing the image of the socialism of our style and 
covering up the reality of South Korea where agriculture now 
faces a catastrophic crisis due to the anti-popular agricultural 
policy. 
  Last year, the agricultural sector of our country not only 
completed irrigation and electrification on a high level and 
made an advance in mechanization and application of chemicals 
but reaped an unusual bumper harvest by doing farming on a 
scientific and technological basis as required by the chuche 
method of farming. 
  We, regarding food as a main strategic supply, have long 
since stored much extra rice. This was proved by the fact that 
when South Korea suffered flood damages, we, out of compatriotic 
feeling, sent to South Korea rice which had been in storage for 
more than four or five years. This was admitted by the South 
Korean authorities. 
  Nevertheless, U.S. and South Korean media are vociferating 
about the "food problem" of the North. This is aimed at 
slandering our socialist system and lulling the South Korean 
people's anti-U.S., anti-"government" sentiments which have 
mounted with a crop failure and rice market opening. 
  Solid foundations for agricultural production have been laid 
in our country in accordance with the theses on the socialist 
rural question. This always guarantees bumper crops. 
  If the U.S. and South Korean media want something to report 
about food crisis, they had better find it in the South Korean 
countryside suffering from bad harvest every year and crying 
over rice market opening. Only then, they will save their face 
as mass media. 

