BFN 

<F P=106> [By Victoria Stegic] </F>
  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 5 (AFP) -- A UN spokesman warned 
of a "very serious" situation in the eastern enclave of Gorazde 
after Bosnian Serb forces confirmed Tuesday [5 April] they had 
broken through defence lines in response to a government 
"offensive." 
  A UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) official, insisting on 
anonymity, said the bombardment of the enclave on Monday had 
been so intense that UN military observers there had been unable 
to move about. Serb forces controlled every road or pathway 
leading to Gorazde and the two other beleaguered eastern 
enclaves Zepa and Srebrenica. 
  UNPROFOR spokesman Major Rob Annink said UN troops in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina were too thinly spread to spare men for 
Gorazde. 
  A spokesman here for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 
Kris Janowski, said 49 people had been killed and 218 injured 
since last week in the fighting in Goradze. He cited a report 
sent from the enclave by UNHCR doctors at 1700 GMT Monday. A 
UNHCR spokesman in Geneva on Tuesday put the figures at 50 dead 
and 250 injured. 
  UN Security Council president Colin Keating of New Zealand 
said in New York late Monday that UN military advisors were 
being sent to the region. [passage omitted] 
  In Geneva, UNHCR spokesman Ron Redmond said a new wave of 
refugees was heading for Gorazde, according to one of the four 
UNHCR members there, with at least 45 arriving late Monday from 
Balici and other neighbouring villages. The level of fighting 
in the enclave was "still very high," he said. 
  Redmond said his organisation was "very concerned" with the 
situation in Gorazde where it had been "unable to get a convoy 
into the town since March 22. ... Those supplies are going to be 
running out and we desperately need to get more convoys." 
  Among those killed in the past week were 11 women and 
elderly 
people and seven children, he said, citing a UNHCR doctor who 
visited the town's hospital daily. Dozens of wounded needed to 
be evacuated, he added. [passage omitted] 
  Annink cited "other priorities" as a reason for the delay in 
getting UN troops to the Gorazde region, among them humanitarian 
aid and support of the ceasefire in Sarajevo and central Bosnia. 
  "We are already spread very thinly and we don't want to let 
up on security for our own troops. When we send them we have to 
be able to defend our own troops," he said. [passage omitted] 

