Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Lech Walesa's meeting with journalists and 
members of the SLOWO-DZIENNIK KATOLICKI editorial team at the 
paper's editorial office lasted almost two hours. [passage 
omitted] The president said that he has decided to run in the 
next presidential election because of the other candidates. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Begin Walesa recording] There are only professors and great 
politicians around. I am president, and I shall remain 
president for a long time because I know about politics. I 
shall do it, although it may surprise everyone. What happened 
at the last elections? Everyone was so sure, but what was the 
outcome? I shall do what is necessary for Poland, and I will 
remain within the law. I will not break the law. If a 
particular solution is necessary, this solution will happen. 
Who will win? Certainly not the Democratic Left Alliance this 
time. It will happen in accordance with the law, and I shall do 
it wearing kid gloves. When they all find out the results, it 
will be too late. 
  I am not changing my opinion because I respect Prime 
Minister 
Pawlak very much. However, Pawlak is a very talented young man 
who has no experience with people in the streets, 
stone-throwing, strikes, and all of that. I can predict what 
times like these will bring, and this is only a prelude. Some 
people can already smell gunpowder and some cannot. I am afraid 
that Pawlak cannot bear the burden of these solutions. 
Moreover, he has a very unrepresentative parliament. I am not 
undermining democracy. I respect it, but I am talking about 
facts that result in more facts. I have foreseen, and I can 
still see, that he will have a difficult life and that he is 
wasted at a time like this. 
  What would the outcome of the elections have been if they 
had 
listened to me then? What would the situation be now? Totally 
different. Fate has accomplished what I wisely proposed 
earlier, but no one writes about this. I wish Pawlak all the 
best, although I am afraid the issues involved are so difficult 
that great experience is needed to cope with them. Pawlak does 
not have experience because of his age and track record. 
  The time has come that we must talk to all social groups, 
including workers. If this stage comes earlier as a result of 
irresponsible behavior or an attempt to change the Constitution, 
other issues will also have to be examined, and more talks will 
have to take place. 
  I favor clarity on the most vital issues, clarity of 
government actions and clarity of economic conditions and 
prospects, so we can feel more certain and can make better 
choices tomorrow. I would like the situation before the 
elections to be clear, so that the nation knows who it is 
choosing, so that the nation is convinced that it must choose, 
so that the elections go well, and so that we can win. [end 
recording] 

