Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] In another 20 years, the Ecuadoran timber industry 
will no longer have any raw material and Ecuador, a country 
traditionally self-sufficient in wood, will begin importing it. 
  This is one of the conclusions of a study on strategies for 
a 
sustained timber industry in Ecuador, conducted by the Ecuadoran 
Institute of Forestry, Nature Areas and Wild Life (Inefan), with 
support from the International Organization of Tropical Woods 
(OIMT). 
  Eduardo Mansur, a technician in forest economy and one of 
the 
authors of the study, gave a lecture on the subject to members 
of the Ecuadoran Association of the Wood Industry. 
  Mansur said that Ecuador has a greater area of natural scrub 
growth in previously deforested areas than of replanted forest. 
Planted forests in the country account for no more than 80,000 
hectares, while scrub growth is more than 95,000 hectares. 
  The study identified the production potential of Ecuadoran 
forests and the need to protect them. 
  A diagnosis of the local industry was also performed and the 
level of development of the country's timber industry 
established. 
  Ecuador has great potential for wood production, but 
exploitation is not rational. While there is extraction of 
forest resources, there is no true management of the natural 
forest, said Mansur. 
  Given this situation, Inefan launched Planfor (Plan To 
Encourage Forest Replanting) that intends to change this 
situation radically and to reforest an area of 600,000 hectares 
in the next 20 years. 
  In this way, the forestry industry would be placed on a 
self-sustaining basis, reversing the disappearance of forestry 
resources that is taking place in the countries of the world's 
tropical belt due to the extraction of timber, replacement of 
the forest for agricultural use, grazing, and human resettlement. 
  The plan maintains that the development level of the 
country's forest industry can be improved through training for 
25,000 persons employed in the industry, the availability of 
credit for the improvement of small industry, the creation of 
poles of industry for cooperative marketing, and control over 
the use of power saws. 
  Mansur emphasized that Ecuador's forest resources, located 
primarily in Amazonia, need conservation and protection, as do 
the scarce forest resources on the coast, which are threatened. 
  The danger is especially evident in northern Esmeraldas, 
where exploitation is twice what it should be, about 1.7 million 
cubic meters per year, when it should be no more than .9 million 
cubic meters, to maintain the forest in a permanent condition of 
production. 
  In conclusion, the study presents three scenarios. The first 
is titled ``Pessimist,'' in which the Planfor does not work, 
there are no forest replantings, and by the year 2013 Ecuador's 
forest resources are depleted so that no further exploitation is 
possible. 
  The second scenario is titled ``Conservative'' and assumes 
that Planfor is only carried out by one-third. In that case, the 
existence of replanted forests is guaranteed to the year 2013, 
with some surplus for export. 
  In the third scenario, titled ``Desirable,'' two-thirds of 
the replanting called for by Planfor is accomplished, some 
400,000 hectares in 20 years, which will permit the construction 
of a paper pulp and paper factory, important investments in the 
forest industry, and significant exports that would exceed a 
billion dollars annually in 20 years. 
  Which of these scenarios comes true depends on the entire 
Ecuadoran society, on the forest industry, the government, the 
peasants, and rural proprietors, who will be able to share in 
the country's forestry development, Mansur said. 
  He pointed out that wood is indispensable to mankind and, as 
it is a renewable resource, we can produce it, plant it, and 
harvest it, but this requires time, planning, and resources. 

