BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 10 KYODO -- Former Foreign Minister 
Michio Watanabe expressed reluctance Sunday [10 April] to leave 
the largest opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) without 
"comfortable" support from LDP members to run for prime minister 
as a candidate of the ruling coalition. 
  Appearing on a TV Asahi program with Shinseito [Japan 
Renewal 
Party] leader Tsutomu Hata, the leading contender to succeed 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, and two other coalition 
leaders, Watanabe said the ruling coalition has not sounded him 
out about running for premier. 
  But during the program, Watanabe signaled his willingness to 
run for prime minister if there is a "comfortable" number of LDP 
members to leave the party to rally with all or portions of the 
ruling coalition. 
  He made the remarks just before representatives of coalition 
partners resumed talks Sunday morning to see if they can settle 
on a candidate for Hosokawa's successor. 
  The ruling coalition has agreed to help inaugurate a new 
cabinet by the end of this week. 
  Watanabe said he has spelled out his policy objectives in 
his 
newly published book "New Conservative Revolution," adding that 
Japan-U.S. trade disputes are "an urgent problem" along with 
Japan's crisis management. 
  Keigo Ouchi, leader of the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), 
revealed during the same TV Asahi program that he recently had a 
one-on-one session with Watanabe. 
  Ouchi said his party would back Watanabe's candidacy for 
premier if Watanabe promises not to be too close to Shinseito 
and Komeito [Clean Government Party] at the expense of other 
coalition partners, including Ouchi's DSP. 
  Tomiichi Murayama, chairman of the Social Democratic Party 
(SDP), voiced skepticism about forming a coalition government 
with the conservative LDP. 
  "There is no such possibility," he told the TV Asahi 
program. 
  Hosokawa announced Friday he is resigning to take 
responsibility for questionable financial deals and for the 
impasse over Diet debate on the budget for fiscal 1994 that 
began April 1. 
  Komeito is in favor of Hata as a candidate to replace 
Hosokawa but the SDP is against his candidacy fearing that a new 
cabinet will be dominated by Shinseito and Soka Gakkai-backed 
Komeito. 
  Komeito Secretary General Yuichi Ichikawa, appearing on an 
NHK program, criticized Watanabe for "talking too much (about 
Komeito) based on misunderstanding." 
  Watanabe has been critical of the longstanding relationship 
between Komeito and Soka Gakkai, a lay organization of the 
Nichiren Shoshu sect of Buddhism. 
  The Japanese constitution bans religious groups from 
exercising "any political authority." 
  LDP president Yohei Kono called for the establishment of a 
new coalition government by gathering conservatives and liberals 
together with the LDP as the axis. 
  Kono told the NHK program that "it is natural to discuss 
rearranging (members of) the coalition government." 
  "The LDP should talk with other parties about policies one 
by 
one and stabilize politics," Kono said. 
  As fundamental policies to which a new coalition government 
should agree, Kono raised such issues as the Japan-U.S. 
relationship, tax reform and welfare policy. 
  Kono did not deny a possibility of tying up with the SDP but 
spurned a speculation that Watanabe quit the LDP to join other 
forces, saying, "I don't think it at all." 
  New party Sakigage leader Takemura Masayoshi, also the chief 
cabinet secretary, showed reluctance to maintain the framework 
of the present coalition government unless a situation will 
change where Shinseito founder Ichiro Ozawa is said to have been 
actually controlled. 
  "We must graduate earlier from a situation where a man, not 
a 
prime minister, leads Japan," Takemura told the NHK program, 
alluding to Ozawa's behind-the-scenes clout. 
  Takemura also hinted that Sakigage may tie up with 
reformists 
within the LDP. 
  Murayama also told a Fuji TV program that he can support 
Hata 
but only on condition that the Shinseito amend its "high-handed" 
political techniques. 
  But Murayama denied a possibility that the SDP will remain 
in 
a coalition government if Watanabe joins after quitting the LDP 
with a certain number of members. 
  "It is meaningless for the SDP to stay in a cabinet to be 
mainly formed by Shinseito and the Watanabe faction which will 
possess the same nature as the LDP," Murayama said. 
  Shinseito was set up by a group of Diet men who bolted from 
the LDP just before the July 1993 general elections. 
  Hosokawa's Japan new party formed the coalition government 
last August with Shinseito, the SDP, Komeito, the DSP, Sakigage 
and the United Social Democratic Party. 
  The LDP lost its 38-year-rule on power but has maintained 
the 
largest force in the Diet with Kono as its president. 

