BFN 

<F P=106> [By Oleg Padenko; from the ``Pacific Ocean'' program] </F>
  [Text] Vladivostok today has other problems. After our 
bothersome winter, the city needs cleaning and piles of rubbish 
removed before they become the cause of dreadful epidemics. 
This work has already begun and, as a matter of fact, quite 
intensively; however, the Sanepidstantsiya [Sanitation and 
Epidemiology Station] has not ceased to sound the alarm. 
  The problem of environmental pollution does not only concern 
the Vladivostok authorities. The Governments of Russia, South 
Korea, and Japan are quite concerned with the level of pollution 
in the Sea of Japan. The Russian scientific research vessel 
Okean, in the Japanese port of Niigata this week took aboard 
Korean and Japanese scientists, as well as an International 
Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] expert, and sailed for the first 
radioactive waste dump site. Journalist Oleg Padenko will now 
give you a more detailed report. 
  [Begin recording] Padenko: This 
expedition was approved by the governments of the three 
countries whose shores are washed by the Sea of Japan. It is 
also being financed by these three countries and that is why it 
is equipped with modern equipment that will be taken aboard the 
scientific ship Okean in the Japanese port of Niigata, and where 
the Russian scientists will be joined by researchers from Japan 
and South Korea. Besides them, representatives of the Pacific 
Fleet -- the culprits of the piece -- as well as an observer 
from the IAEA will also take part in the research voyage. The 
reason for the expedition is known: the dumping of low 
radioactivity liquid wastes into the Sea of Japan by the Pacific 
Fleet in October last year, although our maritime neighbors have 
also solved such problems near their shores in the same way. 
  As was clarified later, our Navy dumped the polluted water 
legally, that is, with the permission of the Russian Ecology 
Ministry and in compliance with IAEA requirements. The 
radioactive waste dumping operation was observed by the 
environmental organization's vessel, Greenpeace. However, as 
they say, every cloud has a silver lining, since it served to 
make everyone once more raise the quite urgent and 
more-than-just-topical issue of environmental protection. And 
here, it is important to unite the efforts of all the sides 
concerned. The first step has been taken. To work out 
recommendations, the joint expedition aboard the Okean will 
collect samples of the sea bottom, take water samples at various 
depths, and carry out a quick analysis using a full range of 
tests to detect pollution in the sea. Well, what do the 
scientists expect from this joint work? Yuriy Nikolayevich 
Volkov, expedition leader and director of the Far East 
Hydrometeorological Institute, explains. 
  Volkov: I am hoping for positive results from this 
expedition. That is, that the radioactivity level will be no 
higher than normal background levels; however, the experiment 
will give us the final proof. 
  Padenko: It is apparent that you have already 
mixed somewhat with your foreign colleagues, namely the South 
Korean and Japanese specialists; tell us what do they have to 
say on this matter? What is their opinion about this voyage and 
the problem in general? 
  Volkov: They recognize that the problem is an 
important one and that this expedition must basically reassure 
the public that the sea is ecologically clean so that ordinary 
folk, who watched television and saw the dumping of the liquid 
radioactive waste, would not be afraid to buy fish -- because it 
is on household tables daily. Nevertheless, knowing how the 
dumping was done and what level of radioactivity there was, I 
and, of course, the other scientists also think that there are 
no consequences. 
  Padenko: Nevertheless, the expedition is still 
going? 
  Volkov: Of course, all this is being done at the 
highest level and in compliance with international standards, so 
that all the people understand that generally there is no danger 
to people's health. Although, I reiterate that it is better not 
to dump in the first place, so that we will not have to 
investigate later. [end recording] 

