Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 7 Feb (NA) -- Defense Minister Oscar 
Camilion thinks that the United Kingdom "is wrong in 
considering" the purchase of 36 Skyhawk A-4M airplanes equipped 
with late-generation radars "as a conflict with Argentina." 
  In Camilion's opinion, the diplomatic mishaps generated by 
the purchase of this materiel from the United States are 
"artificial conflicts and a false problem," because these 
airplanes "do not imply any potential display of military power." 
  According to the minister, the U.S. decision to sell the 
airplanes to Argentina "was made a long time ago," but it was 
postponed given "the strong opposition expressed by the United 
Kingdom before all levels of the U.S. Government." 
  "Thus, the Western countries' arms embargo on Argentina has 
ended, except for the United Kingdom," the defense minister told 
EL CRONISTA newspaper. 
  Camilion said that during his last trip to the United States 
he told former U.S. Defense Secretary Les Aspin that "it is 
incomprehensible" that the UN Security Council of which the 
United Kingdom and the United States are key members should ask 
for "Argentina's participation in peace missions and at the same 
time apply an arms embargo on it." 
  Camilion said that Argentina "never intended to fight with 
anyone over this operation which, from the military point of 
view, is not very important because the airplanes will be used 
to train pilots." 
  When asked about his expectations regarding the British 
reaction, Camilion said that the United Kingdom "has more 
diplomatic experience than any other" country and that Argentina 
"must maintain the good level of dialogue through diplomatic 
channels in its claim for the Malvinas." 
  As for the reasons that led Argentina to buy these airplanes 
if there is no possibility of an armed conflict here, the 
minister said that states "are security organizations that 
require a minimum deterrent capability in case of possible 
aggressions." 
  He also said that some additional credits will be left over 
from the purchase of the Skyhawks and they will be used this 
year to purchase a nonpolluting naval unit to operate in the 
Antarctic zone. 

