BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 30 (XINHUA) -- A signed article 
published in Beijing-based newspapers today warns to be vigilant 
against any attempt to undermine relations across the Taiwan 
Straits by utilizing the "Qiandao Lake incident". 
  It says that peaceful reunification is an inevitable trend 
in 
accord with the desires of the people across the straits. To 
achieve this goal as early as possible, compatriots across the 
straits have made great mutual efforts to bring about good 
relations across the straits. 
  The article written by Guo Taiwen says that no small efforts 
have been expended in bringing the relations across the straits 
to the present stage, adding that all people who hope for 
reunification should treasure the established relations. 
  It points out that any activities aimed at damaging the 
relations between the people across the straits, which are as 
close as flesh and blood, will not enjoy popular support. 
  It says that all compatriots across the straits are deeply 
grieved at the Qiandao Lake incident that caused 32 deaths, 
including 24 Taiwan tourists and eight mainlanders, when the 
tourist boat they boarded was robbed and set on fire in East 
China's Zhejiang Province on March 31. 
  And at the same time people also felt relieved that the 
robbery case has been uncovered, the article says. 
  The article says that after the incident took place the 
central government has shown great concern over it, instructing 
the Zhejiang Provincial Government to investigate and uncover 
the case as soon as possible. 
  Local public security institutions had worked hard and 
announced after 17 days of investigation that it was a case of 
murder, robbery and arson and three suspects had been arrested, 
it says. 
  The article criticized some officials and people in Taiwan 
for their spreading slanderous rumors to whip up resentful 
sentiments so as to sabotage the relations across the straits. 
  It says that it is understandable that people said extreme 
and inappropriate words when they were unaware of the truth of 
the event. But, the article warns that there are really a 
handful of people, who with ulterior motives have tried their 
best to undermine the good ties across the straits. 

