BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Roberto Morejon for the "Evening Information </F>
Review" newscast] 
  [Text] Thirty years after the first agrarian reform was 
signed in Cuba to authorize the private ownership of land up to 
a maximum of 412 hectares, agriculture has entered a new phase 
in which land exploitation by cooperatives prevails over large 
state-owned enterprises. The first agrarian reform eliminated 
large estates in Cuba and turned 100,000 peasants into land 
owners. These peasants tilled land plots as tenants until 1959, 
but a second law affecting this sector reduced to 67 hectares 
the land that a person could own. 
  This provision is still in effect, but the private ownership 
of land is not the prevalent formula. Instead, it is the 
ownership of land by cooperatives, mainly as a result of a law 
issued last year creating the so-called basic cooperative 
production units [UBPC's]. Given the critical shortage of fuel, 
fertilizers, herbicides, and spare parts for tractors and other 
machinery in Cuba, it was not possible to maintain large 
agricultural enterprises where large-scale production relied 
mainly on the availability of the above-mentioned products. 
  Cooperatives that existed prior to this and were created 
after peasants voluntarily relinquished their privately-owned 
land were followed in 1993 by the experience of the UBPC's, 
characterized by the granting of state-owned land plots to 
agricultural workers for their use. The cooperatives combine 
social and individual interests much better and, without 
becoming small estates, turn extensive state-owned enterprises 
into smaller areas ranging between 300 and 1,000 hectares to 
render them more manageable under the current conditions. 
  The new cooperative members purchase the state's machinery 
and raw materials for their crops; they own their production; 
and they distribute their profits every year according to the 
yields of their harvests. The principles that rule the new form 
of activity and production in Cuban agriculture are the result 
of an analysis of the economic feasibility, profit margins, and 
the sustained increase of production with less resources. 
  The degree of participation in the new cooperatives has been 
high -- approximately 1,600 UBPC's were created in the sugar 
cane sector and approximately 900 were created to raise other 
crops -- with tangible results like a better distribution of the 
day's work. This confirms that the country is adapting its 
agricultural system according to the needs of every phase in the 
search for more efficiency in this sector, which is vital for 
all the nourishment of all Cubans. 

