Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by staff reporter Chang Shao-wei (1728 </F>
1421 1218): "China and the United States Increase Cooperation 
in Cracking Down on Crimes"] 
  [Text] "The Chinese and U.S. Governments have clear 
differences in terms of human rights, missile proliferation, and 
trade methods and we neither deny nor ignore them. However, 
since internationalized crime poses a common threat to both our 
countries, we are making joint efforts to face squarely the 
common interests we have on this issue." 
  That is the view aired by Robert Gelbard, U.S. assistant 
secretary of state for international narcotics matters, in a 
speech in Hong Kong yesterday. It was precisely for this reason 
that Gelbard recently led a high-level delegation to China to 
seek increased cooperation in cracking down on crime. 
  Since President Jiang Zemin and President Clinton met last 
November, Sino-U.S. relations have further improved. Gelbard's 
trip proves that, as two big powers, China and the United States 
have many spheres of cooperation. With the rise in 
international organized crime, the focus of the crackdown has 
shifted to how to get more information to accurately deal a 
crushing blow from top to bottom at transnational crime 
syndicates. This makes it necessary for the law-enforcement 
departments of various countries to work with good cooperation. 
  In his speech, Gelbard described how transnational organized 
crime syndicates carry out illegal activities with advanced 
weapons, telecommunications, and transport facilities, as well 
as monetary means. He said: "If the boss of an Asian syndicate 
enterprise wants to fix up a kidnapping case in New York, he can 
order his subordinate in New Jersey by directly dialling his 
subordinate's mobile telephone number using satellite 
telecommunications equipment. Afterward, they can make contact 
again by coded fax. If funds are needed, the money can be 
remitted to the United States electronically, possibly through a 
Hong Kong bank. The ransom can also be remitted to a bank in 
the Bahamas, then sent again from there to Panama, eventually 
arriving in a numbered Swiss bank account. The entire process 
can be completed in one day." 
  This description is like the plot of a movie but it is 
really 
shocking, especially the fact that what has been revealed is 
only the tip of the iceberg. Given such modern methods of 
committing crime, it has become even more difficult to crack 
down on crime. 
  Gelbard pointed out that half the drugs on the U.S. market 
come from Asia. 
  With the opening up of the country, the economic 
development, 
and the influx of Western ideas, various different factors have 
contributed to the resurrection of drug-taking in China, where 
it had disappeared for decades. The drug-trafficking activities 
through China's long borders have also become increasingly 
rampant. The crime syndicates in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the 
United States not only smuggle drugs to other countries through 
the Chinese mainland but also smuggle "human cargo" to the 
United States in a big way, making it more urgent for China and 
the United States to jointly crack down on such organized crime. 
  As a financial and information center, Hong Kong is 
naturally 
regarded by the international crime syndicates as a paradise for 
money laundering and a supreme headquarters for mobilizing and 
organizing various criminal activities. What is needed now is 
for the world's law-enforcement authorities to make joint 
efforts to crack down on the frenzied criminal activities. It 
is gratifying that such joint efforts are being stepped up. 
Gelbard said that from his talks with Chinese officials he had 
got the impression that the Chinese side approached 
drug-trafficking and other issues very seriously and 
conscientiously and that Sino-U.S. cooperation would be further 
strengthened. His successful visit to China also shows that 
through their joint efforts China and the United States can more 
effectively crack down on crimes and safeguard people's security 
and social stability. 

