Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Correspondent Mircea Dascaliuc report from Chisinau] </F>
  [Text] Today the president of the Republic of Moldova 
Mircea Snegur granted an interview to the correspondent of the 
German Radio Station Deutsche Welle, the Press Bureau of the 
Presidency announced. 
  A number of questions referred to the early parliamentary 
elections due on 27 February 1994. President Mircea Snegur 
stated that all necessary conditions have been created to ensure 
an appropriate electoral process in a democratic way. Regarding 
the citizens in the eastern rayons of the Republic of Moldova, 
he has prepared a decree according to which those citizens will 
be able to cast their votes one week earlier because the 
Tiraspol authorities do not want to set up electoral stations in 
the area they controlled. This decree was required by the 
president's duty to respect the claims of the population in that 
area, claims that have been expressed at recent meetings, Mircea 
Snegur also stated. 
  Referring to the issue of the 14th Army, which is deployed 
on 
the territory of the Republic of Moldova, President Snegur 
affirmed that this will be withdrawn unconditionally, which 
means that the Russian side will not ask for a special legal 
statute for Dniester as the price for the withdrawal. 
  President Mircea Snegur also referred to the Ilascu group in 
connection with this issue and said that the current 
constitution of the Republic of Moldova prefers to act more and 
talk less, currently making everything possible for the transfer 
of the group to Chisinau. 
  According to the report of the Presidency's Press, when 
asked 
for his views regarding the responses to the speech he made [on 
5 February] at the congress Our Home the Republic of Moldova, 
Snegur said, quote, the speech focused on concrete realities and 
on the current situation, unquote. Noting that he does not 
withdraw the remarks he made, President Snegur added that none 
of his critics remarked that the speech was deliberately based 
on the idea of maintaining the national and blood ties. 
  In concluding the Deutsche Welle interview, President Snegur 
said that the Republic of Moldova will join the formula proposed 
by the North Atlantic Alliance, that is, the Partnership for 
Peace, but, at the same time, it will not stop militating for 
the achievement of neutral status. 

