BFN 

<F P=106> [Russian Federation president's edict No. 850 "On State </F>
Oversight and Monitoring of the Observance of Russian Federation 
Legislation on Labor and Labor Safety"] 
  [Text] With a view to ensuring the guarantee of citizens' 
constitutional right to labor in conditions which meet safety 
and hygiene requirements and to stepping up oversight and 
monitoring of the observance of Russian Federation legislation 
on labor and labor safety, I decree: 
  1. That it be stipulated that until a legislative act is 
adopted on the state labor inspectorate, state oversight and 
monitoring of the observance of Russian Federation legislation 
on labor and labor safety is implemented by the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Labor's Federal Labor Inspectorate 
(Rostrudinspektsiya) and the state labor inspectorates of 
republics, krays, oblasts, cities of federal importance, the 
autonomous oblast, autonomous okrugs, rayons, and cities which 
are subordinate to it. 
  2. That the state labor law inspectors and state labor 
safety inspectors have the right to visit unimpeded enterprises, 
institutions, and organizations irrespective of their form of 
ownership, to carry out checks on the observance of Russian 
Federation legislation on labor and labor safety, and, within 
the procedure established by Russian Federation legislation on 
administrative law violations, to impose fines on employers, 
officials, and other responsible workers at enterprises, 
institutions, and organizations irrespective of their forms of 
ownership. 
  In implementing their powers state labor law inspectors and 
state labor safety inspectors are independent of state organs 
and officials and are guided only by Russian Federation laws and 
other normative legal acts. 
  3. The leader of the Rostrudinspektsiya is the chief state 
labor inspector of the Russian Federation, appointed to and 
released from his post by the Russian Federation president. 
  The leaders of state labor inspectorates and state labor law 
inspectors and state labor safety inspectors are appointed to 
and released from their posts by the Russian Federation chief 
state labor inspector. 
  4. The Russian Federation Government must within a month: 
  submit a draft statute on the Rostrudinspektsiya; 
  determine the procedure and terms for the remuneration, 
material and consumer backup, and medical services for state 
employees in the Rostrudinspektsiya central apparatus in line 
with the relevant procedure and terms stipulated for state 
employees in the central apparatuses of federal ministries; 
  submit proposals for the ratification of the International 
Labor Organizations's convention on labor inspection (1947) and 
the International Labor Organization convention on regulating 
labor issues (1978) and also for the modifying and supplementing 
the Russian Soviet Federal Socialist Republic code on 
administrative law violations, the Russian Federation code of 
labor laws, and the fundamental principles of Russian Federation 
legislation on labor safety. 
  [signed] Russian Federation President B. Yeltsin, Moscow, 
Kremlin, 4 May 1994. 

