Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] His Excellency President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, 
chairman of the Yemeni Presidential Council, left Amman for home 
this afternoon after taking part in the signing of the Yemeni 
accord document in Amman yesterday under the patronage of His 
Majesty King Husayn. His Majesty King Husayn and His Highness 
Crown Prince Hasan led those who saw off his excellency the 
Yemeni president. Also at hand to see him off were Prime 
Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali, the Senate president, the 
House of Representatives speaker, his majesty the king's 
advisers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, several 
senior civilian and military officials, the Jordanian ambassador 
in Sanaa, and the Yemeni ambassador in Amman. 
  His excellency the Yemeni president was accorded an official 
sendoff. Leaving with him were 'Abd-al-'Aziz 'Abd-al-Ghani, 
member of the Yemeni Presidential Council; Shaykh 'Abdallah 
al-Ahmar, speaker of the House of Representatives and head of 
the Yemeni Reform Grouping; and the members of the delegation 
accompanying him. 
  'Ali Salim al-Bid, vice chairman of the Yemeni Presidential 
Council, also left Amman at noon today after taking part in the 
signing of the Yemeni accord document in Amman yesterday under 
the patronage of His Majesty King Husayn. He was seen off at 
the airport by His Highness Crown Prince Hasan. Also at hand to 
see him off were Senate President 'Ahmad al-Lawzi; House of 
Representatives Speaker Tahir al-Masri; King Husayn's adviser 
Dr. Khalid al-Karaki, who is also the head of the escort mission 
accompanying the guest; the deputy prime minister; the minister 
of higher education; His Highness Prince Hasan's special 
adviser; several ministers; the directors of the General 
Intelligence Department, the Public Security Department, and the 
Civil Defense Department; the chief of staff of the Royal Ground 
Forces; the mayor of Amman; the governor of Amman; and several 
senior civilian and military officials. 
  His excellency the guest reviewed the guard of honor and was 
accorded an official sendoff at Queen Alia Airport. Leaving 
with him was Dr. Yasin Sa'id Nu'man, head of the secretariat of 
the office of the Yemeni Socialist Party's Central Committee. 

