BFN 

<F P=106> [David Marsh article: "Final March of the Old Guard"] </F>
  [Text] Following the revolutions in the East, Europe is 
now coping with upheavals in the West. Five years after the 
surge of Central and East European discontent that led to the 
fall of the Berlin Wall, the ground is shifting under West 
Europe's political leadership. 
  Four weeks after Italy's general election, and with the 
countdown under way to polls in the Netherlands on May 3 and for 
the European Parliament on June 9 and 12, the continent is in 
the midst of a period of intense electioneering. 
  Coming political contests also include Germany's general 
election in October and the presidential tussle in France in May 
1995. By summer next year, most of the leaders who launched a 
dynamic phase of European integration leading to agreement on 
the Maastricht Treaty are likely to have left office. 
  The Maastricht summit in December 1991 represented a high 
point both in enthusiasm for European Union [EU] and for the 
careers of a remarkably long-lived set of European leaders. Of 
the 13 main participants at Maastricht, 11 had been in office 
(some for more than one spell) for six years or more. Since 
then, their political fortunes, like the European economy, have 
turned down. Five of the 13 have left office. At least three 
more will go over the next year. Of the 24 European Union 
finance and foreign ministers who signed the treaty in February 
1992, only seven remain. 
  The new generation must manage a difficult transition. 
Europe's challenges include: 
  1. Handling the slow recovery from recession, in one of the 
most difficult periods for the European economy since the 1930s 
depression; 
  2. Finding a common foreign and security policy to counter 
instability in former Yugoslavia, the ex-Soviet Union and 
northern Africa; 
  3. Holding the 1996 conference to renew the EU's structure 
and preparing for enlargement to East Europe after the planned 
1995 accession of Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden; 
  4. Rediscovering currency stability following the exchange 
rate mechanism's collapse in 1993 and doubts over the Maastricht 
goal of economic and monetary union (Emu) by 1997-99; 
  5. And re-establishing fiscal control after a rise in 
government borrowing to well above Maastricht Emu targets. 
  The Maastricht Treaty has become law, but it looks out of 
kilter with public opinion. The latest opinion surveys in 
Brussels show only 39 per cent of EU voters support the treaty, 
with 22 per cent against it and 39 per cent undecided. 
  Most governments expect a large protest vote in the European 
elections. The treaty gives the parliament greater powers. Yet 
an increased number of anti-Maastricht MEPs [Members of the 
European Parliament] is likely to enter the Strasbourg chamber. 
  "The elections are taking place at the worst possible 
juncture -- a time of malaise and disdain," says Mr Michael 
Sturmer, director of the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, a 
German Government policy thinktank. "All governments have 
failed to explain to their populations why Europe is good for 
them." 
  Political and economic strains have undermined earlier 
assumptions about European integration. No government at 
present wants to press for initiatives ahead of the 1996 
Maastricht review conference. This includes reconstructing the 
ERM [Exchange Rate Mechanism]. Mr Erik Hoffmeyer, governor of 
the Danish national bank, and Europe's longest-serving central 
bank chief, says last summer's break-up of the narrow-margin ERM 
has led to a "vacuum" in Emu planning. "This setback has 
paralysed the political process." 
  The changes in Italy, a traditional supporter of European 
Union, are particularly striking. The new government to be 
formed soon, probably under Mr Silvio Berlusconi, is likely to 
be more inward-looking than administrations run by the 
now-eclipsed Christian Democrats over the last 40 years. 
  Most EU members' policies are increasingly focused on 
national interests. This is underlined by France's support for 
its farmers during GATT negotiations, the row between Greece and 
the EU over Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia], and Britain's attempt to maintain its EU voting 
power after next year's enlargement. 
  Priorities seem to be switching in Germany and France, the 
main partners behind European co-operation. Pointing to unrest 
in the former Soviet Union and the Maghreb Mr Richard Portes, 
director of the London-based Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, says: "Germany will be looking more to its interests 
in the East, France to its interests in the south. 
  These are diverging perspectives." 
  A crucial factor behind the Maastricht Treaty was the French 
and German Governments' desire to reinforce the framework of 
integration to tie reunited Germany to West Europe. Leading 
figures in France and Germany admit that the plan to subsume the 
D-Mark into a single European currency was based partly on the 
perceived need to restrain German power. As exPresident Valery 
Giscard d'Estaing recently put it, "We need an organised Europe 
to escape German domination." 
  However, the German electorate's hostility to abandoning the 
D-Mark has added to the difficulties of realising Emu. 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl says he no longer wants "the United 
States of Europe" -- a goal he formerly specifically endorsed. 
  According to Prof Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann head of Germany's 
Allensbach opinion research institute, whose polls are 
influential with Mr Kohl, "There is a great determination in 
Germany not to go towards a federal European state. People want 
to keep national variations unchanged. Before Maastricht, this 
was not an issue." 
  Ms Noelle-Neumann's surveys show German opposition to Emu 
has softened recently because many Germans believe its prospects 
have receded. On the balance between deepening West European 
integration and extending the EU eastwards, Ms Noelle-Neumann 
says Germans have "an unswerving wish" to open Europe to the 
East. "This could create difficulties with France, Italy and 
Spain." 
  In France, business leaders recall Mr Edouard Balladur, the 
prime minister, a possible successor to President Francois 
Mitterrand, previously voiced strong doubts about Emu. "Union or 
not, we have to solve our own problems," says Mr Gerard Worms, 
chairman of France's Suez financial conglomerate. "What will 
happen in 1997 or 1999 is not the most important question." 
  One top French official says wistfully, "If the Soviet Union 
had not fallen, we could have had a triangular relationship 
between West Germany, Britain and France." 
  All hope for the Maastricht blueprint has not been lost. 
Economic recovery will rekindle enthusiasm for West European 
integration, just as it revived after the 1981-82 recession. 
The Union is likely to find a more coherent policy to deal with 
turbulence on its borders. Whatever the German population's 
scepticism, the German Government will not want to escape its 
treaty commitment to Emu. None the less, as Europe's political 
landscape changes, none of these three forecasts can be assured. 
As the 1980's leaders disappear from the stage, the objectives 
they espoused, too, may start to fade from view. 

