CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aya Furuta, staff writer] </F>
  [Text] In simple terms, gene therapy means enlisting the 
genetic blueprint of life in the battle to cure disease. While 
the technique is still at the basic research stage, some 
clinical success has already been reported, especially in the 
U.S. 
  In Japan, the government has finally set up screening 
committees for gene therapy trials, so now it is only a matter 
of time before Japanese clinical researchers can investigate the 
tremendous potential of this therapeutic technique. 
  Gene therapy was initially viewed mainly as a way to treat 
specific genetic disorders. But it is now seen in a larger 
context as a potential strategy for dealing with such general 
disorders as cancer and heart disease, in addition to fixing 
specific gene malfunctions. 
<H5>  Loaded Gun </H5>
  Whether aiming for something broad like heart disease or 
pinpointing a specific genetic problem, gene therapy involves 
the introduction of foreign genetic information into the body's 
cells. 
  Sometimes the goal is to throw a precisely aimed monkey 
wrench into the works, but most often the objective is to coax 
cells into incorporating the new genetic material and 
translating the genetic information into useful therapeutic 
substances. 
  In this sense, gene therapy is similar to the genetic 
engineering which has been going on for years. The difference, 
of course, is that the cells being genetically manipulated are 
human cells, and they are not cells in a plastic dish, but cells 
in people's bodies. 
  This raises numerous ethical questions, not least of which 
is 
the problem of people custom-ordering specific traits for their 
children. Technically, that is not possible yet because not 
enough is known about the human genome. Even so, ethical 
committees have already begun to address such topics. 
  In the meantime, a more pressing issue involves the safety 
of 
the techniques employed in gene therapy. The standard way of 
introducing foreign genetic material into cells is to ferry it 
in aboard viruses injected into the body. 
  The danger for gene therapy is that a virus used as a 
"vector" to introduce useful genetic material may itself start 
replicating inside the patient. Another danger is that the 
foreign genetic material could be introduced at a site 
disruptive to other important genes. 
  For this reason, scientists are looking at alternative 
approaches, such as using fatty droplets as the vector, and 
removing cells from the body and genetically engineering them in 
a controlled laboratory setting before returning them to the 
patient. 
<H5>  On Target </H5>
  Assuming that gene therapy can be made safe, what are the 
possible applications? One of the major targets is cancer. 
  At Niigata University, Kenichi Tanaka is studying gene 
therapy as a means of treating ovarian cancer. His strategy is 
to genetically alter the cancer cells so that they start 
producing an enzyme normally produced by the herpes virus, and 
then to kill the cancer cells with a herpes drug. 
  In experiments on mice, Tanaka says he can shrink tumors to 
less than half their original size in two weeks. "If I can, I'd 
like to start clinical trials within the year," says a hopeful 
Tanaka. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-015L-32A>      FIGURE </FIG>


  At the National Cancer Research Institute, Teruhiko Yoshida 
and Kazunori Aoki are developing a gene therapy for pancreatic 
cancer that has metastasized throughout the gut. This type of 
cancer is believed to be triggered by a gene called K-ras. 
  The researchers propose introducing a gene into the body 
that 
directs the continual production of a substance to block K-ras 
and inhibit the proliferation of cancer cells. Work is still at 
the stage of animal testing, however, and it could be some time 
before the therapy can be tested on humans. 
  In the end, cancer may turn out to be too tall an order for 
gene therapy alone. Cancer cells multiply extremely rapidly, and 
to be completely effective it might be necessary to introduce 
therapeutic genes into every cell. "The reality is that we now 
can only insert genes into about 5-10 percent of cells," says 
Tanaka. 
  But as long as there is no truly effective treatment for 
progressive cancers, gene therapy used alongside chemotherapy 
"would certainly strengthen our hand," says Yoshida. 
  Meanwhile, gene therapy remains the most promising way to 
cure hereditary disorders caused by defects in single genes. 
  There is already one success story: gene therapy has been 
used in the U.S. to treat children lacking a properly 
functioning gene for the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA). In 
the absence of this enzyme, people experience severe 
immunodeficiency. 
  In Japan, researchers at Hokkaido University are preparing 
for a similar project to treat ADA deficiency. Other researchers 
are developing gene therapy strategies to treat different 
genetic disorders. For example, Yoichi Nabeshima at the National 
Center of Neurology and Psychology is leading an effort to 
tackle Duchenne's muscular dystrophy. 
  It was only recently that the faulty gene responsible for 
this muscle-degenerating disease was identified. Nabeshima's 
idea is to inject a vector carrying a functional copy of this 
gene into the bloodstream, from where it would be transported 
throughout the body. 
  There are still many questions to be resolved, however, such 
as how to make a gene function on the muscles only, and not on 
the liver or kidneys. 

