CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Sapozhnikov: "Andreatta Says Italy Will </F>
Support Russia for a Role in G-7"] 
  [Text] MOSCOW--The G-7 is showing a more open attitude 
towards Russia. At the summit of industrialized countries to be 
held in Naples from July 8-10, Russia will participation more 
than it did at the preceding summit in Tokyo last year. This 
announcement was made yesterday by Beniamino Andreatta, the 
foreign minister, who left for a working trip to Moscow on 
Wednesday [9 March]. The Kremlin has always given particular 
emphasis to its relationship with Italy, and in this instance it 
has also done its best to stress the importance of Andreatta's 
visit: he was received by President Boris Yeltsin who gave 
placed a high value on the relationship between Moscow and Rome. 
"What inspires our admiration," the Kremlin leader stressed, "is 
that Italian leaders understand the partnership [preceding word 
in English] between Russia and the West in the true sense of the 
word, and this makes it possible to build a fruitful 
relationship based on equality." Problems related to the Russian 
military presence in the Baltic countries and the conflict in 
the former Yugoslavia were two other topics that Andreatta, who 
also traveled to Moscow in his capacity as President of the 
Government Council of the CSCE [Council on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe], covered with Yeltsin and the Russian 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Kozyrev. 
  Andreatta confirmed that at the next summit Russia will be 
given more prominence, especially with regard to the political 
portion of the meeting. At the same time, he admitted that from 
meetings held yesterday "there was some confusion from the 
Russian side" concerning "uncertainties and ambiguities" that 
some G-7 member countries still harbor on the future 
participation of Moscow in the group of highly-industrialized 
nations. Andreatta assured Yeltsin that from his standpoint 
"Italy will favor Russia's participation in all organizations 
where this is possible" because Russia's broader international 
presence can "have a positive significance for the growth of 
democracy in that country." 
  For Andreatta the G-7 is an "informal group without 
established rules"; thus, for the summit in Naples, two sessions 
will be organized: one "based essentially on economic issues and 
therefore without Russia present," and the second "on issues 
dedicated primarily to political matters." The nations that 
support the expansion of the G-7 to include Russia recognize, 
however, the need to limit the Kremlin's participation to 
discussions on international political issues, while economic 
matters will be confined to the original seven countries for an 
unspecified period of time. "In this way the process for Russian 
participation in the group of the seven most industrialized 
countries will move forward step by step," Andreatta said. 
  Andreatta and his Russian counterpart discussed at length 
the situation in the Baltic countries, and in particular the 
problem of former Soviet troops that are still located in these 
countries. Prior to leaving for Tallinn and Vilnius yesterday 
evening, Andreatta said, "I would like to draw the attention of 
those countries to the observance of the rules by virtue of 
which we are assisting them." Which is to say that the Baltic 
countries should not be in a hurry to be a part of Europe, and 
should maintain a good relationship with Moscow also. Tallinn 
and Vilnius are insisting on the immediate withdrawal of the Red 
Army, but yesterday Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev said 
that this will primarily depend on logistical problems such as 
the prospect of finding housing for soldiers returning to Russia. 
  In Moscow, Bosnia was also discussed: and later on Andreatta 
said that he noted Moscow's "positive attitude" towards the 
possibility of NATO intervention in Bosnia which is seen as "a 
first sign of the Partnership [preceding word in English] for 
peace." 

