BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Shalnev: "Boris Yeltsin Did Not </F>
Receive U.S. Congressmen, But They Were Satisfied Anyway"] 
  [Text] Russian President Boris Yeltsin did not receive a 
delegation of U.S. congressmen who were supposed to meet with 
him on Wednesday 6 April. 
  The members of the delegation, headed by the leaders of the 
Democrats and Republicans in the House of Representatives, say 
that they are more than satisfied with the talk they had with 
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  But it has become known from sources behind the scenes that 
the delegation's plans did indeed include: "Meeting with 
Yeltsin -- a meeting which did not take place for reasons not 
stated." 
  It is the first time such a thing has happened in the 
history 
of Russian-U.S. relations. Congressmen from the United States, 
on visting Moscow, regarded a meeting with our top leader as 
something that went almost without saying, and their 
expectations were never disappointed. On the other hand, you 
could count on the fingers of one hand the number of audiences 
granted to our parliamentary leaders by U.S. presidents. 
  Be that as it may, at the press conference at which the 
congressmen summed up their visit to Moscow it was again stated 
that support for reforms is in the long-term interests of both 
America and Russia. 
  In a brief conversation with me, Richard Gephardt, leader of 
the Democratic majority in the House of Representatives, was, 
however, rather evasive when asked when we can finally expect 
the lifting of all the restrictions dating back to the Cold War 
period which are hampering the active development of trade and 
economic cooperation between our countries. He reported that a 
legislative initiative will be presented at the current session 
of Congress lifting these restrictions, including the no longer 
relevant Jackson-Vanik amendment, now more than 20 years old. 
But Gephardt's remarks showed no certainty that the initiative 
will be approved at this session. Yet the next congressional 
elections in the United States are due in November, in January 
next year the new Congress will assemble, and anything that has 
been proposed but not approved in the present session will 
automatically be annulled. 
  In other words, it will be necessary to start all over 
again. 
And that is a lengthy process. Incidentally, back in April 
1993, at the Vancouver summit, Clinton solemnly promised our 
president "to tackle in the very near future" all the obstacles 
in the path of the development of our trade and economic 
relations. 
  According to Gephardt, "the Russian parliamentarians could 
learn some things from us." What things, I asked. 
  "We could tell them about the difficulties and 
disappointments we encounter and experience as legislators, 
about how often we are simply not able to do anything because we 
cannot get a majority. This happens in our Congress, where there 
are only two parties, unlike your multiparty parliament. And 
then we simply do nothing. But that is in the nature of 
democracy." 

