BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Controversy" column by Akranis: "CBM's or </F>
Substance"] 
  [Text] No one can question the fact that in his report, the 
UN secretary general blames the Turkish Cypriot side. However, 
the government's claim that this is happening for the first time 
is false. As the UN secretary general ascertains "the Security 
Council is already facing a well-known scenario: the lack of 
agreement due to the lack of political will by the Turkish 
Cypriot side." 
  Certainly, a well-known scenario cannot be happening for the 
first time. Indisputably the same scenario of attributing blame 
clearly and directly was played in November 1992. The only 
difference was that the blame concerned Turkish Cypriot leader 
Rauf Denktas' position on the substance of the Cyprus issue, 
while now the lack of political will is being blamed for the 
rejection of the confidence-building measures [CBM's] package. 
The UN secretary general said the CBM's package was repeatedly 
modified to take into account the "Turkish Cypriot leader's many 
comments." 
  However, it is more significant to look at how we will 
proceed. The government, which had placed all of its hopes on 
alternative ways of action, cannot be vague anymore. Five 
alternatives have been proposed, but in the final analysis 
there are merely two options: the CBM's, or the substance of the 
Cyprus issue. One does not have to be particularly wise to 
realize that the Security Council aims to promote the CBM's, 
possibly through procedures and actions that will be more 
effective. 
  What is our side doing? We are concerned with the government 
spokesman's interpretation that the UN secretary general does 
not favor dealing with the substance of the Cyprus issue. The 
UN secretary general's evaluation, that the status quo will not 
change as long as there is lack of political will, does not mean 
that the substance of the issue is being abandoned. On the 
contrary, it gives us the chance to argue in favor of 
alternative means of action to promote the substance of the 
Cyprus issue, not the CBM's. That is, to combine the second and 
third options: to keep the compulsory measures of the second and 
the return to the substance of the third. This goal can be 
achieved not only because it is provided for in the report, even 
as a combination, but because this was essentially the provision 
of UN Security Council 789: The Turkish Cypriot side either 
complies with the Security Council's conditions on the substance 
of the Cyprus issue or alternative ways of action will be 
adopted. 
  The margins for maneuver seem to be narrowing. The 
government has to act immediately before the Security Council 
adopts a resolution. We repeat that the choice is between the 
CBM's and the substance of the issue. No matter how much one 
disagrees with the framework proposed by the United Nations on 
the substance of the Cyprus issue, one must recognize that it is 
clearly better than the CBM's that bear the tangible danger of 
becoming the solution, not merely a catalyst for a solution. 

