BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with European Affairs Minister Alain Lamassoure </F>
by Renaud de Chazournes; place and date not given: "Maastricht, 
Union or Community, Reforms: Alain Lamassoure Explains His 
Views" -- first paragraph is LE QUOTIDIEN DE PARIS introduction] 
  [Text] In the aftermath of the European elections, European 
Affairs Minister Alain Lamassoure analyzes for LE QUOTIDIEN DE 
PARIS the issues of European integration. He argues for a new 
founding document of a "Union" which has returned to being a 
"Community": fundamental reforms which, according to him, ought 
to be approved by referendum. 
  [De Chazournes] The Maastricht Treaty was approved by 
referendum. Could we return to a simple European Community by a 
simple amendment during the 1996 intergovernmental conference? 
  [Lamassoure] This could only be done by altering the treaty. 
Maastricht made provision for an update in 1996. What will be 
needed then is a far-reaching reform which, in my view, should 
be a new founding document for Europe to simplify the 
institutions and to ensure that Europe can welcome, in 
particular, the Central and East European countries. Among the 
measures which strike me as desirable is this change of name. I 
think that the name "Community" more effectively expresses the 
originality of European integration, better than "Union," which 
is more banal. What we are building is indeed a community of 
nations which maintain their sovereignty but which need to act 
together in a number of spheres. This does not resemble any 
other known model of political union. 
  [De Chazournes] The notion of community inevitably engenders 
an impression of a backward step. 
  [Lamassoure] It is not a backward step, it is a return to 
our 
roots. At the beginning, this community was only economic, and 
then it became political too. That is why it is a community. 
  [De Chazournes] But the European Union [EU] encompassed the 
achievements of the Treaty of Rome and the Single Act, to which 
were added economic and monetary union, the common foreign and 
security policy, internal affairs, and justice. Returning to a 
community could suggest that these three pillars of Maastricht 
are being abandoned. 
  [Lamassoure] This is obviously not what I am proposing at 
all. The Maastricht Treaty, in these spheres and in others, has 
led to complex solutions. Indeed, there is both the Community 
as it remains, and which is the only one to have a legal 
existence, to which is added a political union, which is 
competent in the new spheres which are foreign policy and 
questions of justice. I am naturally in favor of maintaining 
these areas of authority, but they must be developed and made 
more precise. To give two examples: The common foreign policy 
will be one of the fundamental dimensions of European activity 
in the coming years. Similarly, the policy of controlling 
immigration must now be conducted among 12 countries and in 
future among 16. To exercise this set of responsibilities, I 
repeat, the word "community" better reflects the originality and 
spirit of what we want to do. 
  [De Chazournes] You think that Europe must be "refounded and 
reinvented." How is it possible to have this ambition without 
renegotiating Maastricht? There can no longer simply be a 
revision of the treaty. 
  [Lamassoure] The treaty itself makes provision for its own 
adaptation and hence its own renegotiation in 1996. 
  [De Chazournes] So you do not reject the principle of 
renegotiation? 
  [Lamassoure] It is in the treaty. Everybody agrees on that. 
Of the 20 lists of candidates standing in the European 
elections, there was not one which rejected the 1996 conference. 
It will not then be a question of just minor adaptations in the 
European institutions, but a new founding document. We will 
therefore have to put the issue to the French people, because 
only the people can change what the people have done. We must 
also put the question of confidence to all our partners. 
Primarily, to our German partner, because European integration 
is still an edifice built on Franco-German foundations. 
  [De Chazournes] There will therefore be another referendum 
after the 1996 conference. 
  [Lamassoure] Precisely, and if this procedure can be 
generalized to all the countries concerned, so much the better. 
But that depends on each of them. 
  [De Chazournes] You have just reaffirmed your preference 
for a multispeed Europe. Does this notion have a limit? 
  [Lamassoure] A distinction must be drawn between an "a la 
carte" Europe and a multispeed Europe, which strikes me as 
inevitable and even desirable. An "a la carte" Europe would 
mean everybody taking from Europe what interests him and leaving 
the rest. That would be the opposite of solidarity. A Europe 
with several speeds means that, in the new agreement which will 
be signed in 1996, we must all agree on the Community's 
responsibilities. In other words, we must clearly redefine what 
subjects we want to handle jointly. But we can accept that some 
countries might need more time to achieve some objectives. This 
has already been accepted in the Maastricht Treaty with regard 
to monetary affairs. 
  [De Chazournes] But this goes further because Britain is 
exempt from it, if it so wishes. 
  [Lamassoure] This exemption must be called into question. We 
cannot accept that a country should remain indefinitely outside 
on such essential issues as the social policy or the single 
currency. These different speeds are the only method of enabling 
those who want to go further and quicker to advance without 
being held back by the slowest vehicle in the convoy. The 
policies for which different speeds can be accepted are, in 
addition to monetary policy, the common defense policy, the 
elimination of internal borders, and immigration policy. 
Conversely, the economic rules of the internal market and 
competition are subjects which will continue to be binding for 
all member countries. 
  [De Chazournes] Faced with the success of Philippe de 
Villiers' [anti-Maastricht] list, are you not tempted to 
moderate your European convictions? 
  [Lamassoure] Not at all. I expressed the principles of a new 
founding contract and a multispeed Europe during the election 
campaign. The truth is that the European debate has been 
caricatured between a vision of a little federal Europe, which 
was that of the founding fathers 20 years ago, and a Europe of 
nations. It is a European Community which is neither federal nor 
confederal which we are building. 

