CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chiara Valentini: "God, Country, and Santoro"] </F>
  [Text] He started on [TV program] Rosso e Nero. He 
impressed Curzi. And today, Costanzo says that he was the 
electoral campaign's best communicator. Here are the secrets of 
a neofascist former bureaucrat, who has become a star in the 
world of politics. 
  Before the elections, Montanelli, to whom the Right is 
certainly no mystery, maintained that in the so-called Freedom 
Alliance "three leaders are in the arena, each of them a `duce,' 
and we don't know which of them will be the first to climb to 
the balcony of Palazzo Venezia." As of now, it can already be 
said that (in addition, obviously, to poor Bossi) Gianfranco 
Fini will not be the one to set forth on that endeavor. The fact 
remains, however, that this Bolognese with the demeanor of an 
affable young man, a glib tongue, and his awful neckties, is one 
of the winners of the most recent elections. At any rate, Fini 
succeeded in knocking down the last barriers of the apartheid 
that was still excluding him from full participation, and in 
gaining recognition as one of the future protagonists of the 
so-called Second Republic. 
  Not a small feat for a public figure who, less than six 
months ago, confronting Francesco Rutelli in the second round of 
the voting for mayor of Rome, was defeated, although very 
narrowly, by a multiparty coalition held together mainly by the 
idea that a neofascist must not become the capital's first 
citizen. 
  Since then, light years have seemingly gone by. During the 
final round of a frenzied electoral campaign, Giorgio 
Almirante's godson, who in his first press conference as 
secretary of the MSI [Italian Social Movement] stated: 
"Mussolini remains my mentor," was able to gain the support of 
tens of thousands of sympathizers, filling squares that up to 
then had been inaccessible to members of the MSI, such as 
Milan's Piazza Duomo and Bologna's Piazza Maggiore. He flooded 
the leading daily newspapers with hundreds of interviews; but 
above all, on TV, he walked away with the game. 
  More reassuring than Bossi, more capable of appealing to 
reason than Berlusconi, "a true leader for the new Italian 
Right," as Michele Santoro puts it, Fini's star was born within 
the confines of the TV screen. In trying to understand the 
reasons for the rise of a man not endowed with too many 
qualities, such as Fini, the normal parameters of politics are 
not of very much help. Fini's biography reveals--more than an 
outstanding personality, charisma, or a rich store of dynamic 
ideas--a marked ability to tail behind the winning horse and 
remain in the background, helped by a generous measure of luck. 
His catapult into politics demonstrates this. It was 1976, when, 
having arrived in Rome at age 18 from his birthplace, Bologna, 
this lanky youth, a Fronte della Gioventu [Youth Front] 
little-known militant in the shadow of its secretary Massimo 
Anderson, rose, from one day to the next, to take the 
secretary's place. It was neither a plot nor a dazzling ascent. 
It was simply the consequence of Fini's having remained 
practically alone. Anderson, together with almost all the young 
leaders, had gone over, lock, stock, and barrel, to join the 
Democrazia Nazionale [National Democracy] secessionists. Only 
the young people of the Front's left wing, led by Almirante's 
opponent Rauti, stayed. Fini inevitably, therefore, became the 
candidate, even though his popularity among the neofascist youth 
was very scant, because they considered him a bureaucrat. In 
fact, in the elections, Fini finished only fifth. 
  Historian Marco Tarchi, an ardent Rauti follower who later 
left the MSI, finished first in that election, and recalls: 
"Fini shouldered the blow very well, and came to congratulate 
me. `There is no need,' I said to him, `I am convinced that 
Almirante will actually choose you.' Fini replied: `That is 
completely out of the question. I have my dignity.' Two days 
later, he was secretary of the Front." 
  Whenever the Fini story has been told, it has always been 
mentioned, together with a wealth of details, that the 
protection accorded him by Almirante's influential wife, Assunta 
de Medici, heavily favored a career that would lead him to first 
become Almirante's heir apparent and later, in 1987, his 
successor. It was rumored that "donna" Assunta's fondness for 
Fini was not unrelated to her hope of marrying off her daughter 
Giuliana to such a respectable young lad. What instead has not 
been told in great detail is what happened with Fini's wife 
Daniela Di Sotto, the first neofascist first lady to have been 
accredited by Italy's republican history. During the campaign 
for the Rome mayoral elections, Daniela Fini referred to her 
past as an ardent MSI militant in the turbulent section of Via 
Noto in Rome, and to a previous marriage. "In 1980, I separated. 
The year after, I went to live with Gianfranco. In 1985 Giuliana 
was born," she recounted somewhat vaguely 
  The reality is a little more complicated, and in the course 
of the last two electoral campaigns the personal side of the 
story of the rightist leader was used at times as a political 
weapon to cast doubt on Fini, defender of the family to the 
bitter end, and a devout Catholic (this was one of his strong 
arguments during the most recent electoral campaign). As a 
matter of fact, Daniela's first husband, Sergio Mariani, an 
extremist who had had some trouble with the law, had been one of 
Fini's closest comrades, indeed his deputy in the Youth Front. 
The story between Mariani's wife Daniela and his boss Gianfranco 
had generated a good deal of gossip. On 10 March 1980, a brief 
ANSA [National Associated Press Agency] communique announced 
that on that day Sergio Mariani "had attempted suicide in his 
home on Via Valsesia, in the presence of his wife Daniela Di 
Sotto." Mariani himself, who later left the limelight and today 
manages a printing office near the MSI headquarters, actually 
confirmed the hypothesis of an attempted suicide. In the closed 
world of neofascism, the rumor spread that Fini was also present 
when the first shot was fired. As for Daniela, having succeeded 
in obtaining a divorce, she married Fini in a civil ceremony in 
1988, left active politics, and chose, as she stated to LA 
STAMPA, "to be a wife and mother." 
  This not exactly edifying episode, on top of the mediocre 
management of Youth Front, nevertheless did not diminish 
Almirante's trust in his disciple. Maurizio Costanzo recalls 
that in 1985 the elderly leader, arriving for an appearance on 
his TV program "Buona Domenica" [Happy Sunday] had been 
accompanied by a lanky, quiet young man, none other than Fini. 
"He is tops," Almirante had said. "He is my heir apparent. Soon 
you will have to ask him to appear on TV." Those expectations 
became a reality, but also because of the significant 
contribution of another public figure who, after Almirante's 
death, and for completely different reasons, became Fini's 
second sponsor, Francesco Cossiga. 
  In his strategy, still partly obscure today, of pickax 
blows, 
of annihilation of the political system, Cossiga had also played 
the card of the rehabilitation of the only party not committed 
to the First Republic, the MSI. The first declaration on a grand 
scale in favor of a party that should no longer be discriminated 
against came during a trip Cossiga made to London. 
  Seizing the opportunity, Gianfranco Fini got in touch the 
following day, with, among others, Sandro Curzi, the popular 
director of Italian TV's Channel 3 newscast, G-3. Curzi recalls: 
"He asked me to meet with him to talk about the past and the 
future, to sound out my ideas. He immediately came across to me 
as a knowledgeable public figure, made for TV." Michele Santoro 
also became aware of Fini's TV potential, and called on him with 
increasing frequency to take part in his broadcasts. "At first," 
says Santoro, "we called on him mainly because he was an 
excellent intermediary to Cossiga, who at that time was a 
subject of much discussion. Fini seemed to be one of the few in 
a position to speak for him." 
  Like other TV anchormen, however, Santoro soon discovered 
that the MSI secretary was also a viable subject in his own 
right. "He grew with each show. He spoke clearly, and was good 
at making quips, outflanking the opponent, and intercepting him 
at just the right moment, without unleashing brawls," says 
Santoro. He adds, though, that he often detected an imbalance 
between the brilliance of his statements and the modesty of 
their content. "Especially during this electoral campaign, I saw 
Fini searching for an impossible balance between his formative 
culture, that is, the MSI Right, on the one hand, and the 
neolaissez-faire ideas borrowed from Berlusconi." 
  Ah yes, enter Silvio Berlusconi. None other than the third 
man to enter impetuously into Fini's life, in the midst of 
Fini's duel with Francesco Rutelli. Perhaps for the first time 
in his career, Fini had gambled. He had hoped to be able to give 
his votes, by now on the way out of their deep freeze, to a 
friendly candidate, Francesco Cossiga. But when he saw the 
moderates able to put forward only a lackluster prefect, Caruso, 
he entered personally into the fray. It was an extremely 
felicitous move, the first bench-test of the new right that 
today is on the rise. 
  The new Roman bourgeoisie quickly discovered that 
Sbardella's 
old DC [Christian Democratic Party] could be worthily replaced 
by these pliable, zealously enthusiastic comrades, and the 
neofascist drawing rooms like that of Princess Pallavicini gave 
them their all-out support. But more than anything else, it was 
Silvio Berlusconi's weighty dictum: "If I could vote in Rome, I 
would choose Fini," that achieved for the MSI secretary his 
accreditation. 
  As of that moment, our hero finds his third spiritual 
father. 
According to Gianni Baget Bozzo, "It was the start of the heroic 
epic of this eternal number two, to whom the destiny will 
perhaps assign the dissolving of his party into a Right that is 
still in its formative stage." With his habitual ease, Fini has 
sought in recent weeks to wed social content with laissez-faire, 
positing himself as the accredited "social conscience of the new 
alignment." He has battled with Bossi and has been defined by 
Berlusconi as "the loyal ally whose views we share almost in 
their entirety." According to Maurizio Costanzo, "He was this 
electoral campaign's best communicator." This opinion is shared 
by sociologist Renato Mannheimer: "He has contributed 
substantively to the relegitimizing of the Right, and in the 
process he has also gained the high personal regard of many of 
those who did not vote for him." 
  Amid this chorus of praise, however, the question that 
remains unanswered is: Who, really, today, is Gianfranco Fini. 
According to Santoro, "The problem of openness, in an 
image-driven society, is rather complicated. Positing himself 
far and wide as a democrat, Fini has at least performed an 
educational function toward his rank and file." Historian 
Luciano Canfora expresses an opposite view: "A complex body such 
as a political party cannot be changed by the waving of a magic 
wand. Whatever Fini's true intentions may be, it will take more 
than that to transform an apparatus, to permeate the conscience 
of its militants." In the midst of today's confusion, it does 
not seem easy to say he is wrong. 
<H5>  [Box, p 62] </H5>
<H5>  Neo, Post, Quasifascist </H5>
  The rightist National Alliance leader is pursuing an 
ideological high-wire balancing act. In the beginning, he warred 
against the majority rule system, then reaped its benefits. At 
one time, he eulogized Mussolini, then moderated his tones to 
tranquilize the moderate bourgeoisie. Over a period of a few 
years, Fini thought has performed a thousand, not always well 
defined, balancing acts. Here are a few examples. 
  The majority rule swindle: "The majority rule system is a 
swindle that enables those with few votes to occupy many 
parliamentary seats" (December 1992). 
  Eia, Eia, Alala!: [exultant chant used by Mussolini 
suuporters]. "Fascism was a great endeavor, in many respects 
unattained, to impart dignity to the nation. The important 
thing is for us to be always a step ahead of the times, as 
fascism taught us to be" (December 1987). "We shall try to 
realize our dream, by demonstrating that Fascism comprises 
highly valid elements for the Italian society" (December 1987). 
"Fascism has a tradition of honesty, correctness, and good 
government" (September 1992). 
  History is to blame: "The French Revolution is to blame for 
having swept away the values of the Hellenistic-Roman world. 
Also to blame are luminarism, Marxism, hedonism, materialism, 
indeed all that measures the human being by what he or she has 
succeeded in owning, not in being" (July 1988). 
  Tedious companions: "Ciarrapico is a historic fascist friend 
of Almirante" (September 1992). 
  Europe? No, thanks: "Maastricht, for Italy, is a no-win 
situation. Like pitting the Lodigiani soccer team against the 
Milan" (September 1992). 
  Presidentialism? Yes, thanks: "We are at the point we were 
in 
1946. If after 20 years of fascism the Italians were asked to 
choose between a monarchy and a republic, why can this not be 
done after 40 years of democracy? Why not ask the Italians now 
if they want a presidential system?" 
  Longing for Le Pen: "He is 10 years ahead of his time. He is 
a sanguine, generous man in love with life. On 8 January at 
Nice, he dove into the sea as parachutists rained down from the 
cloud-laden sky" (April 1988). 
  The Enemy, Bossi: "He is an ex-dance-hall singer. He is the 
other face of partyocracy. He defends only those with a full 
stomach" (October 1992). "I am convinced that Bossi's talk of 
federalism hides a real secession-mindedness" (September 1992). 
"Bossi is a crony of De Mita and Gava" (July 1992). "Bossi is an 
irresponsible big mouth and is selling his constituents down the 
river" (September 1992). 
  Blows: "I have given some and I have taken some" (September 
1987). 
  The Roman salute: "Like the Roman salute and the black 
shirt, 
fascism's entire liturgical and exterior world is no longer 
valid" (December 1987). "The Roman salute does not scandalize 
me. On the contrary, at a time when everyone is vying with 
everyone else to water down his identity or is ashamed of it, 
there are those who are proud of it" (October 1992). 
  The death penalty: "As for the death penalty, I would not 
make a banner issue of it" (September 1987). "I am for the death 
penalty for heinous crimes and in the case of absolute certainty 
of guilt" (September 1992). "If the perpetrator of the bombing 
of the Bologna train station were discovered I would condemn him 
or her to death" (September 1992). "I am not for the death 
penalty" (March 1994). 
  Italian Istria: "We shall wage a determined battle for the 
return of Istria to Italy" (August 1991). "I shall ask Cossiga 
for a review of the Peace Treaty and the Osimo Treaty. Italy 
cannot renounce its right to the very Italian Istria" (August 
1991). 
  Mussolini: "An example of love for his land and love for his 
people" (August 1987). "The century's greatest statesman" 
(October 1992). "It is thanks to Benito Mussolini that in 1922 
Italy did not turn communist" (January 1992). "If Mussolini were 
alive today, he would guarantee the freedom of the Italians." 
"Along with the names of Cavour, Mazzini, and Garibaldi, that of 
Mussolini will also be given to squares and monuments" (October 
1992). 
  Cossiga as leader: "I shall place Cossiga at the head of the 
`rally' we are putting together" (August 1992). 
  Shaven heads: "An ex-member of the MSI could well be among 
the Nazi skinheads" (November 1992). "I hope all shaven heads 
are not criminalized, including Gianluca Vialli's. The Nazi 
skinheads are not dangerous. Furthermore, in a democracy, even 
the most aberrant ideas must be countered by firm beliefs, not 
laws" (September 1992). 

