BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Irina Savvateyeva: "Directors Face Choice: </F>
Contract or Privatization?"] 
  [Text] It would seem that the broad working masses of 
officials and the no less broad masses of politicians who form 
the image of the centrist statesmen have gotten their way: The 
president has signed a document whose aim is to increase the 
controllability of state property. But the edict "On Some 
Measures to Ensure State Control of the Economy" will hardly 
cause them great delight. 
  Because what this document presupposes is by no means the 
approach toward the problem of increasing controllability which 
the centrist statesmen had in mind when criticizing the 
authorities for their idleness. After all, in proclaiming their 
slogans the supporters of a certain section of the directors' 
corps were in fact seeking primarily an increase in state 
financing. 
  The edict abolishes the directors' sinecure -- the mechanism 
for complete economic control which enabled the leaders of state 
enterprises in fact to privatize their plants and factories in 
their own interests. 
  What has happened until now? The director at the enterprise 
was the full master of the situation. I do what I want and no 
one has the right to punish me, still less dismiss me. But now 
the state will conclude contracts with directors for the right 
to manage their own property. These contracts will guarantee 
what is far from a comfortable existence: All kinds of 
"compensations," "social guarantees," "size of guaranteed 
remuneration," and so on and so forth.... 
  But the leader's responsibility for economic results is also 
established. And there is even "material liability for damage 
caused to the enterprise as a result of the action or inaction 
of the enterprise leader." If the state does not like the 
manager it has hired, the contract can be dissolved. 
  If property at the enterprise is joint-stock property and 
the 
state owns only part of it, it delegates its representative to 
the joint-stock company's management organs. This 
representative must coordinate with the federal organs of 
executive power or the Russian federal property fund the most 
important questions of the enterprise's activity, which will be 
put to the vote. For instance, questions like the introduction 
of changes and alterations to joint-stock companies' charter 
documents, the alteration of the size of incorporation capital, 
the appointment of persons under contract to organs of 
management and control. 
  Without the state's agreement the joint-stock company will 
not now be able to obtain credit of more than 10 percent the 
size of the company's net assets, to sell or mortgage its real 
estate, or to take part in the creation of other enterprises or 
in the financing of industrial groups. In brief, the first 
obstacles have been erected to the pilfering of state property. 
  There is no doubt that the question arises: Will the edict 
operate effectively? Obviously problems will arise. They 
always arise where the need for any agreements appears. They 
arise if only because the mechanism of state control of 
enterprises in the transitional period is not harmonious in 
general, because to this day there is a vigorous surreptitious 
interdepartmental struggle for the right to control this process. 
  And it is still far from clear who will win this 
struggle.... 
  But in any case, Sergey Pavlenko, leader of the Russian 
Government's working center for economic reforms, believes, this 
edict will be a serious spur to enterprise leaders finally 
deciding whether they should carry out privatization in full and 
become absolutely free and independent, including independent of 
state financial support, or still wait for state financing. But 
then they can forget all the delights of full economic control, 
reveal all sources of income, and, essentially, become ordinary 
hired managers in the state's service. 

