Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chang Weimin: "Joint Move Under Way To Exploit Offshore </F>
Oil"] 
  [Text] Sino-foreign joint exploration for petroleum in the 
East China Sea was kicked off last week, signalling a strategic 
move for East China's economy and the future of China's offshore 
oil operations. 
  The long-awaited exploration started with initial seismic 
work commissioned by a foreign oil consortium. At the same 
time, dozens of technical firms have arrived to help establish a 
service centre in Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province. 
  Oil and gas reserves in the region are expected to ease the 
decades of energy shortages in East China's five provinces and 
the economic giant of Shanghai. 
  Estimates say some 4.6 billion tons of crude oil and 2,480 
billion cubic metres of natural gas are contained in the sea. 
Combined, they are equivalent to 6.5 billion tons of crude oil. 
  The exploration, expected to span seven to eight years, will 
be carried out by oil firms such as the American-based Exxon, 
Texaco and Chevron; the Italian Agip; and the Netherlands' Royal 
Dutch Shell. 
  Reserves verified so far in China's offshore areas ensure 
that annual production of oil will increase from last year's 4.6 
million tons to 12 million tons within four years, and continue 
at 8 million tons thereafter. However, future development will 
depend on the size of future discoveries. 
  On Tuesday, an engineering vessel began seismic work in a 
block awarded to a consortium consisting of Texaco, Agip and the 
Danish firm Maersk. 
  It is the first prospecting move by a foreign oil group 
there. 
  As the first winning team in an international bidding 
conducted by the China National Offshore Oil Corporation 
(CNOOC), the three foreign firms were awarded three offshore 
blocks, 400 kilometres southeast of Shanghai. 
  Also on Saturday, some 20 Chinese and foreign technical 
firms 
moved into Wenzhou, a service centre for oil operations in the 
area. 
  The firms will provide technical services for the project. 
Engineering vessels also are to be hauled to nearby ports and 
heavy equipment will be installed at the bases for future use. 
  Other foreign oil firms that won bids are to kick off 
seismic 
work in the sea later this month or the next. A CNOOC official 
said seismic work is likely to begin in all contract blocks 
within the next two months. 
  The bidding for exploring the East China Sea, announced in 
l992, ended in January this year with 18 contracts and 
agreements signed with 17 firms from seven countries. 
  The bidding was for 72,800 square kilometres, divided into 
20 
blocks. All but two of the blocks--7,800 square 
kilometres--were snapped up. 
  Chen, CNOOC's vice-president, last week called the 
international bidding a success. "The results are better than 
expected," he said. 
  In the fourth quarter of this year, the Texaco-led group and 
another group consisting of Japan Petroleum Exploration Co 
(Japex) and Teikoku Oil Co are likely to drill test wells. The 
two Japanese firms were awarded two blocks. 
  According to contracts, foreign oil firms will conduct 
20,000 
kilometres of seismic lines and drill 50 test wells in the sea. 
They expect to use $300 million to finance the exploration. 
  He attributed the success partly to Chinese offshore oil 
firms' good reputations. 
  To date, CNOOC has signed 94 contracts and agreements with 
55 
firms from 15 countries. Some $3.4 billion in overseas funds 
have been used for oil operations in the South China Sea and the 
Bohai Sea. 
  Chen said China did not open the sea until 1993 because more 
work was needed to avoid disputes over the China-Japan ocean 
boundary, unsettled in some places. 
  Chen did not elaborate on that diplomatic matter, but said 
CNOOC had successfully handled related issues and could ensure 
implementation of the bidding. 
  The saying is untrue that China had been reluctant to open 
the sea to foreign oil firms because that site is the country's 
most petroleum-rich offshore area, Chen said. 
  China opened the South China Sea and the Bohai Sea in the 
early 1980s. 
  China, during explorations of the sea before the 
international bidding began, had conducted 120,000 kilometres of 
seismic lines and drilled 28 wells there. 

