BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 30 (TASS) -- ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA on the 
results of privatisation's voucher (cheque) phase which is 
ending on Friday [1 July]: 
  "The validity of the privatisation cheque, popularly known 
as 
voucher, expires throughout Russia on July 1. As many as 136 
million privatisation cheques out of 148 million were exchanged 
for shares as of June 20. 
  "Recently, however, the flow of privatisation cheques 
offered 
for exchange has grown and reached an amount of nine million a 
week. So, there is every indication that a very small number of 
vouchers will remain in the possession of people in Russia by 
July 1". 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI on a new privatisation phase which begins 
on Friday: 
  "It is perfectly evident that the time has come for real 
money, instead of privatisation cheques to come into play. 
Only then privatisation will become effective enough from 
innovation point of view. 
  "A programme for post-cheque privatisation should be 
presented to society in the form of a federal law, because it 
concerns the economic foundations of our entire life". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA runs excerpts from a privatisation study 
prepared by the Reform Foundation under the direction of 
academician Stanislav Shatalin. 
  "In our view, privatisation was designed primarily to 
promote 
the political interests of an extremely narrow circle of people. 
Comparatively small social groups availed themselves of the 
results of privatisation," the newspaper quotes Shatalin as 
saying. 
  "The advancement of those interests was quite often to the 
detriment of the real requirements of the national economy and 
the population of the country." 
  "One can see no unanimity in evaluations and no accord 
between the results and the proclaimed objectives," the 
newspaper concludes. 
  PRAVDA frontpages an article on the final day of 
voucher-based privatisation. 
  "What has it given to the country? Notorious scandals 
connected with the shady transactions of cheque investment 
foundations, and millions of duped citizens. An in-depth 
analysis of this undertaking is yet to be made." 
  The newspaper runs a letter by a war and labour veteran who 
sums up the preliminary results of his particiation in the work 
of an investment foundation which turned out to be unable to 
accomplished the tasks set to it -- to support the most 
vulnerable sections of the population. 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (Red Star) frontpages an interview with 
Presidential Press Secretary Vyachelslav Kostikov. 
  Touching upon the place of the army in politics, Kostikov 
said: "I do not want to say that the army should be outside 
politics. This is apparently impossible to achieve. But, to my 
mind, the army, as has always been the case, should remain the 
symbol of Russia's national strategic interests and serve them, 
that is, the army should uphold national interests, not narrow 
political ones. 
  "One of the main tasks, facing both the president and, 
indirectly, the army, is to maintain in the coming several years 
the still fragile civic and political equilibrium which has been 
established in Russia following the adoption of a new 
constitution and the signing of the treaty of civic accord". 
  "In view of this, it is very important that the army adhere 
to a normal, calm, and civic position". 
  ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA, reporting the entering into force of the 
presidential decree on action to combat organised crime and 
banditry, carries an interview with Russia's acting prosecutor- 
general Aleksey Ilyushenko. 
  "Compared with 1989, crime has more than doubled. Last year, 
2,800,000 crimes were recorded, including more than 500,000 
grave ones -- 30,000 wilful murders, 67,000 heavy bodily 
injuries, more than 220,000 robberies and aggravated assaults," 
Ilyushenko told the newspaper. 
  "The first five months of this year saw 1,094,000 crimes, 
including 216 grave ones. Almost all large cities can be 
reckoned among areas where crime is rampant," Ilyushenko said. 

