CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Glushko, Mosfilm associate, under </F>
rubric "Zastava Workshop": "But Everyone Had the Same Stars"] 
  [Text] Aleksandr Glushko, Mosfilm associate, is the 
consultant. 
  Today let us talk about shoulderboards--one of the most 
vulnerable elements, I would say, in the uniform of our Cossacks 
of today. There is very great confusion and muddle here, and 
with a touch of "musical comedy" and "props," not to mention the 
"rank-mania" in many of those who "dress up" in Cossack uniforms 
nowadays. The impression is created that we have enormously more 
colonels and generals among Cossacks today than under the 
sovereign father. 
  Well then, the shoulderboards. 
  Lower ranks had dark blue shoulderboards with crimson piping 
on one side and camouflage color on the other. The numbering 
[shifrovka] was located one-half vershok [one vershok = 4.4 cm] 
above the lower edge. Digits and letters written in one line 
were seven-eighths of a vershok high, and numbering in two lines 
had a height of seven-eighths of a vershok for the upper line 
and three-eighths of a vershok for the lower line. Numbering was 
stencilled to the camouflage side in dark blue oil paint. 
  Field stripes of uryadniks [NCO rank] were orange. The light 
blue braid of cavalry scout-observers was sewn to the lower edge 
across the shoulderboard; cavalry reconnaissance had a narrow 
red stripe along the shoulderboards. 
  Officers wore a silver galloon with one or two blue central 
stripes (for junior or staff officers respectively), crimson 
piping, and blue edging between the piping and galloon. 
Officers' field shoulderboards were made of khaki-color cloth 
with blue braided central stripes. Shoulderboards also were 
encountered with sewn-on red edging of blue central stripes. In 
1916 the central stripe became all shades of brown and the 
edging essentially disappeared. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-028-04A>      Figure </FIG>


  The differences in ranks were as follows: 

  -  kazak [lowest rank]--bare shoulderboard (Fig. 
1); 
  -  prikaznyy [private first class]--shoulderboard 
with one narrow transverse stripe; 
  -  junior uryadnik--shoulderboard with two narrow 
transverse stripes; 
  -  senior uryadnik--shoulderboard 
with three narrow transverse stripes (Fig. 2); 
  -  vakhmistr [sergeant major]--shoulderboard with one 
broad transverse stripe (Fig. 3); 
  -  podkhorunzhiy [subcornet]--shoulderboard with one 
broad longitudinal stripe (Fig. 4). 


    The prikaznyy and uryadniks had white woollen stripes 1 cm 
wide and the vakhmistr and podkhorunzhiy had a silver galloon 3 
cm wide. The distance between stripes was 0.5-1.0 cm. The upper 
stripe would be sewn 3 cm from the center of the button to the 
upper edge of the stripe. 
  Shoulderboards of lower ranks, from the rank and file kazak 
up to and including the vakhmistr, were buttoned using [one word 
partially legible, possibly "eagle"] buttons 22 mm in diameter. 
The podkhorunzhiy wore buttons of medium (18 mm) diameter 
authorized for officers and generals. Shoulderboards of lower 
ranks to vakhmistr were five-sided, and beginning with the 
podkhorunzhiy they were six-sided. The width of the 
shoulderboard with edge was 6.5 cm, and length varied from 14 to 
16 cm depending on shoulder size. 
  Khorunzhiy [cornet]--shoulderboard of silver 
galloon with one central stripe and two stars, opposite the 
color of trimmings, located at the level of the center of 
numbering at its sides and at least 5 cm from the lower edge of 
the shoulderboard (Fig. 5). 
  Sotnik--shoulderboard of silver galloon with one 
central stripe and three stars, opposite the color of trimmings. 
The stars were placed at least 5 cm from the lower edge of the 
shoulderboard at the level of the center of numbering at its 
sides, and one above the numbering. If there was a monogram, the 
third star would be between the crown and the monogram. 
  Podyesaul [junior captain]--shoulderboard of 
silver galloon with one central stripe and four stars, opposite 
the color of trimmings, stars at the level of the center of 
numbering at its sides and at least 5 cm from the lower edge of 
the shoulderboard. Two more were on the central stripe above the 
numbering, one 2 cm above the other from center to center (Fig. 
6). 
  Yesaul [captain]--shoulderboard of silver galloon 
with one central stripe without stars. 
  Voyskovoy starshina [major]--shoulderboard of 
silver galloon with two central stripes and three stars, 
opposite the color of trimmings. Two stars were at the level of 
the center of numbering at its sides between the central stripes 
and the piping and at least 5 cm from the lower edge of the 
shoulderboard, and one was in the middle above the numbering 
(Fig. 7). 
  Colonel--shoulderboard of silver galloon with two 
central stripes without stars (Fig. 8). 
  Major general--shoulderboard of silver galloon 
with zigzag pattern, with two stars located as on shoulderboards 
of the khorunzhiy. 
  Lieutenant general--shoulderboard of silver 
galloon with zigzag pattern and three stars, located as on 
shoulderboards of the sotnik. The stars on all shoulderboards 
were the same, metal or sewn, with a diameter of around 16 mm. 
Stars on all shoulderboards were located at the same distance 
from each other, which applies to the sotnik, voyskovoy 
starshina and lieutenant general. And if the lower stars were 
moved upward because of the width of numbering, the upper star 
also was moved so that nearly an equilateral triangle of stars 
always was formed. 
  The general of cavalry wore a shoulderboard of 
silver galloon with zigzag and without stars. A full general did 
not have numbering, but he could wear the monogram of the 
sovereign if he was attached to the retinue. 
  Numbering of lower ranks was stencilled to the colored side 
of shoulderboards. The numbering itself requires a special, 
detailed discussion. I am ready to consult with whoever has 
questions and tell which regiments had a monogram and which 
simply had the number of the regiment (which, by the way, was 
crimson). 
  Well, I think that is all for today. Good luck to you, 
brother Cossacks. 

