Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jason Gagliardi] </F>
  [Text] A lengthy spell in the briny was not enough to 
wash away the mark of the world's most notorious opium lord from 
the biggest heroin haul seized by Hong Kong police in two years. 
The "Double Uoglobe Brand" label stamped on 96 blocks of 
high-grade heroin, weighing 67 kilograms and worth more than 
$50m, is the trademark of Khun Sa, the shadowy king of the 
Golden Triangle. Narcotics Bureau police used grappling hooks to 
drag the drugs from the seabed south of Lamma Island on Friday, 
after a tip-off led to a search of the area. 
  "This was a very big seizure so it was not surprising that 
it 
was Khun Sa's stuff," a police source said yesterday. "He is 
the number one man in the Golden Triangle and authorities have 
been after him for years. Khun Sa is believed to have a number 
of hideouts and factories on the Burmese side of the Thai 
border. He flits in and out of the Golden Triangle but no one 
seems able to catch him." 
  Khun Sa, which means "Prosperous Prince" in Burma's Shan 
dialect, ships his heroin through Thailand and is known to use a 
road built by the Thais to the remote border town of Homong, 
where he is believed to have a base complete with international 
telephone dialling, satellite television and soldiers armed with 
the latest in weapons. 
  Hong Kong police are still on the trail of the syndicate 
which dumped the drugs at sea -- a ploy used to minimise the 
risk of the entire shipment being seized on reaching the 
territory -- and have predicted a "long-term" investigation. 
The heroin is believed to have drifted along the sea floor and 
out of reach of the traffickers. The wrapping had begun to 
deteriorate, although the drugs were not damaged. 
  In another operation on Sunday night, police seized 13 
kilograms of high-grade heroin, worth about $8m, in Ngau Tau 
Kok. Acting on information from the Narcotics Bureau, officers 
of the Kowloon East regional special duties squad staged a raid 
on a flat in Amoy Garden and arrested two men after finding the 
heroin and packaging equipment. The men were still being 
questioned last night. 

