Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Richard Byrne Reilly: "Freedom May Be Driving </F>
People To Drink"] 
  [Text] Experts are alarmed at the sharp rise in alcohol 
consumption--and its twin sister, alcoholism--among Czechs since 
1989. 
  According to a report released by the Prague Psychiatric 
Center in Bohnice, the use of alcohol increased dramatically 
between 1989 and 1992. 
  The consumption of pure alcohol--generally drunk in the form 
of beer and spirits in the Czech Republic--has climbed by 
approximately one liter per capita per year, reaching a total of 
9.4 liters per person in 1992. (Pure-alcohol consumption is 
measured in part so that different nations' statistics can be 
compared directly, whether the local drink of choice is beer, 
wine or some other beverage.) 
  Statistics are still being compiled for 1993. 
  The report noted that consumption levels in Slovakia, 
Hungary 
and Poland all mirrored the post-communist trend in the Czech 
Republic. 
  The consequences of the increase in alcohol consumption and 
abuse are graphically illustrated by the growing number of 
crimes committed under alcohol's influence, by those seeking 
counseling, and also by the great increase in alcohol-related 
traffic fatalities, said Dr. Karel Nespor of the Prague 
Psychiatric Hospital, a co-author of the report. 
  "The decrease in stability of Czech society and the increase 
of the supply and availability of alcohol are two of the main 
factors [for the increase in alcohol consumption]," said Nespor, 
who is also a member of the National Center for Health 
Promotion, and has written extensively on the subject. 
  "For the average Czech citizen, the situation under 
communism 
was more or less predictable," he said. "The sociopolitical 
changes that occurred with the revolution in 1989 have created 
social instability as many people, uncertain as to what the 
future will bring, have turned to drinking in order to cope." 
  He added, "The growing trend is also a product of the abuse 
of freedom. And for many people, it has been difficult to 
adjust." 
  According to a source at the Ministry of Health, 
alcohol-related injuries actually doubled between 1989 and 1993. 
There were 4,500 alcohol-related deaths in the Czech Republic 
last year, the source said. 
  Dr. Vladislav Cerny, a psychologist specializing in the 
study 
of epidemiology at the Prague Psychiatric Center, agreed with 
Nespor's assessment. 
  "One of the main factors related to the rise of alcohol 
consumption is the release of social controls," he said, 
referring to changes that ensued with the demise of the 
one-party communist government. "And the other factor is that 
it's associated with the values of our society, specifically 
Czech culture." 
  Cerny pointed out that consuming alcohol is a renowned Czech 
tradition. Many Czechs use pubs and other alcohol-vending 
establishments as venues for socializing with friends and 
family. Some Czechs, Cerny noted, pride themselves on being able 
to imbibe large quantities. 
  "Many Czechs have a traditionally high tolerance as far as 
the overconsumption of alcohol is concerned," he said. 
  The report, citing information published in the "Czech and 
Slovak Statistical Yearbook," disclosed that Slovakia 
outdistanced the Czech Republic in overall consumption by about 
20 percent. Slovakia, which garnered the distinction of having 
one of the highest-alcohol-consuming populaces in Central 
Europe, registered a per-capita pure-alcohol consumption level 
of 14.2 liters per person, mostly in the form of distilled 
spirits. 
  The report also chronicled a very high number of 
alcohol-related psychoses among Slovak males. And the Slovak 
mortality due to cirrhosis of the liver was shown to be one of 
the highest in Europe. 
  The concept of seeking treatment and the availability of 
information pertaining to alcohol abuse are relatively new 
phenomena in the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Under the 
Czechoslovak communist regime, information was tightly 
controlled and the population largely kept in the dark about the 
fact that alcohol abuse could be treated medically. 
  Consequently, many people with alcohol problems continue to 
shun treatment for fear of being ostracized or appearing weak, 
said Nespor. 
  Long a critic of the advertising onslaught from Czech 
breweries, Nespor emphasized the importance of curtailing 
alcohol promotions. He said advertisements have a negative 
influence on a large segment of the Czech population, especially 
the young, who are attracted to ads portraying drinking as 
glamorous and who have no idea they're being targeted by 
corporations. 
  Cerny, when asked what can be done to reverse the alarming 
trend of overconsumption, said education and access to 
information on the adverse effects of alcohol would be one 
solution. But the real responsibility, he claimed, lies with 
politicians. 
  "I think it's time that legislators, or those within the 
sphere of decision making, start showing more concern." 

