CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yu. A. Kuznetsov, designer of ground radar </F>
detection stations, by Nikolay Poroskov: "Our Armament Is 
Competitive and It Is Advantageous To Sell It Abroad"] 
  [Text] Yuriy Aleksandrovich Kuznetsov was born in 
1935 in Krasnoyarsk Kray. He finished the radio engineering 
department of Tomsk Polytechnical Institute. He was head of a 
laboratory and section, director of a research institute, and 
general director of a scientific-production association. Since 
1987 he has been general designer of ground radar detection 
stations. He is the chief designer of radar detection stations 
that are part of the antiaircraft missile systems C-300 of 
various modifications. 
  He is a candidate of technical sciences and a winner of 
the Lenin Prize. He has been awarded orders and medals. 
  [Poroskov] Yuriy Aleksandrovich, for the first time in many 
years domestic radar equipment, including for military purposes, 
was openly presented to the world at the international 
exhibitions "IDEX-93" in Abu Dhabi, "LIMA-93" in Malaysia, and 
FIDAE-94 in Chile. Our developers and producers were able to see 
the level of development of radar in the world. Who presented 
products? 
  [Kuznetsov] According to our information, most of the 
countries and firms participated that are involved in the 
development of ground detection stations: General Electric and 
Westinghouse (United States), Alenia (Italy), Marconi (Great 
Britain), Siemens (Germany), and firms from South Africa and 
China. Unfortunately, the Japanese and French did not 
demonstrate their radar. 
  [Poroskov] What is the level of development of radar 
stations 
in the world today? What are the trends in the use of wavebands, 
antenna systems, and computer technology? 
  [Kuznetsov] The bands are still the traditional ones, the 
centimeter and decimeter bands. As a rule, radar for the 
detection of low-flying targets determines the range and 
azimuth, but not the altitude, that is, there are two 
coordinates. Stations for medium and high altitudes operate with 
three coordinates. The processing of the signals, as a rule, is 
digital and the detection of the targets and measurement of the 
coordinates is automated. Also automated are measures against 
interference. The stations have control and simulators that can 
imitate the air situation. All of this is with the use of 
computer systems. There is a clear striving to improve the 
mobility of the systems. Basically the areas of development here 
and abroad coincide. 
  [Poloskov] It must be assumed that you received exhaustive 
information at the exhibitions. Does this mean that the West is 
truly open to us and is keeping no secrets? 
  [Kuznetsov] It is by no means so. Yes, we did receive 
brochures or information sheets on almost all the foreign radar 
systems. But it is difficult to obtain information that goes 
beyond this. In Abu Dhabi, for example, representatives of the 
Marconi firm avoided answers and did not give out any brochures. 
At "LIME-93," they were in part "corrected." 
  Of course we frequently were interested in technical and 
design-technological solutions and the firms are not interested 
in reporting on this. But we also did not always receive answers 
to questions on purely user characteristics. An exception was 
the Republic of South Africa--we received answers to all 
questions if they did not involve know-how. 
  [Poroskov] What did our country demonstrate at the 
exhibitions and how did our equipment look next to foreign 
models? 
  [Kuznetsov] Practically all of our stations were unique. The 
radar stations "Nebo" and "Nebo-SV" of the meter band attracted 
the attention of visitors in that they are capable of detecting 
targets built using "Stealth" technology (the so-called 
"invisibles"), are not very susceptible to weather phenomena, 
and have a better capability of detecting highly accurate 
weapons. At the same time, the stations themselves are protected 
against missiles that home in on radio emissions. They simply do 
not exist in the meter band and it is problematical to build 
them. 
  The stations "Kasta-2E1" and "Kasta-2E2" for the detection 
of 
low-flying targets are fundamentally different from foreign 
models in that they have the possibility of raising an antenna 
on a special 50-meter tower, smaller losses in the signal 
channel, qualitative selection of targets, and a greater 
operating range. And "Kasta-2E2" also has the possibility of 
determining the altitude (echelon) of targets. 
  Also looking rather good in comparison with the others were 
the radar stations for autonomous target designation in the 
structure of the antiaircraft missile system "BukM1" and the 
systems S-300P and S-300V. This is primarily because in the 
foreign antiaircraft missile systems of a similar caliber the 
surveillance detection radar is not used, that is, the 
antiaircraft missile system cannot work autonomously but only by 
receiving target designations from the means of the radar field. 
Under our system, they come from radio engineering subunits. 
  Our radar stations set up on one transport unit on a 
caterpillar or automotive chassis are mobile with a high 
cross-country capability and have a large zone of coverage at 
the angle of site. 
  [Poroskov] Everything that you have said is certainly 
pleasing. But the reader may get the impression that we are 
ahead of the entire planet in radar. 
  [Kuznetsov] Because of the better performance of the 
computer 
systems and element base, the radar of other countries has 
better indicators with respect to size of equipment, 
reliability, and input, and in a number of cases they have a 
better design and more comfort. 
  [Poroskov] How can we utilize their experience? 
  [Kuznetsov] We can employ their element base in our 
stations. 
International cooperation in developments and the production of 
computer technology is a normal phenomenon. 
  [Poroskov] Who took an interest in the Russian exhibit and 
to 
what extent? 
  [Kuznetsov] Specialists from manufacturing firms, army and 
police officers, representatives of intermediary and commercial 
firms, and the press--from different regions of the world. Much 
interst was shown, especially in Abu Dhabi. The visitors took 
the entire supply of information sheets, 200 to 250 for each 
radar, and had positive comments. 
  [Poroskov] There is a persistent opinion that Russia is 
selling military equipment at prices significantly below world 
prices. 
  [Kuznetsov] Even in the event that our radar is sold at 
prices 40 to 50 percent below those of analogous foreign 
equipment, we can make good profit because of the relatively low 
wages in Russia. Competitiveness is determined not only by 
quality (although we do have quality) but also by price in terms 
of the effectiveness/cost criteria. Our equipment can be quite 
competitive. It was not so long ago that Japan broke into the 
world market mainly because it had the lowest prices in the 
world. Our situation is now analogous with respect to radar 
equipment. 
  [Poroskov] To trade successfully, it is necessary to have 
the 
appropriate system and experience. Have we gained this in 
distant countries? 
  [Kuznetsov] I think that we need to show our equipment more 
abroad and to advertise it. They are not sufficiently familiar 
with it everywhere. It is also expedient to have an exhibition 
in the territory of Russia that guests of the country could 
visit. A second question is whether it should be a unified 
exhibition or dispersed by branch sections, whether it should 
always be for many branches or have periodically changing 
exhibits. It will be useful to have exhibits that are always 
ready to be sent to any international exhibition. It is 
desirable to accompany every presentation of military equipment 
that is being offered for sale with a demonstration on the test 
range with interested persons invited from other countries. 
  [Poroskov] It is clear from the international practice in 
the 
weapons trade that it is not a matter just of sales. A buyer 
acquiring a radar system ties himself to the manufacturing 
country for a long time. 
  [Kuznetsov] And when we sell equipment, it is necessary for 
us to offer servicing and joint operation. Developing countries 
are especially interested in this, but specialists from states 
with a high standard of living are not eager to go to them. This 
will raise the competitiveness of our products. 
  An offer of joint production of equipment being offered for 
sale may be a decisive factor for a country interested in the 
development of its own defense industry, especially if the level 
of employment of the population is low there. 
  The obligation of our country to improve sold equipment may 
also be attractive for a buyer, naturally for additional payment. 
  [Poroskov] Could all of this be offered by "Oboroneksport" 
(its functions have now gone over to "Rosvooruzheniye") 
representing Russia at exhibitions? And are not the creators of 
the equipment--designers and manufacturers--being left out? 
  [Kuznetsov] They must play a dominant role in the arms 
trade. 
Of course not everyone has sufficient experience in commerce 
today. What is needed is joint work with organizations 
specializing in the arms trade. The latter frequently exaggerate 
their own possibilities and strive to make deals independently 
and without consultation with developers and manufacturers. They 
work under the principle "sold and forgotten." Unqualified 
decisions can do harm. What can be sold, to whom, and how much 
must be decided by the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. The rest should be left to industry. 
  [Poroskov] Attempts were repeatedly made to break away from 
the monopoly of one department (Ministry of Foreign Economic 
Relations) in foreign trade with weapons.... 
  [Kuznetsov] The state monopoly in this area ought to be 
implemented through the issue of licenses and the establishment 
of quotas. Under this condition, industrial enterprises should 
be allowed to trade directly. And they should be given the right 
to utilize a middleman. That is the procedure in trade 
throughout the world. 
  [Poroskov] Apparently there are traditions and rules in the 
world for the organization of exhibitions. How did we, generally 
novices, look there? 
  [Kuznetsov] The absence of models of some systems, the low 
quality of map cases, brochures, and information sheets and the 
inadequate amount of information did not encourage visitors to 
stay longer at our exhibit. In the main catalog for the 
exhibition in Abu Dhabi, Russia was presented on just one page. 
For other countries, they provided maps of the pavilions and 
notes on each stand with the addresses of the firms. At the end 
of the catalog was a subject index, with the help of which it 
was possible to find the stands for a subject of interest to the 
visitor for all the firms and countries except Russia. 
  Most of the foreign firms began to publish materials on the 
exhibited arms four or five months prior to the exhibition. We 
did extremely little advertising, and we did not prepare in 
advance meetings with representatives of other firms for closer 
cooperation. 
  [Poroskov] Still, Yuriy Aleksandrovich, our products 
appeared 
worthy despite the organizational shortcomings, and you 
apparently did sign some contracts for the delivery of radar 
systems. 
  [Kuznetsov] The first exhibitions could not give quick 
results, and there were no preliminary negotiations. But the 
interest that was shown in our equipment and its competitiveness 
allow us to expect some offers in the near future. 
  [Poroskov] In selling equipment abroad, are you not risking 
leaving your own army without radar stations? 
  [Kuznetsov] Because of the poor financing, the Ministry of 
Defense was forced to reduce purchases of our output 
substantially. In 1992-93, significantly less funding was 
allocated even to research and experimental design work. Trade 
abroad helps to maintain the potential of the industry, and this 
is the basis for the defense capability. 

