Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Donata Riedel commentary: "A Sheriff for Fair Trade?"] </F>
  [Text] The reaction by the German economics minister to 
the new weapon of the U.S. President in the trade war against 
Japan was unequivocal: At last, somebody has the courage to 
show the Japanese that they cannot ruin the poor but honest U.S. 
and European industries with dumping prices in the sphere of 
cars, computers, and chips! Clinton, the hero who fights for 
free and fair trade against Hosokawa, the sinister 
protectionist: "Super 301" is the miracle weapon, the bomb 
designed to safeguard world trade peace, with which the United 
States can control the evil without having to use the weapon. 
This is the most skillful way of selling the world a trade war. 
The U.S. Administration even remained honest and announced that 
the weapon is not explicitly directed against Japan. It is 
aimed at the whole world. Japan's import barriers are only the 
topical cause. 
  In the United States, which made free trade a dogma after 
World War II and defended it worldwide in numerous GATT rounds, 
a tendency toward protectionism began to spread during the most 
recent recession. When Japan's economy was more successful than 
the U.S. competition in numerous areas at the end of the 1980s, 
and when threshold countries were able to offer competitive 
products in the world markets, the Republican U.S. 
Administration started to consider trade to be the government's 
business. Bush traveled with representatives of the ailing U.S. 
automobile industry to Tokyo to ensure a larger market share 
through negotiations. Three weeks ago, Clinton tried to achieve 
the same thing for all future-oriented industries and services 
-- again without success. 
  Unlike in Japan, however, the U.S. Administration was much 
more successful in safeguarding U.S. interests in other parts of 
the world. At the end of the 1980s, the full impact of "Super 
301" was not felt in Japan, but in Brazil and India. Exactly 
one year ago, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor forced 
better access for U.S. telephone producers to the European 
Community. His main argument was that the U.S. market was 
completely open for every competitor -- a simple lie. 
  To fend off unpleasant foreign competitors, the richest 
country in the world created a sophisticated set of rules for 
the fight against price dumping and export subsidies in other 
countries. The U.S. side alone decides what is to be denounced 
as "unfair trade practices." In the case of Japan, Clinton's 
reproach of unfair and discriminatory trade practices is even 
justified. However, if he were really interested in fairness, 
he would chose a different, even if a bit longer path: That of 
the GATT world trade agreement. 

