Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Order No. 49 of the Russian Minister of Defense," signed </F>
by Army General P. Grachev, Russian Federation minister of 
defense, dated Moscow, 21 February 1994] 
  [Text] Comrade soldiers and seamen, sergeants and 
noncommissioned officers, warrant officers, petty officers, and 
other officers! 
  Comrade war, labor, and Armed Forces veterans! 
  On 23 February 1994 the Russian Federation celebrates a 
remarkable day -- Defenders of the Fatherland Day. 
  Throughout history the Army and Navy have served the people 
and the Fatherland, and they continue to serve them today. Many 
events in Russia's history are adorned by the valor and glory of 
the Armed Forces. The feats of the soldiers of the Great 
Patriotic War, who liberated many countries from fascism and 
militarism, will remain in the people's memory for centuries. 
Their selfless devotion to the Motherland, their ardent 
patriotism, military skill, and loyalty to their duty and oaths 
of allegiance are an unfading example for servicemen of the 
Russian Armed Forces on the eve of the 50th anniversary of the 
Great Victory. 
  The consolidation of unity, esprit de corps, and military 
comradeship in military collectives and the people's respect for 
the honor and dignity of the defenders of the Fatherland are 
today an important factor in the internal stability of society, 
a pledge of the successful performance by Army and Navy 
servicemen of tasks aimed at safeguarding the defense and 
security of the country. War, labor, and Armed Forces veterans 
make a significant contribution to strengthening the 
motherland's defense capability and to young people's patriotic 
education. 
  I salute and congratulate you on Defenders of the Fatherland 
Day, dear comrades. 
  I wish Army and Navy personnel every success in 
consolidating 
the Motherland's defense capability, increasing combat readiness 
and the quality of professional training, and strengthening 
organization and military discipline. 
  I wish war, labor, and Armed Forces veterans good health and 
happiness, and success in raising the rising generation in the 
traditions of loyal service to the people and for the good of 
Russia. 
  To commemorate Defenders of the Fatherland Day I order: 
  That festive firework displays take place 23 February 1994 
at 
2100 hours local time in the hero-city of Moscow, capital of our 
motherland, and in the hero-cities of St. Petersburg, Volgograd, 
Novorossiysk, Tula, Smolensk, and Murmansk, and also in the 
cities of Kaliningrad, Rostov-na-Donu, Samara, Yekaterinburg, 
Novosibirsk, Chita, Khabarovsk, Vladivostok, and Severomorsk. 
  [Signed] Army General P. Grachev, Russian Federation 
minister 
of defense 

