CSO 

<F P=106> [Republic of Tatarstan statute: "On the Order and Conditions </F>
of Privatization of the State and Municipal Housing Fund in the 
Republic of Tatarstan," place and date not given] 
  [Text] 1. The present statute establishes unified 
regulations on the territory of the Republic of Tatarstan for 
privatization of residential apartments in buildings of the 
state and municipal housing fund, the conditions for payment of 
compensation in the form of a supplemental sum of nominal 
privatization investments to citizens of the Republic of 
Tatarstan having inadequate housing conditions, as well as the 
basic principles for payment of expenditures for the maintenance 
and repair of privatized housing accommodations. 
  2. The basic principles of privatization of the state and 
municipal housing fund are: 
  --voluntary acquisition of housing for ownership; 
  --free transfer to citizens of the housing accommodations 
which they occupy in buildings of the state (municipal) housing 
fund, regardless of the size of the overall living space and the 
consumer qualities of the residence; 
  --retention of the principles of the former system of 
operation, repair and servicing of the privatized housing fund; 
  --payment of compensation in the form of a supplemental sum 
of nominal privatization investments to citizens of the Republic 
of Tatarstan who do not have housing or who have housing below 
the average, actually achieved level in the republic (16.2 
square meters of living space per person), regardless of the 
form of ownership in which the housing is held. 
  Every citizen of the Republic of Tatarstan who lives in 
housing accommodations which are not subject to privatization or 
whose housing conditions are below the average level of housing 
provision in the republic (16.2 square meters of living space 
per person) has the right to receive compensation in the form of 
supplemental privatization payment means. 
  A citizen has the right to receive compensation one time, 
regardless of the form of ownership of the housing 
accommodations which he occupies. 
  Compensation is established in the following amounts: 
  For citizens who do not have housing (renters in houses of 
the individual housing fund and in houses of ZhSK 
[housing-construction cooperatives] or those subletting in 
buildings of the state and municipal housing fund, who do not 
have other registration)--40,000 rubles (R) of nominal 
privatization vouchers (investments); 
  For citizens who do not have housing, and who are being 
housed in specialized buildings (buildings of the Ministry of 
Social Provision of the Republic of Tatarstan, Ministry of 
Public Health of the Republic of Tatarstan, Ministry of Internal 
Affairs of the Republic of Tatarstan, who do not have a 
permanent registration outside these institutions)--R40,000 of 
nominal privatization vouchers (investments); 
  For citizens who do not have housing and who are living in 
dormitories (with the exception of seasonal and temporary 
workers, persons working under urgent labor contracts, as well 
as citizens who have settled there in connection with their 
education)--R40,000 of nominal privatization vouchers 
(investments); 
  For citizens living in housing accommodations which have 
been 
found (in accordance with the order established by the effective 
legilsation) to be unsafe and old--R40,000 of nominal 
privatization vouchers (investments); 
  For citizens living in closed military cities and in 
service-related housing accommodations--R30,000 in nominal 
privatization vouchers (investments); 
  For citizens having overall living space of 5 or less square 
meters per person--R30,000 in nominal privatization vouchers 
(investments); 
  For citizens provided with overall living space of over 5 
and 
up to 10 square meters per person (inclusive)--R20,000 in 
nominal privatization vouchers (investments); 
  For citizens provided with overall living space of over 10 
and up to 16.2 square meters per person (inclusive)--R10,000 in 
nominal privatization vouchers (investments). 
  Every citizen of the Republic of Tatarstan living in a 
building of a housing-construction cooperative has the right to 
receive compensation in the form of supplemental privatization 
payments of funds in the amount of R10,000 in nominal 
privatization vouchers (investments). 
  3. The right to privatization of housing accommodations in 
buildings of the state and municipal housing fund is granted to 
citizens who are permanently registered in these housing 
accommodations, including citizens who are temporarily absent, 
and who in accordance with the effective legislation have 
retained their right to the housing accommodations. 
  Citizens who have reserved housing accommodations have the 
right to privatization of housing at the place of reservation. 
  4. Housing accommodations may be privatized only with the 
written consent of all the adult citizens jointly living in 
them. The privatized housing accommodations pass to joint 
ownership of all the citizens jointly living in them, including 
minors. 
  Minor citizens are necessarily included in the list of 
owners 
of the housing accommodations. 
  When citizens move to other housing accommodations in the 
state (municial) housing fund in the order of improving their 
housing conditions, in accordance with the effective legislation 
and its occupancy under rental agreement, the citizens have the 
right to dissolve the privatization contract for the housing 
accommodations previously occupied. 
  The privatization agreement on housing accommodations may be 
dissolved upon mutual consent of the parties to the agreement, 
and in case of a dispute--in judicial order at the claim of one 
of the parties. 
  A citizen who has dissolved a privatization contract for 
housing accommodations in accordance with the procedure 
established by legislation retains the right to free 
privatization of the housing accommodations of the state 
(municipal) housing fund which he occupies under rental 
conditions. 
  5. Housing accommodations in buildings subject to capital 
repair are privatized on a universal basis. 
  6. Housing accommodations which are in an emergency state, 
or 
those located in dormitories, specialized buildings and 
buildings in closed military cities are not subject to 
privatization. 
  Local Soviets of People's Deputies, in conjunction with 
enterprises, institutions and organizations, and with 
consideration of the opinion of trade unions (represented by 
their appropriate bodies), and in their absence--by 
representatives of the workers themselves who have been duly 
elected and authorized in accordance with the legislation of the 
Republic of Tatarstan, determine the relative share (list) of 
service housing accommodations not subject to privatization. 
  Privatization of housing accommodations (apartments) in 
buildings which are historical and cultural monuments is 
performed in accordance with the Statute on the Order and 
Conditions of Privatization of Buildings Which are Monuments of 
History and Culture. 
  7. Housing accommodations in communal apartments are 
privatized with the consent of all the apartment renters. In 
this case, the residential rooms become the property of the 
residents, while the kitchens, corridors, baths, etc. remain the 
objects of common usage. 
  8. Reception of citizens and formulation and issuance of 
documents establishing their rights is performed, as a rule, by 
the housing operation enterprises or subsections (henceforth 
ZhEO), sectorial (departmental) enterprises, organizations, or 
institutions which are the balance holders of the residential 
buildings of the state housing fund and the ZhEO of the local 
Soviets of People's Deputies--the owners of the municipal 
housing fund. 
  Centers (agencies, bureaus) on privatization of the state 
and 
municipal housing fund may be formed in cities (rayons) to 
perform work on formulating documents in the privatization of 
housing. 
  9. The local Soviets of People's Deputies create territorial 
commissions for implementing control over and organizing the 
processes of privatization of the housing fund. 
  The Commission on Privatization of the Housing Fund acts in 
accordance with the Statute on the Commission on Privatization 
of the State and Municipal Housing Fund, ratified by the 
Republic of Tatarstan State Committee on Administration of State 
Property. 
  10. In the preliminary period, prior to operational 
introduction of the law, specialists at the ZhEO formulate a 
draft Agreement on Transfer of the Housing Accommodations to the 
Ownership of Citizens for each housing accommodation which may 
be privatized. 
  The draft agreement is signed and registered with the head 
of 
administration of the city (rayon), and also passes registration 
with the agencies of technical inventorization. 
  Upon completion of the preliminary work, the ZhEO notifies 
the population of the territory regarding the time of operation 
and the location of the center for receiving citizens. 
  11. Citizens submit an application for privatization of the 
housing accommodations to the appropriate ZhEO, signed by all 
the adult citizens jointly residing there. 
  Considering the fact that each citizen has the right to 
acquire for ownership free of charge, in the order of 
privatization, housing accommodations in buildings of the state 
and municipal housing fund only one time, if the citizen changes 
his place of residence, a document must be appended to the 
application, confirming that the housing accommodations which he 
formerly occupied were not privatized. 
  12. A specialist checks to see that the application has been 
filled out correctly, compares the data indicated in the 
application with the corresponding data of the previously 
prepared draft agreement. If there are no discrepancies, he 
issues one copy of the formulated agreement to the applicant. 
The second copy of the agreement remains at the ZhEO, and the 
third is forwarded to the agencies of technical inventorization 
for implementation of state accounting of the housing fund in 
accordance with the established procedure. 
  13. If there is a discrepancy between the data submitted by 
the applicant and the data in the draft agreement, the materials 
on privatization of the given housing accommodations are 
forwarded to a territorial commission for review and adoption of 
a decision. In this case, the resolution of the question of 
privatization of housing must be made no later than in a month's 
time from the day the documents are submitted to the ZhEO. 
  14. Payment for services on formulating the necessary 
documents for transfer of housing to private ownership is 
performed by the citizens according to a unified rate in the 
amount of 0.4 times the minimum labor wage. 
  15. If the rights of the citizen are violated in resolving 
questions of housing privatization, he has the right to appeal 
to the Commission on Privatization of the Housing Fund or to a 
court. 
  16. The rules of accounting of citizens, including those 
living in privatized housing accommodations, who require 
improved housing conditions, and the granting of housing 
accommodations in the Republic of Tatarstan are defined by the 
effective legislation. 
  17. Owners of privatized housing accommodations in buildings 
of the state and municipal housing fund are the users of the 
building in the portion of the technical equipment and places of 
common usage, while those united into partnerships or other 
associations are the co-owners of the living space 
commensurately occupied in this building. 
  18. Servicing and repair of privatized housing 
accommodations 
(apartments), buildings having privatized housing accommodations 
(apartments), and privatized residential buildings are performed 
with adherence to the existing regulations and standards of 
operation and repair of the housing fund. 
  19. The state ZhEO's retain the responsibilities for 
servicing, routine and capital repair of privatized housing 
accommodations (apartments), residential houses having 
privatized housing accommodations (apartments) serviced by them 
prior to the beginning of privatization. 
  20. Owners of housing accommodations (apartments) in a 
multi-apartment building are obligated to participate in common 
expenses for servicing and repair of the structure (residential 
building), its technical equipment and territory surrounding the 
building in accordance with the Agreement on Transfer of Housing 
Accommodations to the Ownership of Citizens. 
  21. For purposes of the rational maintenance, servicing and 
repair of privatized housing accommodations, the owners may form 
partnerships and other associations which act on the basis of a 
charter. 
  22. Prior to the moment of formation of a partnership of 
apartment owners (co-owners of the building), the relations 
between the apartment owners and the ZhEO under whose economic 
management the multi-apartment residential building is held, in 
regard to servicing and repair of the residential building, the 
building grounds, and the privatized apartment, are structured 
on the basis of a contract for servicing the residential 
building, the building grounds and the privatized apartment. 
  According to the contract, the ZhEO promises to perform the 
entire set of operations on maintainence, current and capital 
repair of the building and its grounds in accordance with the 
requirements of the Regulations for Use of Housing 
Accommodations, Maintenance of Residential Buildings and Their 
Grounds on the conditions defined for buildings in the state and 
municipal fund, and also: 
  --to perform preventative inspection of the 
sanitary-technical equipment in the apartment twice a year; 
  --to repair the sanitary-technical equipment at the request 
of the apartment owner, using the owner's materials, or for 
additional payment if the ZhEO's materials are used. 
  The owner promises to make monthly payments for the services 
of the ZhEO and for the municipal services, along with the 
payments (apartment rent and payment for municipal services) 
which are established for renters of state and municipal housing. 
  An accounting of monthly payments for servicing the 
building, 
municipal and other services provided to the apartment owner is 
appended to the agreement. 
  23. Owners of privatized housing accommodations must pay tax 
in accorance with the effective tax legislation. 
  24. A partnership of apartment owners is a co-owner of a 
multi-apartment residential building, and the conditions of 
co-ownership must be defined by the Agreement on Joint Ownership 
of a Residential Building and Share Participation in its 
Maintenance. 
  The balance-holder of the building, acting in the name of 
the 
building's owner, and other legal persons who are co-owners of 
the building must conclude the indicated agreement. 
  25. After the Agreement on Joint Ownership of a Residential 
Building and Share Participation in its Maintenance has been 
concluded, at the decision of the co-owners of the house the 
ZhEO delegates part of its rights and responsibilities in 
servicing and repair of the building and the building grounds to 
the partnership. 
  The partnership may: Act in the role of contractor in 
concluding agreements with subcontractors for municipal 
services; Ensure participation of the building's co-owners in 
payment of all expenses associated with the maintenance and 
operation of the building's ownership, commensurate with their 
share of ownership in the building; Ensure timely payment of 
monies intended for this purpose; Represent the interests of the 
co-owners in state and other institutions, etc. 
  26. After all the apartments in a multi-apartment 
residential 
building are privatized, the residential building, with the 
exception of built-in and added-on non-residential facilities, 
may be handed over for ownership of the citizens united into the 
partnership. And only in this case is the house transferred from 
the balance sheet of the ZhEO to the balance of the partnership. 
  Transfer of ownership of a structure--residential 
building--is performed by the balance-holder in cooperation with 
the owner or his authorized agency, in accordance with the 
effective legislation. 
  27. The relations between the contractor--the partnership of 
apartment owners, and the subcontractor--the ZhEO or other 
organization, regarding the repair and servicing of the building 
and its grounds are built on a contractual basis. 
  28. The intra-apartment communications networks, engineering 
structures and facilities are not subject to privatization. 
  29. The owners of privatized housing accommodations bear 
responsibility for their maintenance and repair in accordance 
with the effective legislation. 
  30. Control over the technical condition and timely repair 
of 
the privatized housing fund is implemented by the local Soviets 
of People's Deputies. 

