Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Norman West] </F>
  [Text] Labour Party [LP] leader the Rev. Allan Hendrickse 
has complained to the ANC [African National Congress] leadership 
that he has been "villified" and "kept in the dark" about 
nominations and that there is a general "hostility" towards his 
party from certain ANC elements. In a letter to the ANC 
leadership on December 21, he appealed for a "bilateral" on 
January 12 to iron out differences. The letter, addressed to the 
"Chairman of the ANC list committee" with copies to ANC leader 
Mr. Nelson Mandela and ANC secretary-general Mr. Cyril 
Ramaphosa, is the first official acknowledgement by Mr. 
Hendrickse that he felt he and his party were "unwelcome" in ANC 
ranks. This is despite the fact that Mr. Mandela included him 
in his entourage to Oslo to accept the Nobel Peace Prize jointly 
with State President F.W. De Klerk on December 10. 
  There is great division within the ANC on whether the LP, 
the 
main coloured party to make possible the Tricameral Parliament 
-- which in turn drew fierce opposition from the Anti-Tricameral 
Parliament Movement, the United Democratic Front -- should now 
be taken on board the ANC election ticket. Whereas Mr. Mandela 
likes the idea of having Mr. Hendrickse as a "magnet" to attract 
coloured voters, elements within the ANC in the western Cape -- 
including western Cape chairman Dr. Allan Boesak -- are against 
it, despite the fact the LP is a partner in the Patriotic Front 
which acted as a united group during the Kempton Park 
negotiations. 
  Because of the bad blood between the LP and ANC rank and 
file 
members, it came as no surprise to observers when Mr. Ramaphosa, 
punted by the LP as the keynote speaker at its 28th annual 
congress in Cape Town this week, never turned up. Nor was there 
a single observer from the western Cape region of the ANC. The 
ANC "snub" occurred despite Mr. Hendrickse devoting his entire 
opening speech on Tuesday to urging coloured people to vote for 
the ANC on April 27. The antagonism between the LP and the ANC 
is clearly acknowledged by Mr. Hendrickse in his letter to the 
leadership -- of which the SUNDAY TIMES has a copy -- which 
reads: "The LP of SA [South Africa] was kept in the dark about 
details of the intended nomination procedure until it was too 
late to prepare for regional nomination conferences. LP members 
from different parts of the country eked out varying degrees of 
information and each followed his own procedure. The head 
committee of the LP of SA had no control over the nomination of 
persons from its ranks. The LP was granted such minuscule 
representation at the regional conferences and ... the hostility 
towards LP members is still too great for Labour to stand a fair 
chance. In the western Cape (ANC) conference, voting was 
preceded by meetings where questions and statements from the 
floor were provided for. This allowed people to vent their 
spleen. The Labour Party was villified and condemned as 
opportunists ..." 

