BFN 

  [Text] Hebron, Occupied West Bank, April 11 (AFP)--An 
advance party of foreign observers moved into Hebron on Monday 
[11 April] to protect Palestinians as Israel lifted the closure 
on the West Bank town centre, an AFP correspondent reported. 
  But party leaders said the full deployment of 160 
lightly-armed observers as agreed by Israel and the PLO 
following the February 25 mosque massacre would not take place 
before next week. 
  "This mandate is to return to normalcy and this opening is 
part of it," said Knud Volveg, head of the Norwegian delegation. 
  "We are very happy that the Israelis responded positively to 
the requests we made for opening the city centre," he told 
reporters. 
  But the Tomb of the Patriarchs where a Jewish settler gunned 
down 30 Palestinians was still closed off as it has been since 
the slaughter. 
  Volveg said the team had been given a "cordial reception ... 
[ellipsis as received] managed to get acquainted and establish 
contact." 
  The reconnaissance party included seven Norwegians, five 
Danes and four Italians, escorted by Israeli police and military 
officials and a representative of the foreign ministry. 
  Five Norwegians, three Danes and three Italians were to stay 
behind and set up in the town after meeting Palestinian 
officials. 
  "We are here today on a courtesy visit," said Kjell 
Johansen, 
the head of the Temporary International Presence and former head 
of the Norwegian contingent with UN forces in Sarajevo. 
  "We are examining the options for accommodation," the 
Norwegian policeman said. 
  "I don't expect the deployment for this week," he admitted. 
"We have to get confirmation from the Norwegian government for 
the actual agreement to deploy," he said. 
  "They (Norwegian, Danish and Italian governments) have 
agreed 
to an advanced team but we need agreement for the deployment." 
  The team met Hebron mayor Mustafa al-Natshah, who told 
reporters: "Today the (military) governor of Hebron has opened 
the city. 
  "This is a good sign. We consider it a gift from the 
delegation." 
  "We shall make arrangements on our side to facilitate their 
job," he said. 
  A preparatory group had reconnoitered the terrain from an 
Israeli army helicopter last week and met officials in Israel 
and PLO leaders in Cairo. 
  Under an agreement signed in Cairo on March 31 by Israel and 
the Palestine Liberation Organisation, Denmark will provide 90 
members to the observation team, and Norway and Italy 35 each. 
  The group will be permitted to carry handguns for 
self-defense, and will be known as a Temporary International 
Presence in Hebron (TIPH). 
  Their prime function will be to bring "a sense of security 
to 
the Palestinians of Hebron" after the mosque killings. 
  They will be barred from police work and will be restricted 
to monitoring events in Hebron. 

