Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 12 (XINHUA) -- Chinese 
Vice-President Rong Yiren said here today that the Chinese 
Government would take into full consideration the nation's 
capability to endure reforms, and would handle properly the 
relationships between reforms, development and stability. 
  Rong made the remarks here today when meeting this morning 
with a Romanian Government delegation headed by Mircea Cosea, 
Romanian minister of state and president of the Council for 
Co-ordination, Strategy and Economic Reform. 
  On China's reform and opening-up, Rong said the past decade 
had witnessed tremendous changes in the country's economic 
system, the rapid growth of its economy and the significant 
lifting of its people's living standards. 
  Planning and the market were both means which should be 
fully 
tapped to boost the development of the country, Rong stressed. 
  "What we mean by building a socialist market economy is to 
incorporate the socialist system into the market economy, allow 
market mechanisms to play a fundamental role in allocating 
resources under the government's effective macro-control, and to 
achieve both efficiency and fairness in our development," Rong 
said. 
  On future reforms, Rong noted that China would, as before, 
take the step-by-step manner in adopting further reform measures. 
  Welcoming the delegation, Rong said the two governments and 
the two peoples had enjoyed traditional friendship and long-time 
cooperation. 
  He expressed the belief that the visit would deepen the 
mutual understanding and friendship between the two governments 
and the two peoples, and help to promote the exchanges and 
cooperation in the reforms of their economic systems. 
  Cosea said Romania is very interested in China's economic 
reform and achievements. 
  The Romanian Government hopes that the traditional 
friendship 
between the two peoples would be further developed and the 
cooperative ties in economic reform and trade be further 
enhanced, he said. 
  The Romanian visitors came here on Monday [10 January] at 
the 
invitation of the State Commission for Restructuring Economic 
Systems. Wu Jie, vice-minister of the commission, took part in 
the meeting. 

