BFN 

  [Excerpt] Tripoli, 31 May -- A ceremony carrying out a 
ruling on the Aouzou Strip by the International Court of Justice 
was held yesterday, following an agreement signed in Surt on 4 
April 1944 between the Great Jamahiriyah and Chad. 
  The ceremony was attended by the brother secretary of 
justice 
and public security, and by the ministers of interior, defense 
and trade from the Chadian side. The head of the UN observers 
also attended. 
  A joint declaration was issued on the occasion. It states 
that the International Court of Justice issued its ruling on the 
regional dispute between the Great Socialist People's Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriyah and the Republic of Chad on 4 February, 1994, 
and that in the realization that the Great Socialist People's 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah and the Republic of Chad signed an 
agreement on 4 April 1994 on ways to implement the 
International's Court of Justice ruling, the Great Socialist 
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah and the Republic of Chad 
declare that the withdrawal of the Libyan administration and 
Libyan forces from the village of Aouzou is to begin on this 
day, 30 May 1944, in a manner acceptable to both sides and is to 
be made under the supervision of a UN observers' team. 
  This declaration was signed in the village of Aouzou today, 
30 May 1994. 
  The brother secretary of the General People's Committee for 
Justice and Public Order delivered a speech during the ceremony. 
He underlined that although the name of Aouzou used to 
represent a symbol for disunity, it can now be a symbol for the 
consolidation of solidarity and the boosting of ties and links 
between the two brotherly peoples in the Great Jamahiriyah and 
Chad. He indicated that for almost half a century, the village 
of Aouzou represented a symbol for a joint struggle to repel the 
colonialist invaders. 
  In his speech, the brother secretary said that although the 
colonialists did not settle in this land, they nevertheless 
established their presence by way of drawing maps of the area. 
The whole of Africa was a target for a deliberate and 
provocative policy of division aimed at sowing disunity among 
brothers and tearing apart the heroic bravery against 
colonialism. This region, alongside other regions in Africa, 
was part of this provocative division. To this day, other 
African areas continue to suffer from this divisionist policy. 
  He added that the colonialists used to exaggerate and stress 
this conflict between Libya and Chad, which hampered the march 
of all our peoples in Africa, and diverted Africa's attention 
from taking care of its matters and developing its resources. 
Colonialism erected a barrier between the two countries, which 
had a negative impact on cooperation between them. We are still 
seeing this policy in a number of African regions. 
  However, today, and following the taking of this brave step 
in opting to solve the conflict through peaceful means and 
through the International Court of Justice, we are taking a 
further heroic step, a step that shows our respect for the 
verdict of the International Court of Justice, a step that some 
so-called superpowers could not take. 
  Today, we give proof that solving a conflict can be reached 
through peaceful methods; through more effective and beneficial 
means. We show that whenever a judicial quarter specializing in 
areas of conflict gives its verdict, irrespective of the point 
of view expressed toward its decision, the parties should adhere 
to this ruling. This method is the fundamental foundation for 
establishing a new world order; the use of force, the imposition 
of or threats to implement political and economic sanctions will 
not provide solutions to the world's problems and difficulties. 
The only method is to solve conflicts via peaceful ways and 
through the UN Charter. 
  He added that the pronouncement of the verdict of the 
International Court of Justice, especially in a case like this, 
does not mean that there was a weak or a strong side, a victor 
or a vanquished, a winner or a loser. It means that a legal 
solution, irrespective of victory, defeat, gain or loss, had 
been found which solves a long-standing conflict, and turns the 
Sahara into what is was in the past: A land for harmonious ties 
and stability. 
  He stressed that the Great Jamahiriyah is setting the ideal 
example on respecting an important binding verdict, and that 
there is no other way for other states other than to heed this 
method for solving conflicts. [passage omitted] 

