Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Bosnia-Herzegovina Foreign </F>
Minister Irfan Ljubljankic with unidentified ETTELA'AT 
correspondent in Tehran; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [ETTELA'AT] How long will 
the Muslim officials of Bosnia-Herzegovina continue to stand up 
to the Serbs to recover 2 to 4 percent of their territory? 
  [Ljubljankic] We still demand the return of our occupied 
territory, in which massacres and ethnic hostilities continue. 
In fact, this is the demand of our parliament and we cannot 
concede it. On the basis of the Geneva conference and the peace 
proposals presented therein, the return of four percent of our 
territory to the Muslim areas is to ensure our interests and we 
cannot abandon it. 
  [ETTELA'AT] How do you view the Bihac adventurists in view 
of the situation currently prevailing in Bosnia-Herzegovina? 
  [Ljubljankic] Fikret Edic is a die-hard communist who has 
never defended Muslim interests. He is colluding with Bosnia's 
neighbors -- the Serbs and Croats -- to undermine the stamina of 
the Muslims at a time when Bosnia-Herzegovina is gasping in the 
throes of a life and death struggle. 
  Edic has reaped much profit in this manner, which he is now 
spending on catering to the needs of the rebels. This is an act 
of treason to the motherland and he is a traitor in our eyes. 
The Bosnian army is successfully defending Western Bosnia 
against the Serbs and the forces of the traitor Edic in most 
difficult conditions and we are trying to approach Edic's 
command base in Valica Klarosa [name as transliterated]. 
  [ETTELA'AT] What is your assessment of the future of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina in the event of the division of the country into 
three ethnic parts? Will peace return to Bosnia-Herzegovina if 
such a partition takes place? 
  [Ljubljankic] Bosnia-Herzegovina has always been considered 
a culturally diverse society with much variety among the various 
minorities. Then, a century ago we saw the end of five 
centuries of Ottoman rule, which had been able to insure 
tolerance and coexistence among the religions. At present we 
are in a situation in which we are forced to be realistic. 
There may be ethnic divisions, but that concept will not bring 
peace. 
  The basic condition of peace -- that is, justice -- has not 
been taken into consideration. 
  [ETTELA'AT] What is the best way of providing assistance to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in view of the arms embargo against your 
country? 
  [Ljubljankic] There is no other way to assist 
Bosnia-Herzegovina at this moment. The best way would be to 
provide financial assistance so that the country can strengthen 
its economy and purchase weapons. 
  [ETTELA'AT] What effect do the practical and theoretical 
stances of the Islamic countries, including that of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran, have on the enemies' aggression? What are 
Bosnia-Herzegovina's expectations of the world's countries and 
how do you feel these are being met? 
  [Ljubljankic] The Islamic countries are all endowed with 
growing economic power. We expect them to use this economic 
power to exert pressure on the Western countries so that the 
arms embargo imposed on us will be lifted. In every city of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, there are churches alongside the mosques. 
Unfortunately because of the fascist ideas of ethnic cleansing, 
all the mosques in the cities under Serb and Croat occupation 
have been destroyed. 
  The idea of dividing the country into ethnic regions is a 
new 
concept that never existed before in our country. We would 
prefer that Bosnia-Herzegovina retain its unique heritage in the 
world; this is quite a practical concept. [passage omitted] 
  If the arms embargo is lifted, we can solve our problems 
quickly. Even if this does not happen, politico-economic 
pressure would help boost the Muslims' stance at the peace talks. 
  [ETTELA'AT] The recent talks in Geneva and Brussels are the 
latest efforts to end the Bosnian crisis. In your opinion, will 
these be successful? 
  [Ljubljankic] The Geneva and Brussels talks give the 
European Union an opportunity to prove that those countries are 
sincere in doing something for Bosnia-Herzegovina on the 
political level. Unfortunately, the European countries are not 
able to motivate the Serbs to grant even a few concessions. 
Europe lacks the necessary ability and instruments to get these 
concessions; this is due to the absence of the political 
determination to use all necessary force. 
  The talks are not successful at present; they merely 
motivate 
the Serbs to perpetrate greater atrocities, so that the cities 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina are being shelled and civilians killed. 
  [ETTELA'AT] What is your opinion of the possibility of the 
Islamic Conference Organization [ICO] participating in the peace 
talks that are being held in Europe? 
  [Ljubljankic] This proposal, which was presented by the 
other sided at the peace talks, will not be accepted within the 
framework of the current talks. 
  Perhaps in the new talks this could get more consideration 
for Bosnia-Herzegovina, a totally new round of talks that should 
be based on documents by the United Nations and the CSCE. The 
ICO should influence the talks by using its political and 
economic power as leverage. 

