CSO 

  [Text] According to the NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN-sponsored 
survey of syndicated loans issued by 21 major banks, including 
city banks, long-term credit banks, and trust banks, Sanwa Bank 
ranked first in the value of loans arranged in the second half 
of fiscal year 1993 (September 1993 to March 1994). Fuji Bank 
ranked second and The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan ranked 
third. Loans arranged in other than "securitized formats," such 
as floating-rate notes (FRN), reached $5.9 billion, increasing 
sharply by a multiple of 2.5 over the first half of fiscal year 
1993. These figures clearly reflect the aggressive lending 
posture of Japanese banks, which expanded transactions in Hong 
Kong and Thailand. 
  Sanwa Bank, which ranked first overall, arranged loans 
totaling $1.2 billion, a figure far above those for the second 
and lower ranking banks. Sanwa Bank also ranked first in the 
loan department, exclusive of "securitized format" instruments 
such as floating-rate certificates of deposit (FRCD). Sanwa Bank 
utilized its operating base in Hong Kong, which is the largest 
of Japanese city banks, in aggressively arranging syndicated 
loans over a wide region including Thailand, major businessmen 
of Hong Kong, Indonesian petrochemical projects and the 
Malaysian Air Lines. 
  Fuji Bank, which ranked second overall, arranged 29 loans, 
primarily in Indonesia, South Korea, and Singapore. The 
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, which ranked third overall, 
arranged 31 loans, the most for all banks. 
  Aside from the leading city and long-term banks, the 
Hokkaido 
Takushoku Bank ranked fourth on an integrated basis and second 
for pure loan packages. The bank expanded its relations with the 
Taiwanese Evergreen Group whose core operation includes the 
world's largest container shipping company, and arranged a 
series of high-value marine vessel purchasing loans which served 
as the main reason for its ranking in the top group. 
  In the securitized loan department, The Industrial Bank of 
Japan ranked first by arranging a sizable $200 million loan to 
the South Korean Development Bank, while The Long-Term Credit 
Bank of Japan arranged eight loans and ranked second in this 
class, demonstrating the strength of its securities department. 
  Japanese banks were able to record a high rate of growth in 
arranging loans because China, South Korea, and the Southeast 
Asian region are involved in an increasing number of projects 
requiring huge sums of capital, including social infrastructure 
projects such as electric power plants and road construction and 
energy investment projects such as petroleum development. There 
is also the fact that a suspension in growth of loans in Japan 
and Europe and the United States due to recessionary conditions 
is being offset by increased loans in Asia. 
  City banks and long-term credit banks are increasing staff 
in 
Asian areas such as Hong Kong and Singapore in order to beef up 
their international syndicated lending operations. The future 
will see increasing competition as European, U.S., and Asian 
local banks also step up their banking activities in a similar 
manner. 

