BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Batygin article under the "Parties, Movements" </F>
rubric: "Big Business Banks on `Russia's Choice'"] 
  [Text] The denunciatory energy that has been pumped into 
Russian society over the past few years has, if not run out, 
then at any rate declined appreciably in the country's political 
life. The phase of democratic reform based on a mass social 
sense of discontent is behind us. Russia's present 
fundamentally different state makes it necessary to master a new 
language -- the language of dialogue, accord, democratic values 
-- and move away from frenzied screams of opposition to playing 
political solitaire. 
  Members of the new liberal-conservative party, "Russia's 
Choice," prefer to speak that language -- the language of market 
ideology -- in a country where, as DEUTSCHE WELLE remarked 
caustically, "everything can change overnight." The new party's 
constituent congress will be held in Moscow next Sunday. The 
program and "Russia's Choice" rules are ready and the party's 
definitive name will be decided by 800 congress delegates from 
64 Federation components where regional conferences have been 
held. 
  It was underlined at a press conference given by the future 
party's organizing committee that "Russia's Choice" is to 
"mobilize all democratic forces in order to decide on a 
presidential candidate for the coming elections." Thus members 
of "Russia's Choice" have very serious intentions. The election 
of the party's chairman is a mere formality, that post will be 
taken by Yegor Gaydar, the "architect" of the new economic 
policy. And delegates are to form a political council to 
represent all the regional organizations and implement the 
"Russia's Choice" policy between congresses, which are to 
convene at least once a year. They will have to decide who will 
hold the office of chairman of the executive committee, which 
tackles economic activity. 
  Per se, the idea of creating a mass political party is 
nothing new in postperestroyka Russia. It has been thought of 
by "Democratic Russia," the Communists, and the Democratic Party 
of Russia. 
  Yegor Gaydar has a clear idea of his party's social base -- 
"new Russians," businessmen, the regional nomenklatura. While 
admitting that there is a great threat of conservatism and 
reaction in the regions, he is fighting to create effective 
parties in the localities, "not fragile entities as was the case 
during the fight against the ossified regime." In the opinion 
of the "Russia's Choice" leader, the huge corrupt state machine 
that must be reformed by like-minded party members is hampering 
the formation of true market relations in the country. 
  In one way or another the fate of the future party depends 
on 
its leader. An extreme radical, Yegor Timurovich has recovered 
fairly rapidly from the knockout sustained by his faction 12 
December. Society's attitude toward him is by no means 
unambiguous. At the height of "shock therapy" I heard the 
following opinion of Gaydar: He was said to only view people as 
material for experiments. Under the ex-premier's "romantic 
exterior" there lurks a tough realist and pragmatist, who 
undoubtedly craves revenge for the humiliation in December. The 
liberal-radical "niche" in the shape of a new party best enables 
him to restore the trust of those who sincerely believe in the 
success of reforms and intend to "forge" them in practice. 
  It is incomparably easier for the admittedly beaten but 
nonetheless recognized Gaydar to tackle party building than, 
say, Socialist Party Chairman Lyudmila Vartazarova, a brilliant 
intellectual, but someone who is less well known in the 
"echelons of power." Despite the fact that high office did not 
enable Yegor Timurovich to cure Russia's economic ills, it is 
now time for a second attempt with the Russian president's 
approval. A party is an excellent, powerful instrument in the 
fight for power. 
  "Russia's Choice" may be called the leaders' party. It is 
unlikely that in his new role as "general secretary" Gaydar, 
whose reforms Solzhenitsyn rudely called "brainless" in 
Vladivostok, will renounce his "architect's" ideas in politics 
as well as in the economy. This idea is prompted by an 
important point -- the future liberal party will depend on a 
quite definite social group, brought up in the Western manner, 
which shares its tactics and strategy. Big business calls the 
tune. Financial groups and banks backing "Russia's Choice" 
would presumably like more rapid compensation for their election 
campaign expenditure. The most favorable prospects here will 
emerge when "Russia's Choice" members get into government. 
  ....I was introduced, admittedly by letter, to a future 
rank-and-file member of the new party. Igor Stepanovich 
Mironov, a resident of Moscow Oblast, sent the editorial office 
a letter entitled "Why I am joining Gaydar's party." The reader 
gave the following explanation for his personal choice: "Russia 
is weary of gray individuals being in power." 
  Needless to say, one letter is no excuse for 
generalizations, 
but nonetheless.... What indeed is to be done with the "gray 
mass," and at the same time with the middle class, people 
far-removed from complex political battles and leadership posts 
who only dream of one thing: Order in the country and normal, 
dignified lives for themselves and their children. Is there a 
guarantee that the new party of the future, which is essentially 
engaged and elitist, will ultimately address the well-being of 
all Russian society and not just the prosperity of a small 
number of entrepreneurs? 

