BFN 

  [Text] The big news on the political and economic level is 
the Americans' warning, who are trying to strengthen the embargo 
against Haiti, especially as regards fuel. This time there is 
talk of tightening the sanctions at the Haitian-Dominican 
frontier. Rothschild Francois Jr. filed a report: 
  [Begin Francois recording] A high-ranking U.S. 
Administration 
official has said: The United States is studying an option to 
strengthen sanctions against Haiti by discussing with the 
Dominican Republic ways of preventing the embargo from being 
by-passed with regards to oil. This official, who asked to 
remain anonymous, also said in Coronado, California, where 
President Bill Clinton is on vacation, that exiled President 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide has not yet told Washington his position 
on the new U.S. plan aimed at allowing him to return to power. 
  The official reminded that this plan is a combination of 
strong sanctions to exert pressure on the current regime and a 
political process in Haiti that must help create conditions for 
a full return to democracy. He added: During the past few days, 
we have discussed with the Dominican Republic how we can 
reinforce the sanctions and reduce fuel trafficking through its 
Haitian land border and by sea. Those discussions went pretty 
well, continued the U.S. official. [end recording] 
  Moreover, the official said Jean-Bertrand Aristide had not 
personally and officially informed the U.S. administration his 
position on the new plan aimed at allowing him to return to 
power. Remember that in a press release on 28 March, the exiled 
president insisted on the need for the military to resign as the 
first step of a peace plan for Haiti. The U.S. initiative 
provides for the simultaneous appointment of a new prime 
minister and resignation by Haiti's current government, meaning 
the military authorities, who would be given amnesty. 
  The high-ranking U.S. official added: The United States 
tried, through this new plan, to satisfy some of President 
Aristide's concerns, and we are going to work with him on it. 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide seems to fear that the political process 
in question might become an alternative to his return to Haiti, 
but that was never what we had in mind, said the U.S. official. 

