Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ye. Ye. Selkov and Yu. V. Stupnichenko; </F>
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics, Pushchino, 
142292; Institute of Plant Physiology, Kishinev, Moldova, 
277002; UDC 576.343.577.121:663.1] 
  [Text]The primary stages of the information technology 
developed for creating and supporting a data base on metabolic 
pathways are presented in this article. The methods utilized for 
formalizing and visualizing information on metabolic pathways 
are described. A description is given of the developed software, 
which allows one to search for metabolic pathways by key words 
(their names, names of substances, enzymes) and produce a 
graphic image on the screen in various forms. 
  Existing methods of presenting information on cell 
metabolism, in our opinion, do not guarantee effective access to 
the information and do not allow one to apply modern analytical 
methods. 
  The presentation of information on metabolic pathways in the 
form of graphic diagrams is generally accepted. Diagrams of 
metabolic pathways are encountered in the majority of 
biochemistry textbooks, and charts [1, 2] and maps [3, 4] of 
metabolic pathways are widespread. Authors of original 
scientific publications on new metabolic pathways also make use 
of diagrams. 
  Apparently, visualization of information in the form of 
diagrams does not have an alternative because without graphic 
images, it is extremely difficult to represent a system in its 
entirety. Nevertheless, presenting information on cell 
metabolism in the form of metabolic maps does not guarantee 
effective access to the information and does not allow one to 
apply modern computer analysis methods. 
  The goal of this work was to create a computer data base on 
metabolic pathways that, together with the use of traditional 
visualization methods, would allow one to apply various computer 
analysis methods. In this case, it would be necessary to develop 
an effective system that would allow one to store and quickly 
process information on metabolic pathways, as well as make it 
possible for one to interface with other biochemistry and 
molecular biology data bases. 
<H3>  Primary Stages of the Technology for Support and Utilization 
of the Data Base on Metabolic Pathways </H3>
  The GDMP (graphic data base on metabolic pathways) is a 
software system for processing and storing information on 
metabolic pathways, the primary portions of which are the 
language for representing primary data, the data base, support 
software for the data base, and software for accessing and 
analyzing information stored in the data base. 
  Technology for operating the data base can be divided into 
three primary parts: translation of the original information on 
a metabolic pathway into the formal language for representing 
primary data, the MPDL (metabolic pathway data language), input 
of changes into the data base via the MPBM (metabolic pathway 
base manager) system, and user access to information via MPBR 
(metabolic pathway base retriever) software. The overall scheme 
of data base operation is shown in greater detail in fig. 1. 




<H3>    Formalizing the Object Field and the MPDL Language for 
Representing Primary Data </H3>
  Metabolic pathway determination. There is no exact 
determination of metabolic pathways. Nevertheless, the current 
practice of dividing overall cell metabolism into individual 
metabolic pathways indicates that in such a division, nodal 
substances play a key role in cell metabolism. Nodal substances 
participate in many metabolic transformations as starting 
substrates or final products. An example of a nodal substance is 
glucose-6-phosphate, which participates in glycolysis, glycogen 
synthesis, the pentose phosphate pathway, and many other 
transformations. Another example of a nodal substance is 
pyruvate, with which many metabolic transformations begin or 
end. Glucose-6-phosphate and pyruvate are related nodal 
substances coupled by the glycolysis metabolic pathway. 
  In this work, the metabolic pathway is determined as a 
sequence of reactions interacting with each other through common 
intermediates that couple related nodal substances. In a 
confluent case, the metabolic pathway can be represented as a 
single reaction. 
  In order to facilitate graphic imaging of metabolic pathways 
and their analysis, it is advisable to utilize representation on 
the three hierarchically organized levels introduced in [5] for 
poly-enzyme systems. 
  According to [5], the interactions of metabolic pathway 
reactions through common intermediates comprise the primary 
structure of this pathway. The primary structure does not 
include interactions through common coenzymes or regulatory 
substances. A well-known example of using the primary structure 
for graphic representation of metabolism is D. Nicholson's map 
"Metabolic Pathways" [3]. In the primary structure, each 
substance is represented by only one node. Such a structure is 
the skeleton of the metabolic pathway whose graphic image is 
required. 
  The addition of interactions of reactions through common 
coenzymes to the primary structure leads to a secondary or 
stoichiometric metabolic pathway structure. The complete image 
of all possible interactions of a metabolic pathway's secondary 
structure may be unsuitable due to the multiple participation of 
coenzymes in various pathway reactions. Therefore, the secondary 
structure is usually represented in a form in which connections 
through common coenzymes are by broken lines. In such an image, 
each coenzyme may be represented by several nodes if it 
participates in several reactions. 
  In order to simplify images, several connections through 
substances in the primary structure may be by broken lines. 
Usually these are simple inorganic substances of the type 
H[.sup]2[/]O, CO[.sub]2[/], orthophosphate, pyrophosphate, 
etc. A well-known example of using such a broken-line secondary 
structure of metabolic pathways is G. Michal's map "Biochemical 
Pathways" [4], published by Boehringer, Germany. 
  The set of all stoichiometric interactions of the secondary 
structure, supplemented by nonstoichiometric regulator 
interactions, comprises the tertiary structure of the metabolic 
pathway [5]. 
  In this work, only the simplest task--computer display of 
the 
secondary structure of metabolic pathways--is discussed. 
  In order to simplify further presentation, we will agree to 
call substances that participate in primary structure 
interactions and that are represented by unique nodes "metabolic 
pathway intermediates." We will call substances that supplement 
the primary structure up to the secondary structure, as well as 
primary structure substances that are graphically represented by 
broken, non-unique nodes, "cointermediates." 
  MPDL language for representing data. The MPDL 
language for representing data is a subset of the format for 
representing data from the DBEMP factual data base on enzymes 
and metabolic pathways [6]. 
  The MPDL language is intended for formally describing 
metabolic pathways, and it includes software for describing the 
bibliographic source of information, the biological source, the 
intracellular localization of enzymes, and the metabolic pathway 
reactions themselves. 
  The MPDL-file is in ASCII format and consists of records. 
  A record is a logical unit of language that describes an 
individual metabolic pathway and consists of a sequence of 
fields. 
  A field consists of a title, located in the first columns 
and 
containing a portion separated from the title by a space. Fields 
are divided into "required" and "not required." 
  The MPDL language is compatible with the DBEMP format in 
such 
a way that any MPDL-record satisfies DBEMP requirements. A DBEMP 
record satisfies MPDL requirements if it meets the following two 
conditions: 
  1) the two fields required for an MPDL-record are present; 
  2) the MPDL syntax rules are followed. 
  Representation of primary data on a metabolic pathway 
in MPDL language. The described version of the data base 
includes an MPDL variant in which a record may contain 10 
fields. Their designations are briefly described below: 
  AN (accession number) contains a record identifier; 
  SO (source) contains a bibliographic description of the 
information source; 
  OR (organism) and OCN (organism common name) contain the 
systematic and commonly used names of an organism; 
  SPN (systematic pathway name), MPW (metabolic pathway), and 
APN (alternative pathway name) contain the systematic, 
recommended, and commonly used names of a metabolic pathway; 
  MPW E has the form of a table, consisting of a title line 
and 
content lines. The title line contains names of fields in the 
table. Content lines contain descriptions of the metabolic 
pathway reactions contained in these fields; four fields in the 
table--EC (enzyme code), EN (enzyme name), RE (reaction), and RD 
(reaction direction)--are entered in the appropriate language 
variant and contain the enzyme code, the recommended name, the 
reaction, and the reaction direction, respectively; 
  DES (designation) contains abbreviated names of substances; 
  INM (intermediates) contains names of metabolic pathway 
intermediates (but not cointermediates). 
  A sample record in MPDL language is given below. 


<H5>  MPBM Data Base Support Software </H5>
  MPBM software is executed in the form of a 300 K EXE-file. 
It 
is in C language (QuickC compiler, Microsoft). The system is 
intended for MPDL-file (containing MPDL language records) 
processing by the expert-operator with the goals of filling the 
data base, entering changes to the graphic images stored in the 
data base, and retrieval when information from the data base is 
needed. Expert-operator interface with MPBM is accomplished by 
means of a system of menus and dialog windows. 
  MPDL language translator. The two-way translator 
assures syntax and name verification and the formation of 
internal representation of metabolic pathways, including the 
stoichiometric matrix and the incidence matrix for subsequent 
construction of graphic images. 
  In general, the process proceeds with the participation of 
the expert-operator, who responds to system requests in specific 
situations. For example, with the appearance of an unknown 
substance name in the system, direct support of the expert is 
required in order to remove mistakes from the name. 
  Metabolic pathway imaging. General description. 
The image is a two-dimensional graph. The graphics software is 
divided into three types of nodes and two types of branches. 
  Each node type designates a metabolic pathway enzyme, 
intermediate, or co-intermediate (see the section "Metabolic 
pathway determination"). Each enzyme or intermediate is 
designated by a single node. Cointermediates are designated by 
several nodes, each of which corresponds to the 
co-intermediate's participation in a given reaction. 
  A branch of the first type is always directed from an 
intermediate to an enzyme and indicates the intermediate's 
participation as a substrate in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. A 
branch of the second type is always directed from an enzyme to 
an intermediate and indicates the intermediate's participation 
as a product in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. 
  An image may also contain various names for each node and be 
viewed on two different scales. 
  Initial planar configuration of the graph. A special 
interative algorithm for planar graph configuration is utilized 
to construct the inital image [7]. The algorithm is empirical 
and intended for producing graphic images that are visually well 
perceived. Our experience indicates that as a result of using 
the algorithm, at least the general structure of the graph is 
viewed well. 
  In conjunction with a sensitive algorithm developed by us 
for 
the initial configuration of points, the system asks the 
operator to assign one of two methods for initial configuration 
of graph nodes, utilizing his own knowledge regarding the cyclic 
nature of the metabolic pathway. 
  MPGE graphic editor. The MPGE graphic editor is intended for 
putting the metabolic pathway image in a form suitable for 
visual analysis. 
  The editor's resources take into account requirements that 
are traditionally imposed on metabolic pathway diagrams, but 
they do not restrict the author in the selection of a method for 
planar graph configuration. All operations can be carried out 
with a mouse. 
  The editor allows one to intermix individual nodes or groups 
of nodes and to arrange a group of nodes in a circle of desired 
radius or in a line of desired length. Operations may be 
conducted on two image scales. It is possible to work with named 
nodes or without them. With the input of changes, the image is 
automatically reconstructed. 
  Information storage in the data base. Data base 
structure. After an image of the required form is created, 
information on the metabolic pathway can be stored in the data 
base by means of a special command. The image form is stored as 
node coordinates. 
  The data base consists of 16 files in the relational SUBD 
"Paradox" (Borland) format that contain information on metabolic 
pathways in an internal form as well as support information. 
  Input of changes to the data base. It is possible 
to input two types of changes: changes to the image form and 
changes to metabolic pathway information at the 
MPDL-communication level. 
  In the first case, changes are entered by means of the MPGE 
editor; in the second--it is possible to retrieve information on 
a metabolic pathway from the data base by means of a special 
command and then to input the appropriate changes into the 
MPDL-file and rewrite the necessary record (see also fig. 1). 
<H5>  Software for Accessing the MPBR Data Base </H5>
  MPBR software is executed in the form of a 200 K EXE-file. 
It 
is in C language (QuickC compiler, Microsoft). The system is 
intended for assuring user access to information on metabolic 
pathways and also includes software for analyzing metabolic 
pathways. MPBR operates in the EGA graphic regime. User 
interface includes a hierarchical menu system, a series of 
pictograms, and a help window system. Complete 
interchangeability of the keyboard and mouse is assured. The 
metabolic pathway image is also used as a graphic interface. 
  Version 1.3 (October 1992) contains the resources described 
below. 
  Information on data base content. The user can 
obtain information regarding the number of metabolic pathways 
contained in the data base as well as about the overall number 
of substances and enzymes that participate in them. 
  Viewing metabolic pathway diagrams. The user 
selects a desired pathway from an alphabetized list of 
recommended names of metabolic pathways, at which point he gains 
access to systematic and commonly used names of the metabolic 
pathway as well as the biological source given in the original 
report. A portion of the menu system, with which these 
operations are executed, is shown in fig. 2. 




    After selection of a metabolic pathway, the system proceeds 
to the viewing regime. The image may be viewed in two ranges. 
Transition to the larger scale proceeds with the aid of a 
movable scale frame. 
  It is possible to include the names of graph nodes in the 
image. Names are EC-codes or recommended names for enzymes (in 
agreement with the enzyme classification in [8]) and complete or 
abbreviated names for substances. 
  In fig. 3, made from a screen display, a black-and-white 
image of the citric acid cycle is shown. 




    Figure 4 shows how a portion of this image appears on a 
larger scale. 




    Searching for metabolic pathways containing a specific 
substance or enzyme. The user selects a desired object from 
an alphabetized list of substance or enzyme names and obtains a 
list of metabolic pathways in which the given substance or 
enzyme participates. A portion of the corresponding menu system 
is shown in fig. 5. 




    This list is analogous to the general list of recommended 
names (see ``Viewing metabolic pathway diagrams''). While 
viewing images of metabolic pathways from the list, one can 
obtain information about the participation of the enzyme or 
substance in each of them. To accomplish this, the system 
automatically selects, during image formation via the graphics 
software, the substance or enzyme about which the inquiry was 
made. 
<H5>  Discussion of Results and Prospective Development </H5>
  In this work, software for visualizing and processing 
information based on the GDMP data base is described. Primary 
information on the structure of a metabolic pathway and the 
intermediates and enzymes participating in it is contained in 
the data base; however, several important characteristics have 
not yet been reflected by the data base software. In the 
described version of the data base, information on the 
intracellular localization of enzymes of a metabolic path and 
their regulation is absent. It is planned to include this 
information in future versions. 
  In the next versions, a link should also be established with 
the factual data base on enzymes and metabolic pathways in DBEMP 
[6] so that the user would be able to obtain information on the 
catalytic, regulatory, and molecular biological properties of 
enzymes participating in metabolic pathways. 
  There is definite interest, in our opinion, for the user to 
have the resources to view structural formulas of intermediates 
via the estblishment of a link with the corresponding data base. 
  Development of software, on the basis of this data base, for 
automating mathematical modeling and using algorithms for 
analyzing graphs for studying various aspects of metabolic 
pathway functioning appears interesting and promising to us. 
  We will be grateful for any comments or suggestions 
concerning possibilities for developing the system in these and 
other directions. 
References 
  1. Legli S., Nikolson D. Metabolicheskiye puti [Metabolic 
Pathways]. Moscow: Mir, 1973. 
  2. Musil Ya., Novakova O., Kunts K. Sovremennaya 
biokhimiya v skhemakh [Modern Biochemistry in Diagrams]. Moscow: 
Mir, 1981. 
  3. Nicholson D. E. Metabolic Pathways Map. St. Louis: 
Sigma Chemical Co., 1990. 
  4. Michal G., Biochemical pathways. GMBH, Boehringer 
Mannheim, 1974. 
  5. Ivanitskiy G. R., Krinskiy V. I., Selkov Ye. Ye. 
Matematicheskaya biofizika kletki [Mathematical Biophysics of 
the Cell]. Moscow: Nauka, 1978. 
  6. Selkov Ye. Ye., Goryanin I. I., Kaimatchnikov N. P., et 
al. Studia Biphysica. Vol 129 No 2-3, 1989 pp 155-164. 
  7. Kamada T., Kawai S. Information Processing Letters. Vol 
31, 1989 pp 7-15. 
  8. Enzyme Nomenclature. New York: Academic Press, 1984. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Biotekhnologiya," 1993. 

