Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Vienna, Feb. 19, IRNA -- The Tehran communique will 
be the pivot of the 30th session of the United Nations 
sub-committee on narcotic drugs to be held in Damascus 21 
February, Mojtaba Arastoo, Iran's ambassador to the Vienna-based 
international organizations announced here today. 
  He added that the Damascus session will discuss the latest 
developments regarding drug trafficking in the Middle and Near 
East as well as the ways to campaign [against] the cultivation 
of opium poppy. 
  Arastoo said that the Tehran communique consists of an 
introduction and six chapters, adding that the first chapter 
calls on all countries to join the 1961, 1971 and 1988 
conventions on narcotic drugs. 
  The first chapter also stresses the need for developing 
financial and regional strategies to fight drug trafficking, he 
added. 
  Destroying illegal poppy farms, creating substitute farming, 
confiscating the wealth accumulated as a result of drug 
trafficking and fighting drug abuse are among the issues 
incorporated into the other chapters of the communique, Arastoo 
said. 
  He also added that the communique envisages the 
establishment 
of an Islamic fund and seeks cooperation of international 
financial organizations for undertaking job-oriented projects 
and setting up of educational centers to enhance the awareness 
of people regarding drug abuse in the areas where poppy is 
cultivated. 
  The relentless campaign of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
against drug trafficking, on the one hand, and the economic 
conditions prevailing [in] the newly-independent republics of 
the former Soviet Union on the other, have given an impetus to 
drug trafficking via the routes of these republics to Europe, he 
said. 
  The agenda of the sub-committee has considerably expanded 
subject wise and from geographic point of view, he added. 
  Referring to the recent visit of the executive director of 
the UN international drug control program to Tehran, he said 
that in the near future a regional office of the said program 
would be established in Islamabad, and a trilateral memorandum 
of understanding would be signed among Iran, Pakistan and the 
U.N. 
  Arastoo left Vienna for Damascus Saturday to deliver a 
speech 
in the opening session of the sub-committee as the former 
chairman. 

