BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sichuan Governor Xiao Yang by staff reporter </F>
Liu Xiaoqing (0491 1420 7230), 12 June--place not given] 
  [Text] Chongqing, 12 Jun (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- Xiao 
Yang, governor of Sichuan Province, can be said to be a 
specialist in foreign trade and economic cooperation. He took 
up this work 16 years ago and has spared no efforts to open 
Sichuan and Chongqing wider to the outside world in the past few 
years, no matter whether he was in charge of the government of 
Chongqing City or Sichuan. Xiao Yang has been interviewed by 
this reporter today. 
  Xiao Yang said the reason why China opened the coastal 
cities 
to the outside world first was their favorable geographical 
position. "The coastal cities are close to the sea and the sea 
links them with the outside. However, we are in mountain 
valleys and we are close to Mount Emei." Xiao Yang spoke 
humorously about a solemn topic. 
  "China had to regard the export-oriented economy as the 
dominant factor before it could converge with the international 
economy when it began to open itself up to the outside world. 
The first thing in the export-oriented economy is 
transportation. It takes five days to go from Chongqing to 
Shanghai by water and the distance between the two places is 
3,000 km. How could import processing and compensation trade be 
carried out? How could Sichuan compete with the coastal areas?" 
  Following the development during the past decade or so, the 
scope of China's opening up to the outside world has greatly 
developed and opening up has spread from the coastal and border 
areas to the vast hinterland. At the same time, China's own 
conditions for economic cooperation with foreign countries have 
also become increasingly mature. China's annual volume of 
foreign trade has developed from $20 billion at the end of the 
1970's to the current $200 billion. 
  After giving this reporter a brief account of the general 
situation of China's opening up to the outside world, Xiao Yang 
analyzed several new characteristics in China's opening up at 
present. He said: The first is that the opening up pattern 
with the export-oriented economy as the dominant factor has 
changed into a pattern with the domestic market as the dominant 
factor or a pattern with equal importance given to both the 
domestic and foreign markets. The degree of opening up of 
China's market has greatly increased. Second, China's economic 
level is able to absorb more foreign capital and large foreign 
enterprises have come to make investments in China's hinterland 
one after another. 
  Third, the gap between the coastal areas and the hinterland 
is evident and the state will give more consideration to the 
hinterland or will implement a tilted policy in favor of the 
hinterland. 
  The amount of foreign capital absorbed by Sichuan, he said, 
is determined by the attractiveness and the degree of opening up 
of the market. Foreign businessmen do not come to see Mount 
Emei or the stone carvings of Dazu. They come because of the 
enormous market in Sichuan. As far as the United States is 
concerned, Sichuan's market has provided 150,000 jobs for the 
Americans. This is quite tempting. 
  Foreign businessmen have already occupied the outside market 
quite thoroughly. Are we not taking away what they have 
occupied if we only develop the export-oriented economy? We 
have opened part of our market and they have come immediately. 
Taking Sichuan as an example, Xiao Yang said: Many large 
foreign enterprises came to Sichuan last year and most of them 
were manufacturing enterprises. The largest telephone 
corporation and glass group from the United States came. The 
Siemens Corporation of Germany and the biggest hydropower group 
from Canada also rushed to Sichuan. U.S. General Motors and 
Japan's Honda Automobile Corporation also followed their 
examples and were ready to make investment in Sichuan on a large 
scale. Japan's Honda repeatedly said it had come late. 
  Xiao Yang said: In view of the three characteristics 
mentioned above, provinces in the hinterland should 
energetically adopt measures to cope with the situation. They 
should first of all have a good understanding of their own 
market. Xiao Yang talked about Sichuan's market and he knows it 
like the back of his hand. He said: The annual transaction 
volume of Sichuan's market is 400 billion yuan and Sichuan's 
market grows at a rate of 10 percent each year. This means 
Sichuan has a market of 40 billion yuan for development each 
year and the volume of this market is its capacity to absorb 
foreign capital. Where else can one find such a vast market in 
the world at present? 
  Second, hinterland provinces should give full play to the 
strong points of their own resources. Both Sichuan's 
agriculture and industry have a solid foundation. Besides, 
Sichuan has 1.6 million science and technology workers and rich 
labor resources. The market plus resources and manpower makes 
for the biggest investment environment. 
  Xiao Yang said: In addition to the market, resources, and 
other basic conditions, the efficiency and behavior of the 
government is also very important. The government should ensure 
that foreign businessmen have a normal operational environment 
for investment and should protect the legitimate rights and 
interests of foreign businessmen. At present, some localities 
have taken a few "bites" out of foreign enterprises because they 
are foreign enterprises and have money. How outrageous! 
  Opening up the market is Xiao Yang's basic train of thought 
on opening the hinterland to the outside world. He has already 
put forward and practiced such a train of thought when he was in 
Chongqing a few years ago. This also shows his realistic and 
pioneering spirit in performing official duties. However, Xiao 
Yang also specially pointed out: The market cannot be opened 
indiscriminately. There should be limits and benefits in 
opening the market. 

