Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Manila, Jan 25 (AFP) -- The Philippines may invoke 
a mutual defense treaty (MDT) with the United States if its 
forces are attacked by other claimants in the disputed Spratly 
islands, Defense Secretary Renato de Villa said Tuesday. But De 
Villa told foreign correspondents that the 1951 treaty, which 
calls for assistance against a third-party aggressor, does not 
guarantee automatic aid from Washington, unlike the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
  The Spratlys are a reputedly oil-rich and strategically 
located archipelago in the South China Sea which are claimed in 
whole or in part by China, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, 
Taiwan and Brunei. 
  De Villa said any attack on Philippine troops, vessels or 
aircraft is considered an "act of aggression," in which case 
Manila can invoke the MDT, which exists despite the closure of 
US military bases in the country. But he said that "there is no 
such thing as an automatic response" if the Philippines invokes 
the pact although "it will trigger an action on the part of the 
US government." De Villa did not elaborate. 
  China and Vietnam maintain the largest garrisons and naval 
patrols in the Spratlys, and all claimants save for Brunei have 
some form of armed presence to press their claim. 
  Regional security experts warn that the Spratlys remained a 
flashpoint for conflict and urged wider dialogue and cooperation 
among the claimaints to avert a new Southeast Asian war. So far 
four informal workshops have been held. 
  The experts also said the United States is not likely to be 
dragged into a regional conflict unless its own national 
interests were directly affected, citing US reluctance to get 
involved in Bosnia and Somalia. 
  China routed Vietnam in a 1988 naval battle in the Spratlys, 
leaving an estimated 78 dead and 24 wounded on the Vietnamese 
side. 
  Security analyst Bilveer Singh of the Singapore Institute of 
International Affairs told a Manila seminar of regional think 
tanks earlier this month that China had overwhelming military 
supremacy over the other Spratly claimants. 
  China has 260,000 men, 94 submarines, 19 destroyers, 37 
frigates, 870 patrol vessels, 128 mine warfare vessels, and 60 
naval aircraft deployed in the South China Sea, he said, while 
Vietnam has the second most powerful presence. 

