Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by David Ze'ev] </F>
  [Text] The Israeli coordinator of activities in the 
territories, Major General Dani Rothschild, told the cabinet 
today there is indifference among Palestinians over the peace 
process. They want to see how they will benefit amid economic 
problems in the Gaza Strip that include high unemployment. A 
senior government source says Gen. Rothschild spoke of internal 
strife within Yasir 'Arafat's Fatah organization -- those loyal 
to the peace process at odds with those who continue to hoard 
arms. 
  Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres says the PLO negotiators 
holding talks with Israel on the Gaza-Jericho First plan are 
personally threatened. They do not have much room to maneuver 
in making decisions. A senior diplomatic source adds that 
Palestinian delegates have received death threats. And Minister 
Yosi Sarid, a member of the Peres team that signed the Cairo 
security agreement with the PLO last week, said Israel must take 
into account the duress of the Palestinian negotiators. 
  Taking into account the recent spate of Palestinian attacks 
on Israelis, Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin said the question of 
whether to tighten the closure imposed on the territories last 
year is to be considered. The police are calling for steps that 
include limiting the number of Palestinian vehicles allowed to 
enter Israel from the territories and, once again, raising the 
minimum age of Palestinians permitted to cross over. Army chief 
of staff, Lieutenant General Ehud Baraq, told the cabinet the 
IDF [Israel Defense Forces] has not yet come to the conclusion 
that the closure should be tightened, or that a complete closure 
should be imposed. But, he said, the Army is ready to 
reconsider whether such steps should be taken. 
  [Jerusalem Israel Television Network Channel 1 in Hebrew at 
1800 GMT on 13 February, in a report by political correspondent 
Gadi Sukenik, carries a recording of Minister Shim'on Shetrit's 
remarks to reporters after the 13 February cabinet meeting: 
"When we discuss the permanent arrangement, we will insist that 
no separate, independent Palestinian state is to be established." 
  [Sukenik adds that "Minister Peres' remarks on the need for 
Israelis to discuss the evacuation of the Netzarim and Dugit 
settlements despite the agreement which leaves them in place, 
caused a controversy in the government."] 

