BFN 

<F P=106> [Ilya Bulavinov report under the "News Conference by Army </F>
Commander in Chief" rubric: "Pavel Grachev Comes To Know His 
Friends in Need"] 
  [Text] Even at a critical time when the Army's fate 
effectively hangs in the balance, the Russian top brass have 
remained true to the principle of unity of command and only come 
closer together in the face of an "external" threat of 
underfinancing. This at least was proved by the results of 
yesterday's news conference by Colonel General Vladimir Semenov, 
commander in chief of the Army. 
  General Semenov started his speech with comments on the 
KOMMERSANT-DAILY material published on 19 May, which spoke about 
the possible heightening of tensions among top commanders of the 
Russian Armed Forces following the adoption of the 1994 draft 
federal budget. The general pointed out as an unquestionably 
positive development that the spirit of the Defense Ministry 
collegium "under the current minister" differs significantly 
from what it was before 1991. In his view, commanders are now 
free to voice their opinions on various problems, whether or not 
they coincide with those of the minister At the same time, if 
the collegium makes any decision "we are obliged to implement 
it." Precisely this scenario was predicted, among others, by 
KOMMERSANT-DAILY observers in the material cited by Mr. Semenov. 
  Given that, one could make a more accurate suggestion. The 
generals' reluctance to use as auspicious a subject as the 
budget for criticizing the minister's activity appears to 
testify not only to Pavel Grachev's firm positions at the 
ministry itself, but also to a lack of serious complaints about 
him from Boris Yeltsin. The latter suggestion was confirmed by 
Vyacheslav Kostikov, who said at a briefing yesterday that the 
president fully supported Pavel Grachev politically and morally. 
Otherwise, the generals, who tend to be keenly sensitive to 
upcoming political upheavals, would not have spoken so kindly 
about their current boss's activity. 
  As for the content of the news conference, General Semenov, 
as expected, complained of a lack of money. Nonetheless, in his 
words, the Army's prospects do not look altogether hopeless. 

