Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Ladislav Konecny, director of the </F>
Radioactive Waste Department at the Nuclear Control Office of 
the Slovak Republic, by Vladimir Duduc; place and date not 
given: "Deep Under Limits"] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] When taking into account all 
the radionuclides contained in liquid waste, we can see that the 
yearly limit of beta activity for the A1 and V1 blocks in the 
Bohunice nuclear plant was fixed at 37,000 Mega becquerels 
(MBq). This limit was set at 0.21 percent and the limit for the 
V2 blocks -- 1,000 Mbq -- at 2.3 percent. In absolute figures, 
this means that from the V1 blocks, 1,600 cubic meters of 
decontaminated liquids were released into the environment in 
July, 650 in August, and 990 in September. The situation in 
other months was quite similar. 
  The remaining part of liquid radioactive waste cannot be 
released, since it would remain radioactive even after the 
decontamination process. Waste of this kind, as well as solid 
waste, such as various contaminated objects and equipment used 
for maintenance, routine repairs, and overhauls of atomic 
reactors (rugs, protective tools, metallic tools, and other 
materials), are stored in specially designated areas equipped 
for this purpose. 
  Both liquid and radioactive waste must be fixed [ridden of 
volatile parts] during further processing to meet transportation 
and storage regulations. "Fixation, or the solidification of 
radioactive waste, is nothing more than giving the material a 
convenient structure for long-term storage," Konecny says. The 
fixation of liquid and solid waste is done using various methods 
-- cementation, bituminization, vitrification, and other methods. 
  The deadline for the test run at the site of the radioactive 
waste permanent deposit in Mochovce is approaching. So far, the 
radioactive waste has been stored inside the power stations -- 
at the Bohunice V1 and V2. From a long-term view, however, this 
is not the final solution, especially if we realize that last 
year, the nuclear power station in Jaslovske Bohunice produced 
120-200 cubic meters of solid waste and 250 cubic meters of 
liquid waste that cannot be decontaminated. 

