Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Special article by reporter Li Xiaozhun (2621 1321 6150): </F>
"Kim Yong-sam Will Play `Economic Card' During China Visit"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong 25 Mar (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE)--Just as 
the mainland market is expanding opening up and with Sino-ROK 
ties in economic relations and trade growing increasingly close 
over the past few years, ROK President Kim Yong-sam has decided 
to accept an invitation and pay an official visit to China on 26 
March. It is expected that during his current three or five-day 
visit to Mainland China, Kim Yong-sam will go all out to seek 
the expansion of ROK-PRC cooperation in economic relations and 
trade to remove the barrier of strong competition overseas and 
open up a new way to revitalize the ROK economy. 
  As one of the "four little tigers" of Asia, ROK has enjoyed 
fast development of its economy and trade in recent years, and 
its volume of foreign trade ranks 13th in the world, ahead of 
Taiwan. However, rising wages and land prices at home, and, in 
particular, strong competition from neighbouring countries and 
regions for foreign investment and trade, have already become a 
bottleneck for the ROK's economic development. This being the 
case, how to utilize the great potential of the Mainland China 
market with its rich mineral and labor resources and advanced 
scientific and technological strength and to seek cooperation 
and development is an important strategy for the ROK to develop 
its foreign economic relations and trade in the days to come. 
  On the eve of his China visit, Kim Yong-sam openly stated 
that the ROK and PRC should not become opponents to each other 
in economic competition, but partners. Should the two sides 
allow a marriage between each other's advantages, the two 
countries' international competitiveness will be further 
strengthened. Regarding his concrete concepts, according to a 
foreign report, Kim Yong-sam plans to explore and discuss the 
formation of a common market following the pattern of the 
European Free Trade Association; at the same time, he will 
propose the establishment of an ROK-PRC committee for industrial 
cooperation, with the focus on joint production and development 
in such areas as autos, telecommunications, aerospace, and 
television. 
  Obviously, the aforesaid ROK concepts has taken into 
consideration the comparatively extensive market of Mainland 
China in those fields and the related technologies and 
experience the ROK is in possession of; whereas the Chinese side 
has in urgent need of further breakthroughs and developments in 
autos, electronics, and the aerospace industry in addition to 
having rich resources and cheap labor. We believe that should 
China and the ROK be able to augment cooperation in these 
domains, not only will there be a foundation and certain 
conditions, but sound prospects for development. 
  Presently, there are some 1,000 ROK-funded enterprises in 
Mainland China, with investment approaching $1 billion. This 
year, some large firm are ready to advance toward Mainland China 
with great ambitions. Tristar Electronics plans to invest 
heavily in sophisticated technology, developing resources, and 
aviation-related industries. The Daewoo Auto Company plans to 
cooperate with Changchun No. 1 Auto Manufacturing Plant to set 
up a joint-venture with an investment of $1.5 billion to produce 
parts and small autos, and the Son Yok Group is ready to invest 
$1.5 billion to build an oil refinery in Shenzhen. It is 
expected that the volume of ROK investment in Mainland China 
will grow to some $4 billion. 
  At the same time, increasing trade between the two countries 
will be an important point on the agenda during Kim Yong-sam's 
China visit. In fact, in the 18 months since the two sides 
established diplomatic relations, bilateral trade has developed 
rapidly, and the trade volume last year was already $9.1 
billion, up 50 percent on the previous year. It is expected 
that ROK-PRC bilateral trade will grow by a wide margin. On the 
part of the ROK, it hopes that the volume of ROK-PRC trade will 
grow to $56 billion before the year 2000. 

