Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 24 (XINHUA) -- The China National 
Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) has expressed willingness to 
co- operate with its counterparts from Taiwan in offshore oil 
exploration and development, an informed source said here today. 
  Chen Bingqian, CNOOC's vice-president, was quoted as saying 
the two sides can join their efforts in "whatever forms are 
acceptable to both." 
  He made the remark at a meeting with a delegation from 
Taiwan's China Technical Consultants, Inc., whose members are 
mainly from Taiwan's China Petroleum Corporation. 
  Chen told the delegation that CNOOC has forged links with 
leading oil producers all over the world in the past decade and 
struck 95 contracts and agreements with 54 oil companies from 13 
countries on offshore oil development. 
  However, he said, "It is a great pity that our counterparts 
across the Taiwan Straits have been deprived of such 
opportunities." 
  The 11-member team from Taiwan is visiting the mainland to 
study the petroleum and petrochemical industries in the coastal 
areas and seek ways to co-operate. 
  Chen said co-operation between the mainland and Taiwan can 
take many forms. The CNOOC can co-operate with the Taiwan 
corporation directly or with its overseas subsidiaries; it can 
co-operate with conglomerates grouping the Taiwan corporation's 
overseas subsidiaries and foreign companies; and it can also 
co-operate with independently-registered overseas companies 
formed by the Taiwan corporation and foreign firms, he proposed. 
  He welcomed the corporation to render technical services for 
the offshore operations carried out by the CNOOC and its foreign 
partners. 
  The two sides can concentrate co-operative efforts on oil 
exploration in the Taiwan Straits, the southwestern offshore 
basin of Taiwan and the Chaoshan Depression, blocks in the East 
China Sea and other offshore areas of interest, he added. 
  The vice-president also briefed the delegation on the 
development of the CNOOC and its co-operation with foreign oil 
companies at the request of the guests, the informed source said. 
  The delegation, at the invitation of the China Petrochemical 
Corporation (Sinopec), arrived in Beijing January 6 to start a 
month-long survey of oil and gas exploration and development, 
oil refining, and the production and sale of petrochemical 
products in the coastal areas. 
  According to the source, the team members showed enthusiasm 
in raising questions and seeking co-operative projects. 
  The two sides reached agreement on enhancing exchanges 
across 
the Straits to end more than 40 years of isolation and find new 
ways for co-operation. 
  Chen also asked the delegation to convey the greetings of 
CNOOC President Wang Yan to the heads of the Taiwan corporation, 
and said he hoped for early formal high-level contacts between 
the two sides. 
  It was reported that the Taiwan corporation's leadership has 
announced considering flexible approaches for cross-Straits co- 
operation and has been working actively in this regard. 
  The source said many indications suggest a softening of 
Taiwan's policy on investment flow to the mainland, which gives 
rise to a "cautiously optimistic prospect" for co-operative oil 
exploration. 
  The delegation is scheduled to end its survey February 5 
before returning to Taiwan. 

