Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Suphaphon Kanwirayothin in Hanoi] </F>
  [Excerpts] Thailand and Vietnam have agreed to set up a 
"hot-line" telephone link after taking a major step forward in 
settling the key bilateral issue of fishing rights. 
  Thai Prime Minister Chuan Likphai said Vietnamese Premier Vo 
Van Kiet had agreed to the hot-line proposal after he presented 
it as a way of dispelling any doubts that might arise in future. 
"This (hot-line) is so we can make use of advanced technology 
to enhance mutual understanding. This is a good sign," said Mr 
Chuan shortly before leaving for the former imperial capital of 
Hue on the second stop of his four-day official visit. 
  "If Vietnam has doubts on any issue, the two foreign 
ministers can make direct telephone calls to each other," he 
said. 
  The hot-line plan emerged after the two countries agreed to 
set up a joint ministerial-level fisheries committee. 
  Mr Chuan, who met Vietnam's senior leader, Communist Party 
Secretary-General Do Muoi, during his stay in Hanoi, also 
confirmed Thailand's support for Vietnam's bid to become a 
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations "at the 
right time". [passage omitted] 
  Mr Chuan emphasised that Thailand and Vietnam must translate 
words of agreement into deeds so that the two neighbours can 
press ahead with mutually beneficial cooperation to advance 
their common objective of economic development. 
  Regarding Vietnam's bid to become a full ASEAN member, Mr 
Chuan said the most important issue was the readiness of all 
parties ASEAN as well as Vietnam. 
  Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam said his country 
was making "active preparations" to qualify for membership and 
the statements from ASEAN leaders so far had been encouraging. 
"Although I cannot specify the timetable, the process may happen 
sooner than what everyone previously expected," he said, adding 
the matter required further consultations and exchange of views 
among ASEAN countries and Vietnam. 
  Mr Chuan inaugurated an investment seminar attracting Thai 
and Vietnamese businessmen in Hanoi yesterday. During his 
speech, he pledged the Thai Government's backing for Thai 
investment and commercial activities in Vietnam. 
  He will arrive in Ho Chi Minh City from Hue today where he 
is 
scheduled to call on Vietnamese President Le Duc Anh and meet 
with the Thai business committee in the southern economic hub. 

