BFN 

<F P=106> ["Statement by the Republic of Georgia State Committee for </F>
the Investigation Into and Publication of Materials Regarding 
the Policy of Genocide and Ethnic Cleansing Conducted Against 
the Georgian Population in Abkhazia and the Presentation of Such 
Materials to the International Tribunal on 15 February 1994"; 
place and date not given] 
  [Text] For one and a half years, the Abkhazian region has 
represented a region in which the most tragic events of the end 
of the 20th century have been taking place. 
  Fascist-minded separatists, who have encroached upon the 
territorial integrity of Georgia, have provoked an armed 
conflict that has been maintained to a significant degree by 
external forces. Having temporarily achieved a military victory 
in the region, the separatists set about conducting operations 
aimed at the elimination of the Georgian population in Abkhazia, 
while violating the elementary norms of international 
humanitarian law and carrying out the practice of genocide and 
ethnic cleansing. World opinion, however, has not given a 
proper assessment of these facts. 
  A special state committee was established and entrusted with 
gathering materials testifying to the fact that the policy of 
genocide and ethnic cleansing is continuing to be implemented. 
  The process of gathering facts has already begun. This 
special investigative body attached to the General Procurator's 
Office, which is now conducting a criminal investigation into 
facts of genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Georgian 
population in Abkhazia, has carried out a huge amount of work. 
The materials that have been collected contain proof that 
genocide against the Georgian population carried out by 
Abkhazian separatists and their associates was planned in 
advance. 
  There exists convincing evidence of a deal between the 
organizers and perpetrators of these heinous crimes and their 
accomplices, whose ultimate aims are violation of the 
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia and the 
elimination of thousands of innocent people who have been 
condemned to this terrible fate only because they are Georgian 
by nationality. 
  In spite of convincing evidence to the contrary, certain 
sides are stubbornly continuing to deny that genocide is taking 
place in Abkhazia and are vainly asserting that it is a question 
of the "usual cruelties of war." Such an assessment of this 
concrete phenomenon is nothing other than an attempt to deceive 
the world community. 
  There exists a multitude of evidence indicating that 
preparations for carrying out ethnic cleansing in Abkhazia had 
been going on for many years. The Abkhazian mass media, 
scientific journals, and other sources had been constantly 
accusing the Georgians of artificially reducing the size of the 
local Abkhazian population. It became all too obviously clear 
that the Georgian population was doomed to annihilation. 
However, who was to fill that huge vacuum formed as a result of 
the expulsion of a group of people numbering more than 200,000? 
The answer was received during the course of the conflict when 
Mr. V. Ardzinba [leader of the rebel Gudauta grouping] and his 
associates publicly proposed to the inhabitants of the North 
Caucasus and adjoining countries to the east that they join 
their side and fight against the Georgians, promising them as a 
reward "a place to live and citizenship." 
  As a result of this treacherous plan, hundreds of thousands 
of Georgians were banished from their homes and became the 
victims of indescribable physical and moral suffering and 
blatant outrages: Their homes and property were destroyed and 
their cattle and cars stolen. The treatment to which the 
Georgian population was subjected made it impossible for them to 
live any longer in Abkhazia as they were facing the threat of 
physical elimination. 
  The results of the current investigation will provide 
irrefutable evidence to all the interested parties that the 
ethnic cleansing conducted in Abkhazia was premeditated. 
  Almost immediately after the fall of Sukhumi on 27 September 
1993, hostilities between the opposing sides ceased. However, 
the investigation has established that the extermination of 
noncombatants continued on a large scale even after the 
cessation of combat operations; it has proof of this. 
  There exists convincing evidence that cynical monstrous 
crimes are continuing to be committed against the peaceful 
population: A great many women have been raped and savagely 
tortured and there have been cases of women having their breasts 
cut off while still alive. Even these terrible facts would 
already be sufficient to press charges. However, one cannot 
refrain from saying that it has not only been women, but also 
children and teenagers who have become the victims of these 
atrocities. The nipples of victims collected by the 
perpetrators of these monstrous crimes in matchboxes are the 
terrible trophies of these heinous deeds. Greeks, Armenians, 
Russians, and people of other nationalities, along with 
Georgians, are raising their voices as testimony to these 
actions and I am making a statement with full responsibility 
regarding these facts. 
  In order that the world has a clearer idea of the aims of 
the 
Abkhazian fascists and has a true picture of the tragedy brought 
about by their actions, it is necessary, as a matter of urgency, 
to direct the attention of international organizations to these 
facts in all their cruelty. 
  According to the testimony of witnesses, there have been 
many 
cases of innocent people who have been killed having the 
following inscription carved on their bodies: "Don't eat so 
much, Georgians. Don't get fat. It's difficult dragging your 
corpses." 
  It is impossible to read without a shudder the testimony of 
witnesses regarding the agony experienced by the Georgians who 
remained in Sukhumi after it was captured by Abkhazian 
separatists. 
  Listen to the fate of engineer Nugzar Dzhimsheleyshvili who 
worked in the Council of Ministers. His father Varlam 
Dzhimsheleyshvili was captured. His house was destroyed and his 
grandmother, Babutsa Pipiya, and mother-in-law, Mziya Kalandiya, 
were tortured and then killed. 
  Listen to the fate of the helpless L. B. (for 
understandable reasons, I am only using his initials) who was 
brutally murdered. One of his students buried him. This 
student, whose nationality was Russian, suffered the same fate 
simply because he had buried a dead person in the proper manner. 
  Listen to the fate of 60-year old V. Moniya who hid in his 
neighbors' house; he was found and killed. 
  It is beyond the scope of this document to relate the tragic 
fates of M. Mirtsklava, the married couple Kvaratskheliya, V. 
Argobliani, A. Gadeliya, T. Gegechkori, Yu. Kvartskheliya, D. 
Dgebuadze, S. Kakuberi, and T. Kakuberi-Gvakhariya. All of them 
were Georgians and neighbors on Tsereteli Street and, to their 
misfortune, remained in Sukhumi after its fall; no one now knows 
where they lie. 
  What about the fate of other Georgian residents of Sukhumi 
-- 
D. Darchemeliya, the Zakradze brothers, S. Karchava, Ye. and Z. 
Abramiya, F. Kalandiya, T. Shariya, V. Kvachakhiya, A. 
Kintsurashvili, D. Kopeliani, and M. Kvirchkhaya? 
  Behind each name is a person who, at the end of the 20th 
century, encountered the surge of fascism and who was shown no 
more mercy than the victims of fascism at all other times. 
  According to the testimony of witnesses gathered during the 
course of the investigation, official representatives of the 
Government of the Abkhazian Autonomous Republic became the 
victims of isolated and group murders. It should be emphasized 
that there are a great many such cases of which there is 
documentary proof. 
  Materials relating to the murder of Zhiuli Shartava, 
chairman 
of the Council of Ministers, and his aides are also relevant to 
the question under examination. The evidence gathered during 
the course of the investigation has enabled us to establish that 
Mr. Shartava and his aides were seized in Sukhumi and subjected 
to particularly cruel torture. A postmortem examination has 
revealed that, before being murdered, they were tortured in a 
monstrous way. 
  The murder of Shartava and many other senior employees in 
the 
apparatus of the Abkhazian Council of Ministers was sanctioned 
by the same group that provoked the armed uprising against the 
Georgian state and its citizens. 
  The policy of genocide and ethnic cleansing continued to be 
resolutely implemented even during the period when negotiations 
were proceeding in Geneva. Although the aim of these 
negotiations has been to find an acceptable peaceful settlement 
to the conflict, they have served only as a smoke screen for the 
Abkhazian side, hiding behind which they have continued to 
implement their barbarous policy. Instead of supporting the 
peace process, the Abkhazian side is continuing to create an 
atmosphere of fear in order to hinder the safe return of 
displaced persons and refugees to their homes. This is borne 
out by the events that took place quite recently in Gali rayon 
in Abkhazia. 
  On 2-3 February 1994, Abkhazian forces, supported by heavy 
artillery and tanks, launched an offensive against villages in 
Gali rayon. During the following 10 days, all buildings in 
Okumi, Mikhumi, Tsarche, Pirveli, Gali, Rechkhi, Tskhiri, 
Gumprishe, Konstitutsiya, Kokhora, and other villages were razed 
to the ground. According to information in our possession, the 
modern "Grad" artillery system was used and poisonous gas was 
used in the village of Gumurishi. More than 800 houses were 
destroyed and hundreds of people taken hostage. The killing and 
intimidation of the peaceful population forced people to abandon 
their villages and seek refuge in the mountains. Thousands of 
women, children, and elderly persons attempted to escape the 
terror: They fled along snow-blocked paths, leaving behind them 
mothers frozen to death along with their children and old men 
and women who were unable to endure the severe conditions 
created both by nature and man. More than 2,000 exhausted 
people managed to avoid death and find refuge in Zugdidi, 
Tsalenjikha, and other towns in western Georgia; many of them 
were taken to hospital suffering from frostbite. 
  We are witnesses to the implementation of the typical policy 
of ethnic cleansing that is one form of genocide. 
  It should be pointed out that the Gudauta separatists did 
not 
allow UN observers based in Sukhumi to visit the region where 
the repressions took place. 
  Are these brazen actions not an open challenge to the UN 
that 
is conducting peace-making efforts and even to the whole 
civilized world? 
  During the course of this investigation, the identity of 
those who, under the patronage of the Abkhazian separatists, are 
carrying out genocide against the peaceful population has been 
clearly established. The materials gathered testify to the fact 
that the tragedy in Abkhazia constitutes a crime against 
humanity. 
  [Signed] Committee Chairman Professor Levan Aleksidze 
This letter was distributed as an official document in the 
UN Security Council. 

