Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] [Word indistinct] one can assert that there are two 
problems of prime concern for the current leadership of Ukraine. 
The first is the economic situation and the second is the 
problem of regional separatism; and Crimea is a kind of a symbol 
of this separatism. We would like to remind you that such a hot 
spot does exist now. And we think that it will be interesting 
for you, dear listeners, to hear the opinion of the chief of the 
Security Service of Ukraine, Yevhen Marchuk, about the political 
situation in Crimea. 
  [Begin Marchuk recording] The Crimean problem, the problem 
of 
regionalization as a whole, threatens decentralization of the 
state. This is one of those threats that today occupies one of 
the leading places in the hierarchy of threats to national 
security in Ukraine. This is due to a number of reasons: 
historical, economic, ethnic, etc. Crimea, as a problem, 
concentrated one of the elements of this threat. Although, at 
the same time, I would not dramatize the situation in Crimea as 
reminiscent of some Yugoslav variant. Nothing like this will 
happen here because the situation is absolutely different and 
there are enough forces and those necessary to prevent the 
Yugoslav variant from happening. Nothing like this will happen 
here, but at the same time, a whole number of political forces 
in Crimea, parties and movements, which are carrying out 
propaganda activity, are doing this -- as a matter of fact, to 
the detriment of Ukraine's interests. But I emphasize that 
political propaganda activity, which political structures and 
separate leaders who create this atmosphere are engaged in, is 
one thing; it cannot be viewed now from the point of view of the 
Criminal Code. This is why the methods to be applied to this 
phenomena should be of relevant nature -- first and foremost, 
political. Any propaganda should be countered by 
antipropaganda: more effective, more reasonable, more 
understandable and so on. And the methods of propaganda itself. 
[as heard] And, possibly, being aware of the patriotic 
sentiments of some people's deputies, their desire to improve 
somehow the situation in Crimea... [pauses]. But with some of 
their actions and even visits they, unfortunately, were 
aggravating the situation instead of easing it. 
  We are doing what the special services should do, and this 
is 
under relevant control. We have been doing something. I cannot 
dwell on this in public but this is within the framework of the 
Ukrainian laws. We have made our contribution. Probably it is 
not as ponderable as we would like it to be, but this is a 
different thing. However, I am absolutely convinced that it is 
only by means of a centralized, sufficiently considered, 
strategically calculated domestic nationalities policy in 
relation to all regions -- Donbass, Transcarpathia, Bukovina, 
and not only Crimea -- that we shall be able to neutralize and 
solve such problems in a timely, quiet, and civilized manner. 
Naturally, the security service, the prosecutor's office, the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, etc. should be assigned 
corresponding roles in this. However, personally I am for 
neutralizing such phenomena by political methods involving 
special services in this work within the framework of the law. 
  If 1.2 million people have such sentiments, this is already 
a 
policy. One person speaking does not shape a policy. But when 
more than 1.2 million people speak, this is a policy and this 
means that it is necessary to examine and analyze rather 
seriously what blunders were made in the internal nationalities 
policy. Although, I know that at present both the new Crimean 
administration, which has become confronted with everyday 
economic problems... [changes thought]. Now it pays little 
attention if any at all to rallying because it has to solve 
specific economic issues daily. 
  Ukraine -- I have in mind Kiev -- gave rather a good example 
when the Crimean delegation, the economic delegation of the 
Council of Ministers of Crimea, was here, when it was working at 
the Cabinet of Ministers. They were working up issues 
pertaining to the Crimean budget and correlation between the 
state and the Crimean, i.e. all-Ukrainian and Crimean aspects 
of the budget and also issues pertaining to the property of 
Crimea and Ukraine. Then Ukraine gave rather a good example of 
tolerance and at the same time of a firm policy of principle in 
relation to Crimea: Crimea is part of Ukraine and there is no 
other option and no one can comment on this off-handedly, but at 
the same time all the aspects of the economic activity for which 
the Crimean leadership is now responsible, were shifted entirely 
to the Crimean leadership's shoulders, as they say. Therefore, 
where there is the Crimean budget they must administer it 
themselves, and where there is the state budget, this is the 
state budget. 
  And it was rather interesting to observe how.... [pauses] 
From the human point of view it was clear why the Crimean 
delegation representatives were raising the question that money 
would be needed for this and for that. The problems they were 
bringing up were correct. But then they were asked the 
following question: These problems, in compliance with the 
delimitation of plenary powers, are they Crimean problems or 
all-Ukrainian ones? Generally speaking, they are Crimean 
problems. In this case you have your Crimean budget. Our 
budget is also bearly alive, as they say. So, it is your 
responsibility, this is the burden of the state activity when it 
is necessary to balance, to find relevant solutions within the 
framework of the allocated budget. 
  If there is a calm but far-sighted internal nationalities 
policy, and it is being worked up at present, if there is a calm 
economic policy Crimea-Ukraine and Crimea in Ukraine as well as 
Ukraine-foreign countries and Crimea-foreign countries via 
Ukraine, and if there is an improvement of the economy as a 
whole in the state, I am absolutely convinced that very many 
issues pertaining to the Crimean situation will be removed. 
  No matter how paradoxical this is, at present, the situation 
in the Crimea, from the point of view of the aggravation of the 
situation, is much calmer than it was two months ago, because 
much has been implemented there as far as political aspects are 
concerned, and then [word indistinct] problems. And now the 
president of Crimea, his experts and the Council of Ministers of 
Crimea have to tackle the issues which discipline them. 
  To wind up my personal vision of the developments in the 
Crimea, the situation will not be simple, because there are 
political structures in Russia, and not even Zhirinovskiy or 
anybody else sharing his views, because there are various 
figures who just cannot say what Zhirinovskiy says, but who 
think exactly the way he thinks. [sentence as heard] That is to 
say, Zhirinovskiy [word indistinct] their alter ego, and it 
would be naive to think that this issue will be removed. 
Although, here in Ukraine there is quite a serious [word 
indistinct] argument: The trilateral statement by the presidents 
of Russia, Ukraine, and the United States concerning nuclear 
weapons in Ukraine and solution of this issue. Moreover, these 
states guarantee Ukraine's territorial integrity and this 
argument will be quite instrumental, because the world today 
differs from what it was 30 or even 10 years ago. That is to 
say, all this will be under a rather serious international 
control. 
  This is why, on the one hand, I see that there will be 
enough 
difficulties: It is clear that both the internal political 
situation in Crimea and the political structures in Russia will 
undoubtedly encourage Crimea's drifting toward Russia. There 
must be no illusions here, as they say. However, the 
possibilities [word indistinct] available to Ukraine, I have in 
mind political possibilities first and foremost, as well as 
historic aspects, as they say, and all other aspects, as I am 
convinced they are much more complicated, and the situation in 
the world will help us straighten out the situation in Crimea 
gradually, [word indistinct] step by step. There will be no 
Yugoslav variant here. [end recording] 
  That was the chief of the Security Service of Ukraine, 
Yevhen 
Marchuk, sharing his views about the situation in Crimea. 

