Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vasiliy Kononenko report: "Russian and U.S. Presidents' </F>
One-on-One Meeting Lasts Longer Than Planned"] 
  [Text] Following the ceremonial meeting between Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin and U.S. President Bill Clinton in the 
St. George's Hall of the Great Kremlin Palace in the Kremlin, 
both men moved to the Green Hall to talk one-on-one, but there 
was then an unforeseen deviation from protocol -- U.S. 
journalists first disregarded the "no questions" ban and started 
asking questions. 
  The U.S. President expressed his intention to discuss the 
progress of economic reform in Russia, noting the exceptional 
importance of building a "free economic system" in the country 
which would help Russia to join the world market. 
  A separate item on the agenda for the presidents' meeting is 
the adoption at this week's NATO summit of the "Partnership for 
Peace" program proposed by the Clinton administration. 
  In this context the tripartite agreement on the withdrawal 
of 
nuclear weapons from Ukrainian territory to Russia -- to be 
signed by the three heads of state in Moscow Friday -- is of 
particular importance. 
  President Yeltsin briefly answered the journalists' 
questions 
-- the main aim of the Moscow summit is to ensure tranquillity 
and peace both in Russia and the United States, and to safeguard 
global stability. 
  Immediately after the small-scale talks had ended, Boris 
Yeltsin stated in reply to an INTERFAX correspondent's question 
that he was satisfied with the start of the talks with Bill 
Clinton. Their first conversation had lasted around an hour -- 
20 minutes longer than scheduled in the program. 
  Both presidents then took the traditional walk around the 
Kremlin, viewing the Czar Pushka and the Czar Kolokol and 
visiting the Cathedral of the Assumption. In the biting wind 
and a temperature of minus 10 degrees, the presidents spent no 
more than 10 minutes outside and went for lunch to warm up. 
  After this the talks continued on an enlarged scale. 
  According to V. Kostikov, the Russian president's press 
secretary, the first round of Russian-U.S. talks at the summit 
took place in a relatively calm atmosphere -- neither side tried 
to impose its line on the other. Naturally, at the very 
beginning of the conversation the two presidents touched on the 
subject of cooperation with parliaments. It is not hard to 
imagine that, during this conversation, the U.S. President would 
have been interested in one aspect -- will the Russians finally 
be able to divide up power in a civilized manner. 
  In the afternoon the presidents were joined in the Kremlin 
by 
delegation members, and the discussion turned to very specific 
problems -- humanitarian aid should be replaced by U.S. 
assistance in restructuring the Russian economy. 

