Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["CHINA DAILY Commentary": "Forging Closer Ties"] </F>
  [Text] National People's Congress [NPC] Chairman Qiao Shi 
set off yesterday on a trip to Western Europe, the first by an 
NPC Chairman since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949. 
  He is visiting Germany, Switzerland and Austria to forge 
closer ties. 
  China's bilateral relations with these three countries have 
improved and expanded steadily in the last few years. This is 
because all four realize that developing good relations on the 
basis of "seeking common ground while setting aside differences" 
is in everyone's interests. 
  In the last two years high-level visits between the three 
countries and China have become ever more frequent, enhancing 
mutual understanding and boosting trade and economic ties. 
  In 1993, both Austrian Federal Chancellor Franz Vranitzky 
and 
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl came to China accompanied by large 
groups of businessmen. 
  They carried home not only the warm friendship of the 
Chinese 
people but also enormous economic benefits in the form of new 
contracts of co-operation. 
  All the world now knows of the extremely rapid growth of 
China's economy in recent years, driven by the policies of 
reform and opening to the outside world. Great efforts are 
being made to switch China on to the track of the socialist 
market economy. And the developments so far have laid a solid 
foundation for further and faster expansion. 
  China's market has vast potential, and opportunities of 
economic co-operation with foreign countries are increasing. 
  As China focuses on economic construction, it naturally 
wants 
to encourage a peaceful and stable international environment. 
It is ready to establish and maintain normal and friendly 
relations with all other countries so long as they adhere to the 
commitments they have made to China. 
  At the beginning of 1993, Germany decided to ban the sale of 
arms to Taiwan, an integral part of Chinese territory. There is 
no doubt the increasingly close relations between Germany and 
China had much to do with this wise and correct decision. For 
to help to arm Taiwan is nothing short of interference in 
China's internal affairs. 
  Last Wednesday, China and France issued a joint communique, 
pledging to restore their traditional friendly relations and 
cooperation. 
  This was made possible only by the French Government's vow 
to 
authorize no firms to participate in arming Taiwan. 
  China is seeking friends all over the world but never at the 
expense of principle. Any country that claims truly to treasure 
friendship with China should consider if its deeds and words are 
consistent. 
  The three countries on Qiao's itinerary each have their own 
distinctive features and strong points. They and China will 
benefit from stronger trade, economic and cultural ties. 
  Qiao's visit will mark another milestone in relations 
between 
each of them and China. Let us wish him a happy journey and 
complete success. 

