Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Carmen Kozak] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia -- The numerous internal and external 
difficulties that the constitutional revision has faced in 
Congress have led to a unanimous opinion: The revision is done 
for. "This Congress is not concerned about changing anything, 
and certainly not about carrying out a revision," fired general 
coordinator Deputy Nelson Jobim (PMDB-RS) [Brazilian Democratic 
Movement Party -- Rio Grande do Sul]. The few legislators 
present during the meeting, including the assistant 
coordinators, agreed. Only PFL [Liberal Front Party] leader 
Luis Eduardo Magalhaes (BA) [Bahia] is continuing his attempts 
to inject the process with some vitality. He admits his 
limitations, and that he is alone: "We still have a chance if 
we bring forward the date for voting on the chapter on economic 
order." "This is not a revision; it is a comedy," says an 
important PFL leader. 
  The five months of impasse in the discussions and voting on 
just about everything have created new casualties in the 
pro-revision group. The PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party] 
and the PMDB have said publicly that it is impossible to 
continue working with such great internal disagreement. The PL 
[Liberal Party], following the example of the PTB (Brazilian 
Labor Party], decided to join the group of obstructionist 
legislators, and announced that it would only vote on the 
chapter on economic order. Important PPR [Progressive Renewal 
Party] leaders prefer not to say openly that they no longer 
believe in the revision. "We have not thrown in the towel yet, 
as we want changes in the chapter on economic order, but we know 
it is not enough," regrets an experienced PPR legislator. 
  It took the leaders of parties promoting the revision two 
weeks to realize that the reform is definitively at risk. 
Yesterday they realized that the situation was practically 
irreversible. Out of 12 proposals only two were approved in the 
two required sessions, and only one in the first session. "We 
lost all the important votes. One example is the non-compulsory 
vote. Do you need any more proof that Congress does not want 
structural changes?" said assistant coordinator Gustavo Krause 
(PFL-PE) [PFL-Pernambuco]. "I do not care if I lose. What is 
important is to show who is who in this house," Jobim and 
Magalhaes said. 
  The issue that weighed most heavily in this failure to 
produce results was the difficulty in negotiating an amendment 
to facilitate the trial of legislators involved in common 
crimes. Last night legislators were unable to make any progress 
in the discussions on this issue, despite the fact that there 
are 450 congressmen in their third term. "Those who are not 
prepared to compromise and discuss internal matters cannot 
discuss more important matters," PSDB leader Deputy Arthur da 
Tavola (RJ) [Rio de Janeiro] said. 
  "I cannot see any light at the end of the tunnel. The 
revision is dead," regrets Deputy Jose Genoino (PT-SP) [Workers 
Party -- Sao Paulo] who supported all coordinator's proposals. 
"Those against the revision will pay a very high price for not 
allowing the approval of structural reforms that are essential 
for the country," said a PT follower who supported PT 
participation in the revision process. 
  "We threw jobs and health care improvement through the 
window," complains one of the most dedicated legislators. "I 
cannot take the initiative, but why can't Congress have the 
courage to publicly admit that the conditions are no longer 
appropriate for continuing the revision process?" Jobim asked 
Magalhaes. 

