BFN 

  [Text] The Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola [FALA] 
Command for Cuanza Norte Province today described the 
intensification of the attacks on the city of N'dalatando, the 
provincial capital, as dangerous to the peace talks. That 
source also said that Jose Eduardo dos Santos, currently 
visiting Brazil, has given orders for the People's Armed Forces 
for the Liberation of Angola [FAPLA] to pursue a scorched earth 
policy against that city. Those orders are already being 
followed. 
  Since 0800 today, the government army has been using its 
heavy artillery to shell Ndalatando's outlying areas and the 
city proper. The cruel shelling has already claimed the lives 
of 300 innocent civilians. The FALA Command for Cuanza Norte 
Province believes that UN Special Representative Alioune Blondin 
Beye must immediately take steps to settle this problem, the 
implications of which are serious for the peace talks. Backed 
by long range M-46 cannons, the Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola-Labor Party's [MPLA-PT] artillery has been 
shelling N'dalatando from the area of Lucala II, where the 
government infantry forces have come to a standstill after 
suffering heavy military defeats. 
  The shellings are continuing at this time and the MPLA-PT 
air 
force has also been dropping chemical and phosphorus bombs on 
the civilians areas. We have just been in touch with Firmino 
Lucamba, the Voice of Resistance of the Black Cockerel 
correspondent in the area, and he had this to say: 
  [Begin Lucamba recording] As I speak to you, the people of 
the city of N'dalatando and outlying areas are coming under 
systematic shelling that prevents people from going about their 
normal chores. A total of 180 M-46 shells and 120 [words 
indistinct] have been fired since 0800 today. The MPLA-PT air 
force has already carried out 18 raids, dropping bombs that are 
generally forbidden. A total of (?300) people (?have perished) 
[words indistinct] the people were asking: what does the MPLA-PT 
want to govern here in Cuanza Norte Province if it kills all the 
people and destroys everything? [end recording] 

