Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" article by Maria Luisa Mac Kay, copyrighted by </F>
CLARIN] 
  [Text] Following the uprising in Santiago del Estero, 
which President Carlos Menem labelled "sedition," the government 
is assessing the means available to repress possible protests in 
other provinces and has started to disburse advance payments and 
other emergency measures to relieve social pressure, at least 
during the summer season. 
  A secret report on provincial police forces' "operation 
capability," to which CLARIN had access, describes in detail the 
situation in eight other provinces with information predicting 
problems ranging from potential disobedience or self-confinement 
to barracks to the lack of equipment to repress revolts. 
  When CLARIN consulted Interior Minister Carlos Ruckauf as a 
result of this report, he admitted that the situation in the 
provinces is "worrisome." However, Ruckauf immediately 
explained that the "uprisings" took place "not where adjustments 
were made but rather where they were not made, where there is no 
political leadership and there is corruption." 
  On 23 December Ruckauf proposed during a cabinet meeting 
holding a meeting of all governors in Mar del Plata on 21-22 
January. That same morning a large number of governors paraded 
through Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo's office to ask for 
financial aid. 
  Not everyone got what he expected, although the finance 
minister did disburse a certain amount of funds. In the case of 
Jujuy, Salta, Catamarca, and La Rioja, the Finance Ministry 
advanced federal revenues apportioned for provinces to pay 
salaries and Christmas bonuses. These advances will be renewed 
in the following months "until we can find a mechanism to settle 
accounts," according to a government official. 
  During the meeting, Ruckauf and Cavallo both admitted the 
need to create alternate job opportunities to absorb the 
employees who have to leave the public administration. Ruckauf 
referred to the "unfair distribution" referring to the sky-high 
salaries of upper-level officials compared to the meager minimum 
salaries of the lowest echelons. He believes, however, that 
they can succeed if they "engage in a transformation process." 
  Corrientes, for example, obtained a 45 million [no currency 
specified] credit and Chaco, 18 million. Brand-new Corrientes 
Governor Raul Romero Feris, during his recent visit to Buenos 
Aires, depicted an explosive situation that -- he warned -- 
could only be attributed to three federal government 
interventions before he became governor. Rolando Tauguinas, in 
a visit previous to the one paid on 3 October, warned Menem that 
the protests and unrest were unrestrainable. The provincial 
government officials were booed during ceremonies in the 
outskirts of Resistencia. 
  In La Rioja, the president's home province, the revolt only 
ended when the salary adjustment law was derogated, the transfer 
of special funds was confirmed, and former Labor Minister Jorge 
Rodriguez was sent to the province to reach an agreement with 
the labor unions, shortly before resigning over a disagreement 
with the government's social policies. 
  As for safety, 20 days earlier in San Juan the government 
had 
summoned all provincial ministers. The demands were jotted down 
by Hugo Franco, interior ministry security under secretary. 
Social unrest then broke out in Santiago del Estero. Protests 
and the occupation of city halls shook Jujuy, Salta, Tucuman, 
and Formosa. 
  As a result, the government deployed 1,452 border policemen, 
a number that dropped shortly before Christmas Eve to 532, 
considered the number necessary to squash any possible crisis, 
while the force as a whole remains "on alert." 
  According to the SIDE's [Secretariat for State 
Intelligence] "strictly secret and confidential" report, the 
situation in each province is as follows: 
  Catamarca: It has 1,800 men but "not very modern logistical 
equipment," although it has patrol vehicles and sophisticated 
radio equipment that allows it to cover a "vast area of its 
territory." According to the report, Catamarca police "fully 
respond to the political power; therefore, it is estimated that 
they will respond promptly and efficiently in the case of a 
revolt." 
  Corrientes: The number of policemen in this province is 
enough "to efficiently control situations arising from 
demonstrations," and it is pointed out that there are no signs 
of salary or disciplinary problems arising here. However, 
according to the report, "the force's operating capacity may be 
weakened by the need to face a lengthy action as a result of an 
insufficient amount of dissuasive defense and safety equipment 
(rubber bullets, tear gas bombs, shields, gas masks)." 
  Chaco: The report, in referring to the province that 
worries the government most due to its socio-economic situation, 
says: "The available means and elements would be insufficient 
to control significant demonstrations of unrest as well as to 
endure a lengthy action." It is believed, however, that the 
aforementioned deficiencies may be "overcome" by the 
professionalism of its forces. 
  Jujuy: This province has sufficient men and equipment "to 
control cases of unrest." The government, however, is not 
certain whether police would be willing to carry our repression 
actions. "In the beginning the policemen would obey the orders 
received, but it is not quite clear how they would react if they 
found themselves in a tight spot after receiving the order to 
repress." The explanation is the feeling of unrest within the 
police due to the possibility that the provincial minister of 
government will appoint a retired policeman as head of the 
police force. Therefore, after receiving the order to repress, 
"the policemen may try to ratify the orders received and, to the 
contrary, may act with indifference to the possible revolt." 
  La Rioja: Police have two "anti-riot" squads with a total of 
18 men "with poor professional training." It also has been 
reported that the useful life of tear gas grenades and rifles is 
"over," and "demonstrators can throw them back because of their 
delayed operation." 
  The report on troop morale is not any better. "Police forces 
do not respect the chain of command, and neither hierarchy nor 
rank are observed." Even though troops are expected to "obey" 
orders, "if a situation becomes ungovernable, they will confine 
themselves to barracks or adopt a passive attitude." The 
government has sent 120 border policemen to this province in 
order to preserve tranquillity. 
  Salta: In this province, where a town hall building has been 
occupied in the north, there are means and men, and "the troops 
will obey the orders" in case of excesses. 
  Santiago del Estero: "Logistics support is insufficient," 
although there are modern automotive units. There are 4,500 men 
(one of the larger units), but -- the report says -- "on 16 
December they were thoroughly overwhelmed by demonstrators." 
Officials, however, say in a low voice that the police actually 
decided not to intervene. 
  Tucuman: "The province's 5,000 troops are properly outfitted 
with an appropriate supply of tear gas, anti-riot shields, smoke 
grenades, rubber bullets, etc." The strongest concern here 
centers around "the lack of hierarchical authority, while there 
is some displeasure within the police in light of the command's 
lack of leadership capacity," the report says, mentioning the 
case of Mario "Malevo" Ferreyra. It is believed, however, that 
"in case of a social outburst, the troops will obey government 
orders." 

