BFN 

<F P=106> ["Abridged" account of statement by the International Reform </F>
Foundation under the "Appraisal" rubric: "First Package of 
Presidential Edicts: One Step Forward, Two Steps Back"] 
  [Text] The International Reform Foundation has 
consistently adhered to a socially oriented model of a market 
economy which can be built only with active regulation by the 
state. 
  The president's edicts point to the intention to enhance the 
role of the state in economic regulation. The spheres where 
control by the executive branch should be reinforced have been 
identified correctly: These are credit and monetary relations, 
tax policy, foreign economic activity, and regulation of the 
state sector. Amid the obvious weakening of the government's 
role the president has correctly taken the initiative and 
demonstrated through these edicts his determination further to 
reform the Russian economy. 
  However, an objective assessment of the essence of the 
edicts 
promulgated shows that behind their purported good intentions 
lie antimarket and antidemocratic measures. 
  After analyzing the edicts, the Reform Foundation has come 
to 
the following conclusions: 
  First. The edicts are largely of an antisocial character. 
Thus, the rate of contributions to the Social Insurance Fund 
has been cut by two points. 
  The edict on tax policy contains a proposal to increase the 
level of taxation of incomes of individuals and their property. 
The document shows that this will affect virtually all strata 
of the population, including highly paid white and blue collar 
workers, not only rich entrepreneurs. 
  The edict on normalizing financial settlements has imposed 
covert limitations on the release of funds for the payment of 
wages. 
  The edict on reform of state enterprises covertly annuls the 
guarantees, arising from the labor laws, for continuation of 
labor relations with an employee in the event of an enterprise's 
reorganization. 
  Second. The edicts seriously undermine partner relations 
between commercial banks and their clients, both private 
individuals and corporate entities. 
  Contracts between private citizens and banking 
establishments 
always contain a guarantee of the secrecy of deposits. Under 
the edict on measures to ensure timely and complete payment of 
taxes, banks are now obligated to inform tax bodies about any 
transactions by citizens in a sum equivalent to $10,000 or more. 
In the present conditions this will undoubtedly cause 
withdrawals of personal deposits or force citizens to fragment 
their deposits and legally open dozens of accounts with various 
banks in order to relieve them of the function of "snoopers." 
  With respect to corporate entities and banks, this edict 
provides for a norm abolishing the parties' obligations 
regarding terms for keeping deposits on accounts. As of now 
money from a deposit account may be compulsorily written off at 
any moment by a tax body. Therefore the client will be deprived 
of interest and the bank of resources. 
  Third. The edicts do not address the most acute problem: 
elimination of the nonpayments crisis. 
  Administrative measures aimed at tightening control over the 
opening of accounts, establishing a calendar sequence of 
payments, and granting tax inspectorates the right to 
uncontested writing off of payments, in the context of 
hypertrophied imbalances between money and commodity supply, 
cannot normalize monetary circulation. 
  Promissory notes surely help partially address the problem 
of 
settlements between enterprises but do not eliminate the 
nonpayments crisis. 
  Fourth. The edicts do not stimulate investment activity. 
  Only two provisions of the edicts touch on this major 
problem. The first is the intention to cut tax rates and the 
second is tax breaks for enterprises with a large share of 
foreign capital. 
  However, the declared quantitative reduction of taxes by 
10-20 percent (not points) in fact means negligible amounts, 
which certainly does not stimulate business or investment 
activity. Furthermore, the edict applies this requirement only 
to federal taxes while local bodies may decide on tax problems 
at their own discretion and proceeding from the needs of the 
local budget. 
  As far as the new tax breaks for enterprises with a share of 
foreign capital are concerned, the following question should be 
put to the authors of the edict: How many enterprises are there 
in Russia whose incorporation capital includes a share of no 
less than $10 million paid in by a foreign partner? At best not 
more than a dozen, and therefore this break is targeted at 
specific individuals. Then you should name them. 
  This provision will not attract new investors because no one 
has yet taken care to give them reliable guarantees or make our 
tax legislation stable for at least a year. 
  Fifth. The edict lifting export licensing and quantitative 
regulation has strengthened the monopoly position of special 
exporters and their powers to dictate. 
  The abolition of all customs privileges does not take into 
account the need for restructuring and selective support for 
enterprises in priority sectors of the economy. 
  Sixth. The edict on reforming state enterprises reduces all 
problems of state regulation merely to the question of budget 
maintenance of state enterprises. 
  The provision limiting the sphere of creating state 
subsidized enterprises only to industry and agriculture appears 
dubious. Although it is hardly expedient to create state 
enterprises in the countryside -- they should rather exist in 
the transport and communications sector. 
  This sphere is further narrowed to the scope of enterprises 
banned for privatization. And it is only with respect to this 
limited range of enterprises that the state is ready to assume 
the functions of management and support. Therefore 99 percent 
of federal enterprises retaining their status as state 
controlled are of no interest to the state. 
  The president has made a political decision, assuming 
responsibility for further direction and development of reform. 
However, there does not seem to be any logic or plan of action 
behind the edicts issued. 
  Therefore we propose that they be suspended, especially 
inasmuch as they infringe citizens' social rights. 
  We also appeal to the government. Show firmness and finally 
assume the role of initiator of reform strategy and its 
implementation. Stop being a firefighting team. 
  On 10 June this year the president announced that he has 
signed a second package of edicts. The Reform Foundation 
considers it its duty, based on independent appraisal, to 
express its opinion on the second package too, after these 
edicts have been promulgated. 
  [signed] Stanislav Shatalin, Leonid Abalkin, Stanislav 
Assekritov, Vadim Bakatin, Vladimir Kiryushin, Stepan Sitaryan, 
Martin Shakkum. 

