CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V.I. Sinko, doctor of economic sciences, and </F>
B.S. Volder, TsENII [Central Economics Scientific Research 
Institute] "Giprostanok": "Prospects for the Development of 
Motor Vehicle Manufacturing"] 
  [Text] The market for motor vehicles, one of the largest 
commodity markets at present, will exert more and more 
substantial influence on the growth of their production and 
sales in the future. And the determining factor in this will be 
the expansion of demand for passenger cars as well as trucks for 
reasons of an economic, social, and scientific and technical 
nature. 
  First of all, under the influence of a certain increase in 
the size of the population and the effect of the objective law 
of an increase in their requirements, the consumer demand for 
passenger cars will increase. The need to increase the 
production and sale of trucks is being demanded and will 
continue to be demanded by the ever-increasing importance of 
automotive transport to carry mass-produced and specialized 
commodities, especially under the influence of the rise in 
containerization. 
  The expansion of road, bridge, and tunnel construction of 
international importance contributes to trends such as these as 
well. 
  It should be taken into account at the same time that the 
expansion of demand for the means of automotive transportation, 
primarily passenger cars, is not infinite. Even the possibility 
that a crisis situation may arise has not been ruled out. For 
example, uncontrolled expansion of the fleet of motor vehicles 
makes the conditions for their operation substantially worse 
(low speeds during peak hours and the increased difficulty of 
parking) and objectively leads to increased environmental 
pollution in spite of the steps taken. 
  All this produces negative socioeconomic consequences and 
may 
lead to a decline in the passenger car's prestige as a social 
symbol. Hence, a slowdown in demand for passenger cars is very 
likely, and important qualitative changes in the motor vehicle 
itself as a means of transportation are just as likely. 
  This is as far as world automotive manufacturing is 
concerned. Our situation is even worse. The decline of the 
public's ability to pay, the noncompetitiveness of vehicles in 
the foreign market (one-fifth to one-eighth as competitive as 
the United States and Japan), and the liberalization of foreign 
trade create exceptionally unfavorable conditions for domestic 
automotive manufacturing. Essentially, the domestic market for 
motor vehicles in Russia has not been protected from dumping by 
both Japan and the United States, which dominate production in 
the world market, sell their products in all parts of the world, 
and have reserves of technologically and technically advanced 
capacities and a highly skilled labor force (30 to 40 percent 
with respect to the number utilized in 1991). 
  Russia cannot avoid such an objective set of circumstances. 
Development of automotive manufacturing will be determined to an 
even greater extent by those far-reaching changes being brought 
into the world economy by scientific and technical progress. The 
utilization in practice of the achievements of science and 
technology is considered under current conditions as a decisive 
factor in a product's competitiveness and as the overriding 
problem facing all countries taking part in the market for motor 
vehicles. First of all, this means achievements in 
machinebuilding technology, roadbuilding, and the production of 
fuel, equipment, and materials, and so forth. The application 
of advanced methods in highly automated flow-line production 
oriented toward the use of flexible automated systems, EVM 
[computers], industrial robots and manipulators makes it 
possible to reduce the production cost of manufacturing a 
vehicle to a minimum. 
  At the same time, along with the big changes in the 
technology, forms, and methods of organizing production, the 
technical development of the vehicle itself has entered a 
qualitatively new stage, which is characterized by completion of 
the process of its refinement and the shift to fundamental 
changes in automotive equipment based on achievements in other 
sectors of industry. The principal directions of scientific and 
technical progress in the automotive industry are already being 
traced: decrease in fuel consumption through fundamental design 
improvements in engines and other components, development of new 
types of power plants and fuels, the use of new structural 
materials, the introduction of measures to reduce the toxicity 
of exhaust gases, and greater safety in operating ATS [motor 
transport vehicles] with the shift to automation in traffic. 
  One of the most important directions mentioned is reduced 
fuel consumption by the fleet of motor vehicles. The problem may 
be resolved, for example, by using alternative fuels, that is, 
fuels whose production excludes the use of petroleum and 
petroleum products. They include natural and artificial 
hydrocarbon gases such as petroleum gas and the gas which is 
formed in petroleum refining; the gases obtained from processing 
the by-products of industrial and agricultural production and 
other organic residue; and alcohol obtained from natural gases 
and other substances. 
  Compressed natural and liquefied petroleum gases are in 
first 
place among the alternative automotive fuels. They have already 
begun to be used in the engines of trucks and passenger cars. 
And compressed natural gas has already proved itself as a type 
of fuel which has the properties of the best brands of domestic 
gasoline. It has sufficient energy content; the octane number of 
its main component--methane--is 104, whereas the "Ekstra" 
gasoline is 95 octane. Moreover, this fuel, which enters engine 
cylinders in the form of a gas mixture, does not wash away the 
lubricant from the walls of the cylinder sleeve, including in 
cases where there is dry friction of components in the cylinder 
and piston assembly. At the same time, the lubricant retains its 
working properties and engine service life is increased by 1.5 
to two times as much. And what is most important, the amount of 
toxic emissions into the atmosphere is reduced when some motor 
vehicles are shifted to gas fuel. 
  A substantial reserve for fuel economy is provided by 
reducing the mass and overall dimensions of vehicles and 
installing less powerful engines, as well as by using lighter 
construction materials: high-strength steels, aluminum, 
plastics, composites, and ceramics. For example, substantial 
fuel savings have already been achieved by firms which 
manufacture passenger cars with plastic bodies and make bumpers, 
springs, frames, and other parts out of composite materials. 
  Electronic equipment also reduces fuel consumption, 
substantially improves the safety of vehicle operation, reduces 
the toxicity of exhaust gases, and simplifies maintenance and 
repair of vehicles, making them less expensive. It may have a 
very wide range of application--from electronic clocks to 
systems which control operation of the engine, transmission, and 
other units and systems in the vehicle. For example, the fuel 
consumption warning devices which are now being installed in 
series-produced vehicles ("ekonometers"), signals for individual 
movement parameters, the microprocessor fuel injection systems, 
ABS [antilock brake systems], automatic suspension control, and 
so forth. 
  There is no question that extensive use of electronic 
systems 
in domestic automotive equipment will become the task for 
tomorrow. Including (and this is almost the most urgent task) 
the maximum use of electronic equipment to improve vehicles' 
level of safety, which will make it possible to almost 
completely eliminate DTP [road accidents] in the future, in the 
opinion of a number of specialists. 
  The lack of automotive power plants at present which do not 
pollute the atmosphere forces us to take steps to reduce the 
toxicity of exhaust gases in existing engines. For example, by 
installing catalytic converters and direct fuel injection 
systems and by taking other steps to improve engines and fuel 
equipment aimed at reducing the toxicity from hydrocarbons and 
oxides of carbon and nitrogen. The experience of industrially 
developed countries as the result of such measures is 
persuasive: despite the increased number of vehicles there and 
the additional new vehicles equipped with more and more refined 
systems for controlling exhaust gases, pollution of the air, 
especially in large cities, has already been substantially 
reduced. 
  A trend characteristic of development of the motor vehicle 
market in the future is an increase in international trade in 
them. But as world experience shows, only a competitive product 
can enter the world markets. The principal element of 
competitiveness now is quality and consumer appeal. For example, 
according to data from research conducted in the United States, 
80 percent of consumers consider quality a more important 
indicator than price when they are selecting a commodity. By 
taking this very trend into account, Japan has been able to 
reach a dominant position in the world motor vehicle market. The 
quality control system which it developed is a mechanism to 
fully meet the requirements and demands of the consumer--it may 
be considered a model for scientific and technical organization 
of the work in manufacturing a motor vehicle, from development 
of a new model to testing of the finished product. In all stages 
of a vehicle's development, factors such as quality, market 
requirements, and national and international safety and 
ecological standards are taken into account. Quality control in 
the vehicle manufacturing stage calls for wide-scale production 
automation and mechanization, the use of advanced technologies 
and efficient methods of work organization, and refinement of 
quality monitoring. The main objective of production automation 
is to eliminate the effect of subjective factors, or to minimize 
their effect, on product quality, although the labor-output 
ratio is reduced at the same time, naturally. For this reason, 
for example, 97 percent of the welding operations in Japan are 
now being performed automatically, and laser units verify the 
accuracy of the geometric dimensions of a vehicle body, which 
eliminates the possibility that parts which do not conform to 
the design may enter the assembly process. 
  The tasks of ensuring high quality are also performed by 
robotization of the vehicles' assembly. At many Japanese motor 
vehicle plants, robots install the doors, the rear windows, and 
the spare tires. Then the conveyer is divided into three 
floor-type flow lines. In particular, as the body moves through 
one of them, the finishing line, robots install windshield 
wipers, the dashboard, the seating, and the bumpers, and they 
install them with an exceptional degree of precision. The hood 
and front fenders are protected from mechanical damage by 
special housings during their movement. 
  The engine, transmission, and wheels are installed on the 
other line. 
  In the process of all production the quality of all systems 
and every operation is regulated and carefully monitored. And 
finally, each vehicle is subjected to tests in a shower--to 
determine if the body is leakproof. 
  The Japanese system of universal personnel training 
unquestionably deserves special attention. First of all, this 
includes quality study groups which, aside from quality 
problems, are concerned with saving resources, increasing labor 
productivity, and improving work conditions. 
  The quality control system used by Japanese concerns, as we 
see, is quite thorough and it may be used in manufacturing 
domestic automotive equipment. 
  As already noted, a characteristic feature in development of 
a motor vehicle market in the future will be an increase in 
international trade in this means of transportation. In 
specialists' estimation, the proportion of exports in the output 
of the main producer countries in the year 2000 will reach 46 
percent for passenger cars and 41 percent for trucks and buses 
(42 percent and 34 percent, respectively, in 1985). The 
structure of international trade (from the viewpoint of the 
proportion of individual vehicle categories) will not undergo 
any specific changes and will basically coincide with the 
structure of their production as it does now. 
  Judging by the available data, the forms and methods of 
vehicle sales by the leading foreign firms apparently will not 
change substantially in the period being examined, either. 
However, it is assumed that the process of market monopolization 
will be speeded up by increasing the levels of production 
concentration and sales in the hands of several transnational 
firms. In particular, the practice of joint NIOKR [scientific 
research and experimental design work] and the production and 
sales of vehicles by the firms of various countries will be 
expanded considerably. In the final analysis, the logic of a 
competitive struggle will lead to the complete elimination of 
all national producers and the formation of truly international 
supermonopolies based on them. The initial base for forming such 
associations has already been established and is manifested in 
the form of mutual participation in joint-stock capital and the 
conclusion of agreements on the collaboration of various firms. 
A typical example is the interaction of General Motors and 
Toyota, Ford Motor Company and Mazda and Fiat, and Nissan with 
Volkswagen and others. It is possible that the international 
market may be redivided among them. 
  A second example is activity by one of the supermonopolies, 
the Volkswagen concern. 
  This is a very large transnational corporation which 
occupies 
a prominent place in the list of industrial corporations of 
economically developed countries in the West. About 270,000 
persons are employed in its enterprises, located in 12 
countries. As of today, the sales volume of Volkswagen accounts 
for more than 16 percent of total sales in the European motor 
vehicle market; this far exceeds the sales volume of other 
automotive firms, including Fiat, Peugeot, and Reno. In 1990, it 
exported 315,000 vehicles to Italy, 257,000 to France, and so 
forth. The baisc model--the "Golf"--is especially popular here. 
Every year the volume of deliveries to the United States and 
Canada is increased. And generally speaking, it must be said 
that Volkswagen has the ability to win more and more markets for 
sales ahead of the others. For example, it was the first to 
organize a joint venture to manufacture motor vehicles in China. 
  Volkswagen continues to work on motor vehicles of the 
future--as an example, on the design of a vehicle which will be 
able to "fit" in an available space between other vehicles 
parked on the street. The concern is also receptive to technical 
developments, many of which received their start at its 
enterprises or which were put into mass production for the first 
time at them. (For example, development of the first catalytic 
converter for a diesel belongs to the designers of this concern.) 
  Unfortunately, Volkswagen has no or practically no ties with 
our country. And such ties would not hurt, inasmuch as the 
export of our automotive products in the coming years can be 
actively developed only when there is close collaboration with 
foreign firms, international cooperation, the availability of 
foreign loans, and the involvement of foreign capital and joint 
enterpreneurial activity. Attraction of foreign capital may 
become the main element in increasing the foreign economic 
potential of automotive manufacturing and be realized in the 
form of joint ventures. (The advantages of a joint venture are 
that it does not return to the firm the funds that it invests, 
only the profit on them, first of all, and secondly, there is 
continuing collaboration with the foreign firm in improving 
production and searching for sales markets.) In this sense, a 
joint venture with Volkswagen for the manufacture of motor 
vehicles would be advantageous. Especially if it were overall 
collaboration embracing the entire production cycle, beginning 
with development of a design and ending with sales. At the same 
time, the concern's advanced achievements should be fully 
utilized: the high degree of mechanization and automation of 
production processes in all stages of the technological 
cycle--from stamping and welding elements of the body to 
installation of finished assemblies, as well as the use of 
highly productive equipment incorporated in the automatic and 
semiautomatic lines and the flexible production systems. 
  Joint ventures (not only with Volkswagen, of course) to 
produce motor vehicles for our country could also speed up the 
solution of many other problems, and not just the problems of 
producing and selling them. In particular, in training highly 
skilled domestic personnel; in modernizing automotive production 
at the level of current requirements for it (taking into account 
automatic assembly, which will compel us to reexamine the entire 
technological process); and in building up export potential 
based on domestic automotive manufacturing, which will make it 
possible for automotive products to compete successfully in 
world markets and for the country to become one of the principal 
producers. 
  COPYRIGHT: ISSN 0005-2337. Izdatelstvo "Mashinostroyeniye", 
"Avtomobilnaya promyshlennost", 1994 

