Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [by Randa Habib] </F>
  [Text] Amman, March 11 (AFP) -- Jordanian leaders blamed 
the United States Thursday [10 March] for prompting Saudi King 
Fahd to snub King Husayn during a trip to Mecca, charging that 
Washington was trying to force Jordan into signing a peace deal 
with Israel. 
  They warned that Saudi Arabia's cold reception could push 
Jordan further towards Syria -- Israel's arch Arab foe. 
  King Fahd cold-shouldered the Jordanian monarch during his 
visit, ignoring the opportunity for a reconciliation meeting. 
  It was King Husayn's first trip to Saudi since July 1990, 
just before the Gulf crisis erupted. But he cut short his visit 
Wednesday when he was ignored by Saudi authorities. 
  Relations between the two countries soured during the Gulf 
crisis when Riyadh accused Amman of backing Iraqi President 
Saddam Husayn, whose forces had invaded and occupied Kuwait. 
  Although ties with Saudi Arabia have traditionally been 
complicated because of old rivalries between the two ruling 
families, Jordan has found itself increasingly isolated in the 
rest of Arab world since the end of the war. 
  Officially, Jordanian authorities played down the Saudi 
trip, 
saying the only purpose had been the king's pilgrimage. 
  But privately a senior Jordanian official commented: "There 
was a clear desire by the Saudis to humiliate not only the 
Hashemite family...but also the Jordanian Government." 
  And although the snub clearly came from Riyadh, Jordanian 
leaders say it was prompted by the United States, keen to step 
up pressure on Amman to sign a peace accord with Israel. 
  Israel and Jordan signed a common peace agenda in Washington 
on September 14 -- a day after the historic Israeli-PLO autonomy 
accord was agreed -- to serve as a framework for future talks 
between the two countries. 
  But several sticking points remain, notably border 
demarcations, water sharing rights and the issue of the 
Palestinian refugees who fled to Jordan in the 1967 Middle East 
war. 
  In January King Husayn held talks with U.S. President Bill 
Clinton during a visit to Washington discussing Jordan's debt to 
the United States, the side-effects of the UN-imposed embargo on 
Iraq for Jordan and prospects for restoring links with Saudi 
Arabia. 
  "Sign a peace treaty with Israel and all these issues will 
be 
sorted out," a senior Jordanian official, who asked to remain 
anonymous, quoted the U.S. President as saying. 
  But King Husayn has said he is anxious to avoid protracted 
negotiations, which have marked the Israeli-PLO relationship. 
The dialogue has been suspended since the February 25 Hebron 
mosque massacre. 
  Jordan remains unwelcome in other Gulf states apart from 
Oman 
and Qatar. Jordanian officials announced Thursday that King 
Husayn is to visit Qatar for the first time since February 20. 
An unconfirmed report said the visit would take place on March 
20. 
  Relations with Egypt are also cool and Amman's estrangement 
from the Palestine Liberation Organisation was revealed when PLO 
Chairman Yasir 'Arafat chose not to tell Amman of the secret 
talks with Israel which led to September's accord. 
  Officials say that as a result of Jordan's isolation it is 
being pushed closer towards Syria, in a move bound to worry U.S. 
leaders. 
  But in Jordanian political circles the message Thursday was 
that following the Saudi snub, King Husayn has even less reason 
to make conciliatory moves towards Israel. 

