BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest, ROMPRES, 5/5/1994 -- The Romanian 
Communist Party (PCR) is the newest political organization in 
Romania, after its legal recognition Wednesday, 4 May, by the 
Bucharest Municipal Court, third civil section, where it was 
duly registered. This new Communist Party is based in Targu Jiu 
(South-West of Romania) and, according to its president, Victor 
Hancu, 30, an economist by profession, boasts a membership of 
4,000, although for legal registration a political party needs a 
minimum of 263 listed members. 
  Its leaders say that PCR does not intend to continue the 
former Romanian Communist Party, the sole political organization 
admitted to rule the Romanian society for 45 years until 
December 1989. The day's papers remark that the court's 
decision can be contended by any natural or juristic person 
within three days from registration by an appeal to the Supreme 
Court of Justice. 
  Victor Hancu told the press some of his creeds: socialist 
mixed economy based on competition, privatisation of services, 
the state's further ownership of large industrial units, the 
promotion of human values and competence. About Ceausescu he 
said a minute analysis of his activities should be made in order 
to establish his share to the good of Romania. Speaking of 
communist doctrine, Hancu stressed that "it was not the ideas 
that did harm, but people." 
  The first Communist Party was founded in Romania on 8 May 
1921, and claimed to continue the ideas of the Social Democratic 
Party of Romania, founded in 1893. Over 1921-1945 PCR acted 
upon directives from the Communist International, the Comintern, 
and Cominform, along political lines in obvious contradiction 
with reality in Romania. PCR members suspected by the Romanian 
pre-communist security authorities were some imprisoned, some 
under inquest. After World War Two, when Romania was abandoned 
to the Soviet sphere of influence, PCR, re-emerged from long 
years of illegal movement on 23 August 1944, and, although 
counting a few hundred adherents, became the leading political 
force in the state. In the name of socialism, the communists 
perpetrated a long series of abuses against citizen's rights and 
freedoms, which were aimed in fact at destroying the Romanian 
national values and the Romanian state's traditional craving for 
sovereignty. Against such a background, the incipient show of 
independence from Moscow by some Romanian political leaders 
earned PCR the support of an ever greater number of persons, 
some of them recruited from the intellectuals jailed in the 
1950's when Moscow's authority had reached its peak. The 
nationalist tinge of PCR's policy, that met popular support, 
coincided with a period of economic rise and improving living 
standard. 
  The brutal economic recession of the 1980's, the gap between 
aspirations and the incapacity of the system to satisfy them, 
the absence of communication with the masses, the widening abyss 
between rulers and ruled had all led to the mass outburst of 
December 1989, which swept the PCR away from the Romanian 
political scene. In January 1990, under the pressure of crowds 
exulting at the victory of the Romanian revolution, the new 
leadership issued a decree on 12 January disbanding the 
Communist Party, but abolished the decree the following day 
considering it as illegally proclaimed under the pressure of the 
street. Other attempts to re-establish the former Romanian 
Communist Party have been recorded since 1991. 

