Language: <F P=105> Somali </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Mohamed Farah Aidid, the chairman of the Somali 
National Alliance [SNA], who is also the chairman of the United 
Somali Congress [USC] has, at his hotel residence in Nairobi, 
met some officials of the recently formed Somali Aid 
Coordination Body, SACB. 
  At the meeting, the chairman first thanked the vital 
decision 
they had made to oversee relief aid distribution and 
rehabilitation of the country, adding that he was happy that 
donor countries and agencies had decided to manage relief aid 
for the Somali people themselves, as this was what had been 
called for all along. He went on to say that no assistance had 
reached the affected Somali people ever since UN Operation in 
Somalia [UNOSOM] took over the responsibility of managing relief 
work, and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Somalia. 
Moreover, not a single project had been undertaken in the 
country to benefit the people, although the international 
community had provided Somalia with a large amount of funds. 
  Aidid told heads of the new body to make new assessments of 
the needs of the country's regions and then to ensure equitable 
distribution of relief aid and reconstruction of the regions. 
He stated that there were some regions which had not received 
any assistance because of UNOSOM's decision to (?sideline) them. 
The chairman described as baseless lies that there was 
insecurity in those regions, adding that security in those 
regions was maintained more than in any other region. Aidid 
appealed to the SACB to give higher priority to basic social 
services such as water supplies, health, education, and 
electricity. 
  He said there were many cripples and insane people as a 
result of the war who needed health care. Speaking on 
development, Chairman Aidid said Somalia had natural resources 
that could benefit the Somali people, such as livestock, 
agriculture and minerals, and he added that Somalia had 3,800-km 
of coastline with inestimable resources. He called on the body 
to help exploit these resources. 
  In particular, he requested the enlargement and 
rehabilitation of the Somali police force, wherever it might be 
in the country, describing it as the best police force on the 
African continent. 
  On the Somali refugees, he said there was a need to 
repatriate and resettle them in their mother country. He said 
the returnees should be cared for until they became 
self-supporting. He said the UNHCR should consult with the 
Somali political organizations, relief agencies, and other 
concerned countries on the repatriation program. 
  General Aidid pledged to the SACB that the SNA would 
guarantee the security of aid workers, adding that full 
cooperation and a good working relationship between the SNA and 
aid personnel would be established. The chairman disclosed that 
the SNA had charged the various committees existing in the 
regions, districts and villages with the responsibility of 
working with the new aid body. He informed the new body that 
there were many highly skilled and educated Somalis in the 
country and he therefore requested the new body to give them 
jobs as these people were unemployed because of UNOSOM's 
preference for expatriates. 
  On reconciliation, Aidid told the officials of the new body 
that political consultations between the Somali organizations 
were going on. He said though it could not be said that 
breakthroughs had been achieved, political gaps had been 
narrowed and soon it was expected that most of the organizations 
would adopt a common political stand. 
  For their part, the SACB officials expressed their thanks 
and 
happiness and satisfaction with the chairman's comments, 
suggestions and the detailed speech. They said that as 
representatives of the countries which contributed aid they 
would directly and properly manage any assistance for Somalia. 
They said that they had long ago requested the UN general 
secretary to hand over responsibility for relief coordination 
and development of the country to the UN Development Program 
from UNOSOM. 
  They said a new era of cooperation between the Somali people 
and donor countries had begun and stressed that they would work 
with genuine leaders and representatives of the Somali people. 
They said their work was purely humanitarian and the task of 
finding a just political solution to the country's problems was 
for the Somali people. The officials promised that the SACB 
would very soon start work throughout the country's regions, 
adding that there would be no practice of preferring one region 
to another, as every bona fide region or person was entitled to 
international assistance. Finally, they appealed to the SNA and 
USC chairman to ensure the security of aid workers and establish 
cooperation and a working relationship. The meeting took place 
in an atmosphere of understanding and success. 

