Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The talks between Bulgarian Foreign Minister 
Stanislav Daskalov and Iranian Foreign Minister `Ali Akbar 
Velayati, who is paying an official visit to our country, lasted 
almost two hours. 
  The talk is reported to have focused on bilateral relations 
between the two countries and on economic links, in particular, 
as well as on the possibilities of reviving trade contacts 
between Bulgaria and Iran. This is how Minister Daskalov 
described the intentions expressed in this respect: 
  [Begin Daskalov recording] In this connection we agreed on 
more intensive contacts between our economic ministries. Iran's 
first deputy minister of trade is a member of Mr. Velayati's 
delegation and he is expected to hold meetings at the Ministries 
of Trade, Finance, and Transport, and to visit the Bulgarian 
Chamber of Industry and Commerce, with the purpose of specifying 
the spheres in which we could intensify our trade relations. We 
also discussed some specific trade problems that have emerged in 
our relations. We are also preparing a trade agreement that is 
expected to be signed during the Iranian delegation's visit, as 
soon as our experts have completed their work. We are also 
planning to sign a protocol on cooperation and consultations 
between our two foreign ministers representing the traditional 
form of protocols that our country usually signs. [end 
recording] 
  Mr. Velayati, in turn, specified the spheres of future 
cooperation between the two countries in the following way: 
  [Begin Velayati recording, in English fading into 
announcer-read Bulgarian report] In our discussion with my dear 
colleague, the distinguished foreign minister of Bulgaria, we 
touched upon bilateral, regional, and international problems. 
We expressed our readiness to pursue and intensify the 
traditionally good Bulgarian-Iranian relations in all possible 
spheres, such as trade, economics, and culture. We also pointed 
out the stands of the two countries on the Yugoslav conflict and 
Iran's readiness to support peacemaking actions under the 
UNmaegis, the Iranian guest declared. [end recording] 

