BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of news conference by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq </F>
'Aziz with "chief editors of local newspapers and magazines, 
heads of information departments, journalists, and writers" on 1 
June; place not given] 
  [Text] Baghdad, INA -- It pleases me to meet with you so 
that we may discuss what took place at the recent UN Security 
Council session and the conclusions we reached after this 
session. I am certain you read the statement issued by the 
spokesman for the joint meeting of the Revolution Command 
Council and the Ba'th Partry command. This statement contains 
basic signs about the recent UN Security Council session and 
basic signs about our conclusions from this session. However, I 
found it useful to provide the Iraqi press with more details 
about this session. 
  A substantial change took place in the UN Security Council's 
stand last March. As you know, in its periodic review of the 
situation before March the UN Security Council used to issue a 
short statement called (Iyala Lasso), a reference to the former 
Ecuadoran ambassador at the UN Security Council who had drawn up 
this formula at the time to show that the council members are 
still not convinced that the conditions for lifting the embargo 
from Iraq have been met. Such a statement was issued for the 
last time in February 1994. In March, as you know, three 
important UN Security Council permanent members, France, Russia, 
and the PRC, called for changing this formula. 
  These countries said there is clear progress with respect to 
the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolutions and 
that such progress should be reflected in the statemnent. The 
United States and the United Kingdom and some countries which 
indulge them objected to this proposal. A serious discussion 
was held within the council at the end of which the council did 
not reach any decision. This was verily viewed as a crucial 
change in the UN Security Council stand. It is the first time 
that the council finds itself divided on the stand on Iraq, a 
division among the five UN Security Council permanent members. 
There was a majority within this group: three countries calling 
for a change. There was also division among the nonpermanent 
members. Some of these members supported the three permanent 
members calling for a change. Other members did not support 
that or remained silent. 
  Before we left for New York to attend the May session, we 
did 
not expect this session would bring about a substantial change 
in stands because the Special Commission's work of putting in 
place the long-term monitoring system has not been completed. 
There was talk last March and even now that this will be 
completed in July, meaning that the Special Commission and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] were expected to 
submit a report on the completion of this system to the council 
in July. 
  From this premise, neither I nor the comrades in the command 
expected that the May review would bring about substantial 
changes. However, we had to go to New York and we had to hold 
extensive contacts before the session with UN Security Council 
members and other important countries which influence 
international public opinion, which in its turn influences the 
stand within the UN Security Council. 
  At the instructions of the president leader, ranking envoys 
visited several countries. As you know, the minister of culture 
and information visited several Arab countries. The foreign 
minister visited three countries in Asia: India, Malaysia, and 
Indonesia, the chairman of the Nonaligned Movement. Barzan 
al-Tikriti, the president's political adviser, visited Arab 
countries in North Africa. 
  On the other hand, envoys at the level of ambassadors and 
advisers to the foreign minister visited other capitals of the 
UN member states, as well as other states not members of the 
Security Council. Foreign Ministry Under Secretary Dr. [Riyad] 
al-Qaysi visited Pakistan and China. Visits were also made to 
countries in Europe, such as Greece, Germany, Austria and 
others, as well as the Vatican. Other visits were made to 
Africa and Latin America. During these visits, the situation 
and the facts were explained to these states. They were told 
that fairness, justice, logic, and the correct legal reading of 
the UN Security Council resolutions must lead to the 
implementation of Paragraph 22 of Resolution 687 and that the 
obstacle in this regard is the U.S. attitude. This fact was 
clear on the international level. 
  While we were in New York, we were required to continue to 
explain things and abort the counterattack that started after 
March when the United States and its lackeys in the region found 
out that Iraqi political and diplomatic activity had begun to 
produce results by changing the attitude inside the UN Security 
Council. They started a large-scale diplomatic and 
non-diplomatic campaign for which they mobilized several 
means--money and bribes paid by the Saudi and Kuwaiti rulers and 
pressure and influence by the United States. The Americans had 
to appear in public, in this instance. As you know, Christopher 
met with the ministers of the Gulf Cooperation Council and 
warned them against rapprochement with Iraq, because there was 
some rapprochement. This still exists on the part of certain 
states. He warned them against such a rapprochement and then 
did an unprecedented thing. He wrote an article in THE NEW YORK 
TIMES in which he said the embargo against Iraq should not be 
lifted, that the embargo should continue, and so forth. 
Incidentally, I will tell you this, as journalists. I replied 
to that article in an article which I published and then sent 
with a letter to an editor at THE NEW YORK TIMES. We had to be 
there to answer questions and strengthen the convictions of the 
various states in a positive direction. 
  We met with all members of the UN Security Council, except 
the United States. I met with the four permanent members -- the 
British, the French, the Russian, and the Chinese. I met with 
some of them more than once. Some of the meetings were held 
jointly. I also met with the other members of the council and 
with ambassadors of other states that were not members of the 
Security Council. We had a lengthy discussion about the entire 
situation. They told us about their expectations of the 
session. They said: The United States refuses to acknowledge 
progress in implementing the Security Council resolution and is 
insisting on that position, and Britain will go along with this 
position. Therefore, most likely, the council will not make any 
decision, meaning there will be no new statement. The trend is 
to not issue any statement, as was the case in March. Indeed 
the council met on 17 May. 
  Here, I would like to reiterate the following facts: 
  First: the states that took a positive position in March 
have maintained, and even improved, their position. I read some 
remarks from press sources, which I respect, but I do not think 
they are aware of the facts. These remarks were made here and 
there, and suggested some retreat in the position of certain 
states. There is no retreat in the positions of Russia, France, 
and China. Their position is firm, and it is even clearer than 
it was in March, because relations between the competent Iraqi 
authorities on the one hand and the Special Commission and the 
IAEA on the other are proceeding very well, in a professional 
manner. There are no problems. This fact is known to all these 
states. On my way to New York, I visited Vienna and met with 
the IAEA director general, who confirmed these facts in a 
statement issued after the meeting. The reasons that caused 
these states to change their position in March are still valid 
in May. They were even strengthened by the continued technical 
implementation of the Security Council resolutions, particularly 
Section C of Resolution 687. 
  In March, some states showed positive signs appeasing or 
supporting the position of the three states that called for a 
change in the May meeting. The position of these states was 
clear. Examples of these states are Spain, Brazil, Pakistan, and 
Nigeria. As the Russian ambassador, who took the initiative in 
this meeting, told me, we can now argue with the U.S. side and 
demand that the statement be changed. He also told me that I 
was not alone in this meeting when I demanded a change; eight 
members spoke with me. In the March meeting, two other council 
members, namely, New Zealand and the Czech Republic, showed a 
negative attitude and did not talk in favor of a change. 
  In this meeting, however, the New Zealand and Czech members 
remained silent and made no statements. During our meetings 
with the representatives of these two countries, they showed a 
good level of understanding and acknowledged progress had been 
made. They, however, did not commit themselves to announcing 
this in the council's meetings for political considerations. 
  There is now a tangible majority of member states in the 
council that call for changing the statement's formula. These 
states also acknowledge that progress was achieved in 
implementing the Security Council resolutions. They believe the 
economic blockade imposed on Iraq should be addressed by the 
council, that the blockade should not be eternal and should not 
last long. They also believe the Iraqi people's suffering 
deserves attention and that the council should prove its 
credibility by fulfilling its commitments toward Iraq in 
exchange for Iraq's fulfillment of its commitments in accordance 
with the council's resolutions. These states called for this 
during the council's deliberations. They also call for this in 
our bilateral contacts with them. 
  For your information, only the U.S. representative made a 
very bad statement filled with falsehoods and contradictions. 
Both the language she used and the presentation she made in the 
council's meeting were not shown in the remarks made by other 
representatives. Even the British representative, who joined the 
U.S. political position on not changing the statement's formula, 
spoke in a language somewhat different from the U.S. language 
and could not deny progress had been achieved. 
  Only one country, namely, Argentina, cheaply--and I must 
briefly describe its position as a cheap one--supported the U.S. 
position in a way that did not show a respected diplomatic 
level. This is the position of these three states. Two other 
countries remained silent, and the majority of the remaining 10 
countries showed a positive attitude. Thus, I consider that 
what happened in May was progress in the situation. 
  Naturally, I cannot describe this meeting as a victory or 
say 
that it realized great achievements. This is because the 
achievement which we, along with our people, are expecting is to 
take tangible steps on the path to the lifting of the blockade. 
However, this political and diplomatic process is very 
complicated, and it is influenced by many circumstances and 
positions and needs time and efforts. Hence, what happened in 
May is considered progress on the path to lifting or easing the 
blockade. 
  The level of both listening to, and understanding of, the 
Iraqi viewpoint on all issues, whether regarding the weapons, 
the implementation of Section C of Resolution 687, or other 
issues evoked against Iraq, is much higher and deeper than ever 
before. 
  As you know, I visited New York twice in 1992. I travelled 
there again in March, 1993 to address the UN Security Council. 
Fifteen council members spokes ahead of me, the representative 
of Iraq. Maybe I had something new to say. I made this 
observation to the council president. I told him that ordinarily 
the guest should speak first, but I have been accorded a 
treatment incompatible with the traditions of hospitality and 
the meetings and the statement that was printed and circulated 
among the 15 member states. 
  Before the council began, we used to meet with council 
members, some of whom were not hostile or tendentious. I mean, 
they listened and showed some measure of sympathy, but did not 
follow the drift of the argument quite seriously. We must 
credit the change that took place in 1992 to Iraq's 
steadfastness. 
  In 1991 and 1992, thanks to the U.S. and Western media, and 
other media paid by the rulers of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, many 
people and nations were not hostile to Iraq. They were friends 
with vested interests in Iraq. [two preceding sentences as 
published] They thought that Iraq would not hold out. How can a 
small nation like Iraq hold out after an unparalleled ferocious 
aggression? How can it hold out after such a comprehensive 
siege and a political and media offensive? They thought it was 
just a matter of time. 
  Even when you speak logically and on a legal basis and 
advance convincing and clear arguments under normal 
circumstances, the representatives of state X or state Y shakes 
his head and says: We love the Iraqi people and sympathize with 
them, but what can we do? This man speaks now. Maybe in a year 
we will not see him. He will not be committed or responsive. 
Not that he is a man of bad faith. But he acts realistically as 
one would expect in our world. As you know, stands based on 
principle and moral values are not there anymore. Now there is 
realpolitik. Things are different now. Now we seek interviews 
with UN Security Council members -- even representatives of 
member nations that participated in the aggression on Iraq. I 
ask to meet them in my residence at the Iraqi ambassador's 
house. We sit for an hour, or an hour and a half, and talk. We 
disagree, but they listen earnestly to what I say. 
  As for the nations that have no tendentious stands toward 
Iraq and those that had interests with Iraq in the past and were 
friends with Iraq, these began to listen attentively and 
empathize with our grievances and the arbitrary fashion in which 
Iraq is treated, and the unprecedented texts, which are not 
necessary even from the UN Security Council's perspective. 
These nations now listen and understand. 
  Then there is the reception our envoys had when they visited 
foreign countries. We recently made visits that until recently 
were out of the question. I visited Austria and met with its 
foreign minister, and on my way back I visited Spain and met 
with Spanish officials. 
  These are signs that Iraq's position is being understood 
much 
more than in the past. One thing that we must also particularly 
note as media people is the visits made to Iraq by major 
entrepreneurs who are heavyweights in their countries. Some, or 
most, of these nations are members of the UN Security Council 
and they can decide to lift or retain the embargo or prolong or 
curtail it. 
  Their visits to Iraq, their meetings with Iraqi officials, 
and their search for job opportunities indicate that they 
completely acknowledge Iraq's steadfastness. It is obvious that 
they admit Iraq has stood fast in the face of the blockade, the 
political and media campaign, and all the conspiracies that have 
been concocted against it. 
  At the same time, it is an acknowledgement that the blockade 
will be lifted and that after it is lifted, these states and 
companies will try to benefit from dealing with Iraq, which 
enjoys a huge potential in terms of economic cooperation. 
  All these are positive signs, but just as excessive 
pessimism 
is completely wrong, excessive optimism also lacks balance. As 
the leader president stressed on many occasions, we have to 
stand fast on all levels. This is our firm Iraqi national 
option. We have to stand fast, to continue our work on the 
domestic level, and to invest all our revenues, energies, and 
creativity to run our affairs in order to confront the impact of 
the blockade. The world's awareness and acknowledgement of our 
success in this area will help shorten the remaining time of the 
blockade. It is, however, clear to me and to any objective 
observer that this subject is and will be under discussion. As 
an official who holds direct contacts with states, I do not 
advise setting dates, or to say: Since the blockade was not 
lifted in May, it will not be lifted in July. This is wrong 
both politically and diplomatically. There is a meeting in July 
which is very important and possibly decisive, although 
deliberations, discussions, and proposals inside the Security 
Council may take a month. This is possible. 
  This is a U.S. political process, and Saudi Arabia employs 
pressure and bribes one state or another to delay the issue for 
two or three weeks. 
  Ekeus may raise a new issue for the first time. We have to 
prepare ourselves for all possibilities. This does not mean 
that moves toward lifting the blockade have stopped or will 
stop. On the contrary, they are still going on firmly and will 
achieve results, God willing. 
  I do not want to set a date, as this is wrong. The president 
said during a cabinet meeting yesterday that the remaining time 
is shorter than the time that has elapsed. I can add a word and 
say that the remaining time is much shorter, not only in days or 
even in months, than the time that has elapsed. 
  Acknowledgment that Iraq has stood fast is obvious. Those 
who deny this deny reality. They know the reality, but they do 
not want to admit it because they do not want to reveal their 
failure. The United States does not want to officially announce 
the failure of its program against Iraq. The same applies to 
some U.S. satellites, including some Arabs and some other 
unrespectable and imbalanced states. 
  The majority of states, including the Security Council 
member 
states and European, Asian, and other states, know and admit 
that Iraq has stood fast and that the steadfastness of a country 
like Iraq with human, leadership, scientific, and cultural 
qualifications and with a huge economic potential means that it 
has a bright future. Therefore, these states should deal with 
strong and prosperous Iraq that enjoys this huge potential. 
  A question from [AL-THAWRAH Chief Editor] Taha al-Basri: 
There are two questions directly related to this subject, 
concerning the impression that there is a little deviation in 
the positions of the three states which the deputy prime 
minister mentioned, namely, Russia, France, and China. These 
questions may be triggered by what Western media are 
circulating, to the effect that these states are linking the 
question of reconsidering the embargo to resolutions that are 
not directly related to Resolution 687, particularly Resolutions 
833 and 688. In press interviews, the envoys of Russia and 
France suggested that Iraq has to abide by these two 
resolutions, thus giving the impression they leaned somewhat 
toward the U.S. position, which did not discuss Resolution 687 
from a technical viewpoint, but linked that resolution to other 
resolutions that are not directly related to it. These two 
resolutions concern the measures taken by the UN Security 
Council and the sanctions imposed on Iraq. We want you to 
explain the motives behind the statements, which spoke clearly 
about or hinted at Iraq's dealing with these two resolutions, 
particularly those made by the Russian and French envoys in 
press interviews. This is one question. 
  The second question is: Certain permanent members, 
particularly France, asked Ekeus, the Special Commission 
chairman, to submit a monthly report on the extent of progress, 
or the problems between Iraq and the UN specialized committees. 
Has anything happened in this regard? Should we expect any 
positive steps as a result of that request? The request gives 
the impression that France does not want the United States to be 
the only party that is well informed about what is going on, and 
that other permanent members must also know everything. Has 
anything happened in this regard? What are the positive aspects 
of the French request? 
  Mr. Tariq 'Aziz said: Regarding the first question, I said 
at the beginning of this meeting that there is an impression or 
a view that there is some change or retreat, or as Mr. al-Basri 
has described it, a deviation in the position of the three 
states, France, Russia, and China. I underlined that there is 
no change in their positions. 
  From a legal viewpoint, Russia, France, and China do not 
link 
Resolution 687 to the other resolutions. They do not link, from 
a legal viewpoint, the implementation of Paragraph 22 to the 
other resolutions that are not related to what we call section C 
of Resolution 687. However, they say that dealing with, or 
addressing the other resolutions will facilitate the 
implementation of Paragraph 22 and will ease or remove the 
pretexts which the other party -- the Americans -- and those who 
go along with them use to obstruct the removal of the sanctions. 
This is their argument. There is nothing new in this. I heard 
the same thing from them in November 1993, and when I met with 
them in March. I heard it for the third time during my [recent] 
meetings with them. To state this or not state it does not mean 
there is a change in their position. There are other UN 
Security Council resolutions that concern other issues. These 
states have an interest in these resolutions for political 
reasons and because they have interests with Saudi Arabia, with 
Kuwait, and in the region, and not only with Iraq. They also 
have an interest because these resolutions were issued by the 
Security Council, of which they are permanent members. 
  I expect them to show interest in these resolutions and to 
ask Iraq to deal with them. This is not surprising for us. 
But, in addition to this, they call in the UN Security Council 
to recognize that there is positive progress and for looking 
into the question of lifting the embargo as soon as possible. 
The French, the Russian, and the Chinese envoys specifically 
implied in March and this month that the question of lifting the 
embargo should be expeditiously discussed. The French 
representative said in his speech that the time will come very 
soon to discuss this issue. 
  With respect to the monthly report, it has become a monthly 
event. After the French President of the UN Security Council 
asked Ekeus to submit a monthly report as of March, Ekeus 
submitted one on 28 April and it was a positive report. Today, 
he will submit his second report to the council. Over the past 
few days, I believe Saturday or Sunday, the foreign minister on 
his way to Cairo through Amman, accompanied by 'Amir Rashid, 
director of the Military Industrialization Organization, met 
with Ekeus in Amman to discuss an issue that needs to be 
followed up. As Lieutenant General 'Amir Rashid told me, Ekeus 
promised to submit a factual report. This means the report will 
be a positive one because the facts are positive. 
  Al-QADISIYAH Chief Editor Hani Wuhayyib asked the following 
question: Some press sources say a retraction took place in the 
May session, compared with what was achieved in the March 
session, and that the man on the street falsely believes that so 
long as the U.S. stand is against the lifting of the embargo -- 
the man on the street also believes that the United States is 
the country holding sway over the council and the one that 
decides what resolutions are issued -- this weakens the chances 
of lifting the embargo. The man on the street also believes 
that even if there is a majority within the council for lifting 
the embargo, the United States will veto any resolution calling 
for lifting the embargo, and that all this results in 
frustration for the man on street. 
  Tariq 'Aziz said: I wanted to speak about this topic before, 
because I hear such talk, even from my own family. They ask me: 
How can the embargo be lifted if the United States does not want 
it? In 1990 and 1991, the United States succeeded in passing 
resolutions against Iraq through the consent of the member 
countries in the council, or through pressure. This was why the 
resolutions were passed with an overwhelming majority. 
  Some resolutions were even unanimously passed. Countries 
which had the right of veto and did not support these 
resolutions did not use the veto. They abstained. This 
actually happened. That's why there were so many resolutions. 
Why do these countries which participated in these resolutions, 
including three permanent member countries, meet with the Iraqi 
deputy prime minister during his visits to Washington? They 
talk with him and discuss the details of the implementation of 
the resolutions, and during the council sessions they call for 
lifting the embargo. They know the United States will not 
agree. Why then? Their interests will not be served if the 
embargo is not lifted. One might say they are placating Iraqi 
to obtain their interests. How can they get their interests if 
the embargo is not lifted? How can France, Russia, the PRC, 
Spain, Brazil, the permanent and nonpermanent members, resume 
their trade exchange with Iraq if the embargo is not lifted? 
The countries which deep down know that the embargo will not be 
lifted will not deal with us. Why bother? Had I been an 
ambassador of a country with interests in the world and the 
Iraqi deputy prime minister comes and asks me to speak, why 
should I bother with him, knowing that his cause is a lost 
cause, because the United States will not agree? 
  What he obtains from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the U.S. 
allies and followers in the region is better than wasting his 
time with me. In other words, it is a futile matter. 
  It is true that the United States still has influence in the 
world. However, the U.S. influence is no longer the same as 
that in 1990, '91, and '92. This is because changes have 
occurred in Russia, China, France, and the world as a whole. 
You now see the results of elections in Hungary, where the 
former Communist Party was toppled. However, this party 
reorganized itself as a socialist party under a liberal system 
whose rulers fully supported the United States. In 1992, 
Hungary's representative in the Security Council was more cruel 
toward us than the U.S. representative. Under a liberal system 
and after elections, which were fully democratic by Western 
standards, this party won 56 percent of votes and an 
overwhelming parliamentary majority. This also happened in 
Poland, in addition to the results of elections in Russia. 
  The world is changing, but not in the direction specified by 
George Bush, which was called the new world order. The George 
Bush order is finished; it fell down and failed. There is now a 
different international situation with a measure of balance. I 
cannot say this situation has the same full balance as that 
which existed before Gorbachev assumed power, prior to the 
Soviet Union's downfall. However, the world is developing a new 
shape by creating new balances. Thus, you find that the Iraqi 
position enjoys being listened to. They are listening to us 
now, which was not the case in 1992. Even those who used to 
lend us a deaf ear, as the popular saying goes, are now 
listening to us, receiving us in their capitals, and sending 
firms to discuss contracts and projects. Hence, they know that 
the blockade will be lifted and that the United States will not 
willingly obstruct [lifting the blockade]. The United States is 
now obstructing, and it used to obstruct this. Had it not been 
for the U.S. position, it would have been possible to seriously 
discuss implementing Paragraph 22 of Resolution 687 in December 
1992, after an official document on dealing with Resolution 715 
was submitted. The United States, however, obstructed this. 
  Ekeus will submit a report after which there will be a study 
of the so-called test period. These are the results of the U.S. 
obstruction. The United States can obstruct and perpetuate 
things. It, however, cannot ultimately stop them. A preliminary 
discussion has thus far been held in the circles and the 
corridors of the Security Council. I asked ambassadors from 
important states whether the United States would resort to the 
veto. They said: We rule out a veto. Based on my simple 
knowledge in this regard, my analysis was that the United States 
will not use the veto because the Security Council resolutions 
against Iraq were based on the so-called international consensus 
(consensus at the Security Council). But when most Security 
Council member states and most permanent member states see that 
the reasons for imposing the blockade and embargo are removed 
and that only the United States has used the veto, then the 
legal and logical basis for these resolutions will fall. 
Consequently, these states can say that they would not comply 
with these resolutions if the United States wants to control the 
Security Council through its isolated decision. 
  Iraq, they will think, then, has legitimate interests. 
These nations will argue that the reasons that were behind the 
way they handled Iraq did not obtain. So let's act 
independently, their argument goes. These nations have 
political, military, and economic clout. The majority of the 
international community will then follow suit and the U.S. 
position will become isolated, just as it is on Cuba. The 
United States is boycotting Cuba, but the United Kingdom is not, 
and the same holds for Brazil and France, each weighing its own 
interests. The Americans are bound to make their position clear 
soon. 
  Now I explained to you that in the most recent session, it 
emerged that as regards Iraq, the United States is in a minority 
in the Security Council. This is important. I even told an 
ambassador that this lady -- the U.S. UN delegate -- or any 
other delegate, for that matter, is supposed to portray a true 
picture when they find themselves beleaguered and in the 
minority camp. She should tell her leaders that, on that issue, 
we are now a minority. I told him: Do you think she will say 
this to her president. He said: Yes, I think she will. 
Furthermore, it is now reported and shown on television 
screens. You, as media people, watch foreign television 
stations that are monitoring the situation. It is now obvious 
that the U.S. position belongs in the minority. 
  Dr. Sabah Yasin put the following question: You mentioned 
progress on the political front. However, the news media have 
now embarked on a new drive to disrupt or delay the mechanism of 
the Special Commission and involve it in the implementation of 
Resolution 715, implying that the mechanism of the commission is 
also tied to a U.S. political decision. How accurate is this 
assessment? How are you dealing with the Special Commission and 
IAEA to speed the completion of its final report that will 
contribute to the work of Paragraph 22, Section C. 
  Mr. Tariq 'Aziz: Answering the previous question, I said 
that if it were not for the U.S. position, the Special 
Commission and the IAEA would have gone to the Security Council 
in January and told them that the road is now open for a debate 
on Paragraph 22, and that, for our part, we are ready. This 
much I told Ekeus in the presence of his aides and members of 
the Iraqi delegation. I told him: You can now go to the 
Security Council and tell them I am satisfied, because you know 
and I know that you obtained all that Section C of Resolution 
687 requires. By such delays, you are saving the U.S. 
Administration. 
  I told him: You are presenting ambiguous points, gray, as 
they say. You are helping the U.S. position. He could not 
prove the contrary and defended himself, but could not prove me 
wrong. This game, however, has an end. This is because this 
game is played according to pretexts of a technical nature. 
When these pretexts become clear, people will say Iraq has a 
good point. Another important thing is what has happened, from 
January until now, including the monthly report. Other nations 
that previously did not care about the Special Commission's 
reports and took them at their face value now take an interest 
in the details of the Special Commission's work. 
  Whenever there is an report by the Special Commission or 
any statement by Ekeus that tells them that Iraq did not agree 
to so and so, and this is considered a violation of the 
cease-fire resolutions, the UN Security Council would 
immediately issue a statement saying Iraq has violated the 
cease-fire resolution. You recall the last statement that was 
issued in this month in 1993 by the Security Council regarding 
the monitoring cameras. Now the states that are interested in 
lifting the embargo imposed on Iraq are interested in the work 
of the commission. Consequently, the staff of the Special 
Commission, including its chairman, are now aware that all eyes 
are watching so they cannot fabricate many pretexts. There will 
probably be a pretext here or a pretext there, but there are 
qualified Iraqis to tackle and explain this. There are 
delegations -- the delegations which we visited, as well as the 
delegations that made visits to various capitals. We were 
sending specialists to explain to the states that are interested 
in the work of the Special Commission the minute details 
concerning what Iraq has done and the pretexts which the Special 
Commission may fabricate to prolong the process. These 
high-level experts explained things to the French, the Russians, 
the Chinese, and others. This process continued whenever we 
felt there was a need to make a technical explanation. We are 
doing that now. This time when we went to New York, no one 
raised this question, except the United States. The U.S. lies 
were disdained because this was a U.S. political position and 
U.S. propaganda. Even the British, who support the U.S. 
political position, did not raise any technical pretexts 
regarding the work of the Special Committee. The British envoy 
said the committee's reports indicate progress and that work is 
proceeding well. 
  The same goes for the IAEA. Its reports fall in that 
direction. Therefore, according to expectations, the Special 
Commission and the IAEA will undoubtedly soon go to the council 
to announce what has been achieved, and July is approaching as I 
have said. Let us consider the worst possibilities: You must 
both go to the Security Council and say this is what has been 
achieved. We completed the implementation of Section C of 
Resolution 687. Now how would the council deal with the subject? 
  Amir al-Hulw [ALIF BA' chief editor] said: There is a 
question which the ordinary man in the street in Iraq is asking 
-- and the same question was asked by the chairman of the U.S. 
Congress Foreign Relations Committee: What does the United 
States want from Iraq? The United States is now raising certain 
political issues and says that Iraq has not arrived at this 
level of response, without that level of pressure, so let us 
continue in the same way to realize certain political 
objectives, some of which you have addressed? 
  Tariq 'Aziz: Funnily enough, the chairman of the U.S. 
Congress Foreign Relations Committee asked this question to 
Assistant Secretary of State Pelletreau in a hearing and 
demanded an answer. Pelletreau promised to send a written, 
confidential answer. We heard from our sources there that the 
answer did not satisfy the Foreign Relations Committee chairman, 
not because of the answer itself, but because the answer was 
not clear. There are two sides to the U.S. position. There is 
the well-known public position. The United States has taken a 
hostile attitude toward Iraq and set certain objectives for 
Iraq. It targets it as a country, a people, and a national 
leadership, but none of these objectives has been realized. 
Yesterday, I was at a meeting with two U.S. journalists who are 
following the issue. I told them that when I met with Baker in 
Geneva he threatened me. He said we will hit you and return 
Iraq to the pre-industrial age and that another leadership will 
decide the future of Iraq. 
  I said to him: Your Excellency the minister, your country 
is very strong, and you have huge potentials and deadly weapons. 
Yes, you will cause severe damage to us, and it is clear from 
your talk that you will attack us. But Iraq is 6,000 years old, 
has experienced many difficulties, suffered much from invasions, 
and remained capable of offering sacrifices and achieving 
progress and prosperity. Therefore, your first aim of returning 
us to the pre-industrial age will not be achieved. The second 
aim, the replacement of the leadership, will also not take 
place, because the Iraqi people, the Arab nation, and the 
region's peoples hate the United States for its hostility to the 
Arab nation, its bias toward the enemies of the Arab nation, and 
its encroachment on and its exploitation of our country and our 
nation. Therefore, every one fighting the United States will be 
backed by the people. I then gave him the following example: 
You know that when Egypt lost the war with Israel in 1967, 
Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir resigned but the Egyptian masses returned 
him to center of leadership despite the clear, unjustified 
military defeat at that time. The people refused to submit to 
the logic of the Israeli enemy, which was supported by the 
United States in the 1967 aggression. 
  I said to them: Now we are in 1994. Are we really in the 
pre-industrial age? They said: No. We visited Baghdad and 
other capitals in the region. The situation in Baghdad is 
better than that of other capitals. Electric power exists 
around the clock, while it is cut off in Damascus for 12 to 14 
hours a day and while Egypt is suffering from problems in the 
services area, although these countries are not besieged. They 
also continue their trade operations. Yet, services are better 
in Baghdad. This is what they, and not Tariq 'Aziz, say. 
  So, the first aim, returning Iraq to the pre-industrial age, 
has failed, and the second aim has also failed. It is clear 
that Iraq and its leadership are still steadfast and that the 
people are rallying around their leadership because this is the 
policy the Iraqis have chosen, at least in the modern age since 
the 1920 revolution -- a national policy of dignity, strength, 
and independence. 
  The current U.S. Administration does not want to admit its 
failure, but it will admit it in the final analysis. This is 
luckily how the Americans act. They are pragmatists. The 
pragmatist refuses to admit failure for some time, but admits it 
later. 
  It is known that confusion exists in U.S. foreign policy. It 
is their circles, press, and Congress which say this, and not 
me. There is confusion in U.S. foreign policy. Therefore, 
running U.S. foreign policy is neither organized nor clear even 
to the Americans themselves. 
  They take this or that position because the matter is not 
clear to them. This kind of confusion affects U.S. positions 
toward many issues, including Iraq. As I have previously said, 
the United States has begun to discover that its isolation in 
the Security Council has become complete. A prominent 
ambassador told me that when the proposal to lift the blockade 
on Iraq is put on the table, the United States should choose, 
and will choose. Some Western circles expected the United 
States not to oppose the unanimous or the majority decision in 
the council. 
  Journalist Ahmad 'Abd-al-Majid asked the following question: 
  There is a view being circulated in our quarters that the 
Iraqi diplomacy has concentrated its efforts over the past 
period on the members of the Security Council and that it has 
somewhat delayed its moves outside this framework. In your 
assessment, what would we have gained if we had concentrated our 
efforts toward these countries instead of the members of the 
Security Council? Could we have achieved the same results we 
have achieved during this period or could we have seen progress 
in the stands or level of understanding of these countries? 
  Tariq 'Aziz: I admit that in the first phase of our 
diplomatic move, in 1991 and 1992, we focused on the Security 
Council member states. This was not a wrong option because 
ultimately the Security Council is the one which will make the 
decision. Any African country will become more important when 
it becomes a member of the Security Council. When this country 
is not a member of the Security Council it will continue to be 
important, but will not have a vote at the Security Council. 
When it takes part in the voting at the Security Council such a 
country will become more important. Therefore, diplomatic moves 
focused on the member states of the Security Council. This is 
correct. However, should we be satisfied with this? This is 
the question. Should we be satisfied with the moves toward the 
members of the Security Council? My answer is: No. For this 
reason, I told you that recently we expanded our contacts to 
cover states that are not members of the Security Council but 
which are also influential. 
  India and Malaysia were members of the Security Council, but 
now, they are not. Indonesia would become a Security Council 
member next year. So we moved toward it and the foreign 
minister paid a visit to Indonesia which declared positive 
stands on lifting the siege of Iraq. 
  As for Europe, we are contacting European countries. I 
visited two European countries: One during my departure trip 
[to New York] and the other during my return trip. Foreign 
Ministry official Wisam al-Zahawi and Dr. 'Abd-al-Amir al-Anbari 
toured Europe. They visited all of Eastern Europe. The Czech 
Republic is the only East European country which is now a member 
of the Security Council. The Iraqi representative [at the 
United Nations] visited Poland, Romania, and Hungary, in 
addition to the Czech Republic. Wisam al-Zahawi visited Greece, 
the Vatican, Germany, Austria, while Dr. al-Anbari visited 
Portugal, in addition to Spain, which is a member of the 
Security Council. 
  We are contacting these countries now. It would have been 
useful had we visited these countries in 1991 and 1992. 
However, we should pay attention to a very important thing 
which I mentioned at the beginning of the meeting. Had we sent 
10 delegations to visit all the world in 1991 and 1992 they 
would certainly would received governments' and popular 
organizations' sympathy with Iraq, its leadership, and Iraq's 
leader. But, practically these countries would have done 
nothing for us. Now that Iraq has remained steadfast, and the 
world has become aware of this a change has been noticed in the 
Security Council. This is significant. Those in Asia and 
Europe would say since there is a change in the Security Council 
there should be something new. Therefore, when an Iraqi envoy 
visits them they will show concern, listen to him, discuss 
things with him, and speak about their future interests with 
him. Thus, the visit would achieve its results. If there was 
any shortcoming in the past, this has been tackled and the 
results, which are being achieved from the contacts with these 
countries, will be useful. 
  Salah al-Mukhtar, chief editor of AL-JUMHURIYAH, asked the 
following question: If the United States insists on maintaining 
the blockade and tries to oppose the will of the majority, then 
the other nations will have to weasel out of their commitment 
regarding the blockade. Can we assume -- and this question has 
been discussed by the Turkish media -- that Turkey, on account 
of its economic crisis, will perhaps be the first nation to 
weasel out of its official commitment with regard to the 
blockade if the United States continues it in an arbitrary way? 
Another question. If we assume that the Security Council wants 
to lift the blockade soon, does this require a statement or a 
new resolution? There are two conflicting views on this issue. 
Some people say that the Council needs a new resolution to lift 
the blockade, and since there has not been a unanimous position 
on this, then the lifting of the blockade is delayed. Another 
view maintains that a statement by the Council will do. Which 
view is correct, a statement or a resolution as a prelude to 
lifting the blockade? I also have a query about a report 
published by the local press. The report says that a former 
member of the U.S. Congress, who visited Iraq last month, said 
that a conference for businessmen will be held in Washington in 
May to discuss lifting the blockade and its effects on U.S. 
firms and interests. He said the Iraqi trade and oil ministers 
are invited. Is this true? 
  Tariq 'Aziz: Regarding the second issue, whether a statement 
or a resolution is needed, it is my personal view that 
implementing Paragraph 22 requires a resolution because it is 
part of a resolution and therefore its implementation requires a 
resolution. Technically speaking, issuing a statement by the 
Security Council is more difficult than issuing a resolution, 
despite the fact that a statement does not have the power of a 
resolution. According to the Security Council tradition, a 
statement should get the approval of the five permanent Security 
Council member states who have the veto right. If any of them 
insists on opposing the statement, then the president of the 
Security Council will be embarrassed to issue the statement and 
the statement he makes will not have the strength of a Security 
Council statement. A resolution, however, can be issued by a 
majority of nine members, provided it is not opposed or vetoed 
by a permanent member. So technically speaking, issuing a 
resolution is easier than issuing a statement. 
  As for Turkey and the others, the Turks have been saying 
that 
the blockade has greatly harmed Turkey on the financial, 
economic, security, and social levels. These statements are 
issued by senior Turkish officials. When the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry under secretary visited Baghdad, and before that in our 
contacts with the Turkish side, we told them: Why don't you 
cite Article 50 of the UN Charter, which says something like: 
When the Security Council adopts a resolution imposing an 
embargo against a certain country, then the country that is 
harmed by this embargo may go to the Council and ask for its 
problem to be solved. The Council could compensate it, one way 
or another, and it can discuss the way to remedy this situation 
with the Council. Of course, the Council does not have enough 
money to give compensations. The party that used to pay the 
compensations is known to the countries that took part in the 
aggression and the blockade against Iraq. However, this well is 
running dry because the United States is using too much of it 
and the well is not the way it was before. Money is no longer 
being paid. The Security Council does not have enough money to 
give to anybody. Turkey can go to the Security Council and say: 
Based on Article 50 we want to deal with Iraq and the Iraqis do 
not mind in principle. But they would not allow Turkey to do 
this. There is great pressure on Turkey and it is not allowed 
to go to the Council at present. 
  I personally have no information about the third news 
report. 
This might have happened. If such a meeting takes place and if 
Iraqi officials are invited to it, I would recommend 
participating in it although the U.S. side is tense and does not 
want to see an Iraqi. They deported the head of the Iraqi 
interests section without any legal or diplomatic justification 
because they are upset by any Iraqi presence in Washington, 
though very limited. They do not want to see an Iraqi. We go 
there for a week and meet with media men and television 
correspondents. In my opinion, this provides an opportunity for 
an Iraqi minister to explain the situation to the U.S. 
businessmen. Some U.S. businessmen used to deal with Iraq 
normally. We bought from them merchandise and agricultural 
crops such as grain, meat, and many other civilian products. 
They have all lost the Iraqi market. They are talking in U.S. 
circles about their losses and how long this situation will 
continue. 

