Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Greg Torode] </F>
  [Text] A senior United Nations shipping safety official 
expressed shock yesterday at reports of piracy attacks by 
Chinese officials but revealed that Beijing believed actions 
outside territorial waters were "just and lawful." Admiral 
Thimio Mitropoulos, of the United Nation's International 
Maritime Organisation (IMO), said: "If the (Hong Kong 
Government) reports are right, as a human being I would be 
shocked." 
  Before leaving Hong Kong to continue his East Asian piracy 
fact-finding mission, Admiral Mitropoulos outlined China's 
strongest statement on the issue, received during talks in 
Beijing with Foreign Ministry and Customs officials this week. 
To eradicate a smuggling boom as China opened up Admiral 
Mitropoulos said, China wanted to get the message across that it 
had taken "appropriate measures involving the detention of local 
and foreign ships within China's territorial seas and adjacent 
contiguous seas. China attaches great importance to the 
maintenance of law and order and will take strong measures to 
suppress piracy and lawlessness. China does not accept the 
lawful execution of law enforcement by competent Chinese 
authorities is unlawful," he said, in a statement which local 
government and shipping industry officials believe could justify 
fears that China is claiming the South China Sea as its own. 
  Admiral Mitropoulos, director of the IMO's maritime safety 
committee, said he could not get answers from China as to 
exactly what territory could be classed as "contiguous" and said 
they had admitted to taking action in areas "adjacent to 
contiguous seas". 
  He said China strongly denied any involvement by its navy. 
Many of the 100 distress reports handed over unabridged to the 
IMO by the Government this week involved attacks hundreds of 
kilometres from Chinese territory, some mentioning the navy. 
  While saying China's version of its actions could well be 
legal under international law, he said he was heartened by 
yesterday's reports that China was setting new guidelines for 
wayward forces. He said he had not heard of that while in 
Beijing but said he welcomed anything that would make the South 
China Sea safer, adding: "I feel that if there has been a crime 
committed then the perpetrators should be brought to justice." 
  The Deputy Secretary for Security, Jim Morris, said last 
night the statement from China issued by the admiral was a 
"clear advance. At least it's an acknowledgement that their 
ships are involved... I think that's a clear advance in itself. 
They've previously been reluctant to do that. That's got to be 
good." 
  When asked if he was concerned that it could mean the whole 
South China Sea, he said: "It's not for us to be expressing 
concern. Why should I express concern on behalf of another flag 
state." 

