BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, May 10 (CTK) -- The Egyutteles 
[Coexistence] movement has proposed the creation of a union to 
Slovakia's other three ethnic Hungarian parties, Egyutteles 
Chairman Miklos Duray said at a press conference today. The 
movement wants, along with its present coalition partner, the 
Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement (MKDH), and the 
non-parliament Hungarian Civic Party (MOS) and the Hungarian 
People's Party (MLS), to create a grouping legally bound to 
cooperate even after the autumn elections. 
  The advantage of a union rather than a coalition would be 
that the threshold needed to enter parliament would drop to five 
percent from the seven which would be needed by the coalition, 
Duray stated. 
  Under the election law, at least five percent of votes are 
required from a party to gain parliamentary seats, but seven 
percent for a coalition. Polls show that the MKDH-Egyutteles 
coalition enjoys support of seven to nine percent of voters, 
while the MOS has not a single percent of followers. 
  "We are now negotiating with the MKDH on the creation of the 
coalition. However, if all four partners agree to create a 
union, we will enter parliament as a single entity and form one 
group of deputies," Duray said, reacting to a question whether 
or not Egyutteles's new plans actually meant the rejection of an 
original idea of a trilateral coalition between the Egyutteles, 
the MKDH, and the MOS. 
  Observers say that Duray does not intend to enable MOS 
representatives to enter parliament thanks to their coalition 
with the Egyutteles and the MKDH without guarantees that the MOS 
will not later withdraw from the coalition to create its own 
group of deputies. 
  "The birth of the union would not mean the abolition of the 
legal status of the four partners," Duray insisted, in 
connection with the question of the different orientation of the 
ethnic Hungarian parties. He said the union, which would have 
its own statutes and political strategy, could serve more 
purposes than a coalition. The union would have its own name 
too, Duray said. However, this question would be solved only 
after an agreement concluded, he added. 
  The Egyutteles now has 9 seats and the MKDH 5 seats in the 
150- seat Slovak Parliament. About 560,000 ethnic Hungarians 
live in Slovakia, 11 percent of the country's population. 

