Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Brana Filipovic and Radovan Radovanovic] </F>
  [Text] Federal Prime Minister Radoje Kontic is currently 
visiting the Timok region. Addressing the leadership of the 
municipality and the Bor mining and smelting works, the federal 
prime minister for the first time fully outlined the economic 
policy for 1994. The government measures will not deviate from 
Avramovic's program but will actually extend further. Federal 
Prime Minister Kontic also announced general economic reforms. 
The federal prime minister was accompanied by [Ministers] 
Nikola Sainovic and Tomislav Raicevic. Brana Filipovic and 
Radovan Radovanovic report: 
  Briefing the Yugoslav prime minister on the development work 
so far and the plans until 2005, Miroslav Cvetanovic, director 
general of the Bor copper combine, stressed that despite the 
sanctions, the Bor and Serbian giant has managed to keep up 
production in the past two years, utilize 70-80 percent of its 
capacities, and develop the Cerevo copper mine. The combine 
invested $40 million of its own money in the mine. 
  Speaking about the development program, Cvetanovic said that 
the combine plans to increase its production by one-third by 
2005, install a new transportation system on the mine's site, 
and secure $120 million for a new and extremely modern smelting 
plant. In a fairly long speech, Radoje Kontic said that the 
first stage of stabilizing the national currency has been 
successfully completed. 
  [Begin Kontic recording] The second stage of implementing 
the stabilization program, which is just starting, consists of a 
gradual revival of the total economic activity. Under the total 
economic activity, I mean the revival of current production and, 
of course, after that, increase in investment activities. 
  While preparing the economic policy for 1994, the federal 
government in fact accepted as its basis the concept and tenets 
contained in the program for reconstructing the monetary system 
and the strategy of the economic recovery of Yugoslavia, which 
was drafted by a group of experts led by Dr. Avramovic. 
However, in doing so, the federal government also borne in mind 
the analyses and assessments of the relevant federal ministries 
on the current economic and social situation in the country, the 
stands of the Economic Council of the federal government on the 
concept of the economic policy for 1994, as well as the views 
expressed in the program for macro-economic stabilization 
prepared by the (?CESMECON) Center for Economic Studies under 
the leadership of Professor Oskar Kovac. 
  The level of liberalization of our macroeconomic policies in 
1994 is certainly not below the average level of this 
liberalization in the so-called developed market economies. One 
of the particularly important tenets of the economic policy for 
1994 is the free but loyal competition of goods, services, 
knowledge, ideas, work force, and so forth. Those making 
business decisions will bear the risk and be completely 
responsible for business failures and losses. 
  In my view, it would be realistic to expect a further fall 
in 
prices in the period ahead. The direct consequence of slashing 
hyperinflation is the stabilization of the exchange rate of both 
the new and old dinar, their consolidation at a certain level, 
although I must say that some attempts have been made to 
destabilize the dinar through various speculative activities, 
the gray economy, and the evasion of obligations to society, 
through the so-called interest rate premiums [sticung], and so 
forth. 
  However, the additional measures of the economic policy, I 
would say, have successfully countered all these attempts, at 
least in the past two months, and the exchange rate of both the 
old and the new dinars has remained the same in the past two 
months. [end recording] 
  Radoje Kontic also said that the reasons for the poor 
economic results in the past should not only be sought in the 
monetary policy but also in the structural problems of the 
economy. In connection with this, he announced new systemic 
solutions and a new economic ambience. Radoje Kontic and his 
aides will visit the Majdanpek copper mine and Majdanpek gold 
works this afternoon. 

