BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Stavros Liyeros] </F>
  [Text] Even the fever of the last days before the European 
elections was not capable of changing the plans for the 
government reshuffle that is expected in early July. Prime 
Minister Andreas Papandreou intends to stay in Corfu for a few 
day after the end of the European Union [EU] summit to make his 
final decisions about the new cabinet away from intense pressure 
from those who want a promotion, those who merely want to stay, 
and of course those who will do anything to get a portfolio. 
  Despite his initial intention to make broad changes, 
Papandreou has made up his mind to enact what he calls a 
selective reshuffle. Although it is understood that this will 
be finalized in the next two days, the issue has concerned the 
prime minister for a long time as he has been considering some 
alternatives. According to existing information from all 
available sources, the plans that are being formulated--at least 
for now--for each ministry are as follows: 

  -  The plan that 
Defense Minister Yerasimos Arsenis and Foreign Minister Karolos 
Papoulias will "exchange" their portfolios does not seem very 
probable, although it has not been ruled out because the prime 
minister came up with the idea when he was forming the current 
cabinet. Papoulias wants to remain at the Foreign Ministry and 
will possibly succeed, since Arsenis appears to prefer the 
Defense Ministry, at least during this sensitive period in 
interparty balance. 
  -  It is considered definite that Alternate 
Foreign Minister Theodhoros Pangalos will abandon his current 
position. In his recent meeting with the prime minister, the 
two men "agreed" that a moratorium is necessary, something that 
will possibly mean that Pangalos will receive another 
ministerial portfolio. Government spokesman Evangelos Venizelos 
would like this portfolio. Deputy Foreign Minister Yeoryios 
Papandreou could be appointed to the position, as he has also 
expressed interest in the position of EU commissioner. 
  -  If 
Minister to the Prime Minister Anastasios Peponis is transferred 
from his position, Venizelos will pursue the position because he 
would like to move from being a deputy minister to a ministerial 
position. The Thessaloniki deputy believes that he has done 
everything he could in his current position, especially 
regarding promotion. The possibility of being transferred are 
few because Papandreou has no immediate alternate solution and 
he is not concerned that his deputy might be politically 
damaged. 
  -  The big question is who will fill the gap at the 
Interior Ministry? Because Interior Minister Akis 
Tsokhatzopoulos is being forced to abandon his portfolio, he 
will try to have his close associate Deputy Interior Minister 
Yeoryios Dhaskalakis become his successor. However, the prime 
minister opposes this solution. Aegean Minister Konstandinos 
Skandhalidhis wants to be transferred to it, but after the 
reaction of the PASOK secretary general and other senior party 
members, he has halted his candidacy. Of course, this does not 
mean that Papandreou will not choose him. Another solution would 
be to transfer Finance Minister Alexandros Papadhopoulos because 
he is knowledgeable on Interior Ministry issues. 

  The problem is that the prime minister considers him 
essential to the Finance Ministry during this critical period. 
The possibility that Peponis will take over the controversial 
ministry is strong. Rokofillos also wants to take over the 
ministry and is pressing Papandreou to give him a portfolio. 
The advantage of the three men mentioned is that they cannot 
exploit this portfolio for personal gains, something that makes 
them acceptable. This is why it appears that there is no 
possibility that Venizelos will be given the 
position. 

  -  National Economy Minister Ioannis Papandoniou and 
Alternate National Economy Minister Yeoryios Romeos appear to be 
secure in their positions. The prime minister believes that 
Papandoniou, who was recently promoted, must be given more time. 
Anomeritis may be appointed in a deputy minister position at 
the Finance or National Economy Ministries. 
  -  Industry and 
Commerce Minister Konstandinos Simitis would want to keep both 
of his portfolios if he is not transferred to the Education 
Ministry. If he is, Pangalos would most likely take over the 
Industry Ministry and Vaso Papandreou would take over the 
Ministry of Commerce. Deputy Commerce Minister Alexandros 
Paltas will possibly be removed. 
  -  There is contradictory 
information on whether Agriculture Minister Yeoryios Moraitis 
and Deputy Agriculture Minister Floros Konstandinou will stay in 
their positions. One of them will possibly be removed while 
there is a serious possibility that Larissa deputy Adhamopoulos 
will take over as deputy agriculture minister in charge of 
forests. It is not likely that Pottakis will be given a 
portfolio, but he cannot be ruled out. There is also the 
possibility that the ministry will be given to 
Pangalos. 
  -  Everything indicates that Labor Minister Evangelos 
Yiannopoulos will be removed from the government. The prime 
minister was very troubled about making this decision. However, 
the possibility that he will be dismissed even before the 
reshuffling cannot be ruled out. The candidates to fill this 
gap are Vaso Papandreou and Tzoumakas. Deputy Labor Minister 
Andonios Kotsakas, a member of the Executive Bureau, will remain 
in the government. 
  -  Environment Minister Konstandinos Laliotis 
will remain in his position but the possibility of dividing the 
ministry to create a Public Works Ministry is being considered. 
Deputy Public Order Minister Konstandinos Yitonas will take 
over the new ministry. If the Environment Ministry is not 
divided, the current deputy public order minister will take over 
the position of Alternate Environment Minister Ioannis 
Souladhakis, who will certainly be replaced. Deputy Environment 
Minister Elisavet Papazoi will remain in her position or will be 
used in the new cabinet. 
  -  In the likely event that Transport 
Minister Ioannis Kharalambous is removed, the ministry may be 
given to Pangalos or Deputy Transport Minister Athanasios 
Tsouras, who is primarily pursuing the PASOK candidacy for 
Athens mayor in the next municipal elections to be held in 
October 1994. 
  -  Health Minister Dhimitrios Kremastinos will keep 
his ministry while Farmakis' appointment as deputy health 
minister is being discussed. Although the thought of upgrading 
the Social Security Department to a separate ministry has lost 
ground, it has not been completely abandoned. At one time the 
prime minister considered appointing Dhimitrios Tsovolas to head 
the new ministry, but the climate has changed now. 
  -  Education 
Minister Dhimitrios Fatouros will be removed from his position 
while Deputy Education Minister Eleni Stefanou will remain in 
her position. Tsatsos supports Stefanou. Simitis and Pangalos 
are being considered for the ministerial position. 
  -  It does not 
seem that Culture Minister Athanasios Mikroutsikos will be 
replaced at the Culture Ministry, but it is likely that a deputy 
minister will be appointed. According to unconfirmed 
information, Sifounakis' is being considered for this 
position. 
  -  Justice Minister Yeoryios Kouvelakis will most 
certainly remain in his position because he is considered 
irreplaceable at the Justice Ministry. He has received praise 
in that position. 
  -  The fact that some government circles managed 
to make the issue of nightclub operating hours a major political 
issue created the possibility for the removal of Public Order 
Minister Stilianos Papathemelis, even though he is considered 
successful. Bandouvas will possibly replace 
him. 
  -  Macedonia-Thraki Minister Konstandinos Triaridhis is not in 
danger of losing his position, even though some people want to 
see others in this ministry. Papandreou regards him favorably 
and has the support of the always strong Deputy Minister to the 
Prime Minister Andonios Livanis. 
  -  Aegean Minister Konstandinos 
Skandhalidhis will keep his portfolio if he is not selected for 
the Interior Ministry. 


