Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Mark Huband report: "Behind the Religious Mask of Power"] </F>
  [Text] "There is no such thing as an Islamic state", 
'Abd-al-Aziz Shiddu, Sudan's minister of justice, said, sucking 
on an elaborate pipe in the chill of his air-conditioned office. 
Black and white photographs of his bespectacled predecessors, 
mounted in a long line high on the wall, formed a visual record 
of Sudan's many ministers of justice. 
  "We are a people looking for an identity, and I believe 
religious values are a way of looking for that identity. The 
international community should realise we are living in a 
conflict. We do not deny that in such a state of armed 
conflict, there would be violations of human rights. This has 
been the case throughout the armed conflict since it began in 
1955," he said. 
  Governments in Khartoum were fighting the southern 
secessionists of the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) 
before Lieutenant-General 'Umar Hasan al-Bashir seized power in 
a bloodless coup in 1989 and carried on the war. But Sudan's 
conflicts are widening beyond its borders. 
  While the government disagreed with Iraq's 1990 invasion of 
Kuwait, it supported Saddam Husayn when Operation Desert Storm 
was launched against him. This has strained Sudan's relations 
with Muslim countries allied to the United States -- notably 
Egypt, which also accuses Khartoum of supporting armed Islamic 
groups intent on destabilising the government of President Husni 
Mubarak. 
  In August the U.S. listed Sudan as a state supporting 
international terrorism, partly on the basis of its alleged role 
in Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, and partly because of a suspected 
Sudanese bomb plot discovered by the FBI in New York. With the 
recent expulsion of Britain's ambassador, Khartoum has further 
closed the door to the West. 
  Africa's largest country has added international isolation 
to 
the ills of hunger, fear, oppression, the displacement of 5 
million people, and a war that has killed 1 million people and 
costs the government $1 million (680,000 pounds) a day to fight. 
  "We told the Sudanese that if they weren't careful they 
would 
be placed on the list," the U.S. ambassador in Khartoum, Donald 
Petterson, said. "They didn't heed that. They denied any link 
with terrorism, but the evidence we had from various sources was 
convincing." 
  Mr Petterson, perched on an old rocking chair in his 
topfloor 
office, has ample time to ponder Washington's declining 
influence over Khartoum. "I don't think the telephone is going 
to ring today," he said, looking at the silent instrument on his 
desk. 
  Unless you know the secret code to open the embassy lift 
door 
on his floor, the lift automatically returns to deposit you on 
the ground floor, where a 15ft fence encircles the building. 
  "With our relations so bad we don't have any influence on 
them. I don't think any Western country here feels they have 
influence," he said. 
  Ministers such as Mr Shiddu try to explain Sudan's crisis as 
a product of the war -- a 10-year conflict which has its roots 
in racial, religious and colonial differences between north and 
south. 
  Mr Shiddu admits it cannot be solved by the al-Bashir 
government, which came to power with promises of peace, 
development and security though not a word about Islamic law. 
Candour is the most disarming weapon used by the soft-spoken 
"radicals" who occupy government positions. 
  Superficially at least, the al-Bashir regime appears at odds 
with Islamic fundamentalist stereotypes. Despite the public 
rhetoric, there is laxity in the enforcement of strict Islamic 
codes. 
  "My husband wears more clothes than I do," Sumayya 
Abu-Kashawa, the secretary-general of the Sudanese Women's 
General Union, said. 
  "He is more covered than I am. But outsiders choose only to 
look at the females when assessing what Islam means while in 
fact here women drive cars and trucks and carry Kalashnikovs." 
  In 10 days in Khartoum, I saw only three women concealed 
behind full chador dress. The Islamic legal code was introduced 
in 1991, but according to Mr Shiddu, there have been no 
executions for hodoun crimes under sharia law. 
  "An Islamic punishment is purification, for people who want 
to be purified. This is something the West cannot understand... 
that a Muslim accepts to be purified, and a stoning or lashing 
is purification. What is cruel and unusual in Western 
civilisation is a dictate in the Muslim world," Mr Shiddu said. 
  "We are trying to do justice within the context of a social 
structure, which needs some understanding by the Western world." 
  Foreigners, meanwhile, are largely left to their own 
devices. 
"Foreigners here have a little man -- usually an Eritrean, it 
seems, who comes round the back door with something called 
whisky, in bottles which resemble those of Johnny Walker. It's 
not bad stuff really," one diplomat said. 
  "Even if we had the resources, we wouldn't harass people," 
said Baha' al-Din Hanafi. He is director of President Bashir's 
political department and the mainstay of Sudan's links with 
Iran, which has a large and secretive diplomatic mission in 
Khartoum. 
  "And even if the war in the south ended, I don't think we 
would reach the utopian goal of everybody abiding by the Islamic 
dress code. Instead we leave it up to society to abide by this 
dress code. 
  "The state will use the media and the mosques to encourage 
people and push them generally in that direction. 
  "But democracy is a relativism. We believe in an absolutism 
in some areas, because we are religious people. Sudan is not 
exactly paradise, but it's getting better," Mr Hanafi said. 
  In another of those bursts of candour he acknowledged that 
the government holds at least 200 political prisoners. But he 
denied the existence of "ghost houses", urban, high-walled 
villas where political prisoners are kept for months without 
trial or outside contact. 
  Paul Qaddum might disagree that things are getting better. 
He stood at the roadside, a jerry can and a long hosepipe at 
his feet, one of hundreds of petrol black-marketeers in 
Khartoum. His T-shirt proclaimed: "Success hasn't spoilt me." 
Eight years ago he was a farmer in the south, then the civil 
war came to his village. 
  Mr Qadoom gets up at 3am every day to travel 35 miles to the 
capital from the refugee camp where he lives. 
  "I buy petrol at 1,600 Sudanese pounds (3.50 pounds) a 
gallon 
and sell it at 1,750 (3.80 pounds). I make about 1,000 (2.20 
pounds) a day, which is enough to eat in the evening," he said. 
  "It's only a bowl of sorghum, or maybe a fish from the 
river. 
It's not enough for clothes or anything else, but at least I 
have a job." 
  The petrol shortage came because the government's radical 
Middle Eastern friends -- Iran and Libya -- decided in October 
they could no longer afford oil subsidies to Sudan. 
  Petrol is rationed at two gallons per driver per week. Buses 
are scarce and fares have soared. Civil service salaries are 
frozen, despite 200 per cent inflation. Sudan is no longer 
eligible for financial assistance from the world's main donors 
having defaulted on its repayments. 
  The weakness and failure of the government -- to stem the 
economic decline, find a solution to the war, or win over the 
majority of Muslims -- have left the way open for abuses of 
power. Life under the regime is increasingly entangled in a maze 
of deceit and self-delusion. 
  "In Islam, man is created by the hand of God. So man is a 
very important creature. So he must be respected," 'Ali 
al-Nasri, the chairman of the official Sudan Human Rights 
Organisation (SHRO), said. "The human being is of a sacred 
nature. So how can we say that human rights are abused in 
Islam. Not at all. In Islam, if a man kills he must be killed." 
  Mr al-Nasri, a London-trained lawyer and vice-president of 
the Sudan Bar Association, said the SHRO had received no 
complaints against the Sudanese army after investigations into 
alleged massacres of civilians in June and July 1992, during 
battles at the southern town of Juba between government troops 
and the rebel SPLA [Sudanese People's Liberation Army]. 
  A United Nations report on the incidents expressed grave 
disquiet. Mr al-Nasri responded: "The difference between us and 
the people in the West is that we are looking for the truth. 
Really, Sudan is very peaceful. The people in the West are 
working against the Sudan and they are trying to strangle the 
Sudan. That is what is happening." 
  Without the claim to be championing Islam, the government, 
burdened by its economic, social and human rights record, would 
have little else to offer. 
  That is not, though, the view of General al-Bashir. "Our 
guiding principles are constant and have nothing to do with the 
conflict in southern Sudan or the economic situation," he said 
in an interview. "On the contrary, we believe that these guiding 
principles address many of the grievances that have led to the 
conflict." 
  "When you try applying Islamic ideas, it could be that there 
are points of convergence between Islamic thinkers, and 
differences as well. You find different points of view, to the 
extreme right and the extreme left. Our way is mediation." 
  In Sudan's last multi-party elections, in April 1986, the 
National Islamic Front (NIF), led by Hasan al-Turabi, won less 
than a quarter of the vote. Mr al-Turabi has steered the 
policies of the government from behind the scenes since it took 
power in 1989. 
  Even within the conservative Muslim Brotherhood--which has 
been split since 1991 in Sudan -- there are doubts about the 
government's course. 
  "The majority of people in the Sudan are Muslims. So we 
don't need to impose Islamic laws on people. This can be 
achieved through negotiation and dialogue," Hibr Yusuf Nur 
al-Dayim, the leader of the Brotherhood in Khartoum, said. 
  "The Brotherhood believes Muslim leaders should participate 
in government. But to try to be the sole figure in Sudan is 
unwise, because there are so many different parties in Sudan." 
  Neither are religious figures necessarily at one with the 
government's supposed religious foundations. "Before you apply 
sharia you must create good conditions for the people to live 
in. Only if people then stray, when they have no justification 
for criminality, can you apply the rules of sharia," Shaykh 
Muhammad Hashim al-Hadir, the leader of the pro-Saudi Sunni 
Society, said. 
  "All this government has, to claim it's Muslim, is that it 
prays," another religious leader said. 
  The differences acknowledged by Gen al-Bashir are 
incorporated within his illusion of moderation. Dr al-Dayim of 
the Muslim Brotherhood experiences the reality: he has been 
unable to travel abroad without first being hauled off the plane 
at Khartoum airport and told to wait for a week while his visa 
is rechecked before eventually being allowed to go. 
  The same harassment is routine for the Catholic Archbishop 
of 
Khartoum, Gabriel Zubayr. 
  Dr al-Turabi, the man seen in both the west and Sudan as the 
power behind the government describes the country's pre-1989 
political parties as "jealous" of his success in luring people 
away from old political loyalties. 
  "Whenever there's a new wave of history, like the Islamic 
revival, there are always attempts to suppress it. Sudan, as it 
grows, is an Islamic model, and richer Muslim countries are 
growing a little bit jealous of it," Dr al-Turabi said. 
  "Our most serious problem in Sudan since independence has 
been the search for stable government. At one point we had a 
formal democracy ruled by tribal families. Then a military 
dictatorship. Because there is now a religious spirit, the 
military can't rule the government," he said. 
  The regime's Islamic veneer receives the same condemnation 
from opposition politicians as from religious leaders. 
  Sid Ahmad al-Husayn, the local leader of one of the main 
opposition parties, the Democratic Unionist Party, has been in 
"ghost house" detention in a converted Khartoum branch of 
Citibank for the past five weeks. 
  But Sadiq al-Mahdi, leader of the other main opposition 
party, al-Ummah, who was prime minister during the 1986-89 
multi-party era, is able to speak from the elegant villa in 
Omdurman where he has lived since his overthrow by Gen al-Bashir 
in June 1989. 
  "The main political parties were committed to Islamisation, 
but the Islamic programme had to be non-partisan and before it 
was implemented there had to be a bill of rights clearly 
defining the rights of non-Muslims," said Mr al-Mahdi, who lives 
under constant army and police surveillance. His sister is 
married to the NIF leader, Dr al-Turabi. 
  "The NIF, with its military allies, has really put aside all 
those principles... According to the Koran, there's no way of 
establishing Islamic authority by a coup d'etat, because 
anything that is based on compulsion is null and void. 
  "Only the implementation of the instruments of power in a 
very callous way has sustained the government in power, just 
like many other dictators. And because they have so isolated 
themselves from other political forces within the country, fear 
of reprisals from within is what keeps them together." 
  Mr al-Mahdi's accusations continue: "The country's welfare 
state has been withdrawn, and the savings have gone to security. 
The free market policy has so lost the confidence of the 
business community that $70 billion (47 billion pounds) of 
personal wealth is now outside the country. 
  "For the flrst time in Sudan's history, there is substantial 
southern support calling for self-determination, which marks a 
big political failure for the government." 
  Against this, Muhammad al-Amin Khalifah, a former army 
colonel who is now the influential speaker of the 
government-appointed transitional national assembly (TNA), 
argues: "Anybody is free to give us his ideas. If they are 
wrong we will reject them." 
  In Sudan, said Mr Khalifah -- who strongly endorsed the 
British ambassador's expulslon: "There are no assassinations. 
The people are very tolerant. You can feel free. We have no 
killing like in Algeria or Egypt." 
  This year, the TNA will become elected. Candidates will be 
vetted by an election commission. Officially, there will be no 
political parties, all having been banned since 1989. 
  "There's no political stability in a multi-party system," Mr 
Khalifah said. 
  But if any average Sudanese believed political salvation 
might lie in an Islamic option, material conditions must be 
eradicating that hope. 
  "Ordinary people no longer believe the NIF government is 
going to solve their problems," a former minister said. "They 
don't believe this is what Islam means. They know the NIF is a 
very efficient machine of oppression." 
  The government's determination to conceal from its own 
people 
who is really in charge confirms this sceptical view -- 
particularly its effort to avoid any suggestion that Dr 
al-Turabi has more than an indirect influence. 
  President al-Bashir said: "In Sudan, there is freedom of 
creativity, and everything is open to debate. There is not an 
Islamic establishment, and al-Turabi doesn't represent an 
Islamic establishment, nor are his religious views binding on 
people." 
  The president also denies the accusations of Sudanese 
support 
for armed Islamic groups elsewhere. "We don't meddle in the 
internal affairs of other Muslim countries, because we don't 
want others meddling in our affairs." 
  But he added: "I do believe there's a revival in all the 
Islamic world. There's a renaissance of Islam, and these 
countries are retarding this. We believe eventually that our 
view will be triumphant." 

