BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Wang Qun, secretary of the Inner Mongolia </F>
Autonomous Regional CPC Committee, delivered at the eighth 
enlarged plenary session of the fifth regional CPC Committee on 
22 December: "Extend the Degree of Reform, Accelerate Economic 
Development, and Strive To Open Up a New Situation in 
Establishing the Socialist Market Economy System"] 
  [Text] Comrades: 
  The forthcoming 1994 will be a crucial year for 
comprehensive 
implementation of the decision of the third plenary session of 
the 14th party Central committee. The state has quickened the 
steps of reform, and a series of important reform measures are 
being put into practice one after another. Faced with the 
establishment of the socialist market economy system, a 
historical profound change, we should clearly estimate the 
situation and seize the opportunity to catch up with the 
country's reform steps so that we can gain the initiative in 
development. For this reason, a success in next year's work is 
very important to us. The tasks for this (enlarged) plenary 
session are, with the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the 
guidelines of the 14th part congress, to implement the 
guidelines of the decision of the third plenary session of the 
14th party congress, to put forward the region's tasks and ideas 
for accelerating reform and development and safeguarding unity 
and stability in line with the objective of establishing the 
socialist market economy system, and to mobilize all the 
Communist Party members and the cadres and masses of various 
nationalities in the region to work hard in unity, concentrate 
their minds and efforts on accelerating reform and development, 
usher in the crucial year with a mental attitude characterized 
by emancipated mind and courage to blaze new trails and 
experiment, create a new situation, and facilitate a sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development in the economy of our region. 
  On behalf of the standing committee of the autonomous 
regional party committee, I will now give a work report for your 
discussions. 
<H5>  1. A Brief Summary of the 1993 Work </H5>
  Based on the guidelines of the important speeches given by 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping during his south China inspection in early 
1992 and the guidelines of the 14th party congress, the sixth 
(enlarged) plenary session of the fifth autonomous regional 
party committee put forward the targets and strategic priorities 
for the two stages of the region's economic development in the 
coming eight years. In 1993, party organizations at all levels 
in the region conscientiously implemented the guidelines of the 
sixth (enlarged) plenary session of the fifth regional party 
committee, kept the party's basic theory and basic line in mind 
when drawing up overall plans, and, seizing the theme of reform, 
opening up, and development, promoted the work in all fields 
according to established priorities. Over the past year, the 
concept of the socialist market economy has been accepted by 
more and more people, and leaders at all levels, in particular, 
have greatly enhanced their understanding of the socialist 
market economy; reform in various fields aimed at establishing 
the socialist market economy system has made new headway; the 
economic structure has been improved further under market 
guidance and macroeconomic regulation and control; and urban and 
rural social productive forces have been further liberated and 
developed in the process of reform and opening up. 
  A. New progress was achieved in the reform in rural and 
pastoral areas, and bumper harvests were won in agriculture and 
animal husbandry despite disasters. The region continued to 
achieve fairly good results in agricultural and animal husbandry 
production in 1993 despite such serious natural disasters as 
spring drought and autumn floods. The agricultural output value 
was expected at 19.5 billion yuan, which was a 6-percent 
increase over the preceding year, higher than the national 
average growth of 4 percent. Grain output was a record height 
of 11.08 billion kg, up 610 million kg from the preceding year. 
The number of animals in the animal husbandry fiscal year 
totaled 55.78 million head, and the rate the animals slaughtered 
was expected at 38 percent, both a record height. The bumper 
harvests in agriculture and animal husbandry despite the 
disasters represented an overall test of the region's rural and 
pastoral work. They are the test of reform achievements and 
also construction level and scientific and technological 
progress; a test of the achievements in material civilization 
and also the achievements in party building and the spiritual 
civilization; and a test of the foundation for past work and 
also new progress in this year's work. 
  This fact once again proved incontrovertibly that the 
guiding ideology which we defined and the series of principles, 
policies, and measures which we adopted during recent years for 
consolidating the agricultural and animal husbandry basis are 
absolutely correct, and that fruitful results were achieved. 
Our region's production level in the rural and pastoral areas 
have jumped to a new stage as compared with previous years. 
This leap forward has greatly encouraged us to advance 
continuously with confidence, and laid a fairly good foundation 
for realizing the objectives of carrying out "high-yield, 
fine-quality, and highly efficient farming" and becoming fairly 
well-off. 
  B. Industrial and commercial enterprises continued to deepen 
reform, and economic efficiency improved. The autonomous region 
achieved noticeable results in implementing reform measures, 
such as delegation of power and signing contracts, in Batou Iron 
and Steel Company and other state-owned large enterprises, and 
succeeded in promoting reform of internal mechanism and 
self-development of these enterprises. The organization of a 
group of enterprise groups helped to readjust the enterprise 
organization structure. After the convocation of enterprise 
reform work conference in July, we gradually popularized the 
pilot reform experience of state-owned medium-sized and small 
enterprises to the entire region. We succeeded in exploring some 
new ways to solve the difficulties and problems of enterprises. 
Reform experiments on improving the property right relations 
was initiated, and a number of state-owned small enterprises 
transformed themselves by implementing the shareholding 
cooperative system, or by renting and selling their property. 
The industrial economic efficiency improved. During the 
previous three quarters, the sales rate of industrial products 
throughout the region reached 94.4 percent; the profit-tax rate 
of funds of industrial enterprises implementing independent 
accounting system reached 7.2 percent; the deficit range of 
industrial enterprises dropped by nearly two percentage point 
from last year; and the number of enterprises running in the red 
reduced by 148. Multilayered commodity markets developed 
rapidly, and all sorts of markets of essential production 
factors began to emerge. New progress was made in the 
supporting reform of all sectors; marcoeconomic regulation and 
control was further strengthened; financial order improved 
noticeably; and the macroeconomic environment improved. 
  C. New strides were made in introducing technology and 
investment and developing internal cooperation. We turned the 
guiding ideology of "using opening up to bring along the overall 
situation" into actual action. All localities successively 
issued new policies and measures on expanding opening up, 
introducing technology and investment from outside, and 
developing internal cooperation; and foreign trade and economic 
and technological cooperation were invigorated increasingly. 
All localities across the region had established trade and 
economic and technological cooperation relations with more than 
70 countries and regions. It is expected that the total volume 
of annual imports and exports may exceed $1.2 billion, up 28 
percent over last year; we newly increased 376 new items on use 
of foreign capital, and the contracts involved $403 million; and 
we approved 372 three types of foreign-funded enterprises, 
exceeding the total number of enterprises of this category of 
the past years. Many localities and enterprises gained new 
vitality through opening up, introduction, and cooperation. Our 
region's opening up is being developed from trade contacts to 
economic and technological cooperation, and the achievements in 
introduction and cooperation are becoming a new growing point of 
our region's economic development. 
  D. The pace in building basic industries, including energy, 
communications, telecommunications, and raw materials, and 
infrastructure facilities was accelerated. Smooth progress was 
made in building a batch of key projects of energy and raw 
materials industries, and remarkable results were made in 
building some key infrastructure facilities, including 
communications and telecommunications facilities. It is expected 
that this year the whole region's social investment in fixed 
assets may reach 20 billion yuan, the greatest input ever made 
during past years. The development of superior industries and 
the accelerated construction of infrastructure facilities will 
provide a strong momentum for our region's economic development, 
and will effectively promote a historical change from a 
traditional industrial structure into a modern production 
structure in our region's economy. 
  E. Township enterprises created a trend of doubling their 
output value plan and non-publically owned enterprises achieved 
faster development. The total output value of township 
enterprises in the year reached 18.5 billion yuan and showed an 
80 percent increased over 1992. The output value of township 
enterprises in a large number of localities showed a doubled 
increase. The output value of non-state-owned industrial 
enterprises is expected to show a 28 percent increase over 1992. 
Non-publically owned enterprises, including individually and 
privately owned ones, achieved faster development. The number 
of individually owned industrial and commercial enterprises 
reached 270,000 and showed a 15.2 percent increase over 1992. 
These enterprises accommodated 410,000 personnel that showed a 
13.9 percent increase over 1992. The "leap forward" development 
of township enterprises has enlightened us that where there is a 
gap there is a potential. Only by upholding the principle of 
proceeding from reality, emancipating minds, arduously 
pioneering a road, and developing the potential, will we totally 
be able to faster turn the potential into practical productive 
forces and to make a breakthrough in the common practice for the 
speed of economic development. 
  F. The livelihood of people of various nationalities was 
further improved. Since the beginning of 1993 we have 
continuously regarded as a basic demand for the work of rural 
and pastoral areas the principle of "stabilizing the production 
of agriculture and animal husbandry and increasing the incomes 
of peasants and herdsmen". We have also regarded as a big event 
the work of easing the burdens of peasants and herdsmen. In 
urban areas we have made efforts to develop the public utilities 
of serving the people's livelihood and to engage in the 
construction of public utilities. We have also adopted every 
possible way and means to bring the prices of daily consumer 
goods under control and paid attention to continuously 
increasing the incomes of staff members and workers. The per 
capita income of peasants and herdsmen is expected to reach the 
target of 100 yuan. The region will be able to narrow the gap 
between the region's per capita income in this regard and the 
national average one from 64 yuan in 1992 to around 40 yuan in 
the year. The region's total wages bill for staff members and 
workers in the first three quarters showed a 21.2 percent 
increase over the same period of 1992. The per capita living 
income of urban residents showed a 30.93 percent increase over 
the same period of 1992 and a 15.83 percent actual increase 
excluding the factor of price hikes. 
  G. The principle of "building the two civilizations 
simultaneously and scoring achievements in both of them" was 
further implemented, new results were scored in the party 
building and in the construction of socialist spiritual 
civilization, the political situation of unity and stability was 
even more consolidated. We smoothly accomplished the tasks of 
term-shift elections of the autonomous regional people's 
congress, and the regional people's government, and the regional 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] 
committee. We deeply carried out commendation activities in 
honor of those who had made contributions to nationalities' 
unity and further enhanced the party building. We also adopted 
measures to enhance the political and ideological work in 
various social circles, to vigorously expand the pioneering 
spirit of the new historic period, to conduct comprehensive 
management of public security, and to grasp the work of 
correcting the malpractice cropping up in various industries and 
trades and of consolidating the "three arbitrary collections". 
In the recent period, we concentrated our efforts on vigorously 
grasping the work of encouraging the honest performance of 
official duties and combating corruptions and scored periodical 
results in the struggle against corruption. Units from top to 
bottom across the autonomous region are enjoying the political 
and social stability as well as nationalities' unity. Cadres 
and the mass of various nationalities displayed their extremely 
creative enthusiasm in the programs of reform, opening up, and 
modernizations. 
  The favorable exploration for establishing the systems of 
socialist market economy and the fruitful results scored in 
building socialist spiritual civilization have promoted the 
overall development of the national economy. The region's GNP 
in the year is expected to reach 44.67 billion yuan and to show 
a 10 percent increase over 1992. Of this GNP, that of primary 
industry is expected to show a 5 percent increase; that of 
secondary industry, a 14.9 percent; and that of tertiary 
industry, a 9.7 percent. The region's financial revenue is 
expected to reach more than 5 billion yuan and to show a 28 
percent increase over 1992. The total retail sale of social 
commodities may reach 21.9 billion yuan and show a 17 percent 
increase over 1992. 
  While fully acknowledging the achievements and the main 
stream of current situation, we must also analyze by seeking 
truth from facts the difficulties and problems cropping up along 
our advancing road. 
  First, strained transportation and shortages of electricity 
and funds remained to be the important factors restricting the 
regions' economic development. These long-standing problems, on 
the one hand, proved that our construction of energy, 
transportation, and other basic industries and infrastructural 
facilities still could not satisfy the needs in the vigorous 
development of various undertakings and the ever improving 
living standard and, on the other, exposed our backward 
managerial and technological levels and irrational economic 
structure. We should have a profound understanding of this and 
strive to fundamentally change such a situation. 
  Second, strained financial resources remained to be a big 
difficulty, and a considerable number of banners and counties 
failed to pay wages on time. We should face this squarely. The 
region's revenue grew fairly rapidly in the past few years. The 
average annual growth of the region's local revenue was 15 
percent from 1987 to 1992, up 4 percentage points from the 
national average in the same period. This year saw another 
rapid growth rate. The subjective and objective reasons for our 
financial difficulties, especially the difficulties of a 
considerable number of banners and counties, were 1) the low 
overall efficiency of the industrial economy, 2) the weak 
industrial foundation of most banners and counties and, on the 
part of many localities, few sources of revenues due to a lack 
of presentable industries and even township enterprises, 3) the 
increased expenditure every year due to the development of 
various undertakings, 4) the overstaffing of offices and 
institutions, the outstripping of the growth in wage over the 
growth in revenue, and the rather rapid growth in the public 
expenses of administrative units and institutions, and 5) some 
localities' lack of ability to manage and use financial 
resources and even the development of lavish spending, a 
man-made reason for strained financial resources. Of course, 
many banners and counties, including some poverty-stricken ones, 
enjoyed a good financial situation. This proved that as long as 
they accelerate reform and opening up, facilitate economic 
development, open up financial resources, and reduce 
expenditure, banners and counties are able to gradually resolve 
their financial difficulties. 
  Third, the region's 1993 GNP growth was the second highest 
rate after the Seventh Five-Year Plan period, but it was still 
lower than what our plan demanded and also lower than the 
national average. The major reasons for this were the uneven 
development in the region's reform, the low degree of reform, 
the wait-and-see attitude adopted by some localities and 
enterprises toward reform, enterprises' failure in reforming the 
three systems, and their continued practice of "eating from the 
common big pot," which dampened the enthusiasm of staff members 
and workers and could not liberate productive forces. Of 
course, problems also existed in enterprises' outdated 
equipment, low technological level, and failure in making their 
products meet market demand. Take light and textile industries 
for example. They registered negative growth in the first half 
of this year and could only create a slight increase by the end 
of the year. In addition, another important reason was our 
insufficient emancipation of the mind, ineffective measures, and 
sluggish development of township enterprises and the non-public 
sectors of the economy in many localities. As long as we face 
these problems squarely and strive to change such a situation, 
it is possible for us to achieve an annual increase of 12 
percent in GNP from 1993 to 1995 because many important projects 
started in the past few years will be completed and commissioned 
one after another. 
  The aforementioned problems and difficulties merit our full 
attention. Meanwhile, we should have a correct analysis and 
understanding. We should recognize that the shortage of 
transport facilities, power, and funds and the fluctuation in 
prices are problems emerged in the course of reform and 
development, and are not difficulties in stagnation; the failure 
in issuing wages on time is a phenomenon emerged not in the 
situation in which the living standards of workers have 
declined, but one emerged in a situation in which we have to 
meet the needs of pricing reform, the wages of workers have 
increased unceasingly and the living standards of people have 
improved increasingly; the failure in making the development 
rate reach the planned requirements is a phenomenon emerged in a 
situation in which the potential of existing reserve funds have 
not been fully tapped, and many key projects that require a long 
construction period but have big momentum for development are 
under construction. These problems and difficulties can be 
gradually solved along with the gradual deepening of reform and 
the development of modernization cause. Particularly, we should 
recognize that the essence and main aspect of our region's 
economic development are sound, the development trend is upward, 
and the hidden potential and momentum are tremendous. This also 
indicates that we have vast prospects for development. 
<H5>  2. Unite the Thinking with the Guidelines of the "Decision" </H5>
of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
and Inspire Our Fighting Enthusiasm With the Grand Objective of 
"Marching Towards the Front Rank" 
  The decision of the third plenary session of the 14th CPC 
central Committee is a major strategic policy, a blueprint for 
realizing the replacement of old economic structure with a new 
one, and a program of action guiding the whole party and the 
people of various nationalities across the country to spare no 
efforts to accelerate reform and development. The 
implementation of this decision has indicated that our country's 
reform of economic structure has entered a new development stage. 
  To successfully implement the guidelines of this decision, 
first of all, we must organize the broad masses of communist 
party members and cadres of various nationalities to 
conscientiously study this decision, profoundly realize and 
understand the essence of the guidelines, realistically unite 
the ideology and understanding with the guidelines of the 
decision, and translate them into a strong motivation for 
promoting reform, opening up and modernization drive. The 
establishment of the socialist market economic structure is a 
profound revolution involving many spheres, including the 
economic basis and the superstructure, which will surely cause a 
major change in the people's ideology, concepts, norms for 
action, and production and life style, and will inevitably meet 
many ideological problems and obstacles. We must solve these 
problems of ideology and understanding by deeply studying Volume 
No.3 of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping" and the decision 
of the third plenary session of the 14th CPC Central Committee 
and by conducting effective ideological and political work, 
enable the broad masses of party members and people of various 
nationalities to greatly emancipate their minds, change 
concepts, and enhance consciousness. At present, we should 
particularly solve well the following few issues of ideology and 
understanding. 
  First, we should correctly treat our region's advantages 
under the socialist market economic conditions, unify thinking 
in the issue of accelerating development, and enhance 
confidence. We should recognize that we have realistically 
lagged far behind the developed areas in the economic growth 
rate, the overall economic balance, and development level. The 
market economy is an unevenly developed economy, and a 
competitive and open economy. Because our economic and 
technological basis is fairly poor, the competitive ability is 
fairly weak, and the degree of opening up is quite low, it is 
possible for this gap to expand continuously within a certain 
period if we fail to push this work forward. However, the 
accelerated establishment of the socialist market economic 
structure has also provided an important historical opportunity 
for accelerating development in our region. For example, the 
region has a vast territory, abundant resources, a small 
population, great potential for the development of agriculture, 
animal husbandry, township enterprises, and energy and raw 
materials industries, and broad market prospects; the state has 
included the support to and promotion of the economic 
development of minority areas in its macroeconomic regulation 
and control and more support will be given to it in terms of 
investment and policy; the region enjoys unique geographical, 
legal, and policy advantages; and so on. This constitutes a 
favorable condition for us to accelerate development. As long 
as we enhance confidence, raise spirit, work hard, emancipate 
the mind, conduct reform boldly, and open wider to the outside 
world, our region's advantages will be developed, its economic 
development will be faster, and its gap from advanced localities 
will be gradually narrowed. 
  Second, we should free ourselves from the shackles of the 
old 
ideas and concepts which have taken shape under the planned 
economy system and embrace the new ideas and new concepts of the 
socialist market economy. Some of our comrades have yet to 
break with the way of thinking that has taken shape under the 
planned economy and are still used to relying on the old ideas 
and old methods formed under the old system to observe and solve 
problems. They do not know how to look for new ideas from the 
developed market economy and always try to rely on the state and 
higher levels. They fail to see that the situation has changed, 
the state and the higher levels have begun acting according to 
the law of the market economy, and the method of asking for 
investment without paying attention to returns of investment and 
taking risks of investment no long works. We should make our 
comrades understand that to accelerate economic development, 
they should work in a creative manner, change their traditional 
concepts, embrace the concepts of information, markets, opening 
up, efficiency, competition, and legal system that conform to 
the socialist market economy, and understand and master the law 
of value, the law of supply and demand, the law of competition, 
and other objective laws governing the market economy. Only by 
using these ideas and concepts to guide our economic work, can 
we stand firm in the ever intense market competition and gain 
the initiative. 
  Third, we should firmly foster and always adhere to the 
criterion of "three advantages" and use it to treat the new 
conditions, new problems, and new things emerging in the process 
of establishing the new system and to judge the achievements of 
reform. As has been proven in practice, we should adhere to the 
criterion of "three advantages" so that we can achieve a common 
understanding and unify our steps regarding some major and 
complicated issues. Some comrades still lack the courage to 
blaze new trails, experiment, and take risks and often adopt a 
wait-and-see attitude and hesitate in doing work. Others do not 
understand and approve some methods for reform and even 
flagrantly criticize or create obstacles to them. The major 
reason for this is insufficient emancipation of the mind and a 
failure to eliminate the influence of outdated concepts and 
"left" ideas. In the final analysis, it is the failure to 
master Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the failure to firmly foster the 
criterion of the "three advantages." The establishment of the 
new system of the socialist market economy is bound to involve 
in the adjustment of the interests of various fields and to 
encounter many complicated contradictions and even obstacles. 
The more complicated problems and contradictions become and the 
more different opinions are, the more we should have the courage 
to emancipate the mind, seek truth from facts, and adhere to the 
criterion of "three advantages." Adherence to this criterion is 
a manifestation of the high political awareness, enterprising 
spirit, and sense of responsibility of communists. Adherence to 
this criterion means to safeguard the fundamental interests of 
the people of various nationalities and will be supported by the 
overwhelming majority of people. It is not the attitude and 
character of communists to avoid contradictions, retreat in face 
of difficulties, act as a good old man, and act perfunctorily. 
  Setting up the socialist market economic structure is a 
highly complicated pioneering endeavor. To accelerate the setup 
of the socialist market economic structure and ensure smooth 
progress in reform and opening up, we must accurately handle the 
following few relations: 
  First, we should accurately handle the relationship between 
reform and development and social stability. The development of 
the economy is our target as well as the foundation for social 
stability. Reform is the motivation of development when 
stability is the basic condition for reform and development. 
These three factors depend on one another and are inseparable. 
As leaders, we should be good at dialectically pondering over 
and handling issues, enhance ability in controlling the overall 
situation, enable these three factors to supplement and 
coordinate each other, ensure that neither is separated only one 
thing is attended to at the expense of the other. We should 
concentrate energy on deepening reform, vigorously conduct 
explorations, keep forging ahead, and promote development and 
stability by deepening reform. Simultaneously, we should pay 
attention to solving various kinds of problems that affect 
stability and use a stable social environment to provide a 
guarantee for reform and development. 
  Second, we should accurately handle the relationship between 
the interests of the whole and those of the part. The interests 
of the whole and those of the part are identical. When the 
interests of the part contradict the interests of the whole, the 
interests of the part must acquiesce to that of the whole. Only 
when we guarantee the interests of the whole will the interests 
of the part exist. Having the minor situation acquiesces to the 
overall situation and the minor principles acquiesce to the 
major ones is a good old rule of our party as well as the 
experience in our successful revolution and construction. 
Therefore, in the gigantic-reform process of setting up the 
socialist market economic structure, we should acquiesce to the 
overall situation of the whole country and resolutely implement 
the central authorities' policies on strengthening macroeconomic 
regulation and control and various reform measures that will 
soon be promulgated. Along with the deepening of reform, our 
region is also confronted with a problem concerning the 
reasonable division of rights and the readjustment of the 
relationship of interests. The autonomous region should take 
into consideration the distribution of interests among various 
levels in a reasonable and unified way and take care of various 
fronts. All leagues, cities, banners, and counties should 
submit themselves to the overall situation of the autonomous 
region, achieve ideological work in various spheres, and ensure 
that various reform measures are implemented. 
  Third, we should accurately handle the relationship between 
the difficulties ahead of us and the prospects for development. 
The difficulties and contradictions cropping up in the course 
of the region's economic operation are inevitable in the course 
of replacing the old system with the new. So, these are 
temporary difficulties and contradictions. Fundamentally 
speaking, we should rely on reform and development to solve 
these difficulties and contradictions. Facing temporary 
difficulties, the people from higher levels on down should work 
arduously, tighten their belts, unite with and help one another, 
and make concerted efforts to tide over the difficulties. We 
should educate the cadres and the masses not only to face up to 
the difficulties ahead but also to see the good prospects for 
development. We should enhance our confidence, meet 
difficulties head-on, and strive to create a new situation in 
the region's reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
  Early in 1987, Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out in his 
speech: Since the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region has vast 
pastoral areas and a small population, the region may be able to 
stand at the front row of development. This is not only our 
earnest expectation but also his great scientific foresight. 
This should become the powerful spiritual motivation of the 
people of all nationalities in the region. The grand goal of 
"standing in the front row" reveals the region's prospects for 
economic development and social progress and conforms to the 
fundamental interests and the common expectation of all 
nationalities of people in the region. By assessing changes in 
the trends of development in both domestic and foreign 
situations and state macroeconomic policies and by judging the 
region's existing foundations and development potential, it is 
possible for us to realize the grand target through a longer and 
arduous struggle. We should regard the target of "being a 
vanguard" as a banner and direct the people of various 
nationalities across the region to aim high, to have lofty 
ambition, and to make unswerving efforts to realize the grand 
target. 
<H5>  3. Promote the National Economy To Achieve Sustained, </H5>
Rapid, and Healthy Development, and Ensure the Realization of 
the Two Periodical Targets by the Given Date 
  To realize the grand target of "being a vanguard," it is 
imperative to fulfill the two periodical targets adopted at the 
sixth (enlarged) plenum of the fifth autonomous regional party 
committee within the given date. By the end of this century, 
the region should become better-off and reach a level which is 
slightly higher than the national average. The year of 1994 is 
the second year of the first periodical target. Success or 
failure in the year's economic development has vital bearing on 
the timely realization of the first periodical target. 
Therefore, we should adopt every possible way and means to 
successfully conduct economic work in the year and to achieve 
faster economic development. In line with the region's current 
economic development trend, our region' GNP in 1994 may show an 
increase of over 10 percent in 1993 and we should strive to show 
a 12 percent increase in this regard. To attain such growth, it 
is imperative to accurately foster a new idea of economic 
development with economic results as a center and to 
emphatically do a good job in grasping the following: 
  A. We should actively readjust the production structure of 
agriculture and animal husbandry and further accelerate the 
economic development of rural and pastoral areas. Agriculture 
and animal husbandry are the foundation of the national economy 
and must be consolidated and strengthened. Tasks for our region 
to conduct its work in rural and pastoral areas are to implement 
in an overall way the spirit of the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee and the spirit of the central rural 
work conference, to regard as an emphasis the work of 
establishing or improving the socialized service systems to 
further deepen the reform in rural and pastoral areas, and to 
actively readjust the production structure of rural and pastoral 
areas by regarding the work of developing agricultural and 
animal husbandry undertakings with "two highs and one 
fine-quality" as a target. The region's total agricultural 
output value should reach 21 billion yuan and show a 6 percent 
increase over 1993. The region should stabilize grains 
production at the level of over 10 billion jin. The number of 
animals for the livestock fiscal year should reach more than 
56.5 million. Of this number, that of hogs should reach 10 
million; that of meat goat, 200,000 ; and that of meat cattle, 
100,000. The per capita net income of peasants and herdsmen 
should show a 100 yuan increase over 1993. 
  According to the aforementioned tasks, party committees and 
governments at all levels should adopt effective measures to 
have the economy of rural and pastoral areas face the markets 
and to quicken the development. First, we should uphold markets 
as a guiding direction and regard economic results as a center 
to accelerate the pace in readjusting the production structure 
and to realize integration between agriculture and animal 
husbandry. Farming areas should accelerate the processing 
industry of grains and stalks; vigorously develop the 
undertakings of animal husbandry; and make a very large 
breakthrough in raising meat cattle, goats, and hogs. Pastoral 
areas should bring in cultivation production to animal 
husbandry, vigorously grasp the construction of fodder grass 
bases, and follow the road of raising animals by carrying out 
construction. Second, we should intensively enforce the 
strategy of having science and education make agriculture and 
animal husbandry prosperous; vigorously promote integration 
among agriculture, science, and education; and implement the 
technical measures of planting crops and raising animals in a 
scientific way. Third, we should continuously increase input in 
agriculture and animal husbandry. Efforts should be further 
made to enhance the support for the productive bases of various 
farming and livestock commodities and to increase the input in 
agriculture and animal husbandry with high-yield, fine-quality, 
and high-benefit. We should conduct reform in the methods of 
investing funds in agriculture and animal husbandry, upgrade the 
benefits of investments, and turn the appropriation into paid 
fund utilization or replace appropriation with award. Fourth, a 
good job should be done in processing farming and livestock 
products to increase their value; developing processing 
industries with farming and livestock products as major raw 
materials; broadening the production of commodities; and 
increasing the economic results. Fifth, we should carry out the 
activities of encouraging townships and villages to play an 
exemplary role or to foster a typical case in becoming 
better-off and apply overall, the target of becoming better-off 
to conducting the work of rural and pastoral areas. 
  We should adopt all kinds of feasible measures to ensure 
that peasants and herdsmen continue to increase income in the 
course of developing production and to actually protect the 
enthusiasm of peasants and herdsmen in production. We should 
continue to implement the pertinent stipulations of the CPC 
Central Committee and the State Council on truly reducing the 
burdens on peasants and herdsmen. We should further support the 
poor and exert greater efforts in developing the economy, 
effecting scientific and technological progress, and improving 
the quality of peasants and herdsmen in order to strengthen the 
self-development functions of poverty-stricken areas. From now 
on, we should consider it a mandatory target to increase the per 
capita net income of peasants and herdsmen and to extricate 
poverty-stricken areas from poverty to become prosperous. 
Meanwhile, we should use the work in this regard to assess and 
evaluate the practical performances of party committees and 
governments of various banners and counties. 
  B. We should pay attention to accelerating the growth pace 
and efficiency of enterprises and making enterprises reverse 
from deficits to profits in order to push the industry of the 
whole region onto a new stage. We should actually orient 
industrial and economic development to the orbit of improving 
efficiency, should switch the low-level duplicated construction 
projects with projects with a high starting point, high added 
value, and high quality, and should change from expanding 
production by mainly depending on the input of human and 
material resources to depending primarily on scientific and 
technological progress. By making flexible use of existing 
assets and effectively increasing new assets, we should strive 
to make the total regional industrial output value reach 57.2 
billion yuan in 1994, an increase of 14 percent. 
  At present, prominent problems in the region's industrial 
enterprises exist due to the poor economic efficiency and grave 
losses. Leaders at all levels should pay high attention to 
these problems and concentrate energy on solving them. First, 
we should further deepen the internal reform of enterprises, 
strengthen management, and fully mobilize the initiative and 
creativity of the vast numbers of cadres and workers. Second, 
we should accelerate technological transformation, technological 
progress, import, and "grafting," should develop new products 
and quality products that are readily marketable, and should, at 
the same time, develop diversified management. Third, we should 
strengthen the building of leading bodies of enterprises by 
selecting people who are very devoted to their work and who are 
familiar with the economy and management to serve as plant 
directors and managers. Handsome rewards should be given to 
those comrades who are outstanding in increasing growth speed, 
improving efficiency, halting deficits, and increasing profits. 
Party committees and governments at all levels should set up a 
responsibility system for improving efficiency and increasing 
profits within a set time and should truly give rewards or 
punishments. We should pay attention to the distribution and 
coordination of restrictive factors like funds, power resources, 
and communications and transportation facilities to ensure the 
development of key trades and enterprises. Large and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises should take the lead in 
accelerating speed and improving efficiency. 
  C. We should continue to pay attention to pillar industries 
and key construction project to add strength and momentum to the 
economic development of the region. Accelerating the building 
of such pillar industries and infrastructure facilities as coal, 
power, metallurgical, petrochemical, light and chemical, and 
building materials industries as well as communications and 
transportation facilities and postal and communications 
facilities constitutes a major growing point of the region's 
economic development. We should try every possible means to 
accelerate the building of the key projects of these pillar 
industries and strive to improve the quality of construction in 
order to complete construction, put into to production, and 
yield results promptly. Pertinent departments in the region 
should again examine the projects under construction in various 
localities, reduce the scale of capital construction, and, in 
particular, reduce the construction of non-productive projects, 
such as luxurious guesthouses and luxurious amusement 
facilities, in order to spend limited funds on projects that 
most need them. We should help leagues, cities, banners, and 
counties yield results as quickly as possible from the projects 
that consume less investment, need a short construction period, 
and yield prompt results. 
  D. We should greatly develop township enterprises to 
enhance the economic strength of banners and counties. Speeding 
up township enterprise development is the only road for rural 
and pastoral areas to suit the needs of the market economy and 
expedite the transformation of farm, animal, and sideline 
products to increase their value and also the only road to 
realize the division of industries, the spread of labor forces, 
and the march toward modernization of agriculture and animal 
husbandry. The weak economy of the region's banners and 
counties has greatly restricted the region's economic and social 
development. At a conference on enterprise reform held in July 
this year, we raised the issue of developing banner and county 
economies. Banner and county economies must show great 
development next year. While keeping agricultural and animal 
husbandry production stable, they should greatly develop 
township enterprises to ensure 28 billion yuan in the output 
value of township enterprises next year and strive to make it 30 
billion yuan, an increase of over 50 percent from this year. 
They should have the courage to develop the township 
enterprises of various ownerships and various managerial 
methods, such as ones run by households individually or jointly, 
joint-investment ones, private ones, and shareholding ones, to 
create a new situation in which different ownerships and 
different systems are adopted in township enterprise 
development. The existing township enterprises run by townships 
and villages and the local state-owned enterprises of banners 
and counties should be transformed to become shareholding 
enterprises and be merged, "transplanted," or sold. They should 
develop the products that are based on a high starting point and 
have high scientific and technological level and high additional 
value. With regard to macroeconomic guidance, we should 
rationalize the distribution of township enterprises in such a 
way that they are concentrated in some areas, give particular 
support to key ones, optimize their structure, strengthen their 
management, and improve their efficiency. Funds should be 
allocated in a unified manner, and particular assistance should 
be given for the localities with a weak foundation to start 
township enterprise development. We should implement the 
strategy of developing towns and townships whose output value of 
township enterprises reaches 100 million yuan. We should launch 
regionwide emulation to create towns and townships whose output 
value of township enterprises reaches 100 million yuan and the 
township enterprises or villages whose output value reaches 1 
million yuan or 10 million yuan. We should strive to expand the 
scale of township enterprises, upgrade the standing of their 
products, improve their management, and promote their 
development to a new height. 
  E. We should continue to boldly develop the non-public 
sectors of the economy. We should have the courage to support 
and encourage the accelerated development of individual, 
private, and foreign-funded economies to truly turn the 
non-public sectors into an important force to enliven the local 
economy. All localities should conscientiously implement 
various policies, include the non-public sectors of the economy 
in the overall pattern of economic development, and make sure 
that no limits are imposed on their proportion, scale, field, 
and management. Localities where conditions permit may explore 
ways to establish individual and private economic development 
zones, expand their scale, speed up their development, and 
achieve a coordinated promotion effect. Pertinent functional 
departments should strengthen and improve management, coordinate 
supervision, management, support, and service, and resolutely 
ban the unhealthy trend of asking for benefits from individual 
and private economies. We should give full play to the role of 
the federation of industry and commerce and various trade 
associations and make a success of the ideological and political 
work for the persons developing non-public sectors of the 
economy. We should strengthen policy and law consultation, 
information, scientific and technical, and business guidance 
services to help the non-public sectors improve management and 
overall quality and guide them to achieve rapid and healthy 
development. 
<H5>  4. Promote Package Reform, Achieve Breakthroughs in Key </H5>
Areas, and Quicken the Pace in Establishing the Socialist Market 
Economy System 
  The most fundamental way to speed up the region's economic 
development lies in seizing the opportunity presented by reform, 
extend the degree of reform, and quicken the pace in 
establishing the socialist market economy system. China's 
economic restructuring will enter a new stage for package reform 
while achieving breakthroughs in key areas next year. Focusing 
on establishing and improving the macroeconomic regulation and 
control system, the state will take significant steps in the 
reform of financial and tax, monetary, investment, planning, and 
foreign economic systems. On the basis of invigorating the 
foundation of the microeconomy and cultivating and developing 
the market structure, the state will issue a series of major 
reform measures concerning the enterprise system, distribution 
system, social security system, housing system, and pricing 
system. Whether we can comprehensively carry out these reforms 
and smoothly implement all reform measures in our region is a 
test for all levels of party organizations throughout the region 
and for the masses of cadres of various nationalities. 
Regardless of whether it is quick or slow, it will also affect 
our region's economic development. All localities and all 
departments should enhance reform consciousness, and guarantee 
that all reform policy decisions of central authorities be 
implemented wherever needed in our region. We should proceed 
from reality and grasp the following reforms in a down-to-earth 
manner. 
  A. While regarding the building of a modern enterprise 
system as the orientation, we should regard the improvement in 
property rights relations as a breakthrough point and accelerate 
the pace of reform in state-owned enterprises. Continuously 
deepening enterprise reform, accelerating the change in 
operational mechanism of state- owned enterprises, and gradually 
establishing the modern enterprise system are the main parts of 
invigorating enterprises, an effective way for pushing 
enterprises to the market, and a central aspect in accelerating 
the building of a new structure. In line with the demand of the 
third plenary session of the 14th CPC central Committee, all 
localities should comprehensively accelerate the pace of reform 
of state-owned enterprises. Next year, the whole region should 
at least change the mechanism of over half of the state-owned 
enterprises and devote two years or so to help all state-owned 
enterprises across the region establish a new operational 
mechanism. 
  Clearly defining property rights relations and establishing 
a 
property rights system that suits the market eocnomy is a core 
issue to establishing the modern enterprise system. To deepen 
reform of state-owned enterprises, we must resolve confusion in 
issues on property rights, and establish a property right system 
that meets the demands of the market economy. At present, we 
should give priority to separating government functions from 
enterprise management, improve property rights relations, 
separate the property rights of legal persons from final state 
ownership, and personalize the property rights of enterprises. 
State-owned, large and medium-sized enterprises should 
continue to deeply implement the "regulation," deepen reform of 
the three internal systems, and actively create conditions for 
gradually moving to the company system. Next year, the region 
will choose 70 large and medium-sized enterprises with fairly 
good management and big development potential for experimenting 
with the modern enterpise system in the region. We may actively 
develop some liability companies with the mutual purchase of 
shares among the legal persons, and actively conduct experiments 
of establishing shareholding limited companies and exclusively 
state-funded companies. On the basis of readjusting the 
production set-up, we should establish 10 trans-regional, 
trans-departmental, trans-trade and trans-ownership enterprise 
groups with public ownership as the mainstay, large key 
enterprises as the lead, and integrated property rights as the 
major link in an effort to further develop the advantages and 
strengthen the competition capacity. Regarding the current 
enterprises with difficulties in operation and heavy debts, we 
should be determined to adopt the method of implementing several 
systems in one plant so as to invigorate each and every plant, 
or conduct "grafting" or transformation in one product, one 
workshop or one production line in an effort to rejuvenate old 
enterprises. 
  Our region has a large proportion of state-owned small 
enterprises, making the problems and difficulties lying ahead 
more prominent. Boldly and resolutely reforming the property 
rights of these enterprises will play an important role in 
promoting reform and development in the whole region. We must 
not hesitate on this issue. During the next two years, all 
localities should consider reform of the property rights system 
of state-owned small enterprises as the most important task, 
grasp it with all-out efforts, and make big strides in this 
regard. Practice has proved that implementing the shareholding 
cooperation system among small state-owned enterprises is a good 
form to promote the reform of the property right system and 
clearly define the property rights. Along with the development 
of the market economy, the public sector of the economy 
essentially merges itself with the non-public sectors of the 
economy in the shareholding form through competition. 
Therefore, we should boldly transform the small state-owned 
enterprises. The small state-owned enterprises that suffer from 
long-term poor management, can't seem to halt deficits, and that 
generate small profits should be auctioned or rented off openly 
so that a system of private ownership and private management or 
state ownership and civilian management is carried out. From 
now on, we should run new enterprises according to new systems 
and resolutely eliminate the practice of taking old paths. 
  The deep-seated problems concerning enterprise reform is 
what 
we should solve to balance the relationship of property rights. 
There are great difficulties in solving these problems. To 
effectively promote this reform, we should achieve the following 
few tasks: First, we should achieve the determination and 
assessment of property and property rights in line with reality 
and the principle of seeking truth from facts. We are allowed 
to use a portion of the profits from the state stocks to 
eliminate the traditional burdens of enterprises and solve the 
problems relating to the collective benefits. We should assess 
the assets according to the procedures, methods, and standards 
as stipulated in the State Council's "method for assessment and 
management of state-owned assets" so as to avoid creating the 
tendencies of overestimating or underestimating assets. On the 
premise of paid use of land, we can appropriately reduce the 
assessment value of the region's land. Second, we should make 
concerted efforts to appropriately eliminate the traditional 
burdens of enterprises. The enterprises with debts payable due 
to policy reasons are allowed extensions on paying back their 
debts and will not be charged interest so that they can first 
become active before paying off their debt in a step-by-step 
manner. It is necessary to separate enterprise management 
functions from social functions. Third, we should quicken the 
establishment of the state-owned asset management system; firmly 
attend to organizing and setting up commissions for management 
of state-owned property and their work organizations; and set up 
subordinate state-owned property management companies, 
investment companies, and holding companies. They should 
represent the state to supervise and manage the property of 
state-owned enterprises and to ensure that the value of state- 
owned property is protected and added. 
  B. We should deepen the rural and pastoral reform with the 
focus on setting up and perfecting the agricultural and 
livestock socialized service system. The establishment of the 
socialist market economic system has provided new tasks and 
requirements for reform in rural and pastoral areas. All 
localities should continue to stabilize and ceaselessly perfect 
the responsibility system dominated by the contracted 
responsibility on a household basis with payment linked to 
output as well as the dual management system where centralized 
management is linked with decentralized management, expand the 
extent of reform in the rural and pastoral areas with the focus 
on setting up and perfecting the agricultural and livestock 
socialized service system, guide the entrance of peasants and 
herdsmen into the markets, and promote the socialist market 
economy's replacement of the agricultural and livestock economy. 
  At present, the peasants and the herdsmen have an urgent 
demand for scientific and technological service and circulation 
service. All localities should set up and perfect the 
township-level scientific and technological service 
organizations and township- level circulation service 
organizations; and gradually form an overall socialized service 
system dominated by banner and county service, linked by town 
and township and sumu service, founded by village and gacha 
service, and supplemented by the self-service of the peasants 
and herdsmen. Next year, all leagues and cities should set up, 
on a trial basis, the socialized service system among several 
banners and counties. Each and every banner and county should 
set up several town and township service organizations and one 
or two "leading" companies and enterprises. The departments in 
charge of agricultural and livestock production at various 
levels should focus on offering scientific and technological 
service, vigorously popularize applied techniques, strengthen 
scientific and technological education for peasants and 
herdsmen, and upgrade their scientific and technological quality. 
  Our region's practice has shown that vigorous efforts to 
develop integration among trade, industry, and agriculture as 
well as among production, processing, and sale are favorable for 
optimizing or reorganizing the essential factors of production; 
for rationally readjusting the industrial structure; and for 
realizing the mutual supplement of strong points and the mutual 
benefits of interest between urban and rural areas. These 
efforts are also favorable for integrating the production of 
peasants and herdsmen with the demands of markets, for dealing 
with the contradiction between small-scale business and large 
markets, and for promoting the traditional agriculture and 
animal husbandry to be turned into modern ones. These efforts 
also represent a successful way for rural and pastoral areas to 
develop the socialist market economy. Various localities and 
departments should adopt effective measures to actively guide 
the integration; to vigorously support it; and to strive to have 
the integration among trade, industry, and agriculture, as well 
as among production, processing, and sale, be gradually adopted 
in wider fields, by more industries and trades as well as by 
units from low level to high one, and in a manner from 
inattentive style to attentive one. 
  C. By regarding as an emphasis the establishment of markets 
of essential factors of production, we should accelerate the 
fostering and improvement of market systems. All-out efforts 
should be made to develop the wholesale markets of means of 
production as well as the markets of money, labor forces, real 
estate, technologies, and information so as to gradually carry 
out rational distributions through markets among funds, 
technologies, labor forces, and essential factors of production. 
We should vigorously develop local regional trading markets. 
We should also establish the wholesale markets of staple 
products of agriculture, animal husbandry, and sideline 
production, as well as the wholesale markets of means of 
production along the border lines with northeast, north, and 
northwest China as well as along the important lines of 
communications so as to gradually foster a large number of 
distributing centers for the commodities of grains, leather and 
fur, meat and foodstuffs, herb medicine, timber, coal, iron and 
steel, building materials, petroleum, and textile products. By 
making full use of the geographical strong points, we should 
further do a good job in establishing markets of trade between 
the border domestic and foreign residents at border ports as 
well as border banners and counties. We should also actively 
broaden the commodity exchanges with Mongolia and CIS. A good 
job should be also done in taking up the pilot work of futures 
markets. We should continuously deepen the reform in commodity 
prices, straighten out the relations among prices, and relax the 
restrictions on the prices of overwhelmingly major commodities 
and laboring work except for only a few products that have a 
bearing on the national economy and the people's livelihood. We 
should also gradually do away with the double-track system in 
the means of production and establish price forming mechanism 
that is chiefly formed by market prices. 
  D. By regarding as an emphasis the shifting of governmental 
function, we should accelerate the pace in conducting 
organizational reforms. Organizational reforms represent 
important conditions for establishing the systems of socialist 
market economy and accelerating the economic development. The 
overall plan for the autonomous region to conduct organizational 
reforms has been defined and the region may organize all forces 
to enforce the plan as long as it has been approved by the 
central authorities. According to the initially tentative idea 
in the plan, the autonomous regional level organs should strive 
to accomplish their organizational reform before the third 
quarter of 1994; leagues and cities (county-level cities) should 
strive to accomplish their organizational reforms before the end 
of 1994; and banners and counties should accomplish their 
organizational reform within the first quarter of 1994 because 
the original decision to have them accomplish reform by the end 
of this year has been changed due to giving consideration to the 
term- shift election at the banner-county level. The emphasis 
of organizational reforms should be placed on shifting the 
function. By meeting the needs of the systems of socialist 
market economy, the party and government organs at all levels 
should further define their duties and conduct comprehensive 
consolidation in the fields of managerial function; 
organizational style; operation mechanism; managerial methods; 
and personnel structure. They should also enhance the 
macroeconomic management, weaken the direct management, and 
strengthen the services so as to gradually establish an 
administrative managerial system that is in conformity with the 
new systems of the market economy and that is with all the 
necessary functions, a rational structure, harmonious operation, 
and accurate and high efficacy. Specialized economic 
departments should be turned into enterprises. Office personnel 
laid off due to streamlining should be encouraged to establish 
economic entities. Party, government, and mass organizations at 
all levels should reduce their sizes by 25 percent in two to 
three years. We should strictly enforce discipline and adopt 
realistic measures to prevent law and discipline breaches 
emerging in the process of institutional reform, such as 
promoting cadres suddenly and turning public property into 
private one. 
  E. We should ensure implementation of macroeconomic 
regulation and control measures, with the focus on reform of the 
financial and tax, monetary, investment, and planning systems. 
The central authorities have issued some major policies on the 
financial and tax, monetary, investment, and planning systems. 
This has an important significance in establishing the 
socialist market economy system, enhancing the central 
macroeconomic regulation and control capacity, and gradually 
narrowing the gap between the eastern area and the western area. 
We should resolutely implement the central policies and, at the 
same time, promote the region's reform in these fields in a 
creative manner in line with our actual conditions. Regarding 
the reform of financial and tax systems, we should step up 
establishment of local tax collection system, do a good job in 
organizing local tax organs, increase financial resources by 
developing production, strengthen tax collection and management, 
and prevent tax evasion to make sure that the financial 
situation at all levels is improved gradually. Regarding the 
reform of monetary system, we should separate policy-lending 
banking from commercial banking and, while putting total amount 
under state control, properly promote management of the 
proportion between savings deposits and loans and management of 
risks so that the market mechanism will be applied more to bank 
management. We should exert efforts actively to win approval 
for establishment of local development banks to guarantee 
supplies of funds for the region to accelerate economic 
development. Regarding the reform of investment system, we 
should step up efforts to make scientific policy decisions on 
major construction projects and establish the system of 
responsibility for investment risks and the system for 
intermediate organizations to exercise supervision and 
management of these projects. Regarding the reform of planning 
system, we should strengthen overall targets and efficiency 
targets and change direct administration into indirect 
administration. At present, we should pay particular attention 
to the connection in enterprises' transition from the contract 
system to the new tax system. According to the regulations of 
the central authorities, the projects and enterprises which have 
enjoyed tax reduction and exemption as approved by the 
autonomous regional government and whose tax reduction and 
exemption term had not expired when the central document no. 6 
was issued may continue to enjoy tax reduction and exemption 
until 1995, but they should be reexamined and acknowledged by 
pertinent departments first and should pay taxes and later have 
their taxes refunded. On the premise that the state 
macroeconomic regulation and control targets and tasks are 
fulfilled, we should strengthen the macroeconomic regulation and 
control of the region's economy and achieve success particularly 
in the following work: 1) We should achieve a balance between 
total supply and total demand and a success in structural 
adjustment according to established priorities. 2) We should 
strengthen the monitoring, warning, and forecast of economic 
trends. 3) We should adopt various means to address the 
contradictions and problems in economic operation and bring 
prices under control in line with state regulations to maintain 
social stability. 4) We should do a good job in the overall 
coordination of macroeconomic regulation and control measures. 
  F. We should speed up the reform of social security system 
by 
achieving a breakthrough in realizing the region's overall 
planning for retirement funds. Speeding up the establishment of 
the social security system is an important part of the endeavor 
to establish the socialist market economy system. We should 
realize regionwide overall planning for the retirement funds of 
enterprise staff members and workers, establish more quickly and 
improve the unemployment insurance, industrial injury insurance, 
and medical service systems, and form a mechanism whereby funds 
and risks are shared by the state, the collective, and the 
individual together under an overall plan. In rural and 
pastoral areas, we should gradually establish an old-age 
insurance system under which the aged are supported chiefly by 
their families with proper subsidies from the collective. We 
should also develop and improve the cooperative medical service 
system. 
  G. We should keep abreast of the demands of reform, 
opening up, and economic construction and further deepen the 
reform of scientific, technological, and educational structures. 
We should firmly foster the idea that "science and technology 
constitute the primary productive forces" and the idea that 
"education is of fundamental importance to the fulfillment of 
our great long-term mission." We should accelerate the reform 
of scientific, technological, and educational structures. At 
present, we should positively promote the readjustment of the 
structures of scientific and technological departments and the 
rational flow of talented people. We should encourage 
scientific research institutes to "stabilize basic research and 
basic technological research and to decontrol and allow 
flexibility for technological development institutes, public 
welfare-oriented scientific research institutes, and scientific 
and technological service institutes. We should also encourage 
scientific research institutes to follow the road of "combining 
scientific research with production and management." We should 
encourage scientific and technological personnel to plunge into 
the main battlefield of economic construction and to develop 
scientific and technological enterprises that embrace various 
forms of ownership and various forms of management in order to 
help translate scientific and technological achievements into 
practical productive forces. In line with the objective demand 
of modernization drive, we should positively readjust 
educational structure with a view to effecting a new step in 
developing vocational and technical education as well as adult 
education and in combining agriculture with science and 
education. Institutions of higher learning should further 
deepen reform in the links of enrollment, faculties setup, 
teaching materials content, teaching methods, and employment of 
graduates. We should actually change the situation in which the 
government takes on everything of schools and should set up the 
new system of combining government administration with 
participation of various circles of society. 
  H. We should comprehensively promote the opening to the 
outside world and to other domestic places, with large-scale 
import and large-scale integrations as the places to make 
breakthroughs. We should further strengthen the sense of 
opening to the outside world and penetrate the idea of "using 
opening up to promote the whole situation" to all trades and all 
items of work. We should accelerate the regionalization of 
economic development, integrate the province with various 
provinces, municipalities, and regions in northeast China, north 
China, and northwest China, use large-scale integrations to 
promote large-scale opening up, and use large-scale opening up 
to promote large-scale development. In the fields of 
importation, integration, and "grafting" renovation, we should 
have some thorough measures. We should energetically implement 
the strategy of diversification of markets and encourage various 
localities to boldly break with the doors of their own 
localities and country to actively open up markets at home and 
abroad. We should further enhance the stratum and level of 
opening up and expand the sphere and channels of opening up to 
create a new pattern of opening to all directions. We should 
make full use of the region's natural resources to accelerate 
the pace of absorbing foreign investment. We should continue to 
deepen the reform of foreign trade structure and set up 
mechanisms that are in agreement with the current international 
economic regulations. We should also expand export and develop 
spot exchange trade. We should continuously improve investment 
environment, improve work efficiency, and positively train 
export-oriented economic talents in order to create conditions 
for vigorously developing export-oriented economy. 
<H5>  5. Further Strengthen and Improve Party Leadership, and </H5>
Firmly and Unswervingly Implement the Principle of "Taking a 
Two-Handed Approach and Being Tough With Both Hands" 
  Setting up the socialist market economic system and 
accelerating the pace of modernization drive constitute a great 
historical mission of the new period. To win victory in this 
unprecedented and creative cause, we must actually strengthen 
the building of the party to provide a strong and effective 
political guarantee for accelerating reform, opening up, and 
modernization drive and must thoroughly carry out the strategic 
principle of "taking a two-handed approach and being tough with 
both hands" to create a fine social environment for accelerating 
reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
  A. We should strengthen the building of the party around the 
target of establishing socialist market economic system. The 
new situation of accelerating the establishment of the socialist 
market economic system has set new task and demand on party 
leadership and party building. In light of the current 
prominent problems, party committees at all levels should 
continue to adopt practical and effective measures to 
comprehensively strengthen party building, exert strenuous 
efforts to build the leading bodies at all levels in accordance 
with the demands of the party Central Committee and the regional 
party committee on strengthening the building of leading bodies 
at and above the county level, and enable them to become a 
powerful political core for leading the masses to build the 
socialist market economic new structure. Party leading cadres 
at all levels must adapt themselves to new situation, greet the 
new test, take the lead in changing ideology and concepts, the 
way of thinking, the work methods, and the style of work, stand 
on the van of this great reform, shoulder the responsibility of 
leaders, and make contributions to accelerating reform and 
development. 
  In strengthening party building, the most important is to 
use 
the theory of Comrade Deng Xiaoping on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics to arm the minds of all communist party 
members. At present, we should particularly study well Volume 
No.3 of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," strive to 
understand that emancipating the mind and seeking truth from 
facts is the quintessence of this socialist theory with Chinese 
characteristics, and be good at using this ideological weapon to 
understand and solve practical problems. In the course of 
study, we should act in line with the reality of our own 
localities, departments, and units, and in accordance with the 
reality of one's ideology and work, sum up experience 
conscientiously, consciously correct the understanding and work 
methods that are incompatible with the socialist market economic 
theory, and correctly answer the questions and handle various 
contradictions emerged in the course of reform and development. 
Party committees and governments at all levels should do a good 
job in training party and government cadres as well as 
enterprise cadres, and strive to rotationally train cadres at 
and above the section level at least once next year. Party 
committees at and above the banner and county level should 
carefully organize the central group's study. We should further 
enhance the political awareness of the broad masses of cadres, 
in particular, the leading cadres, in upholding the party's 
basic line through the study, and strengthen their sense of 
principle and foresight in carrying out their work in a 
systematic and scientific manner. 
  To strengthen the building of leading bodies at all levels, 
we must strictly implement the principle of building ranks of 
"revolutionary, young, well-educated, and professionally 
competent" cadres, and the standards of employing people of 
ability and political integrity, overcome the trend of giving 
priority to seniority, demanding perfection, and yielding to or 
making allowance for cadres, and boldly use cadres who make 
outstanding achievements, emancipate their minds, dare to blaze 
new trials, adopt highly efficient and practical work style, and 
are clean and honest in performing official work. We must adopt 
resolute and effective measures for readjusting the leading 
bodies who are average in political achievements, and fail to 
create a new situation in their work for a long time. At 
present, end-of-term elections are being conducted in the banner 
and county (city and district) people's congresses, governments, 
and committees of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference. Party committees at all levels should regard this 
end-of-term election as an important measure for strengthening 
the building of leading bodies, pay great attention to and 
carefully organize this work, strengthen leadership, and 
guarantee its smooth progress. The party leading bodies at all 
levels must strictly implement the principle of democratic 
centralism, further strengthen unity of the party and inside the 
leading bodies, resolutely guard against and overcome the 
disorganized and unprincipled acts of failing to strictly 
enforce law and prohibitions, guard against and overcome 
liberalism in politics, and maintain unity politically and 
organizationally and in work. Next year, we should conduct 
activities on "vying with one another in pioneering a work," in 
100 banners and counties (cities and districts) throughout the 
region, commend advanced units, and encourage the backward ones. 
It is necessary to further strengthen the building of 
grass-roots organizations. Beginning this winter and next 
spring, all localities, aiming at leading peasants and herdsmen 
to a fairly comfortable life, should comprehensively implement 
in rural and pastoral areas the three-year plan for improving 
village-level organizations with party organizations as the core 
and truly build rural and pastoral grass-roots party 
organizations into fighting bastions capable of leading the 
masses to affluence and a fairly comfortable standard of living. 
At enterprises, in coordination with the reform of the property 
right system and the establishment of the modern enterprise 
system, we should comprehensively implement the guidelines of 
the national forum on the party building of state- owned 
enterprises, exert more efforts to improve the party 
organizations of state-owned enterprises, and give full play to 
the role of these party organizations as the political core and 
their role of supervision and guarantee in deepening reform and 
in production and management. 
  Leading cadres at all levels should forge closer 
party-populace ties and, with the spirit of great responsibility 
to the party and the people, the spirit of serving the people 
wholeheartedly, and the spirit of plain living and hard work, 
score achievements and innovation in reform and development. 
They should learn about the trends in reform in a timely 
manner, go deep into the reality of life and the masses to 
intensify investigation and study, and adopt a down-to-earth 
work style to implement the party's various principles and 
policies to the letter. 
  We should further strengthen Army-government and 
Army-civilian unity and step up the building of the People's 
Liberation Army, people's armed police force, and militia. We 
should improve trade unions, Communist Youth League, women's 
federations, and other mass organizations and fully develop 
their role in reform and development and in safeguarding unity 
and stability. 
  B. We should adhere to the principle of "attending to two 
tasks simultaneously and being competent in both" and 
conscientiously build the socialist spiritual civilization. 
"Attending to two tasks simultaneously and being competent in 
both" is a basic principle we should always adhere to in the 
entire process of reform, opening up, and the socialist 
modernization drive. The more we deepen reform, open wider to 
the outside world, and accelerate development, the more we 
should strengthen ideological and political work and step up 
building of the spiritual civilization. We should note that 
people's style of living, style of thinking, and concept on 
value will change greatly following the establishment of the 
socialist market economy system. Generally speaking, the theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, the party's 
basic line, patriotism, collectivism, socialism, the creative 
spirit of the masses in developing reform and the modernization 
drive, and the traditional virtues of the Chinese nation will 
show their tremendous power more and more thanks to the 
continuous social progress. However, we should also see that the 
market economy has its negative effect. Party committees and 
governments at all levels, especially leading cadres of the 
party, should have a clear understanding of this and always 
attend to and be competent in both construction and the legal 
system, both the endeavors of reform and opening up and the 
crackdown on various criminal activities, and both the material 
civilization and the spiritual civilization. 
  Spiritual civilization is important for its building and is 
valued for adherence. At the moment, what is most important and 
essential is to use Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics to arm the whole party 
and to educate cadres and the masses. With the aim of training 
a new generation of people who are politically aware, morally 
sound, well-educated, and disciplined, we should make best 
possible use of the advantages in ideological and political work 
to enhance the political and ideological awareness of the vast 
numbers of cadres and the masses and to enhance their mental 
ability to bear the changes in reform. We should energetically 
advocate the practice of persisting in correct outlook on life 
and civilized and healthy style of life under the condition of 
the socialist market economy, should oppose money worship, 
ultra-individualism and corrosive style of life in a clear-cut 
manner, and should strive to eliminate all sorts of ugly 
phenomena to give rise to a fine social outlook that is 
conducive to the development of the socialist market economy. 
All levels of propaganda and mass media departments should 
energetically propagate the 64-character pioneering spirit set 
forth by Comrade Jiang Zemin, propagate the essence and 
characteristics of socialism, and extensively conduct the 
education on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism as well as 
the education on the legal system in order to enhance the 
people's national self-confidence, self-esteem, sense of pride, 
and sense of law. 
  We should further strengthen the building of socialist 
democracy and legal system and give full play to the role of 
people's congresses at all levels and their standing committees. 
The regional people's congress should accelerate the drawing up 
of local regulations in line with the demand of establishing the 
socialist market economic system. In accordance with the 
related regulations of the state and with the guidelines of the 
third plenary session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, we 
should accelerate the drawing up of the regulations regarding 
the regional autonomy of minority nationalities and other local 
regulations. We should also strengthen the supervision over law 
enforcement to promote the building of the two civilizations. 
  Leaders at all levels should pay high attention to the work 
concerning social stability and actually assume the political 
responsibility of "ensuring the stability of one's own area." 
Leaders should frequently study social trends and the trends of 
the masses' ideology and correctly approach and handle the 
contradictions among the people in order to tackle all sorts of 
instable factors in the bud and at the grass-roots level. They 
should further strengthen the comprehensive management of public 
security and deal severe blows to all sorts of serious criminal 
offenses to enhance the people's sense of security. 
  We should further pay attention to family planning work and 
strictly control population growth. Top leaders of party and 
government organizations at all levels should put this work in 
an important position and strive to yield results from it in 
line with the demand of "doing the job oneself and assuming 
overall responsibility." 
  We should energetically develop cultural, public health, and 
sports undertakings to constantly improve the ideological, 
cultural, and physical quality of the people of all 
nationalities. Party committees and governments at all levels 
should regard the vigorous development of productive forces and 
the constant improvement in people's living standards as the 
starting point of all their work. We should conscientiously 
implement the "housing project" to emphatically solve housing 
problems for homeless households, the households with dangerous 
houses, scientific and technological personnel, and teachers. 
  C. We should pay attention to the united front work of the 
party during the new period and strengthen the nationality work 
and the religious work to mobilize all positive factors. During 
the new historical period, the united front remains a major 
magic weapon of our party. The party's united front can only be 
strengthened but not be weakened and can only develop but not 
stop. We should consolidate and develop the system of 
multiparty cooperation under the leadership of the CPC. We 
should strengthen the unity among all nationalities and 
strengthen the unity and cooperation between the party and the 
various democratic parties, nonparty figures, and religious 
personages. We should mobilize all positive factors, turn the 
passive factors into positive ones, expedite reform and opening 
up, promote economic development, and safeguard a political 
situation of stability and unity. It is necessary to uphold the 
Marxist national concept and religious concept, and strengthen 
education and propaganda on national theory and policy and 
religious policy. In line with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's thesis 
that in treating the party's national policy and the issue of 
minority areas, it is necessary to pay attention to the essence 
and not to the form, we should firmly grasp the crux of the 
issue of whether we can develop the minority areas, implement 
the party's policy on nationalities, do a good job in 
nationalities work, and solve the problems on nationalities 
well. Activities on commending those who do a good job in 
national unity and progress must be carried out in close 
connection with reform, development, and stability. We should 
further consolidate and develop a socialist national 
relationship of equality, mutual help, unity, and cooperation, 
and realize common prosperity, unity, and progress among the 
people of various nationalities. It is necessary to implement 
the party's religious policy, respect the beliefs of the masses 
of religious believers, strengthen management over religious 
affairs in line with law, and never let them alone. Under the 
current situation, we should particularly guard against the 
conspiracy of advocating "westernization," and "polarization" of 
the international hostile elements, prevent domestic and foreign 
hostile forces from using nationalities and religious issues to 
engage in sabotage activities, immediately handle them in line 
with law when discovered, and never tolerate or abet them. 
  D. We should conscientiously implement the central plans, 
and 
unceasingly deepen the anticorruption struggle. In order to 
guarantee the smooth establishment of the socialist market 
economic structure, we must do a good job in anticorruption 
struggle. After the issuance of the central plan on conducting 
anticorruption struggle, all localities and departments have 
taken action actively, done lots of work in urging leading 
cadres to make self- investigation and self-correction, 
investigated and handled corrupt elements, checked the unhealthy 
trends in various trades, and achieved certain achievements. 
However, we must not overestimate the achievements we have 
made. Party committees at all level should fully understand the 
importance, arduousness, and protractedness of anticorruption 
struggle, and carry it out with unremitting efforts. Leading 
cadres at all levels, principal leaders, in particular, should 
act strictly in accordance with the demands of the party Central 
Committee, consciously assume leadership responsibility over 
anticorruption struggle, realistically take the lead in keeping 
themselves clean, honest, and self-disciplined, dare to grasp 
and manage this work, and guarantee that actual results are 
achieved in this anticorruption struggle. We should resolutely 
and conscientiously investigate and handle corrupt elements. 
Prior to the Spring Festival, party committees and governments 
at above the banner and county level and various departments of 
the regional organs should report the situation of fulfilling 
the definite anticorruption struggle tasks to the regional party 
committee and the discipline inspection commission, and 
promulgate the results of handling a number of major and 
appalling cases to the public in a step-by-step manner in an 
effort to unceasingly deepen the development of anticorruption 
struggle. We should take both permanent and temporary measures, 
strengthen the building of clean politics, strengthen the 
mechanism of supervision and restraint, and fundamentally check 
the growth and spread of corrupt phenomena. 
  Comrades, the establishment of the socialist market economic 
structure is an important and pressing task. Leading cadres at 
all levels are shouldering major historical responsibilities. 
Under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the 
leadership of the party Central Committee with Comrade Jiang 
Zemin as the nucleus, we should unite with and lead the people 
of various nationalities across the region, enhance spirit, 
blaze new trials, and strive to realize this great historical 
task and the two expected objectives defined by the regional 
party committee. 

