BFN 

  [Text] In a controversial operation, which is suspicious in 
some experts' opinion, Brazil is participating in the explosive 
international atomic market. On 20 April, ISTOE learned about a 
deal (renting yellow cake [two preceding words in English] and 
enriched uranium to the U.S. enterprise Nuexco) that left the 
Brazilian strategic reserves at zero. Some suspect that Brazil 
may be indirectly feeding an Iraqi or Iranian atomic bomb. 
Others warn about the risk Brazil is running of being the victim 
of a ``nuclear swindle [calote nuclear].'' Brazilian Nuclear 
Industries (INB) President Roberto Franca celebrated the 
transaction as the first step toward the financial independence 
of the state-owned uranium-producing company: ``I made an open 
commercial transaction through bidding.'' For $1.7 million, the 
INB rented out the fuel for periods ranging from six to 18 
months. The fuel will begin being returned in August. Nuexco 
sent the Brazilian fuel to Canada. Professor Bernardino Ponte, 
who was an International Atomic Energy Agency surveyor for 12 
years, found the news strange. He said: ``Canada does not use 
uranium oxide produced by Brazil, which has a low 
concentration.'' To those who want to solve the mystery, 
professor Ponte suggests they read the book YELLOW CAKE [two 
preceding words in English] by journalist Alexandre Baumgarten, 
who was murdered in 1982. In the book, the journalist discusses 
the trafficking in Brazilian uranium to be used in the 
production of atomic bombs in Iraq, Iran, and India. Strategic 
Affairs Secretary Admiral Mario Flores told ISTOE on 22 April: 
``I do not believe Canada would accept playing this sort of 
role. Canada is one of the most active controllers of the use of 
nuclear energy.'' Adm. Flores was asked about the issue before 
the business was closed. The INB president confirmed: ``I 
believe the material was really transferred to Canada because 
part of the fuel that was stored in Brazil was shipped to 
Canada.'' According to Franca, what Nuexco did with the fuel is 
not Brazil's problem. Corvette Captain Sergio Porto da Luz, 
adviser to the Chamber of Deputies National Defense Committee, 
doubts the negotiation's strategic virtues. The problem is that 
the 200 metric tons that must be returned in August are crucial 
for the production of pills to recharge Angra-1. This operation 
is expected to take place in the beginning of 1995. ``The U.S. 
company may not have fuel available at the established moment 
and decided to pay us for it in cash,'' Porto da Luz fears. 
Franca answers: ``Nuexco has given us all guarantees, 
particularly because it has its own mines.'' The funds from the 
transaction have been used to reactivate the Pocos de Caldas 
mine. By July, the pills stock will have been reduced to 80 
metric tons, which is less than half the pills necessary to 
recharge Angra-1. 

