Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] In Nigeria, there has been trouble at the campus of 
Lagos University, UNILAG, home to 15,000 students. It involves 
the student union's attempts to clamp down on followers of 
secret cults on the campus. The leader of the university 
student's union, Omoyele Showore, has been leading the clamp 
down on the secret cults. He's been taken to hospital and is 
reportedly in a critical condition after being set upon by a 
gang. And now it seems the campus has been shut down. From 
Lagos, Obadina reports: 
  [Begin Obadina recording] The University of Lagos, UNILAG, 
has once again been closed down by the school authorities. The 
order to students to go home came after a fortnight of bloody 
clashes, as student union activists tried to expel members of 
violent secret cults from campus. On Friday [11 March] the 
president of the student's union, Mr. Omoyele Showore, was 
stripped naked, beaten up, injected with a poisonous substance, 
and left in a coma by a gang of about 60 thugs said to be either 
cult members or hoodlums hired by cult members to serve the 
violent warning to other students not to interfere with cult 
activities. 
  The students retaliated by burning a Peugeot 504 saloon car, 
said to belong to a cult member; by interrogating two cult 
suspects who were paraded naked before a crowd of 400; and by 
setting fire to the household effects of one member of the 
university administration suspected by the students to have left 
detained alleged cult suspects go free. Students in Lagos today 
expressed disappointment at the situation, saying that exams -- 
in some cases, final exams postponed from last September -- were 
due to start next week. They described cult members as academic 
fallouts whom they suspect to have instigated the troubles to 
avoid exams. 
  There are about five cults parading themselves on campus in 
Lagos. They call themselves (?Tie Eye), the Mafioso, the Black 
Cats, Buccaneers, and the Vikings). They have been banned from 
campus since the early 1980s and only began reappearing late 
last year. Their presence has been marked by intergang 
feudings, increased numbers of rape, and the presence of arms, 
including a grenade on campus. The cults, which seem to be 
degenerate forms of 1960s American-style college fraternities, 
are said to attract the sons of the Nigerian elite. Student 
union activists, who have detained suspected cult members and 
handed them over to the police, complain that the authorities 
are yet to take action against the cult suspects. [end recording] 

