Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rupert Steiner] </F>
  [Text] Four airlines, including Virgin Atlantic, failed to 
detect Semtex bombs being smuggled by government security 
investigators on board their aircraft at Heathrow. 
  Staff checking baggage and monitoring x-ray machines missed 
the devices, some of which were hidden inside Mr Blobby dolls 
and built out of Semtex, detonators and electric wires. The 
tests last month were part of a campaign to improve security at 
the busiest international airport. 
  American, United and KLM Royal Dutch also failed the test, 
conducted by Transec (transport security) officials working for 
the Department of Transport, after a complaint about security 
loopholes from a former security employee at the airport. 
  The devices were recovered by Transec inspectors minutes 
before they were due to be loaded into holds. 
  A block of Semtex the size of a bag of sugar blew up a Pan 
Am 
Boeing 747 over Lockerbie in Scotland five years ago, killing 
270 people, many of whom had boarded at Heathrow. Security 
experts said yesterday that the dummy devices posed no threat to 
passengers because the Semtex was chemically inert. 
  Harry Ditmas, the Transec director, recently reported to 
ministers that travellers using Britain's airports were still 
facing an "unacceptable" risk from terrorism. He said he 
regarded security standards as getting better but still 
depressingly poor. 
  Last year, Transec inspectors identified at least one 
significant security lapse a month, any one of which could have 
allowed terrorists to slip through the "ring of steel" promised 
by successive transport ministers. 
  Standards vary, from Glasgow, where all baggage is screened, 
to Norwich, where Transec has issued a warning to managers to 
strengthen security. Last year even El Al, the Israeli airline 
widely regarded as the most security-conscious airline in the 
world, was criticised by Transec. "Overall, the implementation 
of security measures is still patchy," said Ditmas, a defence 
ministry official seconded to Transec after the Lockerbie 
tragedy. 
  United Airlines, one of the world's biggest, has dismissed 
an 
employee after the Heathrow tests. "We have tightened up 
procedures," the airline said. "But we do not feel the test was 
fair. Transec does not allow for `profiling' -- identifying 
terrorists by passport-checks and other methods -- and anyway 
the device would have been picked out before being loaded on to 
a plane because we reconcile all bags with passengers. British 
airlines do not have to do that until 1996." Virgin Atlantic 
said it was investigating "an incident" and would review safety 
procedures. KLM confirmed it had failed the test on January 20, 
but said it would have stopped a bomb getting on to an aircraft 
by baggage reconciliation. 
  Other airlines tested during the week-long Transec campaign 
are believed to have detected the bombs, but officials declined 
to identify them. 

