BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Italian Deputy Foreign Minister Livio Caputo </F>
by RIA-NOVOSTI correspondent Aleksey Khazov in Rome "especially 
for ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI;" date not given: "Italian Diplomacy: 
Thoughts on Naples and Moscow"] 
  [Text] It did not prove very hard to get an interview with 
Livio Caputo, new Italian deputy foreign minister. Partly 
because that is the new style which has already been established 
in the Berlusconi government, and partly because Caputo is a 
former journalist colleague. We became acquainted at a time 
when he was chief of the international edition of the Milan 
CORRIERE DELLA SERA and, coming to Moscow, managed to get what 
was at that time an international "scoop" -- an hour-long 
interview with Yegor Ligachev. 
  Caputo is 60 years old. He is married with three children, 
speaks five languages fluently, and has an indomitable passion 
for sailing (he participated in the first round-the-world event 
in 1973). He has a long journalistic and writing career behind 
him (he won the Hemingway Prize for his reports from war-torn 
Kuwait and has written three books devoted to Italian domestic 
politics, one of them significantly entitled The 
Downtrodden Citizen [Bednyaga-grazhdanin]). He is one of 
the "new people" who have come to the fore of Italian politics 
on the wave of the Forza Italia movement, which has proclaimed 
that its aim is to fight total irresponsibility and corruption. 
Already the new deputy minister, who is responsible for Italy's 
European affairs, has at least two successful diplomatic 
operations to his credit -- the Cairo talks which made it 
possible to secure the votes of "nonaligned" needed for Italy's 
admission to the UN Security Council 1 January next year, and 
the signing of a treaty on partnership between the European 
Union [EU] and Ukraine. 
  And so to our interview. 
  [Khazov] Today, on the eve of the summit meeting in Naples 
and President Yeltsin's visit to Italy, what in general terms is 
the Berlusconi government's attitude toward the new Russia? 
  [Caputo] To us, Russia is a great power which, in tackling 
difficult problems, is striving to find equilibrium and trying 
to transform a command economy into a market economy and 
simultaneously take its proper place in the changed world. This 
place must correspond to both its historical traditions and its 
status as a nuclear power. 
  [Khazov] Does official Rome support Russia's admission to 
the G-7 or does it support the option which commentators have 
dubbed "G-7 and a half," where Moscow is cast in the role of the 
"half"? 
  [Caputo] We advocate Russia's admission to the G-7 Political 
Directorate. At the same time we believe that the conditions 
for your country's full participation in this formation, where 
the economic factor is overriding, have objectively not yet come 
about. 
  [Khazov] What are these conditions? 
  [Caputo] Above all a sufficient level of market relations, 
currency convertibility and its known stability, and 
competitiveness of industry beyond the bounds of customs 
barriers, that is to say, full compliance with all the 
requirements made of G-7 participants. This, of course, is not 
only Italy's opinion, it is the opinion of all G-7 members 
without exception. 
  [Khazov] Is it possible to talk of the Berlusconi cabinet's 
continuity of "Russian" policy? 
  [Caputo] Of course, there are no radical changes of course 
and there cannot be any. I would mention as a new element only 
our government's constant attention to the process of 
liberalizing the Russian market, which would make your economy 
more comparable to Western ones. Let us put it this way: 
Compared with our predecessors we are trying to monitor Russian 
economic growth trends more seriously. 
  [Khazov] Some observers are trying to define the degree of 
Russia's "potential danger" to the Western world and to 
Europe.... 
  [Caputo] We believe that no danger exists as long as the 
current Russian leadership keeps firm hold of the reins of 
government. Yes indeed, we observed Russian diplomacy's first 
moves in the Bosnian crisis with some concern, but then we 
appreciated the possible "domestic" nature of this position and 
thereafter welcomed Russia's mediation. In my view this 
mediation made it possible to secure from the Serbs something 
the West would never have secured with its threats. Let us hope 
that Moscow's desire to cooperate will prevail over the logic of 
old alliances founded on religious and ethnic factors. 
  [Khazov] Consequently, can it be assumed that Rome, with its 
interests in the Balkans and Mediterranean, will be developing 
special contacts with Moscow regarding this region? 
  [Caputo] As regards cooperation, this is already taking 
place in addition to that through official channels. But it 
must be borne in mind that Italy is a member of NATO and the EU. 
Therefore it is obliged to synchronize with its allies its 
actions in relation to Russia. It is also important that our 
bilateral relations are developed outside the "umbrella" of 
coordinated policy, especially in the economic, trade, and 
cultural spheres. From this viewpoint we are mainly hoping for 
the very rapid modernization of Russian legislation regulating 
the attraction of foreign investment and favoring the activity 
of joint enterprises. Without a solution to the problem's legal 
aspect the Russian market's potential may never materialize in 
the way that it merits. 
  [Khazov] How are relations between Italy and other CIS 
countries developing? 
  [Caputo] Only yesterday in Luxembourg I and President 
Kravchuk put our signatures to the treaty on partnership between 
the EU and Ukraine. It is identical to the one we are shortly 
to sign with Russia in Corfu. Our relations with Moscow and 
other CIS capitals will be developed on parallel courses. As 
objective opportunities occur, partnership agreements will, I 
hope, be concluded with each of them. In the light of specific 
local characteristics, naturally: Thus, in the case of Ukraine 
the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power station is an 
important factor. But we have no bias toward anyone. 
  [Khazov] The slogan of the Forza Italia movement, which won 
an unqualified victory in the recent elections to the European 
Parliament, was the call: "Italy must mean more in Europe!" 
What are the ways of achieving this? 
  [Caputo] First, we want to be more vigorous in protecting 
our interests in the EU, where our partners, displaying better 
organizational capabilities, have encroached on them time and 
again. Second, we want to have greater weight in the "contact 
committee" for solving the Bosnian crisis. Finally, our 
membership of the UN Security Council, which we have just 
practically secured for ourselves, will be of great importance 
as regards putting the slogan into practice. 
  [Khazov] What does the Naples summit mean for the Berlusconi 
government? 
  [Caputo] Oh, it will be trial by combat. We hope that 
Naples will give the whole world a chance to see for itself that 
the new Berlusconi government knows full well what it wants, 
that it is not a "danger" to the West's stability, as the 
left-wing press has tried to prove, and finally that it can 
worthily represent Italy's interests at the highest echelons of 
world politics. 

