Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 12 Jan (NA) -- Foreign Ministry 
Secretary General Andres Cisneros today denied that Argentina's 
position regarding the Malvinas Islands is a weak one, but he 
did admit that it is overshadowed by the fact that "a war was 
lost," and that "he who is now unlawfully in possession of them 
has, in fact, the power to do and undo due to the power invested 
in weapons." 
  Cisneros made it clear that the official Malvinas policy is 
not set by the Foreign Ministry, but "by President Carlos Menem 
himself." 
  He said: "There are only three ways in which to recover the 
lost territories: to demand them by right, war, or through 
negotiations," and he justified the use of the last alternative 
because to "insist only on the judicial factor is not enough to 
recover the islands because the world organization does not have 
an institution that can award what each country has a right to." 
  In remarks to a radio station, Cisneros said that with this 
type of claim, which he considered "very dignified and very 
correct for these times, we have the reason but not the islands. 
There are two ways for a right to become a reality: war or 
negotiation, there are no others. We already know what the 
results of a war are with Great Britain; therefore, only 
negotiation remains." 
  Regarding the attempts to change the attitude of the Kelpers 
[preceding word in English] regarding Argentina, Cisneros said: 
"It is not a question of seducing them to deceive them or 
attract them with fantastic promises." 
  He stated that there are two very distinct attitudes 
regarding the Malvinas, and one of them "has lasted for 160 
years and it is the hostile attitude based on the premise that 
if the islanders always get the short end of the stick, 
Argentina will always be better off." 
  Cisneros indicated that instead this government believes the 
better way "is everything to the contrary, and that as we 
establish links of mutual interest they will begin to understand 
that the only way they have to exploit their notable raw 
materials is through cooperation with the only neighbor in the 
world that God has given them." 
  He mentioned that the fact that the British Government is 
investigating alleged war crimes by its soldiers and that 
Argentina has offered to clear up the mine fields are among the 
achievements that have helped the rapprochement between the two 
nations. 
  Finally, he stressed that for some time now "millions of 
Argentines" have had two passports and can now visit the 
islands, and "this is a very important first step toward 
unfreezing relations with the islanders." 

