BFN 

  [Excerpts] The UN Security Council will certainly vote 
tonight on the French proposal for military intervention in 
Rwanda. Without waiting for the resolution to be adopted, the 
French army has already started to deploy men in eastern Zaire. 
Our special correspondent in Goma is Jean Helene: 
  [Helene] Some 50 French soldiers who arrived by Transall 
[aircraft] this morning, probably from Bangui, are waiting at 
the edge of the tarmac, next to the Goma airport terminal. Some 
of them are surveying the runway, which is 3,200 meters long: 
ideal for large transport planes. 
  The detachment arrived with only two jeeps. No heavy 
materiel is to be seen around, but large transport planes are 
expected in the next few hours. According to reports heard in 
the town, French planes are also said to have landed troops in 
Bukavu, 200 km further south. The runway of that airport, half 
the length of the one in Goma, can only take fully laden Hercule 
C-130s, though Transalls with 11 [metric] tonnes of freight can 
land. 
  In town the market is as busy as usual. There is just a hint 
of excitement among the security forces. Opposition supporters 
are frowning, explaining that the French operation will benefit 
President Mobutu. The people of Goma are worried that a 
French-UN intervention, virulently criticized by the rebels of 
the Rwandan Patriotic Front, may bring troubles to the town. 
Some are even afraid the Rwandan conflict may spill over to 
this side of the border. 
  Jean Helene, Goma, RFI 
  [Announcer] Various rumors, denied by the French Government, 
spoke of some French troops already being present on Rwandan 
soil, sent as scouts to prepare a possible intervention. 
  The intervention will not be easy, and is already creating 
serious problems to the UN peacekeepers in Kigali. [passage 
omitted] 
  Major Plante, the UNAMIR [UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda] 
spokesman in Kigali, explains. He is interviewed by Assane Diop: 
  [Begin recording] [Plante] The commander of the force 
decided 
to rotate personnel, a measure to take these people, about 40 in 
all, and take them to Nairobi. We are going to collect about 40 
of our military observers who are currently in Nairobi and bring 
them here to replace them. This will be done today. 
  [Diop] You say there were various signs that made you think 
these African soldiers were not welcome in rebel territory? 
  [Plante] Perhaps so, or perhaps it was a decision made here 
that it was better from a security point of view, that those 
people should go and work at the Nairobi (?mission) for the 
moment, and come back later. 
  [Diop] But isn't it connected to the fact that these 
countries -- Senegal, Congo and others -- are supporting the 
French intervention plan, an intervention to which the RPF 
[Rwandan Patriotic Front] is opposed? 
  [Plante] Don't make me say things I don't want to, and that 
I 
can't say. [end recording] 
  [Announcer] That was Major Plante, the UNAMIR spokesman in 
Kigali. 
  In Brazzaville, the Foreign Ministry announced yesterday 
evening that Congo will not after all send troops with the 
French force in Rwanda. But Congo does agree to take part in 
Unamir, the UN force, and to send men, but in the very clear 
framework of the deployment in Rwanda of the extra 5,500 
peacekeepers. 
  But in Senegal yesterday the cabinet confirmed its 
willingness to send troops to Rwanda in the framework of the 
humanitarian operation initiated by France, which is raising 
quite a lot of questions among the Senegalese public. Nicolas 
Balique [reports]: 
  [Begin Balique recording] Forty-eight hours after the 
agreement in principle announced during the French foreign 
minister's visit to Dakar, President Abdou Diouf has in fact 
confirmed the firm yes from his country to the humanitarian 
intervention in Rwanda. The communique published after the 
cabinet meeting speaks -- I quote -- of a contribution to 
stopping the massacres, and reestablishing peace and accord. 
  If nothing has been agreed about the number of men 
committed, 
and the precise modalities of their participation, the 
authorities are recalling that their agreement remains linked to 
the decision of the UN Security Council. Nor has there been any 
comment on the departure from Kigali of the 40 or so Sengelese, 
Togolese, and Congolese observers. 
  At a time when the massacres in Rwanda continue, the press 
is 
asking questions. Yesterday the daily LE TEMOIN carried as a 
front page headline over five columns: "What sauce are our 
djambars [soldiers] to be served up with?", speaking about 
Senegal's hasty -- I quote -- yes to France. The daily WAL 
FADJRI thinks that this support seems to be precipitate. 
  Nicolas Balique, Dakar, RFI. [end recording] [passage 
omitted] 
  [Announcer] France does not despair of convincing the RPF of 
the validity of the operation. The Foreign Ministry 
spokesperson reported that there have been contacts in Paris 
with representatives of the RPF starting this morning. Muriel 
Pomponne: 
  [Begin Pomponne recording] Yes, Jacques Bihozagara, the 
representative of the RPF in Europe, was in Paris this morning 
at the invitation of the French authorities. He had a long talk 
with Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, and an hour and a half of 
more technical discussions with representatives of the 
Cooperation, Foreign, and Defense ministries and at the office 
of the president of the republic. The conclusion of the RPF 
representative: Our position remains unchanged. We reject the 
idea of French intervention in Rwanda, whatever its timeframe 
and whatever its size. 
  The proposal not to intervene in zones controlled by the 
RPF but to maintain permanent contact with the RPF headquarters 
did not succeed in softening the position of the rebel movement. 
However, the RPF is not opposed to France putting its financial 
and material means at the disposal of UN forces who could 
intervene in the framework of UNAMIR-2, though of course French 
soldiers should not take part in the force. 
  Alain Juppe is reported to have told Jacques Bihozagara that 
he noted his position. 
  Paris therefore now has two other mediators in contact with 
the RPF in Uganda: they are Ambassador Jean-Michel Marlaud 
[French ambassador to Rwanda] and the deputy director of African 
affairs. So French pressure continues, but the RPF appears to 
be inflexible for the present. [passage omitted] 
  The former French minister for humanitarian action, Bernard 
Kouchner, has just returned from Rwanda. He considers French 
intervention is, in his words, a terrible solution but a 
necessary one. 

