BFN 

  [Text] Arcore, Italy, April 4 (AFP) -- A row escalated 
Monday [4 April] between Silvio Berlusconi, whose Forza Italia 
led Italy's general election, and his critical Northern League 
ally, making the chances of forming a government together 
increasingly remote. 
  The media magnate, who launched Forza Italia (Go Italy) only 
a few months before last weekend's election, broke his 
diplomatic silence Monday and attacked Northern League leader 
Umberto Bossi after failing to make headway on a new cabinet. 
  Bossi has rejected Berlusconi as a candidate for the post of 
prime minister, demanded greater local autonomy as a condition 
for joining the government and declined a further meeting with 
him in favour of talks with opposition parties. 
  "Umberto Bossi seems to want to give way to the temptation 
of 
falling into the old rut" by including in the process groups 
which were "rejected" by electors, Berlusconi said in a 
statement from his home at Arcore, near Milan. 
  Bossi immediately reacted by calling an impromptu press 
conference at his home in nearby Ponte Di Legno. 
  "A party which does not exist has won the elections thanks 
to 
manipulation of television, creating a Kafkaesque situation," 
said Bossi. "Citizens should understand that in such a 
situation, only the League can guarantee democracy." 
  Berlusconi had warned the League in his statement that its 
new deputies, elected thanks to the Forza Italia campaign, 
should remain "loyal to its electors and allies." 
  "We will never forget that Forza Italia is the movement 
which 
gave voters the means to demolish" the discredited old political 
system. "We will continue to look for an agreement" with Forza's 
electoral partners, he said. 
  The Northern League and Forza Italia are in a fragile 
alliance with the right-wing neo-fascist Italian Social Movement 
(MSI), which favours greater central control. 
  But Bossi Monday repeated earlier protests against a 
possible 
inclusion of the MSI, stating two conditions for participating 
in the government -- "No to Berlusconi as prime minister, and no 
to a government with MSI." 
  The MSI spokesman Francesco Storace, joining the fray Monday 
evening, said Bossi "could have realised before now that 
Berlusconi posed a threat to democracy." Voters had "chosen the 
alliances selected by Berlusconi," he added. 

