Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by city reporter Honda from the "Kasumigaseki at </F>
the Crossroads" series; part three in a series of articles on 
the Ministry of Health and Welfare] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] On 2 July, a reception was 
held among health ministry officials to commemorate the 
inauguration of the ministry's "AIDS Division" -- the first such 
organization set up in the central government or in any local 
government. 
  The Office of Measures Against Tuberculosis and Infectious 
Diseases, which had handled the administration of AIDS, was 
promoted to the AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Infectious Disease 
Division effective that date. The event was held to encourage 
personnel of the new division, but remarks made by senior 
ministry officials in their congratulatory addresses were of a 
rather humorous but cynic substance -- as if reflecting the 
nature of that office. 
  Shuichi Tani, director of the ministry's Health Service 
Bureau, said in his speech: "We certainly hope that this newly 
born division will not be promoted to the status of a department 
or a bureau." Sadaichi Furukawa, administrative vice minister, 
on his part, said: "I pray that this division will come to be 
dissolved for a good purpose." 
  While the rate of the disease's growth is not as sharp as 
that in the United States or Southeast Asian countries, the 
numbers of patients and infected persons have continued to 
double every year since 1990. Even excluding those infected 
through blood transfusion, there were about 1,300 cases reported 
as of the end of June this year. According to an estimate by a 
ministry study team, the number could be "about nine times that" 
if unconfirmed cases of patients and infected are added. Some 
are concerned about the possibility of the "infection becoming 
explosive." There are many who critically contend that "the 
government has been too late in taking full-fledged measures"; 
but a senior MHW official notes that his ministry raised the 
1992 AIDS-related budget by five times the 1991 budget and that 
the AIDS Division has been inaugurated as well. He insisted that 
the ministry has made its position clear that "it is all out to 
take on the issues." 
  But it is still difficult to say that prejudices against 
AIDS 
patients and infected persons have been removed. Many hospitals 
are still refusing to take care of them; there are only a 
limited number of hospitals which are prepared to take them in. 
About the only thing we can see are "AIDS-centered" hospitals 
being readied in a hurry. Japan's measures against AIDS may be 
said to be still in the beginning stage. 
  Now, when there are no drugs to cure the disease, there is 
no 
alternative but for the ministry's functions to be limited to 
those intended for education and information on AIDS. 
Consequently, cooperation with such other offices as the 
Education and Labor Ministries is becoming essential. 
Furthermore, the understanding of businesses must be gained to 
protect the infected's human rights. The system of cooperating 
with other countries needs to be upgraded as well. This means 
that the ministry is being compelled to do things which it has 
not done before. 
<H5>  Concern Rising on Right for Dignified Death </H5>
  Meanwhile, changes in the structure of diseases that have 
been brought about by progress in medical technology are 
beginning to bring about major changes in the direction of 
medical care itself. We can no longer unequivocally say that the 
treatment recommended by a doctor is the best for a patient. 
  What this condition has brought about is a system of 
"informed consent," which enables treatment to be given only 
after a doctor has adequately explained the proposed treatment 
to his patient and the patient has consented to it. The MHW has 
begun to take up the matter seriously, and is now beginning to 
recognize the importance of the right for patients to make 
decisions on treatment as well. Meanwhile, growing rapidly in 
number -- thus raising the concern of the ministry -- are the 
people who do not agree to treatment which is only aimed at 
prolonging life. They support the right to die in a dignified 
manner. This may be a good example that typically shows changes 
taking place in the relations between patients and doctors 
concerning questions of disease, treatment, and death. What 
position the ministry will take with regard to this matter will 
become a task for it to solve in the future. 
<H5>  Growing Responsibility on Ethics Questions </H5>
  Another big issue is one concerning transplanting organs, 
which is being done in the United States and Europe as a normal 
practice. But since this involves removing organs from 
brain-dead humans, it requires a change from the past perception 
on the "death" of humans. In Japan, it is not done except in 
rare cases. 
  As the first reason Japan cannot decide on the organ 
transplant issue despite repeated requests by the medical 
circles, a senior MHW official cited the "people's deep-rooted 
mistrust in medicine." At present, a bill on organ transplants 
is being readied by a suprapartisan group of Diet members, but 
many people in the ministry said: "The medical circles, as the 
professional group, should have been responsible for explaining 
to the people the need for and problems related to transplants." 
The ministry appears to be in a quandary sandwiched between the 
people and the doctors. 
  Over the past several years, there have been a growing 
number 
of people with doctor's licenses applying to join the MHW as 
medical officials. Last year, 50 people -- or double the 25 
actually wanted -- applied. Hisashi Teramatsu, director of the 
ministry's Health Policy Bureau, noted: "Times have changed a 
lot compared to 20 years ago when hardly enough people applied 
to fill the necessary posts." Some think this shows the country 
is entering an era of too many doctors, but a senior MHW 
official thought this only showed there are a growing number of 
doctors getting attracted to the challenge of the new tasks 
faced by the new health and welfare administration. 
  Indeed, before the health and welfare administration there 
is 
now a mountain-load of new tasks it has had no experiences with. 
The problem of a rapidly aging population, the problem of 
pensions that come with the aging, the AIDS issue, the issue on 
the right to die, and the issue of organ transplants -- all of 
these are big topics that have much to do with the basics of the 
people's lives. No doubt, the MHW's responsibilities will grow 
further. 

