BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Wang Lingling: "State Tightens Control </F>
of Land Use"] 
  [Text] The State land administration department is taking 
action to bring China's vast land resources under control. 
  Top land administration officials pledged that by the end of 
next year every piece of urban land will be issued an "ID card." 
  "All the land will be registered and all land users will be 
given certificates that define their rights to exploit the 
properties within State regulations," said Lu Xinshe, top tax 
registrar with the State Land Administration (SLA). 
  In 1986 local land administrators were instructed to 
strengthen land registration procedures. And so far, half the 
users of State land have got certificates . 
  A nationwide land inspection will also be completed soon, 
according to Lu. For years, no accurate figures have been 
available on the rural areas under cultivation. 
  After nearly 10 years of investigation, a full picture of 
local land use patterns is starting to appear, said Lu. And 
statistics on the country's land reserves will be obtained by 
June, he added. 
  The survey shows that the country's cultivated land area is 
30 percent greater than was originally estimated, said Ma Kewei, 
deputy director of the SLA. 
  While this may come as a relief to a populous and land 
hungry 
country like China, it also reveals just how inefficient the 
agricultural sector is. 
  In other words, the survey shows that average output per 
unit 
of farmland was smaller than reported. 
  And it is now crucial for the central government to adjust 
its economic development blueprint and draft new plans in 
accordance with the reality. 
  While the land in all rural areas is collectively-owned, 
that 
in urban areas belongs to the State. 
  The government used to distribute urban land to State work 
units free of charge, and without land-use certificates. 
Loopholes in the practice started to surface in the early 1980s 
when land was first traded as a commodity. 
  But, in 1987, the first land-use auction took place in 
Shenzhen, ending the era when State land could be used free of 
charge and without time limits. The market began to play its 
role. 
  And people realized that land can bring in profits. 
  But the commercialization of land brought another set of 
problems. Disputes over land-use transactions and black markets 
became rampant, said Lu. 
  In one case, a dispute erupted when a factory refused to 
give 
back a piece of land it "borrowed" from an institution -- free 
of charge -- in the 1950s. The factory argued that since the 
institution didn't have any documents to prove its land 
ownership, it had no property rights. 
  In other cases, poor management of the land tax registration 
system lost the State a lot of money. 
  China loses about 30 billion yuan ($3.5 billion) annually 
through illegal State land property deals, said Lu. 
  One of the main leaks is in the land leasing sector. Many 
parcels of State land were rented at below face value rates. 
  A recent land inspection in 43 cities shows that the average 
rent for a square metre of land is about 188 yuan ($22), some 40 
percent lower than the official SLA rate. And only 15 of the 
cities surveyed collect a standard charge on their leases. 
  Over 93 percent of land exploitation rights were sold 
through 
negotiations rather than public bidding. This often means that 
personal relations and private interests can come before State 
interests, which, of course, results in unfair land deals, said 
Lu. 
  Another problem is that the lion's share of land leasing 
revenue ends up in the pockets of local work units instead of 
being handed over to local governments, despite the stipulation 
that work units should only take 2-5 percent of the earnings. 
  And most local governments failed to hand over the mandatory 
32 percent of land revenues to the State coffers. 
  The irregularities in State land leasing were a major factor 
leading to the overheated real estate profiteering of 1992 to 
1993, economists say. 
  And the SLA has had to take some tough measures to check the 
malpractice and throttle the drain on State property purse, Lu 
said. 
  Local governments and land administrators must now auction 
land- use rights and put a stop to negotiated land deals. 
  And, in a bid to curb speculation on value-added land. 
regulations on collecting land-added tax have come into effect 
this year. 
  Local land administrations have to make sure that land 
traders follow the legal procedures and remit the appropriate 
charges. 
  The management now also requires strict land valuation. More 
than 400 cities and towns have finished rating their land. And 
it is expected that by the middle of next year, price tags will 
be attached to every piece of land in the country's cities and 
towns. 
  But State land management is now facing a new challenge from 
get- aheads, reform-driven State enterprises. Different firms 
across the country are coming up with different land use 
proposals and solutions. 
  The Beijing No 1 Light Industrial Corporation, for example, 
moved one of its loss-making factories to the suburbs and 
converted the downtown factory space into a residential 
development, for which shares were issued. 
  The apartment blocks are run by a company under the 
corporation. 
  A radical solution to land-use problems. And, perhaps, one 
with only limited benefits. 
  "It is controversial that the country benefits nothing 
through the exchange of State land rights, though the enterprise 
revitalized its ailing properties," said Lu. 

