Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taipei, Feb 18 (AFP)--Taiwan prosecutors said 
Friday they would recommend heavy punishment for a Chinese man 
who allegedly diverted a China Southwest Airlines Boeing 737 
here. 
  "Hijacking is a serious crime under international law, and 
we 
will ask that the court hand down severe punishment against the 
alleged hijacker," Lin Chieh-teh, chief of Taoyuan Prosecutor's 
Office, told reporters here. He said Lin Wenqiang had been 
arrested and detained by the office pending legal action here. 
Under local law, the maximum penalty for hijacking is life 
imprisonment. 
  Huang Hui-ho, deputy director of the Civil Aeronautics 
Administration, asked China to further tighten its airport 
security to prevent future cases from ocurring. "They must 
search the suspicious passengers, regardless whether they are 
police or not, before allowing them to board the plane," he 
said, referring to Lin's disguising himself as a police officer. 
  Lin, 36 (eds: correct), impersonated a military police 
officer, and ordered the crew of the Chinese airliner with 130 
people on board, including eight crew, to change course when the 
plane was on a domestic flight from Changsha to the coastal city 
of Fuzhou. 
  Lin, a business manager at a state-run company in Changsha, 
Hunan province, brought his foster mother, wife, and two sons 
aged 9 and 11 with him. 
  Lin was arrested after he surrendered to police when the 
plane touched down at Taiwan's international airport at 10:43 
a.m. (0243 GMT). All passengers, including Lin's family and the 
crew, were returned to Fuzhou via Hong Kong four hours later. 
  "I used a fake military police ID which I obtained through a 
friend to board the plane," Lin told reporters before being 
taken to the prosecutor's office, explaining why the airport 
personnel did not search him. 
  Lin used a knife and a fake bomb to make the pilot fly to 
Taiwan, Huang said. The bomb turned out to be a lid cup stuffed 
with toilet paper. The hijacker showed a crew member a piece of 
paper that said: "I want to hijack the plane to Taiwan. If you 
come close to me, I will blast off the plane," Huang said. 
  Lin said he had planned the hijacking since October last 
year. "I had been prosecuted [as received] by the communists ... 
and wanted to come here," he said, adding he was aware that 
hijacking was a crime in Taiwan. 
  The incident was the 11th in ten months, and the first this 
year. A total of 15 suspects were involved in the hijacking of 
Chinese airliners to Taiwan last year. 
  The issue has become a new source of friction between Taiwan 
and China. 
  The two sides have remained rivals since the 1949 Chinese 
civil war after which the defeated Nationalists fled to Taiwan. 
Both governments claim sovereignty over all of China. 
  Represented by their semi-official agencies, the two sides 
began negotiations in Beijing in August 1993. Although the two 
sides held three rounds of talks, no conclusion on the 
repatriation of the hijackers was reached. 
  China has strongly demanded the return of hijackers, but 
Taiwan insists it has the jurisdiction to handle the cases and 
try the hijackers here. 
  Taiwan has so far sentenced six of the 15 hijackers to jail 
terms ranging from six to ten years. 

