Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] During its plenary session yesterday, the Chamber of 
Deputies accepted the Movement of the Revolutionary Left's [MIR] 
request that the lower house's Constitution Commission 
investigate this party. 
  I have said, quote, investigate this party, unquote, 
intentionally because MIR Deputy Mario Rueda Pena will now 
explain to us that the MIR is by no means, nor is it even 
suspected of being, involved with drug trafficking, but rather 
some of its leaders. 
  [Begin Rueda recording] It is not the MIR, my party--and 
this 
must be made quite clear--but some MIR leaders and militants, 
who have been mentioned by two outstanding Bolivian drug 
traffickers such as Meco Dominguez and Chavarria, to the judges 
in charge of hearing drug cases. I think Meco Dominguez rather 
than Chavarria made the charges. Therefore, let us not mistake 
the trees for the forest. The trees are those mentioned, and 
the forest is the institution, the party. It is not a matter of 
saying that the MIR is being investigated; I belong to the MIR, 
and nobody can say I am involved with drug trafficking, that I 
am linked to drug trafficking, or can you accuse me of that? 
Not me. Anyway, the Chamber of Deputies Constitutional 
Commission will determine who is involved. Well, they already 
have the names, the names have already been made public, and 
among them more or less 300 to 500 outstanding MIR leaders are 
not mentioned, nor are the thousands and thousands of militants 
the MIR has in its capacity as an institution. [end recording] 
  Mario Ruedas is right. But the MIR leaders themselves are to 
blame for the confusion. The MIR leaders yesterday held a news 
conference during which they said that the MIR rejects, the MIR 
is submitting itself, the MIR--several things in its capacity as 
an institution, as a political party--but they did not bother to 
identify those involved in this affair with Meco Dominguez and 
Oso Chavarria. We are referring to an institution with more 
than 20 years of impeccable reputation. 

