BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Martin Abbugao] </F>
  [Text] Manila, June 14 (AFP) -- The Philippines' frenzied 
search for oil has led it into potentially dangerous waters with 
the grant of an exploration contract around the disputed Spratly 
islands, analysts said here Tuesday. 
  Philippine officials in May gave the green light to Alcorn 
Petroleum and Minerals Corp. and US partner Vaalco Energy Inc. 
of Houston, to begin preliminary exploration work on the Reed 
Bank, an undersea structure near the South China Sea chain. 
  The six-month, non-exclusive contract includes "research and 
library work" on aeromagnetic surveys and other data held by the 
Department of Energy. 
  Philippine energy officials insist the area where the 
exploration would be conducted is not part of the Spratlys -- a 
chain of atolls in the South China Sea claimed wholly by China 
and in part by Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and 
Vietnam. 
  The Spratlys are believed to sit atop vast deposits of oil 
and natural gas and also straddle strategic sea lanes. All 
claimants but Brunei have stationed troops on islets in the 
chain. 
  Analysts say Manila's recent move would strengthen its 
sovereignty over islets, reefs and atolls it has garrisoned, but 
could also have a political and diplomatic impact on efforts to 
peacefully resolve the territorial dispute and suggestions for 
joint development of the area. 
  "It's a response to what the Chinese and Malaysians are 
doing," Julius Cesar Parrenas, director of the International 
Institute for Strategic Studies, told AFP. 
  He was referring to Beijing's granting of a contract to the 
US-based Crestone Energy Corp. to explore for oil in the area, 
prompting vehement protests from Vietnam. Malaysia has also 
embarked on a project to develop a resort in the Spratlys. 
  "One means of strengthening sovereignty is by already having 
activity there, such as a contract of government or development 
plans," he said, adding that exploration was a good move by the 
Philippines. 
  Noel Morada, an analyst with the Institute for Strategic and 
Development Studies, said what is crucial to the Philippines' 
move is the reaction of China and Vietnam. 
  "Since we are taking this particular action, we should be 
prepared of the possible consequences," he said. "This is an 
economic move which has political implications." 
  Energy Secretary Delfin Lazaro and Undersecretary Rufino 
Bomasang on Tuesday sought to forestall trouble by insisting the 
permit granted to Alcorn was limited to the Reed Bank and did 
not include areas in the Spratlys. 
  The Reed Bank is an underwater structure between the 
Philippine island of Palawan and most of the Spratlys. 
  Lazaro and Bomasang said Manila had done exploratory 
drilling 
there in the 1970s, which had not been disputed by other 
claimants, adding that political and diplomatic repurcussions 
had been considered before the permit was granted. 
  Alcorn said in a statement the research permit only covered 
the Reed Bank and excluded the disputed areas of the Spratlys. 
  But the statement said the area of coverage also includes 
Patag and Lawak islands -- two of the eight small islands and 
reefs garrisoned by Philippine marines and collectively referred 
to by Manila as the Kalayaan (Freedom) group. 
  The group was annexed in a presidential decree by the late 
dictator Ferdinand Marcos. 
  The Philippines has become an attractive site for oil 
exploration with news of recent oil strikes off Palawan, 
confirming the country's potential. It has programmed 18 wells 
for drilling this year, many in frontier areas. 

