Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Correspondent Hong Mei (4767 2734) and Reporter </F>
Yang Ming (2799 2494): "Prospect of a Rewarming of 
Sino-Vietnamese Border Trade, Closing the Back Door and Opening 
the Front Door"] 
  [Text] Prospects at the moment are for a rewarming of 
chilly Sino-Vietnamese border trade. This is what Zhou Jiafa 
[0719 1367 4099], director of the Guangxi Autonomous Region 
Border Trade Bureau said during an interview with the reporters 
several days ago. 
  Border trade between China and Vietnam has cooled for some 
time, largely because Guangxi closed all its maritime border 
trade cargo piers in July, thereby causing a great decrease in 
the volume of cargo crossing the border. In addition, Vietnam 
recently adopted a containment policy toward border trade. 
  First, since August, Vietnam has tremendously increased the 
tariff rate on imports from China. For example, the duty on 
diesel engines was increased nearly 10 fold, and the tariff on 
bicycles was raised from 60 percent to 150 percent. 
  Second, the Vietnamese authorities have strictly controlled 
the movement of goods and personnel. In the contested area of 
western Guangxi, border disputes escalated; consequently, border 
trade in places like Pakse fell 50 percent. In the Tonkin Gulf, 
pirate attacks on Chinese fishing ships also hurt border trade. 
  During an inspection trip to the Tonkin Gulf in October 
1993, 
Deputy Premier Li Lanqing [2621 1526 3237] noted the need to 
develop barter trade with Vietnam under Customs supervision and 
control. While increasing crackdowns on smuggling, China should 
further develop border trade. It should close the back door and 
open the front door, selecting wharfs and opening maritime 
points of entry and exit at places where conditions are ripe to 
engage in border trade. Guangxi Province presently has four 
national level, and eight provincial and local level land points 
of entry and exit. It has 28 border defense reciprocal marketing 
points. Departments concerned plan to normalize Customs 
supervision and control at major provincial level cargo entry 
and exit points, including Shuikou, Aidian, Nongyao, and Puzhai. 
They will increase the number of cargo shipping wharves for 
border trade, opening them in turn as conditions warrant, 
thereby promoting development of Sino-Vietnamese border trade. 
  Guangxi authorities concerned are currently working to 
create 
a fine climate for border trade, and they plan to use the 
advantage Guangxi has in neighboring Vietnam to focus on 
long-term increase in economic cooperation with Vietnam in the 
technical and financial fields. 

