BFN 

  [Text] Washington, May 23 (XINHUA) -- The passage of the 
final pact of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 
in Congress before the end of this year was at stake, Clinton 
administration officials said here today. 
  "There's a great deal at stake here," Treasury Secretary 
Lloyd Bentsen said at the opening ceremony of the World Trade 
Week 1994 held here, "We're going to ratify (the agreement), but 
it's not going to be easy." 
  The Congress was debating the revenue losses as the result 
of 
the GATT agreement, estimated at 14 billion U.S. dollars in five 
years, and whether the new World Trade Organization (WTO) meant 
the loss of the U.S. sovereignty to developing countries in 
trade disputes. 
  Meanwhile, Commerce Secretary Ron Brown said that the 
Clinton 
administration was committed to GATT passage, "but it will not 
occur without the broad and vocal support of the entrepreneurial 
community." 
  "In the politically charged atmosphere of this election 
year," Brown said, "Congressional approval can still be blocked 
by a small group of people who are frightened of the future." 
  "We gotta have a GATT," Brown stressed, "The passage of GATT 
reflects the fact that government can and should make the 
American economy more competitive." 
  Clinton administration officials said that the GATT 
agreement, which reduces world tariffs by an average of 40 
percent, will create 1.4 million jobs in the U.S. and raise the 
annual income of the average American family by 1,600 dollars. 
  Treasury Secretary Bentsen, meanwhile, stressed that the 
Uruguay Round will make a contribution to deficit reduction in 
this country, reducing federal deficit by 15 billion dollars by 
the year 2004. 
  "This agreement also is a tax cut. It's a tax cut for 
American consumers. And it's a tax cut for American exports," 
Bentsen noted. 
  One-hundred and nine nations signed the Uruguay Round trade 
agreement in Marrakesh, Morocco, April 15, ending seven and a 
half years of negotiations. The agreement is subject to 
ratification by U.S. Congress. 
  This week, the United States observes the world trade week 
for the 60th consecutive year, with the theme "U.S. Exports = 
U.S. Jobs". 

