BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, June 24 (TANJUG) -- Moslem forces, not 
Serb, fired on a convoy of the U.N. Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
Thursday at a place called Teocak, east of the town Tuzla, 
northern Bosnia, a local Bosnian Serb military command set out 
Friday [24 June]. The statement came as reaction to UNPROFOR 
spokesman in Sarajevo Rob Annink's statement that the Serb 
forces used mortars to attack UNPROFOR vehicles escorting a 
humanitarian convoy, and which then invited NATO planes "air 
support". 
  The Serb military command statement said "members of the 
Bosnian Serb Army did not open fire" on the convoy -- which, as 
specified, was not previously announced -- but that "a mortar 
mine was fired on the UNPROFOR vehicle by the Moslem forces 
stationed in the occupied Serb village of Nikolic, not far from 
the Serb positions." 
  The local Serb command denied also that "NATO air force 
combat activity was registered" subsequently in the Teocak 
region. Immediately after the convoy attack, NATO air force 
began overflights of Serb Positions, but did not engage in 
combat activity, the statement said. U.N. Special Envoy Yasushi 
Akashi's spokesman, Michael Williams, who met in Pale (near 
Sarajevo) Friday the Bosnian Serb Republic (R.S.) President 
Radovan Karadzic, denied reports that NATO air force was engaged 
Thursday in combat missions on Serb territory in the Teocak area. 
  Explaining there had been an inaccuracy in the English 
translation, Williams said NATO planes overflew the said area, 
but fired no warning missiles. They only gave warning signs, he 
said. U.N. secretary-general's spokesman Joe Sills, as TANJUG 
New York correspondent set out, confirmed Friday news agency 
reports that the Bosnian Serb forces opened mortar and 
machine-gun fire Thursday near Teocak on a humanitarian convoy 
for which reason, as he said, NATO planes fired a number of 
warning missiles. 
  One mortar mine exploded some twenty meters from an armoured 
personnel carrier escorting the convoy, but there were no 
casualties, said Sills. He noted that this was not classical 
air support to UNPROFOR and that for this reason no approval was 
requested from Akashi for air strikes. 

