BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS observer Lyudmila Yermakova: "Money </F>
Likes Accounting"] 
  [Text] The Russian Federation Central Electoral Commission 
has created a special control and auditing service which has 
engaged in checking accounts and expenses during the election 
campaign. A report on the expenditure of funds has been sent by 
the Central Electoral Commission to the State Duma, which will 
decide what to do about violations and violators. The Central 
Electoral Commission has no "punitive powers" in that sense and 
does not have the right to draw legal conclusions. 
  According to the financial reports, 4.68 billion rubles [R] 
including R1.3 billion from the Central Electoral Commission 
went into the electoral associations' election funds. Of that 
sum R4.62 billion were spent. The remainder was returned to the 
current account of the Central Electoral Commission, which has 
channeled it into local elections. 
  For instance, according to the all-Russia state television 
and radio broadcasting company, the "Noris" enterprise paid over 
R5 million for air time supplied to the Liberal Democratic Party 
while the "Premyer" firm paid over R33 billion for "Russia's 
Choice." Similar facts were discovered with regard to the 
payment for air time supplied by the "Ostankino" company. Thus 
the "Mars" enterprise paid over R62 million for political 
advertizing for the Democratic Party of Russia and the "Folium" 
firm paid about R18 million. Payment of nearly R75 million was 
made for the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia by the "Sokol" 
leisure center. The Sverdlovsk branch of "Kedr" financed the 
election campaign, only to the tune of R11,000, it is true, 
without crediting the money to the association's electoral fund. 
  It was discovered that in contravention of the statute on 
elections, donations to electoral associations by corporate 
bodies with the participation of foreigners were allowed. An 
additional check of these cases is now under way. 

