BFN 

    [Editorial report] The following review of the 24 May issue 
of Cairo 'AQIDATI summarizes articles that are Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Controversy Over Book Continues 
  2. Islam and the West 
  3. UN Position on Bosnia-Herzegovina Criticized 
  4. Litigation Among Ulema 
  5. Muslims and the United States 
  6. Islamic Media 
  7. Schindler's List 
  8. Satellite Dishes 
<H5>  CONTROVERSY OVER BOOK CONTINUES </H5>
  Beginning on page 1 and continuing on pages 10 and 11, the 
newspaper allots further space, an approximate total of 6,000 
words, to a controversy first reported by 'AQIDATI'S 17 May 
issue, namely the publication of Professor 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
al-'Arusi's book "Towards True Islam: Studies in the Koran Bring 
True Islam to Light." The book -- which addresses, among other 
matters, issues such as the unification and amendment of Muslim 
prayer times worldwide, amendment of ablution and hajj 
procedures, female modesty rules, and urges a modern 
interpretation of the religious edicts governing them -- draws 
attacks from 'AQIDATI, Mufti of the Republic Dr. Muhammad Sayyid 
Tantawi, and several al-Azhar University professors. Tantawi 
points out that modes of worship are not a matter of opinion but 
are strictly regulated by the Koran and the prophet's example. 
Muhammad 'Abd-al-Hadi al-'Ujayl, mufti of Yemen, faults the 
writer, who is a professor of architecture, for his lack of 
academic credentials in religious studies. 
  'AQIDATI publishes a letter from Dr. Samir Sarhan, chairman 
of the Egyptian General Book Authority, who defends the decision 
to allow the book's publication. It also publishes a report 
written by the recognized Muslim intellectual Dr. Muhammad 
'Imarah, who says that after asking the writer to alter and 
correct a few minor points, he recommended publication of the 
book which shows "a remarkable intellectual effort, independence 
of opinion, and the writer's personal labor in trying to 
interpret Koranic verses." He calls the book "a good research, 
made more valuable by the fact that it is the fruit of the 
contemplations of someone who is not a specialist in Islamic 
studies." 
  'AQIDATI then proceeds to dispute the arguments put forward 
by Sarhan and 'Imarah in the book's defense and reiterates that 
the book constitutes an attack on Islam. 
  A separate brief news item on page 10 reports that Shaykh 
Muhammad Futuh al-Sani', a mosque imam and prayer leader from 
al-Mansurah, has asked al-Mansurah's Prosecutor's Office to 
investigate the Egyptian General Book Authority for publishing 
the book that contains "bizarre ideas, foreign to Muslim 
concepts, that contradict the unanimous opinions of Muslim ulema 
such as the amendment and alteration of prayer times, fasting, 
and pilgrimage." He also demands that further printing of the 
book be halted. 
  Another brief report on the same page says that a committee 
of ulema from the al-Azhar-affiliated Council of Islamic 
Research examined the book and recommended its withdrawal from 
circulation. A brief report on page 2 reads: "Following 
'AQIDATI'S campaign against some books published by the Egyptian 
General Book Authority, the Authority's officials are now 
inclined to prevent the publication of any book that has not 
been approved by al-Azhar." 
<H5>  ISLAM AND THE WEST </H5>
  In a 1,000-word article entitled "Islamic Consensus and 
Western Incursion" in the "Islamic Perspectives" column on page 
7, Dr. Muhammad 'Imarah, a well-known Islamic intellectual, 
discusses the tendency of orientalists to give undue prominence 
to Muslim "radical groups" and "bizarre intellectuals streams" 
in the Muslim world while ignoring moderate streams. He 
comments on a study by researcher (Martin Kramer) of Tel Aviv 
University who discusses the failure of Islamic conferences to 
confront Western incursions into the Muslim world. He also 
refers to other "Zionist studies" that focus on the success of 
"a Jewish minority in achieving their settlement project despite 
the [opposition of] the Arabs and Muslims who represent a 
quarter of humanity." 
  'Imarah says that the "Zionist scheme did not confront our 
nation with the power of the Jewish minority alone but is--by 
its nature and birth--a scheme of the imperialist West. Its 
forces are the forces of the ascendant Western civilization in 
which the Jews are merely the minor partner." 
  Recalling the efforts of major Islamic leaders and thinkers 
who sought to confront Western advances into the Arab-Muslim 
world, he says at least one of them, Jamal-al-Din al-Afaghani 
(1838-1897), understood that the nation could not be revived in 
time to withstand the "Western colonialist onslaught." 'Imarah 
continues that al- Afaghani realized that the circumstances of 
"backward Ottoman rule, reactionarism, misadministration, 
stagnation, injustice, and corruption," combined with the power 
of the industrialized West to preclude successful confrontation. 
For this reason al-Afaghani sought merely to reduce the losses 
and shorten the period of the nation's decline. 
  'Imarah concludes his article by saying these matters must 
be 
taken into account in the struggle against the West. He 
stresses that the West, two centuries after overrunning the 
Muslim world, is worried about Islam's increasing strength. 

<H5>    UN POSITION ON BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA CRITICIZED </H5>
  The paper's "In All Frankness" column on page 6 is devoted 
to 
criticism of the United Nations for its lack of action on 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, faulting the UN for leaving its affairs 
under the "domination of the big five." The writer, Basyuni 
al-Halawani, voices astonishment at UN Secretary General 
Butrus-Ghali's recent remarks to a French radio that the United 
Nations is neutral and that it has achieved success in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. He says the Bosnian Muslims were denied 
weapons at a time when arms were being smuggled to the Serbs and 
Croats. He says: "Had this organization adopted a just stance 
toward the afflicted Muslims in Bosnia, events would have taken 
a different course and the Muslims would have been able to 
defend their children, wives, and brothers and would have forced 
the Serbs to accept a peaceful solution." 
<H5>  LITIGATION AMONG ULEMA </H5>
  In a 2,500-word report on page 3, 'AQIDATI solicits the 
views 
of several academics and officials on the phenomenon of ulema 
seeking legal redress against other ulema who, differing with 
them on religious matters, use invective and slanderous remarks. 
The background to this affair is a lawsuit brought by the 
mufti, Dr. Muhammad Sayyid Tantawi, against several al-Azhar 
academics who have been attacking his fatwas on banking 
transactions and bank interest in newspaper articles. 
  There is no consensus among the respondents on whether it is 
desirable for Muslim ulema to air their disputes on the pages of 
the newspaper. Some support it but others say that public 
airing of such differences diminishes the public's confidence in 
the ulema. As to litigation, Dr. Ra'uf Shalabi, a former 
deputy rector of al-Ahzar, would like such controversies to be 
settled quietly but finds nothing wrong with someone going to 
court if he has been slandered or verbally abused. Al-Azhar 
professor Muhammad Mazru'ah believes that disputes among ulema 
should not reach the point of hurling insults or accusations of 
disbelief. He notes, however, that when one describes the 
other, in the course of a religious debate, as "an ignoramus, a 
misguided person, or falsifier," this does not constitute 
invective or slander. He says taking such matters to court is 
harmful to both sides. 
  Counselor Ahmad Mahmud Haykal, a former Court of Appeals 
judge, says that if a religious dispute leads to personal 
insult, then the injured party has the right to seek legal 
redress. 
<H5>  MUSLIMS AND THE UNITED STATES </H5>
  An 800-word article on page 20, by Muhmmad Muhammadayn, 
discusses a recent REUTER news analysis which says the United 
States strongly defends Islam and views Muslims as allies. It 
cites U.S. National Security Adviser Anthony Lake as saying that 
Islam is not the issue, but the extremists who exploit religion 
to attain political power are the issue. The writer finds 
REUTER's analysis strange and asks if the United States really 
defends Islam worldwide. He says: "Do the events in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina prove the sincerity of the U.S. National 
Security Adviser and demonstrate that Muslims are really 
Washington's allies?" 
<H5>  ISLAMIC MEDIA </H5>
  In the second installment of an ongoing series of articles 
on 
media affairs, published on page 18 and discussing ways to 
"develop the Islamic media," 'Abd-al-Rahman Sunbul, director of 
Egyptian television's religious programs calls for increasing 
the "religious dose" on television throughout the Arab world. 
Senior religious programs presenter Muhammad 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
calls on the Islamic Conference Organization to establish "an 
Islamic Information Institution" that will prepare radio and 
television programs dealing with the call to the faith. He says 
the INTERNATIONAL ISLAMIC NEWS AGENCY [IINA] must be 
strengthened and assisted in disseminating the Islamic world's 
news without being influenced by "the distortions of other news 
agencies which inject poison into their reports." 
<H5>  SCHINDLER'S LIST </H5>
  A 300-word report on the same page cites a comment by Radwan 
al-Kashif, a young Egyptian movie director, on Steven 
Spielberg's Schindler's List. He says he supports the screening 
of this film in Arab and Muslim countries but calls for the 
production of films "revealing Israel's crimes and practices." 
He says assistance from Arab governments to produce major 
motion pictures on this topic is necessary. 
<H5>  SATELLITE DISHES </H5>
  A 200-word report on page 2 reports that a lawsuit brought 
by 
a young Egyptian lawyer demanding the "banning of the 
importation and circulation of satellite dishes" will be 
discussed by Cairo's Administrative Court on 7 June 1994. 
  The report continues: "The Lawyers Association's Islamic 
Shari'ah Committee has already declared its solidarity and 
backing for the request to ban the use of satellite dishes. It 
believes that our opening up to the outside world must be based 
on selecting [broadcasts] that harmonize with this nation's 
character and rejecting all that threatens to obliterate this 
character." 

