CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Procedure for Preparing and </F>
Disseminating the Annual State Report on Questions of Consumer 
Rights Protection"] 
  [Text] 
  1. The annual state report on questions of consumer rights 
protection (henceforth referred to as the report) is an official 
document prepared for purposes of providing the organs of state 
power and the population of Russia with information on the state 
of affairs in the field of consumer rights protection. 
  The report serves as the basis for defining the priority 
directions of activity by organs of executive power on consumer 
rights protection, as well as for developing legislative 
measures for ensuring these rights. 
  2. The report utilizes official data of state statistics and 
accounting, as well as analytical developments, including 
predictions and recommendations of interested ministries, 
departments and organizations of the Russian Federation, along 
with other information. 
  Materials on the state of affairs in the field of consumer 
rights protection in the republics, krays, oblasts, the cities 
of Moscow and St. Petersburg, and the autonomous oblasts are 
used in preparing the report, as well as the results of 
scientific studies and information of social organizations 
associated with the evaluation of the protection of these rights. 
  3. The report is prepared by the Russian Federation State 
Committee on Anti-Monopoly Policy and Support of the New 
Economic Structures with participation of the ministries and 
departments of the Russian Federation and the organs of 
executive power of Russian Federation subjects, which submit the 
necessary materials for this purpose based on the methodological 
recommendations of the Russian Federation State Committee on 
Anti-Monopoly Policy and Support of the New Economic Structures. 
The terms for presenting the materials are determined by the 
Russian Federation State Committee on Anti-Monopoly Policy and 
Support of the New Economic Structures. 
  4. The Russian Federation ministries and departments, the 
agencies of executive power of Russian Federation subjects and 
the public organizations bear the responsibility for the 
objectivity, completeness and quality of the information. 
  5. After approval of the report by the Russian Federation 
State Committee on Anti-Monopoly Policy and Support of the New 
Economic Structures with the participation of interested 
ministries and departments, each year prior to 1 July, the 
report is submitted to the Russian Federation Government so that 
the appropriate decision on it may be adopted. 
  Accompanying the report are the proposals for improving 
consumer rights protection, which have been prepared in 
accordance with the established procedure. 
  6. The Russian Federation State Committee on Anti-Monopoly 
Policy and Support of the New Economic Structures provides for 
dissemination of the report. 
  7. The Russian Federation State Committee on Anti-Monopoly 
Policy and Support of the New Economic Structures, in 
cooperation with the Russian Federation Ministry of Finance, 
defines the order and sources of financing of the expenditures 
associated with the preparation and dissemination of the report. 

