BFN 

  [Text] Police Superintendent Juan Angel Aguero, chief of 
the Narcotics Department of the National Police, has warned that 
cocaine trafficking has grown by remarkable proportions in our 
country. He added that this information is based on the latest 
seizures of the valuable yet illegal merchandise in our country. 
  Aguero said: "There is a noticeable increase that is easy to 
detect in the latest drug seizures," adding that cocaine 
trafficking in Paraguay has grown considerably. 
  Aguero noted that drug seizures were smaller than the latest 
seizures, especially those made so far this year. Aguero added: 
"The trade is growing and cocaine trafficking is flourishing. 
We have no information on a group of cocaine addicts in 
Paraguay, but we know we are on the drug route. Trafficking has 
grown in Paraguay." 
  Aguero said the National Narcotics Directorate (Dinar) and 
the Narcotics Department of the National Police's work has been 
successful. "Dinar has in a few weeks confiscated more cocaine 
than the total confiscated in an entire year," Aguero said to 
prove his remarks. 
  According to National Antinarcotics Secretariat (Senad) 
information, 34,200 grams of high-purity cocaine from the 
Bolivian cartel of Santa Cruz de la Sierra was seized in April 
and May. Normally, cocaine seizures amount to only a few kilos 
per year, Senad sources said. 
  Aguero said mobile laboratories for producing cocaine have 
not yet been detected in our country. "There were reports that 
a border `mini-cartel' had a cocaine-producing laboratory in the 
Chaco or in the town of Pedro Juan Caballero, but so far we have 
been unable to confirm anything but drug trafficking." 
  The police official said the cocaine issue could be serious, 
considering the ratio accepted worldwide between the quantity of 
drugs seized and the volume that reaches its illegal market. 
"If we consider the accepted worldwide ratio, it may become a 
concern. Only 20 percent is being confiscated, while 80 percent 
reaches its destination. It is difficult to seize more," he 
said. "This means that if 50 kg are seized, it represents only 
20 percent of the entire shipment. Traffickers are getting most 
of their shipments to their destinations," the police official 
said. 
  Aguero added that recent cocaine seizures prove "there is an 
excess of narcotics. We must optimize our work, uniting 
security organization forces in the drug enforcement effort." 

