BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Lu Yongjian (7773 3057 1696)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 13 Jun (XINHUA) -- Premier Li Peng has 
shown deep concern for the masses affected by floods in 
Guangdong Province recently. On 12 June he extended through the 
State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters sympathy and 
solicitude to the people in the flood-stricken areas and paid 
high tribute to cadres, masses, officers and men of the People's 
Liberation Army and the Armed Police Force participating in the 
flood fighting and relief operations. Premier Li Peng also gave 
instructions on flood-related work, urging the affected people 
to fight the floods in unity, help themselves by stepping up 
production, and overcome difficulties to ensure an all-round 
victory in the struggle. 
  Caused by this year's third typhoon, the heavy rainfall and, 
in some areas, powerful rainstorms widely hit Guangdong Province 
8-9 June, sending river water levels quickly up -- 0.27 meter 
above the highest water level for the Jiuzhou River near 
Lianjiang City and above their warning level for Beijiang, 
Jianjiang, and Luojiang Rivers. Floods have affected 23 
counties and districts in Zhanjiang, Maoming, Yangjiang, 
Zhaoqing, Foshan, and Guangzhou cities; 7.95 million mu of 
farmland; and 8.09 million people -- 440,000 of whom were once 
stranded -- causing 58 deaths; 684 injuries; damage to 
irrigation facilities worth 217 million yuan; and an estimated 
provincewide direct economic loss amounting to 5.8 billion yuan. 
  With the arrival of the floods, local governments and 
relevant departments were quick in organizing the masses for 
flood fighting and rescue operations, with more than 7,100 
officers and men from the army, navy, air force, and the armed 
police force stationed in Guangdong being rushed to the front 
line. All the 440,000 people stranded by floods earlier are now 
out of danger, with disaster relief operations going on in full 
swing. 
  Chen Junsheng, state councillor and head of the State Flood 
Control and Drought Relief Headquarters, who was on an 
anti-flood inspection tour of the Taihu and Huaihe areas, also 
sent his regards to the flood victims in Guangdong, including 
Zhanjiang City. 
  Meanwhile, typhoon-related rainstorms in the past few days 
also sent water in Zhejiang Province's Qiantang and Puyang 
Rivers above their warning levels, affecting over 2 million 
people in more than 10 counties. Local cadres and masses have 
actively plunged themselves into flood relief operations. 

