Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Gornostayev report in the "In Brief" column: </F>
"Nuclear Weapons in Kiev Are in an Inadequate Condition"] 
  [Text] Addressing a press conference at the Russian 
Federation defense conference yesterday, which was devoted to 
the military aspects of the visit by U.S. President Bill 
Clinton, Colonel General Yevgeniy Maslin, chief of the Defense 
Ministry's Main Directorate, said that Russia will be ready 
within a year to evacuate to its territory all nuclear warheads 
stationed in Ukraine to be dismantled. As of now 176 ICBM 
launching pads are located in Ukraine, including 130 SS-19 and 
46 SS-24 units. Overall Kiev has 1,300 ICBM warheads and 600 
air-based cruise missile warheads. Having given a positive 
assessment of the signing of the trilateral 
Russian-Ukrainian-U.S. agreement on the abolition of Kiev's 
nuclear potential, General Maslin stated that it is 
impermissible to mark time on the evacuation and dismantling of 
the nuclear missiles. The beginning of this process now depends 
on the Ukrainian parliament, which is to ratify the trilateral 
agreement. Should it not be approved by the Ukrainian 
lawmakers, there may be unpredictable consequences. Nuclear 
munition storages are over-filled, which has already led to 
enhanced radiation backgrounds. The shelf life of most nuclear 
missile components have run out; part of the charges are in a 
near-emergency condition, while the level of emergency response 
crews shows that in the event of an explosion or leakage they 
will not be able to handle the consequences. "There are 
people," Maslin said, "who do not understand this danger." But 
there are also others who appreciate the threat but do not wish 
to help the abolition, either because they are playing the 
nuclear card or are unwilling to part with their chairs in state 
structures which they obtained after Ukraine assumed 
jurisdiction over the nuclear weapons of the former USSR located 
on its territory. 

