BFN 

<F P=106> ["New Talk" column: "A Turning Point for Renewing U.S.-DPRK </F>
Dialogue"] 
  [Text] Yesterday, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman 
commented on the Korean nuclear issue, and once again called on 
the parties concerned to remain calm and restrained and to make 
all possible efforts to restore dialogue, consultations, and 
negotiations as soon as possible in order to prevent the further 
aggravation of the situation. 
  Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Foreign Minister Qian 
Qichen talked separately about the Korean nuclear issue when 
meeting foreign visitors last week and hoped that the parties 
concerned would solve the problem through negotiations. 
However, the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA], after 
being prompted by some countries, adopted a resolution on 10 
June on halting technical assistance to the DPRK. Three days 
ago, the DPRK announced its decision to withdraw from the IAEA, 
and the situation thus worsened. 
  On the other hand, at the invitation of DPRK Foreign 
Minister 
Kim Yong-nam, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter visited the 
DPRK by crossing the border at the truce village of Panmunjom, 
and this has become the focus of people's attention. Yesterday, 
Carter held talks with Kim Yong-nam. More importantly, Carter 
will talk with DPRK President Kim Il-song, and the meeting will 
probably be held today. 
  Because the Korean nuclear issue has now come to an impasse 
that is making the situation more tense than before, the 
international community hopes that Carter's visit will help 
relax the atmosphere. In his speech at a banquet yesterday, 
Carter said that an optimistic outlook remained in the 
situation, and Kim Yong-nam also expressed hope of solving the 
problem through negotiations. Therefore, after Carter's meeting 
with Kim Il-song, some new developments may emerge and a further 
worsening of the situation can be avoided. The situation may 
thus become conducive to the restoration of consultations 
between the two sides. 
  A delegation from Japan's Socialist Party concluded its 
visit 
to the DPRK and returned home from Pyongyang via Beijing 
yesterday. When meeting the press in Beijing, they said that 
during their visit to the DPRK, they were told that the DPRK and 
the United States might resume talks by the end of this month. 
Whether this was true will be verified by Carter after he 
returns to Seoul or the United States via Panmunjom. 
  President Clinton says that Carter is visiting the DPRK just 
in a private capacity, but when meeting Congressional leaders of 
the two parties yesterday, he said that he hoped that Carter's 
visit might bring about more certainty to the situation. 
However, he still stressed that the United States was pursuing 
a "very prudent and very firm" policy toward the DPRK. 
  According to information from Washington yesterday, Clinton 
has drawn up a draft for a sanctions resolution and passed it to 
the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations for consultations with 
the representatives of other nations. The draft requires an 
arms embargo, a halt to UN assistance, a halt to scientific and 
technological cooperation, and a reduction in diplomatic 
contacts with the DPRK. However, the U.S. mass media also 
reported that there would be a one-month grace period even if 
the draft was passed. 
  Carter will stay in the DPRK for four days and will leave on 
Saturday. He will return to the United States on Sunday or next 
week. It is not clear whether a message will be brought back by 
Carter before the UN Security Council begins to discuss the 
U.S.-proposed sanctions, which may not only encounter opposition 
but could also be vetoed. Therefore, if the sanctions plan is 
shelved or removed before the resumption of U.S.-DPRK talks, 
then this will not only bring about a turning point for the 
situation on the Korean peninsula, but will also be conducive to 
the peace and tranquility of Asia and the world. 

