BFN 

  [Text] In an exclusive statement to AL-BILAD, Information 
Minister Dr. Jawad al-'Anani has denied reports that Amman will 
host Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin and U.S. President 
Bill Clinton within the context of an international investors 
conference allegedly scheduled to be held before the end of this 
year. 
  Al-'Anani added that Shim'on Peres proposed the convening of 
this conference under the pretext of reinvigorating the 
Jordanian economy. He went on to say: Peres should have 
realized that Jordan would not agree to host such a conference 
before the peace process comes to a successful conclusion. 
  Our interlocutor asserted that many ideas are being raised 
on 
the international scene. We have also heard about joint 
projects. Israel seems to want to conduct feasibility studies on 
such projects, he said. 
  Al-'Anani added: We will hear many things. There are 
various ideas being floated. However, those who learn of them 
should not take them seriously. 
  When asked whether he is optimistic or pessimistic over the 
prospects of the current negotiations, al-'Anani said: As a 
former negotiator, I do have a certain objective; namely, the 
restoration of our rights in full, as enshrined in the relevant 
UN resolutions. 
  Al-'Anani added: The key to the negotiations is not in the 
hands of any single party. It is in the hands of many parties. 
Given the current circumstances, and the current Arab 
divisions, we in Jordan cannot control the course of the 
negotiations. 
  We asked al-'Anani why Jordan suddenly adopted a tough 
position toward the siege of al-'Aqabah. He answered us, 
saying: Jordan did not express its anger over the al-'Aqabah 
siege only last week. It has been expressing its anger for a 
long time. However, Jordan's expression of this anger has 
become stronger than ever before in the aftermath of the recent 
ship search incident, in which UN troops and U.S. battleships 
hastened to inspect a German cargo ship carrying goods bound for 
Jordan and other countries. In this incident, the U.S. 
battleships inspected the goods imported for Jordan and other 
countries twice. Nonetheless, the ship was prevented from 
unloading its cargo in Jordan. The ship left for the Suez 
Canal, where it unloaded its Jordanian cargo. 
  We asked al-'Anani about statements made by former 
information ministers regarding the need to disband the Ministry 
of Information, contending that its existence is no longer 
justified, al-'Anani said: I believe that the media must have 
an official agency to supervise them, be it a ministry or 
another state agency. I think that the Ministry of Information 
is the best agency to provide such supervision. 
  When pressed further about the rationale for the existence 
of 
the Ministry of Information, al-'Anani said: Honestly, I do not 
insist on the existence of the Ministry of Information to 
supervise the media in Jordan. Another agency other than the 
Ministry of Information could be created to supervise the 
Jordanian media. 
  We asked him the following question: We believe that the 
official media has failed to express Jordan's policy. What do 
you have to say on this? 
  Al-'Anani said: I believe that the official media is 
experiencing problems. We need the convocation of a media 
conference to discuss the multifaceted problems facing the 
press. It goes without saying that a diversity of views is 
required. I am a true believer in the statement made by His 
Majesty King Husayn that we need a state media, rather than a 
government media. 

