Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I.R. Barylyak, A.M. Serdyuk and Yu.M. </F>
Stempurskiy, Ukrainian Medical Genetics Science Center, MOZ 
[Health Ministry] and AN Ukrayiny [Academy of Sciences of 
Ukraine; received Mar 10 93] 
  [Text] The fate of the future of every people depends on 
their natural and social characteristics and the totality of 
external effects. The natural foundation of a population is 
represented by the gene pool, which is the basis of population 
integrity and stability, as well as of its functioning and 
development. The condition of the gene pool is determined both 
by internal laws and external effects of ecological factors. It 
is well known that a joint action of genetic mechanisms and 
ecological factors causes around 60% of the total amount 
of 
damage of population condition and health. However, in Ukraine a 
certain asymmetry in attention given to these two components has 
formed: while wide circles of scientists and public have 
expressed steadfast and strong interest in the ecology 
component, the genetic component is drawing attention of very 
few research professionals. So the real contribution of genetic 
mechanisms to health condition of the population has not yet 
become the subject of modern wide)scale theoretical and applied 
studies. However, it is clear that the nearest future of 
Ukraine's population depends to a large extent on timely and 
complex solution of the gene pool problem.To make this statement 
not just clear intuitively but also well reasoned we shall turn 
now to well)known facts.1. Since 1989 the reproduction of 
Ukraine's population has been decreasing, and there is a danger 
of its depopulation. Mortality has surpassed the birth rate 
[1,2]. According to Minstat [the Ministry of Statistics of 
Ukraine] the index of natural reduction of Ukraine's population 
was 39147 people in 1991 and 96861 in 1992. At the same time the 
reproduction rate for the number of girls born per woman who 
have reached 15 years of age and has dropped below one, to 0.976 
[1, 2]. In the last decade the frequency of hypotrophy among the 
newborn has increased fivefold, and the frequency of genetic 
disturbances, native developmental defects, spontaneous 
miscarriages and psychic diseases has also increased. 46% 
of 
high school students suffer from various chronic diseases, and 
one out of two has morphological and functional disturbances. 
Only 5 to 8% of high school graduates can be considered 
healthy 
[1, 3].Thus, dangerous trends of increasing reproductive losses 
of and genetic load in Ukraine's population have clearly 
shaped.2. The damaging effect of the extremely tense ecological 
situation in Ukraine is getting more serious. Excessive 
concentration of the metal mining, metallurgical, coal mining, 
power generating and chemical industries with their mostly 
obsolete and ecologically dangerous equipment, and inefficient 
and sometimes monoculture agriculture, they all dangerously 
pollute the environment. In the majority of regions atmospheric 
air pollution exceeds maximum permissible levels five to 
twentyfold, ground is being chemically poisoned, and 3 billion 
cubic meters of polluted sewage are dischargedT)annually into 
the environment [4]. The chemical load on the gene pool is 
increased due to the effect of the Chernobyl catastrophe. In 
recent years the number of certain oncological, hematological 
and endocrine diseases has increased, while the overall level of 
immune protection in people has decreased, especially in those 
who had been subjected to the effect of Chernobyl radiation 
factors.3. A number of infections, especially such as 
chlamidioses, mycoplasmoses, ureoplasmoses, as well as 
gelmintoses and virus carrying, have a negative effect on the 
gene pool.4. Ukraine has a relatively high level of a number of 
hereditary diseases and native developmental defects, and due to 
the extremely low availability of diagnostic means and 
medication they have an especially high negative effect on the 
gene pool.5. The multinational and multiethnic character of 
Ukraine's population is the result of the complicated history of 
the people who for many centuries has been divided among several 
states and affected by internal and external migration of large 
population masses, the 1932/ 1933 famine, substantial losses 
during WWII and other factors. This is why the gene pool of 
Ukraine's population and her regional and ethnic formations 
requires that a differentiated population)genetic research be 
conducted.The above circumstances (as well as other 
circumstances that have not been listed, make it possible to 
conclude that the question is not only preservation but also 
protection of Ukraine's gene pool. Apparently it is necessary to 
have a thoroughly thought over and carefully worked out program 
of scientific studies and practical actions.The main idea in 
developing a program to protect the gene pool of Ukraine's 
population is the understanding of its urgency by a group of 
scientists and by the Health Ministry management and taking into 
account certain work performed in this area and the available 
personnel and material and technical potential.A group of 
scientists had been developing the program in the 1980s, but it 
only became possible to develop a complete project in 1990/1991. 
The concept of the Program is based on the fact that problems of 
legislative, medical, scientific, personnel, economic and 
organizational support must be solved in an integrated manner, 
with a clear definition of the work scope and stages.The Program 
has been developed for a five)year period and counts on 
participation of researchers from various fields of biological 
and medical science and medical)genetic service 
practitioners.All Program provisions were centered around the 
following conceptual components: 1) studying the status of the 
gene pool of Ukraine's population; 2) genetic monitoring; 3) 
prevention and treatment of hereditary disturbances and native 
developmental defects; and 4) computerized forecasting systems 
for integrated control of the gene pool of Ukraine's population 
[5].The Program passed the competition conducted in 1991)1992 by 
the State Committee of Ukraine on Science and Technology 
Problems and took the first prize in the ``Human Health'' field. 
Thus it has acquired the status of a state S&amp;T Program.In 
1992 
74 projects of 27 academic and industry scientific and 
scientific production organizations and universities were under 
way within the Program framework. The Program consists of 8 
sections and 48 subsections that cover aspects of medical and 
scientific support and infrastructure ) creation of a scientific 
research institute and specialized medical genetics centers, as 
well as personnel, material, organizational and economic 
support.A number of studies regarding the status of the gene 
pool and effects of)ecological factors were performed.The 
mutagenous load on the environment was analyzed and evaluated. 
In particular, the summary mutagenous activity of the aerosol 
portion of chemical pollutants of atmospheric air was studied 
using the Ames method. It was demonstrated that in a group of 
``metallurgical'' towns the activity exceeded background values 
by a factor of 13 to 20, (``average'' mutageneity), while in 
towns with prevailing development of the chemical industry it 
varied between ``weak'' and ``average''. However, it was found 
that even in a control group of relatively ``clean'' towns 
genetic toxicity of air exceeded the background (by 50% in 
Sevastopol and by a factor of 8 in Poltava) (see the article by 
O.M. Dugan et al. in this issue of the magazine).Scientific 
foundations of screening for native and hereditary pathology had 
been developed, and the screening was conducted.An account of 
hereditary and native pathology and perinatal mortality among 
Kiev newborn was conducted, and the structure of native 
developmental defects was studied. It was demonstrated that in 
recent years the level of their variations varied within a wide 
range, albeit without any growth trends. This calls for studying 
the spread of dominant and recessive pathology in capital's 
population and for creation of a computerized register [7].A 
retrospective analysis of the structure of hereditary pathology 
in the Western region of Ukraine was conducted. It showed 
different densities of native developmental defects, 
phenylketonuria and hypothyrosis in various oblasts. The scope 
of necessary studies in each oblast and measures aimed at 
improving organization of medical preventive work were 
determined (Lviv Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Hereditary Pathology 
SRI, MOZ Ukrayiny).The frequency and types of chromosome 
aberrations in peripheral blood lymphocytes of people that had 
been subjected to radiation effects after the ChAES [Chernobyl 
Nuclear Power Plant] accident were studied. Significant 
individual variability of their frequency had been noticed. It 
was concluded that according to cytologic analysis data it can 
be considered a confirmed fact that radiation affected not only 
on those who participated in liquidation of consequences of the 
ChAES accident and residents of the stringent radiation control 
zone, but also Kievites. Taking into account the fact that 
genome changes can facilitate an increased share of certain 
malignant tumors, the studies that were conducted orient one 
towards individual approach to studies of the contribution of 
both damaging environmental factors and the hereditary component 
to the development of pathology (Experimental Pathology, 
Oncology and Radio Biology Institute, AN Ukrayiny).Studies of 
the spread of hereditary propensity to disturbances of formation 
and native developmental defects of the locomotor system in 
Ukraine regions with different levels of inbreeding and 
environmental pollution demonstrated that the most frequent 
disturbances were the ankle joint pathology and foot 
deformation. The frequency of this pathology in regions that had 
suffered from the ChAES accident especially hard and in 
ecologically disadvantageous Donets basin rayons is considerably 
higher than in Kiev. The studies continue, and a computerized 
register and forecasting model are being developed (see the 
article by A.P. Krasyuk et al. in this issue of the magazine).It 
was found that the number of cases of native pathology of organs 
of vision in children is increasing (approximately one third of 
all patients). Pathologies such as ptosis, dermoid cysts, 
hemangiomas and retinoblastomas are unevenly distributed among 
Ukraine regions. Among those hospitalized with a hereditary 
pathology of cornea the most frequently encountered was a 
chronic form of keratoconus and the least frequently encountered 
was peripheral keratoconus (Terien disease), but no regional 
differences had been detected. In children that had recieved a 
large overall dose of radiation due to the Chernobyl 
catastrophe, the frequency of the ophthalmologic pathology 
hasT)increased (Ukrainian Institute of Eye Diseases and Tissue 
Therapy, MOZ Ukrayiny).According to preliminary analysis data in 
cases of hearing diseases the most frequently observed is the 
autosomal recessive type of inheritance of deafness and reduced 
hearing, while the autosomal dominant type and the type linked 
to the X chromosome are less frequent. The expediency of 
regional and population studies of inherited pathology of organs 
of hearing, determining the probability of its detection and 
treating it as a separate group was demonstrated (Kiev 
Otolaryngology SRI, MOZ Ukrayiny).Of great scientific importance 
are projects devoted to human genome, which form a section of 
the Program. The work is being conducted at a state of the art 
molecular)biological level and has yielded interesting results. 
Libraries of the 3rd, 5th and 19th chromosomes have been 
amplified. mRNA were extracted from human and rabbit livers in 
order to create kDNA probes. Major transcripts that yield 
themselves to alternative processing were extracted from the 
kDNA library of human embryo livers. mRNA from human brain and 
kidney and the entire RNA from a human heart were extracted in 
order to create kDNA probes. Differential screening of the kDNA 
library of human livers was performed, and clones with liver 
specific and "generic" genes were obtained.The spectrum of 
2.5)oligoadenylates in initial cultures of cells of chronic 
lymphoid leukosis patients was studied, as well as changes of 
the expression of receptors of interleukin 2 and the C3 fraction 
of the complement in patients' leukocytes due to the effect of 
immunity correcting preparations.The possibility of injecting 
RecA protein E. coli into an jejukaryotic cell while 
preserving protein enzyme activity has been demonstrated. 
Peculiarities of expression of the human ApoAI genome and DNA 
genes in a cell culture of mammals controlled by promoters of 
cytomegalovirus, mice rybosomic and RNA polymerase II were 
studied (human Alu repeat). It was demonstrated that in a 
plasmid retrovector DNA (plasmid probe pSTH lg 1/Rtsp) there is 
a fragment that corresponds to the human growth hormone gene. 
This makes it possible to continue developing a gene therapy 
model based on the human hematopoietic system. A system for 
computer storage and processing of electrophoregrams, 
particularly when detecting point mutations in various genome 
areas, was developed. Based on computer analysis data, 
oligonucleotide primers for the constant area of the IgE gene 
were calculated. It was demonstrated that the IgE response 
(pollinosis) is linked to human organism resistivity to 
respiratory diseases, and it was also found that in recent years 
there had been a trend towards a decrease in the number and 
functional activity of T lymphocytes accompanied by increased 
reactivity of B lymphocytes (Molecular Biology and Genetics 
Institute, AN Ukrayiny; Ukrainian Medical Genetics Science 
Center, MOZ and AN Ukrayiny).Work on genetic monitoring is 
conducted within the framework of the Program. The key point of 
the work is a combination of genetic and ecological studies. 
Results of studies of ground in five national preserves in the 
Western, Eastern and Southern regions show the presence of toxic 
and mutagenous effects. Analysis of aberrations (mostly 
chromatide) detected in sprout roots of Allium cepa 
onion shows the dominant action of chemical mutagens, and in 
areas adjacent to arable land it could possibly be pesticide 
phenomena. But positive results of bioindication in the absence 
of evidence of the presence of local pollution sources indicate 
a regional or global (including biospheric) character of 
pollution [8].Work has begun on genotoxicological evaluation of 
the territory of national preserve ``Roztochchya'' (Lviv 
oblast). The system of tests includes the AmesT)test, test for 
dominant lethal mutations and test for somatic mutations and 
recombination. In the water reservoirs at the reserve a 
mutagenic effect in fish was found. An assumption of industrial 
pollution was made. The studies that have been performed are 
part of the work on inventorying mutagens in the Lviv oblast 
(Lviv University).The level of genotoxic pollution of areas of 
the lower Danube and Dnieper (using bacterial test systems with 
salmonella strains) is being studied. Accumulation of genotoxic 
pollution in the silt of region's lakes and rivers was detected. 
Considerable variations of mutagenic activity at levels 
exceeding the spontaneous level by a factor of 2 to 6 was 
noticed. Activity of mutagenic action of organic)soluble 
fractions was considerably higher than that of water soluble 
fractions (Odessa University). Based on studies that used 
measurements of activity of marked enzymes of 
pseudocholinesterase and creatine phosphokinase, determining the 
amount of peroxide oxidation of lipoids and accumulation of 
malone dialdehyde in blood samples (taken to a low temperature 
bank from blood transfusion stations in several unfavorable 
areas of the Donets)Dnieper region and city of Kharkiv) it was 
found that the maximum permissible level of heavy metals had 
been exceeded. Computerized processing of the results is 
promising for development of genetic monitoring (Problems of 
Cryobiology and Cryomedicine Institute, AN Ukrayiny). Selective 
analysis of chromosome pathology and the condition of chromosome 
apparatus in children in various regions of Ukraine 
(particularly in regions that had suffered from the Chernobyl 
catastrophe) revealed that even in a relatively ``clean'' 
region, the Lviv oblast, the overall frequency of chromosome 
aberrations in newborn in 1992 was approximately 120% 
higher 
than in Kiev in 1984 (Lviv Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Hereditary 
Pathology SRI, MOZ Ukrayiny). Cytogenetic analysis of several 
groups of children residing in areas polluted with radio 
nuclides as a result of the Chernobyl accident demonstrated a 
reliable increase of the frequency of aberrant cells, 
chromosome)type aberrations and specific markers of radiation 
effects. A trend of increasing cytogenetic effect with time is 
being observed [9]. A number of trends of genetic instability 
has been detected in populations adjacent to the ChAES: 
increased number of native anomalies and spontaneous 
miscarriages, a shift of the chromosome aberrations spectrum, 
increased frequency of structural defects in the bone system in 
embryos compared to the control group, and increased share of 
children with disturbances of catabolic P protein homeostasis 
[10].Studies of ecological effects on hereditary pathology had 
led to a search for comparison methods and equivalents of 
effects of various factors. Thus, genetic)epidemiological 
studies of spontaneous miscarriages and native developmental 
defects in ecologically polluted industrial towns demonstrated 
that genetic consequences of the effect of chemical factors can 
be compared to the effect of radiation. For Mariupol they are 
equivalent to the effect of 230 Ber over 30 years [11].Studies 
of problems of diagnostics, prevention and treatment of 
hereditary diseases and native developmental defects are a 
considerable part of the State Program. Cytogenetic examination 
and computerized population analysis of the Kharkiv population 
led to a conclusion of expediency and effectiveness of applying 
genetic approaches to family planning and using the program of 
preconception help to families with native developmental defects 
and aborted pregnancies. A system of preventive measures 
includes family examination, preventive sanation, 
synchronization of reproductive processes and individual 
preventive help to pregnant women. This makes it possible to 
reduce the use of invasiveT) procedures by 33% 
[12].Studies 
have demonstrated that not only complex prenatal diagnostics 
makes it possible to conduct selective examination of women in a 
high)risk group (those suffering from sugar diabetes and 
internal infections, but also perform mass scale screening of 
pregnant women. The complex includes ultrasound scanning and 
timely invasive procedures. Based on examination results not 
only one makes decisions on interrupting pregnancy in expedient 
cases, but also on emergency help to newborn with correctable 
defects [13].A number of projects are aimed at developing 
diagnostic methods and searching for markers that indicate 
genetic disturbances.A test system for early diagnostics of 
dilatation cardiomyopathy using monospecific polyclonal 
antibodies is being developed. It has been demonstrated that in 
all cases of this pathology the serum contains autoantibodies 
against myosin and tropomyosin (Molecular Biology and genetics 
Institute, AN Ukrayiny; Ukrainian Medical Genetics Science 
Center, MOZ and AN Ukrayiny).A 50)item collection of mutants 
that are resistant to glyphosphate, a phosphorus analog of 
glycine. This opens up a possibility for continuing a search for 
methods for affecting a number of molecular)biological 
mechanisms. Certain areas of the Y chromosome were detected and 
analyzed, which forms a basis for testing mutations using 
restriction analysis (Molecular Biology and Genetics Institute, 
AN Ukrayiny). Methods are being developed for using DNA 
analysis of certain mutations and deletions linked to a high 
risk of mucoviscidosis disease and formation of Duchen's 
muscular dystrophy in various regions of Ukraine [14].A 
longitudinal polymorphism of restriction fragments of the apo)B 
gene that were obtained using the polymerase chain reaction and 
then the XbaI and SSt)1 restrictases was studied. The relation 
between the detection of three genotypes of X1X1 and X2X2 and 
indices of lipoid metabolism was analyzed. Prospects for further 
studies of genes of basic apo)proteins in the population at the 
preclinical and clinical stages of atherosclerosis in families 
of young patients have been delineated (Ukrainian Therapy SRI, 
MOZ Ukrayiny). During cytogenetic examination of children that 
were subjected to the effects of the Chernobyl catastrophe an 
increased frequency of specific markers of radiation effects was 
detected, and based on this an attempt was made to calculate the 
overall radiation dose [9].Methods are being developed for 
determining mutagenous effects of chemical and physical factors 
on the gene pool using sensitive genetically marked strains of 
microorganisms that can register one mutation per 10 to 100 
million of normal cells, which borders on the spontaneous 
mutagenesis background (Microbiology and Virology Institute, AN 
Ukrayiny).Enriching the arsenal of anti-mutagenic means is 
especially important for solving problems of preventing and 
correcting hereditary pathology, and it has been the subject of 
several projects.Scientific fundamentals of the search for and 
development and application of antimutagenes and gene protectors 
are being developed. They are aimed at increasing the 
effectiveness of organism's internal protective forces, 
particularly DNA reparation systems, blocking damaged genome 
structures etc.Promising studies of interferon inductors and 
prolongators were performed, and optimum conditions for 
obtaining its preparations and developing a compound that can 
induce interferon that has the antimutagenic effect were 
determined (Kiev University).T 0*0*0*00T The effect of 
bioflavonoids and polysaccharides on anti-mutagenic and radio 
protection activity of beta carotene was studied. It had been 
determined that beta carotene displays well pronounced 
antimutagenic activity against nitrozoguanidine, a supermutagen 
and supercarcinogen, and average antimutagenic activity against 
carbon and phosphorus radioactive isotopes (Microbiology and 
Virology Institute, AN Ukrayiny). A search for natural 
anti-mutagenes is being conducted. Researchers are finding even 
more advantages of natural antimutagenes over chemical factors. 
Experiments with higher plants demonstrate the protective effect 
of the millimeter wave band electric field on the chromosome 
apparatus. It has been determined that low exposures and doses 
of a UHF field help reduce the total number and shrink the 
spectrum of chromosome mutations. The possibility of 
extrapolating these results to other biological objects 
including a human organism has been demonstrated. The search for 
vegetative antimutagenes (a biological mass of rose radiola, 
fern)leaf polyscias etc.) continues, their cytogenic action is 
being studied, and first promising results have been obtained 
(Ukrainian Medical Genetics Science Center, MOZ and AN 
Ukrayiny).The first year of scientific studies according to the 
State S&amp;T Program ``Protection of the Gene Pool of Ukraine's 
Population'' has had productive results.The work of science 
collectives has begun, and authors of research objects and 
methods have been determined. A number of specific results have 
been obtained in all areas of the Program. They are valuable in 
their own right, but what is more important, they open up 
prospects for deepening and widening further science search. 
Research coordination has been set up, and the Ukrainian 
Medical Genetics Science Center, the lead scientific research 
organization in implementing the Program, has been organized. 
Bibliography 
1. Barylyak, I.R. and Gnateyko, O.Z., ``Condition of Gene Pool 
of Ukraine's Population: Problems and Ways for Improvement'', in 
book ``Zdorovya y vidtvorennya narodu Ukrayiny'' [Health and 
Reproduction of Ukraine's People], Kiev, 1991, pp 116,120 
2. Steshenko, V.S., ``Natural Migration of Ukraine's Population: 
General Characteristic'', Ibid., pp 6, 10.3. Khyzhnyak, M.I., 
``Health Condition of Ukraine's Children Population'', Ibid., pp 
54,58 
3. Serdyuk, A.M., ``Medico Ecological Being of Ukraine: 
Realities and Estimate Forecasts'', Ibid., pp 72,76.5. Barylyak, 
I.R., ``Problems of Medical Genetics in Ukraine'', TSITOLOGIYA I 
GENETIKA, 1992, Vol 23 No 4, pp 3,6.6. 
4. Serdyuk, A.M., Barylyak and Pyrih, L.A., ``The State Program 
of Ukrainian Population Protection'', in book ``First 
International Conference on Mathematical and Computational 
Analysis of Human Genome and Its Mutation Load. Szeged, Oct. 
20,24'', p 18.7 
5. Buzhievskaya, T.I., Tchaikovskaya, T.L., Demidova, G.G. and 
Koblanskaya, G.N., ``Confined Genetic Monitoring Conducted in 
Kiev During the Period of 1969,1989'', Ibid., p 19. 
6. Kurinnyy, A.I., "Ecological and Genetic Evaluation of 
Ukraine's Territory in Terms of Mutagenic Pool", in book ``VI 
syezd Ukrainskogo obshchestva genetikov i selektsionerov: Tezisy 
dokladov'' [6th Congress of Ukrainian Geneticists and 
Selectionists Society. Theses of Papers], Poltava, 1992, Vol 3 p 
179. 
7. Pilinska, M.A., Dybskyy, S.S. and Dybska, O.B., ``Cytogenetic 
Effect in Lymphocytes of Peripheral Blood of Children Residing 
in Certain Radio Nuclide) Polluted Settlements of Ovrutskiy 
Rayon, Zhitomir Oblast'', TSITOLOGIYA I GENETIKA, 1992, Vol 23 
No 4, pp 10,14.10 
8. Gavrilyuk, Yu.Y., Sazanskyy, O.O., Akopyan, G.R. et al., 
``Genetic Monitoring From Chernobyl Catastrophe Aspect'', Ibid., 
pp 15,19.11 
9. Antypenko, Ye.M., Kogut, N.M. and Oleksiyenko, P.L., 
``Attempt of Quantitative Assessment of Genetic Consequences of 
Chemical Pollution of Atmospheric Air in Urban Human 
Populations'', Ibid., pp 7,10.12. 
10. Grechanina, O.Ya., Stepanets, A.P., Nevedrova, N.V. et al., 
``Programs of Mass)Scale and Selective Screening of Pregnant 
Women During Prenatal Examination. Screening of Alpha Feton 
Protein in Mother's Blood Serum'', Ibid., pp 20,24.13. 
11. Gordiyenko, I.Yu., Sopko, N.I. and Nikitchina, T.V., 
``Cytogenetic Studies of Chorion and Placenta During Prenatal 
Diagnostics of Fetus Pathology'', Ibid., pp 25,29. 
12. Livshyts, L.A., Gryshko, V.I. and Kravchenko, S.A., 
``Possibilities of and Prospects for Using DNA Analysis for 
Diagnostics and Prevention of Hereditary Diseases in Ukraine'', 
Ibid., pp 35,41. 
13.Institut kletochnoy biologii i geneticheskoy inzhenerii AN 
Ukrayiny, Institut agroekologii i biotekhnologii UAAN, 
"Tsitologiya i genetika", 1993 

