Language: <F P=105> Slovene </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tanja Staric: "First Step Toward Actual </F>
Unification Accomplished"] 
  [Text] Ljubljana -- Yesterday, Janez Drnovsek, Igor Bavcar, 
Peter Tancig, and Viktor Zakelj, the presidents of four center 
parties, signed a charter on the intentions and significance of 
the merger of the political center parties. This symbolic act 
demonstrates above all that they are serious about the merger, 
which might substantially alter the balance of power on the 
political stage and will be finalized at five party conventions 
in Bled on 12 March. The charter cites the reasons for the 
formation of the "bloc of center parties," which is of "vital 
importance for political stability -- without which there can be 
no economic progress or social environment in which conflicting 
social, economic, ecological, and political interests can be 
accommodated through a social and political consensus and 
parliamentary adopted solutions rather than through subjugation, 
humiliation, or even destruction of a real or perceived 
political opponent." The new party will be "open to cooperation 
with any political party or group which actively upholds the 
principles of constitutional order in the country, especially 
the protection of human rights, the rights of the disadvantaged 
and ethnic minorities, and the principle of equality for all 
citizens regardless of their nationality, race, religion, and 
sex." 
  In addition to these libertarian principles, the charter 
states that "the new party will cooperate closely with those 
political parties that strive for a secular state, for free 
enterprise -- balanced by the concerns of a modern state with 
respect to social policy and the protection of the environment 
-- and for a revenue system based on the need to gradually 
reduce the rate of public expenditures to a level comparable 
with that of the Western European countries." 
  The new party will be called the LDS (Liberal and Democratic 
Party, or Liberal Democracy of Slovenia). Its president will be 
Janez Drnovsek. No other positions in the new party have been 
filled. However, the parties' shares in the leadership have been 
agreed upon. The positions in the Executive Committee will be 
divided on a one-to-one basis. If it is comprised of 14 members, 
it would mean that there would be seven Liberal Democrats and 
seven members of "the small troika." The membership of the 
Council will be based on the results of the last election, in 
which the LDS got 22 deputies, Democrats and Eco-Greens together 
10 deputies. In the Statutory and Supervisory Committee the 
Liberal Democrats would have two candidates, and the Democrats, 
Eco-Greens, and Socialists one each. The negotiators have worked 
on these complicated mathematical formulas for months. The 
sensitive issue of which individuals are to hold certain leading 
positions remains open. It seems that there will be four vice 
presidents: Dimitrij Rupel, Peter Tancig, Borut Suklje, and Vika 
Potocnik. The party will have 32 seats in the Parliament, 
compared to the SKD [Slovene Christian Democrats], the second 
largest party, which has only 15 deputies. The unification does 
not change the government coalition, as emphasized yesterday by 
Prime Minister Drnovsek and all three presidents of the "small 
coalition." 

