Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Following Mr Velayati's meetings with the officials 
of the Republic of Ireland in Dublin and the convening of the 
two countries' joint commission, a memorandum of understanding 
on the expansion of bilateral economic and commercial relations 
was signed. 
  Today before leaving Ireland, in an interview with our 
correspondent, Mr. Velayati described his meetings with Irish 
officials as very positive, and he provided some explanations 
about the memorandum of understanding signed between the two 
countries. I draw your attention to this interview: 
  [Begin recording] [Correspondent] Mr. Velayati, following 
the 
convening of the second joint commission which was held today in 
Dublin, a memorandum of understanding was signed by the two 
countries. Could you please give us some details about the 
contents of that memorandum of understanding and the areas of 
cooperation between the two countries. 
  [Velayati] There exists a comprehensive framework for 
bilateral cooperation in scientific, technical and educational 
fields, in the transfer of technology in the industrial, 
pharmaceutical, agricultural and animal husbandry fields, and in 
commercial exchanges. Good decisions have been taken. The 
exchange of expert teams for a complete and precise 
identification of areas of cooperation in the needed sectors, as 
well as cooperation in the field of joint investment and 
attempts to establish a kind of balance in commercial exchanges, 
and provide sufficient facilities for presenting Iran's export 
items in Ireland's markets are included in this cooperation. 
  There are definitely good grounds for the expansion of 
relations, and we can witness also clearly the political will of 
both sides for the expansion of relations -- we can see its 
signs in our meetings. While relations between the two countries 
followed a growing trend during the period between the convening 
of the former joint commission and the present joint commission, 
the memorandum of understanding which has been drawn up and 
signed today provides a new framework for the expansion of 
relations which had started and continued in a satisfactory 
manner after the convening of the first joint commission. [end 
recording] 

