BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Virginia Marsh: "Ex-communists Embrace a </F>
Half-capitalist Bulgaria"] 
  [Text] In Bulgaria's transition to a market economy -- as 
in other former east bloc countries -- it is former senior 
communists and secret police officers who have been among the 
quickest to embrace capitalism. 
  "There is little doubt that communist capital is behind many 
of the leading entrepreneurs one sees in Bulgaria today," says a 
western observer. "They will tell you they founded their media 
empire with two typewriters in a one-room office. What they 
don't tell you is that the next week they somehow managed to 
raise a couple of million dollars." 
  Many of the self-styled "Group of 13", [G-13] the name given 
to the business lobby recently founded by the country's largest 
private companies, started business this way. Between them, the 
G-13 control a large part of the country's emerging private 
sector. Their empires include banks, insurance companies, stock 
exchanges, large trading and financial companies, real estate 
developments, television channels, and newspapers. Some G-13 
companies already have annual turnovers of more than $1bn (685m 
pounds). 
  Several G-13 executives were among those sent abroad in 
Bulgaria's "perestroika years" of the 1980s by the Bulgarian 
Intelligence Service, [BIS] the former regime's secret police. 
Bright young officers were sent to top business schools in 
Europe and the US or to work in foreign trade companies which 
were often used as conduits for Communist party slush funds. 
  The BIS aimed to step up its industrial espionage activities 
through a network ranging from Liechtenstein, Austria and 
Switzerland to Silicon Valley in the US. These included the 
diversion of embargoed high technology equipment and information 
to the then east bloc. 
  Once communism collapsed, former BIS employees with a 
foreign 
education and contacts, and alleged access to the regime's 
foreign bank accounts, were in a prime position to go into 
private business. 
  The G-13's kingpin is Mr Ivan Pavlov, head of Multi-Group, 
considered the most powerful of the G-13 companies. A former 
professional wrestler, Mr Pavlov married the daughter of the 
head of military counter-intelligence and worked with deposed 
dictator Todor Zhivkov's son-in-law as an art dealer in the 
1980s, before moving to Malta. There he traded scrap Soviet 
submarines with, he says, Turkish financing. 
  Once back in Bulgaria he expanded into metal and oil 
trading, 
agro-businesses and providing security services. Multi-Group 
now employs 3,500 in 50 local comuanies including a bank, 
insurance company, the country's most active stock exchange and 
a sugar plant recently purchased from the state in one of the 
country's biggest privatisation deals to date. 
  Mr Pavlov is also believed to control nine casinos, seven in 
Bulgaria and two in Paraguay. Until recently, one of 
Multi-Group's "consultants" was Mr Emil Doynov, a former 
business associate of the late British publisher Robert Maxwell 
and brother of Oguyan Doynov, a senior communist-era minister. 
The Doynov brothers are widely held to be behind Multi-Group. 
  Many consider that Multi-Group and other similar G-13 
companies operate on the fringes of the law, gaining positions 
through their contacts in political circles and in the state 
enterprise sector, which still accounts for 90 per cent of 
industrial production. 
  One well-used scam is for privately-owned trading companies 
to over-charge state companies for raw materials or buy products 
cheaply and sell them on with a big mark-up. Another common 
practice is for companies to operate through offshore 
subsidiaries to avoid local regulations and to qualify for tax 
and other benefits reserved for foreign investors. 
  The government is belatedly taking steps to crack down on 
fraud and to strengthen tax administration after a 50 per cent 
shortfall in expected revenues last year. However, Mr Dimitar 
Kostov, the deputy finance minister, says: "There are 
suggestions that not all the methods used by G-13 companies are 
legal. We do not have facts that they are avoiding tax. 
Rather, they are finding legally-based incentives." 
  He also denies that the G-13 are as powerful or as dangerous 
as they are made out to be. But many in business and diplomatic 
circles fear that their activities set a bad precedent in a 
country which is already lagging behind in implementing reform 
and where many are ambivalent about the transition to a market 
economy. There is also concern that G-13 companies, which, 
fearing foreign competition, have started a campaign to protect 
"national capital", are prepared to sabotage efforts by foreign 
companies to participate in privatisation or invest in Bulgaria. 
  A western banker in Sofia says: "These companies have the 
power to poison the scene, the ability to buy politicians. 
There is clearly a need for regulation before it is too late. 
Today these guys work in broad daylight; in five years' time it 
will be much more difficult to trace their tracks and 
connections." 

