BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Gao Xinghua (7559 5281 5478)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 19 May (XINHUA) -- Chen Bingqian, 
spokesman for the China Offshore Petroleum Corporation, issued 
the following statement here today in connection with the 
Wananbei contract: 
  On 25 April, a Vietnamese newspaper published an article 
entitled "We Oppose the Crestone Energy Corporation for Engaging 
in Illegal Activities in the Sizhengtan Area (that is, the 
Wanantan in China's Nansha Islands) Which Falls Under Vietnam's 
Sovereignty," claiming that the "Wananbei-21" petroleum 
prospecting and exploitation contract concluded between the 
Crestone Energy Corporation of the United States and the China 
Offshore Petroleum Corporation "has encroached upon" Vietnam's 
sovereignty. The article demanded that the contract be canceled 
and that all activities in connection with the contract be 
suspended. 
  The "Wananbei-21" contract concluded in 1992 between the 
corporation and the Crestone Energy Corporation of the United 
States is a contract with legal effect. The area covered in the 
contract is within the territorial waters of the Nansha Islands, 
which are within the jurisdiction of China and are within 
China's sovereignty. Our corporation and the contracting U.S. 
company have the right to engage in normal operations in the 
said territorial waters. The abovementioned accusations and 
demands by Vietnam are totally unacceptable to our corporation. 
  It must be pointed out that in recent years the Vietnam 
Petroleum and Gas Corporation has carved up a number of zones in 
the territorial waters of China's Nansha Islands and invited 
bidding by foreign companies. A number of foreign companies 
have concluded contracts with the Vietnamese corporation to 
exploit oil and gas. This has violated China's sovereignty over 
the territorial waters of the Nansha Islands and has also 
encroached upon our corporation's interests. 
  The Chinese Government has pointed out on many occasions 
that 
before the disputes over the Nansha issue are solved, the 
disputes should be shelved for the time being in order to 
participate in a joint development program. For this reason, 
the China Offshore Petroleum Corporation welcomes relevant 
companies, including the Vietnam Petroleum and Gas Corporation, 
to cooperate with us and to join us in exploring the possibility 
of joint development. 

