Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brothers Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, 
accused of heading drug trafficking operations from Valle del 
Cauca Department, last weekend evaded a siege by combined Army 
and police units in the area of Juanchito, outside of Cali. 
  At least 150 Public Force members took over the area after 
receiving intelligence reports on the whereabouts of Cali Cartel 
members. According to the intelligence reports, the Rodriguez 
Orejuela brothers are reportedly attending the Cali Fair 
festivities, so the raids may yield results at any time. 
  However, the operation carried out last Saturday at the 
roadside taverns [estaderos] in Juanchito was foiled apparently 
because the lieutenants of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers 
managed to inform them of the military activity. The two main 
leaders of the Cali Drug Cartel were close to being captured 
this weekend during the beginning of festivities marking the 
36th Cali Fair. 
  The foiled special operation by state security agencies was 
carried out based on intelligence reports that detected the 
presence of Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela where the 
Cali festivities were being held. Approximately 15 soldiers 
placed several barricades on Saturday in the town of Juanchito, 
outside of Cali, after determining that the Cartel leaders were 
to attend the festival. After a seven-hour wait, the Public 
Force units did not achieve favorable results. 
  This report was aired yesterday by the NTC newscast, also 
adding that the Army suspects Cartel informants warned their 
leaders about the implementation of the operation to bust them. 
  Official spokesmen neither confirmed nor denied the 
information. They only said that the activities registered at 
the roadside taverns in Juanchito is customary during the 
festivities to avoid disturbances. That is why security forces 
are constantly patrolling the rest of the city. However, it was 
reported the operations to find Cali Cartel members continue and 
security forces may act in Valle del Cauca territory at any time 
following intelligence reports. This is how the Medellin Cartel 
was dismantled, the sources asserted. 
  The Cali Cartel controls over 70 percent of the cocaine that 
is sent to the United States, according to the U.S. DEA. Its 
main rival, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, capo of the destroyed 
Medellin Cartel, died on 2 December in a shoot out with the 
Search Bloc, when his haven in the Medellin suburbs was raided. 
  The authorities' operation during the Cali Fair could cause 
new inconveniences in implementing the policy of submission to 
justice announced one week ago by the Prosecutor General's 
Office, after holding several contacts with the attorneys that 
represent drug trafficking capos in Valle del Cauca. 
  The leaders of the drug trafficking organization in 
Cali--including brothers Miguel and Fabio Urdinola Grajales and 
Jose Santacruz Londono--are negotiating with the government the 
possible mass surrender of their members next year. However, 
the disproportionate demands made by these people prompted 
authorities to intensify their search. 
  Members of the Search Bloc--which ended its operations in 
Medellin following the death of Pablo Escobar--could reinforce 
these operations against Cali Cartel members in the next few 
days. Therefore, it is expected the search will intensify this 
week. 

