BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature: By diplomatic </F>
correspondents Igor Porshnev, Vitaliy Trubetskoy and others] 
  [Text] The regulations providing for passing of ships via 
the Black Sea straits of Bosporus and Dardanelles which have 
been unilaterally imposed by Turkey early this year and are due 
to go into effect since July 1 violate the generally accepted 
norms of the international law. Russia "seriously opposes" 
these regulations, deputy director of the legal department 
within the Russian Foreign Ministry Yakov Ostrovskiy declared in 
his interview with Interfax. This February he headed a Russian 
inter-departmental delegation which negotiated in Ankara with 
the Turkish authorities on this issue. 
  The diplomat explained that passing of ships via the Black 
Sea straits is regulated by the international convention 
Montreux signed by the USSR, Turkey, and several other states in 
1938. "Turkey believes that several provisions of the Convention 
can be replaced by its domestic legislation. Russia insists 
that the Montreux Convention should be strictly observed. If 
Ankara thinks that it is obsolete, let it introduce amendments 
in accordance with the established order," said Ostrovskiy. 
  He pointed out that the international convention on sea law 
dated 1982 regulates the order of ships' passing via the 
straits. "According to the Convention, none of the coastal 
states should hinder free navigation via the straits," said 
Ostrovskiy. 
  In his words, "settling of this situation" would largely 
depend upon the sitting of the navigation security committee of 
the International Sea Organization (one of the UN specialized 
offices -- Interfax). It is due to be held mid-May in London. 
"Of course, Turkey does not intend to present the regulations 
for this sitting thinking that it is its domestic document. 
Participation of the Turkish representatives in the discussion 
of international navigation rules in straits is a positive 
factor," said Ostrovskiy. 
  He expressed opinion that the Turkish provision on passing 
large ships via the Bosporus strait in a strict sequence 
"slightly contradicts" to the Convention." According to new 
Turkish rules, all ships must wait when a large ship enters the 
gulf. This creates a lot of inconveniences," said Ostrovskiy. 
  He specially emphasized that the Turkish regulations 
establish "rather a complex order" of passing for military 
ships. "This contradicts to the generally accepted norms. 
Military ships enjoy immunity and cannot be subjected to 
customs, sanitation, or any other inspection. The Turkish party 
has nothing to contradict. However, it promised to hand over a 
document via its Embassy which would stipulate that the 
regulations do not concern military ships. However, we have not 
received such a document yet," said Ostrovskiy. 
  In his opinion, "one can understand the Turkish party 
because 
it cares about its security but sometimes its logic looks 
strange enough." "If we take it into consideration then it is 
possible just to close the Black Sea straits. Then there will 
be no accidents for sure. But this is not a way out of this 
situation," said Ostrovskiy. 

