Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Tal'at Fu'ad Qasim, in Denmark, by Muhammad </F>
Salah-al-Din, in Cairo] 
  [Text] The spokesman for the Egyptian al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah [Islamic Group], Tal'at Fu'ad Qasim, commonly known 
as "Abu-Talal al-Qasimi," has said in a telephone interview from 
Copenhagen with AL-HAYAH, that al-Jama'ah has not prepared 
assassination lists, and that its "legal committee" had 
undertaken "the issuing of legal decisions for killing in 
certain cases." 
  He confirmed al-Jama'ah's responsibility in the 
assassination 
of the former speaker of the Egyptian Parliament, Dr. Rif'at 
al-Mahjub, emphasizing [al-Jama'ah's] rejection of 
reconciliation with the Egyptian Government. He explained that 
the military court's death sentence against him had made it easy 
for him to obtain political asylum in Denmark as "politically 
persecuted." He denied that al-Jama'ah received any support from 
foreign powers, asserting that it had differences with Iran. 
  He said that Washington knows that Shaykh 'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman is innocent of the charge of which he is accused, 
and said that if he were turned over to Egypt, "it would be a 
great mistake" on the part of the American authorities. 
  The text of the interview follows. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How did you leave Egypt? How did you get 
political asylum in Denmark? 
  [Qasim] I was a member of al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah and was 
arrested in September 1981 on the heels of the precautionary 
decisions issued by al-Sadat. He was assassinated, and then came 
the incidents in Asyut during my incarceration. Even so, I was 
surprised to find my name on the list of those accused. I was 
sentenced to prison for six years and served it. Just three days 
after I left prison, I was arrested again and served several 
months, until God willed that I should escape from prison, and 
from the country, too. I went to Pakistan, where I published 
AL-MURABITUN magazine in Peshawar and continued to run it, and 
propagate the faith. Then I learned that the ambassador of one 
of the Gulf states was pressuring the Pakistani Government to 
turn me over to Egypt because the magazine had published an 
article against his country. At that time I had an invitation to 
visit Denmark and cooperate with some other brothers. I left 
Pakistan and headed for Copenhagen. After arriving here, I 
learned that my name had appeared among those of the accused in 
Case No. 392 (Supreme State Security), known by the name 
"Returnees from Afghanistan." I was sentenced to death along 
with seven others. Amnesty International published a report 
confirming that I was being persecuted politically and that the 
death sentence had been passed on me despite the fact that I had 
been outside Egypt for several years. I had applied for 
political asylum in Denmark, and the death sentence and Amnesty 
International report came along to speed up the approval of my 
application. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How do you pursue political action despite 
the 
fact that political asylum rules forbid it? 
  [Qasim] There are no such laws here in Denmark. I am 
permitted to pursue any political action, to act, to send and 
receive letters. In any case, I am bringing no harm to the 
country in which I am living, nor am I breaking its laws. 
  [Salah-al-Din] When did you become the spokesman of 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah? Is this the post that was held by Dr. 
'Ala' Muhi-al-Din, who was killed in September 1990? 
  [Qasim] The area of organizational and movement issues is 
not 
open for discussion. I know that Egyptian intelligence knows 
little about the Islamic movement and its members and is 
stumbling in its dealing with us. We like it that way--it makes 
our work easy. We want to leave them to their confusion. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How do you perform your mission? Is it enough 
to read what the newspapers publish and the wire services carry, 
or are there contacts between you and the leaders of al-Jama'ah 
inside and outside Egypt? 
  [Qasim] These too are organizational matters relating to 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, and I am not in a position to discuss 
them. 
  [Salah-al-Din] The U.S. Government has accused Dr. 'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman in the bombing case, yet al-Jama'ah has announced 
no position on this development. Why? 
  [Qasim] No comment. We in al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah have 
already issued a statement in which we warned against 
extraditing Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman to Egypt, on the grounds that he 
had been detained without any specific charge. Now the situation 
is different. They have not turned him over, and there is a 
charge against him, thus we have no comment. 
  [Salah al-Din] But al-Jama'ah generally does comment on 
events and issues of even less importance--how can it not have a 
specific position after the arrest of its leader? 
  [Qasim] We have our own reasons, and we leave it to others 
to 
find their schemes. We expect our lack of comment to carry 
meaning, but what I would like to say is that we still hold our 
view on the matter of extradition to Egypt. We are saying that 
if the U.S. Government extradites Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman to Egypt, 
it will have made a great mistake, and a needless one. Because 
they have gone this far with their trickery and fabricated a 
charge against him, they know better than anyone that he is 
innocent, and in this case we will not comment--with words. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What is your comment on reports that Dr. 
'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman was a CIA agent, and that he was actually 
involved in the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York? 
  [Qasim] That is a lie and slander that merits no response 
whatsoever. We have declared that al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah and 
its leader had no part in the bombing case in America. We are 
positive that the first to be aware of Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman's 
innocence was the U.S. Government itself. 
  [Salah-al-Din] One of the charges against 'Abd-al-Rahman is 
that he took a sum of money collected from Muslims in the United 
States for the Afghan mujahidin, and that this was the cause of 
his dispute with Mustafa Shalabi. That 'Abd-al-Rahman was behind 
Shalabi's murder. 
  [Qasim] That is laughable. It has no leg to stand on, not 
even a lame one. First of all: Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman went recently 
to America when the Afghan issue was barely settled, and before 
that he was virtually under house arrest for two years. 
Secondly: Shalabi was the director of al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah's 
U.S. office. The charge that the leader of al-Jama'ah was behind 
his murder is an invalid charge, because, anyway, a Muslim would 
not dare kill another Muslim or encourage others to do so. 
Third: we believe that the aim of spreading these rumors is to 
draw attention away from the real killers who brutally killed 
Mustafa Shalabi. 
  [Salah-al-Din] And who was that? 
  [Qasim] We believe it was the Mosad (Israeli intelligence). 
There was a close relationship between al-Sayyid Nusayr, who 
killed [Meir] Kahane, and Mustafa Shalabi. We know that the 
Mosad had information confirming that Shalabi was the planner of 
Kahane's assassination. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Does that mean that there were no disputes 
between 'Abd-al-Rahman and Shalabi? 
  [Qasim] There were no basic differences that would lead to 
such an act. The differences were in their points of view as 
regarded administrating their work. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What is al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah? Who are its 
members? What is the difference between it and the Islamic Jihad 
and al-Shawqiyun and al-Najun min al-Nar and others? 
  [Qasim] There is a confusion of false stories about the 
founding of al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah and its evolution. I am 
talking about al-Jama'ah and private affairs I have seen, of 
which I was personally aware, not in a secondhand fashion. 
Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah's activities started in Egyptian 
universities in the mid-1970s. In 1978, the idea came along to 
create a military organization for the Jama'ah. The organization 
had a consultative council founded at that time. It was headed 
by Karam Zahdi, and among its members were Tal'at Fu'ad Qasim, 
Muhammad 'Abd-al-Salam, 'Isam Darbalah, and others. Then 'Abbud 
al-Zumur joined, and the events of 1981 occurred. The State 
Security Agency chose the name "al-Jihad" for al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah's military organization. They wanted to lump us in 
with some other groups which had no role either in spreading the 
faith or in military action. We were joined by a small group, 
like that of Ayman al-Zuwahiri, and we met them in prison. 
Basically they were not members of al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah. They 
got out and formed their own organization, which had no relation 
to us, and was not an offshoot of ours. 
<H5>  'Abbud al-Zumur </H5>
  [Salah-al-Din] But 'Abbud al-Zumur split away from 
al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah in the mid-1980s, and with him a group of members 
who rejected 'Abd-al-Rahman's leadership of the organization. 
Al-Zumur is supposed to have said, "No leadership for the blind." 
  [Qasim] As I have said, for long years there has been no 
splitting away from al-Jama'ah. As to the case of our brother 
'Abbud, there were circumstances. He came back into al-Jama'ah 
nine months ago and is now a member of the consultative council. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How could you accept his return to the 
consultative council, knowing that he is Dr. 'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman's chief rival? 
  [Qasim] It is not a question of rivalry. Al-Zumur held high 
office before going into prison. The truth of what transpired is 
that there was a discussion on the question of the leadership of 
the blind, and it went on for a time. Al-Zumur said that he 
wanted a religious edict deciding the issue, then he obeyed the 
consultative council's decision and came back into al-Jama'ah. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman agreed to be commander of al-Jama'ah only 
after he was persuaded, and after intense pressure. He did not 
want the job. I repeat that 'Abbud al-Zumur came back to 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah as if nothing had happened. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Why did Shawqi al-Shaykh and his group split 
off from al-Jama'ah and form an organization called 
"al-Shawqiyun" that has remained active even after al-Shaykh's 
murder? 
  [Qasim] This Shawqi al-Shaykh was never a member of 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah. He and his group were arrested during 
the police's campaigns in al-Fayyum against al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah. Neither he nor any of those with him were members, 
but they were tortured in prison and they became inclined to the 
charge of unbelief. We in al-Jama'ah have a policy on the charge 
of unbelief, and we undertook to prepare religious research on 
this subject. In any case, the existence of these small groups 
that appear now and then is the result of the government's 
practices and the restriction of the clergy to issuing religious 
edicts that serve to support the status quo. Even when Shaykh 
al-Ghazali spoke the truth in his testimony in the case of Faraj 
Fudah [assassinated secularist], there were vicious secularist 
attacks on him. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What do you think of al-Shawqiyun's armed 
attacks on the gold shops and seizure of non-Muslims' money? 
  [Qasim] We do not approve of this issue from the point of 
view of legitimacy. It is an extremely complicated issue, which 
has detailed precepts, because Islam is against stealing, 
killing, and treachery, except in time of war. Thus we do not 
approve of the seizure of the money of any person in this way 
without the precepts set out by the clergy. 
  [Salah-al-Din] But the deeds that you are committing also 
hurt innocent people. 
  [Qasim] When we carry out our operations we are careful not 
to hit any member of the general public. The operations are 
aimed at the targeted person. The proof is that we carried out 
the assassination attempt on former Interior Minister Zaki Badr 
in a desert area, far from populated areas, so that no innocent 
person would be injured. In any case, if someone happens to be 
in a place where one of our operations is carried out, and he is 
hurt, we feel sorry for him. I affirm that none of our 
operations has ever hurt anyone. The bombings were attributed to 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, for example, but the truth is that we 
did not do them. When members of al-Jama'ah carry out an 
operation, we announce it. We did not say this out of fear, or 
to dodge blame, or to seek praise. 
  [Salah-al-Din] But you killed a British [woman] tourist and 
wounded others in your operations striking at tourism in Egypt. 
  [Qasim] We have an opinion of the tourism issue. The 
government's economy depends on the tourism sector, and so 
striking at tourism means striking the economy, and thus 
striking at the regime itself. The intention is not to kill 
tourists themselves. We are against tourists, because the money 
they pour into the government treasury every year means that the 
regime, which according to our belief should be eliminated, 
remains in power. The revival of tourism in Egypt puts obstacles 
in the way of our establishing an Islamic state in Egypt. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Who issues the religious edicts to kill? 
  [Qasim] This is a matter of legislative vote in al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Who are its members? 
  [Qasim] I am not in a position to mention names, but I may 
say that they have reached the [academic] level of independent 
reasoning as defined by scholars of Islamic jurisprudence. We 
have, in al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, a fairly good number of such 
scholars--more than dozens. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Was an edict issued for the killing of Major 
General Ghabarah? Is there an edict to kill all policemen? 
  [Qasim] We draw a distinction between killing and combat. In 
the case of a killing, there must be a specific edict against a 
killer, or someone who has taken part in the killing of one of 
our brothers, or represents part of the organization. In the 
case of combat, that usually takes place during an all-out 
confrontation, as happened in Dayrut. Young men there are 
considered to be in a combat situation with the police and all 
their representatives, because they attack these youths and 
their families. They consider all of them enemies. If you take a 
pigeon and want to kill it, you will see it beat its wings, and 
you don't blame the pigeon for doing that. What of a Muslim man 
seeing these practices, when he considers that any security 
force that takes part in these practices are bent on combat? 
  [Salah-al-Din] Who are those on the assassination lists that 
you have prepared? 
  [Qasim] This business of lists is just a form of provocation 
used against al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah. It is used by secularist 
writers and some government newspapers. Some provocation is 
accomplished, but I consider it laughable. It is said that we 
put people on assassination lists because they listen to Shaykh 
'Abd-al-Basit 'Abd-al-Samad reading the Koran. Can anyone 
believe that? There are some who say that we want to kill some 
artist. Our cause, and our chief enemies, are the ruling 
government and the group that cooperates with them. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Who is that group? 
  [Qasim] Anyone who supports or sustains the foundations of 
the regime. For example, who supports the regime? The State 
Security Agency, of course. Who is its tool? The police. I am 
amazed at people who value themslves so highly and claim that 
they are targets. This is not their time. Our confrontation now 
is with the regime. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What are your relations with the Copts? 
  [Qasim] We have a study on this topic, published in several 
installments in the magazine AL-MURABITUN. These Christians will 
never find justice anywhere but in an Islamic state. I believe 
that Egypt's security service is trying to prove that members of 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah are attacking Christians. There are also 
some Christian individuals who engage in dangerous practices, 
purposely stirring up trouble, in order to provoke State 
Security into striking at Islamists is some areas, thus 
achieving their aim. These practices are not in the interest of 
the Christians. I affirm that Muslims will never deal with them 
or rule over them except on the basis of justice. Justice is a 
duty for us, even towards those who have oppressed us. 
  [Salah-al-Din] But you killed 13 Christians in one day in 
Dayrut last year. 
  [Qasim] Dayrut is a special community. Christians have lived 
there for a very long time. No Christian has ever been a mayor 
in Egypt, except in Dayrut. Even so, there has never been any 
trouble before. The new thing is that one of the causes I 
mentioned did occur. There were practices that pushed the Muslim 
masses to defend themselves, so I do not attribute all the 
incidents at Dayrut to al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah. Most of the 
incidents that took place against Christians in Dayrut and 
elsewhere were natural reactions to practices that could have 
happened anywhere. 
  [Salah-al-Din] About six months ago, the subject of 
reconciliation between the Egyptian government and members of 
religious groups was brought up, but it ended with the dismissal 
of the interior minister, Major General Muhammad 'Abd-al-Halim 
Musa. What is your position now on dialogue and reconciliation? 
  [Qasim] The reconciliation between the government and 
al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah was, in our view, something cooked up by 
people with vested interests. Our point of view, which we 
announced in a communique, confirmed our rejection of 
reconciliation. 
  [Salah-al-Din] But one of al-Jama'ah's prominent members, 
Safwat 'Abd-al-Ghani, made statements in one of the sessions of 
his trial to the effect that al-Jama'ah was prepared to stop the 
violence on certain conditions. Was he expressing a personal 
point of view, or al-Jama'ah's position? 
  [Qasim] Al-Jama'ah's point of view is the one that we 
announced in our communique. We say, has the policy of 
executions, military trials, and arrests imposed security? Is 
there any official who feels safe in his house, or at work, or 
at play? We have one demand. 
  Our basic demand is the establishment of an Islamic state. 
If 
they released all the detainees, and gave every one of us a job 
and lots of money to abandon this course, not one in a million 
would accept it. The confrontation would go on, with violence 
and combat. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Do the statements of Safwat 'Abd-al-Ghani 
reflect a conflict inside al-Jama'ah, over the issue of 
reconciliation? 
  [Qasim] Al-Jama'ah has one specific position. Perhaps the 
prison conditions some of them are enduring, Safwat 
'Abd-al-Ghani among them, have moved them to say something to 
mitigate them. 
  [Salah-al-Din] The al-Jihad Organization has claimed 
responsibility for the assassination attempt on Interior 
Minister Hasan al-Alfi. Observers say that the organization used 
a method resembling that of al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah. Is al-Jihad 
now competing with al-Jama'ah after years of absence? 
  [Qasim] There is no such thing as the "al-Jihad 
Organization." This was a name given by the State Security 
Agency. 
  [Salah-al-Din] But there is an organization issuing 
communiques and carrying out violent operations, bearing the 
name al-Jihad. 
  [Qasim] I have mentioned that some of those who went out 
from 
the events of 1981, and got acquittals or short prison 
sentences, and never had any role in spreading the faith or 
military action, were tortured in prison. After they got out, 
they went to Pakistan and Afghanistan. Some of them called 
themselves the al-Jihad Group, then the al-Jihad Society. Ayman 
al-Zuwahiri was one of them. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How do you plan for al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah 
members in Pakistan and Afghanistan, especially as there are 
Egyptian efforts to extradite them? The al-Jihad Organization 
said that its members would gather in an Arab capital. Will you 
follow their example? 
  [Qasim] The security apparatus in Egypt has made a great 
deal 
of trouble for our brothers in al-Minya and Asyut, forcing them 
to move to Cairo and Alexandria. There was a time when our 
activity was confined to the governorates of al-Minya and Asyut, 
but they made trouble for the youths, who went to Cairo and 
Alexandria to spread the faith, and many joined them. After that 
they made it hard for them in all the governorates, and they 
were compelled to leave the country. They went to Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, and there they found that almighty God had a place 
for them. Now they are making it hard for them, so they are 
looking to go to other countries. I can promise that the 
Egyptian government will suffer terribly from them. It will want 
them back in al-Minya and Asyut. It will wish it had let them 
stay in the country. 
  [Salah-al-Din] According to some analyses, the mounting acts 
of violence in Upper Egypt are due to economic and social 
conditions, and that the random and poor areas in Cairo and the 
rest of Egypt's governorates produce the extremists. 
  [Qasim] That is shallow analysis, an attempt to escape from 
reality and the real confrontation. Is it a question of social 
and economic problems? I tell you we have brothers in al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah who have millions. If it were a question of revenge 
in Upper Egypt, then I point out to you our brothers who are 
from the Lower Egyptian governorates. 
  [Salah-al-Din] You have claimed responsibility for Mahjub's 
assassination, and the al-Jama'ah members accused in the case 
were acquitted. Did the accused carry out the operation? 
  [Qasim] Yes, al-Jama'ah claimed responsibility, and I 
believe 
that the failure of the police and state security to prepare 
investigations and a case was a reason for the innocent verdict. 
They relied on the methods they are used to using with 
al-Jama'ah members when they interrogate them to twist 
confessions out of them by torture. It is only natural that 
anyone who is tortured may speak the truth, or exaggerate, or 
say things which are untrue, to escape what is happening to him. 
Thus the judges found gaps in the case and handed down the 
innocent verdict. 
  [Salah-al-Din] You are opposed to the Supreme State Security 
courts, and the military courts, even though the Supreme State 
Security court handed down innocent verdicts in the Mahjub case. 
  [Qasim] My response to that is to mention what happened to 
me 
personally when I was in Denmark and found my name among those 
accused in the "Returnees from Afghanistan" case before the 
military court. A death sentence was issued against me. The 
brother who was executed after his conviction in the case of 
Sharif Ahmad Hasan--God knows he had never done anything that 
called for that sentence. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What will be al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah's 
reaction should the accused in the Mahjub case be tried again? 
  [Qasim] Their retrial, or failure to return them, would to 
us 
be a double disgrace. We know that our brothers who were found 
innocent will be trapped when they confront the military court, 
and may be sentenced to death. 
  [Salah-al-Din] Do you have links with the Muslim Brotherhood 
in Egypt? What is your view of their activities? 
  [Qasim] The Brotherhood are our brothers, and they have 
their 
direction and their way of operating. We know they have certain 
interests they want to protect. They believe that their 
interests are worthwhile; we do not think so. At any rate, such 
is their view, for which God will judge them. We believe that 
the regime's confrontation of Islamists is in phases. The early 
phase is al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, and then the Brotherhood's 
time will come. They did not leave them these seats in some of 
the syndicates for nothing. 
  [Salah-al-Din] How are al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah's activities 
funded? You are accused of getting money from certain countries, 
such as Iran. 
  [Qasim] I affirm that we have no connection with any country 
in the world. Even if the Egyptian Government could prove even 
one percent of this talk, it would have used it as proof. We do 
not accept contacts with countries or aid from them. Reality 
tells us that these countries only give for some goal of their 
own. Those who give, pay people whose support they seek, or whom 
they wish to use for some aim of their own. [The donors] want to 
take part in decisionmaking. We reject this. 
  [Salah-al-Din] So where do you get the arms and money for 
al-Jama'ah's activities? 
  [Qasim] These matters are not open to discussion. We accept 
aid from no one. 
<H5>  Iran </H5>
  [Salah-al-Din] How are your relations with Iran? 
  [Qasim] The Iranians are Shiites. Our difference with them 
is 
theological--what the clergy call contradiction. 
  [Salah-al-Din] What is your comment on the reports of human 
rights groups that strongly criticize the behavior of members of 
the religious groups? 
  [Qasim] If they are looking at reactions, that is unjust. 
They should reveal what is actually happening, then look at the 
reaction, but not using the same standards. I assert that what 
is happening among us are reactions, not actions. 

