CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Paul Brown, environment correspondent: "Britain </F>
`Exploiting Toxic Loophole'"] 
  [Text] The Government is exploiting a loophole in the Basel 
Convention, which controls the international trade in toxic 
waste, to get rid of unwanted substances in the third world, 
opposition parties alleged yesterday. 
  Chris Smith and Simon Hughes, environment spokesmen for 
Labour and the Liberal Democrats, said the loophole consists of 
describing waste exports to developing countries as substances 
intended for recycling or as foreign aid in the form of 
recoverable materials. 
  They said much of the waste was simply dumped, and called 
for 
the loophole to be closed. 
  In 1993 Britain exported 105,000 tonnes of waste, half of it 
to South-east Asia, three times more than three years ago. 
According to Customs records, 65 countries outside the developed 
world's Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
received waste from Britain last year. 
  On March 31 the countries which have signed the Basel 
Convention, which includes all the members of the European 
Union, will meet to discuss controls on the toxic waste trade. 
Denmark has proposed a ban on all exports of waste from the 25 
OECD nations to non-OECD countries, whether described as for 
recycling or otherwise. 
  Greenpeace, in a letter to John Gummer, the Environment 
Secretary, said this call was supported by more than 100 
developing countries and at least 12 industrialised countries, 
but opposed by Britain. Six other countries, including the 
United States, Germany and Japan, want the loophole to remain 
open. These are the countries that export most waste. 
  At Mr Gummer's request, Greenpeace has sent files in which 
the damage done by British toxic waste exports is catalogued. 
  Greenpeace said in its letter: "Our report on the export of 
lead battery waste shows very high levels of contamination in 
the Philippines and Indonesia, where British waste has been 
exported. These recycling operations cannot be considered 
environmentally sound." 
  Mr Smith said the Government should sign up for the ban. 
"Exporting toxic waste to the developing world amounts to 
dumping our environmental problems in someone else's back yard. 
It is immoral -- promoting profits for multinational companies 
at the expense of human health. It is ecological 
irresponsibility. And it is economic nonsense, costing jobs in 
the UK." 
  COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, March 15, 1994 

