Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Olga Frolova, professor and department head, </F>
Sociomedical and Epidemiological Research Department, 
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Perinatology Scientific Center, 
Academy of Medical Sciences, by ROSSIYA correspondent Genadiy 
Shalayev under the ``Firsthand'' rubric: ``Caucasus Gives Birth; 
Good for All of Russia''; first paragraph is boldface ROSSIYA 
introduction] 
  [Text] Professor Olga Grigoryevna Frolova, head of 
the Sociomedical and Epidemiological Research Department, 
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Perinatology Scientific Center, 
Academy of Medical Sciences, responded to the questions of our 
ROSSIYA correspondent. 
  [Shalayev] Olga Grigoryevna, it seems like Russian women 
have 
stopped giving birth. Young mothers with baby carriages have 
become a rarity, especially in the cities. What does this say 
about science? 
  [Frolov] There has been a landslide drop in the birth rate. 
Population growth is falling sharply. In 1989, 18.2 children 
were born for every thousand persons. In 1990 the figure dropped 
to 14.6 children, and in 1991 it dropped to only 12. A small 
increase in population throughout Russia as a whole is being 
achieved thanks to the Northern Caucasus region, the Eastern 
Siberia region, and to a lesser extent the Far Eastern region. 
The absolute indicators are decreasing, however. 
  Let's open the handbook of the Russian Federation State 
Committee on Statistics. In the northwestern region, for 
example, the number of deaths has exceeded the number of births 
by 13,000, and in the central region, deaths have exceeded 
births by 60,000. In a year in Moscow, 94,000 have been born and 
114,200 have died. That is too rapid a population loss. 
  [Shalayev] And how is the pattern emerging with respect to 
age groups? 
  [Frolov] There has been a decrease in birth rate throughout 
all age groups, even in the periods from 20 to 24 and from 25 to 
29 years. And that is the time of greatest reproductive 
activity. As far as those who are not yet 20 are concerned, they 
worry us greatly because they are a group that is very 
vulnerable from a social standpoint. In addition, their sexual 
activity, coupled with disregard of modern contraceptive methods 
and just simple ignorance of them, has led to an increase in the 
number of abortions and unplanned births that have resulted in a 
multitude of problems. 
  And there is yet another suppressing force -- the ratio of 
the number of marriages and divorces. In Russia as a whole in 
1991 divorces were registered in more than 40 percent of 
families. In Moscow the situation is even worse: More than half 
of all families divorce. 
  [Shalayev] Have you not tried to explain what is inhibiting 
maternal instinct and interfering with the idea of having 
children in a family? 
  [Frolov] We have tried. We conducted a suitable survey of 
Moscow women. It turned out that one in five women gives birth 
only because she is at the critical age of 30 years and cannot 
wait any longer. As far as social problems are concerned, 56 
percent of Moscow residents polled are not having families out 
of material considerations: 60 percent because of a shortage of 
products and 80 percent because of difficulties in feeding and 
caring for their children. That was a year ago. This year we are 
preparing to repeat the study. Perhaps Russians have somehow 
recovered from the socioeconomic shock. Although we are not 
entertaining any particular illusions. 
  [Shalayev] And well, what about those who are giving birth? 
Is everything all right for them? 
  [Frolov] Here are the results of yet another study recently 
conducted in accordance with the modern method of evaluating the 
health status of pregnant women. Only one in four turned out to 
be healthy. This naturally affects the health of children. Only 
28 percent of infants discharged from the obstetric hospital are 
healthy; 41 percent have some sort of abnormality, and 31 
percent are at increased risk from a health standpoint. Of the 
latter group, only 29 percent remain healthy for their first 
year of life. Add the well-known quality of our medicine to 
this... 
  [Shalayev] What do the statistics say about maternal 
mortality during childbirth? 
  [Frolov] It is unfortunately increasing. According to the 
State Committee on Statistics, there were 47.4 deaths per 
100,000 childbirths in 1990 and already 52.4 by 1991. In our 
country maternal mortality is now ``miscalculated'' according to 
World Health Organization indicators. They count all women who 
have died from medical and illegal abortions and from premature 
and timely births and within 42 days of giving birth. In the 
United States, for example, this indicator amounts to 7.2. In 
Finland it is 6.6, in France it is 10.9, and in Japan it is 12. 
Sweden has the lowest maternal mortality at 2.9. In Russia there 
has also been an increase in infant mortality, when children 
under 1 year of age die. 
  [Shalayev] What can be done? 
  [Frolov] In Russia a special family planning program has 
been 
developed, and budget funds have already been allocated for it. 
A federal program to reduce maternal mortality is also being 
prepared. But it can only provide general arrangements. We have 
taken the maternal mortality statistic in its dynamics and asked 
a computer what the indicator is like in individual territories. 
It turned out that a minimum of six regional programs are 
needed. A number of territories, such as the Kemerovo Oblast and 
Tuva Republic, have a high maternal mortality that has remained 
stable. In other regions it is high or average but is 
moderating. There trend has been toward a decrease in Tumen, the 
Irkutsk Oblast, and Moscow. There are regions with a low 
indicator, let's say the Krasnoyarsk Kray, Karelia, and 
Mordovia. In a word, a differential approach is needed: In one 
place, the fight against toxicosis must be intensified; in 
another, special attention must be paid to family planning. 

