Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by station commentator Yun Pyong-son: "The </F>
Traitorous Regime Cannot Last Long"] 
  [Text] According to a radio report from Seoul, the Kim 
Yong-sam puppet clique established a new traffic tax under the 
pretext of resolving the traffic issue early this year. Now it 
is once again trying to establish a new agriculture-fishery 
special tax as well as an environment tax. 
  The puppets are raving that new taxes are necessary in order 
to generate the financial resources needed to change the 
structure of agriculture-fishery villages in the wake of market 
opening and in a bid to resolve the issue of polluted tap water 
from polluted rivers. However, this is nothing but sophistry to 
justify maneuvers to create new taxes to exploit the people. 
  As is widely known, broad segments of the South Korean 
populace, including farmers, strongly objected to the rice 
market opening, branding the puppets' maneuvers for rice market 
opening as the act of driving farmers to their death and making 
the South Korean people slaves to foreign provisions. However, 
the Kim Yong-sam puppet clique, ignoring their promises and the 
people's resistance, did not hesitate in opening up the South's 
rice markets in order to ingratiate itself with the U.S. masters. 
  In addition, the South Korean people have long urged the 
puppet authorities to come up with a policy to prevent river 
pollution. The rascals received considerable amounts of money 
from intermediary waste disposal companies to overlook the 
discharge of poisonous industrial wastes into the Naktong River, 
and allowed these companies to build waste disposal plants in 
areas designated as tap water protection sites. As a result, 
ten million residents in the Naktong River area alone are 
suffering from a lack of tap water, which is of utmost 
importance to daily living. 
  South Korea has become the worst traffic hell in the world, 
many residents are suffering from the polluted tap water from 
the seriously polluted environment, and agricultural and fishery 
villages are doomed to ruin because of market opening. This is 
entirely attributed to the policy of Kim Yong-sam's flunkeyist, 
traitorous regime against the nation. Therefore, the Kim 
Yong-sam puppet regime should totally assume responsibility for 
this. 
  Nonetheless, the Kim Yong-sam ring's new taxes and their 
attempt to strengthen exploitation of the people is like the 
saying of the guilty person venting his anger upon others for no 
reason. 
  A South Korean radio reported that if the special tax for 
rural and fishing villages and the environment are added to the 
existing education tax and traffic tax, the people will be 
forced to pay an additional four different taxes this year. The 
radio denounced the authorities' maneuvers to establish new 
taxes, saying that if taxes are created every time issues like 
this come up, no matter how many purposeful taxes are created, 
it will never be enough. 
  The South Korean people have been burdened with various 
kinds 
of heavy taxes. According to the materials released by the 
puppet Finance Ministry, taxes that will be imposed upon the 
South Korean rural and fishery households this year will amount 
to an average of almost 1,350,000 won. Like the gangster-like 
theory that taxes can be squeezed out of people once levied, the 
puppet clique has constantly created new taxes and tried to 
exploit the South Korean people by squeezing every last drop of 
their blood. 
  The puppets' babble about generating so-called financial 
resources is a brazen-faced maneuver. To maintain their own 
conveniences and power, the traitorous groups opened the rice 
markets on which the lives of hundreds of farmers depend, and 
have polluted the tap water of the 10 million residents. What 
on earth can they do for the people? 
  While paying lip service to conducting politics centered on 
the people's livelihood, the Kim Yong-sam ring babbles as though 
it is doing something for the people. In actuality, it only 
thinks of exploiting the people. The Kim Yong-sam puppet's 
regime is an exploitatious, blood-sucking regime which exceeds 
preceding rulers. 
  The rascals can never cover up their traitorous color of 
afflicting misfortunes and sufferings upon the people. As long 
as the Kim Yong-sam ring, which answers people's complaints over 
the rice market opening and the river pollution with strong 
exploitation to maintain power, the South Korean people cannot 
free themselves from the present status or poverty 
  The South Korean people will never forgive the Kim Yong-sam 
traitorous regime's crimes and will deal a hard blow to the 
rascals. 

