Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sophia Coudenhove: "Visegrad Countries Make </F>
Small NATO Gain"] 
  [Text] Central European leaders got both more than they 
expected and less than they wanted when Bill Clinton offered 
them the Partnership for Peace initiative. 
  Despite concerted efforts to present a unified front as 
international television networks battled for the best shots, it 
was clear that the region's countries are still reluctant to 
stand together. 
  The leaders of the Visegrad four--the Czech Republic, 
Slovakia, Hungary and Poland--were pleasantly surprised by the 
results of the Jan. 10-11 NATO summit in Brussels. At the 
summit, members redefined the Partnership for Peace, conceived 
last October by NATO defense ministers as a way to foster ties 
between Central and Eastern Europe and the alliance. NATO 
announced plans for joint training and holding military 
exercises on the territory of Central European states as a 
prelude to eventual NATO membership. 
  "President Clinton's visit undoubtedly dispelled fears that 
had arisen here and in some of our neighboring countries that 
[the Partnership for Peace] is like a pacifier or an excuse or 
something just intended to calm us down," said Czech Foreign 
Minister Josef Zieleniec. 
  The presidents of the Visegrad countries all provisionally 
accepted the initiative, which is considered a first step 
towards--though not a promise of--NATO membership. 
  "Our countries have very similar views on the Partnership 
for 
Peace," said Czech president Vaclav Havel. "I would be happy if 
today the city of Prague could emerge as a symbol of Europe 
standing in alliance." 
  While the leaders agreed that they all wanted eventual NATO 
membership, they differed on how strongly they pressed for 
specifics. The partnership plan contains no security guarantees 
and no timetable for NATO membership. 
  While Hungarian president Arpad Goncz called Jan. 12 "a 
historic day," the Polish delegation was much less enthusiastic. 
  "We have plenty of promises and political statements but we 
lack specific perspectives," said Polish Foreign Minister 
Andrzej Olechowski. According to Polish representatives, the 
initiative is a step in the right direction, but a step that is 
too small. 
  Meanwhile, Polish President Lech Walesa, who had threatened 
to boycott the talks unless the Partnership for Peace was 
defined to his satisfaction in Brussels, refused to take part in 
any of the press conferences following the talks. 
  Prior to the meetings, he said he expected talks with 
Clinton 
to be difficult. 
  Less concerned with guarantees or speed than its neighbors, 
Slovak representatives were happy to be included in the talks at 
all. At the NATO summit, British Prime Minister John Major had 
omitted Slovakia altogether when naming countries most likely to 
join NATO in the near future. 
  The Slovak delegation in Prague stressed that even though 
Slovakia had not advanced economically as far as its neighbors, 
it was still just as interested in the plan. 
  "Different economic conditions among the different countries 
should not be a reason for being included in the Partnership for 
Peace or not," said President Michal Kovac. 
  As Clinton stressed that all four countries would be 
considered individually rather than collectively in the 
Partnership for Peace, Central European leaders settled their 
differences over whether talks with President Clinton should 
have been bilateral or multilateral. 
  President Havel underscored the need for regional 
cooperation, even though the Czech Republic had been the only 
Visegrad member to press for bilateral, rather than multilateral 
talks. 
  "Good relations with our neighbors are in the fundamental 
interest of each of our countries as well as in the fundamental 
interest of Europe as a whole," he said. 
  On that front, Havel confirmed that the presidents of the 
Visegrad countries plus Germany, Austria and Slovenia will meet 
in April at Litomysl, east Bohemia, the birthplace of Czech 
composer Bedrich Smetana. Havel said the event will be cultural 
and no pacts, treaties or declarations will be issued. 
  In his weekly radio broadcast, Havel said Czechs should 
avoid 
expressions of "Czechocentrism" or "provincial mistrust" towards 
the world. 

