Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [``Article Received Through RIA-Novosti Exclusively for </F>
ADEVARUL'' by Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev: ``Russia 
and NATO''] 
  [Text] The tendency to establish a democratic Europe as a 
whole is being thwarted by the tendency to break it up and the 
appearance of new threats and dangers. Which of these 
tendencies is going to prevail? This greatly depends on the 
decisions that will be adopted in Brussels and by the CSCE in 
Budapest. 
  Toward what goals should the general security system that is 
going to be established be directed? What criteria are to be 
used to establish this system? What possible ways are there for 
this system to come about? 
  One cannot say that there is a crisis of solutions -- 
apparently with ``only one way'' that is effective -- to 
European security issues. These solutions are based on two 
myths that are believed by their supporters as being axioms of 
current European policy. First, we talk about the thesis that 
there is a ``security vacuum'' and a ``gray zone'' in Central 
Europe, which is condemned inevitably to become Russia's sphere 
of expansion. And second, we talk about the thesis of 
``Russia's move toward a nationalistic, imperialist policy'' 
after the recent parliamentary elections. 
  By putting the two affirmations together, one can conclude 
that NATO must defend Central European countries from the 
imminent pressure coming from the East. 
  To accept the thesis of the ``security vacuum'' would mean 
to 
reject precisely the essence of the general European process, 
the way in which it is described in the Paris Charter, namely 
the unity of democratic peoples in Europe. This would be the 
greatest failure of the orientation of the entire European 
policy, which, apparently, in spite of unavoidable difficulties, 
brought about the unification of Germany and ensured the 
destruction of the totalitarian monsters of the 20th century. 
  And if we consider the worst-case scenario -- the revival of 
Russian imperialism -- then we should start, not from the 
hypothesis of ``Soviet tanks'' pouring into the West, but from a 
replay of the Yugoslav drama in the former USSR. The result 
would be tens of millions of refugees, catastrophe in great 
industrial complexes, and the danger posed by the use of 
tactical nuclear weapons. What will NATO be able to do in such 
a situation to defend its Eastern members? Two Chernobyls would 
be more than enough for all of Europe. The ``guard on the 
[River] Bug'' would not be able to save anybody. 
  Among other things, this scenario -- the worst possible -- 
might be provoked precisely by a hasty expansion of NATO. It 
would serve the extremists in Russia as the most convincing 
argument in favor of a revival of the Russian empire to reject 
the ``pressure of the West.'' Thus, the strategy of ``the most 
evil scenario'' is dangerous because it carries in itself a 
forecast that can very easily become reality. 
  The fear of a new ``Russian threat'' can be eliminated first 
of all through a partnership with democratic Russia, which has 
embarked on a path of establishing a rule-of-law state and a 
market economy. The foreign policy promoted by Russia's 
president has already proved its orientation toward achieving 
the national interest of the country through partnership and not 
through confrontation with the surrounding world. This foreign 
policy is sanctioned in a democratic Constitution. Russia does 
not have territorial claims on any country in the word, and thus 
no claims on Central or Eastern European countries either. 
Russia's new military doctrine directs its armed forces 
exclusively toward defending the country and its allies and 
toward peace operations in accordance with Russia's 
international engagements. 
  As far as the results of the parliamentary elections are 
concerned, I am convinced that there can be no fertile ground 
for any real fascist outbursts in Russia, a country that in 
World War II took more sacrifices than any other country in the 
world to the shrine of the victory over fascism. The electorate 
cast their votes not for a ``campaign against the West'' or ``to 
set out for the South Seas'' and not for the forced restoration 
of the Soviet Union or of the socialist camp. They voted 
against the ambitions and arrogance of certain reformers, 
against their lack of ability to explain to the people the goal 
of reform in simple, human language, and against the current 
lack of social protection for the population and the inadequacy 
of the fight against crime. The Russian democrats have already 
started to draw the necessary conclusions from the awakening 
lessons administered to them by the parliamentary elections. But 
there is not and will never be any ``flirtation'' with 
right-wing extremism. We condemn all overt or covert forms of 
extremism, aggressive nationalism, and fascism. 
  The West in turn must also draw conclusions and correct the 
tone and the manner of its dialogue with Russia. Advice and 
recommendations have no room in this dialogue. The partner 
starts off on the wrong foot by presenting certain proposals 
that we must either adopt entirely or reject entirely, without 
the right to make certain adjustments to it, in accordance with 
our own interests. 
  Now is the time when Russia should feel more strongly 
foreign 
support for its reform process. An accurately worked out, 
detailed strategy of cooperation between Russia and its 
democratic allies in the West is required now. We need new 
strategic schemes and mechanisms to implement them that would 
thoroughly reflect the current degree of maturity in our 
relations. And most important: One should proceed from promises 
of large scale cooperation made to Russia in Tokyo to the 
fulfillment of those promises. 
  In the process of establishing a new architecture of Europe 
it is important to take into account a number of criteria, such 
as: 
  -- a balanced approach, in subsequent stages to the European 
security system. The methods of ``shock diplomacy'' and the 
policy of the ``fait accompli'' should be excluded. The Russian 
side is in favor of broad consultations with all the interested 
states. 
  -- the open nature of regional organizations and 
institutions 
as a guarantee of their appropriate adaptation to the current 
European realities. Russia has no right to dictate who should 
and who should not join NATO, but we have the right to count on 
the fact that the North Atlantic Alliance will take into account 
the particularities of the transition period, which is 
inevitably a long-term process. And if we were to talk about a 
longer term process, it should confirm the position included in 
the documents through which NATO declares itself open to accept 
all democratic states in the Euro- Atlantic region. One should 
not exclude a priori that in the future Russia will also request 
to be accepted into NATO. It is important to ensure an 
effective partnership, based on equal rights in the period of 
transition and of mutual adaptation. 
  -- ensuring an equal level of security for each European 
state. The emergence of ``first degree security and second 
degree security,'' of ``gray zones,'' of ``special spheres of 
influence,'' of ``isolated regions,'' or of ``cordons 
sanitaires'' in Europe are inadmissible. 
  -- the preservation of a contract-juridical base for 
European 
security. 
  -- the elimination of territorial claims in interstate 
relations in Europe. 
  The major goals of the strategy of partnership that we are 
proposing in the political sphere and in the area of security 
must be the following: 
  -- First: to develop Euro-Atlantic cooperation. The CSCE 
should be turned into a political organization for all the 
regions (a general regional organization), and the North 
Atlantic Cooperation Council into an organization of independent 
political and military cooperation, but closely connected with 
the CSCE. Their goal should be to coordinate the efforts of 
NATO, the Western European Union, and the CIS on international 
security, achieving peace, and ensuring the active defense of 
the European ethnic minorities' rights to their language and 
other rights. I believe that a great step in this respect would 
be to adopt at the Rome session of the CSCE a declaration on 
fighting aggressive nationalism. 
  -- Second: to create a system of mutual guarantees for the 
security of Central and Eastern European countries. The 
stronger interstate relations are, the more durable the nature 
of their relations will be. 
  -- Third: I welcome the proposal of my German colleague 
Kinkel to conclude certain conventions of cooperation and 
consultation between NATO on the one hand and Central and 
Eastern European countries, Russia, and Ukraine on the other. 
The opening of a NATO- CIS communications channel would also be 
useful. 
  -- Fourth: to increase the capacity of European countries to 
ensure peace. For the time being, we should say it openly, East 
and West have not found a common way to respond to local 
conflicts in Yugoslavia or the former USSR, although meanwhile 
these conflicts have become a great problem for European 
security. 
  -- Fifth: to ensure the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons 
in Europe. It is not correct to present the Russian-Ukrainian 
dispute around the issue of strategic missiles as an episode in 
the process of dividing the Soviet inheritance. Here we are 
talking about ways to prevent the creation of a breach in the 
regime of nuclear nonproliferation. The strategy of European 
partnership should foresee strong encouragement for the strict 
observance of the accord on nonproliferation of nuclear weapon. 
  Certainly, separate discussions are required by the economic 
component of the partnership and the essence of those 
discussions would be to move from the stage of certain 
chronically delayed programs to moves to include Russia in the 
international division of labor on an equal basis and without 
discrimination, and to facilitate its access to European markets. 
  The dialogue on the issue of partnership for Europe is 
already actively developing. I hope that the NATO summit, 
through its balanced and farsighted decisions, will mark a 
useful contribution to the development of this dialogue. The 
members of the North Atlantic Alliance can find in Russia an 
interesting and responsible partner for drafting this strategy. 

