CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Urmo Kohv: "Port of Tallinn Developing in All </F>
Directions"] 
  [Text] 
  For the coming year, according to Peeter Palu, 
executive director of the Port of Tallinn [RE Tallinna Sadam], 
there are two major tasks facing the company: To increase the 
handling of goods up to 10 percent, and to secure financing for 
expanding the Port of Muuga. The financial and economic 
indicators for the enterprise show that last year's biggest 
increase occurred in the area of passengers, and that goods in 
transit accounted for the biggest part of the volume. Last 
year's net volume turned out to be 790 million kroons, which 
exceeded the 1992 figure by more than two times. 
  "In addition to passengers, last year's increase in volume 
showed up in practically all categories of goods," Peeter Palu 
said at his meeting with the media. 
  The company's total volume of goods handled in 1993 was 12.5 
million tonnes (a 17 percent increase). The principal business 
of the Port of Tallinn--the republic's export-import and the 
volume of goods in transit (through the Midtown and Muuga ports) 
increased by 29.5 percent the last year. The bulk of commercial 
hauling is made up of goods in transit (79 percent), as most of 
the loading volume is made up of grain (36 percent). Last year's 
biggest increase (200.1 percent) occurred in the area of liquid 
cargo. 
  Palu said there was a significant increase in the handling 
of 
goods at all the ports. The Midtwon port, which had been 
suffering from a gradual erosion of coastal traffic, had a 30 
percent increase in export-import and goods in transit. There 
was also a 25 percent increase at the Muuga port, and a 49 
percent increase at the port of Kopli. "This year, we consider 
it realistic to secure an increase of 8 to 10 percent in the 
area of handling goods," Palu said. 
  Last year, 2,256,000 passengers went through the Port of 
Tallinn (a 68 percent increase), in previous years these figures 
were 1,341,000, 900,000 and 400,000 respectively. 
<H5>  The Midtown Port Will Become a Passenger Port </H5>
  "Our projections call for 5 million passengers in the 
future," said Palu, adding that this figure is expected to be 
reached before the end of the century. "With this in mind, we 
have concentrated our efforts on developing the Midtown port 
facility into a real passenger port." 
  The passenger terminal at the Midtown port is currently 
being 
expanded, which has resulted in a 50 percent increase in the 
available area, so far. The second floor of the two-story 
terminal is going to house offices for the border guard and 
customs services, while the entire first floor will serve as the 
waiting room and check-in. Depending on the departure area of 
the ship, the terminal will be open at two ends. At the moment, 
finishing touches (installation of elevators and escalators, 
etc.) are being added to the terminal, due to be completed by 
May. 
  Last year saw the completion of a digital telephone system 
connecting the ports, using Siemens technology. This year's 
planning calls for further development of the information 
system, and for implementing the radar-based navigational 
project. The latter will be installed not only at Midtown, but 
also at the Muuga and Kopli ports. Palu said that these radars 
can also be used by the border guard. 
<H5>  Midtown port To Be Connected With Old Town </H5>
  Most of the piers at the Midtown port have been repaired and 
paved and, by the end of the year, proper port gates will be 
completed, along with construction on pier 17. Palu said that 
the main objective is connecting the Midtown port with the Old 
Town, and this is why agreements are being sought for 
demolishing all the little-used structures within the port's 
territory. So far, a swimming pool and a workshop have already 
disappeared from view. The admiral's pool building, however, is 
being remodeled into a terminal for smaller ships, where big 
yachts should have access as early as next year. 
  The matter of getting rid of the concrete plant next to the 
town hall, that has been awaiting resolution for 15 years is, 
for the time being, snagged in what seems like an endless court 
battle (the plant, for example, is still part of the 
Gosimushestvo listing as property belonging to Russia, while the 
plant's administrative owner AS Meekam is listed as one of the 
creditors of the now defunct Commercial Bank of Tartu). The 
plant making foundation blocks has incorporated some property 
belonging to the Russian army and, according to Palu "no clean 
moves" have been made there up to this day. 
<H5>  Kuwait Counts on the Business Project of the Muuga Port </H5>
  "Our primary task this year is financing the expansion at 
the 
port of Muuga," Palu said. "We sent Kuwait a business plan in 
December and, according to the reply received, Kuwait's fund is 
counting on the project proposed, and on financing its 
infrastructure, which is close to half the cost of the total 
project. Right now, we are doing profitability studies on the 
infrastructure, according to Kuwait's specifications, which we 
hope to complete within a few months, so that we could give 
specific answers to questions asked by the investors. 
  Financing for expanding the port at Muuga, however, is not 
being discussed with Kuwait only. Negotiations are also under 
way with the European Investment Bank, the World Bank, and other 
international credit institutions. "Financial matters are firm 
only once the money has been received," Palu remarked. 
  Construction is now going on at the Muuga plant for an idea 
long in the making--a warehousing facility for the transit of 
cotton coming from Central Asia. Pier 6, now under construction, 
is intended for handling coal (with help from the port of Kopli, 
efforts will be made to further reduce the mountains of coal 
accumulating on the piers of the Midtown port). Currently, the 
transport of coal through the Midtown port has dropped from 3 
million tonnes to 1.1 million tonnes (partially due to reduced 
coal exports from Russia). A considerable increase, however, has 
lately been noted in the transit volume of metal through the 
Muuga and Midtown ports. 
<H5>  Ten Offers Received For South Port of Paldiski </H5>
  Palu said that, as of today, 10 project proposals have been 
received in the bidding to rent out the South Port of Paldiski. 
Of these proposals, three call for a processed crude oil 
terminal, one for hauling scrap metal, one for metal exports and 
the rest for expediting timber and gravel exports. 
  "Before the port's administrative council can make a 
decision, work will have to be completed on the piers, along 
with depth studies. The primary criteria for evaluating business 
plans will be utilization of local labor, and guaranteeing 
environmental safety," Palu said. 
  Still, building a proper commercial port at Paldiski would 
require big expenditures, since not only the railroad, but also 
the highway and existing structures and communications are in a 
bad shape and need to be replaced. The most valuable part of the 
port is thought to be the 360 meter-long breakwater and the 
favorable natural conditions (Paldiski is one of the two 
completely ice-free ports in Estonia). The water depth of the 
South Port, at the mouth of the bay, is 10 meters, diminishing 
to about 4 meters near the land pier. Palu thinks that further 
deepening may be considered for the future. An operating 
management team for the South Port has been found by the Port of 
Tallinn and, for the time being, the port is engaged in the 
transport of gravel. 
  The 6-meter deep North Port of Paldiski will reportely be 
leased out by the Ministry of Defense but, so far, results of 
the bidding have not been made available yet. The port will be 
leased out for three years, while the leasing party is not 
restricted to operating a military port (access needs to be 
available, however, for defense and border guard vessels). 
<H5>  Development of Small Ports Continues </H5>
  Out of the small ports, planning calls for fixing up the 
Triigi, Orissaare, and Koiguste ports. Last year, Port of 
Tallinn made direct outlays amounting to roughly 53 million 
kroons for the development of small ports. 
  "Port of Tallinn considers it expedient to finish 
construction on the small ports before they are turned over to 
municipal ownership," Palu said. "In small ports that are fixed 
up properly, we do not see competition but rather distribution 
of labor, since the latter complement the work of the big ports." 
  Palu also expressed hope that some organizations making use 
of small ports will emerge in the near future, since the state 
is not behaving reasonably with its ports right now. "The state 
does not yet have an overview of its ports, also the rules of 
the game have not yet been put in place, so as to rule out the 
existence of numerous pirate ports, harmful to the state," Palu 
said. 

