BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report] </F>
  [Text] He has been described as ambitious and is often 
passed off as a political moderate. He has also been praised 
for his astute diplomatic skills, political incisiveness and his 
pragmatism. But above all, Thabo Mbeki, the ANC's director of 
international relations, is best known for his charm, 
statesmanship and ability to keep his composure. Born more than 
51 years ago on June 18, in the Transkei, Mbeki was initiated 
into the struggle in his early teens. He became one of the ANC's 
youngest National Executive Committee (NEC) members and has been 
a member of the organisation for most of his life. The son of 
the ANC and SA [South African] Communist Party leader, Goven 
Mbeki, joined the ANC's youth league in 1956, when he was just 
14 years old. 
  He is as much a product of his father's influence as he is a 
graduate of student struggles. This is despite the fact that he 
spent most of his political life separated from his father, who 
spent a quarter of a century behind bars after being imprisoned 
with Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and the other Rivonia 
trialists in 1964. But by then, Thabo Mbeki had already emerged 
as a significant figure in student politics and had been through 
a number of struggles at school. In 1959 he was forced to 
continue his studies at home when the school he attended in 
Lovedale near Alice in Eastern Cape was shut down after a 
student strike. Mbeki was politically active at the school. 
  Not much is known of his early childhood, but Isaac Mogase, 
an ANC activist at the time, remembers Mbeki "as a very naughty 
little boy." Mogase recalls that event at the youthful age of 
17, Thabo showed leadership qualities, he was a very good judge 
of people. "His childhood spontaneity has been replaced by a 
mature personality that is difficult to fault," Mogase added, 
when asked about Mbeki in 1990 soon after his return to the 
country from exile. 
  After matriculating in 1959, Mbeki went on to study 
economics 
as a correspondence student at a British university. It was 
during this time that Mbeki joined the ANC's underground 
structures. In 1961 he was elected secretary of the African 
Student's Association (ASA), and worked under the direction of 
Walter Sisulu and Duma Nokwe. 
  Thabo left the country in 1962 on the instructions of the 
ANC 
as part of one of the first groups sent out for training. He 
made his way through Botswana to what was then Southern 
Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe. There he was arrested and almost 
repatriated to South Africa. Fortunately, however, he was given 
political asylum in Tanzania, and left for London soon after to 
complete his Masters degree in economics at Sussex University in 
1966. During his student years, Mbeki remained active in 
student politics and maintained contact with international 
student and youth organisations, including the international 
Union of Socialist Youth. 
  He also played a very prominent role in building the ANC 
youth and student section outside the country and, from the 
beginning, he was regarded as being a leader in these sectors. 
During this period the ANC had only one full-time 
representative in London and the bulk of the organisation's work 
was done by students like Mbeki. 
  In those early years in exile, Oliver Tambo and Yusuf Dadoo 
were two of the major political figures who influenced Mbeki. 
After university, Mbeki worked in the ANC's London office until 
1970 when he moved to Lusaka after completing his military 
training in the Soviet Union. During his initial stay in 
Lusaka, he was appointed the secretary of the organisation's 
Revolutionary Council. He also served as the ANC's acting 
representative in Swaziland from 1975 to 1976, before returning 
to ANC headquarters in Lusaka. 
  In 1975, he was elected to the ANC's National Executive 
Committee and became the political secretary in the office of 
the ANC president Oliver Tambo and subsequently director of 
information. During the seventies, he was also involved in 
building the ANC in Swaziland and underground structures inside 
the country. An added quality in this regard was his 
willingness to undertake any mission, no matter how dangerous, 
if that was what the movement required of him. 
  "He's always calm and composed and has a very warm and 
endearing personality." So, even if someone disagrees with him 
at great deal, they cannot but help to appreciate him. "He 
always tries to understand the other side's point of view. But 
this does not mean that he is weak -- it is just that, even in 
arriving at his own position, he would take a very close look at 
what others have to say," one of his close associates said. 
  While most have known Mbeki for his "remarkable diplomatic 
qualities," ANC members closer to him point out that his most 
outstanding quality is that he is a "very deep thinker." 
  His worth in international affairs brought him into contact 
with statesmen all over the world in his relentless efforts to 
isolate apartheid, a move that the ANC regarded as crucial. 
  Mbeki was elected to the position of National Chairperson of 
the ANC last year. Since then he has served as both chief of 
international affairs and chairperson. Last week, President 
Nelson Mandela named Mbeki as his first vice-president. He was 
formally inaugurated into that position on Tuesday. 

