Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Karmo Kaas: "Sales of Shares in State </F>
Enterprises To Start"] 
  [Text] 
  The Privatization Agency is getting ready to privatize 
30 state-owned companies through a public offering of shares 
scheduled for June. Privatization of state property through the 
sale of shares should accelerate the development of Estonia's 
securities market which, in turn, would speed up development for 
the entire economy. 
  "Many things still remain unclear about privatizing state 
property through the sale of shares," admitted Vaino 
Sarnet, 
executive director of the Privatization Agency. "It has been 
determined that the sale of shares is necessary, but no detailed 
plan for the process has been established so far. Also, some of 
the legislative measures currently in force will have to be 
changed." 
  Right now, a listing is being compiled of enterprises whose 
shares could be sold. An important criterion for an enterprise 
to be selected is its economic stability, enabling it to 
continue normal business activity throughout the entire 
privatization period. He added that privatization through 
selling shares could make for a longer period of privatization 
than the sale of enterprises at auctions or through previously 
arranged international negotiations. 
  Another criterion for the selection of enterprises is that 
they be known well enough to the wider public. 
  Sarnet said that, all these factors considered, the planning 
now calls for starting privatization through the sale of shares 
by selling the state's portion of jointly held companies, since 
their economic condition is sufficiently stable, and they are 
mostly well known. Besides, jointly held companies have a strong 
motivation to be privately owned, as that would be conducive to 
bringing in new investments. 
  The extent of shares to be sold in the first round has not 
been determined, according to Sarnet, but he does not favor 
selling off big blocks of shares of any given company. For 
openers, sales should be limited to blocks of about 10 to 20 
percent of the total number of shares, in order to establish the 
market price of shares, and to reduce the impact of better 
informed investors on the whole process. 
<H5>  RKO's To Be Traded Freely </H5>
  For selling part of the shares in state enterprises for 
RKO's 
[national capital debentures], the government will have to 
resolve, according to Sarnet, whether or not RKO's are going to 
be traded freely. Last week, the privatization chief made a 
presentation to the government on this matter, in which he 
favored turning RKO's into freely traded securities, since that 
would reduce the state's liability to owners of RKO's, and also 
bring about their wider use in the whole privatization process. 
  As state enterprises are being privatized, more and more 
enterprises are finding new owners, as weaker ones go bankrupt. 
  "This also means diminishing chances for RKO owners to use 
these debentures in the privatization of state enterprises, and 
the responsibility for it will revert to the state," Sarnet said. 
  Trading RKO's freely means that people can decide for 
themselves whether to use debentures in the course of 
privatization, or to sell them. Making that decision also places 
responsibility for the use of these debentures on their owners. 
  In the course of privatizing a state enterprise, an option 
could be given to privatize some portion of the enterprise for 
RKO's, which the investor would have to buy up. This way, the 
use of RKO's in privatization would be diffused between all the 
companies. 
  Sarnet said that people can use RKO's in the privatization 
of 
state enterprises either by participating directly in the 
privatization process, or through investment funds. "The latter 
method would prevent the formation of a scattered group of 
owners, that would make the management of the company more 
difficult," Sarnet said, "but the state cannot set up any 
restrictions here, as public opposition to such a move would be 
too great." 
<H5>  Shares To Be Entered in Data Base </H5>
  The head of the Privatization Agency said that current 
planning calls for the sale of shares to be handled 
electronically, through the depository of securities. The first 
step in that direction will be the opening of electronic 
privatization accounts for owners of privatization securities. 
  The depository is a data base containing information on all 
securities being traded on Estonia's securities market. All the 
buying and selling of securities on the securities market will 
be handled through the depository, from which one can also 
obtain information on the prices and quantities of securities, 
the assets backing them and other such. 
  According to Rein Usin, board chairman of Forekspank [Foreks 
Bank], the need to sell shares of state enterprises accelerated 
the formation of the depository, and it will certainly come in 
handy when selling shares of state enterprises, but its creation 
would have been inevitable even without that. 
  "The securities depository is one part of the system known 
as 
the securities market. As long as there is no depository, the 
securities market could not be activated," Usin said. 
<H5>  Credit Market Is Expanding </H5>
  According to Usin, the existence of the depository for 
securities also helps to expand the credit market. Up until now, 
there has been no private property that could be put up as 
collateral for a loan but, relying on the information in the 
depository, securities could be put up as collateral for loans. 
Sarnet remarked that with the creation of the depository, 
confidence in the Estonian securities market would go up, 
because it will keep any counterfeit or uncovered securities 
from participating in the market. 
  Usin admitted that the creation of the securities depository 
has taken a long time, because it is the only part of the 
securities market that does not make a profit. Finally, the 
point has been reached, where a large number of banks, along 
with the central bank and the Ministry of Finance, have decided 
to join forces and come up with the capital for creating the 
depository as a separate legal entity. 
  Commenting on having shares of state enterprises entering 
Estonia's securities market, the head of Forekspank said that 
these will be in the market temporarily, increasing that portion 
of securities that derive from ownership. 
  "Along with the development of industry and agriculture, 
there will be an increase in the market share of commercial 
paper, which will eventually make up the bulk of securities 
being traded in the market," Usin said. 
<H6>  Privatizing Enterprises Through Public Offering of Shares </H6>
<H6>  Plan of Action Up Until August 1, 1994 </H6>
  Selection of enterprises for the public offering of 
shares. List 1. (roughly 5 enterprises) List 2. (roughly 30 
enterprises). 
  Preparation of prospectus on the stock issue. 
  Creation of depository for securities. 
  Legislative measures regulating investment funds. 
  Licencing of investment funds. 
  Procedures for the public offering of shares 
(government decree). 
  Procedures for the issue and notation of shares. 
  Public Relations campaign. 
  Approval of privatization terms for shares. 
  Public offering of List 1. enterprises. 
  Certification of results. 
  Source: Privatization Agency 

