Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by Salvadoran Presidency Minister Dr. Oscar </F>
Santamaria with unidentified moderator and local and foreign 
reporters in San Salvador on 31 January; broadcast in progress 
-- live or recorded] 
  [Text] [Santamaria] ...in these cases, special matters such 
as the case of all diplomats assigned to a country. It means a 
diplomatic mission should not interfere with the investigations 
involving one of its members. Once we have the information 
given to us by the attorney general and the director of the 
National Civilian Police [PNC], as an official report for us, we 
would submit it to the Foreign Ministry, which is the 
appropriate office to review it. It will then depend on what 
they decide. If the laws have been violated by the mission, the 
Foreign Ministry will make it known at the proper time. What 
we can say now, as you said, is that both the PNC and the 
Attorney General's Office have deemed that certain members of 
the U.S. Mission, who were involved in this case, have violated 
Salvadoran laws. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Could the extradition of this 
gentleman be requested? 
  [Santamaria] The extradition process is a different matter. 
If a person is being tried for a certain case when these types 
of situations occur, the extradition institution is reviewed to 
determine if the person will be tried according to the national 
laws in the presence of the indicted person. That is a phase 
that will be determined once the process reaches the point of an 
arrest warrant being issued. 
  [Moderator] Jose Gerardo Lopez from LA PRENSA GRAFICA. 
  [Lopez] Last week, opposition sectors asked the PNC to 
report 
the weapons that were being confiscated since the law on bearing 
weapons will now go into effect. They want to know about the 
weapons that are being confiscated. 
  [Santamaria] The PNC is a legal institution in the country. 
It is not a private person who is confiscating the weapons. 
The weapons that are meant for the exclusive use of the Armed 
Forces are subjected to certain procedures. There are weapons 
that are confiscated and once it is determined who their owner 
is, the PNC would return them to their rightful owner as long as 
the legal procedures are followed. We believe the PNC is acting 
according to the country's laws. If there are doubts as to what 
is done or what is not done with the weapons, I can tell you 
that in the case of weapons for the exclusive use of the Armed 
Forces, they are submitted to the appropriate institution 
according to previously established procedures. When we talk 
about weapons illegally in the hands of private individuals, 
then we follow procedures established by the law on the 
possession of weapons. 
  [Moderator] Jorge Barahona from Teleprensa. 
  [Barahona] I have two questions. The first question is why 
is President Cristiani not with us. Perhaps you know why he is 
absent. Secondly, as for the case of the U.S. Embassy, we know 
that the U.S. Embassy is pressuring the government and is 
imposing quotas on textile products and coffee. In this 
situation, added to the situation of the PNC, why has the 
government not taken any action? Why has the Salvadoran 
Government not filed a protest? 
  [Santamaria] I would like you to explain it a little better 
because you said the U.S. Government was imposing quotas and 
then you talk about the PNC. What are you talking about? 
  [Barahona] There is interference in both areas, both in the 
police system as well as in the economic field. That is why I 
ask, if you are being pressured, why not take action? 
  [Santamaria] First, the president could not be here this 
morning for personal reasons. He has asked us to hold this news 
conference as he usually does on Mondays. I have already spoken 
previously and I said we would probably be participating in the 
Monday news conferences depending on the president's agenda. 
  We must note, however, that should any U.S. Government 
institution adopt certain attitudes or positions to pressure us 
into following specific guidelines, by conditioning the 
treatment our country will receive, as we have always said, we 
are sovereign, autonomous, independent, and will not be subject 
to pressures from any country. As we have said, countries that 
wish to cooperate with us can do so under the terms established 
by international laws. 
  As for aid or cooperation for specific purposes, 
particularly 
the assistance we have received recently in connection with the 
peace agreements, there are no conditions. As you know, the 
peace agreements practically determine the way in which each 
party will comply with the commitments. I mentioned the PNC 
because the former question implied that some authorities or 
members of the U.S. Mission interfered with the investigation of 
a case involving a member of the mission. The attorney general 
also referred to that situation as meddling or interfering in 
our affairs. What we ought to do here is apply the country's 
laws. When we believe some action is against the laws of the 
Republic, we must apply the law. We should not evade that 
responsibility. We must guarantee respect for the country's 
institutionality. 
  We believe in other cases when the aid is conditioned, it 
will depend on what the donor country or the country giving the 
assistance determines. We do not know whether the conditions 
are right now for establishing quotas or not. Generally, U.S. 
commercial policies in some areas are based on quotas. I do not 
know if this was the case. Maybe the economy minister could 
clarify this point. The truth is that within the framework of 
normal relations among countries and within the principle of 
respect for the sovereignty of each country, relations must be 
based on mutual respect. That is what our country has always 
demanded in its international relations with all countries. In 
no way will we act differently. 
  [Moderator] Guillermo Valencia, of EL NOTICIERO. 
  [Valencia] I understand that [words indistinct] a report on 
the possible admission of former Treasury Police [PH] and 
National Guard [GN] agents directly into the PNC without a 
previous evaluation. I would like to know if this report was 
completed and presented to Onusal [UN Observers for El Salvador] 
and if the report was confirmed or not. 
  [Santamaria] Well, first of all, I must clarify that it was 
not as you said. We are working with Onusal on compliance with 
the peace agreements on aspects related to the incorporation of 
the UEA into the PNC, in other words the Drug Interdiction 
Executive Unit, and the CIHD, the Commission to Investigate 
Criminal Actions. The decrees for the transfer and merger were 
already issued and approved by the Legislative Assembly, and 
therefore they became laws of the Republic. What is still 
pending is the government's compliance with an aspect concerning 
an evaluation of the members based on the agreements reached on 
22 December 1992 between the government and the FMLN in the 
presence of the United Nations. The government, however, does 
not handle this unilaterally. It is handled based on agreement 
between both sides in the presence of the United Nations. Both 
parties agreed on what the evaluation would consist of, and on a 
course that members of those units must take at the Public 
Security Academy on humanist subjects, and on the new doctrine 
and philosophy of the PNC. Those are the only two requirements 
that must be met. After those two requirements are met, the 
merger will be made within the framework of the agreements. We 
have not incorporated any GN or PH member in this. Those are 
the two institutions that were functioning: the UEA and the 
CIHD, which according to the agreements were to be incorporated 
into the PNC. The FMLN agreed and signed those agreements, and 
the United Nations was present to witness those agreements. 
That is my opinion, which I believe is correct. I do not know 
if there has been any subsequent statement within a different 
context, which would not correspond to reality. 
  [Valencia] It has been said that former agents of those 
security agencies received very low grades in the academy, but 
were admitted in the PNC due to government pressures. 
  [Santamaria] No, that is not true. We have not enrolled any 
GN or PH members in the academy. All those who have enrolled 
are members of the National Police, as stipulated in the peace 
agreements. The only ones entitled to enroll in the Public 
Security Academy are the members of the National Police. 
  This is done based on their background history or sworn 
statements, it is not based on a simple personnel list sent by 
the government. There is a prior evaluation, then it is 
established if their application meets the entry requirements. 
If they meet the requirements they are accepted. This is what 
we have done up until now. 
  [Mediator] Antonio Alvarado, Cuatro Vision. 
  [Alvarado] I have two questions: first, will there be an 
official protest by the government with regard to the murder of 
the bodyguard? The second question is: Yesterday you were 
talking about the current problems with the peace agreements. 
The UN chief also mentioned some of these. He said that the 
reintegration problem was delayed to the extent that only 
one-third of the persons who were to participate have benefited 
from this program. He also mentioned delays in land 
distribution and in the training of the former combatants. We 
would like to you to tell us what is the solution to these 
considerations. 
  [Santamaria] Yesterday we mentioned that the reintegration 
program for former combatants is being implemented based on the 
work plans that were presented, previously approved by the FMLN 
and the United Nations. These were presented by the government 
at the negotiating table as part of the commitment made. True, 
there have been some delays, we have never denied that there 
have been some delays in implementing the program. 
Nevertheless, as foreseen, the program continues to be 
implemented. Work continues in each of the areas of the 
reintegration program. True, as [UN] Ambassador Ramirez Ocampo 
said, there have been some difficulties. We have never denied 
this. Some of these cases have been due to the lack of 
resources for the programs to tee off with the speed required. 
  In another turn of events, I have said that the FMLN has 
included other contingents to be benefited by those programs. 
These persons were not originally included in the programs. 
Many times this has destabilized the program's implementation. 
Also, at times the FMLN has not sent the information required, 
and on certain occasions the information has been altered or is 
untrue. It is very difficult to work with this kind of input 
for the implementation of a program. This is a program of 
specific actions, there is no rhetoric here; specific actions 
are required here. 
  To give you an example: If a 600, 1,000, or 1,500 former 
combatants are to be benefited one must know how many resources 
are available, to what area each person is to be assigned, and 
what is that program's cost. These references must be 
established in advance. If, however, at the time of 
implementing the program someone completely changes all the 
information or increases the number of persons benefited, that 
upsets the program that had been set up. Based on this, we have 
been experiencing a number of setbacks in this regard. Other 
times, there have been some difficulties in the operating phase. 
  Nevertheless, we want it known that in September we 
presented 
a land distribution plan. This was a plan to speed up the PTT, 
that is the Land Transfer Program. This is a program that has 
given some of the best results; thus was voiced by the United 
Nations. You all recall that Marrack Goulding [UN under 
secretary general] was here in November. He was the first to 
acknowledge that a significant contribution had been made with 
the PTT presented by the government, as it had a managing 
capacity that perhaps the program did not previously have. This 
has allowed us to increase land transfers to a number of 
beneficiaries that otherwise would not have been possible. This 
we have achieved. This means that the program, in the case of 
the PTT, has been giving us those results, however, we have also 
come up against difficulties there. The difficulties have been 
that when the time comes to draw up the land deeds, many times 
the persons who have to sign the documents do not show up. They 
give excuses, they give a long story why they could not come. 
But what happens then? Well, the date you had slated to meet 
that commitment is wiped out. 
  I truly do not want to be accusing anyone specifically, but 
when the PTT and the reintegration programs are analyzed, this 
should be done broadly. 
  I believe we have done enough and proof of this is that we 
have advanced to where we stand today. I said yesterday that the 
accumulated result of all the work done with the reintegration 
program for the former combatants and the beneficiaries of the 
reintegration program has allowed us to advance and we now 
manage the program completely. The land problem has not 
destabilized the current political situation because we have 
attended each specific issue and each problem has been given a 
response. We have -- I repeat -- encountered situations that 
have prompted interruptions and sometimes a delay in the 
program's implementation. However, I am sure we are managing 
the program adequately and am totally sure that we will 
satisfactorily conclude it within the established time schedule. 
  [Reporter] [words indistinct] protest by the government? 
  [Santamaria] On the.... 
  [Reporter, interrupting] On the bodyguard's murder by the 
U.S. citizen. 
  [Santamaria] I have already said that we are waiting for the 
information from the organizations involved in the initial 
investigation, including the PNC and the Prosecutor General's 
Office. They have already publicly reported that several 
members of the U.S. diplomatic mission interfered in the 
investigation. Once we get an official report on the case we 
will send it to the Foreign Ministry so that it can present the 
case to the U.S. Government using the established diplomatic 
channels and procedures. 
  [Moderator] The last question, Mr. Minister, will be by 
Oscar 
Rene Lopez of Mayavision. 
  [Lopez] Good day, Mr. Minister. Two questions. One refers 
to the land problem. You talked about the dismantlement of the 
operational program for the transfer of land. At a given 
moment, will the government relocate the existing program to 
solve the deadlock, get up to date, and conclude its work on the 
established dates? 
  [Santamaria] Well, as I just mentioned, that is the work we 
have been doing permanently. We are constantly adjusting and 
readjusting the program to the existing situation. Different 
causes prompt the changes we make. However, the program -- I 
repeat -- is being implemented in conformity with the agreed 
time schedule. The time schedule was agreed to collectively. 
The government is not implementing those programs -- I repeat 
-- simply because it believes this is the way they should be 
done. No, we reached an agreement and have the approval of, in 
this case, the beneficiaries and the former combatants, both of 
the FMLN and the Armed Forces. The United Nations also 
supervises the program readjustments. However, our activities 
have had to be interrupted on several occasions and the program 
has been delayed. I repeat, this happens when we are unable to 
accomplish an activity programmed for a specific date. The 
program is interrupted and we have to make changes and take 
several complementary actions which throws the schedule off. We 
report this to the United Nations. We, as well as the FMLN, 
meet with the United Nations representatives once a week. The 
FMLN meets with the United Nations representatives and we also 
meet with them to review and evaluate the program on a weekly 
basis. Based on this evaluation, a number of pointers and 
concrete suggestions are presented to make the program more 
effective. Thus, the land program has had some difficulties and 
delays but we have been overcoming them. 
  [Lopez] The second question: Copaz [National Commission for 
the Consolidation of Peace] was established about two years to 
deal with peace agreement compliance issues. This past week, 
however, it was reported that Copaz has serious administrative 
problems, especially of an economic nature. Will the government 
support this commission and contribute so that it can continue 
to verify compliance with the peace agreements as it has been 
doing up to now? 
  [Santamaria] Copaz is involved in a transition period, in 
which its role is to verify compliance with the peace agreements. 
  To verify, at the local level, that each party complies 
constitutes Copaz's fundamental role. Its role, I reiterate, is 
played within what we call the transition period. When Copaz 
has experienced financial setbacks, it has resorted to foreign 
cooperation sometimes, but from the beginning, the government 
has provided funds to Copaz. To date, the government has not 
stopped giving funds to Copaz. Based on the needs of 
organizations, they prepare a budget, present it to the 
pertinent authority -- the Finance authorities, in this case -- 
and based on whatever commitment they have, those authorities 
decide on the resources that are to be allocated to their plan. 
I do not know whether or not they have worked on this already, 
in addition to the statement you have mentioned [words 
indistinct]. Apart from that, their actions are in agreement 
with what we have done previously. When there has been a need 
for resources, the government has granted them. 
  [Moderator] Mr. Minister, here is another question by Amadeo 
Cabrera of "The News." 
  [Cabrera] Good Morning, Mr. Minister going back to the topic 
of the United States. Your government is awaiting the final 
report on the investigations. However, we would like to know if 
your government condemns the U.S. interference in the legal and 
police investigative process in this case? 
  [Santamaria] What we have said is that if there is any 
interference or intervention in the investigative process -- 
which is nothing other than the implementation of our laws -- 
that is a case that must be determined, and the investigations 
have not concluded. Once the investigations are over, we will 
issue an official report, which will be sent to the Foreign 
Ministry. We must remember that the government has an 
organization to deal with cases of this kind -- the Foreign 
Ministry. The Foreign Ministry will have the responsibility to 
determine the causes, the circumstances of this interference so 
that we can present the case properly to the U.S. Government. 
  [Cabrera] However, there is a PNC communique, which says 
that 
the U.S. interference took place with consent in this case? We 
would like to know the government's position, does it condemn 
the U.S. actions? 
  [Santamaria] As far as I understand, the PNC has issued a 
public statement. 
  [Cabrera] Is there a fax that is addressed to you for you to 
take care of this case? 
  [Santamaria] Well, if Commissioner Pena Duran sends me the 
fax, he would have to act through official channels. I have not 
received any fax from Pena Duran yet. As I said before, as soon 
as I receive the official report, which must be issued by the 
director of the PNC, we will send it to the Foreign Ministry, 
which in turn will decide on any future actions with regard to 
the U.S. Government. I am not in any way saying whether it will 
or will not be done. What I am referring to is the usual 
procedure that is followed in these cases. 
  [Moderator] Now, Fausto Valladares will ask you a question. 
  [Valladares] Mr. Minister, in the past weeks, Fenastras 
[Salvadoran Workers National Union Federation] has indicated 
that the new labor code does not have the consensus of workers. 
Fenastras has pointed out that the new code, and Fenastras has 
begun also a wave of protests. [sentence as heard] 
  [Santamaria] This topic concerns the economic and social 
forum. What I can tell you is that the forum drafted an entire 
bill on labor legislation as a part of the agenda discussed by 
the three sectors. We understand that there was a moment in 
which there was a disagreement over some provisions or articles 
of the labor reform. However, there were many articles within 
the same framework that had been agreed upon, and were 
eventually sent to us. We, through the pertaining draft bill, 
sent it to the Legislative Assembly. I do not know if Fenastras 
is trying to voice a position as a sector by saying that it does 
not share the view expressed by all the sectors that 
participated in the forum. Perhaps they have a different view 
on what the labor reform should be, and therefore, they are 
making a value judgment by not agreeing with the reform. 
However, we would wait until they sent it to the Legislative 
Assembly. We know the bill is in the hands of a commission, and 
one the Assembly's duties is to listen to the sectors. What I 
do not know is whether Fenastras will be one of the sectors to 
present its position to the Assembly. 
  [Reporter] Is the forum fulfilling the goals for which it 
was created? 
  [Santamaria] Well, the forum is precisely one of the 
organisms created to sponsor a consultation. At a given moment 
the labor issue went beyond what was originally planned in the 
forum but what I want to say is that, regardless of the 
dispositions adopted by consensus -- meaning based on a 
consultation in which the parties reached an agreement -- there 
were apparently six or seven dispositions on which they did not 
reach agreement. 
  The option was clear concerning the six or seven 
dispositions 
on which they failed to reach an agreement. Remember the 
Inter-Union Association sent a draft code to the assembly; the 
(Fesinconstrans) Construction and Transportation Workers Unions 
Federation sent a draft code to the assembly; and everyone 
expected the government would be able to state its position on 
certain parts of the labor code that would be subject to a 
revision. Since no agreement was reached, everything dealing 
with a consultation at the forum level has been left in a 
quandary. 
  This does not mean each participant cannot personally do 
what 
he considers or believes appropriate. However, I think the 
essential thing is that an agreement was reached on most of the 
dispositions, and this indicates the forum was a success. 
Hence, it would have to be assessed from that point of view. 
The government has stated its position and we will see what the 
assembly says. 
  [Moderator] Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
  [Santamaria] Well, I also want to thank the media for the 
opportunity to talk with you. Thank you, everyone. 

