BFN 

  [Excerpts] Santa Fe de Bogota, 27 May (EFE) -- 
Presidential candidate Ernesto Samper favors maintaining an open 
policy, initiated by current President Cesar Gaviria, toward 
Cuba, indicating he will not sponsor measures against the Cuban 
people. 
  "I will not sponsor measures that go against the Cuban 
people 
such as the embargo provided for by the Torricelli Bill. I will 
continue relations with Cuba, initiated by President Gaviria. 
Although we may not agree, as we do not with some aspects of the 
Cuban political system, while the Island's government does not 
meddle in Colombia's internal matters, we will support these 
relations." 
  During an exclusive interview with EFE, Samper, one of the 
two candidates leading the polls for the up-coming presidential 
elections, expressed his opinion on some current international 
issues. Here are some excerpts. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Drug Legalization </H5>
  Fifteen years ago, when I proposed drug legalization, this 
problem was reduced to the marijuana plantations in the Sierra 
Nevada of Santa Marta. At that time, my theory was to give the 
peasants the possibility to substitute their crops and leave 
behind drugs. What was done was to increase the pressure and to 
spray the plantations. From marijuana we went to cocaine, from 
cocaine to drug trafficking, and from drug trafficking to 
narcoterrorism. Currently drug legalization is not feasible in 
Colombia. It would be seen as an amnesty, as a pardon for all 
that has occurred in the nation in the past 15 years. This does 
not mean that the international arguments I then outlined do not 
continue to hold true. Drug consuming nations are not making 
significant efforts to reduce drug consumption nor to control 
money laundering. Until there is world-wide legalization, 
Colombia's obligation is to demand more firmly that the consumer 
nations make a greater effort. 
<H5>  Drug Trafficking and Economy </H5>
  Drug trafficking is what makes the opening process in 
Colombia difficult. It is being used to destabilize the source 
of capital, and it is also destabilizing the opening and 
importation process. We cannot ignore that with these mechanisms 
of free exchange and free trade some hot money from drug 
trafficking seeking to become legitimate have infiltrated. 
  One must be careful with regard to the issue of exchange 
revenues, and we must partially reestablish customs, because we 
have practically dismantled them. An opening process is very 
simple. Imports are allowed, with the monetary margin obtained; 
the use of dollars is created; exports are devaluated and 
stimulated; and with this more imports are purchased. Here we 
only went halfway. We allowed imports and the entrance of 
capital. Large amounts of speculative capital arrived forcing 
us to revaluate our currency. With this revaluation we have held 
back exports. This adversely affects jobs, agriculture, and 
industries, because in an open economy revaluation does away 
with everything. [passage omitted] 

