Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hans Georg Raschbichler, chief managing </F>
executive, Magnetschnellbahn Berlin-Hamburg GmbH [Berlin-Hamburg 
High-Speed Maglev Railway Limited Liability Company], under the 
rubric "Vistas '94": "`Transrapid' Has Now Made the Breakthrough 
to Worldwide Marketing. Technology and Transportation 
Representative for Germany As an Industrial Base. For High-Speed 
Maglev Railway Head Hans G. Raschbichler Success Is Also an 
Indication of Engineers' Forcefulness"; first paragraph is VDI 
NACHRICHTEN's introduction] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 24 Dec 93 (VDI-N)--With the 
government's affirmative decision to build the Transrapid 
high-speed maglev railway, a decision was made that reaches far 
into the future in terms of transportation and environmental 
policy. Hans Georg Raschbichler, chief managing executive of 
Berlin-Hamburg High-Speed Maglev Railway Limited Liability 
Company, takes this view in the following article. This graduate 
engineer is absolutely certain that Transrapid will 
revolutionize our transportation system. 
  The federal government's decision of 8 December 1993 to 
implement the Berlin-Hamburg high-speed maglev railway cleared 
the way for the first application of maglev railway technology 
in Germany. This decision is not just the prelude to a new era 
of environmentally compatible and industrial-trend-setting rail 
transportation. It is at the same time proof of German 
industry's innovation strength. And this applies both to the 
no-contact and no-wear technology that has for the first time 
overcome the limitations of wheels and tracks, and to the 
financing plan worked out by industry and the banks. 
  As with many projects of the century, it was the creativity 
and commitment of engineers that set the course toward the 
future. If in 1835 it was the first railroad that began its 
triumphant march as a new transportation representative on the 
Nuremberg-to-Furth line, so at the beginning of the 21st 
century it will be the high-speed maglev railway that 
revolutionizes our transportation system. Hence, in terms of 
transportation and industrial policy, recently a decision was 
made that reaches far into the future. 
  It all began with Emsland Graduate Engineer Hermann Kemper, 
who was annoyed by the noise caused by the railroad going by his 
house. His idea was to replace the railway's wheels with 
electromagnets. He knew that magnetic forces can assume the 
carrying and guiding functions of the wheel and track and thus 
enable no-contact levitation with high speeds and low noise 
generation. 
  His Reich patent from the year 1934 for a "levitation 
railway 
with wheelless vehicles that by means of magnetic fields are 
guided levitating along iron tracks" (DRP [German Reich Patent] 
64 33 16) was more than the vision of a young engineer who was 
ahead of his time, for the possibilities in electronics and 
vehicle construction were still very limited at that time. 
Consequently the implementation of his ideas was limited. 
  In 1966 engineers took up anew the technological 
possibilities of this idea and tested its technical feasibility. 
But they also in particular correctly judged its importance in 
terms of transportation policy. The results of the high-capacity 
high-speed railway study completed in 1971 were so positive that 
the development work begun soon led to the first experimental 
vehicles having quite different designs. 
  As a young engineer, I began my work on the development of 
the high-speed maglev railway in the middle of the sixties. 
We--my comrades-in-arms and I--were then conscious of the 
awakening in a new era of railway technology in which Germany 
had played a leading role all along. 
  A pilot system having a new design--the so-called 
long-stator 
maglev railway technology--was able to be put into operation 
successfully in Kassel as a result of a joint effort begun in 
1974 with Professor Weh of Braunschweig Technical University. In 
this design the motor is not located in the vehicle as usually, 
but in the railway. Because of this, the highly problematic 
transmission of power through current collectors at high 
traveling speeds was able to be avoided. In addition, the result 
was an especially lightweight and simple vehicle. 
  The various development directions thus far were assessed in 
1977 in a sweeping system decision of the Federal Ministry for 
Research and Technology. It was decided to focus further work on 
the long-stator maglev railway technology. Thus we had put 
through our design as the main development direction. 
  Then in 1979 came the first large-scale application on a 
just 
under 1- km-long line on the occasion of the International 
Transportation Exhibition in Hamburg (ITE '79). The government 
license for passenger transport was able to be obtained for the 
vehicle already then. Fifty thousand visitors were transported 
in scheduled service with reliability already very high for the 
state of development then. 
  The success in Hamburg was also decisive for the 
construction 
of the pilot system unique in the world for railway systems, the 
Emsland Transrapid Pilot System (TVE). 
  So, railway history has been written since 1984 in North 
Germany, between Lathen and Dorpen. The Transrapid 
high-speed maglev railway has proven its everyday usefulness in 
continuous service with a running capacity of more than 160,000 
km and a world-record speed of 450 km/h. Its readiness for use 
was certified at the end of 1991 after comprehensive testing and 
assessment by the German Federal Railways and leading university 
institutes. 
  This was also proof of German industry's leading role in a 
high technology that has now made the breakthrough to worldwide 
marketing, in addition to its use for a new transportation 
representative--especially after the affirmative decision for 
Berlin-to-Hamburg. 
  When I sum up personally today, after working nearly 30 
years 
in high-speed maglev railway development, I come to the 
conclusion that it was decisive for success that we--the 
engineers, companies and politicians-- steadily kept up our 
common commitment over so long a time, in spite of often serious 
obstacles and setbacks. 
  Only because of this is it possible now that a particularly 
attractive and environmentally compatible transportation system 
will open its service between the two largest German cities, 
Berlin and Hamburg, at the beginning of the new millennium. Then 
Transrapid trains will transport over 40,000 passengers a day 
every 10 minutes, comfortably and safely, over the 284-km-long 
distance with travel time of less than an hour. 
  Also a prerequisite for this is the plan--which is no less 
innovative-- adopted by the federal government for the financing 
and private-sector operation of the Berlin-Hamburg high-speed 
maglev railway. It goes far beyond the practice thus far in 
transportation investment, and is without precedence nationally 
and internationally. For example, the operating company that 
will operate the high-speed maglev railway will be privately 
financed for the first time. Furthermore, the financing proposal 
also provides for a high degree of taking the burden off the 
federal government in financing of the railway. 
  I am convinced that the implementation of the Berlin-Hamburg 
high-speed maglev railway through the joint initiative of the 
federal government, the states taking part and German industry 
will be a sign visible worldwide of the achievement and 
innovation strength of Germany as a technology and industrial 
base. It will prove strikingly the creativity and forcefulness 
of engineers, who with the high-speed maglev railway have also 
continued a part of the tradition showing them to be pioneers of 
progress. 

