BFN 

<F P=106> [Doug Payne report: "Ireland Works Up to a Boom"] </F>
  [Text] Dublin -- Ireland's jobs growth rate could double 
by the end of the decade as the country experiences boom times 
with the best economic growth and biggest rise in living 
standards since the early 1960's. 
  The growth in employment could bring with it increases in 
consumer spending -- exports are surging, and the currency 
appears finally to be taking on a life of its own; a decline in 
the birth rate also looks likely to provide some much-needed 
medium- and long-term benefit. 
  Unless there are significant unexpected changes in family 
size, emigration and, most importantly, in wage demands, the 
country's performance in the next five to six years could be the 
best recorded. 
  Both the Central Bank and the Economic and Social Research 
Institute (ESRI) have been remarkably upbeat in their most 
recent estimates -- the Central Bank in its review for the year, 
the ESRI in its Medium Term Review 1994-2000. 
  The Central Bank has increased its prediction of growth for 
the rest of the year from three to four per cent of GNP. 
Although partly based on an assumption of a gradual improvement 
in the world economy, the Central Bank is also confident of a 
rise in the volume of consumer spending and a recovery in both 
construction and business investment. It forecasts that up to 
22,000 jobs could be created. Given that the job increase last 
year was 9,000 -- and emigration was flat -- this year could see 
those without work drop to 288,000. 
  The Central Bank warns, though, that further steps to limit 
government intervention in the economy are needed: there are, 
it points out, eight social welfare recipients and eight people 
in the noncommercial state sector for every nine workers in the 
market economy. 
  The ESRI predicts annual economic growth of 4.5 per cent to 
the year 2000: growth of 20,000 jobs a year; unemployment 
dropping to 13.5 per cent; per capita income rising from 72 per 
cent of the EU [European Union] average to 83 per cent; 
inflation averaging 2.5 per cent; the national debt falling to 
60 per cent of GDP; and a falling tax burden. 
  The punt [Irish Pound] is showing signs of independence. 
Since the departure of sterling from the ERM [Exchange Rate 
Mechanism], the punt had tracked sterling closely. But the 
markets of late have begun to more accurately reflect low Irish 
inflation and better growth prospects. The punt, worth 98 
pence, is within a whisker of sterling as opposed to 92 pence 
last August. If it continues on its own path, however, it is 
also unlikely to show a decline in its trade-weighted value 
against all other currencies beyond last year's 2.2 per cent. 
  It is also likely that the bond market will reflect this 
strength; analysts from Dublin-based Davy stockbrokers suggest a 
fall in the yield on five-year bonds by the end of this year 
from 7.3 per cent to 6.15 per cent. Davy's expect interest 
rates closer to 5.5 per cent, which would provide a necessary 
fillip to retail rates 
  Exports also remain strong. Last year's world recession 
couldn't dampen an 8.75 per cent surge to IR18.1bn [Irish 
Pounds] (26bn), give in a cumulative increase for the past five 
years of 23 per cent. Given that world trade grew 2.6 per cent 
last year the Irish export figure reflected the attainment of an 
increasing market share at the expense of international 
competitors. 
  The Irish boom is likely to peak next year but growth should 
remain robust until the end of the decade. The main pay-off 
will be in jobs; between 1994 and 2000 the number at work in 
Ireland should expand from 1.155 million to 1.285 million, an 
increase of 130,000, or an average yearly increase of 1.7 per 
cent -- almost double the growth figure since 1990. 
  Unemployment will fall from 16.9 per cent this year, says 
the 
ESRI, to 13.4 per cent by 2000. Significantly, agricultural 
employment will continue to plummet. The expected decline in 
the birth rate will bring a rapid drop in those entering the 
work force from the year 2000, and a major increase in the 
proportion of the population in working age groups (with a 
resulting boost in tax revenues). 
  Last year's birth rate was estimated at 13.7 per 1,000 (EU 
average is 11.6 per cent), and has fallen since. Children under 
15 were 27 per cent of l991's population, by 2005 this is 
expected to be 18 per cent, resulting in lower education 
spending. Ireland has a small proportion of those over 65 -- 
just 11 per cent in 1991. A gradual rise over the next decade 
should allow planners to cushion resulting demands on health and 
social services. If ESRI projections are correct, 1995 could 
see a surge in confidence, with investment topping 16 per cent 
and staying above ten per cent in 1996. But a sharp rise in 
interest rates, for example, could, if tied to a sterling dive 
and a wild wage price spiral, put out everything. 

