Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The provincial party committee, the provincial 
people's congress standing committee, the provincial government, 
and the provincial committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference held a rally of cadres at and above the 
section level of provincial-level organs at Jinan Zhenzhuquan 
Auditorium on the morning of 25 March to relay the guidelines of 
the Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress 
[NPC], the Second Session of the National Committee of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC], and 
the central rural work conference. 
  Jiang Chunyun, secretary of the provincial party committee, 
gave a speech on how to implement these guidelines. He 
stressed: It is necessary to implement the guidelines of the 
NPC and national CPPCC sessions and the central rural work 
conference, firmly attend to the overall situation of the whole 
party's and the whole country's work tasks for this year, 
concentrate efforts on grasping the three major affairs of 
reform, development, and stability, and promote a greater 
development in Shandong's economic and social undertakings. 
  The rally was presided over by Li Zhen, chairman of the 
provincial people's congress standing committee. Ma Zhongcai, 
vice chairman of the provincial people's congress standing 
committee, and Lu Maozeng, chairman of the provincial CPPCC 
Committee, respectively relayed the guidelines of the NPC and 
the national CPPCC sessions. Zhao Zhihai, deputy secretary of 
the provincial party committee and provincial governor, relayed 
the guidelines of the central rural work conference. 
  In referring to the opinions for the implementation of the 
guidelines of the NPC and the national CPPCC sessions, Jiang 
Chunyun stressed the necessity of grasping four points: 
  1. Conscientiously study the documents, understand the 
guidelines, and reach a consensus of views. 
  2. Further clearly define this year's work tasks, 
clearly recognize the overall situation, concentrate efforts on 
the three major affairs of reform, development, and stability, 
and consolidate and develop an excellent situation of economic 
and political stability. 
  3. Uphold the principle of taking a two-handed approach 
and be tough with both, strengthen democracy, the legal system, 
spiritual civilization, party style, and administrative honesty, 
and win new victory in the two civilizations. 
  4. Realistically change leadership work style, go to 
the reality of life to conduct investigation and study, deal 
with concrete matters relating to work, make earnest efforts to 
do practical things, give priority to discussing hot topics and 
solving difficult problems in work and problems which the people 
show strong reaction, and realistically fulfill all tasks put 
forward by the NPC and national CPPCC sessions. 
  Jiang Chunyun said: The central authorities have held the 
rural work conference within the first half of this year. This 
shows that the central authorities have paid great attention to 
agriculture and rural work. The speeches given by Comrades 
Jiang Zemin, Li Peng, and Zhu Rongji have comprehensively and 
fully analyzed the agricultural and rural work situation, 
expounded on the status of agriculture and rural work from the 
high plane of the whole party and the whole country's major 
affairs, and put forward the objectives, tasks, policies, and 
measures for agriculture and rural work for this year and for 
some time to come. Their speeches are very purposeful and have 
a strong guiding significance. We must implement them well. 
First of all, we must unify thinking and understanding, 
recognize the major significance of agriculture and rural work 
from the high plane of the overall situation of seizing the 
opportunity, deepening reform, expanding opening up, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability, and closely integrate 
the agricultural and rural work issues with the country's 
overall situation of reform, development, and stability. Without 
agricultural development, the development of rural economy, 
particularly the steady increase in grain, cotton, and 
oil-bearing crops, and rural stability, it will be difficult to 
achieve a sustained, rapid, and sound development in the 
national economy, to effect reform of the socialist market 
economic structure, and to have social stability. Our party and 
government cadres at all levels must unite their thinking with 
the central guidelines, overcome and straighten out the ideology 
of neglecting or slackening efforts in agriculture and rural 
work, regard agriculture as the primary task of economic work, 
and do a good job in agriculture and rural work. 
  Second, we must clearly define the objectives and tasks. 
Jiang Chunyun said: In line with the central plans and 
demands, this year our province's agricultural and rural work 
tasks are to regard increasing the production of agricultural 
products and income of peasants as the focus, pay simultaneous 
attention to cultivation of grain, oil-bearing crops, and 
cotton, and guarantee a steady increase in the output of grain, 
oil-bearing crops, cotton, and the rural economy, and greatly 
increase the income of peasants. To realize these objectives and 
tasks, we must stabilize the farming acreage, guard against 
drought, do farm work in the right farming season, [words 
indistinct], try by all possible means to raise economic 
efficiency, and increase peasants' income by a large margin. He 
stressed: We must regard raising efficiency and increasing the 
income of peasants as the central tasks of agricultural and 
rural work; resolutely develop high-yield, fine-quality, and 
highly efficient farming; pay attention to the comprehensive 
development of agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline 
production, fishery, and diversified undertakings; and continue 
to run [words indistinct] well. 
  Third, we should deepen rural reform. Jiang Chunyun pointed 
out: To greatly develop agriculture and the rural economy, the 
fundamental way out is to reform. In line with the demand of 
establishing the socialist market economic structure, we should 
accelerate the change of agriculture and the rural economy into 
the market economy and instill new vigor and vitality into 
agricultural and rural economic development. In rural reform, 
we should also combine package reform with breakthroughs in key 
areas. We should continue to stabilize and improve all kinds of 
rural policies with the family-base output-related contract 
responsibility system as the mainstay, actively cultivate the 
market, and provide loans for developing the market-oriented 
agriculture. It is necessary to actively promote the 
shareholding cooperative system, integrate farming with 
industry, commerce, foreign trade, science, and transport, 
accelerate the process of industrializing the rural economy, 
actively establish the rural socialized service system, and make 
special efforts to stabilize the agricultural technology 
dissemination organs and ranks of scientific and technical 
workers in the agricultural sector. 
  Fourth, we should guarantee social stability in the rural 
areas. 
  Jiang Chunyun pointed out: Judging from the general 
situation, our province's rural areas are stable, but really 
there are some destabilizing factors. We must pay full 
attention to this. It is necessary to do much work to maintain 
stability. We should persist in carrying out the entire rural 
work with two hands and be tough with both, strengthen socialist 
spiritual civilization in the rural areas, intensify ideological 
and political work, extensively conduct education on patriotism, 
collectivism, and socialism, and guide the peasants to properly 
handle the relations among the state, collectives, and 
individuals. Efforts should be made to comprehensively manage 
public security in the rural areas, strengthen democracy and the 
legal system in the grass roots, strengthen grass-roots 
organizations, give priority to improving the state of weakness 
and slackness in grass-roots organizations and economically weak 
backward villages, proceed the work with reshuffling party 
branches, and change their outlook as quickly as possible. 
  Fifth, we should further change leadership work style. Jiang 
Chunyun stressed: In this aspect, the provincial organs should 
serve as good examples. They should take the lead in studying 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the knowledge on market economy and 
enhancing ideological and theoretical level, and the ability to 
control the overall situation. They should also take the lead 
in upholding the party's purpose, strengthening the mass 
concept, and serving the people wholeheartedly; going deeply to 
the rural areas to conduct investigation and study, keeping 
abreast of the situation, summing up experience, and solving 
problems; reducing peasants' burdens, and not bringing chaos to 
peasants; speaking the truth, doing practical things, and 
resolutely overcoming unhealthy trends, such as bureaucracy, 
formalism, boastfulness, cheating, and telling only good news 
but not the bad ones; performing official work diligently and 
honestly, opposing corruption, and recently checking the 
unhealthy trends of abusing one's power to seek personal gain, 
engaging in lavish wining and dining, entertaining guests, 
sending gifts, extravagance, and waste. 
  Jiang Chunyun stressed: The higher and the lower levels 
across the province should unite as one, make earnest efforts to 
do practical things, make this year's agricultural and rural 
work a success, create outstanding achievements, and give a 
qualified answer to the party Central Committee and the State 
Council. 

