BFN 

  [Excerpt] The Labor Knesset caucus and the party bureau 
leadership have decided that an in-depth review will be 
necessary to investigate the party's defeat in the Histadrut 
elections, but that no one will be forced to pay a personal 
price. Prime Minister Rabin said a team had been set up to 
conduct coalition negotiations with Hayim Ramon and that the 
return to the party of those who broke away is being considered. 
On this, David Ze'ev: 
  [Begin Ze'ev recording] The meeting of the Labor caucus and 
bureau lasted four hours. It was highly charged with emotion. 
Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin was angered by the emotional 
statements of some members, who lashed out at the various people 
centrally involved in this crisis. Rabin said personality 
bashing is not what the party needs now. 
  The premier told reporters after the meeting of the 
following 
conclusions: Labor will work to set up a Histadrut coalition 
with Hayim Ramon; it will not sit in the opposition and will not 
try to set up a coalition with the Likud. No beheadings, in 
Rabin's words; Labor Party Secretary General Nisim Zvili will 
not be forced to resign, nor will Hayim Haberfeld be forced to 
leave his post as the head of the Labor faction in the 
Histadrut. A committee to be chaired by Rabin, joined by Zvili, 
Haberfeld, and NA'AMAT women's organization head 'Ofra Friedman, 
will conduct the coalition negotiations with Ramon's party. 
  The prime minister said a proposal is to be considered 
whether to grant amnesty or to call upon those who broke away 
for the Histadrut elections, as well as in the local elections 
last November, to return to the party. Rabin said additional, 
more comprehensive deliberations -- perhaps the establishment of 
a commission -- will be necessary to examine just exactly what 
went wrong. 
  Asked whether in fact he is not so disappointed that Hayim 
Ramon won, Rabin replied: Look, I voted for Labor, I worked for 
the Labor list, but in light of the circumstances, it would have 
been worse if the Likud had won. [passage omitted] [end 
recording] 

