BFN 

  [Text] President Suleyman Demirel left for a one-day 
working visit to Egypt this morning. In a statement at Esenboga 
Airport before his departure, Demirel said that during his 
visit, he and Egyptian President Husni Mubarak will assess the 
ways of further advancing the cooperation between the two 
countries in the bilateral and international fields. Demirel 
pointed out that both countries have the political will to 
further develop their bilateral economic relations and increase 
their volume of trade. He added that in connection with 
international problems, the two countries are in close 
solidarity at the bilateral level and with international 
organizations. 
  President Demirel pointed out that the Middle East peace 
process is advancing toward its end. Within this framework, he 
added, Turkey and Egypt, which are two important countries in 
the region, have important duties to perform. 
  Demirel said that the two countries are ready to contribute 
to the efforts to rebuild the region after the peace process 
successfully ends and to the economic cooperation efforts that 
will be made by the regional countries. 
  The president said that there are other international 
problems that fall within the joint interest of Turkey and 
Egypt. He said: Our two countries are jointly making intensive 
efforts both at the United Nations and in the Islamic Conference 
Organization for the solution of the Bosnia-Herzegovina problem, 
for the prevention of the attacks against our Muslim brothers 
there, and for the amelioration of their suffering. I hope that 
the talks I will hold with my brother Husni Mubarak, president 
of friendly Egypt, on all these issues will contribute to the 
relations between the two countries and to the solution of 
regional problems. 
  President Demirel will be the first high-level guest to be 
visiting Cairo since the Palestinians and Israelis signed the 
autonomy agreement. 
  At the (Kubba) palace where he will be staying, President 
Demirel will receive Arab League Secretary General 'Ismat 
'abd-al-Majid and Prime Minister 'Atif Sidqi separately. 
Demirel will also visit the Egyptian parliament. He will leave 
Cairo this evening. 
  Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin went to Egypt together with 
the 
president. 
  The president was seen off from Esenboga Airport by Assembly 
Speaker Husamettin Cindoruk, Air Force Commander General Halit 
Burhan, Presidential Secretary General Necdet Keskinoz, Ankara 
Governor Erdogan Sahinoglu, and other officials. 

