BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch" on interview with PRC Foreign Minister </F>
and Vice Premier Qian Qichen by unidentified TA KUNG PAO 
reporters in Beijing on 15 April 1993: "Qian Qichen Interviewed 
by Our Staff Reporters and Answers Their Questions"] 
  [Text] Beijing 15 Apr (TA KUNG PAO)--Hong Kong 
Issue 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Hong Kong residents are very concerned about 
the question of how Hong Kong's prosperity and stability can be 
ensured in the three years or so left before 1997. How will the 
Chinese Government urge the British side to implement its 
commitments made to Hong Kong as stipulated in the Joint 
Declaration? 
  [Qian] The "Sino-British Joint Declaration on the Question 
of Hong Kong" was an agreement signed by the heads of the two 
governments, and the British Government is obliged to strictly 
observe it; otherwise, it will lose its reputation for good 
faith in the world. The Chinese side is accelerating various 
preparations for restoring its sovereignty over Hong Kong. We 
will adhere to the principle of "one country, two systems," 
implement the Basic Law in accordance with the various 
principles stipulated in the "Sino- British Joint Declaration," 
and rely on the joint efforts of the broad Hong Kong 
compatriots. In this way, a stable transition and the long-term 
stability and prosperity of Hong Kong will certainly be insured. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] The Sino-British talks over the arrangements 
for the 1994/1995 elections in Hong Kong have broken down. The 
British side's three-tier framework in Hong Kong will be 
terminated on 30 June 1997, and the Chinese side is starting to 
"build a new kitchen." Can we take it that a smooth hand over 
of government has become impossible? Will a stable transition 
be maintained? 
  [Qian] "To build a new kitchen" refers to the fact that a 
direct transition is impossible for the three-tier framework 
produced through the 1994/1995 elections unilaterally pushed by 
the British Hong Kong Government; inevitably, the special 
administrative region [SAR] will preside over elections for a 
new framework. The future elections will be conducted according 
to the Basic Law, with arrangements made by proceeding from the 
actual conditions in Hong Kong. To my mind, with the concerted 
efforts and cooperation in solidarity of the broad Hong Kong 
compatriots, we can be sure of a stable transition in Hong Kong. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] The British side has stated that should there 
be no cooperation in Hong Kong's constitutional system, the 
arrangements for the 1994/1995 elections, economic cooperation, 
and other aspects as was hoped for before. What attitude will 
the Chinese Government take regarding cooperation with the 
British side? 
  [Qian] We welcome the British side's expression of its hope 
for cooperation. If that can be achieved, Hong Kong residents 
will benefit. The key lies in the practical actions of the 
British side. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Britain is playing the "international card" on 
the issue of Hong Kong. Some foreign forces covet Hong Kong, 
too. How should China handle the international relations of Hong 
Kong from now on? 
  [Qian] The issue of Hong Kong is a matter between the 
Chinese and British governments before 1 July 1997; after that 
date, it is entirely China's internal affair, and no other 
countries have any right to intervene whatsoever. Hong Kong, as 
a special administrative region of China, may develop economic 
and cultural exchanges and ties with foreign countries. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Director Qian talked about restoring the 
integrated sovereignty of Hong Kong at a meeting of the 
Preliminary Work Committee [of the Preparatory Committee] of the 
Hong Kong SAR. How should we see this integrated sovereignty? 
  [Qian] In history, the British colonialists have always done 
their utmost to prolong the influence of their colonial rule 
when they withdraw. Since Hong Kong entered the second half of 
the transitional period, some of the words and actions of the 
British side show the unwillingness of some people in the 
British Government to withdraw from Hong Kong and that they have 
always wanted to create trouble. Deng Xiaoping has long 
foreseen this and he explicitly indicated that the issue of 
sovereignty is beyond discussion. China will recover Hong Kong 
in its entirety in 1997. To my understanding, the Hong Kong in 
its entirety referred to here is not just a geographical 
concept, but, more importantly, the concept of complete 
sovereignty. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] In his 1994 "Government Work Report," Premier 
Li Peng expressed the hope that the Preliminary Work Committee 
[PWC] of the Hong Kong SAR would unite Hong Kong compatriots of 
all walks of life on the most extensive scale. Nevertheless, 
there is just a communications office of the PWC with several 
staff in Hong Kong today. Could you please tell us, Director 
Qian, how will the PWC further unfold its work in Hong Kong from 
now on? 
  [Qian] In doing a good job of the work of the PWC, a very 
important point is to bring forward democracy, pool the wisdom 
of the masses, give play to the sense of responsibility and 
being the masters of the broad Hong Kong compatriots, and pool 
the wisdom and efforts of every one to make preparations for 
building the Hong Kong SAR. Presently, an increasing greater 
number of people from all walks of life in Hong Kong are 
concerned about the work of the PWC; they have offered many 
sound opinions or suggestions to the PWC through various 
channels from Hong Kong or by coming straight to Beijing. 
  The great responsibility of making preparations for the 
Chinese Government to recover the sovereignty of Hong Kong rest 
with the broad Hong Kong residents, but not just the scores of 
the PWC members or its secretariat or communications office in 
Hong Kong. The way of work of the PWC will further be improved. 
For example, some ad hoc groups are ready to call meetings in 
Hong Kong, while absorbing some professionals in Hong Kong to 
participate in special topic studies. The PWC will unfold 
consulting activities in Hong Kong to directly hear the opinions 
of various circles in Hong Kong. I believe that, with the 
concern and support of the broad Hong Kong compatriots, the PWC 
will live up to people's expectations in its work. 
<H5>  The Taiwan Issue </H5>
  [TA KUNG PAO] The Taiwan authorities want to expand 
"international space" and have unfolded "vacation diplomacy" not 
long ago. Presently, dialogue between Taiwan and Mainland China 
is stalled at a technical level, and there has been 
insignificant progress. What will the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs do to make the world see clearly that Taiwan is an 
inseparable part of China and will inevitably advance toward 
reunification with the China mainland? 
  [Qian] Taiwan is an inseparable part of Chinese territory, 
which is universally acknowledged in the world community. The 
reunification of Taiwan and Mainland China is the wish of the 
Chinese people in their entirety, including the Taiwanese 
people, and is an irreversible historical trend. The Chinese 
Government has always adhered to the position of safeguarding 
the one-China principle, while resolutely opposing "two China's" 
or "one China, one Taiwan," a position that has won the respect 
and understanding of the overwhelming majority of countries in 
the world. Taiwan has economic ties with various places in the 
world and space for its activities; we do not contradict it in 
that arena. What we oppose is that the Taiwan authorities are 
sparing no efforts to create "two China's" and expand their 
so-called diplomatic "international space," and behavior which 
jeopardizes the motherland's reunification runs counter to the 
trend and is unpopular. 
<H5>  World Issues </H5>
  [TA KUNG PAO] The U.S. Clinton administration believes that 
there are other aspects of its cooperative relations with China 
aside from trade and the human rights issue. What is the 
Chinese Government considering to push forward its relations 
with the United States and to reduce trouble? 
  [Qian] China and the United States, as two powers in the 
world, bear a great responsibility in safeguarding peace and 
stability in the Asia-Pacific Region and the world, promoting 
global economic growth, and improving the environment of 
mankind. There are extensive common interests between China and 
the United States, as well as differences on some issues. 
These are objective facts. In handling those issues, the two 
sides should base themselves on the future and the world's 
overall situation. They should learn to establish relations of 
mutual benefit and mutual respect with countries with different 
social systems and ideologies, while refraining from focusing 
attention on disputed issues. In this way, trouble can be 
reduced and continuous progress made in Sino-U.S. relations. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] During the Cold War period, Europe was the 
focus of contention between the superpowers, and China supported 
the unification of Western Europe. Now, changes have taken 
place in East and West European relations and turmoil has 
surfaced in the Balkans. Will Foreign Minister Qian analyze the 
changes in the European situation under the international 
backdrop? 
  [Qian] The changes in the European situation have been the 
greatest with the end of the Cold War. However, Europe has not 
entered a period of peaceful development as expected. Many 
countries of the former USSR and East Europe have met 
difficulties in their economic conversion, and the political 
situation there is comparatively turbulent. Regional conflict 
has occurred in the former Yugoslavia, and has evolved into a 
hot war. Western Europe is suffering from economic recession, 
with unemployment rates remaining high. Some progress has been 
made in the unification of Europe, along with quite a few new 
problems. In short, the relatively stable post-war European 
situation has broken down, but a new pattern has not finally 
taken shape. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Viewing the growing influence of Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy, the Russian ultra-nationalist, the election of a 
right-wing alliance in Italy, and the expansion of German 
xenophobia, Europe seems to be beginning an adverse trend of 
discord. What is China's attitude toward this? How should one 
forecast and deal with this adverse trend? 
  [Qian] Various forces in post-Cold War Europe have 
disintegrated and are under reorganization, with some new 
political ideological trends and forces surfacing; that is a 
reflection of a complicated European political situation and 
people's resentment against reality. Only by building a new 
international political and economic order based on peaceful 
coexistence and doing away with the practice of hegemonism and 
power politics, will it be possible to do a good job of 
resolving the issue of peace and development while maintaining a 
stable situation. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] When Japanese Prime Minister Hosakawa visited 
China last month, the two countries established an understanding 
of striving to build bilateral relations characterized by 
"facing the future." A report said that the two countries were 
augmenting a Beijing-Tokyo axis which would help resist pressure 
from Washington. How will China deal with Sino-Japanese 
relations and their development from now on? 
  [Qian] Japan is an important neighbor of China, and the 
development of Sino-Japanese relations is a matter of course, 
but this does not aim at a third country, nor will it affect 
relationships with third countries. Basically, there is no axis 
relationship to speak of. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Asians hope for a nuclear-free Korean 
peninsula, but actual conditions show that it will be 
comparatively difficult to remove such worries. With patience, 
do you think that this issue can be effectively resolved? 
  [Qian] To realize a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula, and 
safeguard peace and stability on the peninsula as well as 
Northeast Asia falls in line with the basic interests of the 
northern and southern parts of the peninsula and the common 
aspiration of the countries in this region. Viewing progress in 
the past year, through dialogue and negotiations between all 
sides directly involved, progress has been made in efforts to 
resolve the Korean nuclear issue. True, some difficulties have 
surfaced today, but if all of the sides involved continue 
dialogue and talks within the original framework with a 
realistic and flexible attitude and patience, the issue will be 
resolved. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Some national issues in Central Asia have 
roused universal concern in the world. Regarding this, with 
what attitude will China deal with its relations with those 
countries? 
  [Qian] Since the disintegration of the USSR, China has 
established direct ties with various countries in Central Asia. 
We are for developing good neighborly, friendly relations 
characterized by equality and mutual benefit with these 
countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful 
coexistence. We hope to see stability and economic growth in 
this region, with people working and living in contentment and 
peace, and all nationalities inhabiting this region coexisting 
in peace and harmony. As for their internal affairs, we have 
never intervened. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] South Africa will hold a general election 
soon; it is most likely that Mandela will be elected. What are 
China's predictions and preparations for the possibility of the 
emergence of the first black government in South Africa? When 
will the issue of establishing diplomatic relations between the 
two countries be placed on the agenda? 
  [Qian] Despite many difficulties and ups and downs, it is an 
irreversible trend that a general election will be held in South 
Africa with the emergence of a government of national unity. 
This signifies the end of racist rule in South Africa and the 
birth of a new South Africa of equality between all races. Like 
the rest of the world community, China expresses its heartfelt 
congratulations to the historic victory of the South African 
people. China has all along supported the South African people 
in their just struggle against apartheid, and it is only logical 
for China to develop friendly, cooperative relations with the 
new South Africa in a comprehensive way. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] Asia is a region which is enjoying the fastest 
economic growth. Countries like India and Vietnam have recently 
adopted a policy of opening up and reform and are actively 
absorbing foreign funds. How will China handle relations with 
these countries in cooperation and economic competition? 
  [Qian] Vietnam has scored results in pushing a policy of 
reform and opening up, India is exerting efforts in economic 
reform and development, and the economies of many developing 
countries in Asia have taken on a sound momentum of development. 
China is sincerely happy for them. The economic growth of 
developing countries in Asia has provided greater chances for 
cooperation between us. Of course, in international cooperation 
there is inevitably competition. So long as such competition is 
based on equality and mutual benefit, it will be helpful to 
promoting mutual cooperation and common development. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] A recent report said that pirates were 
plundering China's coastal waters, and some vessels outside the 
borders were victimized. Is this true? Could you please say 
something about it? 
  [Qian] Coastal areas are the gates of China's reform and 
opening up and bases of economic development, and maritime 
security is of the utmost importance to China. In recent years, 
maritime security conditions have worsened and the activities of 
international smuggling gangs are rampant in China's coastal 
areas, thus causing maritime criminal activities such as piracy; 
consequently, Chinese fishermen and vessels have been seriously 
victimized, as were vessels from other countries. The Chinese 
Government has conducted serious investigations of maritime 
incidents. On separate occasions last year, China negotiated 
with Japan and Russia on maritime security. With the joint 
efforts of all related departments, maritime security conditions 
have improved notably. Since mid-July last year, no more 
incidents endangering security have taken place in China's 
coastal areas. 
<H5>  China's Diplomacy </H5>
  [TA KUNG PAO] China's accomplishments in foreign affairs in 
recent years have been unanimously acknowledged in the world. 
Since the beginning of 1994, China's diplomatic arena has been 
increasingly active, with heads of governments from many 
countries in Asia, America, and Europe visiting China one after 
the other; China is playing an increasingly important role in 
world affairs. In its assessment of the outside world, China's 
diplomacy is as tough as it is soft. Could you please summarize 
China's successes in foreign affairs? What new concepts and 
designs does China have for the next step in foreign affairs? 
  [Qian] The continuous elevation of China's position in the 
world is attributable to two points: First, China enjoys 
political stability in its internal affairs and sustained, 
vigorous economic growth; and second, the success of China's 
pursuit of a peaceful foreign policy characterized by 
independence and taking the initiative in our own hands. In 
handling world issues, China adheres to principles, while being 
flexible and practical. Equality and mutual respect are pursued 
when China handles relations with other countries, while always 
observing the five principles of peaceful coexistence. China 
will promote world peace and development as always and will make 
its own contributions to building a just, rational, political 
and economic new world order. 
  [TA KUNG PAO] "The 21st century will be the Asian century," 
"the 21st century belongs to China." This is already an 
established saying in the world. How will China face the 21st 
Century in foreign affairs? 
  [Qian] In another five years or so, mankind will enter the 
21st century. We do not believe that the 21st century belongs 
to any region or country. Two world wars have taken place in 
the 20th century, and the Cold War lasted for almost half a 
century. China hopes that there will not be cold wars or hot 
wars in the 21st Century and that it will become a new century 
of peace and development. Nuclear weapons surfaced in the 20th 
Century: mankind is capable of manufacturing nuclear weapons and 
should be able to totally destroy them. China hopes that the 
21st century will become a new century free of nuclear weapons. 
The Chinese people are willing to welcome a new century of 
peace, stability, development and prosperity and to work hard 
together with the people of all countries. 

