BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of State Adviser Qabil Guseynli's assessment of </F>
President Clinton's letter to President Aliyev on U.S. aid to 
Azerbaijan -- recorded] 
  [Text] Political circles have focused much attention on 
President Bill Clinton's letter to President Geydar Aliyev. The 
letter contained specific suggestions for trying to establish 
the new diplomatic approaches that are required for improvement 
in the relations between the United States and Azerbaijan. 
  The question of humanitarian aid to Azerbaijan must be 
emphasized at this point. It will be recalled that the U.S. 
Congress adopted a resolution to enable the U.S. Administration 
to provide humanitarian aid to Azerbaijan when the former 
government was in power in our republic with a view to 
supporting Azerbaijan's independence. The resolution applied 
only to Azerbaijan among the former Soviet republics. It 
worried Armenia at the time. I wish to take note of several 
facts. The number of refugees in Azerbaijan totalled 120,000 
when the resolution was adopted. However, that number has 
increased to more than 1 million at the present time. That 
shows that the humanitarian aid Armenia has received when 
Azerbaijan was deprived of that right has contributed toward the 
further broadening of that republic's aggression. 
  I also wish to stress that the U.S. political circles, 
President Clinton in particular, are well aware of that state of 
affairs. It has been observed that President Clinton's stand on 
the maintenance of the embargo on Azerbaijan has significantly 
changed since October 1993. The letter he conveyed to President 
Aliyev, in which he mentioned that he personally supports the 
lifting of the embargo, indicated that President Clinton's stand 
on the matter has significantly changed and that he intends to 
influence the Congress. 
  In addition, I wish to recall a point that was mentioned in 
President Clinton's letter. He stressed that the commencement 
of the peace process on Daghlyk Karabakh within the CSCE 
framework will facilitate humanitarian aid to Azerbaijan. That 
was an indication that the United States wishes to contribute 
toward the peace process in the region and give every kind of 
support for the peaceful progress of social and political 
changes in Azerbaijan. That, however, requires serious work by 
Azerbaijan's diplomats. 

