Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by the Microgravity Advisory Committee: "Focused </F>
Sciences Interim Report: Focused Research in the Microgravity 
Programme"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Part 1: Physics, Materials, and Fluid Science </H5>
  The Microgravity Advisory Committee of ESA proposes to 
concentrate the scientific programme in the field of 
microgravity on the most promising research areas with 
outstanding expertise in Europe. Being intended to form the 
foundation for a sound development of this recent field into the 
future, the programme will not be restricted to existing 
knowledge, but is open to new ideas at any time. The present 
paper is limited to physics, materials, and fluid sciences; a 
similar exercise covering life sciences has been initiated. 
<H5>  Results of Previous Experiments </H5>
  Despite the fact that the number of flight opportunities for 
microgravity experiments in the past has been severely limited, 
the results available to-date have had considerable influence on 
the scientific development in the disciplines concerned, 
demonstrated by the large number of scientific papers emerging 
from microgravity-promoted studies. Materials science has 
experienced a dramatic improvement of our general understanding 
of transport processes in crystal growth from space experiments, 
resulting in improvements in ground-based production methods. 
In fluid sciences, detailed phenomena have become observable 
which previously were not accessible due to obscuration by 
buoyancy flow or hydrostatic pressure on Earth. Thermodynamics 
has made considerable progress in understanding transport 
processes in fluids and relaxation effects near the critical 
point. Physical metallurgy has developed a new understanding of 
the interactions at fluid-solid interfaces, and novel insight 
into the behaviour of multicomponent systems. 
  Several major breakthroughs or discoveries can be identified 
in the results available today. Among those are: 
  In the Field of Crystal Growth: 
  -- the new, rapidly growing research field of protein 
crystallisation in space opened by a SL-1 result, which 
generated considerable fundamental and commercial interest, e.g. 
in pharmaceutical industry; 
  -- identification of the relative influence of various 
transport processes on crystal perfection, with subsequent 
improvements in ground- based production techniques, e.g. by 
magnetic field growth; 
  In the Field of Fluid Physics: 
  -- the observation and quantitative measurement of 
bifurcation phenomena in pure Marangoni flow; 
  -- a quantitative understanding of static and dynamic 
stability limits of large liquid interfaces; 
  In the Field of Thermodynamics: 
  -- evidence against the accepted model for diffusion in 
liquid melts, with important implications for metallurgy; 
  -- the first accurate measurement of the Soret effect in 
liquid metals and the observation of isotopic separation through 
a thermal gradient; 
  -- the unexpected observation of critical heat flux in 
boiling being independent of gravity, in contradiction to 
present understanding; 
  In the Field of Critical Point Phenomena: 
  -- the demonstration of a novel thermalization phenomenon 
near the critical point (piston effect); 
  -- the quantitative confirmation of a thermophysical 
divergence in the immediate vicinity of the critical point; 
  In the Field of Metal Physics: 
  -- new insight in physical phenomena at the growth interface 
of metallic materials and in the dynamics of the solidification 
front; 
  -- an improved understanding of phase separation and 
ripening 
processes in immiscible alloys, the results of which are used in 
ground production of bearing materials. 
  One objective of the ESA microgravity programme was a 
critical assessment of the early speculations concerning 
industrial activities in space. Here fundamental scientific 
investigations were used as a basis for judgement. The results 
clearly indicate that, while applications emerged in several 
fields for ground-based industry, no near-term prospects for 
space production have been identified so far. 
<H5>  Science Priorities </H5>
  Leaving aside possible developments in the direction of 
space 
production at the moment, the programme presently concentrates 
on -- fundamental science within existing basic research fields, 
-- application-oriented investigations directed towards 
improvement of ground processing and strengthening of the 
European industry. 
  A high level of excellence is to be ensured by critical peer 
reviews, and by industrial interest where applicable. 
  The present analysis relies on the outcome of the recent 
peer 
review of the Columbus precursor proposals, combined with the 
experience of past results and the preferences in the national 
programmes of European member states. The latter has been 
derived from an ESA paper which forms an element of the future 
development of the programme. The priorities obtained in this 
way are defined in terms of research focuses and individual 
experiments centred around proposals which have received the 
highest rating in the peer review. 
  High-priority research focuses bring together several 
proposals of highest quality, which are expected to benefit from 
the synergy originating from cooperations in topical working 
groups. The following topics were selected in this group (on 
equal level): 
  In the Field of Crystal Growth: 
-- `Crystallisation Mechanisms of Biological Macromolecules' -- 
finding the underlying fundamentals of this successful new 
method; -- `Growth Mechanism and Perfection in Solution and 
Vapour Crystal Growth' -- towards the perfect crystal; 
  Cross Disciplinary Between Crystal Growth and Fluid Physics: 
-- `Convection and Morphological Stability' -- exploiting new 
understanding that originated from earlier microgravity results; 
  In the Field of Fluid Physics: 
-- `Flows and Instabilities Induced by Surface or Thermal 
Radiation Forces' -- investigating fluid dynamics processes 
masked by convection under Earth gravity; -- `Double Diffusive 
Instabilities' -- coupling between heat and mass transfer in 
fluids can be investigated unambiguously under microgravity; 
  In the Field of Thermodynamics: 
-- `Time and Length Scales in Critical Point Phenomena' -- 
following up recent discoveries obtained under low gravity 
conditions; -- `Thermophysical Properties of Fluids' -- 
extending thermodynamics into novel areas like the largely 
inaccessible metastable regime of undercooling; -- `Mechanism of 
Boiling' -- investigating unexpected results with high 
fundamental and technological relevance; 
  Cross Disciplinary Between Materials and Thermodynamics: 
-- `Metastable Phases' -- investigating the fundamentals of the 
formation of novel materials through containerless processing. 
  High-priority individual experiments are defined as 
investigations of scientific excellence proposed by coordinated 
European groups with proven expertise. The following 
experiments were selected (in alphabetical order, with proposing 
institutions in brackets): -- Droplet Combustions (Laboratoire 
de Combustion, Orleans) -- Interfacial Tension and Absorption 
(CNR-ICFAM, Genova) -- Laser Cooling of Atoms (Laboratoire de 
Spectroscopie Hertz, Paris) -- Monotectic Alloys (DLR, Cologne) 
-- Plasma Crystal (Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics, 
Garching) -- Protoplanetary Dust Aggregation 
(Max-Planck-Institute for Aeronomy, Lindau) 
  ESA is encouraged to advance both types of high-priority 
experiment groups by supporting international cooperation these 
fields within Europe, and by giving priority in the selection of 
flight opportunities and hardware development. For the case of 
high-priority research focuses, it is recommended to establish 
`Topical Working Groups' (TWG's) composed of the investigators 
concerned (essentially those selected as category I in the 
precursor proposals evaluation) as an active means to stimulate 
cooperation. 
  The activities of these working groups shall be reviewed at 
regular intervals. The priority fields shall be updated 
frequently and remain open for extension by new proposals of 
high excellence, and sufficient flexibility should be retained 
to permit the incorporation of new ideas at any time. 
<H5>  Consequences for Flight Opportunities and Programmatics </H5>
  A programme based on the scientific priority elements 
defined 
here, which notably does not yet include life sciences, has 
specific demands on future flight opportunities. It requires a 
wide spectrum of microgravity timescales, ranging from a few 
seconds to several days. Some experiments demand several weeks 
of continuous low gravity. In order to ensure research 
continuity, it is important to avoid large gaps in the sequence 
of operations. The experiments having priority in this part of 
the programme can be performed without human interaction in 
space. However, if astronauts are present, they could 
efficiently handle some of the experiments proposed. Taking 
into account compatibility with the specific scientific 
requirements, the selection of flight opportunities should be 
strictly governed by the criterion of cost efficiency. 
  A number of programmatic consequences and recommendations 
can 
be derived from the present analysis: -- Adequate funds should 
be provided in the framework of the ESA microgravity programme 
to ensure an efficient operation of the high- priority research 
groups defined above. -- ESA should encourage and stimulate new 
scientific and technical research proposals, both solicited and 
unsolicited, which, after careful scrutiny, can be introduced to 
the present programme. -- ESA is advised to extend its efforts 
to study scientific or technical problems, for example by 
initiating science definition studies. -- In view of the 
shortage of funds and of flight opportunities, ESA should use 
its proven ability and expertise to foster closer cooperation 
between national programmes in European member states. -- ESA 
should encourage increasing involvement of scientific 
investigators in hardware development, following the example of 
the science programme. -- Considering the fundamental research 
nature of the programme defined, ESA is advised to seek ways of 
incorporating the microgravity programme into the Agency's 
mandatory activities, in line with the resolution of the Granada 
ministerial council of 10. November 1992. 

