Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Doreen Cheung] </F>
  [Text] Chief Secretary Anson Chan Fang On-sang said 
yesterday the Government had to keep the latest financial 
proposal for the Chek Lap Kok airport secret to ensure an early 
agreement with China. Despite being pressed by legislators to 
reveal the fourth financial package at yesterday's Legislative 
Council Finance Committee meeting, Mrs. Chan said it was not in 
the public interest to disclose the package yet. She said a new 
package had been handed to the Chinese side and the Government 
had pressed for a meeting with China to conclude an early deal. 
  Pro-China legislator Tam Yiu-chung said recent press reports 
contained details of the financing plan and queried whether it 
was the Government or Executive Councillors who had failed to 
heed the confidentiality rule. Pointing out he did not support 
the Government' move to pump more funds into airport projects at 
this stage, Mr. Tam asked whether such a move would dampen the 
chances of striking a deal with China. But Mrs. Chan said it 
was needed to avoid any delay, and none of the items needed 
consultation with China. 
  Apart from Mr. Tam and Philip Wong Yu-hong, the Finance 
Committee voted for four funding proposals totaling $4.7 billion 
at 1997 prices relating to the airport core programme projects 
including: 
--$1.3 billion for the remaining works of the Lantau Fixed 
Crossing --$145 million for certain airport railway advance 
works --$1.9 billion to provide infrastructure for the Tung 
Chung phase I 
  New town and the new airport--$1.4 billion for government 
facilities at the Chek Lap Kok Airport. 
  Members pressed the Government to promise completing the 
Kowloon to Chek Lap Kok Airport rail link by mid-1997 but the 
Government was unable to assure them. Principal Assistant 
Secretary for Transport, Arthur Ng, would only say the 
Government hoped the section could be finished by June 1997 to 
coincide with the airport's opening. 
  He also failed to give a date beyond which the airport 
railway could not be completed as scheduled. Meanwhile, 
legislators approved a funding proposal to allocate $6.8 billion 
as an initial capital injection to a sewage services trading 
fund to finance the construction of the high priority programme. 

