BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, June 1, IRNA -- The Iranian Foreign Minister 
'Ali Akbar Velayati here Tuesday [31 May] outlined Iran's stance 
towards international developments at the 11th session of 
foreign ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). 
  Delivering a speech, he said that despite the existing 
hopes, 
conflicts continue to prevail in international relations and not 
only they have not ceased after the end of Cold War, but have 
also grown in numbers, geographical spread, intensity and human 
suffering. 
  Moreover, Velayati added, the rather arbitrary way of 
dealing 
with these conflicts and crises presents dangerous precedents 
both for international peace and security and for national 
sovereignty and the principle of non-interference. 
  Referring to genocide of Bosnian Muslims as a proof of an 
international disorder and lack of will for putting an end to 
the tragedy, Velayati noted that since Jakarta meeting no 
significant step has been taken in this regard. 
  The Security Council and NATO have adopted an irresponsible 
policy of negligence, silence and at best doing too little and 
too late, he stressed. 
  The foreign minister criticized the Security Council for 
having turned a blind eye even to its own decisions including 
those calling for respect for Bosnia's sovereignty and integrity 
and those denouncing ethnic cleansing. 
  He believed that under these circumstances, it is necessary 
to ensure that the ongoing efforts to find a settlement would at 
least be based on the principles already adopted by the General 
Assembly, the Security Council and the London conference. 
  "Based on past experience, we believe that in order to 
ensure 
the necessary political, humanitarian and military conditions to 
attain these objectives and to force the aggressors into genuine 
negotiations, it is necessary to stop the siege of Bosnian 
cities by all possible means, to lift the arms embargo against 
this country, to remove all the obstacles made for dispatch of 
humanitarian assistance to Bosnians and to intensify the 
international sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro. 
  "We should ask our coordinating bureau and the non-aligned 
caucus in the Security Council, in coordination with other 
concerned groups particularly the OIC contact group on Bosnia to 
move appropriate action in the Security Council and if necessary 
the General Assembly toward those ends," he continued. 
  On the Middle East crisis, Velayati said that the massacre 
in 
the Ibrahimi mosque in al-Khalil and the terrorist abduction of 
a Lebanese civilian by Israeli forces deep inside Lebanese 
territory are clear and obvious cases of state terrorism and 
hostage taking by official forces of the Zionist entity. 
  "In our analysis which is based on the experience of the 
past 
half century in Palestine and other similar situations, the 
attempts aimed at preserving the interests of this regime and 
imposing its illegitimate wishes on the Palestinian people, 
depriving them of their elementary human and national rights, 
cannot bring about a lasting solution to this crisis", he added. 
  The Non-Aligned Movement should play a more active and 
determining role in the process of preventing, mitigating and 
resolving international and regional conflicts and tragedies, 
Velayati underlined. 
  "We believe that the transitional nature of the 
international 
environment requires a continued assessment of the successes and 
shortcomings of the movement in meeting the challenges, in 
maintaining its principles and in making its presence and role 
felt in the international community", Velayati commented. 
  We do not share the now isolated view that with the collapse 
of the bi-polar system, the movement has lost its relevance, he 
noted, adding that although we believe in the necessity of 
enhancing the coordination in the position of the developing 
countries, we find it difficult to go along with the proposal 
for establishing unified Third-World grouping. 
  The shared and common interest of the developing world is 
not 
confined to the fields of economy and development, Velayati 
said. He went on to say that the developing world is facing 
social and political challenges particularly in today's 
transitional period that will determine the future course of 
inter-state relations. 
  He stressed that the world faces fundamental issues and 
problems ranging from a trend to undermine the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of developing less powerful nations, to 
concern over peace-keeping, peace-making, human rights as well 
as the restructuring of the United Nations and the Security 
Council. 
  Velayati further suggested that the member states of the 
Non-Aligned Movement should develop a more regular and routine 
system of exchange of information and consultations at various 
international fora at the appropriate level. 
  The coordinating bureau and the non-aligned caucus in the 
Security Council are valuable mechanisms which must be utilized 
more effectively and more often, he concluded. 

