BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed MBO: "East European Drug Trafficking </F>
Prospers"] 
  [Text] The Russian drug empire is preparing to conquer West 
Europe. Western amphetamine laboratories (ecstasy and others) 
are moving one after another, mainly to Poland. From the 
Netherlands, hashish plants are being taken by truck, mainly to 
Russia. As soon as the drug mafia has established itself 
properly in the former East Bloc, much cheaper drugs will flood 
the West European market. The European Commission (EC) is 
preparing a large campaign against drug abuse. Interpol 
Secretary General Raymond Kendall in London called for the 
decriminalization of drug possession. 
  Drug trafficking from former East Bloc countries to West 
Europe are assuming disturbing dimensions. That was the 
conclusion of a three-day international conference on helping 
drug users which took place in the Russian town of Kaliningrad. 
Carlo Baeten of the Center for Alcohol and Drug Problems (CAD) 
in Hasselt was the only Belgian to attend and addressed an 
international group of specialists, at the invitation of the 
Narcotic Federation of Moscow. 
  "The drug abuse problem is growing enormously over there due 
to the lack of economic perspectives and any belief in the 
future among young people," Baeten said. "The drug mafia is 
throwing itself into this virgin territory. A daily dose of 
heroin costs scarcely 200 Belgian francs [BFr] over there 
compared with nearly BFr3,000 in Belgium. The Russian police 
are finding that an increasing number of amphetamine 
laboratories are starting up. They also know that there are new 
trafficking routes for heroin and cocaine. They are not just 
targeting the local market, but West Europe as well thanks to 
their competitive prices." 
<H5>  European Plan </H5>
  The EC has drawn up a plan for combating drug abuse. Its 
main points are: Reducing drug use and implementing 
preventative measures among high-risk groups (young people, 
prisoners); combating drug trafficking by more controls on money 
laundering, more cooperation between police, customs and justice 
departments and the expansion of Europol; international 
agreements at the United Nations and the Council of Europe 
levels and agreements with other countries. 
  The action program will start next year and last until 1999. 
The EC will set aside 960 million [currency not specified] for 
combating drug abuse. The number of addicts in the European 
Union is estimated at 1 million. Five million Europeans are 
believed to use drugs occasionally. 
  In London yesterday Raymond Kendall called for drug 
possession to be decriminalized. He believes that drug use is 
more of a social and health problem rather than a matter for the 
police. 
  "Combating symptoms is inefficient," Kendall said, expecting 
little benefit to be gained from the fight against drug dealers 
without tackling the problem situations which lead to drug use. 

