BFN 

<F P=106> [Pavel Felgengauer report in the "Neighbors" column: "The </F>
Push to the South Has Not Materialized. Russia's Military 
Industrial Complex Hopes To Cooperate With Turkey's] 
  [Text] On 20 April Turkish Defense Minister Mehmet Golhan 
and his Russian counterpart Pavel Grachev signed an 
intergovernment agreement On Cooperation on Military and 
Technical Matters and in the Sphere of Defense Industry. The 
document does not envision any specific transactions or 
programs. It is a framework agreement that provides legal 
underpinnings for cooperation. 
  In February, during a visit to Moscow by French Defense 
Minister Leotard, Russia signed the first such agreement with a 
NATO member country. The agreement with Turkey, however, 
according to First Deputy Defense Minister Andrey Kokoshin, is 
broader because, as follows from its title, it also provides for 
direct cooperation between the two countries' defense industries. 
  Competent sources in the Russian Federation Defense Ministry 
say that the Turks are interested in gaining access to some 
modern Russian technology in the area of creating armored 
hardware, rotary-wing aircraft, and aviation. At the same time, 
Russia would like to borrow from Turkish know-how for the 
benefit of the most backward sector of its military industrial 
complex -- the electronics industry. For the last eight to 10 
years Turkey has managed (mainly by using Western technology 
obtained within the NATO framework) to achieve fairly modern 
standards in military communication means and some other fields. 
  Combining Turkish electronic software with Russian hardware 
appears quite a promising idea. The end product may prove 
competitive, especially in "Third World" countries. 
Furthermore, Turkey has the largest army among NATO European 
member states, and therefore is itself a serious arms market. 
Ankara is ready today to buy Russian helicopters and armored 
personnel carriers because the Turkish Army is constantly 
engaged in combat operations in the east of the republic, in 
Kurdish areas, and needs a constant inflow of new equipment. 
  The Turkish defense minister said that "our good-neighborly 
relations have grown into friendship, including between armies." 
Yet not everything is that cloudless. Moscow is persistently 
urging a revision of the flank quotas (the numerical limitations 
on heavy weapons of the Russian Army and Internal Affairs 
Ministry troops in the Caucasus and in the Leningrad Military 
District), envisioned under the 1990 Paris (CFE) Treaty and the 
1992 Tashkent Treaty. The unstable situation in the Northern 
Caucasus and the Transcaucasus has compelled Moscow to reinforce 
its troop grouping in the region but Turkey, rather sharply, 
blocked all attempts to have the quotas revised. In the 
Northern Caucasus and the Transcaucasus Moscow's and Ankara's 
strategic interests have often clashed in the past two years. 
The idea of creating a chain of permanent Russian military 
bases along the former Soviet-Turkish border is not evoking any 
enthusiasm in Turkey either. 
  On 24 April, during "one to one" talks between the Turkish 
minister and General Grachev, the quota problem will apparently 
be discussed in earnest, but the possibility of a compromise 
being reached does not look too realistic so far. The flank 
quotas under the CFE Treaty are to take effect in 1995: Not 
much time is left. The good-neighborly cooperation between the 
two military industrial complexes could be scaled down having 
barely started. 

