Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 15 Jan (MENA)--The newspapers AL-AHRAM and 
AL- AKHBAR emphasize the importance of the Syrian-U.S. summit in 
Geneva, which seeks to give impetus to the Middle East peace 
process by surmounting the obstacles that have hindered progress 
in the Syrian- Israeli negotiations. 
  In an editorial in Sunday's issue, AL-AHRAM says that the 
Syrian-U.S. summit coincides with Washington's statement that it 
is holding contacts with all the Arab parties and Israel for 
resumption of the bilateral negotiations in the U.S. capital and 
to reach agreement on a specific date for this purpose. 
  The paper adds: The summit is even more significant because 
it will be followed three days later by the visit of Jordan's 
King Husayn's to Washington for a meeting with the U.S. 
President amid signs that a Jordanian-Israeli agreement is in 
the offing. 
  AL-AHRAM notes that promoting the Syrian-Israeli 
negotiations 
will also give impetus to the Lebanese-Israeli talks and 
encourage Palestinian and Israeli negotiators to seek the prompt 
implementation of autonomy in Gaza and Jericho. 
  AL-AKHBAR's editorial says the al-Asad-Clinton summit is an 
attempt to overcome the obstacles to the Syrian-Israeli talks on 
peace in the Middle East. It notes that Israeli Prime Minister 
Yitzhaq Rabin has retreated from his earlier position that his 
country is willing to withdraw from the Golan Heights. 
  The paper adds: It was understood right from the beginning 
of the Arab-Israeli negotiations in Madrid in 1991 that Israel 
agreed that these negotiations would be conducted in line with 
UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, which call for 
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories. 
  AL-AKHBAR says this is the solution that can guarantee a 
real 
and lasting peace between the Jewish state and the Arab 
countries in the region. 
  The paper urges Rabin and his colleagues to think again 
about 
the kind of peace that can be attained if Palestinian, Syrian, 
and Lebanese territories remain under Israeli control. 

