BFN 

<F P=106> ["Newsletter" by Wu Guoqing (0702 0948 3237): "Ningxia Curbs </F>
Drug Trafficking"] 
<H5>  txt}[Text] Yinchuan, 8 Apr (XINHUA) -- International drug </H5>
trafficking rings have gone all out in recent years in an 
attempt to open up a so-called "China passageway." Drug 
traffickers who ply their trade from their provinces emerged 
even in remote, outlying places in the north. These drug 
trafficking activities were quickly held back. 
<H5>  Beacon-Fire Rose in the North </H5>
  In the late 1980s, some self-employed traders from Ningxia 
region who transported goods to Yunnan and Guangzhou or dealt in 
native and special products there became addicted to drugs. 
Lured by the promises of gain from international drug 
trafficking rings, they gradually joined the business of drug 
trafficking. With money raised in Ningxia, they went to Yunnan 
to buy narcotics from the "Golden Triangle" and took them to 
Guangzhou for sale, playing the role of "mazai" [ma zai 7456 
0098 -- drug runner] for the international drug trafficking 
rings. Thanks to the extraordinary profits of drug trafficking, 
some of these lawbreakers became very rich overnight. More and 
more people from Tongxin County and neighboring mountainous 
areas in southern Ningxia joined the drug trade. 
  For many, trading in drugs outside Ningxia became a 
"shortcut" to wealth. They either provided capital, services, 
or both, and sometimes hired help to traffic in narcotics. 
People with no money joined in the action with borrowed capital 
or worked as a "mazai" for others. Also emerged were big-time 
drug kingpins like Ma Shixin, Zhou Yanji, and Hai Zongru whose 
drug-trafficking activities even had some nationwide impact. 
  They had well-organized, clandestine drug-trafficking 
set-ups 
to handle everything from purchasing, transportation, to 
marketing, and they organized frequent transregional drug 
trafficking. 
  These outbound drug traffickers also brought narcotics back 
to Ningxia, resulting in drug taking in many parts of Ningxia. 
  All circles of society--including the broad mass of Hui and 
Han nationalities--called for cracking down on outbound drug 
trafficking and strictly enforcing the ban on narcotics to make 
the north clean again. 
<H5>  The Capture of Drug kingpins </H5>
  As the saying goes: To catch bandits, first catch the 
ringleader. Ningxia's public security departments launched an 
aggressive crackdown to hold in check the evil trend of outbound 
drug trafficking. Their first targets were the ringleaders. 
  Target No. 1 was drug kingpin Zhou Yanji. A native of 
Weizhou Town in Tongxin County, he goes by the nickname of "Zhou 
Da," as he is the first child of the family. Weizhou is the 
birth place of outbound drug trafficking. For a time, Zhou was 
the ringleader of outbound drug trafficking in Ningxia and the 
northwest. Daring and cunning, the 30-year-old Zhou Yanji 
established a drug trafficking ring with over 100 people that 
carried out its dirty trade over half of China. He was wanted 
by public security organs in Yunnan, Guangdong, Sichuan, and 
Ningxia, and the Ministry of Public Security. Many times he was 
able to successfully escape the net that was cast to catch him. 
During one narcotics transaction in Yunnan, drug-enforcement 
policemen suddenly forced open the door and Zhou jumped out of 
the window and ran away injured, leaving behind 15.9 kg of 
heroin and 450,000 yuan in cash. 
  The cloven hoof eventually gave the devil away. In early 
December 1991, Ningxia's public security departments got 
information that Zhou had sneaked back and was hiding out in his 
home town with his armed bodyguards. After careful 
investigation and planning, the Ningxia Autonomous Regional 
Public Security Department issued an order to the Yinnan 
Prefectural Public Security Department for the drug kingpin's 
arrest. 
  In the early hours of 14 December, a special motorcade with 
scores of public security and armed policemen in full battle 
array quietly left Wuzhong City and headed directly for Weizhou 
Town in Tongxin County. Policemen assigned to the assault, road 
checks, or encircling the site quickly took their positions and 
began to quietly close in on their target. 
  After taking their combat positions, the assault squad, at 
the sound of the command, sprang toward the target and forced 
open the door. They didn't find Zhou in his house or at three 
of his hideouts. As the assault squad was about to enlarge the 
scope of search, a window of Zhou's neighbor's house suddenly 
opened and a dark shadow jumped out. Policemen who were lying 
in ambush close by quickly released a police dog to chase him. 
With a guileful dodge, the dark shadow tricked the police dog 
to fall into a deep pit nearby. As he started to run, two 
policemen jumped out and sprang on the dark shadow and subdued 
him in no time at all. At this time, search lights from all 
directions converged on the dark shadow to reveal what it was: 
What they saw is the sorry sight of the big-time drug kingpin 
Zhou Yanji, barefoot and wearing only a vest and pants, 
shivering in the cold winds. Zhou's bodyguards were also 
captured in the operation. According to Zhou's confessions, he 
took part in the transaction of as much as 200 kg of heroin. 
  The second target was Ma Shixin, known as "the top drug 
kingpin in Ningxia." He was a big-time ringleader from Ningxia 
who was engaged in the drug trade the longest--hiding out mostly 
in Yunnan--and had a big "herd" of followers and hangers-on. 
Confident that Yunnan's public security organs did not have 
anything on him because his activities were so well concealed 
and that he was also beyond the reach of Ningxia's public 
security organs, he married again in Dali, Yunnan, and was seen 
blatently swaggering through the streets of Dali city from time 
to time. On 2 April, as he was again swaggering leisurely in 
the streets of Dali, several police officers from Ningxia 
suddenly emerged in front of his face. Before he knew what 
happened, shiny handcuffs were already on his wrists. It turned 
out that the police officers were part of an antidrug brigade 
set up by Ningxia's public security department who had travelled 
thousands of kilometers to Yunnan to arrest Ma and bring him to 
justice. 
  Hai Zongru and many other drug ringleaders were also 
captured 
one after another, thereby frightening Ningxia drug dealers and 
restraining their criminals activities. 
<H5>  Block the Sources of Narcotics and Deal With Both the </H5>
Symptoms and the Root Cause of Drug Trafficking 
  In mid-August 1992, the State Antinarcotics Office and the 
Ministry of Public Security, summoned Ningxia's relevant 
personnel to Beijing for an exclusive briefing on antinarcotics 
efforts and to work out plans for a special crackdown on 
Ningxia's drug dealers operating out of the region. 
  Pursuant to the policy of "blocking the sources of 
narcotics, 
enforcing the ban of growing, taking, and selling of narcotics, 
and dealing with both the symptoms and the root cause," the 
regional CPC committee and government have spread a mammoth 
dragnet to enforce the drug ban all over the land of the north. 
  In late October, task forces made up of dozens of Ningxia 
public security police left for Yunnan, Sichuan, and Guangdong 
to capture drug dealers and take into custody drug suspects. 
With help from public security departments in the three 
provinces, in two months the expedition forces cracked six 
exceptionally large cases involving Ningxia dealers, arrested 59 
Ningxia drug dealers, confiscated over 40 kg of heroin, and sent 
back to Ningxia a large number of drug suspects. 
  Meanwhile, in cooperation with public security units, 
government at all levels in Ningxia also cracked down on the 
offensive launched by drug traffickers operating outside the 
region. They sent work teams to counties and villages with 
serious drug problems to publicize the drug ban, and to educate 
and mobilize the masses to combat drug trafficking. 
  According to the regional antinacortics office, Ningxia has 
made great headway in its war on drug trafficking. As of the 
end of 1993, the region had smashed 55 drug rings, arrested 776 
drug criminals, and confiscated a large amount of narcotics, and 
destroyed a number of underground opium dens. Under the impact 
of the severe crackdown of public security departments and the 
influence of the party's lenient policy, many drug dealers 
returned home to surrender themselves. Ningxia's outbound drug 
trafficking has been restrained somewhat. 

