Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Paris, March 12 (AFP) -- Tens of thousands of youths 
marched through Paris on Saturday [12 March] to demand that the 
government drop plans to cut the minimum legal wage for young 
people. 
  The demonstration was the second in three days as pressure 
mounted on the conservative government of Prime Minister Edouard 
Balladur. 
  Saturday's march was called by the communist-lead CGT 
[General Labor Confederation] trade union. Taking part were CGT 
Secretary General Louis Viannet and Communist Party National 
Secretary Robert Hue. 
  But student unions, a teachers' union and antiracist 
organisations joined in as the Left appeared to unite against 
the government. 
  A large police contingent monitored the march to prevent a 
repeat of violence that marred a student demonstration Thursday, 
when gangs of hooded youths burned cars and looted posh stores 
in the Montparnasse area on the city's Left Bank. 
  In Saturday's march on the other side of the Seine River, 
CGT 
guards clashed with splinter groups and drove them off. 
  Another big demonstration has been called for Thursday by 
students, the independent trade union Force Ouvriere and the 
pro-socialist labor union CFDT [French Democratic Confederation 
of Labor]. On Saturday, Viannet anounced that the CGT would 
take part in that rally. 
  On Saturday, demonstrators also turned out in six provincial 
capitals, at Marseille and Toulouse and in Bastia on the 
Mediterranean island of Corsica in the south, at Lyon and Metz 
in the east and at Nantes in the west. 
  More than 25,000 marched in Toulouse, 25,000 in Nantes and 
in 
Lyon the turnout was estimated at more than 10,000. 
  The marchers demanded that the government withdraw its youth 
employment measures altogether, although Balladur has 
considerably watered them down. 
  Initially the government planned to allow firms to recruit 
youths at less than the minimum take-home pay of 880 dollars a 
month, whatever their qualifications, in an attempt to whittle 
away at France's record unemployment. 
  But it backed down in negotiations with the trade unions, 
saying holders of university degrees or technical diplomas would 
be guaranteed the minimum wage provided arrangements were made 
to train them. 
  With French unemployment at 3.3 million or 12.2 percent, 
employers and conservatives say the minimum wage is excessive 
and a major structural impediment to job creation. 
  Students and unions had charged that the Balladur proposals 
would allow employers to simply replace existing workers with 
more educated youths at lower wages. 

