Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major-General Viktor Ivanovich Tsarkov, </F>
chief of the Main Military Trade Directorate of the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Defense, by Colonel V. Ukolov: "Better 
Times Will also Come for Military Trade..."] 
  [Text] The chief of the Main Military Trade 
Directorate of the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense 
answers questions from readers and the editorial staff of the 
journal ARMIYA. 
  [Ukolov] Viktor Ivanovich, will military trade really 
survive 
in market conditions? 
  [Tsarkov] It is obvious to me that the future of military 
trade is directly dependent on the very existence of the armed 
forces themselves. Officers, warrant officers, and 
representatives of other categories of servicemen serve in the 
troops, and their families live in military camps--which means 
military trade is to provide people with all the necessities. 
  About the ability to survive... According to forecasts of 
the 
Ministry of Economics of the Russian Federation, a further 
reduction in the production of consumer goods is expected, food 
products in particular--products from animal husbandry, sugar, 
tea, vegetable oil. The same goes for nonfood consumer items. 
Wholesale trade fairs held recently have shown that compared to 
the average level of 1992, it is still possible to purchase the 
following: Sewn goods--40 percent; knitted wear and hosiery--70 
percent; leather footwear--65 percent; fabric--50 percent; and 
household goods--80 percent. Nevertheless, today military trade 
must not only survive but must also become a system of 
guaranteed trade and consumer support for service members. And I 
am convinced that during the course of reforming the armed 
forces, better times will also come for military trade. 
  [Ukolov] I would like to share your optimism. But judging 
from the letters to the editor, military trade, especially 
recently, is the object of constant criticism and people's 
dissatisfaction. How did you yourself assess the work of 
military trade prior to your appointment and how do you assess 
it now, having plunged directly into the maelstrom of its 
problems? 
  [Tsarkov] Of course, before I was involved with military 
trade as a consumer; nevertheless, I felt its difficulties and 
problems. But having plunged into the maelstrom, as you say, I 
certainly should begin my work in the new field of endeavor not 
with a simple assessment of excellent, good, or bad, but, I am 
confident, with the fact that I am obligated to understand the 
situation and find ways of solving the numerous problems and 
improving this important and necessary matter. The consumers of 
the numerous garrisons will grade us. 
  [Ukolov] Readers write to us, and this is noticeable in 
Moscow, that with each day the showcases and shelves of military 
trade stores are becoming increasingly empty. Okay, one can buy 
something in the cities and large populated areas, turning to 
merchants. But what are the families of servicemen to do in 
remote garrisons, where military trade is the only supplier of 
goods and products? 
  [Tsarkov] I understand it is particularly difficult in 
remote 
areas now... But what can you say here? Today the commercial 
work of the military trade stores (like in the country's trade 
as a whole) is being impeded by their unsatisfactory financial 
condition. It is associated with the shortage of their own 
working capital, the extremely long time it takes money to pass 
through banks, and the limited nature of credit resources 
compared to the incredibly high interest rates. Here there are 
constant demands from suppliers for prepayment of deliveries and 
many other things. 
  Nevertheless, not everything is so miserably bad. In just 
four months of this year, military trade bodies sold goods 
amounting to more than 79 billion rubles [R]. But the most 
important thing is that the main task of military trade to 
supply servicemen and their family members in closed and remote 
garrisons and "hot spots," in general and on the whole, is being 
accomplished positively. Naturally, this did not come about 
simply. The leadership of the Ministry of Defense was forced to 
ask the government of Russia to allocate manufactured goods from 
the country's federal reserves. 
  [Ukolov] What is the situation in military trade with 
furniture, televisions, and refrigerators? For example, prices 
for them have risen considerably, but the demand has not 
decreased... 
  [Tsarkov] In conditions of a market economy, many 
enterprises 
that are manufacturers of furniture, televisions, and 
refrigerators prefer to sell their products through company 
trade or commercial structures. And they place almost enslaving 
delivery terms on military trade bodies. However, thanks to 
long-term economic ties with suppliers and the persistence of 
our commercial workers, already in the first quarter of this 
year military trade bodies received furniture amounting to more 
than R1.9 billion, 15,000 televisions, and 9,000 refrigerators. 
Of course, this does not fully satisfy consumers' needs, but I 
can assure you that we are constantly working to find resources 
for these goods. 
  [Ukolov] Judging from letters to the editor, the prices for 
certain food products are higher in military trade stores than 
in civilian stores. What is the reason for this? 
  [Tsarkov] You correctly noted that they are for certain 
products. This concerns confectionery products (candy, 
chocolate, caramels, cookies), alcoholic beverages, and other 
goods that are not primary necessities, purchased by military 
trade, as a rule, not from federal reserves, but through 
commercial and other structures. Naturally, the remoteness of 
the regions (the Far North, the Arctic) and additional 
expenditures associated with this are taken into account when 
forming retail prices for these goods. 
  Primary necessities received from the state's federal 
reserves in volumes approved by the government of the Russian 
Federation are sold by military trade enterprises at prices 
below those in civilian trade. 
  [Ukolov] Our readers also complain that despite the price 
increases, as before, many goods at military trade stores remain 
under the counters and in warehouses. Before, bodies of people's 
and public control fought this, and shop commissions were sort 
of regulators of social justice. How are distribution and 
control accomplished now? 
  [Tsarkov] The work of military trade enterprises at military 
camps and garrisons, as before, is monitored by commissions 
(groups) of public control created according to the April 1990 
Minister of Defense Order No 135 "On Workers' Control of Trade 
Unions and Public Control of the Work of Military Trade 
Enterprises in the Soviet Army and Navy" that is still in force 
today. Distribution of goods coming into military trade stores 
is also done by public control commissions. 
  [Ukolov] "There are frequent instances of military trade 
having no products and goods, but the plan is fulfilled from 
month to month." These lines are from a letter from a 
serviceman's wife (Kartaly, Strategic Missile Troops). How would 
you comment on this fact, considering that it is far from 
isolated? 
  [Tsarkov] In conditions of market relations, the "plan" 
concept, for known reasons (to be discussed later), has lost its 
former importance. Today, trade enterprises independently 
compile forecasts of retail trade turnover volumes and increase 
or decrease these volumes themselves. 
  Still, there exists some kind of plan in military trade 
stores which is fulfilled even in the absence of goods. How do 
you account for this? On the one hand, if the plan is fulfilled, 
this indicates the volume of services provided to military 
consumers in the form of some kind of goods sold. But here is 
the other side... Here there is a mirror reflection of the real 
results of the financial and economic activity of military trade 
enterprises. 
  I will use figures to clarify this somewhat. During the 
period January-April of this year, military trade turnover was 
R86.3 billion and increased 6.7-fold compared to the 
corresponding period last year. But this is only appearance. For 
if a shirt, let's say, costs 25-35 times more now, this in no 
way means that more of these shirts were sold in the period 
January-April 1993. 
  [Ukolov] I would like to single out a question about the 
Western Group of Forces, from where many letters are received 
asking to tell in detail about the cheating of the Military 
Trade Directorate "abroad," headed by its chief. What can you 
say about the abuses here? 
  [Tsarkov] Recently, articles have appeared in the German and 
Russian press about negative activities of the military trade 
directorate of the Western Group of Forces. It must be noted 
that individual miscalculations and oversights, at times 
bordering on criminally punishable acts, indeed took place in 
the work of the Military Trade Directorate of the Western Group 
of Forces. In particular, in conditions of a market economy, in 
the pursuit for cheap goods by specialists of this directorate, 
the volumes of goods being purchased were incorrectly defined, 
and many of the firms selected for cooperation later proved to 
be unreliable suppliers. "Reliable" suppliers, including foreign 
firms, trying to line their pockets, offered goods that were not 
in demand and were of low quality, but...at fairly high prices. 
Some managers of the Trade Directorate of the Western Group of 
Forces, in contacts with the latter, and these are the first 
"Rekond," "Inova," "Moseniko-Invest" (incidentally, as an 
investigation showed, at one time they were recommended to the 
leadership of the Trade Directorate of the Western Group of 
Forces by higher chief--former leaders of the Main Military 
Trade Directorate from Moscow), violations and abuses were 
committed, for which they were held liable. Thus, 10 managers 
from military trade bodies of this group of forces have already 
been discharged, including four servicemen. 
  In 1992, work was terminated with these firms. By order of 
the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, the chief of 
the Military Trade Directorate of the Western Group of Forces, 
Colonel F. Rezyapov, was removed from the position and 
discharged into the reserve. The chief of the trade office of 
this directorate, B. Yenenkov, was also fired. Details of all 
these abuses and violations of the law will be discussed only 
after completion of the investigation being conducted by the 
General Procuracy of the Russian Federation. 
  [Ukolov] Another thing about this group of forces. In 
garrison military trade stores, prices for many goods, including 
vodka, confectionery products, and tobacco products, are lower 
than in German stores. As a result, military trade workers make 
deals with the local population, sometimes emptying the shelves 
of their stores, selling off goods in whole batches. How will 
your directorate fight this? 
  [Tsarkov] In accordance with the agreement concluded between 
the command of the Western Group of Forces and the Federal 
Ministry for Economics of the FRG "On Supplying the Soviet 
Forces and Organizing Cooperation," goods purchased by the Trade 
Directorate of the Western Group of Forces from foreign firms 
are exempt from the turnover tax and also from duty. This is the 
first reason for the lower prices for goods at military trade 
enterprises of the Western Group of Forces. The second reason 
for the comparatively low prices for goods at military trade 
stores is that the Military Trade Directorate has an economic 
incentive to establish prices that are more accessible for all 
categories of purchasers. That is because the main contingent of 
these purchasers is compulsory-service soldiers and sergeants, 
warrant officers, and lieutenants, whose wages are considerably 
lower than those of the lowest-paid German civilians, and this 
does not enable them to purchase goods in the German trade 
network, where prices for foodstuffs and manufactured goods are 
considerably higher. 
  Goods being sold in military trade stores at lower prices do 
not lie around unsold. Their trade turnover rate is accelerated, 
and the profit received increases accordingly--a direct 
advantage to both the purchasers and trade. 
  Of course, there are infringements of the law here. But they 
are isolated, because there is strict monitoring of the purchase 
volumes of tobacco products and alcoholic beverages. In 
addition, a limit has been set on purchases of these goods, 
taking into account the buyer demand in our garrisons and camps. 
Where access to the camps is possible for persons not belonging 
to the Western Group of Forces, trade in tobacco products and 
alcoholic beverages is forbidden. 
  [Ukolov] How is military trade set up in Russian Army units 
located on the territory of former republics of the USSR? What 
problems are arising there, and how are they being resolved? 
  [Tsarkov] Military trade enterprises have been deployed to 
service military contingents located in the former republics of 
the USSR. Goods are delivered to these regions, as a rule, in a 
centralized manner. Some of them, especially perishables such as 
fruits and vegetables, are acquired locally or obtained from 
reserves of the corresponding CIS countries. 
  A few words in this context. In accordance with a bilateral 
agreement (Russia-Kazakhstan), Baykonur with all its 
infrastructure has been transferred to the jurisdiction of 
Russia. It has a trade directorate with military trade stores 
subordinate to it, which provide trade and consumer services to 
the garrisons. 
  The most critical problems have emerged in Tajikistan and in 
the countries of Transcaucasia. As a result of the unstable 
political situation, the absence of order, and the presence of 
armed groupings, the system of supply and delivery of goods is 
constantly disrupted, and there are instances of robbery and 
attacks... In short, military trade is suffering large losses, 
but the most important thing is that sometimes people suffer 
without goods and food products. 
  [Ukolov] Will traveling trade develop, including mobile post 
exchanges visiting remote garrisons? The same for the system of 
orders--will it expand? 
  [Tsarkov] Traveling trade and visits by mobile post 
exchanges 
to remote and small garrisons, primarily to border guard 
outposts and air defense subunits--all this will continue. 
But...on the condition (after all, this is a market!) that this 
work will not be unprofitable for military trade enterprises. 
  As far as the sale of foodstuffs by orders is concerned, it 
will be expanded, primarily for privileged categories of 
buyers--veterans of war and labor, large families... 
  [Ukolov] What do you think about the development of new, 
progressive forms and methods of military trade? What prospects 
do you see here? 
  [Tsarkov] Unfortunately, recently the pace of development of 
progressive forms and methods of trade has decreased somewhat. I 
consider this a temporary phenomenon. Progressive methods and 
forms of trade in military trade stores will develop and improve 
with stabilization of a market in the country. This primarily 
concerns self-service, sale of goods by sample, and introduction 
of forward commodity movement using containers and equipment. 
  [Ukolov] Much hope is being placed on marketing today. Does 
it apply to military trade? 
  [Tsarkov] The demand of military contingents being serviced 
by military trade is constantly being studied. In parallel, we 
are taking steps to supply the necessary goods and services. In 
conditions of the transition to market relations and their 
stabilization, marketing will develop further, which will make 
it possible to conduct more systematically measures for studying 
the market and to influence consumer demand in a systematic 
manner in order both to speed up trade turnover and increase the 
volume of trade turnover. 
  [Ukolov] In your view, what must be done to put an end to 
the 
cheating in weighing and shortchanging in stores that exists in 
military trade and the rudeness and boorishness of salesmen? 
  [Tsarkov] As in any other system, say, the house-maintenance 
office, militia, or public catering, military trade also has its 
own moral canons, which some people will always want to violate. 
Here it must be said that this is not widespread. We do not 
ignore those same isolated cases that still take place. We also 
are breaking the stereotype among buyers: They say, if there is 
trade, there are all kinds of cheating in weighing, 
shortchanging, and deception. That is not so! Because most of 
our personnel are honest and conscientious workers who take 
pride in their vocation. In short, we are working both with our 
contingent and with purchasers. We are educating people... Yes, 
even if someone can say that this is not entirely our job. 
  [Ukolov] There is much talk concerning the fact that, 
beginning with Moscow, there exists a separate trade service for 
higher authorities. Does this still exist? 
  [Tsarkov] A straightforward question... I will also give you 
a straightforward answer. It does not! 
  [Ukolov] Has the practice of having open military trade 
stores in cities and populated areas proved to be worthwhile? 
After all, the vast majority of purchasers in them are people 
who have nothing to do with the Army. 
  [Tsarkov] There are virtually no stores located on open 
territory and trading in foodstuffs and manufactured goods, more 
precisely, primary necessities in our system. However, we must 
have a base, or more precisely so-called base enterprises, for 
trade and domestic support of remote and small garrisons, where 
the trade network is poorly developed or lacking entirely, by 
the method of traveling trade to service field measures and 
accomplish other tasks. And we have them. They include trade and 
purchasing bases, refrigerators, district and garrison military 
general-purpose stores, military book stores, cafes and 
cafeterias at officer's clubs and hotels, tailor shops, 
barbershops... I do not think I need to say how important this 
network of enterprises is to servicemen, war veterans, 
soldier-internationalists, and military commissariat workers. 
Thus, the circle of people coming to them is expanding 
considerably, which, as we understand it, is not hurting anyone. 
  [Ukolov] What are you personally most concerned about in 
military trade now? 
  [Tsarkov] As was already stated, we are most concerned about 
the problem of providing enterprises in military trade with 
working capital. I will develop this thought somewhat. In 
conditions of the economic reform being conducted, as a result 
of price and rate increases, the change in the procedure for 
forming working capital, crediting and the increase in interest 
rates for credit, and high taxation, military trade enterprises 
have essentially found themselves without working capital. Can 
this situation be corrected using our own profit? Alas... It is 
not so significant. Then what about bank credits? Here, too, 
everything is not the way I would like it to be. Using 
commercial bank credits is not possible due to high interest 
rates and again the shortage of profit at our enterprises to 
repay them. 
  This most critical problem reflects on the development of 
military trade enterprises, worsens trade and consumer support 
for servicemen and their family members, and evokes justified 
complaints. Something must be done... We are striving to use 
more effective forms and methods of selling that promote an 
increase in trade turnover, and we are taking steps toward 
effective specific-purpose use of working capital. Enterprises 
accomplishing advance delivery of foodstuffs and goods into 
areas of the Far North and equivalent areas by decision of the 
government of the Russian Federation also must do their part 
here. They receive preferential credits from the government for 
this. In response, efficiency and obligatoriness must follow. 
  [Ukolov] How do you feel about the directorate personnel you 
"inherited?" Do you plan to make some changes? 
  [Tsarkov] Most in our directorate are highly qualified 
specialists who have much practical experience in working in 
military trade, and I have nothing special against them. One 
thing I will say is that there is not always enough dynamic 
quality or view into the future. But that is in general and on 
the whole. 
  [Ukolov] Viktor Ivanovich, how did you end up in military 
trade, putting it in the words of a well-known song--"willingly 
or unwillingly?" 
  [Tsarkov] Neither. It is the classic pattern--if you as an 
officer are trusted and offered a higher position, you have no 
right to refuse it. And if, moreover, the future work is to your 
liking, you can even consider yourself a lucky person. 
  [Ukolov] A new, higher position involves new concerns and a 
chronic shortage of time. Friends, old comrades, and passions 
are relegated to the background, or...? 
  [Tsarkov] This always happens. A new position requires 
complete devotion of effort and time. Our system is throughout 
Russia, and we must examine everything in the localities in 
order to make the correct decisions. 
  I try not to draw back from friends and comrades. As far as 
passions are concerned, I like books and good music. Both are my 
rest and relaxation. 
  [Ukolov] Tell me, what role does your family play in your 
difficult service today 
  [Tsarkov] There is a well-known expression with profound 
meaning: "A good, strong family is a reliable support." Military 
people sense and value this like no one else. I am no exception, 
because I have precisely such strong support. 
  From the Bibliography: 
  Viktor Ivanovich Tsarkov was born 8 July 1946 to the 
family of a white-collar worker in the city of Karaganda. He is 
Russian. After graduating from secondary school in 1964, he 
entered the Volsk Higher Rear Services Military School, where he 
graduated with honors. He graduated from the engineering 
department of the Military Academy of Rear Services and 
Transportation in 1974. 
  He was regimental chief of clothing service from 1967 
until he entered the academy. Beginning in 1974, he was in the 
Far East Military District in positions of chief of clothing 
service of a large unit, formation, and district. In 1987 he was 
deputy chief of the orders office of the Central Clothing 
Directorate. In 1988 he became chief of the office and then 
deputy chief of this directorate. He has been in his current 
position since September 1992. 
  He was promoted to the rank of major-general in April 
1993. 
  His family includes his wife Galina Nikolayevna, 
daughter Irina, and son Vitaliy. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Armiya", 1993. 

