BFN 

<F P=106> [By Steve Ball] </F>
  [Text] An armed Chinese marine patrol which boarded a 
cargo ship two nautical miles inside Hong Kong territorial 
waters at the weekend planned to hijack it and steal its $1 
million cargo of consumer goods, sources said last night. 
  The attack was thwarted by a Royal Navy patrol which 
identified the Chinese speedboat involved. Security Branch 
officials will decide this morning whether to go through the 
Political Adviser's office to ask mainland authorities to take 
further action. 
  The 200-tonne Chinese-registered Shanwei 039, legally 
carrying 186 air-conditioners and 60 televisions was heading 
from Victoria Harbour to its home port of Shanwei about 120 
kilometres from Hong Kong. It was intercepted by the speedboat 
due east of Sai Kung at around 10.15 pm on Saturday. 
  Four officials in Chinese uniforms and armed with AK-47s 
clambered aboard and ordered the ship's master to change course 
for a Chinese naval base on Dangan Dao, one of the Lema islands 
to the south of Hong Kong. 
  The ship's eight-strong crew had not issued a distress call. 
But Royal Navy patrol craft HMS Peacock on a routine 
anti-smuggling operation in Mirs Bay was tracking the 
speedboat's movements and moved in when it went alongside the 
cargo ship. 
  "The ship's crew were overjoyed to find out the Royal Navy 
had arrived," a source said. 
  "The crew heard the Chinese planning to lock them inside the 
foredeck, take the ship into the base and offload the cargo. 
Then they would take the ship back out to sea and release the 
crew." 
  The mainland officials abandoned the attempt when HMS 
Peacock 
lit up the scene with its searchlights and sent over a fast 
pursuit craft to find out what was going on. 
  A spokesman for the British Garrison said: "There was no 
confrontation. We informed them they were inside Hong Kong 
territorial waters. 
  They returned to their own vessel and headed back to Chinese 
waters." 
  "They were definitely Chinese officials and we are 90 
percent 
certain they were border security guards." He said they were 
wearing green uniforms. 
  Marine Eastern Waters district commander Ian Tyzzer said: "I 
really don't know what they were up to. You can look at the 
facts of the case and be suspicious but I cannot say one way or 
the other." 
  HMS Peacock commanding officer Lieutenant-Commander Sean 
Steeds called in a marine police launch at 10.47 pm to help 
investigate. The police found the cargo ship was operating 
legitimately with a full cargo manifest and a carriage licence 
from Hong Kong Customs and Excise. 
  All vessels under 250 tonnes need a licence before they can 
carry televisions and air-conditioners. 
  The Shanwei 039 was released to carry on its journey, but 
the 
ship's master asked for permission to remain in Hong Kong waters 
overnight and attempt the journey again in daylight. 
  The ship anchored off Tiu Chung Chau and eventually left 
Hong 
Kong early yesterday morning. 
  A British Garrison spokesman said it was not unusual for 
Chinese patrols to use speedboats. 
  "Like our police, they use captured (boats) to catch 
smugglers. It is difficult to tell where the boundary is, there 
is no line marked in the sea, so we can give them the benefit of 
the doubt." 
  But another source said: "That would be a lot of doubt to 
give them. They were two miles inside the boundary, and that is 
a long distance at sea." 
  The previous similar incident reported to police was the 
seizure of the cargo ship Tequila by two speedboats off Waglan 
Island on March 20. The vessel, which was legally carrying 36 
second-hand cars, was eventually found at Zhuhai. 

