Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bonn, Feb 7 (CTK) -- Czech Trade and Industry 
Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said today that the eventual failure of 
Czech-Bavarian talks on the Ingolstadt oil pipeline would affect 
the Czech public's opinion of the German Government as well. 
  "If the talks failed, the German public would have to 
understand that the Czechs would no longer take into 
consideration whether the Bavarian or the German Government had 
direct powers over the oil pipeline issue," Dlouhy said. 
  Meeting with Bernd Schmidbauer from Chancellor Helmut Kohl's 
office who is responsible for the coordination of intelligence 
services' activities and for European affairs, Dlouhy said: "If 
the talks failed and the construction of the oil pipeline did 
not start, the Czech party will consider it as a certain lower 
measure of preparedness of the German party to offer support in 
a matter of such strategic and security importance as the 
construction of an alternative oil pipeline." 
  Construction of the pipeline from the Bavarian town of 
Ingolstadt to Kralupy, central Bohemia, began in the Czech 
Republic in September. Construction of the pipeline in Germany 
was expected to begin this spring. The entire project should be 
completed in 1995, unless it is further derailed in Bavarian 
Parliament. The oil pipeline is to end the Czech Republic's 
dependence on deliveries from Russia, the sole oil supplier to 
date. 
  On a one-day visit to Germany, Dlouhy said it was not yet 
necessary to seek the Bonn government's assistance in the 
Czech-Bavarian talks on financial guarantees for uninsurable 
unpredictable damage. The talks are continuing, Dlouhy said, 
expressing the hope that a compromising solution would soon be 
found by Prague and Munich. 
  Last week, Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said the 
Bavarian Government was not a partner for the Czech Government 
to reach agreement on any guarantees. 
  Dlouhy also informed Schmidbauer about a law banning arms 
exports which is now being prepared in the Czech Republic. 
  He dismissed rumors about possible exports of components for 
nuclear facilities to Iran through the Skoda heavy engineering 
works based in Plzen, west Bohemia. He said that "anything like 
this is a nonsense at the moment." 

