Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<H3>  [Unattributed article: "Moroccan Organization for Human 
Rights Publishes Report on Those Who Died While in Government's 
Custody; More Than 17 Deaths in the Government's Police Stations 
and Dungeons Because of Mistreatment, Torture; Cases Were Not 
Properly Investigated"] </H3>
  [Text] El Yaagoubi Abdeljalil, a citizen, died 
approximately five years ago only two hours after he was 
arrested by police in Ouarzazate. The authorities claimed that 
Abdeljalil's death was merely a "suicide." Many people lost 
their lives, before and after Abdeljalil lost his, while they 
were guests of the government in its police stations and its 
public and secret detention centers. While the bodies of the 
dead were being carried out of the cold prison surroundings and 
taken to their graves for burial, questions about these deaths 
were relegated to oblivion. Even in official circles complaints 
filed by the victims' relatives and by human rights 
organizations fell on deaf ears. Officials paid no attention to 
these complaints just as they paid no attention to respecting 
people's right to life and to the dignity of those citizens who 
died in the government's dungeons. 
  Ever since its establishment in 1988 the Moroccan 
Organization for Human Rights has given maximum attention to 
those deaths that occur in centers that are subordinate to the 
judicial police and local authorities and those that result from 
the use of general force. It has demanded an investigation in 
each one of the many cases in which the victims' families had 
been persuaded to file complaints. The organization filed its 
own complaints and demanded civil rights [for the victims] but 
to no avail. All inquiries directed to the Ministry of Justice, 
in its capacity as the competent government authority that is 
responsible for the office of the attorney general, also went 
unanswered. Out of 17 cases recorded by the organization in 
which death had occurred under suspicious circumstances and the 
involvement of public officials was suspected, only two have 
been turned over to justice. 
  The Moroccan Organization for Human Rights issued a report 
on 
the subject yesterday. The report, which included incidents 
related to the deaths, listed those deaths from 1989 to 1993. 
The organization demanded that the Ministry of Justice tell the 
public what measures were taken by judicial authorities in all 
the cases discussed in the report. It also demanded that a fair 
investigation of those matters be duly held and that every 
official in the judicial police or with security forces be 
turned over to the competent courts if evidence is found against 
him that he was engaged in torture while a prisoner was in his 
custody or that he used unjustified force in the public street. 
The organization demanded that the court award the victims' 
families the compensation that they are entitled to receive. 
  The organization protested against all forms of evading 
punishment that infringe upon the notion of a state of law and 
order. Evading punishment infringes upon Morocco's international 
obligations and violates the protection clause for the 
fundamental rights of individuals. 
  Almost five years ago, on 4 February 1989 to be specific, El 
Yaagoubi Abdeljalil, a citizen, died just two hours after he was 
arrested by the police in Ouarzazate. At first, the death was 
considered a suicide. 
  The Moroccan Organization for Human Rights wrote to the 
Ministry of Justice, demanding an ordinary judicial 
investigation into the matter, and it filed a complaint 
demanding civil justice. The prosecution declared that there 
would be an investigation, but that announcement has had no 
effect to speak of to date. No security official was turned over 
to justice. Unfortunately, that was neither the first such case, 
nor was it the last. 
  Since then the organization has received several complaints 
from the families of citizens who died under identical 
circumstances in police stations, police centers, or in 
locations that are affiliated with local authorities. The press 
also featured other similar cases where death had occurred and 
local authorities, in most cases, had taken no action to respond 
or comment. Those matters that were brought to the 
organization's attention most recently have to do with the death 
of Mustapha Hamzaoui in Khenifra and Abdallah Bentaouet and 
Mounir Azzag in Tangier. 
  All inquiries sent to the Ministry of Justice, as the 
governmental authority that is responsible for the office of the 
attorney general, went unanswered, and none of the cases were 
turned over to justice, except for the 1989 case of Mr. Ben 
Khalifa Abderrahman in Ahwaz Marrakech and the 1991 case of Mr. 
Lamaskam El Hachemi in Casablanca. In those two cases death had 
occurred as a result of the two victims' being subjected to 
violence in the public street by public officials. 
  The authorities have always claimed that these cases were 
suicides and that those who died had hanged themselves. In 
making such a claim the authorities were relying on medical 
testimony or reports prepared mostly by physicians who are not 
forensic physicians and unaccompanied by a sanctioned attendance 
roster. And yet, most of the medical documents that were 
examined by attorneys or by the organization do not always 
categorically rule out that violence or torture was used on the 
victims. Also, the physicians who were charged with performing 
autopsies were not always independent, nor did they observe the 
principles of medical ethics. Furthermore, the suicide story was 
often contradicted by identical evidence that pertained to the 
material circumstances of the case (the method used to commit 
suicide, the characteristics of the building where the detainee 
was being held, and the limited period of time during which the 
person was detained: between a few hours and two days). The 
suicide story was also contradicted by the absence of clear 
motives for suicide. That is why we find that families were 
always rejecting the official story. 
  And yet it seems that most of the cases in which death had 
occurred under suspicious circumstances while a person was in 
custody or was being detained were closed after the office of 
the attorney general conducted what was merely an administrative 
procedure. No judicial investigation was conducted in those 
cases, and even the few that were investigated did not end up in 
court. 
  And yet, Morocco's penal code penalizes acts of violence 
committed by individuals, whoever they might be. And 14 years 
ago, the Moroccan state ratified the international convention on 
civil and political rights that renounces all forms of torture. 
In fact, it was recently, on 21 June 1994, that Morocco signed 
an agreement against torture and other forms of harsh, inhumane, 
or degrading treatment or punishment. 
  The organization had welcomed a review of the criminal 
guidelines that went into effect two years ago. These include 
some mechanisms to protect people from torture during the course 
of an interrogation. It seems that this measure and the 
instructions that accompanied it contributed to a reduction in 
the practice of torture, which, according to the testimony of 
many, occurred quite frequently until the end of 1990. 
  It has been noticed, nevertheless, that some public 
officials 
are still practicing torture. That was established in the courts 
in the cases of those citizens who were arrested in Bouznika 
during the June 1993 parliamentary elections, and it is also 
evident in the cases in which death had occurred in the past two 
years. 
  And yet, security officers do from time to time resort to 
the 
use of general force and physical violence as a way of 
controlling people. This happened in the case of Mr. Lamaskam El 
Hachemi in Casablanca and in the case of Nouaimi Mohamed in 
Rabat. This issue had previously been raised in the 
organization's report that was issued in the wake of the 
distressing events of December 1990. The organization calls 
attention to the fact that the use of general force is subject 
to specific international standards determined by the code of 
conduct for officials who are charged with implementing the laws 
that were approved by the UN General Assembly on 17 December 
1979. This code stipulates specifically that those officials 
cannot resort to the use of force unless it becomes absolutely 
necessary. If force must be used, it is to be used within the 
boundaries that are required for the performance of their duties. 
  The case of Mr. Benmouh who died in the police station in 
Rabat on 30 September 1990 shows that first aid was denied to a 
person who had asthma and who had been arbitrarily arrested 
during a police raid. 
  In December the organization's national office decided to 
issue a report on this matter after noticing that there had been 
no follow-up on 15 of the 17 cases that it had recorded as cases 
in which a public official might have been involved. In 
addition, all the efforts made by the organization to get 
officials to respond to this matter went unanswered. 
  In the meantime, the minister of justice indicated 
specifically in his answer to a question posed by a 
representative about one of the last three cases that, "It is 
inconceivable that people who are supposed to protect lives and 
property turn around and attack lives and property. When 
something like that happens, it behooves the king's deputy to go 
to the location where such an incident took place and conduct an 
investigation that must be thorough and must reveal everything. 
  "Complaints have been filed by the families with the 
investigating magistrate, and investigations into those 
complaints will run their course. It is inconceivable that a 
criminal, regardless of his social status, would go unpunished." 
  In putting in the record the content of this statement, 
which 
differs from the position that was taken by public authorities, 
the national office of the Moroccan Organization for Human 
Rights is demanding [the following]: 
1. 

  1. That the Ministry of Justice announce to the 
public the measures that are being taken by the judicial 
authorities, and specifically, by the competent district 
attorneys, on all the issues raised in this report; 
  2. That a fair judicial investigation be conducted in 
accordance with the law. Since the facts of this case are not 
old, an investigation cannot be impeded by the fact that a 
decision to close the case was made by the office of the 
attorney general; 
  3. That every officer in the judicial police or in the 
security forces against whom there is evidence that he became 
engaged in torturing a prisoner who was in his custody be taken 
to a duly qualified court of law where he may be duly tried in 
accordance with the requirements of the penal code. The same 
would apply to one who used unjustifiable violence in the public 
street. 
  4. That the courts award the victims' families the 
compensation to which they are entitled. 
  The National Office of the Moroccan Organization for Human 
Rights protests all forms of evading punishment that run counter 
to the notion of a law and order state. Evading punishment also 
runs counter to our country's international commitments and 
violates the protection clause for individuals' fundamental 
rights. Proper application of the law against those who engage 
in torture is an unavoidable requirement for the elimination of 
a terrible practice that was too often used during preliminary 
investigations. Torture was even sometimes practiced outside 
those preliminary investigations. The practice of torture is an 
unacceptable violation of a person's right to life, his right to 
be free from bodily harm, and his right to dignity. 
<H5>  A List of Victims from 1989 to 1993 </H5>
  Yaagoubi Abeljalil, in Ouarzazate, 1989; Bouizzat El Kharaz, 
in Boujaad, 1989; Abdessalam El Ouahabi, in Larache, 1989; El 
Arabi El Cherat, Sidi-Slimane, 1989; Abderrahim Ben Khalifah, 
Marrakech, 1989; Belghiti Moulay Ali in Casablanca, 1989; 
Habaysa El Talebi, in Azilal, 1989; Adali Ali, in Ouezzane, 
1990; El Touati Idris, in Er Rachidia, 1991; Lamiskam El 
Hachemi, in Casablanca, 1991; Benmouh Mohamed Benabdelkader, in 
Rabat, 1991; Hadri Hamida, in Taourirt, 1991; El Nouaimi 
Mohamed, in Rabat, 1992; Mustapha El Hamzaoui, in Khenifra, 
1993; Bentaouet Abdallah, in Tangier, 1993; Mounir Azzag, in 
Tangier, 1993. 
  We will try to publish details about the aforementioned 
list. 

