Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 8 Mar (MENA)--The State Security 
Investigation Service [SSIS] has arrested 25 terrorists 
responsible for the recent wave of bomb attacks on banks in 
Cairo and al-Jizah. Revealing the information, an Interior 
Ministry source said that SSIS officers obtained search warrants 
from the Public Prosecution Office and stormed terrorist 
hideouts in Cairo, al-Jizah, Suez, al-Qalyubiyah, and 
al-Sharqiyah. 
  The source said that among those arrested is a man who was 
in 
charge of liaison between the group's [not further specified] 
members at home and abroad. 
  The source added that at the time of his arrest this 
terrorist was in possession of an explosive charge matching 
those used in the recent bombings, dynamite sticks, and foreign 
currency. 
  Among those arrested are 'Irfan Muhammad Hasan al-Khuli, 
sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labor in connection 
with the 19/93 military case involving a shooting in Zinhum area 
in Cairo; Yasir Fathi Muhammad Ahmad Fawwaz, who is wanted by 
the police for involvement in terrorist attacks including one 
against a tourist bus in Asyut; Muhammad Fawzi Muhammad Ibrahim 
al-Sayyid, a leading member of the organization [not further 
specified] in Suez, who is wanted by the police for involvement 
in acts of violence in Suez; and Ahmad 'Abd-al-Fattah Sayyid 
'Uthman, a member of the organization [not further specified] in 
east Cairo. 
  The Higher State Security Prosecution Office is 
interrogating 
the defendants. According to the source, the suspects have 
admitted involvement in the recent wave of bomb attacks against 
several banks in Cairo and al-Jizah. They also admitted 
plotting to assassinate public figures and policemen. 
  The source said suspects' confessions confirmed information 
available to the SSIS that some fugitive terrorist leaders--some 
still in Afghanistan and others who have returned from 
there--are involved in planning, giving assignments, and 
financing the said terrorist moves. These fugitive leaders are: 
  --Tal'at Yasin Muhammad Hammam [aka Tal'at Fu'ad Qasim], a 
fugitive sentenced to death in the case of the Returnees From 
Afghanistan Organization. 
  --Islam Ahmad Muhammad al-Gharmi, a fugitive leader trained 
in Afghanistan to carry out bombings. 
  Husam Muhammad Khamis Nuwayr, a fugitive terrorist leader 
wanted in the case of Dr. Rif'at al-Mahjub's assassination. 
  One of the detainees, the security source added, is a 
fugitive leader sentenced to life imprisonment at hard labor in 
Military Crimes Case 19/93, concerning the shooting in Zinhum 
region. 
  Another detainee is a fugitive in Yemen tasked to receive 
sophisticated training in Afghanistan on remotely-controlled 
bombings. He was sent to Egypt about four months ago to take 
part in planned suicidal operations targeting the motorcade of 
an important figure. 
  The Interior Ministry praised the public's positive 
involvement in confronting and foiling the criminal schemes of 
the terrorists and extremists. 

