Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By P.V. Vivekanand, JORDAN TIMES staff reporter] </F>
  [Text] Amman--A senior Palestine Liberation Organisation 
(PLO) official on Tuesday [29 March] briefed Jordanian officials 
on the status of the PLO's negotiations with Israel on security 
arrangements for Palestinians in the occupied territories 
following the Feb. 25 massacre in Hebron and said afterwards 
there were no differences between Jordan and the organisation. 
  Hakam Bal'awi, the PLO's representative to Tunisia, briefed 
Prime Minister 'Abd al-Salam al-Majali on PLO-Israeli contacts 
and related developments in the Middle East peace process 
following the adoption of U.N. Security Council Resolution 904. 
  While the resolution cleared the way for a possible 
resumption of Middle East peace talks by condemning the Hebron 
massacre and calling for international protection for the 
Palestinian people living under occupation, it also signalled a 
possible shift in the U.S. stand towards Jerusalem. 
  U.S. President Bill Clinton has denied thatthere was any 
such 
shift, and senior Washington officials say that the U.S. refusal 
to endorse the Holy City's status as occupied territory stemmed 
from a desire not to prejudge the outcome of Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations on the future of the occupied lands. 
  Jordan has criticised the PLO over the resolution saying the 
document was mishandled since it opened the door for the U.S. to 
state what could be a precedent-setting position by abstaining 
on the reference to Jerusalem as occupied territory. 
  Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani, one of the officials 
who met on Tuesday with Mr. Bal'awi, who was sent there by 
Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, agreed with Mr. Bal'awi that there was 
no "fundamental rift" with the PLO. 
  "In essence the difference is not a political one because 
what is demanded first and foremost is guaranteeing the Arab 
rights in Jerusalem," Dr. al-'Anani said. 
  Dr. al-'Anani told reporters that Mr. Bal'awi had brought a 
"positive approach" in the sense that he reaffirmed that 
"Jordanian- Palestinian relations are strong and should remain 
strong and should not be negatively affected by a difference 
here or a difference there." 
  Dr. al-'Anani said Jordan's foremost concern in the context 
of Jerusalem was to defend the Arab rights to the Holy City. 
"Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organisation should not 
differ over Jerusalem because we have a right in Jerusalem and 
we should restore them," Dr. al-'Anani said. 
  "Differences in opinion sometimes lead to exaggerated 
political implications if those differences are overread," Dr. 
al-'Anani said, emphasising the need for coordinating Jordanian 
and Palestinian stands towards Jerusalem, "an issue that 
concerns the Arabs, Jordanians, Palestinians, Muslims and 
Christians..." 
  It was clear from Mr. Bal'awi's comments to reporters after 
the meeting that the PLO was anxious to avert any dispute with 
Jordan. Jordanian-PLO differences were "something of the past" 
he said, adding "Jordanians and Palestinians share the same 
objectives and goals and we are working together to achieve 
them." 
  Mr. Bal'awi avoided direct questions on a statement issued 
by 
the PLO early this week criticising Jordan and defending the 
organisation's handling of Resolution 904 at the Security 
Council. 
  Jordan said that it was a midtake to have insisted on 
including a reference to Jerusalem in Resolution 904 after it 
became clear that Washington would abstain from voting on any 
reference to the Holy City as occupied territories. Instead, 
Jordan said, the wording of the resolution could have been 
amended to include a general reference to the territories Israel 
occupied since 1967 without mentioning Jerusalem. 
  Jordan pointed out that for all practical and technical 
purposes Washington always recognised Jerusalem as occupied 
territory and the door would not have been open for the U.S. to 
signal a shift in its stand by abstaining on a specific 
reference to Jerusalem if it was not included in the resolution. 
  But the PLO stand was that every U.N. resolution issued on 
the Middle East since 1967 included a reference to Jerusalem and 
dropping such a reference would have implied an abandoning of 
the Palestinian claim to the city as the capital of their future 
independent state. 
  Mr. Bal'awi indirectly repeated the same position on 
Tuesday, 
"Jerusalem is the capital of the independent state of 
Palestine," he told reporters. "At the same time it is also an 
issue of concern for Arabs, Muslims as well as Christians." 
  The PLO official looked visibly uncomfortable answering 
repeated questions from journalists focusing on the theme of 
Jerusalem and the restoration of holy shrines there. 
  The question of restoring holy shrines in Jerusalem was 
raised when last week's PLO statement specifically referred to 
Saudi Arabia's "contribution to repairing and maintaining" them 
but did not contain any reference to Jordan, which continues to 
be the guardian of the Muslim shrines in the Holy City despite 
its severance of legal and administrative links with the 
occupied territories in 1988. 
  Asked what the PLO's stand was towards the restoration of 
holy sites, Mr. Bal'awi skirted a direct answer and said: "Any 
development of any sites in the occupied territories is not 
different from developing any sites elsewhere in Palestine or in 
Jordan... Karak, Ma'an, Qalqiliya, Gaza or Nabulus..." 
  Answering other questions, Mr. Bal'awi said he briefed the 
Jordanian government on the status of negotiations with Israel 
"following the massacre in Hebron and the adoption of U.N. 
Security Council Resolution 904." 
  He stressed that the talks that the PLO launched with Israel 
after Resolution 904 was adopted were not a continuation of the 
negotiations on self-rule as envisaged in the Sept. 13 
Israel-PLO accord but covered only "security arrangement for the 
Palestinians living under occupation." 
  If these talks produced a satisfactory arrangement, he said, 
the PLO would resume the self-rule negotiations. 

