BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by UNIAN correspondent Volodymyr Teteruk: </F>
"Ukrainian Army Is More Reliable Than Its Economy"] 
  [Text] After the signing of the trilateral declaration by 
the Russian, U.S., and Ukrainian presidents in Moscow in January 
1994, the foreign policy gap between Washington and Kiev has 
been lessened primarily due to Ukraine observing its 
commitments. However aside from compensation for nuclear arms 
removed from our territory -- $175 million -- the United States 
is going to earmark another $10 million for the creation in Kiev 
of an international scientific center that would employ 
scientists who used to work in defense industries. According to 
U.S. experts, Ukraine should receive some $1 billion for the 
weapons-grade uranium extracted from nuclear warheads. 
  However, it is too early to speak of direct economic 
assistance for our state, that is investments, the sponsoring of 
foreign trade, and so on. People from U.S. financial and 
business circles prefer a reserved stance regarding investments 
in the Ukrainian economy. Inflation, the absence of market 
infrastructure and mechanisms to protect investments make 
Ukraine unattractive for businessmen. 
  U.S. experts link economic chaos in Ukraine to the current 
leadership's inability to resolve economic issues. Analyzing 
the results of Ukrainian legislative elections, a correspondent 
of the influential THE NEW YORK TIMES in particular points out: 
"Mr. Kravchuk used to talk about reform a lot, but he did 
nothing to implement it. At the same time, he kept criticizing 
the former legislature for hampering his efforts." Similar 
skeptical remarks about the activities of Leonid Kravchuk and 
his team in the economic sphere, however, are fully compensated 
in the sphere of foreign policy. 
  In the opinion of the West, the Ukrainian head of state 
reaped dividends by signing the tripartite declaration. 
Ukraine's gradual nuclear disarmament and access to the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty is now connected with the name of 
Kravchuk. For the United States, this issue is much more actual 
than problems of the Ukrainian economy. That is why Kravchuk, 
despite his inability to carry out economic reform, has become 
very popular with Americans due to the service he paid to the 
United States. Washington understands perfectly well that under 
the current Ukrainian Administration, economic changes in our 
state will have to wait. That is why there are attempts to limit 
U.S.-Ukrainian relations to those areas that can yield much more 
than risky investment in our economy. One such sphere concerns 
the military, where U.S. interests are being gradually shifted 
from Russia toward Ukraine. The primary reason for this is 
probably official Kiev's consent to disarm, as opposed to the 
ever growing aggressiveness of Moscow's foreign policy and 
attempts to enter the superpowers' club. 
  The United States and NATO are currently concerned over the 
concentration of Russian forces pulled out from Central and East 
Europe along Russia's southern (the northern Caucasian military 
district) and northern (the Leningrad military district) 
borders. Under the provisions of the Treaty on the Reduction of 
Conventional Arms in Europe signed in 1990, Russia is to reduce 
its hardware so that by November 1995, 580 armored vehicles, 700 
tanks, and 1,280 artillery pieces remain in each of these 
districts. 
  According to U.S. analysts, however, Russia is very 
sluggishly reducing its arms and by the deadline in 1995 will 
still have a surplus 2,000 armored vehicles, 400 tanks, and 500 
artillery pieces. Russia's desire to concentrate a large amount 
of hardware along its borders is no secret. During the March 
conference between U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry and 
Russian Army Chief of Staff Mikhail Kolesnikov in Moscow, the 
Russian general directly stated that it is necessary to review 
the quotas of arms stipulated by the treaty. 
  At any rate, until November 1995 Russia has the legal right 
to keep unlimited amounts of arms along its borders, despite 
negative reactions by Turkey, Norway, and other NATO members. 
  In this situation, the United States may display interest in 
Ukraine as a possible "buffer zone" between Russia and East 
Europe. The Partnership for Peace project, to which Ukraine has 
acceded, envisions joint maneuvers and at the same time does not 
bind NATO's hands with commitments. 
  In light of the current realities, future U.S.-Ukrainian 
relations will hardly cross the framework of military 
cooperation. 

