BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yi Hong-ku, deputy prime minister and </F>
minister of the National Unification Board, by Yi Yong-il, 
senior KBS-1 reporter, at the KBS-1 Television studio in Seoul 
on the "Focus of News" program; date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Reporter Yi Yong-il] How are you? As soon as you, 
deputy prime minister, came to office, the North Korean side put 
forward a new card. As you learned from a news report yesterday, 
North Korea abruptly informed our side on 28 April that it will 
unilaterally withdraw from the Military Armistice Commission 
[MAC] at a time in which the North Korean nuclear problem has 
not been resolved. 
  What do you think is North Korea's true intention? 
  [Minister Yi Hong-ku] The North Korean side wanted to shift 
the Armistice Agreement system into a peace agreement system in 
the past and North Korea took a position of doing this through 
negotiations with the United States. 
  However, the North Korean side's declaration of withdrawal 
from the MAC, which implements the Armistice Agreement, is, 
first of all, an extremely irresponsible act. This goes counter 
to the Armistice Agreement itself. The agreement stipulates that 
one side should not withdraw from it unilaterally. 
  Secondly, Article 5 of the North-South agreement also 
stipulates that when one side wants to change this system, one 
should go through consultations and reach an agreement between 
the North and the South. Thus, the North Korean act goes counter 
to this spirit. Moreover, the MAC has the responsibility for 
managing an unexpected situation, or any accident which may take 
place in areas near the tension-filled armistice line. 
Therefore, removing such a management system is unjust. 
  The nuclear problem has entered into a very important stage. 
At this very important time, North Korea put forward a new issue 
which evades the focal point of the nuclear problem. This is not 
desirable at all. Therefore, I hope that the North Korean side 
will rectify this. 
  [Reorter Yi] My understanding of what you are saying is that 
the North Korean demand for replacing the Armistice Agreement 
with a peace agreement between North Korea and the United States 
is an offensive act that is linked with a political aim. Do you 
think that a peace agreement as North Korea demands is possible? 
  [Minister Yi] This agreement would be possible only when the 
prospect is clearly seen for the resolution of the present 
impending questions. Among these questions, the nuclear problem 
is the most important. Next, the basic North-South agreement, as 
I mentioned earlier, stipulates in its Article 5 that issues 
related to the Armistice Agreement should be resolved through 
inter-Korean concurrence. Thus, the peace agreement can only be 
discussed as part of the peace structure after we go through all 
of these procedures. The act of abruptly putting forward this 
issue at a time when the nuclear issue came to an important 
turning point will only cause confusion. This being the case, 
our position is that we absolutely cannot accept the North 
Korean assertion. 
  [Reporter Yi] Our government and international community 
made 
great efforts to resolve the North Korean nuclear problem ever 
since North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty [NPT]. However, there has been no remarkable progress. 
Besides, the issues pertaining to the witnessing of the 
replacement of the fuel rods at the five-megawatt atomic reactor 
and to the additional nuclear inspection have not been resolved. 
What is your view on the nuclear problem? 
  [Minister Yi] The nuclear problem, particularly the issue of 
fuel rods, are presently at a very important turning point. 
Various messages have been exchanged between the United States 
and North Korea, and all international communities, including 
the International Atomic Energy Agency, direct great attention 
to this issue. What is particularly noteworthy is that the 
world's public opinion toward the North Korean nuclear problem 
is unanimous and reached an agreement, urging North Korea to 
respect and follow the opinion of the international community. 
This opinion will be enhanced as the day passes by. As a result, 
the North Korean choice may become even more difficult. 
(more) 031246 yy/ramirez/KYY29045.01/dr610405.07/hc 04/0603z May 
BT 
#0094 
NNNN 
UNCLAS 4D 
PASS: COPY TO GIG TND, GIG TAC 
REF: SK0405060394 seoul kbs-1 television korean 031246///even 
  more difficult. 

