Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In Barcelona, President Carlos Menem yesterday 
blamed "Marxists, ultraleftists, and All for the Fatherland 
[MTP] activists" for having caused the violent incidents in 
Plaza de Mayo on 2 March. 
  In remarks to Radio Mitre, Menem said: "They are cowards and 
scoundrels, who do not know how to behave themselves under a 
democracy. It is not worth bothering with these criminals." 
  In the afternoon of 2 March a group of people joining a 
retirees' march stoned the government house. Afterwards the 
police responded, and various people who had not thrown any 
stones were also involved in the repression. 
  The president again discussed this issue at the end of a 
reception hosted by Barcelona Mayor Pascual Maragall. A large 
group of Argentines living in the Catalan city participated in 
the reception. Menem stressed: "The square was full of red 
flags." 
  Asked how he received this information, Menem responded: "I 
received it from Buenos Aires." 
  Even before he arrived at the Barcelona (municipal) city 
hall, the president disclosed that he "had reports" that "groups 
interested" in disrupting public order were involved in the 
Plaza de Mayo incidents. He enumerated them: "Leaders, [Grand 
Front Deputy Carlos] "Chacho" Alvarez, [Radical Civic Union 
Senator] (Fernando) de la Rua, the MTP, the Workers Party..." 
  In Buenos Aires, however, Interior Minister Carlos Ruckauf 
preferred to wait for the courts to decide. He said: "After 
all I have suffered, I do not want to imitate McCarthy." 
Ruckauf added: "I will not single out anyone politically until 
a judge hands down the appropriate ruling and it becomes known 
who, according to the courts, is guilty and who is innocent." 
  Radical Civic Union [UCR] President Raul Alfonsin could not 
restrain his annoyance over what he described a 
"disproportionate police action." 
  The former president also expressed his solidarity with the 
retirees. In his opinion, the 100th retirees' march became "a 
protest demonstration by all the sectors that are enduring the 
callousness of an economic policy that does not take the people 
into account." 
  Senator Fernando de la Rua, his opponent in the UCR 
primaries, was not as critical. De la Rua told journalist 
Bernardo Neustadt: "A group of activists who caused the disorder 
appeared, and then came the police repression." De la Rua made 
it clear that he did not participate in the retirees' march. 
  For his part, Raul Galvan, the UCR bloc leader in the 
Chamber 
of Deputies, announced that his party would ask for the interior 
minister's interpellation "to explain why the police made 
indiscriminate repressions." 
  Speaking for the center-left, [Grand Front] Deputy Graciela 
Fernandez Meijide stressed: "Those who stoned the police must 
be criticized, condemned, and repudiated. I believe these 
people were not supporting the retirees." Nevertheless, the 
Grand Front legislator said: "The police, who brutally beat the 
people, must also be repudiated." 

