BFN 

<F P=106> [Joerg Bischof article: "Like a Fish in Water"] </F>
  [Text] In mid-February this year it happened again: Five 
noncommissioned officer cadets died and 26 soldiers of the 
Turkish Army were injured, some of them seriously, when a bomb 
exploded at the railroad station of the Istanbul suburb of 
Tuzla. It was hidden in a trash can and the timer was set for 
0910 local time . This was precisely that time when every 
Saturday hundreds of soldiers wait on the platform to go away 
for the weekend. 
  The left-wing extremist "Partya Karkeren Kurdistan" [Workers 
Party of Kurdistan] (PKK) claimed responsibility for the attack, 
which tore off the arms and legs of many victims. And it did 
not shy away from having its KURD-A information service, which 
operates from Germany, announce to Turkish newspapers and news 
magazines by telefax that a "revenge team" of the PKK's military 
arm will carry out further attacks on Turkish towns and vacation 
resorts on the Turkish Adriatic. This showed the security 
authorities that the PKK organization is still intact, even 
though it has meanwhile been banned in Germany, too. 
  In Turkey the PKK has been on the list of banned extremist 
organizations for years. On 26 November last year, after a 
difficult decisionmaking process, FRG Interior Minister Manfred 
Kanther came round to formally classifying the PKK in Germany as 
a terrorist group and banning it and 35 cover organizations, 
including Kurdish "cultural and friendship association," a PKK 
publishing company, and the KURD-A press agency, which is still 
active despite the ban. The security authorities expect the 
other cover organizations, at best, to scale down their public 
activities. Underground, however, the PKK will probably continue 
to be active. Its assets had probably already been removed when 
the police enforced the ban in a raid on 26 November. 
<H5>  Hardly to Be Determined </H5>
  The decision was probably not easy for Kanther, because the 
PKK organization in Germany can hardly be determined exactly by 
security authorities. Even though last year several acts of 
violence against Turkish consulates, banks, and airlines in 
Mainz, Darmstadt, Hanover, and Munich, which were planned to the 
minute, showed that the PKK, which was founded in 1978 and is 
controlled by General Secretary Abdullah Ocalan from Syria, is 
able to "mobilize" its estimated 5,000 activists in Germany 
practically any time. It showed that most recently on 4 
November 1993 with a well planned series of attacks, which 
affected not only Germany but also other countries in Europe. 
Nevertheless, the security authorities have so far been 
restrained regarding countermeasures, because the PKK is 
swimming "like a fish in the water," as Mao Zedong's famous 
saying goes, of the total of 15 Kurdish liberation movements and 
skillfully exploits for its own purposes the sympathetic 
feelings of the German people for Kurdistan's freedom struggle. 
  When Kanther finally used the club of an official ban 
against 
the PKK, it was probably not so much for reasons of security 
policy as foreign policy. For years Ankara had been urging the 
government in Bonn to dry up the PKK's field of action in 
Germany and to officially stress the difference between the 
terrorist organization and the legal liberation movements in 
Kurdistan. It was Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, who was the 
essential influence in the cabinet. He primarily wants to 
cultivate good relations with Ankara, because Turkey plays an 
important role for Bonn, as Germany's traditional friend, as a 
"bridge" to the Turkish peoples in the south of the former 
Soviet Union, and as the only Islamic power in NATO. 
<H5>  For Socialism </H5>
  German security authorities classify the PKK as a 
Marxist-Leninist organization, which uses its military arm, the 
"People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan" (ARGK), formerly 
"Liberation Unit of Kurdistan" (HRK), to bring about a socialist 
Kurdistan and thus the separation from Turkey, Syria, Iran, and 
Iraq. Other, moderate Kurdish groups, which mainly come from 
the Kurdish areas of Iran and Iraq, on the other hand, content 
themselves with the demand for more autonomy of their 
compatriots within these states. In Germany the PKK operated 
several subgroups until it was banned, e.g. the propaganda 
organization "National Liberation Front of Kurdistan" (ERNK) or 
the cultural organization "Association of Patriotic Artists of 
Kurdistan" (HUNERKOM), which can hardly be distinguished from 
the moderate Kurdish "cultural associations." 
  Constitutional Protection classifies it as the "for years 
most active and most militant association" among the 15 leftist 
Kurdish groups in Germany. In particular it pursues a tough 
struggle, also on German soil, against its rivals from the 
moderate wing of the Kurdish freedom movement, such as 
"Devrimici Isci." In 1990 police found the corpse of former PKK 
member Abdulla Hosgoren in a plastic bag. He had been executed 
as a "traitor" six years before because he reportedly worked for 
"Devrimici Isci" and prevented revenge murders. Previously, PKK 
General Secretary Abdullah Ocalan had made it known via the 
"Kurdistan Report" how the PKK deals with defectors: "We will 
put them on the operating table and save what can be saved; 
those who do not survive this procedure will be left to 
liquidation." 
  The PKK is extremely skillful with its strategy. Protest 
actions intended to draw the German people's attention to the 
Kurdish problem, have generally been peaceful. Women and 
children were used. In contrast, the terrorist organization has 
not shied away from open violence when it acted against Turkish 
authorities and institutions in Germany. 
<H5>  Strong Influx </H5>
  One of the reasons for the ban was the strong influx of 
followers the PKK had experienced in Germany over the past 
years. Up to 25,000 Kurds participated in an "International 
Kurdistan Festival" of the PKK cultural organization in Bochum 
in 1992. A little later, 12,000 persons marched "against 
treason" in Frankfurt/Main. When, at the end of 1992, it 
advertised elections for a "Kurdish National Parliament in 
Europe" the PKK was warned because of activities that are 
impermissible under the Aliens' Law. Increasingly frequently 
cases have come to light in which PKK activists extorted money 
for the liberation struggle from Kurds in Germany. 

