Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Yearender" by the China International Studies Center: </F>
"Review of International Situation in 1993 and Future Prospects"] 
  [Text] The year 1993 was the second after the 
disintegration of the bipolar structure. Taking the whole 
situation into account, the international situation has tended 
to ease; economic factors are playing a more prominent part in 
international relations while a relative decline has been 
registered in the roles of military factors; regional conflicts 
in a number of "hot spots," which have been in existence for 
years, are achieving political solutions; and there are better 
prospects for bringing about world peace which has been sought 
for a considerable length of time. However, the world is 
not yet a peaceful one. Local armed conflicts have never ceased 
and new "hot spots" keep multiplying. The crisis in Russia is 
continuing. The end of the Cold War in particular, has further 
exposed contradictions among Western countries, which are 
currently plagued by deteriorating economic difficulties and a 
turbulent political and social situation. By contrast, Asia is 
rising and is enjoying an enhanced status and role in the world. 
The world's multipolarity trend has become more clear. 
International relations, as well as the internal and external 
strategies of major countries, are now going through 
comprehensive changes and readjustments. 
  Major Western countries are still trapped in the longest 
economic recession since World War II. Though its economy began 
to recover in 1993, the United States still finds it hard to 
resume the vigor of the old days. Germany is still struggling 
in vain to extricate itself from its current difficult position. 
This year, the European Community saw a negative growth in its 
economy and Japan is still at the low ebb of an economic 
depression. The economic recession currently plaguing the West 
is both periodical and structural and cannot be separated from 
the present difficult situation in their military industries in 
the wake of the end of the Cold War. Because of the conclusion 
of the Cold War, contradictions among major Western countries 
begin to sharpen, the public are more resentful of the 
traditional political forces, and many long-lasting ruling 
political parties have stepped down, one after another. At 
present, all major Western countries are readjusting their 
policies and placing their focus on the settlement of internal 
problems, coupled with an effort to rejuvenate their economy and 
facilitate social reform; yet they are encountering numerous 
problems. It is estimated that the economic situation in 
the West will not take a turn for the better until the latter 
half of the 1990's and they will have to wait till the end of 
this century and the beginning of the next before they are able 
to enter a period of new development. 
  Profound changes are taking place in the relations among 
Western countries. In the wake of the Cold War, their common 
enemy has disappeared, the unifying force has been weakened, and 
former allies are gradually becoming competitive rivals. 
Due to a deep-rooted reliance among the three, the United 
States, Europe, and Japan will continue to base their relations 
on coordination for a long time to come yet, at the same time, 
economic frictions and conflicts among the three are becoming 
more acute with each passing day, and their fight for dominant 
power in international and regional affairs will escalate. 
The dominating position of the United States is now under grave 
challenge. 
  Taking advantage of its position as the world's only 
superpower, the United States is trying its utmost to act as the 
"leader" of the world and of all regions; however, its strength 
has been relatively weakened and its "new interventionism" has 
been subject to constant setbacks. All these have served to 
show its difficult position of not having the ability equal to 
its ambition. At present, the United States has stepped up its 
efforts to readjust its internal and external policies. 
  Regional conflicts and local wars in 1993 gave rise to two 
trends. Breakthroughs have been made in seeking political 
solutions to problems in "hot spots" which have been in 
existence for many years. The Cambodia issue has achieved a 
basic solution. The peace treaty signed between Palestine and 
Israel marks a new beginning in seeking a peaceful solution to 
the Middle East issue which has lasted for nearly half a 
century. The day to terminate the rule of the white as well as 
the apartheid system in South Africa is on its way. On the 
other hand, however, wars are continuing in some new "hot spots" 
and the situation in a number of old "hot spots" is taking a 
turn for the worse. It is true that regional conflicts 
spreading in former Yugoslavia, specially in the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and parts of former Soviet Union, are 
attributable to national, religious, and territorial factors; 
yet the intervention of big countries in their fight for 
dominant power and spheres of influence have also made the 
problem more complicated and more difficult to solve. The 
frustrated military intervention of the United States in Somalia 
as well as the puzzlement of large Western countries over the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina issue have all showed clearly that sanctions 
and armed interventions are not solutions to such conflicts. 
Both positive and negative experience in solving regional 
conflicts have urged relevant big countries and the United 
Nations to readjust their policies step by step. In 
future, major Western countries will take their choice when 
making military interventions to stop regional conflicts and the 
United Nations has no alternative but to act according to its 
capability. 
  In 1993, Russia experienced a severe political turbulence 
while its economy was in crisis. The October incident put an 
end to the confrontation between the government and the 
parliament and now the country is enjoying a temporary 
stability. The future development of the Russian situation 
depends on what the government is going to do to end the current 
economic crisis, in which direction the new parliament intends 
to move, and in what way the central authorities are going to 
share power with local governments. Whilst seeking continued 
cooperation with the West, Russia is trying to strengthen its 
position in the CIS and to maintain its influence over Eastern 
Europe. Russia's intention to maintain its position as a big 
country is shown more clearly in its foreign policies. In 
recent years, Russia and the West have been divergent on more 
and more issues. 
  The most noticeable change in the international 
situation in 1993 is the rise of Asia. Asia's high-speed 
economic growth and relatively stable political and social 
situation have apparently enhanced its status and role in the 
international community. Asia has become a significant 
force in pushing forward the world's economic development and in 
safeguarding world peace. 
  In recent years, considerable growth has been registered in 
investment and trade among the countries of the Asian-Pacific 
Region and a multilevel regional and subregional economic 
cooperation structure is gradually taking shape, featuring 
openness and diversification. The convocation of the informal 
meeting for leaders of the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Organization has further boosted the economic cooperation of the 
region. As regards the multilateral dialogue on Asian-Pacific 
security, the regional security forum advocated by ASEAN has 
been accepted by the countries concerned and this will also help 
check the spread of factors leading to instability in the 
Asia-Pacific situation. 
  Facing the rise of Asia, especially China's enhanced 
international status and influence, many countries in the world 
have attached greater importance to promoting ties with Asian 
countries and with China in particular. Major Western countries 
have also given added weight to Asia in their foreign policies. 
Asia is becoming a new arena for their competitiveness. 
The United States has stressed that it will lay particular 
emphasis on Asia in its future development strategy, advocating 
the idea of establishing a "new Pacific commonwealth." Japan 
relies more and more on Asia and discussions on "leaving the 
United States and returning to Asia" can be heard in the 
country. A number of Western European countries, such as 
Germany, have drawn up new policies toward Asia. On the other 
hand, certain forces in Western countries are still trying their 
best to prevent China from becoming strong and rich but they 
will find it hard to succeed under the present situation. 
  The formal meeting of Chinese and American state leaders in 
Seattle has been followed by all sides with close interest. 
This meeting gives people a message that both China and the 
United States are willing to set their eyes on the future and to 
improve Sino-U.S. relations on the basis of a broader vision. 
With the concerted efforts of both sides, a new beginning may 
emerge in the relations between the two countries. The 
normalization of Sino-U.S. relations is beneficial to both 
countries and will also exert a significant influence on 
strengthening the cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region and on 
safeguarding world peace. 
  In the wake of the end of the Cold War, certain major 
Western 
countries have stepped up pressure on and interference in the 
affairs of developing countries. The exchanges of unequal 
value, as well as trade and technology protectionism, pursued by 
Western countries have added to the economic difficulties of 
developing countries, resulting in a widened the gap between the 
South and the North. At the same time, however, developing 
countries in Eastern Asia are enjoying high-speed economic 
growth and have become the motive force of the world's economic 
and trade development. Because advanced countries and 
developing countries are becoming more dependent on each other 
economically, and also because the markets in advanced countries 
have become relatively saturated, more and more Western 
countries are tending to open up the markets of developing 
countries. 
  The year 1993 has also witnessed the further growth of 
regional cooperative organizations among developing countries in 
Asia, Latin America, and Africa. The Third World has made new 
headway in safeguarding independence, opposing power politics, 
and in striving to set up a new political and economic world 
order. At the 1993 World Human Rights Conference, developing 
countries in Asia stood in the forefront of a struggle against 
certain Western countries which use the human rights issue as a 
pretext for interference in the internal affairs of other 
countries. The "Bangkok Proclamation" adopted by Asian 
countries as well as the "Kuala Lumpur Human Rights Declaration" 
adopted by the parliaments of all ASEAN countries, have all 
given expression to the independent stand of developing 
countries on the human rights issue. Facts clearly show that in 
today's world, the Third World continues to present a 
significant force not to be ignored. 
  In 1993, the trend of international economic regionalization 
enjoys a continued growth. The approval of the Maastricht 
Treaty shows that European integration will advance on a 
tortuous road; the North American Free Trade Zone will take 
effect in 1994; and the Asian-Pacific economic cooperation is 
being further strengthened. Meanwhile, the Uruguay Round of the 
GATT talks, which had lasted for seven years, finally reached a 
package agreement on 12 December. All this serves to show that 
although it may amplify trade protectionism and international 
economic competition, the trend of international economic 
regionalization will be restricted by the global development of 
the world's economy. From a long-term point of view, the 
multicentered development trend of the world economy will 
continue to grow in the future. The trials of strength and the 
growth and decline of the relative strength of different regions 
will produce a farreaching influence on the future development 
of the world situation. 
  Looking forward to 1994 in prospect, the Western economy 
will 
recover slowly; Europe and its neighboring regions will continue 
to be troubled by turbulence; and Asia will enjoy a relatively 
stable situation with its economy maintaining rapid growth. 
Different social systems, development patterns, and cultural 
formations will draw on the experience of each other and measure 
their strength through diversified competitions. Hegemonism and 
power politics will continue to the major obstacles of the 
world's peace and development, yet the old international order 
will be faced with more and more challenges. 

