Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Munich ARD Television Network at 1930 
GMT on 20 January on its ``Monitor'' program, moderated by Klaus 
Bednarz, carries a 10-minute report by Jo Angerer and Mathias 
Werth on the Federal Intelligence Service, BND, in 
Munich-Pullach plans to extend its activities to industrial 
espionage. 
  Asked about the BND's future tasks, Bernd Schmidbauer, 
intelligence coordinator in the Federal Interior Ministry, says 
it will deal with the problems of "drugs, money laundering, 
terrorism, and problems related to proliferation, meaning the 
export of instruments and machinery for the production of 
weapons of mass destruction, which, in view of the changed 
world, is one of the important central points." 
  Asked whether the new tasks include dealing with the large 
area of industrial espionage, Schmidbauer says: "It does, as 
far as prevention is concerned; it does not, as far as active 
industrial espionage is concerned. The FRG does not pursue 
industrial espionage with its intelligence services." 
  The video shows a "confidential BND document" that says "the 
opposite." It reveals that "Department I, the most important 
BND department, which is responsible for active espionage, is 
being restructured. The author of the paper is Volker Foertsch, 
head of Department I and a confidant of Minister in the 
Chancellor's Office Schmidbauer. This document not only deals 
with proliferation, organized crime, and international drug 
trafficking. Among other things, the BND work will in the 
future be focused on Comp Int, or competitive intelligence -- in 
other words, industrial espionage." 
  Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, an "intelligence expert," says "the 
creation of such a section in BND Department I means agents from 
Pullach will in the future steal foreign companies' internal 
secrets to make them available to German firms for competitive 
advantages. The BND pursued such activities in the past in 
exceptional cases, but is obviously planning to do so 
systematically." 
  According to ``Monitor'', the BND is prohibited by law from 
carrying out industrial espionage abroad. "But this is 
precisely what the service is planning to do," says the 
correspondent. "What the BND means by competitive intelligence, 
or industrial espionage, is described in an internal working 
paper, which demonstrates by a U.S. example what -- as it says 
verbatim -- competitive intelligence as such means." 
  The video shows a document that deals with the way a U.S. 
firm obtains information from the U.S. NSA on the planned 
introduction of a new microchip generation by a foreign producer. 
  The BND "cooperates closely with German industry, and, in 
addition to the Federal Government and federal authorities, 
German firms are among its consumers." Schmidbauer denies this: 
"This has never been the case, and it will not be the case in 
the future. Of course, certain information is passed on to 
private institutions by the responsible authorities if such 
institutions are concerned. This is not the rule, however, but 
the exception." 
  The video shows an internal BND document "for official use 
only." Apart from government authorities and NATO, "we also find 
industry as a consumer of BND information." 
  Schmidbauer says he does "not know this document. I repeat, 
this would be an activity that would be incompatible with the 
legal bases of the Federal Intelligence Service. If such 
information really exists, we must examine it and, if necessary, 
submit it to the Parliamentary Control Commission." 
  According to these documents, the "BND passes on secret 
information to German industry, and intends in the future to spy 
on foreign firms as well -- illegally, but in the world trade 
war, one does not hesitate to use dirty tricks in this country, 
too," the ``Monitor'' report concludes. 

