BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporters] </F>
  [Text] Top executives of the Ming Pao newspaper will 
tonight begin a 72-hour hunger strike outside Xinhua's offices 
as part of last-ditch efforts to persuade Beijing to free their 
jailed reporter Xi Yang. 
  Exasperated by the harsh 12-year sentence handed to Xi on 
charges of "spying and stealing state secrets", the newspaper 
was considering seeking the Hong Kong Government's assistance in 
pressuring Chinese authorities. 
  Separately, local politicians and Beijing's key advisers in 
Hong Kong have stepped up their pleas for leniency towards Xi, 
38, as well as pressing for a detailed account of the verdict in 
his case. 
  The Legislative Council [Legco] will hold an emergency 
meeting tomorrow afternoon to gauge the impact of the case on 
the territory, particularly the press. 
  Representatives of five major newspapers and journalists' 
bodies will take part. 
  Yesterday morning, top editorial executives of Ming Pao led 
about 50 staff in a march on the Xinhua (New China News Agency) 
office protesting against Xi's sentence. 
  Three senior executives -- C.C. Tung, chief editor, Cheung 
Kin- bor, executive chief editor, and Simon Fung Shing-cheung, 
deputy executive chief editor -- will kick off the 72-hour 
hunger strike tonight. 
  Staff members will stage a sit-in every Saturday for the 
next 
two months. 
  Five Hong Kong members of the New York-based Chinese 
Liberal- 
Democratic Party have already started a 48-hour hunger strike in 
support of Xi. 
  Mr Cheung, who led the Ming Pao rally, refused to admit the 
newspaper had adopted the wrong approach in the past. 
  "In the past, we thought it was only a matter between Ming 
Pao employers and the Chinese Government. 
  "We didn't want to see the issue being politicised in the 
tense atmosphere of the Sino-British row," said Mr Cheung. 
  "But now the 12-year sentence has told us the method we 
tried 
in the past was useless." 
  Speaking at the Legco policy panel meeting, chairman and 
former journalist Emily Lau Wai-hing expressed concern over the 
possible dangers of reporting in China. 
  "We would like to know how the journalists have been 
affected 
and how the media employers are going to protect their 
reporters," she said. 
  "The incident has already alarmed the whole industry, 
society 
and even Hong Kong people to a very large extent," Daisy Li 
Yuet-wah, the chairman of Hong Kong Journalists' Association 
(HKJA), said at the Legco meeting. 
  The HKJA has asked for a meeting with Xinhua director Zhou 
Nan to convey the journalists' concern about Xi's fate. 
  It has also written a letter to all local deputies of the 
National People's Congress (NPC) and Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference to call for their help in pressing for a 
fuller account of Xi's case from Beijing. 
  But a vice-director of Xinhua, Zhu Yucheng, rejected 
suggestions made by a group of six Hong Kong Affairs Advisers 
that Xi might have violated China's law by mistake. 
  Xi should have known beforehand that he had infringed the 
Chinese law of "stealing state secrets", Mr Zhu was quoted by 
Tsang Yok-sing as saying. 
  The Xinhua official however, admitted that he had little 
knowledge of the case. 
  Mr Zhu insisted that Xi's case was an individual one which 
should not be related to normal news-gathering in China, and 
would thus not affect Hong Kong reporters working there. 
  Another Hong Kong Affairs Adviser, Ng Hongmun, said he had 
started drafting a letter to the Supreme People's Procuratorate 
to get hold of the facts of Xi's case. 
  "I will also ask the procuratorate to supervise the court 
proceedings of Xi's appeal because they have this right under 
the law," said Mr Ng, also a local NPC delegate. 
  Another Adviser, Mr Vincent Lo Hong-sui, who led a 
delegation 
of the Business and Professional Federation to visit Beijing 
yesterday, said he would try to find out more on Xi's conviction 
when meeting officials there. 
  He told reporters at Kai Tak the sentence handed down on Xi 
"looked very severe". 
  The United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK) said they would ask 
all legislators to jointly sign a letter to ask the Chinese 
Government to immediately release Xi. 
  The party would also hold an eight-hour sit-in outside 
Xinhua 
headquarters on Saturday. 
  Party chairman Martin Lee Chu-ming said they had been 
advised 
earlier by Ming Pao to adopt a low profile. 
  "Unfortunately, this results in a 12-year imprisonment," he 
said. 
  He said the UDHK would make a strong protest to the Chinese 
Government as the trial posed a threat to Hong Kong press 
freedom. 
  "The law is vague and the offence is never made known. 
  "We don't even know when exactly the trial took place," he 
said Mr Lee added that the material released by Xi was not 
considered to be a sensitive state secret. 
  "Anyone in a similar position would have done the same 
thing," he said. 
  "And any publisher would have taken that as a scoop and 
would 
have been very happy to publish it." 
  In a letter to Chinese Minister of Justice, Xiao Yang, the 
Brussels-based International Federation of Journalists strongly 
protested against Xi's sentence and demanded it be reviewed. 

