BFN 

<F P=106> [Article from the "New Talk" column: "China Still Wishes To </F>
See Peace and Stability on the Korean Peninsula"] 
  [Text] U.S. President Clinton, who plans to leave for 
Normandy in France the day after tomorrow to attend ceremonies 
marking the 50th anniversary of D-Day, announced yesterday in 
Rome that he will urge the UN Security Council to impose 
sanctions on Korea. On the day of the ceremonies in Normandy, 
the UN Security Council will deliberate the issue and vote on a 
decision. This fully shows that, although approximately 50 
years have elapsed since the war and despite the end of the Cold 
War, conflicts still exist in the world, which is by no means 
tranquil. 
  In his remarks in Rome, Clinton said that he had a 
conversation with ROK President Kim Yong-sam, who is in Moscow, 
and they had reached an agreement, which he said had the support 
of Russia and China as well. We must still wait for the changes 
in the situation next week to see whether this is true. 
  Officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
[IAEA], 
who arrived in Pyongyang to examine the nuclear fuel rods 
replaced by Korea, said that, after their arrival in Pyongyang, 
Korea did not stop withdrawing the fuel rods, and, therefore, 
they could not verify whether nuclear material had been 
transferred for other military purposes or even for making 
A-bomb. Following their return to the Vienna headquarters, they 
sent Director-General Blix to New York to report the latest 
developments in Korea's nuclear crisis to the UN Security 
Council. After listening to his account, the UN Security 
Council will have to decide on countermeasures. The sanctions 
Clinton mentioned in his remarks in Rome yesterday constitute 
one of these measures. 
  The latest news shows that there is still room for maneuver, 
however. A Korean official said that the fuel rods which were 
removed from the reactor can still be traced and examined, 
because Korean engineers have used a storage method which 
permits reexamination. Korean Ambassador to Vienna Kim 
Kwang-sop also proposed that the IAEA hold a new round of talks 
to break the deadlock. 
  During his visit to Moscow and his meeting with Russian 
President Yeltsin, ROK President Kim Yong-sam discovered that 
Yeltsin's remarks gave consideration to the position of both 
parties. At first, Russia's position was to suspend weapons 
shipments to Korea if necessary. However, Russia also opposed 
imposing UN Security Council sanctions on Korea. This does not 
seem to be fully in line with Clinton's estimates. 
  As for China's attitude, the speech made by Li Daoyu, the 
PRC 
representative to the UN Security Council, and the Chinese 
Foreign Ministry spokesman's reply to reporters both emphasized 
China's opposition to using drastic means and its hope that the 
issue could be resolved through dialogue. 
  Analyses in the U.S. media believe that, while extending 
China's most-favored-nation trading status, in addition to 
economic and trade concerns, President Clinton also took into 
account the U.S. comprehensive ties with Asia, which includes 
improving U.S. ties with Korea through China. In handling the 
Korean issue, the United States must consider the China factor. 
  Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan, currently in 
Seoul, held talks with Deputy Prime Minister Yi Hong-ku and Vice 
Foreign Minister Pak Kon-u and exchanged views on the nuclear 
issue in the Korean peninsula. Both sides reached an agreement: 
In handling the issue, first, peace and stability must be 
maintained on the peninsula; and, second, efforts should be made 
to denuclearize the peninsula. This is China's consistent 
principle, and it will probably be expressed at the Security 
Council's deliberations next week. 

