Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Andrey Varlamov] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo December 10 TASS-- Russia offered Japan 
cooperation in liquidating radioactive waste of the Pacific 
Fleet and in building a storage for fissile nuclear materials 
released as a result of disarmament. Documents to this effect 
were submitted on Thursday to the Japanese Government during 
two-day consultations in Tokyo. The Russian side was 
represented at the consultations by a delegation led by 
academician Nikolay Laverov, vice-president of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences. 
  When discussing possible disposal of liquid low-active waste 
produced by nuclear-powered submarines of the Pacific Fleet, the 
Russian delegation, which included representatives of the Navy, 
suggested calculating how much it will cost to stop dumping 
these wastes into the world ocean and to build facilities for 
their complete recycling. Another proposal provides for the 
construction not far from the Siberian city of Tomsk of a 
storage for uranium and plutonium released in the process of 
dismantling nuclear warheads. 
  Commenting on the Russian projects in an interview with 
TASS, 
Nikolay Yegorov, a member of the delegation and Russian deputy 
minister for nuclear power engineering, stressed that in this 
manner the Russian side displayed an initiative to promote 
implementation of the agreements reached, specifically, during 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin's visit to Tokyo this October. 
Yegorov noted that Japan's participation in both projects would 
not cost it more than 6 mln dollars out of the 100 mln dollars 
of the earlier announced financial assistance to the former 
Soviet Union's nuclear disarmament. In any case, Moscow is 
ready to shoulder the lion's share of expenses. 
  The Japanese side, represented at the meeting by experts of 
the Foreign Ministry, scientific and technical department and 
the Ministry for Foreign Trade and Industry, showed a great 
interest not only in Russia's proposals, but in the very 
possibility of exchange of opinions between nuclear specialists. 
An official of the scientific and technical department gave a 
positive assessment to the consultations and stressed that Japan 
favoured this initiative and was ready to go ahead with it. 

