Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 25, BNS -- Despite the fact that the 
structure of Estonia's population was purposefully changed in 
the last 50 years, Estonia and its citizens should show 
magnanimity to ethnic Russians, said British Foreign Office 
Secretary of State Douglas Hogg in an interview to the 
Tallinn-based PUHAPAEVALEHT newspaper. 
  In Hogg's opinion, non-integration of Russians into the 
Estonian society may bring about an extremely dangerous 
situation. 
  Estonia needs to map out a policy to promote the integration 
of all people who want to live here into Estonian society both 
politically and socially, Hogg said. "No society that wishes to 
remain stable can afford to keep a considerable part of the 
population deprived of political rights. This is a challenge 
which Estonia and Latvia alike face," Hogg said in the interview. 
  Commenting on the Baltic states' relations with NATO, the 
British diplomat said Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania should 
regard NATO's Partnership for Peace program as a stepping-stone 
to eventual membership in the alliance. 
  "It is impossible to say at present which nations will be 
admitted to NATO through this program, but certain states will 
definitely get the opportunity. Obviously you want to join 
NATO to avail yourself of its collective guarantees. However, 
NATO is at present not prepared to give such a guarantee, this 
is not NATO policy," Hogg said. 
  The British diplomat was skeptical about Russia's joining 
NATO. 
  "I find it very difficult to imagine how Russia could become 
a member of NATO in the near future," he said. "Russia can, of 
course, benefit from the Partnership for Peace program, which it 
hasn't signed on to yet, however." 
  Hogg considered the relations between Estonia and Great 
Britain to be very good. He affirmed that his country would 
like to see Estonia more firmly integrated into West Europe as 
its partner in free trade. 
  "A free-trade agreement may lead to Estonia's becoming a 
member of the European Union. I believe the negotiations on an 
association accord could begin already this year. However, it 
would be a mistake for the Baltic states to speed up the process 
of joining the European Union: they would come under pressure 
which their economies would be unable to withstand. After all, 
the economic regime of the union is primarily characterized by 
lack of subsidies and a free market," was Hogg's opinion. 
  Hogg was among the first high-ranking Western diplomats to 
visit Estonia after it regained its independence in 1991. 
  PUHAPAEVALEHT interviewed Hogg last week in London. The 
interview will be published in tomorrow's issue of the newspaper. 

