Language: <F P=105> Malay </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] Kapar, 1 Feb--Malaysia's political system cannot 
be belittled. On the contrary, it has proved successful in 
creating public unity and national stability and in stimulating 
the economic growth rate, said Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim. The 
deputy prime minister said that the policies of National Front 
(BN) leaders in decision-making, cooperation, and creating unity 
among the people are the key to domestic and foreign investor 
confidence in investing in this country. 
  Mistakes in choosing leaders, however, would make communal 
unrest possible and would turn the country from development and 
the flow of global progress. "Who will come to invest (in this 
country) if the government is unstable? Therefore, this 
country's political system cannot be belittled. Cooperation 
among Malays, Chinese, and Indians at all levels will increase 
(investor) confidence, because this is not only a success story, 
but a unique success story. It is different and unique because 
not all countries with citizens of different religions can 
record such gratifying success. Therefore, we must not belittle 
our political system and our (the government's) policy in making 
decisions," he said today as he inaugurated the Abdul Samad 
National School at Sementa during his one-day visit to Selangor. 
  Anwar first listened to a briefing and toured the West Port 
Project at Pulau Indah, Klang Port. Selangor Chief Minister Tan 
Sri Muhammad Muhammad Taib accompanied him. Anwar said he 
announced an additional allocation of 2 billion ringgit to 
finance the supervision of government construction because the 
national economy is strong and makes investors confident in 
increasing their investments. [passage omitted] 
  "Our schools should be able to create harmony among students 
from various communal groups. Teachers must be alert to efforts 
to foster a spirit of cooperation, and this unity must begin at 
the school level," he said. Anwar called attention to the fact 
that although the Western educational system is supported by 
quality teaching personnel and facilities, it fails to produce 
students with morality. "The Western educational system is able 
only to produce people like cattle. They have no realization of 
learning or morality, and they do not want to create a spirit of 
unity or build up their nations or states. 
  "Our educational philosophy, however, stresses the desire to 
improve skills and capabilities in all fields, besides creating 
high character," he said. Touching on the Malay language, Anwar 
repeated the assurance that Malay will remain the official and 
teaching language. "We want Malay to be an effective teaching 
language, but we want our children to master English, because 
the Malaysia of today is not the Malaysia of 20 years ago. We 
are now considered a model country for economic development. We 
are now in a race with neighboring countries and are cooperating 
with ASEAN member states, the Group of 15, East Asian nations, 
and Islamic countries. This cooperation requires a good 
communications tool, which is the English language," he said. 

