BFN 

  [Text] Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, 16 Jun (EFE) -- 
Chilean President Eduardo Frei has reported to EFE that, at the 
end of a 30-minute meeting in this city, where the Fourth 
Ibero-American Summit was closed yesterday, he and Cuban 
President Fidel Castro today agreed to seek a coordinated 
solution of the case of eight Cubans who entered the Chilean 
consulate in Havana on Wednesday. 
  "The two countries' foreign ministries will work together 
for 
a solution," Frei said. He admitted that this is a complex 
problem and that Castro reiterated to him his government's 
position of not authorizing the departure of anyone who resorts 
to forceful measures to secure a departure. 
  Frei described as positive his meeting with Castro, a 
meeting 
held to review current bilateral relations. Frei said Castro 
showed considerable interest in the Chilean Government's social 
programs to eliminate extreme poverty. 
  As for resuming diplomatic relations, Frei said this 
possibility will be considered during Cuban Foreign Minister 
Roberto Robaina's visit to Santiago late in August. 
Nevertheless, Frei pointed out that the current status of 
relations, on a consular level, is adequate "for the time being." 
  Frei reiterated both his rejection of the U.S. economic 
blockade against Cuba and the need for Cuba to implement a more 
democratic form of government, but that any decisions on this 
subject "can be made by the Cuban Government only." 
  Frei added that Castro, "respectfully and with a friendly 
disposition," listened to the recommendations made by most of 
the heads of state and government attending the Fourth 
Ibero-American Summit. "Everything depends on him (Castro)," he 
said. 
  Before meeting with Castro, Frei had a working breakfast 
with 
the presidents of El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala, and 
Honduras, as well as with Nicaraguan, Panamanian, and Dominican 
officials, and he later met with Paraguayan President Juan 
Carlos Wasmosy. 
  Most of the discussion at these meeting consisted of Chile's 
cooperation programs with these countries in several fields 
related to education and culture, as well as commercial and 
financial cooperation, Frei said. He termed the conversations 
"very positive." 
  In a news conference later, Frei reiterated his positive 
assessment of the Fourth Ibero-American Summit, saying it can be 
the starting point for "a true integration process." 

