Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sergey Badalyan, first secretary of the </F>
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Armenia, by 
Valentina Nikiforova; place and date not given: "There Are 
Different `Wonders' Now in Armenia: The Communist Party's Phases 
of Coming of Age"] 
  [Text] I had not seen Sergey Grigoryevich Badalyan, 
first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
of Armenia, for half a year. Not all that long, but how the man 
has changed! A lively and witty person in the past, he is now 
sad, his judgments categorical and cutting. 
  "Why do you all keep talking about Zhirinovskiy, his 
inclination to divide Russia into 50 provinces? In Armenia, 85 
percent of the population are agreeable to becoming a Russian 
district. I would dare say that there is no such thing as an 
independent state. We in Armenia feel more acutely than others 
the trouble hanging over Russia as well, but you do not have 
such a perception!" he said angrily. 
  [Nikiforova] Are you not exaggerating the danger? 
  [Badalyan] More likely, the reverse: I do not know the 
details, but the policy of "leading"--that is, 
capitalist--countries is aimed at driving a wedge between Russia 
and Iran, the Arab countries. Armenia is a small isthmus and the 
main obstacle in the geopolitical game of Israel, Turkey, and 
the United States. It stands in the way of Turkey, which has 
gained strength over the past 200 calm years, forming an 
alliance with Azerbaijan, stealing Central Asian republics and 
reaching the Altay peoples. The Karabakh problem was not put on 
the agenda by the Armenians. Remember the stormy beginning of 
perestroyka, with its slogans of modernization of socialism. 
They roused even the passive ones; it appeared that people had 
gained a second wind and were ready to live in a new way. 
  This situation, however, was used by anticommunist, 
anti-Soviet forces. All sorts of Starovoytovs and Sheynises 
began to visit us, and they pulled the movement into a different 
direction. The situation also became uncontrollable because 
knowledgeable party cadres have already been dismissed, while 
the young ones have not yet gained experience or learned to 
think on a large scale and with an eye on the future. Please 
understand: Armenia cannot live without Russia, but Russia will 
also lose a lot without Armenia. I am amazed that people take 
seriously the absurdities suggested to us by people proffering 
their advice from abroad--Solzhenitsyn, for instance--that 
Russia, as he says, can survive in a union with only Belarus and 
Ukraine. Nonsense! Russia either may stay as it was when it was 
called the Soviet Union, or it will shrink like shagreen leather 
to the borders of the Moscow principality. 
  [Nikiforova] This is a serious problem, requiring careful 
thought and sensitivity. Let us put it straight, though: Perhaps 
you are driven by a genetic fear of Turkey? Is there not in 
your--generally fair--position a consumerist attitude toward 
Russia? 
  [Badalyan] No, and no again. I cannot be accused of an 
anti-Muslim attitude. Moreover, I understand the Azeris, 
too--they also have found themselves in the role of hostage. But 
we cannot underestimate the danger. I believe that a solution 
should be found to the Karabakh problem that will satisfy 
everyone, including Russia. The people paid too high a price for 
the indecisiveness of the CPSU Central Committee. Armenia tied 
its fate to Russia 200 years ago--who can reject people who 
joined the state voluntarily? 
  [Nikiforova] Is this the position of Armenian Communists? 
  [Badalyan] All reasonable people in the republic think this 
way, with the exception of the government, perhaps. You should 
have heard how indignant people were over the statement of our 
prime minister who, answering to the question of the Communist 
faction in the parliament as to why Armenia has refused to join 
the ruble zone, said: "The terms that were accepted by 
Tajikistan do not befit an independent state!" Meanwhile, people 
in long lines are outraged: Does he believe that we are 
independent?! We have been independent for 70 years. Now we have 
to work and work to achieve such independence! People even begin 
to mention the Dashnaks, who in 1929 voluntarily surrendered 
power in order to save the people! 
  [Nikiforova] Does it mean that people support the communist 
idea of restoring the Union of republics? In your opinion, has 
your prediction of last year--that 1993 would be a decisive year 
for the Communist Party of Armenia--come true? 
  [Badalyan] That is what it was. The Communist Party is 
functioning. The draft of the constitution prepared by the 
Communists has been published along with the government draft 
and is being submitted for discussion. The Bureau of the 
Communist Party of Armenia Central Committee officially stated 
that we reject the destructive policy of privatization aimed at 
plundering the national wealth, and that the Communist Party 
will continue to fight for the restoration and strengthening of 
a socialist economy in the republic. 
  [Nikiforova] This statement undoubtedly will play its role. 
But if a party is not in power, let us be honest, its ability to 
influence the outcome of state issues is small. 
  [Badalyan] This is our pain. But here is what we are certain 
of: No one party can currently pull the republic out of the 
crisis. What is needed is a bloc supported by a majority of the 
population. To save the country and the people we are willing to 
form an alliance with all forces in opposition to the 
government. The people's situation is catastrophic: The minimum 
wage or pension is not enough to buy 10 eggs or a glass of 
kerosene. Electricity is turned on for half an hour a day, and 
even then not every day. The main nutrition staple is bread, but 
it is rationed at 350 grams a day per person. In Armenia, the 
first among the Soviet republics that began privatization of the 
land, with our dearth of land, where each square meter is worth 
its weight in gold, half of it is not cultivated! In some 
regions people say: They did not give land to the farmers--they 
buried the farmers in it. And when our prime minister 
pontificates that this is the highest achievement, that by this 
we have "rooted out the foundations for the restoration of this 
disgusting socialism," people do not even laugh anymore. Where 
they used to grow 40 quintals of grain per hectare of 
kolkhoz-sovkhoz land, the tired farmer now gathers two or 
three--less than he had sown. So much effort has been expended 
to berate the broad integration of the republic economy, and 
what do we have as a result? In Ararat valley, farmers are 
chopping down the best vines and sowing wheat so that they can 
feed their families! But famine will soon reach the countryside, 
too. Prosperous Yerevan is turning into a cemetery of a city, 
where bright lights are burning in only one building--the 
American Embassy. 
  [Nikiforova] I saw a brief report recently that oil and gas 
have been found in Armenia. Perhaps this will save it? 
  [Badalyan] This still has to be verified, because this 
report 
came out right after the one on reactivating the nuclear power 
station, which is being done by Russia. The Americans cannot 
fail to notice that the queue at their embassy is much shorter 
than the one at the Russian Embassy, although this does not make 
us happy either. Eighty-five percent of the population support a 
restoration of the closest possible union with Russia. We, 
Communists, have all the grounds to maintain that the road 
chosen by Armenian Bolsheviks at the beginning of 1920's was the 
correct one. Now the anti-Communists, too, are denouncing the 
missionaries and admitting that they did not at all want the 
Soviet Union to disintegrate. Therefore, interest in Russia, in 
the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, is growing now. 
Its success in the elections was cheered as if it were our own. 
You will not believe it, but people here followed the 
Communists' campaign. They discussed not only what the 
candidates said but how, for instance, Gennadiy Zyuganov looked. 
They would get upset if it suddenly appeared that he was not 
answering his opponents as convincingly as he could. They 
grieved because during the October events the opposing side was 
able to outwit and deceive the defenders of the constitution. 
When we learned of the upcoming plenum of the Central Executive 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, the 
bureau decided that we had to attend, although we did not have 
any money. We found some, with difficulty. We have the same kind 
of work ahead of us, and therefore the experience of our Russian 
comrades is very valuable for us. 
  [Nikiforova] Sergey Grigoryevich, how are your current work 
conditions? 
  [Badalyan] Very difficult. But I am already used to it. The 
constant sense of danger--I travel to regions where shooting 
goes on from time to time. I always find friends to go with me. 
But I cannot step down. I only ask my comrades: If anything 
happens to me, please do not forget my family. 
  [Nikiforova] Has the party organization increased over the 
past year? 
  [Badalyan] There has been some increase, although not as 
significant as we would want. Of 48 city and rayon committees, 
36 have been restored; the rest are in border areas where 
military operations are going on. 
  [Nikiforova] In the past, the foundation of the party were 
the workers. Does the Communist Party of Armenia have any plans 
to increase its work in production collectives? 
  [Badalyan] We have plans. It is opportunities that we are 
short on. Many enterprises--95 percent of them--are closed. But 
we sense that the situation is becoming hot. In Leninakan, for 
instance, there is now talk about strikes. We try to help 
formulate economic demands. People may be deceived for a while 
by vouchers, but they remember that there used to be free 
education and medical care, that children went to pioneer camps 
in the summer and people themselves went on vacation, to health 
resorts, traveled, went on sightseeing tours. In short, they had 
confidence in tomorrow. Now the workers have lost all of it! 
  The Communists wrote in their draft of the constitution that 
we support all-people's state property and social guarantees 
that only socialism can ensure. And the mechanism for 
implementation of this are the soviets. People remember this and 
see where the rejection of socialism has brought us. You know, I 
remember the words of the great writer and artist Rockwell Kent. 
When he was asked "Where is the most wondrous place?" he 
replied: "Go to Armenia!" He was speaking of Soviet Armenia! 
Today all one can see in Armenia is the ruin and pain brought 
upon us by pseudo-democrats. President Levon Ter-Petrosyan 
reassures us: The people agree, he says, because they are 
silent. A dangerous delusion! I am afraid that the silence may 
lead to a terrible social explosion. That is why we demand: 
Surrender your authority; do not push the people to the brink of 
tragedy. The fateful question has already been raised in the 
parliament: "Can the state finally take upon itself the supply, 
distribution, and regulation of prices, in order to put an end 
to the economic disaster?" "Yes, it can," said the prime 
minister, "but this will be a Communist government." 
  And he is right. I want to hope that we will be able to 
repeat Rockwell Kent's wonderful phrase in the near future. 

