Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Washington, 4 Jan (PL) -- Today, a year after taking 
office, Bill Clinton visited for the first time the CIA's 
general headquarters to give it his vote of confidence in a 
world he says "continues to be dangerous" and "more difficult to 
understand." 
  In this first contact at Langley, which U.S. presidents 
usually make, Clinton told the personnel at the world's largest 
espionage center that he "firmly trusts the intelligence reports 
he receives every morning" on the state of international affairs. 
  Despite the warm welcome afforded to the visitor, the press 
and observers have said that Clinton is not "a totally likeable 
personality" for the espionage services because of his liberal 
past and lack of interest -- according to what is said -- in 
foreign affairs. 
  The visit also serves -- in the opinion of the same sources 
-- to iron out "certain difficulties" between the CIA and the 
White House, stemming from a CIA report to Congress that cast 
Haitian President Jean Bertrand Aristide in a bad light, just 
when the Clinton administration was working on Aristide's return 
to Port-au-Prince. 
  Another point of contention surfaced after last week's 
disclosure of secret radioactive experiments on humans in the 
United States after World War II, an affair that directly 
involves the CIA. 
  The White House ordered its espionage agency to join the 
government investigations on these tests, which were even 
performed on newborns, the mentally retarded, and inmates, and 
to specify its involvement in these tests, a presidential 
adviser disclosed. 
  "We are going to be working with the CIA, and we expect 
their 
cooperation," said George Stephanopoulos, one of President 
Clinton's top advisers. 
  The big investigation was decided on yesterday at the 
executive mansion in a meeting attended by the Departments of 
Defense, Energy, Health, Veterans Affairs, and Justice, as well 
as the National Security Council. But the espionage services 
were absent. 

