BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk at opening </F>
session of the Ukrainian Supreme Council in Kiev -- live] 
  [Text] Esteemed people's deputies. You will recall that 
when the Supreme Council session was opened in this chamber a 
preparatory working group submitted proposals and issues that 
were to be considered by the Supreme Council for the agenda. 
One of the first points after the organizational formation of 
the Supreme Council was the issue of the government. I also 
know that the overwhelming majority of deputies who announced 
their preelection programs also took into account the fact that 
one of the first actions of the Supreme Council of the new 
convocation would be the appointment of a prime minister and the 
formation of a government. It is completely fair that in the 
present situation it is necessary to have a government which is 
capable of conducting reforms, one that will take Ukraine out of 
the crisis and guarantee the stabilization, above all, of its 
economic development. 
  Taking into account that the Supreme Council of the present 
convocation has a functional structure and a party structure, 
that is, deputies' groups and groupings are present in it, I had 
a meeting with the Supreme Council Presidium and with members of 
groups and groupings at which candidates for the post of 
Ukraine's prime minister were proposed. They were discussed and 
analyzed during the meeting. The economic situation which our 
state finds itself in was also analyzed. Both the deputies' 
groups and the Supreme Council Presidium, with my participation, 
raised those issues which are constantly being raised both in 
the Supreme Council and in our society. These are: consistent 
implementation of economic reforms, [Ukraine's] emergence from 
the economic crisis, stabilization of the economy, and social 
protection of the population, particularly its most vulnerable 
sections. 
  Having such a structure in the Supreme Council, I submitted 
a 
proposal to debate in detail the candidacy, and, taking account 
of the present situation and the balance of forces in the 
Supreme Council, I propose Vitaliy Andriyovych Masol for the 
post of prime minister of Ukraine. I believe this nomination 
will be supported by the majority of people's deputies. This 
nomination is supported by some of the parliamentary groups and, 
as far as I understand, the majority of the Supreme Council's 
Presidium. Other candidates have been proposed, as you have 
been informed. But considering the situation, and knowing that 
other candidates do not have the support of a majority in the 
Supreme Council Presidium and the groups, I want to avoid 
putting these candidates in a position which could harm the 
appointment of the prime minister and mount political tension. 
I want to elect a prime minister in a constitutional manner 
without violating the procedure and the constitution. This is 
what I propose, and I would ask you to consider this. 

