Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ben MacLennan] </F>
  [Text] Umtata March 5 SAPA -- The United Nations should be 
asked to mediate in South Africa's constitutional crisis African 
National Congress [ANC] leader Nelson Mandela said on Saturday. 
Speaking to about 12,000 people at an ANC rally in Umtata he 
also welcomed the Inkatha Freedom Party and Afrikaner 
Volksfront's [AVF, Afrikaner National Front] move to register 
for the elections as "one of the most exciting decisions of the 
past few days". 
  The ANC had accepted the principle of international 
mediation 
but still had to discuss it with the 29 political parties which 
had now registered, "and I have no doubt we will be able to 
resolve that question," he said. "Thinking on mediation should 
not centre on individuals, or organisations linked to a 
particular country. 
  "We must think in terms of experienced international 
organisations which will set up a structure which will deal with 
the question of a constitution, violence and peace." 
  South Africa was going to be a member of the United Nations, 
the Organisation of African Unity, the Commonwealth and the 
non-aligned movement and was going to have a very close 
relationship with the European Community. "These are the 
organisations that must be entrusted with the task of 
international mediation. 
  "All of them are members of the UN organisation and if we 
deal with that body then the international community as a whole 
will be involved. 
  "I will go to any meeting where we are going to negotiate 
this issue with the suggestion we should trust this important 
task to an organisation of which we are going to be members and 
which have enormous experience in these types of mediations." 
  Welcoming the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] and AVF 
registration decision he said "these are leaders who like us are 
thinking in terms of serving South Africa." The ANC might differ 
with them on number of issues but deciding to register for the 
election they were making it possible for the process to be all 
inclusive and were giving the people of South Africa a wider 
choice on who should represent them in government. 
  "Our idea is one of a government of national unity which 
will 
give the perspective of unity and the more parties that 
register, the more it will be possible for us to have a credible 
and legitemate government of national unity." 

