BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, Apr 28, BNS -- Russia was not guided by 
political motivation, but proceeded exclusively from economical 
reasoning when introducing the new import tariffs, to become 
effective from July 1, Russian Agriculture Minister Victor 
Khlystun told his Estonian counterpart at a meeting in Moscow. 
  Khlystun said Russia is trying to protect its domestic 
market 
against dumping and that the introduction of customs tariffs was 
a necessary precondition for Russia's membership in the GATT. 
  Russia's new higher tariffs will be effective as to Estonia 
because the Russian parliament has not ratified a trade 
agreement signed between the two countries. But the Baltics are 
not the only countries exports from which will be hit by the 
higher tariffs; the new regulations also affect Georgia, for 
instance, the Estonian minister quoted his Russian counterpart 
as saying. 
  Leetsar said the Russian minister had agreed to immediately 
start talks on reducing the import tariffs for products coming 
from the sector governed by the Agriculture Ministry. Talks 
could be started over raw products, such as meat, potatoes, 
cheese, etc. Leetsar said there was little interest toward 
Estonian-made butter in Russia, but added that Estonian cheese 
and pork continued to be much-wanted articles. 
  The talks of the Estonian minister with Russia's farm sector 
leaders, which focused on the new tariffs, also dealt with more 
general topics, such as financing of the farm sector, state 
subsidies, pricing. Discussed was the possibility to set up 
joint ventures and even possible joint participation in 
international corporations. 
  Russia proposed Estonia to take part as observer in the work 
of Russia's Federal Market Center. Leetsar in his comments in 
support of the idea said this would enable Estonia to be better 
informed about the developments on the Russian market. Estonia 
also wishes to participate in the creation of an international 
farm exchange in St. Petersburg, a town traditionally a major 
market for Estonian farm products. 
  Leetsar, in his further remarks on the visit, said a deep 
crisis in Russia's farm sector is continuing and that the 
country doesn't expect to get out of it even in the coming year. 
Debts of the farm sector are huge, and 14 percent of the 
collective and state-governed kolkhoz and sovkhoz enterprises 
have gone bankrupt. 
  The Estonian minister also invited his Russian counterpart 
to 
visit Estonia. Khlystun's visit is expected some time in the 
second half of May. 

