Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Svetlana Sukhova: "Moscow Changes Tactics in </F>
Relations With Hanoi"] 
  [Text] Yesterday in the Russian Ministry of Foreign 
Economic Relations a protocol on commodity deliveries between 
Russia and Vietnam in 1994 was signed that will substantially 
increase both the types of products delivered and the number of 
facilities built by Russia in Vietnam (which created a small 
sensation). This week Moscow carried out an "offensive" across 
the entire line of the "Vietnamese front": on Thursday talks 
were also held between the chiefs of the two countries' general 
staffs. The discussion focused on questions related to the 
servicing of the Russian military base at Cam Ranh. 
  After the removal of the U.S. trade embargo on Vietnam, 
Russia, remembering the losses of many East European and Asian 
markets, decided to change its tactics for the protection of its 
interests in that country. And although, according to Mikhail 
Fradkov, first deputy ministry of foreign economic relations, 
Russia has not yet felt competition from the United States in 
the Vietnamese market, Moscow has already felt a slight chill in 
relations with the "Hanoi comrades." And in order to ensure 
against possible unpleasantness in the future, Russia has placed 
its stakes on not only preserving but expanding the spheres of 
cooperation. 
  As a KOMMERSANT correspondent learned, the greatest 
difficulty in the talks was caused by the problem of Vietnamese 
indebtedness (its the overall volume today comes to $10 
billion). And that is why Mr. Fradkov called the decision to 
reinvest at least part of it in setting up joint ventures in 
Vietnam ($80 million worth) the "Russian delegation's greatest 
success." Two Russian-Vietnamese joint ventures for the 
production of latex and activated charcoal were chosen as 
targets of investment. It was possible to reach agreement for 
part of current indebtedness to be paid in the form of 
deliveries of goods ($70 million worth). 
  On the other hand, in the opinion of [Le Suan Chin], the 
head 
of the administrative offices of the Socialist Republic of 
Vietnam government, the Vietnamese side's main victory was to 
get a considerable expansion of the list of mutual deliveries of 
goods in 1994, as well as the list of industrial facilities in 
Vietnam whose construction will be carried out with Russia's 
assistance. However, whereas such construction was financed with 
Soviet state credits during the existence of the USSR, today all 
projects are being financed jointly by Russian and Vietnamese 
firms. And since both sides' funds are limited, in the talks a 
decision was made for Russia to take part in an international 
bidding for Vietnamese facilities (international organizations 
will serve as the sponsor in them). The new projects will 
include the construction of the [Yali] Hydroelectric Power 
Station and several electric power networks and roads. 
  The question of debt was also addressed in the talks between 
Mikhail Kolesnikov, the chief of the general staff of Russia's 
Armed Forces, and his Vietnamese colleague [Dao Dinh Luen], in 
which First Deputy Minister of Defense Andrey Kokoshin also took 
part. The problem is that, according to an intergovernmental 
agreement, the Vietnamese side is supposed to cover all expenses 
for the maintenance of the Russian material and technical supply 
center (read Russian Navy base) at Cam Ranh and credit them 
toward repayment of its debt. So far use of the base has been 
free for Moscow, but it is not out of the question that as the 
debt gets repaid, Hanoi will more and more insistently press the 
question of rent for Cam Ranh (which it prefers to speak of so 
far in Aesopian language). 
<H6>  Some Figures on Cooperation Between Russia and Vietnam </H6>
  In 1993 trade between Russia and Vietnam came to $500 
million 
(this year the plans are to raise it to $1 billion). 
  Russia's principal spheres of activity in Vietnam are power 
station construction (two hydroelectric power stations--the 
[Chan] and the [Khuabin]--and the [Faley] Thermal Electric Power 
Station are already in operation, and the [Yali] Hydroelectric 
Power Station is under construction) and petroleum extraction. 

