BFN 

  [Excerpts] A regional propaganda and ideological work 
meeting solemnly opened in Nanning Theater on the morning of 4 
March. The opening ceremony of the meeting was presided over by 
Cheng Kejie, regional party deputy secretary and regional vice 
chairman. He said: This is an important meeting held by the 
regional CPC Committee to implement the spirit of the national 
meeting on propaganda and ideological work, and also the largest 
meeting held by propaganda sectors in our region since reform 
and opening up. 
  Regional leaders Zhao Fulin, Cheng Kejie, Ding Tingmo, Chen 
Huiguang, Li Zhenqian, Peng Guikang, Yuan Zhengzhong, Ma 
Qingsheng, Yang Jichang, Du Jingyi, and others attended the 
meeting. 
  Regional CPC Secrtary Zhao Fulin made an important speech at 
the meeting entitled "Strengthening the Party Leadership, and 
Sticking to the Fundamental Guideline to Raise Propaganda and 
Ideological Work in Our Region to a New Level." Zhao Fulin 
said: This propaganda and ideological work meeting of the 
regional CPC Committee is a very important one which has an 
impact on the overall situation. The main tasks of the meeting 
are: In accordance with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's guiding 
principle of doing two types of work simultaneously, and 
attaching equal importance to both, we should study, comprehend 
and implement the spirit of the national propaganda and 
ideological work meeting to emancipate our minds, seek truth 
from facts, formulate measures in light of local conditions, and 
conscientiously carry out various tasks set by the national 
propaganda and ideological work meeting to raise our region's 
propaganda and ideological work to a new level. 
  In his speech, Zhao Fulin advanced the following three 
opinions: 
  1. It is necessary to conscientiously study and profoundly 
comprehend the spirit of the national propaganda and ideological 
work meeting to completely fulfill the tasks set by the meeting. 
  2. It is necessary to give prominence to focal points to 
carry out the main tasks of the present propaganda and 
ideological work. 
  3. It is necessary to strengthen and improve party 
leadership over propaganda and ideological work. [passage 
omitted] 
  With regard to the first opinion, Zhao Fulin stressed: The 
recently held national propaganda and ideological work meeting 
was an important meeting convened by the CPC Central Committee, 
which had an impact on the overall situation during the crucial 
period of establishing the socialist market economic system and 
promoting socialist modernizations. This meeting was not only 
one which assigned the tasks for our propaganda and ideological 
front, but also an essential meeting in which the central 
authorities implemented Comrade Deng Xiaoping's instruction of 
doing two types of work simultaneously and attaching equal 
importance to both, and mobilized the entire party to strengthen 
and improve propaganda and ideological work to provide an 
effective ideological guarantee and a fine environment in terms 
of public opinion in a still better way for reform, development 
and stability. [passage omitted] 
  Zhao Fulin urged CPC Committees at all levels to show 
concern 
for comrades working on the propaganda and ideological front 
politically and ideologically. They must also show concern for 
their work and life to build well their contingent. 
  With regard to the second opinion, Zhao Fulin pointed out: A 
fundamental guideline, and four key work points put forth by 
Comrade Jiang Zeming at the national propaganda and ideological 
work meeting are overall arrangements and strategic ideas aimed 
at doing propaganda and ideological work well in the process of 
speeding up establishment of the socialist market economic 
system. In accordance with the spirit of the national 
propaganda and ideological work meeting in light of practical 
realities in our region, Zhao Fulin called on the whole region 
to do the following work well: 
  First, do a good job in studying theory and unifying our 
thinking. In other words, we must persist in arming the entire 
party with Comrade Deng Xiaoping theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, put study of theory in the first 
place, and grasp it as a systematic project. We must take the 
study and propagation of volume three of Deng Xiaoping's 
Selected Works as the most important task in our propaganda and 
ideological work and grasp it persistently and profoundly. It 
should be combined with the study of the spirit of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee to 
comprehensively implement the decision of the central 
authorities. 
  Second, persist in a correct guidance for public opinion to 
create a fine environment in this regard. Zhao Fulin said: 
With regard to our future public opinion and propaganda work, 
we must comprehensively and accurately publicize the party line, 
guiding principles, and policies, and insist on the guideline of 
promoting unity and stability, arousing the drive of the people, 
and mainly conducting propaganda by positive measures. We must 
uphold materialist dialectics, and avoid onesidedness. [passage 
omitted] 
  Third, we must grasp ideological education well, and train 
new people who have ideals and morality, acquire education, and 
observe discipline. At present, we must grasp well the work of 
giving publicity to advanced figures and learning from typical 
examples. We must further carry out the activities of 
profoundly learning from Comrade Li Zhenghai. We must give 
prominence to ideological education for workers and staff 
members of the state-owned medium and large enterprises. We 
must also give prominence to ideological education for rural 
party members and peasants. We must truly grasp well 
ideological and moral education for young people and students in 
schools in particular. 
  Fourth, we must grasp well creation of outstanding 
literature 
and art works to bring about a prosperous socialist cultural 
undertaking. CPC committees and governments at all levels must 
use a certain amount of manpower and material and financial 
resources to ensure the production of excellent mental products 
which reflect the main trends of society. Propaganda and 
cultural departments at all levels must make efforts, work out 
plans, and organize production of excellent works which reflect 
the main trends of society. 
  Fifth, we must grasp foreign-related propaganda, and serve 
opening up to the outside world well. 
  While dwelling on the issue of strengthening and improving 
party leadership over propaganda and ideological work, Zhao 
Fulin emphasized: Strengthening and improving party leadership 
is a key to doing propaganda and ideological work well during 
the new period. CPC committees at all levels must truly 
undertake their leadship responsibility. They must attach 
importance to and truly hold themselves responsible for 
emancipating their minds, seeking truth from facts, and taking 
the road of reform. They must establish and improve their own 
systems and truly ascertain leaders' responsibility. It is 
necessary to vigorously strengthen the building of the 
propaganda and ideological contingent, and to solve practical 
problems in a planned way to create still better conditions for 
propaganda and ideological work. [passage omitted] 
  Zhao Fulin hoped that leaders at all levels in the whole 
region, and comrades on the propaganda and ideological front in 
particular, will get a clear understanding of the situation, be 
clear about their tasks, actively make exploration, explore 
their way forward, work in a down-to-earth manner, and start the 
strenuous undertaking to raise their propaganda and ideological 
work to a new level and make new and still greater contributions 
to the building of the two civilizations in our region. 
[passage omitted] 

