BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, June 23 (CTK) -- The agreement with Russia 
on the former Soviet Union's debt to Slovakia could be signed on 
Friday even though the Slovak Government rejected it this week, 
Slovak Deputy Premier Brigita Schmognerova said today. 
  The problem of debt towards Slovak companies still needs to 
be resolved but the Slovak side agrees with all other points in 
the agreement, she said after her talks with vice-premiers of 
the Russian Federation Oleg Soskovec and Yuriy Yarov. 
  Slovakia would like to include at least a provisional 
estimate of the Russian debt to Slovak companies in the 
protocol, while the definitive sum could be specified later, 
said Schmognerova, who began a two-day visit to Moscow today. 
If no agreement was reached, she added, a new round of talks 
would have to be prepared on the condition that the contentious 
issue with the Czech Republic were resolved. 
  Originally it was expected that the agreement on Russia's 
share of the Soviet debt towards Slovakia, which is estimated at 
$1.3 million, would be signed during Schmognerova's Moscow 
visit. The Slovak Government, however, failed to approve the 
document on Wednesday because, as Schmognerova explained, debt 
claims raised by Slovak companies had been included in the 
agreement the Czech Republic recently signed with Russia. 
  Claims for Slovak companies were included in the 
Czech-Russian agreement because before Czechoslovakia split (on 
1 January 1993) most Slovak-produced goods were exported via 
foreign trade companies based in the Czech Republic, 
Schmognerova said yesterday before leaving for Moscow. 
  Czech Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik has said the figure put 
on the Russian debt in the agreement was only a guide and would 
be specified later. 
  The Czech agreement stipulates a debt of $3.5 billion which 
the Russian Federation is to take over from the former Soviet 
Union and to repay by 2003. Around $1.5 billion of this sum is 
due to Slovakia. $180 million worth of this has already been 
paid to Slovakia in the form of military supplies. Further 
supplies of military spare parts worth $90 million under 
negotiation have not yet materialized because the Slovak and 
Russian Governments have not agreed on precisely what parts 
should be included in the deal. 

