BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 3 (XINHUA) -- The Information Office 
of the State Council has released a white paper entitled "The 
Situation of Chinese Women". The full text of the white paper 
follows: 
<H5>  Foreword </H5>
  In March 1992, the United Nations decided to hold in 1995 
the 
Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, the capital of 
China. This has aroused greater world attention on the status of 
Chinese women. 
  In the feudal society which lasted several millennia and the 
subsequent century of semi-colonial and semi-feudal society, 
Chinese women experienced a bitter history of prolonged 
oppression, degradation and abasement. From the first half of 
this century, masses of women plunged into an undaunted and 
heroic struggle lasting several decades under the leadership of 
the Communist Party of China. This was a quest for national 
liberation and their own emancipation. It was not until the 
founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949 that Chinese 
women, who make up one-fourth of their sex in the world, finally 
won their historic freedom. 
  New China proclaimed that Chinese women enjoy equal rights 
with men in all aspects of political, economic, cultural, social 
and family life and that they have become, like all Chinese 
citizens, masters of the state and society. Chinese laws 
guarantee that women and men enjoy the same rights and status 
and have equal personal dignity. The Chinese Government employs 
legal, administrative and educational means to eliminate all 
kinds of discrimination against women and protect their special 
rights and interests. Today, as an important token of 
civilization and progress, Chinese women enjoy the equal rights 
which had remained unattainable in Chinese society over 
millennia and which only became accepted in many developed 
countries after some centuries. 
  Under the socialist system, the once-stifled wisdom and 
talents of Chinese women have been released to a great extent. 
Women are actively plunging into China's social development as 
masters of society, becoming a great force in both economic 
construction and cultural and ideological advances. They are a 
vital force in China's reform and opening to the outside world 
and the modernization drive. Women have made extremely 
important contributions in various undertakings, including 
industrial and agricultural production, science, culture, 
education and health care. In China, the expression "women hold 
up half the sky" has become the most vivid expression the entire 
society uses to praise the role played by women. 
  While women's impetus for social development has been 
forming, great changes have taken place in their mental outlook. 
They have gained a sense of self-respect, self-confidence, 
self-reliance and self-strengthening and have taken long strides 
forward in their ability to participate in government and 
political affairs, in their cultural accomplishment, level of 
scientific knowledge and production skills. 
  Chinese women have a glorious peace-loving tradition. They 
have never forgotten the calamities caused by aggressive wars 
and rendered resolute support for the foreign policy of peace 
adopted by the Chinese Government. No matter what clashes might 
break out in the world, they always stand on the side of justice 
and the victims of aggression and oppose violence and 
aggression. Chinese women are an important force in 
safeguarding world peace. 
  Over the past 45 years, especially in the 15 years since the 
introduction of reform and opening to the outside world, Chinese 
women have achieved truly historic advances toward the goal of 
"equality, development and peace". This great forward march is 
an important component of the progressive cause of women 
worldwide; it is also an important part of the progress China 
has made in human rights. 
  China is a developing country. Owning to the constraints of 
social development and the influence of old concepts, the 
condition of Chinese women is still not wholly satisfactory. 
There exist various difficulties and resistance which have 
prevented the full realization of equal rights to women with 
respect to their participation in political and government 
affairs, employment, access to education, as well as marriage 
and family. Instances of looking down upon and discrimination 
against women and even infringement of their rights still occur 
from time time [as received]. On the other hand, the overall 
competence of women remains to be further enhanced. All these 
account for the fact that the road toward emancipation and 
progress for Chinese women has not reached its end. The Chinese 
Government is making every effort to develop the economy, 
strengthen the legal system, eradicate all backward ideas of 
discriminating against and looking down on women and promote 
equal rights for men and women in all spheres of social life as 
stipulated in Chinese law. This will speed the realization of 
the various development goals of the Nairobi strategies [the 
Nairobi Forward-Looking strategies for the Advancement of Women 
to the Year 2000] in China before the end of this century. 
  The Chinese Government, Chinese women and Chinese people as 
a 
whole warmly welcome the convocation of the Fourth World 
Conference on Women in Beijing. They are going all out to make 
comprehensive preparations for the congress. To enable the 
international community to acquire a better understanding of the 
condition of women in the host country, we have prepared this 
report for release to the world. 
  Chapter I -- Historic Liberation of Chinese Women 
  In semi-colonial and semi-feudal old China, women were for a 
long time kept at the bottom of society. It was not until the 
first half of this century that the Chinese Communist Party led 
the Chinese people to wage a great and profound national 
democratic revolution on this ancient land. At the same time, 
a large-scale women's emancipation movement was launched, 
resulting in the historic liberation of Chinese women which won 
worldwide attention. 
  The impact of the several millennia of oppression and 
devastation imposed by the feudal patriarchal system on Chinese 
women was exceptionally grave. In political, economic, 
cultural, social and family life, women were considered inferior 
to men. This was profoundly manifested in the following ways: 
  Possessing no political rights, women were completely 
excluded from social and political life. Economically 
dependent, women were robbed of property and inheritance rights 
and possessed no independent source of income. Having no social 
status, women were forced to obey their fathers before marriage, 
their husbands after marriage and their sons if they became 
widowed. They had no personal dignity or independent status, 
and were deprived of the right to receive an education and take 
part in social activities. They enjoyed no freedom in marriage 
but had to obey the dictates of their parents and heed the words 
of matchmakers, and were not allowed to remarry if their spouse 
died. They were subjected to physical and mental torture, being 
harassed by systems of polygamy and prostitution, the 
overwhelming majority of them forced to bind their feet from 
childhood. For centuries, "women with bound feet" was a synonym 
for the female gender in China. 
  The successive invasions by the Western powers after the 
Opium War in 1840 aggravated the plight of Chinese women. In 
the full-scale war of aggression launched by Japan against China 
from 1937 on, most of the over 30 million Chinese who were 
brutally killed were women and children. Within a month after 
the Japanese troops occupied Nanjing, they committed over 20,000 
rapes. The cruel oppression and exploitation of the Chinese 
people by imperialist and feudalist forces as well as 
bureaucratic capitalism pushed China to the brink of national 
subjugation and annihilation. It also plunged Chinese women 
into an abyss of misery never witnessed before. 
  For national salvation and self emancipation, Chinese women, 
along with the entire nation, waged a dauntless struggle that 
lasted for over a century. They also launched a succession of 
movements for women's liberation. The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom 
enacted and promulgated a series of policies on sexual equality. 
The Reform Movement of 1898 advocated and ignited the wave to 
ban feet binding and establish schools for women. The 1911 
Revolution kindled a feminist movement which focused on equal 
rights for men and women and participation by women in political 
affairs. These movements promoted the awakening of Chinese 
women. Nevertheless, they all failed to bring about a 
fundamental change in their miserable plight as victims of 
oppression and enslavement. 
  Ever since its birth, the Chinese Communist Party has made 
the achievement of female emancipation and equality between men 
and women one of its goals. Under the leadership of the Party, 
women were mobilized and organized to form a broad united front 
with working women in industry and agriculture as the main body. 
Women of all ethnic groups and walks of life united to stage 
popular women's liberation movements closely tied to the Chinese 
revolution. In Communist Party-led base areas in particular, the 
revolutionary political powers issued a series of decrees and 
regulations to ensure the rights of women and raise their 
status. This brought light and hope to women throughout the 
country. 
  For the women of China, the founding of the People's 
Republic 
of China ended the thousands of years of feudal oppression and 
enslavement and the history of being trampled and bullied by 
foreign aggressors. With an entirely new face, they have stood 
up and become the masters of New China like all citizens of the 
country. In 1949, the First Plenary Session of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference was convened in 
Beijing. The 69 women present accounted for 10.4 percent of the 
delegates. They represented women throughout the country in 
discussions together with men delegates on matters of vital 
importance for the country's construction. At the conference, 
Soong Ching Ling was elected vice- chairperson of the Central 
People's Government. Li Dequan, Shi Liang and some other women 
were also placed in leading posts in the government. The 
Common Program, adopted by the conference which had the nature 
of a provisional constitution, solemnly declared the toppling of 
the feudal system which fettered women and stated that women 
enjoyed equal rights with men in the political, economic, 
cultural and educational fields and in other aspects of social 
life. Thus a new era in the emancipation of Chinese women was 
ushered in. 
  After the founding of the People's Republic, there was a 
surge of mass movements throughout the country to quickly change 
the backward economic and cultural outlook left over by old 
China and eradicate the antiquated system and outmoded customs 
that fettered, discriminated against and humiliated women. This 
effected an earth-shaking historic change in the social status 
and condition of women. 
  -- Land reform. In old China, poor farmers and farm 
laborers who accounted for 70 percent of the rural population, 
owned only 10 percent of the land. Women had no right to own 
any land. In the very early days of the People's Republic, a 
widespread and profound land reform movement was carried out, in 
accordance with the principle of distributing land on the basis 
of the number of members in a family. Rural women obtained 
land, just like their male counterparts, and became masters of 
their piece of soil. This fundamentally altered the situation 
of economic inequality between men and women. 
  -- Universal balloting. The Electoral Law of the People's 
Republic of China promulgated in 1953 clearly stipulated that 
women enjoy the same rights to vote and stand for election as 
men. The subsequent elections conducted at grass-roots levels 
nationwide in December that year were the first large-scale 
general ballot in Chinese history. More than 90 percent of 
women cast their vote, and the number of women people's deputies 
elected at grass-roots levels accounted for 17 percent of the 
total. Among the deputies to the National People's Congress, 
elected somewhat later, women made up 12 percent, with females 
accounting for 11 percent of all representatives from ethnic 
minorities. This indicates that ever since the founding of the 
People's Republic, the participation of women of all ethnic 
groups in state administration has been not only written into 
the law but also an actual practice. In some Western countries, 
only one or two centuries after their founding, did the law 
stipulate that women had equal voting rights with men. 
  -- The move out of the home. Along with the economic 
rehabilitation and development, there appeared a nationwide 
upsurge of women stepping out of their homes to take part in 
social production. In 1957, around 70 percent of rural women 
engaged in agricultural work, and the number of urban women 
workers and staff reached 3.286 million, representing a 5.5-fold 
increase over 1949. This thoroughly transformed the situation in 
which women were excluded from social productive labor, 
providing them with an independent source of income. 
  -- Illiteracy eradication campaign. In old China, as many as 
90 percent of women were illiterate. In order to raise the 
cultural level of the entire nation, New China launched a 
planned campaign to gradually wipe out illiteracy. The mass 
campaign witnessed three upsurges in 1952, 1956 and 1958. 
Various literacy classes, popular evening schools and workers' 
spare-time schools mushroomed in both rural and urban areas, and 
women attended these in their millions. By 1958, 16 million 
women had learned to read, and this represented an initial step 
in eradicating the ignorance and backwardness of Chinese women. 
  -- Publicity and implementation of the Marriage Law. The 
Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China, promulgated in 
1950, was the first statute enacted by New China. It clearly 
declared the abolition of the feudal marriage system 
characterized by arranged and forced marriage, male superiority 
and female inferiority, and disregard for the interests of 
children. Implementation of the new system was marked by 
freedom for both men and women in marriage, monogamy, sexual 
equality and protection of the legitimate rights of women and 
children. This signified a profound revolution in the patterns 
of wedded and family life that had prevailed for several 
thousand years in Chinese society. In the months that followed 
the law's promulgation, a large-scale mass campaign was staged 
throughout the country to publicize and implement the Marriage 
Law. This action resulted in the annulment of numerous feudal 
engagements, a rapid reduction in wife bashing and maltreatment, 
and freely chosen love marriages became prevalent. Through 
several years of hard work, the shackles imposed upon women by 
the millennia-old feudal marriage system was smashed and freedom 
of marriage was basically established. 
  -- Ban on prostitution. Brothels, prostitution and whoring 
were among the disgusting social phenomena left over by old 
China. Immediately after its founding, New China adopted 
resolute measures to outlaw prostitution. In November 1949, the 
Second Beijing Municipal People's Congress took the lead in 
adopting a decision to ban prostitution. The municipal 
government immediately closed all brothels and gathered 
prostitutes in designated places where they could be educated, 
have their thinking reformed, receive treatment for venereal 
diseases, and be provided with guidance to help them start 
normal lives and support themselves through their own work. 
Following the example of Beijing, all large, medium-sized and 
small cities in the country, including Shanghai and Tianjin, 
waged campaigns to wipe out prostitution. In a very short 
period of time, the sale of sex, a chronic social malady that 
seemed impossible to eradicate in old China and which seriously 
damaged the physical and mental health of women and degraded 
their dignity, disappeared, enabling society to take on a 
brand-new outlook. 
  By means of these large-scale mass movements, New China took 
only a few years to clean up the filth and mire left over from a 
feudal society that had lasted for thousands of years. It 
effected fundamental emancipation for women in all aspects of 
political, economic, cultural, social and family life. This 
represented a significant transformation in the history of 
contemporary social development that China can be proud of. It 
was also an important contribution made by the Chinese 
revolution to the worldwide movement for women's liberation. 
  Chapter II -- Equal Legal Status 
  China attaches great importance to providing legal 
protection 
to females. Women enjoy equal legal status with men. Now, a 
comprehensive legal system has come into being to protect the 
rights and interests of women and promote sexual equality. It 
takes the Constitution as the basis and the Law on the 
Protection of Rights and Interests of Women as the core, and 
encompasses various specific state laws and regulations, 
administrative decrees and regulations enacted by various 
government departments, and local legislation. 
  The basic principles in China's legislative work concerning 
women are equal rights for men and women, protection of the 
special rights and interests of women, and the banning of any 
discrimination, maltreatment and persecution directed at women. 
The Constitution of the People's Republic of China clearly 
stipulates, "Women enjoy equal rights with men in all spheres of 
life, political, economic, cultural and social, including family 
life...The state protects the rights and interests of women, 
applies the principle of equal pay for equal work for men and 
women alike and trains and selects cadres from among 
women...Marriage, the family and mother and child are protected 
by the state...Violation of the freedom of marriage is 
prohibited. Maltreatment of old people, women and children is 
prohibited." In line with the principles established by the 
Constitution, New China has promulgated over 10 fundamental 
laws, including the Marriage Law, Electoral Law, Law of 
Inheritance, Civil Law and Criminal Law. The State Council and 
various ministries and commissions under it have enacted over 40 
administrative decrees and regulations. Local governments have 
devised more than 80 local regulations and rules. All these 
legislations include clear provisions on the protection of the 
rights and interests of women. No law in China contains clauses 
that discriminate against women. 
  The Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection 
of the Rights and Interests of Women promulgated in 1992 
provided an effective legal weapon for further enhancing the 
social status of women and guaranteeing their basic rights and 
interests. 
  Under Chinese law, the legitimate rights of women can be 
summed up into the following six aspects: 
  -- Women enjoy equal political rights with men. Women have 
the right, through various channels and in various ways, to 
administer state and social affairs, and enjoy equal rights to 
vote and stand for election. To ensure female participation in 
government and political affairs, the law stipulates that 
deputies to the National People's Congress and local people's 
congresses at various levels should include appropriate numbers 
of women and the proportion should be increased step by step. 
It states that the principle of sexual equality should be 
upheld when appointing people to leading posts, and attention 
should be paid to training and selecting top officials from 
among women. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men with respect to culture 
and education. These cover school admittance, advancement to 
higher levels of schooling, job assignment after graduation, 
conferment of academic degrees and being dispatched for study 
abroad, plus women's rights to engage in scientific and 
technological research and literary and artistic creation. The 
government, society, school and family have the responsibility 
to ensure that the right of female children and adolescents to 
receive compulsory education is observed. 
  -- Women enjoy equal working rights with men. These 
mainly include: the right to work and be employed, equal pay 
for equal work, time-off, on-the-job safety and medical care as 
well as special labor protection, and social insurance. The law 
stipulates that any unit, while recruiting employees, is not 
allowed to refuse to employ women or raise the recruitment 
standards for women under any pretext. It cannot fire women or 
unilaterally annul their labor contracts on the pretext of 
marriage, pregnancy, maternity leave or baby nursing. It is not 
allowed to discriminate against women in terms of promotion, 
award of academic and technical titles, allotment of housing and 
enjoyment of welfare benefits, nor to assign women to tasks that 
are not suitable for them. Women enjoy special protection 
during menstruation, pregnancy, child birth and baby nursing 
period. 
  -- Women enjoy equal property rights with men. The law 
stipulates that rural women enjoy the same rights as rural men 
in the allotment of "responsibility farmland" and "grain-ration 
farmland" and in the approval of housing sites. With regard to 
marriage and family property, women enjoy equal ownership and 
inheritance rights with men. Widows have the right to dispose 
of property they inherit, without interference from anyone. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men relating to their 
persons. Women enjoy the right to life and health, freedom of 
the person, the right of portrait [as received], reputation and 
other rights relating to the person; and they enjoy the right of 
kinship, guardianship, fame and status as a producer. The law 
prohibits abandonment and drowning of female babies and other 
forms of infanticide and bans discrimination against and 
maltreatment of women who give birth to female babies and women 
who are sterile. It forbids tormenting women with superstitious 
and violent means and bans maltreatment or abandonment of aged 
women. It forbids the abduction and kidnapping of women as well 
as the sale and purchase of such women. It bans actions to 
organize, force, seduce, shelter or introduce women to engage in 
prostitution. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men in marriage and the 
family. The law states that women enjoy equal freedom in 
marriage and divorce, and the relations between husband and wife 
are equal. Women can use their own surnames and given names and 
participate in production and social activities. Women are 
subject to special protection with regard to divorce. 
  While clearly delineating the various concrete rights and 
interests of women, China's legislation amplifies the 
responsibilities of state organs in protecting women and 
clarifies the special status and role of the women's federations 
and other women's organizations in lawsuits, thus establishing a 
comprehensive legal mechanism for protecting women. Among the 
54 articles of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and 
Interests of Women, 75 percent list in detail the consequences 
and legal responsibilities for infringements, thus providing an 
operational legal basis for enforcement of the law. 
  At present, China is still at the primary stage of socialism 
and remains comparatively underdeveloped in economic and 
cultural development. Therefore, certain provisions on the 
legal rights of women and guarantee mechanisms need to be 
further improved. Along with the in-depth development of 
China's modernization drive, the country's legal system on the 
protection of women's rights and interests will be perfected. 
  Chapter III -- Equal Rights and Important Role in 
Economic Sphere 
  Improvement of the economic status of women constitutes the 
most important foundation for achieving sexual equality. The 
Chinese government has made fruitful efforts to upgrade and 
enhance the economic status of women. Under new conditions, 
Chinese women have become a great force in the country's social 
development, making major contributions to the socialist 
economic construction. 
  Chinese women enjoy equal rights with men in employment. 
Since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, the 
population of employed women has risen constantly. In China, 
employed females now account for some 44 percent of the total 
number of employees, higher than the world rate of 34.5 percent. 
In 1992, employed females made up 72.33 percent of all women 
over 15, and in the countryside, women laborers made up half the 
rural labor force. The number of urban working women increased 
from 600,000 in 1949 to 56 million, while their share of the 
country's total working population went up from 7.5 percent to 
38 percent. Women's areas of employment cover a wide range. 
Among 12 branches of the national economy, nine employ over 1 
million women. They include industry, agriculture, building, 
transport and communications, commerce, public health, 
education, party and government organs and social organizations. 
There has been a remarkable upgrading of the kinds of jobs they 
are holding. In 1992, the number of women in scientific research 
and comprehensive technological services, party and government 
organs and social organizations, and financial and insurance 
establishments accounted for 34.4 percent, 21.6 percent and 37.3 
percent respectively of all employed in these fields. Despite 
the great progress made in the employment of Chinese women, some 
new problems have cropped up in recent years. For instance, 
women are experiencing difficulty finding jobs, chiefly because 
some units do not want to accept females. The Chinese 
Government is now taking active measures to tackle these 
problems. 
  The principle of equal pay for equal work for men and women 
is basically in place. In China, workers in the same 
industries, doing similar kinds of work and having the same 
technical skills, receive the same pay regardless of sex. 
However, due to current differences in cultural and 
professional competence as well as occupational composition, 
some real income gaps still exist between men and women. 
According to a survey conducted in 1990, the average monthly 
incomes for male and female workers in urban areas were 193.15 
yuan and 149.60 yuan respectively, with women receiving only 
77.4 percent of the pay given to men. In rural areas, the 
average annual incomes for men and women were 1,518 yuan and 
1,235 yuan respectively, with women getting 81.4 percent of the 
earnings of men. However, 1.2 percent of all rural women earned 
an average annual income of over 10,000 yuan, and the percentage 
was the same for men. This indicates that, among those who have 
been the first to prosper in the countryside, the income gap 
between men and women has become insignificant. 
  The Chinese Government provides comprehensive protective 
measures for employed women. According to a survey, 85.3 
percent of child-bearing female workers and staff members in 
urban areas enjoy a three-month paid maternity leave, while some 
units have extended the leave to six months. Female workers 
during their pregnant and lactation period have their work load 
and work time reduced. Most state-owned enterprises where 
women predominate have established gynecological clinics, rest 
rooms for pregnant women, breast-feeding rooms, nurseries and 
kindergartens. 
  As the economic status of Chinese women improves, they are 
playing an increasingly significant role in the economic sphere. 
  The rural economic restructuring, conducted since the end 
of the 1970s, unleashed the immense labor potential of women. 
Women have become an important and indispensable force in 
invigorating and promoting the rural economy. Females account 
for more than half of all workers in agriculture, forestry, 
animal husbandry, fisheries and water conservancy. In major 
cotton-producing areas, the management of cotton fields is 
mostly undertaken by women. Of the 14 million self-employed 
rural individuals engaged in commerce and service trades, women 
account for about one-third. In areas where the commodity 
economy is relatively developed, rural women engaged in business 
account for half of farmers who have gone into trade. About 
50-60 percent of the total rural output value is generated by 
women. 
  Rural women in China are an important driving force for the 
development of township enterprises. At present, rural China 
boasts more than 100 million workers in township businesses, and 
40 million of them are females. The ratio is even greater for 
women working in the food, clothing, knitwear and other woven 
products, toy and electronics industries, as well as traditional 
handicrafts and service trades. They create about 65 percent of 
the output value. Township enterprises producing textiles, silk, 
tea, knitwear and other woven products, embroidery and toys, 
where women make up the bulk of the employees, are the ones 
which earn the most foreign exchange for the country. Quite a 
few women become leaders at different levels in township 
enterprises. For instance, there are 2,000-3,000 women 
directors and managers in such businesses in each of the 
provinces of Jiangsu, Guangdong, Anhui, Fujian and Henan. In 
addition, tens of thousands of women serve as the technical 
backbone in production at workshop and shift level. 
  The great role played by Chinese women in rural economic 
construction has won commendation from some international 
organizations. The rural area of Longkou city, Shandong 
Province, has been selected by the United Nations Development 
Program (UNDP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
as an international monitoring point for studying the problem of 
rural women. There rural women not only shoulder 40 to 60 
percent of the workload in the fields but also 74 percent of 
production tasks of township textile, clothing and embroidery 
enterprises. The embroidery articles they make are exported and 
can earn for the country U.S.$2.5 million annually. In recent 
years, 100-odd experts from more than 20 countries have made 
study tours of the area. They have concurred that rural women 
in Longkou are playing as important a role as their male 
counterparts. 
  In the cities, women have made important contributions to 
urban economic reform and development. In the 1982-90 period, 
the growth rate in the number of females employed in the 
following sectors, namely finance, culture and education, radio 
and television, public health, sport and recreation, social 
welfare, commercial concerns, catering, supply and storage, and 
government and social institutions, exceeded that of males by 21 
to 78 percentage points. In 1993, females accounted for 36.8 
percent of those with professional and technical titles in 
enterprises and institutions throughout the country. Women have 
taken an active part in management and offered numerous 
proposals and suggestions for the development of their 
enterprises. According to one survey, women workers and staff 
in Shaanxi, Jiangsu and eight other provinces alone raised 3.87 
million rationalization proposals in the last three years, 
generating 2.1 billion yuan in economic returns. 
  Many women factory directors and enterprise managers have 
come to the fore in the wave of economic reforms and the drive 
to open to the outside world. They have actively participated 
in competition and courageously accepted challenges, playing a 
vital role in ensuring the survival and development of their 
respective enterprises. In 1992, 97 females in the 28 pilot 
enterprises in Liaoning Province, picked to try out reforms, 
rose from rank and file to enterprise managers and leaders in 
the course of fierce competition. In 1988 and 1992, a total of 
107 women factory directors and managers were cited as 
outstanding entrepreneurs. 
  In the 40-odd years since the founding of the People's 
Republic, Chinese women with a sense of self-respect, 
self-confidence, self-reliance and self-strengthening, have 
continued to enhance their own capabilities. Their historic 
accomplishments and significant role in the country's economic 
construction have won widespread commendation. From 1949 to 
1988, a total of 24,858,000 women were awarded the title of 
advanced worker. In the 1978-92 period, 572 outstanding females 
were cited as national model workers, and 20,152 others were 
given the title of "March 8 (International Women's Day) 
Red-Banner Pacesetters." In 1988-93, 936 females were granted 
national "May 1" labor medals. 
  Chapter IV -- Extensive Participation in 
Administration of State and Social Affairs 
  In China, women take full part in administering state and 
social affairs and thus have made mammoth contributions to the 
country's development of democracy and building of its legal 
system. 
  Chinese women occupy an important place in people's 
congresses at various levels. When the First National People's 
Congress (NPC) was held in 1954, there were only 147 women 
deputies, accounting for 12 percent of the total. By 1993, when 
the Eighth NPC was convened, the number of women deputies had 
increased to 626, accounting for 21.03 percent of the total. 
The permanent body of the National People's Congress, the 
Standing Committee, had only four women members, or 5 percent of 
the total, at the time of the First NPC. By the Eighth NPC, the 
number of women Standing Committee members had increased to 19, 
rising to 12.3 percent. From 1954 to 1993, eight women served 
as vice-chairpersons of the NPC Standing Committee. They 
include Soong Ching Ling, He Xiangning, Cai Chang and Chen Muhua. 
  Women deputies to people's congresses at various levels have 
played an important role in legislative work and the 
administration of other state and social affairs. They pay 
particular attention to the problems of education and public 
health, the ecological environment, the protection of the rights 
and interests of women, children and the disabled, social 
security and the general mood of the society. They are active 
in raising suggestions for legislation and policy-making and 
working hard to promote advances in these fields. The enactment 
of the Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of 
Women and many other laws were made on the basis of motions put 
forward by women and with their participation. 
  Chinese women take an active part in the activities of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) at 
various levels. In the Eighth National Committee of the CPPCC 
held in 1993, women accounted for 283 of the members and 29 of 
the standing committee members, making up 13.52 percent and 9.2 
percent of their respective totals. Women members of the CPPCC 
are outstanding figures from all walks of life, and provide wide 
representation. From their different vantage points, they 
express their opinions on national affairs and government work, 
render consultation and carry out democratic supervision. Deng 
Yingchao, Kang Keqing and Qian Zhengying had been or is 
currently among the seven women serving as chairperson or 
vice-chairpersons of the CPPCC National Committee. 
  The system of multi-party cooperation and political 
consultation under the leadership of the Communist Party of 
China forms the basic political system of China. At present, 
the Chinese Communist Party has over 7 million women members, 
accounting for 14 percent of general membership. Many 
outstanding women work in various leading posts within the 
Party. The current 14th CPC Central Committee has 24 women 
members and alternate members, while six women are now acting as 
directors or deputy directors of departments under the CPC 
Central Committee. China's eight democratic parties have some 
110,000 women members. In one party, women constitute 41 
percent of the membership. There are 203 women in the central 
leading organs of the eight democratic parties. Madam Lei 
Jieqiong, vice-chairperson of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee, 
a noted scholar and social activist, is the chairperson of the 
Central Committee of the China Association for Promoting 
Democracy. 
  Participation in government work is an important channel for 
women to play their role in the administration of state and 
social affairs. Since the founding of the People's Republic, 
one woman had served one term as vice-chairperson and later 
honorary president of the country, two women have served as 
vice-premiers of the State Council, and two have been State 
Councilors. China's policies of reform and opening to the 
outside world not only have promoted economic development and 
social progress, but have also prepared better conditions for 
women to participate in government and political affairs. In 
1993, women made up 32.44 percent of all people working in 
government organs. At present, the various ministries and 
commissions under the State Council have 16 female ministers and 
vice-ministers, and the country has 18 female provincial 
governors and deputy governors. In the nation's 517 cities, 
more than 300 women have been elected mayor or deputy mayor. 
  Women play an important role in strengthening legislative 
construction and safeguarding state security. China's judicial 
organs have a large number of women judges, procurators and 
lawyers. In 1992, the country boasted 21,012 female judges and 
4,512 women lawyers. 
  Ordinary women in general also show concern for national 
affairs and government work. There is increasing enthusiasm on 
their part to involve themselves in government and political 
affairs. In all general elections since 1953, when the first 
general election was held for deputies to grass-roots people's 
congresses, over 90 percent of women had exercised their voting 
rights. Since 1984, the rate has risen to 95 percent. Apart 
from frequently making their voices heard through mass 
organizations, women also vent their opinions and raise their 
suggestions on government work and social issues by writing to 
or calling at relevant government offices or through the mass 
media. 
  Women of all ethnic groups and from all walks of life 
realize 
their democratic participation in and supervision over state and 
social affairs through women's federations at various levels. 
This is one of the important channels of women participation in 
political affairs in China. On behalf of women, these 
federations play a part in the making of laws and regulations 
related to the vital interests of women by the people's 
congresses and governments, and supervise their implementation. 
They can propose to relevant government departments that they 
issue policy documents for the settlement of women-related 
problems that emerge. They can also recommend women cadres to 
government organs, social organizations, enterprises and 
institutions. 
  The Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese Government 
consider the participation of women in government and political 
affairs an important component part of the building of democracy 
in China. They have issued special documents and called meetings 
for improving the external environment for women cadres, so as 
to raise the ratio of women participating in political affairs 
and ensure that women really enjoy the political rights written 
in the Constitution. These documents and meetings deal with the 
work of training and selecting cadres from among women. A whole 
series of regulations have been issued to this effect. At 
present, there are women in the party and government leading 
bodies of 23 provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities 
directly under the central government), 244 prefectures (cities, 
autonomous prefectures and leagues) and 2,106 counties 
(districts and banners). In order to promote equality, unity, 
progress and common prosperity among all ethnic groups, the 
government attaches particular attention to training women 
cadres of ethnic minorities, and has established schools for 
these minorities, run training classes for their women cadres 
and offered opportunities for them to go on to advanced studies. 
This has promoted a rapid growth of ethnic minority women 
cadres. By 1992, the number of minority women cadres nationwide 
reached 607,600, accounting for 26.6 percent of all minority 
cadres in the country. Among deputies to the Eighth NPC, 106 
are female deputies from ethnic minorities, accounting for 17 
percent of all women deputies. Moreover, three minority women 
were elected members of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee. 
Cadres from minority nationalities have become a backbone force 
in the political, economic and social development of minority 
areas. 
  The Chinese Government is now working on the program for the 
development of Chinese women, which is aimed at further 
promoting women's participation in government and political 
affairs as well as their overall participation and development. 
  Chapter V -- Full Advance in Society 
  In old China, women were excluded from social life. New 
China has enabled women to make conspicuous progress in all 
aspects of society, especially in the fields of education, 
science and technology, culture, sports and public health. 
  The Chinese Government has exerted great efforts to promote 
women's education. In regular education, the state has adopted 
measures to increase the proportion of female enrollment. In 
some remote, poverty-stricken areas and ethnic minority areas, 
there are free courses and schools specially for women as a 
measure to remove barriers to female education. In 1992, the 
attendance rate for girls from 7 to 11 years old had risen to 
96.2 percent from less than 20 percent before the founding of 
the People's Republic of China in 1949. The proportion of 
females in middle schools, colleges and postgraduate schools 
reached 43.1 percent, 33.7 percent and 24.8 percent 
respectively. Among engineering college graduates, women 
accounted for 27 percent. From 1982, when the academic degree 
system was resumed, to 1993, 1,149 women were awarded 
doctorates, making up 9.4 percent of total Ph.D recipients. 
  The Chinese Government has also paid special attention to 
promoting adult and vocational education and eliminating 
illiteracy among women. There are 1,679 women's secondary 
vocational schools and three women's vocational colleges, which 
offer more than 60 specialties suitable for women. Over 13 
million women are enrolled in institutions of higher learning. 
Over a period of 45 years since the founding of the People's 
Republic, more than 110 million women illiterates have been 
taught to read, reducing the female illiteracy rate from 90 
percent in 1949 to 32 percent in 1993. 
  Chinese women have made active contributions to education. 
In 1992, women teachers at all levels made up 30-44.5 percent 
of teachers nationwide. In Beijing University, the most 
distinguished university of China, about one-third of the 3,000 
academics are female. Among them, 19 are tutors of postgraduate 
candidates, 68 are professors and more than 300 are associate 
professors. Over 20 women across the country assume the posts 
of university president or vice-president. In 1990, 50,000 
teachers were cited for having made outstanding contributions. 
Seventy percent of them were women. In 1993, 5,971 people were 
cited as exemplary teachers and education workers in the 
national education system, among them 1,702 being women, or 28.5 
percent of the total. Of the 592 model workers in the national 
education system, women accounted for 150, or 25.3 percent of 
the total. 
  The Chinese Government has attached great importance to 
training women scientists and technicians, trying to improve 
their working and living conditions and encouraging and 
supporting them in their scientific research. Many women have 
stepped into the frontiers of science and technology in areas 
such as high-energy physics, genetic engineering, 
microelectronics and satellite launching. Together with male 
scientists, they have achieved many breakthroughs. In 1993, 
China had 8,097,000 women scientists and technicians, making up 
35 percent of the total. In the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
there are 186 women directors of research centers, accounting 
for 11.9 percent of all directors. As to leaders of research 
teams, 514, or 14.8 percent of them are women. In the Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, women make up over 40 percent of 
scientists with senior professional titles, and 47.3 percent of 
the 112 academy-level key research projects are in the charge of 
women. Up to 1993, the Chinese Academy of Sciences had selected 
29 women as academicians, making up 5.4 percent of the total. 
By 1992, 204 women had become state-level experts, accounting 
for 5.7 percent of all such experts in the country. Among 
specialists and scholars who enjoy special government 
allowances, 11,374, or 10 percent of the total, are women. 
Chinese women have become a significant force in scientific and 
technological circles. 
  Chinese women have exhibited their acumen and talents in the 
arts and culture. In 12 cultural organizations, such as the 
Chinese Writers' Association, the China Film Association, the 
Chinese Artists' Association and the China Society for the Study 
of Folk Literature and Art, women members are quite active and 
their proportion hits 41.8 percent at the highest. Women 
writers, performers, painters, directors and musicians are 
constantly emerging. Since China implemented its reform and 
opening up policies, the emergence of a galaxy of writers has 
brightened the literary scene. At international ballet, piano, 
violin and vocal music competitions, women made up over 50 
percent of Chinese prize winners. With acrobats, it is over 70 
percent. 
  The Chinese Government takes active measures to create 
favorable conditions for women participation in physical 
training and international matches. With their enterprising 
spirit, women athletes have done brilliantly in the global 
sports arena. From 1985 to 1993, China had 404 top sportswomen 
at international level, accounting for 51 percent of all Chinese 
athletes at that rank. Between 1949 and 1993, Chinese athletes 
won 775 world championships, of which 460, or 59 percent, were 
won by women; Chinese athletes broke world records 725 times, 
with women accounting for 458 of these, or about 63 percent of 
the total. At the 25th Olympic Games held in 1992, Chinese 
women athletes scooped 12 gold medals, taking three quarters of 
the golds for China. The indomitable and tenacious character 
displayed by Chinese women athletes embody the new look of the 
Chinese nation. 
  Women have made outstanding contributions to the nation's 
medical and health services. By 1993, China had 2.27 million 
medical workers specializing in maternity and child care, 
accounting for 55 percent of all those in the medical 
profession. The late Lin Qiaozhi, who possessed superb medical 
skills and high medical ethics, was vice-president of the 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and the head of the Society 
of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of the Chinese Medical 
Association. She long engaged in gynaecological and obstetrics 
teaching and research, conducting general surveys and curing 
common and recurring women's illnesses. She contributed 
significantly to China's modern gyniatrics and set an excellent 
example of humanitarianism in healing the wounded and rescuing 
the dying. 
  In the 15 years since the reform and opening up, 382 
achievements in medical sciences have been honored with 
state-level awards. More than 50 percent of these achievements 
were made with the participation of women and a quarter have 
been independently accomplished by females. From 1983 till now, 
15 Chinese women have won the Nightingale Medal, the world's top 
honor for nurses. 
  Women have played an irreplaceable role in enhancing social 
morality, improving social environment and maintaining social 
stability. 
  Neighborhood committees can be found in cities and towns all 
over the country. These are autonomous popular organizations 
and one of their major duties is to mediate in neighborhood 
disputes. Most of the active members are women. With all their 
heart and soul, they perform patient and painstaking work to 
settle disputes among their neighbors. In doing so, they quash 
numerous civil quarrels that might otherwise develop into 
criminal cases and thus promote harmony among residents. 
  Women take the initiative in helping the government in its 
efforts to educate people who have taken a wrong step in life. 
From the very early days after the founding of the People's 
Republic, many public-spirited women visited prisons on their 
days off to see criminals whom they had never met. They wrote 
to felons and encouraged them to rehabilitate themselves during 
their time inside and try to turn over a new leaf. In the last 
few years, more and more women have been participating in this 
type of activity. There are many thousands of "assistance and 
education teams" across the country, mainly composed of women. 
These groups not only help young wrong-doers to remould their 
thinking, but also try to find jobs and spouses for them on 
their release. China is among countries with the lowest 
incidence of crime and recidivism. This fact is closely related 
to the efforts of women. 
  Responding to the government call for a cultured, scientific 
and progressive life style, women show great enthusiasm in 
public welfare work. Most of those who serve in old folks' 
homes and social welfare institutions are women. They treat 
elders and youngsters like their own kith and kin. In numerous 
cities and villages, many women voluntarily take it upon 
themselves to support and care for aged widows and widowers or 
adopt orphans. In cities and towns, retired women take over 
community services on their own initiative. They set up 
nurseries, snack bars, sales commission agencies and hygiene 
supervision posts, which are welcomed by the society. In many 
places, women volunteer to organize associations to ban gambling 
and thus save many families on the verge of disintegration, 
promoting a favorable turn in civil practices and the general 
mood of society. 
  Owing to historical reasons and the constraints of the level 
of social, economic and cultural development, some problems 
continue to impede women's full participation in social life and 
must not be ignored. In particular, the majority of women have 
a low level of education and in some rural areas, especially in 
remote or border regions, female children are not being fully 
guaranteed their right to education. The government and social 
organizations are adopting measures to overcome these 
inadequacies. 
  Chapter VI -- Equal Status in Marriage and Family 
Life 
  The founding of New China put an end to the feudal marital 
and family system that had endured for several millennia. 
Independent marriage based on mutual love and a family life in 
which husband and wife are equal have become the main current in 
contemporary Chinese society. 
  Women have gained the right of self-determination in 
marriage. In old China, over 95 percent of marriages were 
arranged and on a monetary basis. Over the last 40-odd years, 
the degree of freedom in choosing a partner has increased 
significantly. Sample investigations show that 74 percent of 
young couples make the decision themselves to wed or do so after 
consultation with their parents, and 80 percent of marriages of 
women under 40 years old are based on their own choice. Women's 
rights with regard to divorce and remarriage are also duly 
guaranteed. This fact has helped improve the quality of 
marriage and enhance family stability. In addition, it lays an 
emotional foundation for equality between husband and wife in 
the family. 
  Chinese women have gained the important personal right of 
being able to retain their maiden names. In old China, surnames 
symbolized the continuity of a clan. Most women had no formal 
name before marriage. They adopted their husband's surname 
after they wed and children used their father's surname. In New 
China, both husband and wife have equal right to use their own 
names and children do not have to adopt their father's surname 
as was the former custom. In cities, quite a few children take 
their mother's surname. 
  Women's economic independence has promoted their status in 
the family. In old China, family heads were predominantly men. 
In New China, women earn their own income through work. The 
share of women's earnings in total family income has risen from 
20 percent in the 1950s to the present 40 percent. In some 
families, especially rural households which are headed by women 
and which specialize in certain areas of production, the money 
brought in by women makes up as much as 60-70 percent of the 
family total. As they have become economically independent, 
Chinese women have gained more management and decision-making 
power in principal family and economic matters. Sample 
investigations show that in over 58 percent of urban and rural 
families, major affairs are decided by the husband and wife 
together. This figure continues to climb. 
  Women enjoy the same rights of possession and inheritance of 
family property as men. In old China, family assets could only 
be owned and inherited by men. If a widow remarried, she could 
take nothing and a married daughter had no right to inherit 
anything from her parents. Nowadays, in the overwhelming 
majority of families, husband and wife jointly own family 
property and they have equal access to its use and allocation. 
It has become common practice for husband and wife to enjoy the 
same bequeathment rights and for sons and daughters to have 
equal rights as heirs. 
  Historical changes have taken place in family relationship. 
The traditional family characterized by the authority of 
husband and patriarchal system has gradually been replaced by 
the modern family mode, marked by equality and a democratic and 
harmonious atmosphere. In both urban and rural areas, the 
relationships between husband and wife and between 
parents-in-law and daughter-in-law are equal. There is social 
disapproval of ill-treatment meted out to wives and 
daughters-in-law. Women's personal dignity, their rights to 
education and work as well as their ideals and pursuits, are 
generally respected by their husbands and other family members. 
In the past, a wife took on all the housework. Nowadays, in 
most Chinese families, husband and wife share this task 
together. They support each other in their careers and help 
each other in everyday life. In China, such families with close 
emotional ties are emerging in large numbers. 
  China has 267 million families and every year about 10 
million newlywed couples join their ranks. The Chinese 
Government has consistently protected marriage and the family, 
emphasized equality between husband and wife, and fostered the 
Chinese national tradition of respect for the old, love for the 
young and harmonious relations in the family. Currently, the 
divorce rate in China is 1.54 per thousand. Because Chinese 
families are basically stable, family functions, such as living 
arrangements, child rearing and support for the elderly, are 
fully in evidence. Most of the elderly enjoy support and care 
from their children as well as society. 
  The Chinese Government pays much attention to the building 
of 
families and considers family stability and progress to be the 
basis for social stability and progress. Governments at all 
levels list enhancement of family cultural levels in their 
overall planning for local cultural and ideological advance. 
Much effective work has been done in this regard. Associations 
for respect of the elderly and for fostering of morals, and 
wedding and funeral councils have been set up in many places, 
effectively improving the general family and village atmosphere. 
Over the years, campaigns to create civilized and fine families 
and various other related activities have been launched in urban 
and rural areas. They have helped improve the overall 
attributes of family members and promote family democracy and 
harmony, between husband and wife and among all members. 
  The Chinese Government has made significant efforts to 
promote social welfare undertakings and accelerate the 
socialization of housework. The state encourages and supports 
efforts to expand community services. Handy help networks have 
been set up in large numbers, and efforts are made to develop 
branches that are closely related to daily life -- foodstuffs, 
vegetables, commerce, gas and light industrial products. 
Currently, various housework service facilities are surging in 
urban and rural China. There are 450,000 nurseries and 
kindergartens nationwide. The entrance rate to these reaches 70 
percent of pre-school age children in towns and 32 percent in 
the countryside. Convenience foods and electrical household 
appliances are finding their way into families. As a result, 
the average time women spend on housework daily has generally 
decreased. In cities, professional women put an average of 3.75 
hours into household chores. This is almost equivalent to the 
time spent on such tasks by their female counterparts in 
developed countries. 
  Women's rights to decide whether or not to bear children are 
duly protected. In old China, women were just child bearing 
tools, and they were often persecuted by their parents-in-law or 
abandoned by their husbands because they were unable to provide 
any offspring, let alone a son. In New China, women are in 
control of their own child bearing and they can discuss with 
their spouses whether or not they will go through with a 
pregnancy. Historically, Chinese women were victims of early 
marriage and burdened by excessive numbers of offspring. They 
display great enthusiasm for the state's family planning policy 
and the overwhelming majority of them are willing to marry late 
and have children late, and to have fewer children so as to 
guarantee a better quality of life for them. The contraception 
rate among married women reaches 83 percent in the country as a 
whole, and over 90 percent in some places. In 1992, the birth 
rate for the Chinese population was 18.24 per thousand and the 
natural population growth rate was 11.6 per thousand, 
representing respective decreases of 45.4 percent and 55 percent 
over 1970. In the same period, the gross fertility rate fell 
from 5.81 to about 2.0. 
  Maternal health is protected by the state. In old China, 
since there were no maternity and child care centers, countless 
women died from pregnancy complications or other gynaecological 
complaints. New China has devoted much efforts to developing 
health care for women and children. Governments at all levels 
have special functional departments in charge of maternity and 
child hygiene. Health centers in this regard have been set up at 
all levels in both urban and rural areas. By the end of 1992, 
China had 346 maternity and children's health care centers, 
2,841 clinics and 34 pediatric hospitals, initially forming a 
national health network for women and children. At present, 98 
percent of pregnant women in urban areas and 70 percent in rural 
areas can receive prenatal examinations. Modern methods are 
adopted for 84.1 percent of deliveries in China. Compared with 
the early days after the founding of New China, the mortality 
rate for pregnant and lying-in women has dropped from 1,500 per 
hundred thousand to about 94.7 per hundred thousand, and the 
infant mortality rate has fallen from 200 per thousand to 31.42 
per thousand. Some common ailments and frequently-occurring 
diseases that threaten female health have effectively been 
prevented or put under control. Every year close to 40 million 
women receive preventive health checks. In the light of the 
poor hygienic and medical conditions and high incidence of 
disease in ethnic minority areas, the state has attached great 
importance to developing women's health care facilities there. 
Enormous efforts have been put into popularizing modern 
delivery methods, health care for women and children, prevention 
and control of frequently-occurring diseases and elementary 
knowledge of hygiene and sanitation. Much has been done to 
train midwives and gynecological and pediatric medical workers. 
In addition, authorities at all levels often organize mobile 
medical teams to visit farming and pastoral areas and other 
ethnic communities. Free medical care for women is provided in 
Tibet and other regions. 
  Thanks to all these efforts, the average life expectancy of 
Chinese women has risen from 36.7 years in old China to the 
present 72 years. This is three years above the figure for 
Chinese men and seven years higher than the average life 
expectancy of 65 years set as a goal by the United Nations for 
the women of the world by the year 2000. 
  However, in spite of all these achievements, the influence 
of 
feudal concepts and regional imbalances in economic and cultural 
development continues to show their effect. The bad habits of 
arranged and mercenary marriage linger on in some rural areas, 
especially in the outlying and backward spots. Cases of 
drowning and abandonment of female infants and trafficking in 
women occur from time to time. The Chinese Government is paying 
close attention to these problems. It is vigorously advocating 
the equality of the sexes and educating women to use legal 
weapons to defend themselves. Strong measures have been adopted 
against unlawful cruel treatment of women to ensure that their 
legitimate rights and interests are not infringed upon. 
  Chapter VII -- Organizational Guarantees of the 
Rights and Interests of Chinese Women 
  Guarantees for the legal rights and interests of women are 
an 
issue of common concern in China. Government organs, social 
organizations, enterprises and institutions, and rural and urban 
mass groups at the grass roots have all made efforts to this 
effect in line with the laws and regulations. 
  People's congresses at all levels are responsible for 
drafting and revising laws and statutes to protect women's 
rights and interests. They supervise the implementation of 
relevant laws and governmental work to safeguard the position of 
women and children. To ensure the task is performed well, the 
Committee for Internal and Judicial Affairs under the National 
People's Congress (NPC) and the standing committees of 16 
provincial, autonomous, and municipal people's congresses have 
established special departments to handle matters concerning 
women and children. Committees at all echelons of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) carry out 
democratic supervision and provide political consultation on 
legislations concerning women's rights and interests and their 
implementation. They conduct surveys of major problems 
connected with women, and submit their opinions and suggestions 
for resolving them. The National Committee of CPPCC and its 
counterparts in some provinces and municipalities have also 
established committees for women and youth. 
  People's governments at each level and their departments are 
responsible for drafting and revising women-related 
administrative regulations, issuing relevant decisions and 
orders, linking women's advance with social development, and 
adopting administrative measures to oversee the protection of 
women's rights and interests. Judicial bodies at all levels, in 
accordance with legal procedures, hear and judge cases and 
punish criminals who infringe on women's rights and interests 
and see to it that laws are upheld. To coordinate and propel 
governmental departments in their work of guaranteeing the 
rights of women, the State Council has established a Work 
Committee for Women and Children. Its members include leaders 
from 16 ministries and commissions and four mass organizations. 
Similar local government bodies have also been set up in all 
the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, with the 
exception of Taiwan. 
  More than 5,800 mass women's organizations in China 
undertake 
to report women's views and their problems to the authorities 
and make suggestions on how to solve them. They are an 
important force in safeguarding the status of women. The 
biggest of these is the All-China Women's Federation (ACWF), 
which comprises women from different ethnic groups and all walks 
of life. It has broad representation and a popular basis, and 
furthermore, a sound functional network. Its basic units can be 
found in urban neighborhoods as well as in villages. Aiming to 
represent and defend the interests of women, the federation 
devotes itself to promoting sexual equality and raising women's 
position in society. Its outstanding work has earned it a high 
reputation in society and women's confidence. Many other 
national, regional, and professional women's organizations, such 
as the Council of Women Workers, the Association of Women 
Scientific and Technological Workers, the Young Women's 
Christian Association, and associations of women entrepreneurs, 
women engineers, women journalists, women judges, lawyers, 
writers, calligraphers and so on, are affiliated with the 
federation. As the federation has the same goal as the 
government, which is to unite women to take part in social 
development and to defend women's rights and interests, its work 
is supported and encouraged by the authorities on every rung. 
The eight democratic parties of China have also set up 
commissions for women, whose efforts have effectively defended 
the cause of women. 
  Mass media and research institutes play an important role 
in safeguarding the rights and interests and promoting the 
advancement of women. The press, radio and television publicize 
state laws and regulations upholding women's rights and 
interests and civilized and progressive views on women. This 
has greatly promoted public awareness of women's rights and 
contributions to society. Women's organizations have also 
published many newspapers and magazines for women, the ACWF and 
its branches alone have 47 periodicals. Some newspapers have 
special columns on women. Radio and television stations make 
special women's programs. National and local research 
institutes on women have been established and their activities 
help in many ways to protect women's rights and interests. 
  Coordinating their efforts and acting together, the 
above-mentioned groups have produced positive results in 
eliminating discrimination against women, upholding equality 
between men and women, improving women's qualifications and 
promoting the advancement of women. 
  The Law on the Protection of the Rights and Interests of 
Women is the product of joint efforts by organs of state power, 
executive bodies and mass groups. The idea of drafting such a 
law was first put forward by the All-China Women's Federation. 
Drafts and proposals to this effect were submitted by deputies 
to the NPC, members of the CPPCC and representatives to the 
Women's Congress. The proposal gained the attention and 
acceptance of the Standing Committee of the NPC, which entrusted 
the drafting work to the ACWF, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and 
the All-China Federation of Trade Unions. The Committee for 
Internal and Judicial Affairs under the National People's 
Congress and the Work Committee for Women and Children under the 
State Council also participated. Since the statute was 
promulgated, these organizations have launched publicity 
activities and extensive surveys to promote its implementation. 
  To stop the abduction and sale of women and children and 
prostitution, phenomena which have reappeared in some areas in 
recent years, the State Council issued a Notice on Reprisals 
Against Trafficking in Women and Children in 1989. In 1991, in 
response to proposals by some political parties and 
organizations, the NPC drew up the Decision on the Strict 
Prohibition Against Prostitution and Whoring and the Decision 
Regarding the Severe Punishment of the Criminals Who Abduct and 
Traffic in or Kidnap Women or Children. Government departments 
involved held three successive work meetings, and as a result, 
social security was enhanced and felonies checked. In 1992, 
there was a 35.2 percent reduction in cases of abduction and 
sale of women and children as compared with 1991, and there was 
a further drop of 9 percent in 1993. 
  Female self-improvement is a strategic task fundamental to 
the protection of women's rights and interests. Since 1989, the 
All-China Women's Federation, together with over 10 governmental 
departments, has launched several campaigns for the betterment 
of women themselves. One aimed at promoting cultural and 
technical studies and achievements among women of different 
ethnic groups in the countryside. By the end of 1993, more than 
120 million rural women had joined in and 90 million of them had 
received practical technical training. Another 10 million had 
learned to read and write, while 510,000 gained the title of 
agro-technician. In poverty-stricken areas, mostly old 
revolutionary bases, ethnic minority areas and border regions, 
250 training classes have been held and 4,500 aid stations have 
been set up to help the impoverished. Nowadays, 80 percent of 
the poor families covered by these stations have adequate food 
and clothing. About 37.76 million urban women took part in an 
ACWF-initiated project to contribute to the Eighth Five-Year 
Plan, and 4,672 of them were dubbed pacesetters, and another 
15,132 were awarded at provincial level or above the title of 
"Able Woman." The above-mentioned project embraced a call for 
women to have high ideals, high moral standards, education and 
discipline (briefly known as "four haves") as well as to strive 
for self-respect, self-confidence, self-reliance and 
self-strengthening (briefly known as "four selfs"). The slogan 
of "four selfs" was first raised at the Sixth National Congress 
of Women. Then, the Seventh National Congress of Women adopted a 
10-Point Goal for the Advancement of Chinese Women in the 1990s. 
The "four selfs" slogan and the 10-point goal produced a 
widespread impact upon women and society. Inspired by them, 
millions of Chinese women are realizing their own betterment and 
progress in the course of propelling society forward. 
  Chapter VIII -- Active Participation in 
International Women's Activities 
  China recognizes and respects the principle of sexual 
equality affirmed in the United Nations Charter and appreciates 
and supports UN endeavors to promote the status of women and 
realize sexual equality. China has taken an active part in 
international women's activities sponsored by the UN. In 
accordance with its independent foreign policy of peace, China 
is striving to develop friendly exchanges and cooperation with 
women from all over the world, while making unremitting efforts 
to realize the goal of worldwide equality between men and women, 
women's participation in social development and maintenance of 
world peace. 
  Since resuming membership in the UN in October 1971, China 
has shown great enthusiasm in participating in UN activities 
related to women. 
  China has been playing an active role in UN women's 
organizations. Since 1974, China has been elected five times as 
a member state in the UN Commission on the Status of Women. 
There, Chinese representatives have expounded Chinese women's 
stand on world peace, participation in development and promotion 
of sexual equality, exchanged experience and information on 
promoting women's conditions and giving full play to the role of 
women with their counterparts from other countries. This has 
helped to enhance mutual understanding and develop friendly 
cooperation. Since 1982, Chinese experts have been elected four 
times in succession as representatives on the Committee on 
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women and participated in 
evaluating the reports submitted by governments and made 
strenuous efforts to eliminate discrimination against women. 
From 1985 to 1988, China was elected a member of the board of 
directors of the International Research and Training Institute 
for the Advancement of Women, where it made positive 
contributions to women's research and training. 
  China was one of the first signatories to the Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and 
has submitted timely reports on its implementation in China as 
required. China took part in formulating and examining the 
Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women 
to the Year 2000, and has laid down statutes and adopted 
concrete policies in accordance with China's reality so that the 
Nairobi Strategies may be realized. China has consistently 
carried out the principle that men and women enjoy equal pay for 
equal work. In 1990, it formally ratified the Convention 
Concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work 
of Equal Value released by the International Labor Organization. 
  China supported and engaged in activities for International 
Women's Year in 1975 and the UN Decade for Women, from 1975 to 
1985. The Chinese Government sent delegations to the world 
conferences on women held in Mexico City in 1975, Copenhagen in 
1980 and Nairobi in 1985, and also to the five global 
preliminary meetings and two regional preparatory meetings. At 
these events, Chinese representatives gave full support to 
exertions for the United Nations Decade for Women and expounded 
China's stand and viewpoints on some major international 
problems and strategies for the advancement of conditions for 
women, thus making positive contributions to the success of 
these conferences. At the same time, Chinese women's 
organizations sent members to take part in Non-Governmental 
Organization Forum held during the three conferences. China 
attended 17 UN-sponsored training classes and seminars aimed at 
realizing the goals of the UN Decade for Women. In the course of 
these efforts, China exchanged observations and improved its 
relations with other countries. 
  Chinese women have made vigorous efforts to develop links 
with women organizations and individuals around the globe. To 
date, the All-China Women's Federation has established ties with 
nearly 480 governmental and non-governmental women's and 
children's organizations in over 130 countries and regions and 
received more than 10,000 visitors in recent years, including 
first ladies, women ministers, members of parliament, 
entrepreneurs, specialists, scholars and leaders and staff 
members of women's and children's groups. In the past 15 years, 
China has sent 280 women delegations abroad. Indeed, Chinese 
women have friends all over the world. 
  China believes that although different countries have 
different histories and their realities and level of economic 
development vary, they face some common tasks, similar situation 
and difficulties with regard to women. China is ready to 
establish relations with women of all states to learn from each 
other so as to jointly improve the situation for women. In 
recent years, Chinese women's organizations have jointly 
sponsored seminars with their counterparts in the United States, 
Russia, Japan and other countries to study and exchange views on 
issues that confront women worldwide. 
  China has taken an active part in international cooperative 
projects concerning women. At the request of UNESCO, the 
Asia-Pacific Development Center and United Nations University, 
China has undertaken research projects on Chinese women and 
submitted many reports which have all been well received. Over 
the past decade, the All-China Women's Federation has cooperated 
with the United Nations Children's Fund, United Nations Women's 
Development Fund, United Nations University, Canadian 
International Development Agency and other governmental and 
non-governmental organizations in over 700 projects in 30 
provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities. The schemes 
include such items as eliminating illiteracy among rural women 
and providing them with practical technical training, offering 
vocational training for job-seeking young urban women, training 
kindergarten teachers, and promoting women's and children's 
health care and family education. Over 300,000 women have taken 
part in these programs and the results have been outstanding. 
The Assistance for Youth Employment Project has been awarded a 
special prize by the United Nations Women's Development Fund, 
and the All-China Women's Federation has been highly commended 
as an ideal partner for international cooperation. 
  Support has flowed from China for efforts by developing 
countries to foster women's participation in economic 
development. Since 1980, China has provided 101 batches of 
material assistance to women's and children's organizations in 
50 countries. The provisions included sewing and embroidery 
machines, cultural and sports facilities, and clothes and toys. 
They have helped vocational training for unemployed urban young 
women and promoted women's work. To meet the needs of these 
countries, China has in recent years dispatched technical groups 
specializing in straw, flax and corn straw weaving and 
embroidery to Mozambique, Mexico, Mauritius, Uganda and Ecuador 
to help raise the production skills of local women. These 
contributions have received high praise from the local 
governments and people. 
  China adheres to the United Nations theme of equality, 
development and peace when taking part in international 
bilateral and multilateral women's activities. 
  In upholding the principle of equality between men and 
women, 
China believes this concept concerns not only the interests of 
women but also the full employment of the wisdom of humanity and 
total utilization of social productive forces. Equality is a 
prerequisite for women's participation in social development. 
In March 1985, at the third preliminary session on reviewing 
the achievements of the UN Decade for Women, the Chinese 
delegate pointed out, "Equality between men and women has been 
the goal of the women's movement for a long time. The United 
Nations Decade for Women has scored marked progress in 
legislative equality, but this is not enough... We believe that 
strategically we must stress that efforts must be made at the 
international, regional and national levels to work out active 
plans in order to reach a genuine equality; every governmental 
and non-governmental organization should provide legal services 
for women and make it possible for them to adopt legal weapons 
to protect their legitimate rights." At present, political, 
economic, social, family and racial discrimination against women 
continue to exist in some countries to varying degrees. Hence, 
a significant narrowing of the gap between law and reality 
remains an important and arduous task for every government and 
the international community at large. 
  China is convinced that the key to achieving sexual equality 
is to enable women to take part in development as the equals of 
men. Women provide great momentum for human progress, and 
without their participation, true progress is not possible. 
Nowadays, many obstacles still prevent women from fully taking 
part in social development. In addition to formulating laws and 
regulations to ensure the right to equal participation, it is 
necessary to strengthen women's education so that women's 
talents are developed and their scientific and cultural 
standards and management skills can be enhanced. For historical 
reasons and as a result of an unfair and irrational global 
economic order, most of the developing countries suffer from a 
low level of economic development and backwardness in science 
and technology. This has seriously hindered women's 
participation in social and economic development, hence their 
low social status. For this reason, the international economic 
order should be thoroughly transformed. Bilateral and 
multilateral economic and technical cooperation should be 
developed so that women worldwide, and especially those from 
developing countries, can enjoy the right to participate in 
social development as men's equals. 
  China believes that women are a great force in maintaining 
world peace, and this is closely linked to the future of our 
planet and the destiny of the mankind, women in particular. 
Without peace, development and sexual equality are out of the 
question. However, in today's world, acts which go against the 
United Nations Charter and the principles of international law 
still exist. These include such practices as the big bullying 
the small, the strong domineering over the weak, interfering in 
the internal affairs of other countries and violating their 
sovereignty, and armed aggression and occupation of the 
territory of other states. Local wars and regional conflicts 
have been incessant. China firmly supports the struggle by 
women and the entire humanity against external aggression and 
interference and the efforts to safeguard national independence, 
promote national economies and women's advancement. China 
believes that all countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich 
or poor, are equal. Countries should abide by the Five 
Principles of Peaceful Co-existence. The internal affairs of a 
state should be solved by its own people, while international 
matters should be settled through consultation among countries. 
Over the years, Chinese women have made unremitting efforts to 
maintain world peace, and to fight against imperialism, old and 
new colonialism, hegemonism, racism of various forms, fascism 
and all forms of terrorism. 
  As the host country of the Fourth World Conference on Women, 
China will make positive efforts to ensure its success. Since 
the United Nations accepted the application of the Chinese 
Government and decided to hold the Fourth World Conference on 
Women in Beijing in September 1995, the Chinese Government has 
attached great importance to its preparatory work. In August 
1992, the State Council set up an Organization Committee 
consisting of leaders from 30 relevant ministries, the Beijing 
municipal government and mass groups to be fully responsible for 
the preparation. Chaired by State Councillor Peng Peiyun, the 
committee stresses that the preparation for the conference 
should also be used as an opportunity to promote the role of 
Chinese women in social development and sexual equality. In 
March 1993, Chinese Premier Li Peng stressed in the Report on 
Government Work at the First Session of the Eighth National 
People's Congress, "We should make the Fourth World Conference 
on Women a success." This is a call to the Chinese people for 
general mobilization and also a solemn pledge to the 
international community. At present, the Chinese Government is 
earnestly carrying out its responsibilities as a host country 
and increasing its contacts and cooperation with UN 
organizations, governments and relevant non-governmental 
organizations in the world. It is exerting its utmost efforts 
to facilitate the convocation of the conference and contribute 
to the global advancement of women. 

