the   City Public Health System 

<F P=102> 947C0183B Kazan KAZANSKIY MEDITSINSKIY ZHURNAL in Russian 
Vol. 74 No. 4, Apr 93 pp 315-317--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 947C0183B </F>
<F P=104>  Kazan KAZANSKIY MEDITSINSKIY ZHURNAL </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. S. Abdullin, Kazan Public Health </F>
Administration; UDC 614.2:616-058.9:352] 
  [Text] The health of the population takes shape under the 
influence of a large number of socioeconomic, ecological, 
behavioral and biological factors. It depends directly on the 
state of the public health system in only 10 percent of cases. 
Despite this, public health often assumes the responsibility for 
maintaining and strengthening public health. 
  A large number of alarming trends have revealed themselves 
in 
recent years in the health of the city's residents. For example 
in 1992 the birth rate dropped to 10.2 per 1,000 population, 
while mortality grew to 10.5. Natural growth is 0.3 per 1,000 
population, and it is exhibiting a tendency of further decline. 
We have thus encountered depopulation of the capital of the 
Republic of Tatarstan for the first time. Growth is noted in the 
incidence of malignant neoplasms from 296 per 100,000 population 
in 1986 to 317.5 in 1992. The frequency of their neglect 
increased significantly during this period as well (from 17.2 to 
30.2 percent). Cancer mortality grew correspondingly from 210.0 
in 1986 to 228.5 in 1992 per 100,000 population. 
  A tendency for growth in incidence of tuberculosis, 
including 
the active form, and of mental diseases, syphilis, drug 
addiction and toxic substance abuse is observed. 
  A certain tendency for decline of both overall morbidity and 
incidence of illnesses can be discerned in the presence of 
significant growth of mortality. This paradox is apparently 
explained by a decrease in the frequency of the people's visits 
to medical institutions, a drop in infectious morbidity, and in 
part, flaws in accounting and reporting. Special mention should 
be made of the paradoxical three-time decrease in incidence of 
alcoholism on the backdrop of a drop in alcoholism control 
efforts and growth of the volume of alcoholic beverages consumed. 
  In describing the health of the population of Kazan we would 
like to dwell specially on the health of women of child-bearing 
age, children and adolescents, which allows us to predict the 
health of future generations to some degree. The health index of 
children in their first year of life is decreasing with every 
year; it is only 24.1 percent. Infant morbidity has been 
observed to grow from 1,788 cases in 1986 to 2,245 cases in 1992 
per 1,000 population of the corresponding age, while the number 
of dispensary patients decreased during this period from 279 per 
1,000 population to 277. Health indicators are also worsening 
among schoolchildren. 
  The health of adolescents--both boys and girls--evokes 
alarm. 
In the last 5 years the incidence of illness among adolescent 
girls has increased, and one of every three suffers some 
disease. In some of the city's rayons 50 percent of the young 
girls are found to have extragenital diseases. Thus the 
reproductive function of the future generation is in danger, 
because healthy children are born only from healthy parents. 
  Today the health of the female population of Kazan evokes 
serious concern. Maternal mortality was 46.7 per 100,000 live 
births in the city in 1992. Almost 50 percent of pregnant women 
suffer extragenital diseases. Only 12 percent of women use 
contraceptives (60-80 percent do so in civilized countries). 
This is obviously why there are three abortions for every birth, 
and why the quantity of complications following abortions has 
increased. 
  Sixty percent of women are employed in Kazan's industrial 
enterprises in jobs exposing them to harmful production factors. 
This situation has led to growth in occupational diseases among 
women, and the number of premature births and spontaneous 
abortions has increased. 
  We are also troubled by the fact that strange as it may seem 
at first glance, the health of the population is continuing to 
worsen as the availability of physicians to the population has 
increased from 37.8 in 1986 to 38.3 in 1992, and on the backdrop 
of relative improvement of the material and equipment base of 
public health institutions. 
  Today the city has 59 hospitals with 16,890 beds; of this 
number, 42 hospitals with 9,050 beds are under the Public Health 
Administration. There are 159 beds per 10,000 population (the 
norm is 139). There are 82 outpatient polyclinic institutions in 
the city fitted out with modern endoscopic equipment and 
ultrasonic units. 
  Despite the extensive network of therapeutic and preventive 
institutions in the city, their construction is continuing: A 
ward with a capacity of 240 beds was built by the construction 
and installation division of the Tasma Production Association, 
and erection is under way of a rehabilitation ward for City 
Hospital No. 16, a multiprofile hospital with 800 beds, a 
pediatric multiprofile hospital with 300 beds, and so on. 
  The material and equipment base of therapeutic and 
preventive 
institutions is also improving due to reconstruction of existing 
institutions. Overhaul and reconstruction were carried out in 
1992 in 27 therapeutic institutions; however, the results of our 
labor are more modest today than they were 5-6 years ago. A 
declining interest in conscientious work and a decrease in the 
level of professionalism of medical workers are playing a major 
role here. The residual principle of financing may be included 
in another group of causes. Rather than 6-10 percent of gross 
national income, we have actually allocated two to three times 
less. Hence the low wages and the insufficient supply of medical 
equipment, medicines and instruments in therapeutic and 
preventive institutions. Mention should also be made of the 
former presence of serious shortcomings in public health 
planning. Our principal indicators, you see, were the number of 
visits and fulfillment of the bed-days plan; financing was 
provided depending on these indicators, with no relationship to 
the end results. Therefore the number of hospital beds per 
capita is twice greater than in developed countries. However, 
this indicator has no direct bearing upon the health of 
patients, because in many ways the effectiveness of treatment is 
determined by the availability of medical equipment and 
pharmaceuticals. Given the current situation in public health, 
we need to take immediate steps to improve medical support to 
the city's population. 
  In what directions is reform of the city public health 
system 
foreseen? 
  The main direction is transition of the city's public health 
system to new economic mechanisms of management, coupled with 
further practical introduction of budget-supported insured 
health care into the work of therapeutic institutions. This will 
make it possible to upgrade the quality of health care, and to 
make effective and sensible use of human, material and financial 
resources, which in my opinion will have a positive effect on 
the health of the city's population. 
  With the transition to new economic methods of 
administration 
and to budget-supported insured health care, personnel training 
has important significance. Considering this circumstance, we 
intend to raise the professional level of doctors by organizing 
their training and subsequent licensing and certification to 
engage in a particular activity. We are thinking about raising 
the role and prestige of outpatient and polyclinic institutions 
by establishing multiprofile outpatient therapeutic and 
preventive associations that will include women's consultation 
offices and children's polyclinics supported by day hospitals. A 
medical institution acquires prestige only when it is able to 
render specialized care. This is why we need to give proper 
credit to the many executives who are working hard to create 
specialized centers. Naturally, they are finding support from 
the Public Health Administration, because we see their efforts 
as being extremely promising. 
  Development of the independence and initiative of labor 
collectives is an important factor for improving medical 
support. When it comes to obstetric care, we feel it necessary 
to integrate the service into the general public health 
structure: We need to erect maternity hospitals as a part of 
multiprofile hospitals, and organize provision of health care by 
general practice and family practice physicians. 
  Thus we can determine the following directions for reform of 
the city's public health system: 

  -  regular (systematic) scientific forecasting of trends in 
public health, and determination of adequate priority directions 
in the system's development; 
  -  forced introduction of economic 
methods of public health administration at all levels of medical 
services; 
  -  integration of the activity of individual specialized 
services, 
centers and structural subdivisions with an orientation on 
attaining the end result and an effective relationship to 
science; 
  -  priority development of multiprofile outpatient polyclinic 
institutions, with an accent on the preventive orientation of 
their work; 
  -  maximum sensible and highly effective use of available public 
health resources; 
  -  significant upgrading of the quality of health care by 
intensive training of personnel, by establishing proper 
conditions for their work, by increasing the amount of resource 
support to hospitals and polyclinics, and by stimulating good 
work results. 

    The objective of reaching the average European health 
standards may be posed with full justification today before the 
Kazan city public health system. This is to be the main goal and 
strategy of the development of this city's public health in the 
immediate future, and possibly in the more remote future. 


