BFN 

<F P=106> [Part 2 of unattributed article: "Vietnamese Seas and </F>
Islands"] 
  [Excerpt] The Hoang Sa [Paracel] archipelago is divided 
into two groups: The eastern group is formed by several islets 
and coral atolls that rise above the sea. Of these, the Phu Lam 
and Linh Con [Lincoln] islets are the largest which, 
approximately 1.5 square km in diameter each, are covered with 
shrubs and surrounded by coral reefs and submarine rocks. The 
western group is made up of many islets, which are called the 
Croissant group because it has a horse-shoe shape and which 
includes the Hoang Sa, Huu Nhat, Quang Anh, Quang Hoa, Duy Mong, 
Chim Yen, Tri Ton, and so forth. With less than 1 square km in 
area, Hoang Sa is not the largest island on this archipelago. 
On Hoang Sa Island, now there still remain some traces of those 
facilities formerly built by the Japanese to exploit bird 
droppings and of a meteorological station which, operated by the 
Vietnamese authorities during the period 1938-1947, was 
recognized and given the codename 48-860 (The code number 48 
indicates Vietnam area) by the International Meteorological 
Organization. 
  During the reign of the Nguyen Dynasty, the Hoang Sa 
archipelago was under the jurisdiction of the Quang Ngai 
provincial city, Quang Nam province. In 1938 the archipelago was 
placed under the jurisdiction of Thua Thien Province. In 1961 it 
was reorganized into Dong Hai village under Hoa Vang district of 
Quang Nam province. In 1982 our government decided to establish 
the Hoang Sa island district under Quang Nam-Danang province. 
Taking advantage of the time when our army and people were busy 
with the overland battlefront, in 1974 China sent troops to 
seize our entire Hoang Sa archipelago. 
  The Truong Sa [Spratly] archipelago is located some 200 
nautical miles to the south of the Hoang Sa [Paracel] 
archipelago. The archipelago, which is made up of over 100 
islets, underwater sandbars, and coral reefs, stretching along a 
sea area of some 180,000 square km, is measured 325 nautical 
miles from east to west and 274 nautical miles from north to 
south and which is located at approximately 6.50-12.00 degrees 
north latitude and 111.20-117-20 degrees east longitude -- some 
240 nautical miles from Cam Ranh, 305 nautical miles from Vung 
Tau, and 595 nautical miles from the Chinese island of Hainan 
(counting from the Truong Sa islet) 
  The Truong Sa archipelago is divided into eight groups -- 
namely Song Tu, Thi Tu, Loai Ta, Nam Yet, Sinh Ton, Truong Sa, 
Tham Hiem, and Binh Nguyen -- with the Song Tu Tay islet being 
the tallest, about 4-6 meters above sea level and with Ba Dinh 
being the largest islet in the archipelago, about half a km 
wide. There are only some 20 islets [as published] in the 
archipelago with the remainder being underwater sandbars and 
coral reefs. 
  The natural conditions and the weather in this area are very 
tough. With its scarcity of fresh water and its unfertile soils 
that will not support trees, the area is frequently hit by 
scorching sunshine, strong winds, and typhoons. Many of the 
islets have no trees at all. 
  Taking advantage of the difficult situation in our country 
including those difficulties encountered in national 
reconstruction, some countries in the region have seized a 
number of islets and coral reefs of the Truong Sa archipelago, 
thus sparking a very complicated dispute with Vietnam over 
sovereignty. Presently, the Philippines occupied eight islets, 
Malaysia three, Taiwan one, and China six coral reefs. Vietnam 
has maintained its presence in and is defending 21 islets and 
coral reefs in the Truong Sa archipelago. [passage omitted on 
geographical data of other offshore islands of Vietnam] 

