CSO 

<F P=106> [By MUNHWA ILBO reporter Kim Chae-mok] </F>
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] Assuming his post with the 
birth of the Kim Yong-sam administration, Foreign Minister Han 
Sung-chu faced his greatest challenge as minister from the 
middle of last March through early April. To put it more 
precisely, from 17 through 31 March, when the results of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) nuclear inspection 
of North Korea [NK] were officially announced to be 
"unsatisfactory," and when the United Nation's Security Council, 
with China participating, adopted a statement on the NK nuclear 
issue, Minister Han truly seemed to be treading on thin ice. It 
was not difficult to read the sense of crisis from his facial 
expressions and manner of speech. [passage omitted] 
  On 17 March, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs [MOFA] [passage 
omitted] reiterated its established position, "If NK 
satisfactorily accepts IAEA nuclear inspections--an item in its 
agreement with the United States, and if there is progress in 
working-level contact for a North-South exchange of special 
envoys, the opening of a third round of U.S.-NK talks could be 
realized. However, if there is no change in the NK attitude, the 
South Korea [SK]-U.S. response cannot help but enter into a "new 
stage." Here, of course, a new stage of the NK nuclear issue 
refers to a situation in which hard-line actions, such as 
referring the NK nuclear issue to the UN Security Council, would 
be taken. 
  However, this MOFA position seemed to disappear with one 
"hard-line" statement given on this day at 5:00 PM by Kim 
Sam-hun, Ambassador for Nuclear Affairs. "As for the government, 
it has worked with a fundamental objective of resolving the NK 
nuclear issue through dialog. However, NK refused inspection of 
indoor nuclear facilities at its Yongbyon radiochemical 
laboratory, despite its agreement on February 15th with the IAEA 
on inspection scope and procedures," said Ambassador Kim in a 
press conference he called. "We now have strong doubts about 
whether to continue efforts to resolve the problem through 
dialog," Kim continued, "I have made clear the position that if 
efforts at dialog fail repeatedly in the future, `all possible 
alternatives' would be considered." And he said that "we are 
asking ourselves maybe that time has come." Thus he repeatedly 
made strong statements, signifying things were entering into a 
stage in which sanctions would be taken, such as referring the 
issue to the United nation's Security Council [UNSC]. 
  Of course, these strong statements by Ambassador Kim were 
not 
his own decision. In a meeting with reporters on same day at 
about 9:40 PM, he showed a calm position, "there has been no 
change in our principal position, that we will continue to have 
dialog as long as possible, but if things don't work out in 
spite of this, we will have no choice but to enter a new stage, 
such as referring the issue to the UNSC. We will be watching the 
outcome of the special session of the IAEA Board of Governors 
scheduled for March 21st." 
  Then, who caused this "sudden change" in our position? 
Primarily, it was Kim's direct superior, Minister Han 
Sung-chu--Ambassador Kim also plays the role of special aid to 
Minister Han. Han seemed to be the person who put the final 
touches on Kim's statement, then why did Han give Kim such 
instructions to change it for the press conference? This leaves 
us with the question: who was it that moved Minister Han? 
  At about 3:00 PM on this day, Minister Han had a phone 
conversation with chief of Blue House [Presidential office] 
Secreatry for Foreign and National Security, Chong Chong-uk. 
Originally, Chief Chong had visited the Unification Board at 
about 11:00 AM, and immediately after a meeting with Deputy 
Prime Minister Yi Yong-tok tried to meet with Minister Han. At 
that time, however, Han was in the middle of a meeting with U.S. 
Deputy Defense Secretary Weisner. Failing to meet Minister Han, 
Chief Chong conveyed the Blue House's position with a telephone 
call. "The content of the Foreign Ministry statement is too 
weak. In the present circumstances, isn't a stronger message to 
NK needed? I think it would be good for the minister to hold a 
press conference directly and show a strong response," requested 
Chief Chong. It has not been confirmed whether Chief Chong 
stressed that this position was the intention of President Kim 
Yong-sam. It is not difficult to surmise that Minister Han did 
not feel good about Chong's statement. Afterwards, it has been 
said that, as if judging that he could not opposed the will of 
the Blue House head on, Minister Han called on Ambassador Kim 
Sam-hun and had him hold the press conference in his place. 
Ultimately, the hard-line mood of Chief Chong and others in the 
Blue House was the source of this day's "mixed-up announcement" 
by the Foreign Ministry. 
  Here, some in the media, such as the "Chosun Ilbo," through 
editorials, etc., in their 18 March edition characterized the 
Han-centered nuclear diplomacy of the last year as a failure, 
even calling for the complete replacement of the 
nuclear-diplomacy team. 
  With the situation like this, it appears Minister Han could 
not help but be tense. As if having reached some decision, 
Minister Han sent notification to the press center through a 
spokesperson that he would be holding a press conference on the 
afternoon of the 18th. For informal press-conference-type 
meetings between the foreign minister and reporters, 
notification was normally given at least one or two days in 
advance. So as news of the Han press conference on this day 
become know immediately after lunch, the press room suddenly 
grew tense. Stories even went out that Minister Han might be 
going to express an intention to take responsibility and resign. 
The reporters moved busily, preparing against all possible 
situations, such as reporting to their main offices and calling 
for camera crews. 
  However, going to the press room at about 2:20 PM, as soon 
as 
Minister Han took his seat, he began the session with a "pointed 
joke," "My first reason for meeting with you today is to show 
you that I still have my job." [passage omitted] The stress in 
his face was so clear as to give one a sense of tragic heroism, 
even the reporters listened somberly." Han said "the present 
situation of the NK nuclear issue are as we had original thought 
out in our road map. It will be fortunate if it is resolved 
well, but we have already clarified repeatedly that if it is 
not, we would show a new response. It is a fact of which we have 
also notified the other side, NK. The question is whether this 
is the time for a new response. That right now is not the moment 
is the only thing that is clear. However, with an understanding 
that the time is drawing near, there was a need to give a 
stronger response." Up to this point, he sound as if he were 
rationalizing the strong-response policy, such as referring the 
issue to the Security Council, elucidate the day before by 
Ambassador Kim on his orders. 
  However, the words Minister Han really wanted to say 
continued at the end. "It is true we were unable to realize the 
objective of our road map of `resolving the NK nuclear issue.' 
However, for the next objective (economic sanctions) we must get 
the support of China and other member nations of the Security 
Council. We needed to show the IAEA as well as China and other 
members of the Security Council that we have exhausted all 
possible means of dialog." This was a strong objection to the 
criticism of some concerning Minister Han, that, although 
efforts at dialog brought no resolution of the nuclear issue, 
his diplomacy was not one producing "no real results," in a 
word, that it was not the mere extension of a meaningless 
nuclear diplomacy his critics claim it to be. Negotiation and 
dialog are needed for the peaceful resolution of the nuclear 
issue, and if a peaceful resolution should fail, then dialog 
will also be needed for a coercive resolution through the 
sanctions of the international community against NK, he says. To 
put it another way, dialog, while a means of peaceful 
resolution, is at the same time a lever for acquiring a 
justification in preparation against the event there is no 
change in the NK attitude. 
  Minister Han's opinions continued. "NK has been earning 
time, 
but in the last year or so, has it obtained money or oil?" he 
countered, stating bluntly, "U.S. satellite intelligence, the 
analysis of the IAEA inspection team, Deputy Defense Secretary 
Weisner whom I had a meeting yesterday, and U.S. Secretary of 
State Christopher with whom I spoke on the phone, all agree that 
there is no clear evidence that NK improved its 
nuclear-development technology or made new attempts at 
developing nuclear [weapons] during the last year or so, nor 
does it appear that they did." During the last year or so, NK 
probably only gained a more severe sense of isolation from the 
international community, he added. 
  Minister Han continued, "We must question whether, apart 
from 
`continuing dialog and turning the issue over to the UNSC when 
this does not work,' there could have been other methods we 
could have used for resolving the NK nuclear issue during the 
last year or so." "The trend of the times is to immediately draw 
hasty conclusions about success and failure. But there can be 
some problems which cannot be solved, no matter who adopts what 
means. The NK nuclear issue is just such a problem," he stressed 
strongly. 
  Given the mood of the IAEA, referral of the NK nuclear issue 
to the UNSC is now unavoidable; this is a movement of the 
international community which we cannot stop, concluded Han. 
However, he also pointed out in detail the dangers of the 
materialization of UNSC sanctions. In the event the UNSC decides 
on sanctions, any form of NK nuclear inspection whatsoever will 
become unlikely; it is unknown when and in what form 
unpredictable NK might take some unexpected actions; 
negotiations and dialog would be cut off; and it is inevitable 
that the initiative of both SK and the U.S. concerning the NK 
nuclear issue would be comparatively reduced. "Resolution of 
the NK nuclear issue is in stopping in advance the possibility 
of a NK provocation, which might take place five to ten years 
from now. It's not like Hitler's armies are going to be invading 
now," he said, asking, "Is there really a need for us to incite 
the provocation of NK?" 
  These ideas of Minister Han have the character of a 
refutation of the criticism of some that the NK nuclear issue 
should have been referred to the Security Council earlier, and 
at the same time seem to be saying that efforts at finding a 
solution through dialog must be continued in the early stages 
after the issue is handed over to the UNSC and before concrete 
sanctions are adopted. 
  His ideas of resolution through dialog were repeatedly 
stressed even on March 22nd, the day after the IAEA Board of 
Governors decided to refer the issue to the Security Council. 
Saying, "The Security Council's NK sanctions or resolution 
calling for inspections are, on the one hand, for pressuring NK 
into accepting nuclear sanctions, and on the other hand, for 
making NK draw its own conclusion that reaching a resolution 
through dialog would be better than having sanctions placed on 
it," he made it clear that it was a "Security Council discussion 
for inducing dialog." 
  Going one step further, Minister Han, as if taking aim at 
the 
hard-line forces opposing his resolution through dialog, said, 
"The nature of the NK nuclear issue is not keeping someone from 
doing something, but making someone do something. In this sense, 
it can be compared to pulling a calf out of a vegetable garden." 
"Because if you try to drag the calf out by beating it, it's 
easy to end up ruining the garden, you have to pull it out by 
giving it a carrot and soothing it," he said. 
  It is a fact that this theory of Minister Han's, that 
fundamentally the NK nuclear issue must be solved by placating 
NK, has run up against the opposition of senior, policy decision 
makers in government ministries, such as Blue House, Unification 
Board, Ministry of National Defense [MND], Agency for National 
Security Planning [NSP], and most scholars of international 
politics. 
  At what point, then, does Minister Han actually differ from 
what policy decision makers? 
  The Blue House Secretary General Pak Kwan-yong, Secretary of 
foreign and National Security Affairs Chong Chong-uk and 
Secretary of Unification Affairs Chong Se-hyon belong to the 
group called, "hard-line forces." Almost all officials below 
Deputy Prime Minister Yi Yong-tok of the Unification Board have 
argued for a strong response. Only Ku Pon-tae, Chief of the 
North-South Dialog Executive Office, has usually stressed a 
flexible response. He is classified as an exception within the 
Unification Board. 
  The MND has an "inborn" tendency to raise a strong voice. 
Both hard-line and moderate positions are reported to exist 
within the NSP. Particularly, in late March when Minister Han 
had the whole world against him, NSP moderates helped him as 
much as they could, reports one senior government official. 
  However, although positions are commonly classified as 
hard-line and moderate for convenience, those concerned are not 
too happy about being called hard-line or moderate. Minister Han 
says of himself, "I'm neither hard-line nor moderate, but a 
realist." Secretary Pak, Chief Chong and others within the Blue 
House strongly object to being labeled hard-liners. Who would 
not want to resolve the issue through dialog, they ask. It is 
only that there are some differences of opinion concerning ways 
of responding, depending on each situation, they say. 
  "If there is a difference in understanding between Minister 
Han and other diplomatic and security policy makers, it is that 
senior officials outside the MOFA are all displeased with 
Minister Han's "talking too much and showing too often and too 
many carrots as a card to play against NK," this source added. 
"Persons who are displeased with Minister Han and his tactical 
operation, and who are putting the brakes on it, also agree that 
the actual time to use the carrot toward NK must be after 
nuclear security has been secured," he said, "They only have 
mutual differing opinions on when to use the carrot with NK." 
  Putting together what this source said, there are no 
differences of opinion within the present administration's 
diplomacy and security team on strategy for resolving the NK 
nuclear issue; there are only some differences of perspective on 
the tactical operation of negotiations, dialog, and pressure. 
That is, the side which believes that in the event NK does not 
show sincerity in trying to resolve the nuclear issue and sticks 
to its attitude of refusing inspections, etc., strong pressure 
must be applied in order to bring a change of attitude are the 
so-called hard-liners; the officials of the Foreign Ministry 
symbolized by Minister Han believe that rather than pressure, 
the North must be given justification for participation in order 
to promote dialog. 
  However, Minister Han does not agree with the criticism 
about 
him that he talks too much and stresses dialog at a time when 
pressure must be applied. Han believes that we have nothing to 
loose by first providing NK with justification to enable it to 
respond to dialog. This means that if this effort at dialog to 
the last moment is successful, things could not be better; but 
even if it fails, then we can proceed to the next stage, 
extending our sympathy to the sanctions mood of the 
international community. 
  Some figures representative of those outside the 
administration classified as hard-liners are DLP lawmakers No 
Chae-pong and An Mu-hyok and many in the academic community. 
Their positions are generally follow the thinking below. 
  "We have now reached the stage to implement a coercive 
diplomacy against NK. For the success of coercive diplomacy, we 
must send them a message that our will to prevent NK from making 
a nuclear weapon is stronger than its motivation to do so, and 
must make it credible. Although we have demanded nuclear 
inspections of NK, we have hesitated to set a time restriction 
as a final communication to make NK comply with this. Even 
concerning NK noncompliance, we have committed the error of 
trying to entice NK with a carrot rather than punishing it." 
  Even if this difference of perspective is one of 
understanding concerning tactical operations for enticing NK to 
dialog, not a gap at the strategic level, its causes and effects 
are in reality very great. To put it another way, the debate 
over whether pressure or providing a justification for dialog 
would be more effective in breaking through the NK nuclear 
impasse, bringing dialog and negotiations, appears to be due to 
fundamental differences in the parties' views of NK. 
  Minister Han's view of NK is designated either the courteous 
"Older Brother Theory," which says to embrace NK, or the 
"Non-zero Sum Game Theory," which says that NK's gain is not 
necessarily our loss. His metaphors given in a press conference 
last February 28 accurately show his view of NK. 
  "The younger brother (NK) comes into the room holding a hand 
grenade (nuclear weapon), insisting he will not talk with his 
older brother (SK). However, he says he can talk with the old 
man next door (the U.S.), come out of the room and hand over the 
grenade, and threatens to explode the grenade if the older 
brother calls the police (UN or power of the international 
community). From the older brother's point of view, should he 
really call the police at this time? I mean, even though it is 
obvious that, although all the police would have to do is 
conduct one operation, the house would be wasted." 
  However, the Blue House and other hard-line forces' view of 
NK, that only coercive diplomacy can bring NK to dialog, is 
different. 
  "We in no way want a war. Because we would have to pay too 
high a price. However, at the time of the Panmunjom Axe Murder 
Incident in 1976, when ROK-U.S. Combined Forces made a strong 
display of military force and threatened to turn Kaesong into 
rubble, the North held up the white flag and Kim Il-song 
apologized. For the resolution of the NK nuclear issue as well, 
we must display our power through close military cooperation 
between SK and the U.S. If we continue to be dragged about by 
North Korean strategy as we are now, not only we will be wasting 
our time but give time NK need to complete a nuclear-weapons 
system capable of threatening us. Thus, in order to prevent a 
catastrophe on the Korean peninsula, we must have our resolute 
policy of strength and determination." 

