Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ruslan Ignatyev report under the "Only in ROSSIYSKAYA </F>
GAZETA" rubric: "Sarcophagus for Submarine Komsomolets"] 
  [Text] Russian specialists and scientists have proposed a 
unique method of preserving the submarine Komsomolets which sank 
7 April 1989 in the Norwegian Sea approximately 180 miles 
southeast of Bear Island. Studies have been going on for 
several years, expeditions have been organized, and hundreds of 
options have been examined. As a result one option has been 
selected -- the best one. It involves the construction of a 
sort of sarcophagus. The Committee for Carrying Out 
Special-Purpose Underwater Operations has been tasked with 
coordinating the project. Its Chairman Tengiz Borisov 
familiarized the editorial office with this unusual project. 
  The nuclear submarine Komsomolets has now been lying on the 
bottom of the Norwegian Sea for almost five years. Today we can 
say that it was the pride of the former Soviet Union's Armed 
Forces. It was the only submarine of its kind in the world: 
The most up-to-date and most deep-water. The Komsomolets could 
dive to 1,000 meters, whereas an ordinary submarine could only 
go as far as 400 to 600 meters. The vessel had a multipurpose 
design. To use the language of military pilots, it could be 
deployed as a fighter and a ground-attack aircraft. The 
Komsomolets was to have destroyed missile-armed submarines and 
carrier strike groups composed of aircraft carriers and escort 
ships, and it could also direct long-range fire against onshore 
targets.... 
  This supersubmarine cost our state over 1 billion rubles at 
old prices (in present-day prices this is approximately 1 
trillion). However, the Komsomolets was in fact unable to serve 
the Motherland. During a routine patrol it caught fire and 
sank. A total of 20 conventional torpedoes and two fitted with 
nuclear warheads went down with it. The latter gave cause for 
concern because there was a danger they would contaminate the 
environment with radioactive substances. 
  The very first expeditions to the accident site confirmed 
the 
specialists' fears. The radiation situation in the vicinity was 
not good. A second set of studies backed up the previous 
findings with new information. In the final analysis, the 
situation at the site of the Komsomol wreck was such that all 
permissible norms had been exceeded many times over. This 
provoked a negative reaction from a number of countries. The 
decision was then made to raise the Komsomol. 
  A number of countries offered to help in formulating a plan 
to raise the submarine from the bottom of the Norwegian Sea. 
They included states such as the United States, France, Italy, 
and Sweden. Dozens of proposals were also put forward by our 
own scientists and designers. The special commission received 
plenty of interesting and promising options. For example, some 
specialists suggested using cryogenic technology. That is to 
say they planned to freeze the submarine and lift it in the form 
of a block of ice. Others insisted on dismembering the 
Komsomolets with a view to coaxing each part out of the watery 
depths separately. Still others sought a way out of the problem 
by using an enormous overhead crane. There were also, to put it 
mildly, one or two quite unrealistic plans. Thus some people 
tried to demonstrate that the vessel could be pumped full of a 
special foaming material which would turn into foam rubber and 
ensure the buoyancy of the submarine, which would then float to 
the surface of its own accord. Another very simple method would 
be to latch onto the Komsomolets with a kind of lasso and tow it 
toward the shore.... 
  Meanwhile the former USSR party leadership issued a decree 
tasking the appropriate organizations and departments with 
carrying out the work necessary to raise the sunken submarine. 
The aim was to establish the real reason for the wreck of the 
Komsomolets and to remove the torpedoes with nuclear charges. 
But there was a hitch, because the state lacked the funds to 
carry out an operation of this sort (at the time about $300 
million were needed). 
  However, expeditions to the bottom of the Norwegian Sea 
showed that it has also become impossible to raise the submarine 
from the technical point of view. This is why. 
  Using the manned deep-sea submersibles Mir-1 and Mir-2, it 
has proved possible to descend to the site of the sunken 
submarine. Here, at a depth of 1,700 meters, it is pitch black. 
The searchlights shining out of the portholes picked out a wall 
of "snow." It seemed as if a blizzard was raging at the bottom 
of the Norwegian Sea. Apparently there is a large accumulation 
of plankton in precisely this area. It hampered attempts to 
follow the planned route. The submersibles encountered a number 
of small and medium-sized fish along the way. 
  The specialists were able to determine the exact position of 
the submarine. It is lying atop a 40-meter-thick silt incline. 
Further on there is a precipice and an increase in depth. The 
Komsomolets is lying level on an even keel. The submarine's 
position encouraged the specialists to think that they could 
execute their plan to raise the vessel. 
  After a thorough examination of the submarine it became 
apparent that the inner hull was badly damaged. It has 
practically been blown in two in the vicinity of the forward 
compartment, even though the fire occurred in the stern. A 
study of video materials and a comparison of information 
obtained during the expedition showed that a powerful explosion 
had occurred on the vessel. This could have happened during the 
depressurization and flooding of the submarine or at the moment 
when it hit the bottom. This explosion damaged the submarine. 
  For the first time our specialists were able to go inside 
the 
Komsomolets using remote-control robots. A terrible picture 
unfolded before the investigators: Smashed flooring, decks, and 
all sorts of structures had formed massive obstructions. The 
submarine's systems, instruments, and equipment had been 
transformed into scrap metal. They were unable to find the 
bodies of any sailors. 
  Robots the size of large vacuum cleaners entered the 
Komsomolets through gaps in the hull and two open portholes. 
They reached the torpedo apparatus. They not only examined the 
forward cover assemblies enclosing the warheads, but also the 
tail sections of the torpedoes. The conclusions drawn by the 
specialists were very sorry indeed; the beryllium screens -- the 
neutron deflectors which are a design feature of the warheads 
and which prevent the plutonium from spreading -- were heavily 
corroded and partially destroyed. In the scientists' opinion, 
these screens will only last until the end of this year or the 
middle of 1995. They will no longer be in any state to hold 
back the radioactive material inside. As a result, a total of 
400 curies -- an extremely dangerous dose -- will leak into the 
environment. For the purposes of comparison, a total of 0.38 
curies was discharged into the water in the Far East. This led 
to an international outcry. Here, however, we are talking about 
a discharge 1,200 times more potent! 
  Basically, with every day that passes the nuclear warheads 
aboard the sunken submarine are being destroyed as a result of 
electrochemical corrosion on a large scale. While the 
Komsomolets was ablaze on the surface, military pilots 
photographed it from the air. These photographs show that the 
water around the submarine was literally boiling. These high 
temperatures caused the submarine's special coating to peel off. 
And owing to the difference in temperature between the inside 
and outside of the submarine, the vessel basically exploded. 
  Naturally, it is quite impossible to disturb or manipulate a 
heavy, cumbersome object weighing almost 10,000 tonnes and 
measuring 117 meters in length (with a diameter of approximately 
10 meters) in such a condition. Otherwise the hull would split 
in two and the protective structures of the torpedo apparatus 
would fall apart. It is impossible to guess in advance what the 
consequences of such an environmental disaster might be. This 
is why specialists have started to look for a way of 
neutralizing the Komsomolets that avoids having to bring it to 
the surface. 
Of all the suggestions they have received, the specialists 
from Arzamas-16, the "Rubin" Central Design Bureau, and the 
Committee for Carrying Out Special-Purpose Underwater Operations 
under the Russian Federation Government have picked the safest 
-- constructing a kind of sarcophagus in the submarine's nose 
section. Work on this project has been completed. It has been 
coordinated with a dozen ministries and departments and handed 
over to the State Environmental Expert Committee. 
  The initial plan was to construct an external sarcophagus. 
In other words, the intention is to cover the submarine's nose 
cone with concrete at a depth of 1,700 meters. But calculations 
have shown that on soft ground with a density of just 1.8, the 
Komsomolets could break up. It was then decided to construct an 
internal sarcophagus. But in this case it was assumed that 
special substances would be used -- sorbents capable of 
absorbing any plutonium that escapes. Eight such sealants were 
approved in a test during the latest expedition. They performed 
well. But specialists have chosen the very best. At the moment 
they are running them through yet more tests. 
  This summer a new expedition will set off for the sunken 
Komsomolets. Some 100 kg of sorbent will be pumped into the 
interior [mezhbortnoye prostranstvo]. After this all the 
hatches and cabins will be sealed. Constant environmental 
monitoring will be organized in the area. 
  The operation to construct the sarcophagus at the site of 
the 
accident and the wreck of the nuclear submarine Komsomolets is 
slated to take two months. The work will be financed by the 
Russian Federation Government. 

