Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Military Affairs editor] </F>
  [Text] Since the end of the Gulf war, Iran has turned into 
the most dangerous country in the area by virtue of its pursuit 
of a massive rearmament policy encompassing conventional, 
chemical ,and nuclear weaponry, to the degree that all of the 
classified military reports warn continually of the Iranian 
threat looming over the Gulf. The situation has prompted a 
return of the arms race to the countries of the region, which 
have sought to obtain defensive systems. Dubai's recent airshow 
is a reflection of this anxiety-driven climate, wherein all 
weapons-manufacturing countries [exhibitions] had crowds. What 
is the true nature of the Iranian threat, and how should the 
countries of the region confront it? 
  Weeks after the end of the Gulf war, the major 
industrialized 
countries called for the imposition of an embargo on weapons 
exports to the developing nations. In the opinion of the 
"majors," advanced weaponry in the hands of the "minors" would 
necessarily lead to the flare-up of wars, in contrast to the 
situation among the former. Rearmament among the majors has a 
deterrent goal; in essence, the availability of effective 
weaponry to a given state leads to other states' fearing to 
attack it. This logic underlay the formation of the "nuclear 
strike force" in France during the reign of General Charles de 
Gaulle. The rationale was that the existence of such a 
formidable force in France, in the first and last instance, 
would be a deterrent to others against launching a war against 
France, and not that France would launch a nuclear attack 
against the enemy. All nuclear nations adopted this Gaullist 
nuclear logic, and none deviated from it except for Russia, 
recently. A fortnight ago, the Russian minister of defense 
stated that his country would respond with nuclear weapons to 
any attack on its territory using conventional weapons. 
  Addressing members of Congress in March 1991, one week after 
the end of the Gulf war, former U.S. President George Bush 
expressed his fear of the smaller countries' arming, especially 
those of the Middle East. "It is catastrophic, now that the war 
is over, for Middle Eastern and Arab Gulf countries to enter a 
new arms race." 
  Bush failed in the U.S. presidential elections, and with him 
fell the theory of arms limitation (in the Middle East and 
elsewhere), because the weapons-manufacturing lobby has the 
ability to find any justification for selling weapons, and even 
for participating in the escalation of regional crises and 
tensions in order that the volume of sales not be affected. 
  What has survived is merely the theory of the prevention of 
the deployment of (nuclear, biological, and chemical) weapons of 
mass destruction. 
  Dubai's recent airshow witnessed the largest gathering of 
producers of civilian and military aircraft, missiles, 
electronics, and radars, not to mention radar jamming equipment. 
  Russia staged an aerial demonstration of the "Sukhoi 35," 
its 
latest aircraft. Besides its aircraft, Britain dispatched Crown 
Prince Charles to carry out public relations for the British 
aircraft manufacturers. France sent its minister of defense and 
industry, who doubles as the minister of foreign trade. 
  Warplane manufacturers' mouths watered when the UAE [United 
Arab Emirates] announced its desire to purchase 80 advanced 
fighter aircraft at a cost of no less than $10 billion. Experts 
have estimated the cost of arms purchases in the Gulf area for 
the remainder of the century at $65 billion. 
  There is competition between the United States and France 
for 
the arms market, with the United States ahead by leagues. Since 
1990, [the United States] has sold $39 billion worth of weapons 
to the countries of the region. As for France, do not forget 
that it was Iraq's primary arms supplier prior to the Gulf war. 
Thirty percent of its military exports in the years 1982, 1983, 
1984, and 1985 were to Iraq alone (13 billion French francs per 
year), and 70 percent of its military sales were to Middle 
Eastern and North African countries. France has succeeded in 
striking large deals in at least three Gulf countries, the most 
significant of which is the provision of 436 large LeClerc tanks 
to the Emirate of Abu Dhabi. 
  In addition to the United States and France, Russia (which 
dominated the advanced countries' markets in the region during 
the Soviet Union era), Italy, Britain and Germany were 
represented, not to mention new countries such as South Africa 
and the Czech Republic, in addition to China and North Korea. 
  Prior to the Gulf war, Iraqi leaders were under the 
impression that their country had become the primary regional 
military power following the end of the Iraqi-Iranian war in 
mid-1988. 
<H5>  Iranian Arsenal </H5>
  Following the Gulf war and the defeat of the Iraqi Army, 
Iran 
once again stood out as a regional military power. The rulers of 
Tehran drafted a large rearmament program based on a declared 
annual military outlay of $8 billion. This vast sum drained the 
Iranian budget and overburdened the Iranian economy and is the 
reason for the inflation now extant in Iran, as well as the poor 
exchange rate of the Iranian currency. 
  The focus of Iran's military programs was its naval fleet. 
The prevailing view is that Iran has purchased three 
"Kilo"-class Russian submarines, taken delivery of two of them, 
and is awaiting delivery of the last one at the start of next 
year. However, it has recently been revealed that the "Kilo" 
submarine deal signed by Iran with Russia involves seven, not 
three, submarines. 
  Each "Kilo" submarine is capable of carrying 18 torpedoes or 
36 naval mines, and is equipped with four surface-to-air 
"SAM-16" missiles. In early 1993, Iran received an estimated 
1,800 "Kilo"-compatible naval mines. 
  The most important development in the rearmament of Iran, 
however, has been its formation of a squadron of "Sukhoi 24" 
strike fighters. In the opinion of American military experts in 
the region, the threat to shipping in the Gulf that is posed by 
these aircraft is greater than that posed by the "Kilo" 
submarines. 
  Negotiations are in their advanced states between Iran and 
China on the supply to Iran of 10 "Hegu" fast boats equipped 
with "Ying-Ji" antiship missiles with a range of 40 km. 
  A report entitled "The Strategic Plan for the Intelligence 
World in the Nineties," submitted by CIA Director James Woolsey 
to the U.S. Congress, states that Iran most probably will be the 
first country to obtain the 1000-km-range 
North-Korean-manufactured "Nodong" missile, and that within six 
years it will be capable of manufacturing the "Scud-B" and 
"Scud-C" short-range missiles, in addition to the "Nodong" 
missile. 
<H5>  Defensive Measures </H5>
  In the face of the Iranian threat to control navigation in 
the waters of the Arab Gulf, Arab Gulf countries undertook 
effective defensive measures to counter the Iranian mines. The 
minesweeper deals concluded by three Gulf countries fall under 
this category. Also, the Gulf cruisers and fast missile boats 
are a practical response to the Iranian cruisers and boats. Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries enjoy close military cooperation, 
and in most of them there is in place an integrated air defense, 
monitoring and early warning system. The Saudi "Peace Shield" 
system operates during peacetime at the same level of total 
efficiency as did "Desert Storm" during wartime. Gulf countries 
enjoy greater material capabilities and capacity for defensive 
provisioning than does Iran. Thus, Iran's policy of 
"muscle-flexing" remains limited and indicative of 
short-sightedness. It would have been more advantageous for the 
rulers of Tehran to have directed oil revenues to investments 
and developmental causes for the benefit of their people than to 
have utilized them for the purchase of arms and the 
impoverishment of their citizens. 

