Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Belyakov commentary: "The Return of the Russian </F>
Bear"] 
  [Text] Cairo -- Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev 
has been on a trip to the Near East. He visited Israel and 
Tunisia, where the headquarters of the PLO are located. As 
Kozyrev stated during the trip, its aim was to save the Near 
East "peace process." It was interrupted after an Israeli 
settler carried out a massacre in a mosque in the Palestinian 
city of Hebron 25 February, killing and wounding dozens of 
people. 
  Russia reacted quickly to this crime and its political 
consequences. First of all First Deputy Foreign Minister Igor 
Ivanov left for Tunisia and Israel. Then President Boris 
Yeltsin appointed Viktor Psuvalyuk, director of the Near East 
Department at the Foreign Ministry, as his special 
representative in the region. And finally, Andrey Kozyrev's trip 
took place. Usually it is the other co-initiator of the "peace 
process" -- the United States -- that displays such verve if, 
like now, unexpected obstacles arise on the path of talks. But 
this time U.S. diplomacy concentrated its efforts on weakening 
the essence of the Palestinian draft UN Security Council 
resolution condemning the massacre in Hebron and listing a set 
of measures to protect the population of the lands occupied by 
Israael. So Moscow's emissaries have acted in proud solitude. 
  It is noteworthy that Russian diplomats also arrived with 
their own ideas, different from the American ones. Essentially, 
they identified with the PLO's stance. "It is necessary to 
ensure extra security for the Palestinians and an international 
presence in the occupied territories," Kozyrev stated in Israel. 
Russia also proposed that all participants in the talks should 
meet again in Madrid in order to sum up the results of the 
"peace process" since October 1991 and give it new impetus. 
  Moscow's proposals on "Madrid 2" have generated a 
contradictory reaction. The PLO has come out in support of the 
proposals, while Israel has rejected them. The United States 
has also expressed its dissatisfaction, and indeed not only with 
the proposals as such, but also with the actual fact of Russia 
taking its own steps. After all, Washington has gotten used to 
hearing only cries of approval from Moscow concerning its 
foreign policy actions. 
  Russia's current activity in the Near East has been greeted 
with approval in the Arab world, if not always in essence, then 
at least in form. The press is noting that for the second time 
this year Moscow is operating independently of Washington -- 
first in Bosnia, and now in the Arab-Israeli conflict. "The 
Russian bear is returning to the international arena," the Saudi 
AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT states. And not just the Near East, but also 
other areas on our planet have been waiting for this for a long 
time. 

