BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, al Maa' [May] 18, JAMAHIRIYAH NEWS AGENCY 
-- Ever since it was established, American Central Intelligence 
has played the role of a saboteur, which has been extremely 
dangerous in international relations and internal affairs 
throughout the world which assumed that the end of the Second 
World War would bring an end to antagonistic conflicts, 
conspiracIes and plots. This after the people gave their lives 
and all they had, involved in a conflict which they had nothing 
to do with. It was a war conducted by the Europeans where the 
United States attempted to fulfill its expansionist aspirations 
and to extend beyond the borders of the American continent. A 
role which expanded and was undertaken using all types of 
methods, the most dangerous being American Central Intelligence, 
which is considered, without exaggeration, to be the den of 
terrorism in the world, responsible for criminal activities 
which threatened to disrupt stability in the world. It is they 
who are responsible for the coup d'etats in independent nations 
-- examples of this abound: Iran in the 1950's, Cuba in the 
1960's, then Chile, Panama, Peru, Argentina and [words 
indistinct]. 
  American intelligence is also responsible for the killing of 
thousands of people, the assasination of dozens of leaders and 
national figures, such as Nkrumah, Lumumba, Allende, Maurice 
Bishop and dozens of assasination attempts against Castro, [word 
indstinct] Nasir, Col Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi, and other leaders 
in the ugliest scenes of terrorism and conspiracy. The CIA gave 
support to and trained the terrorist rebel groups opposed to 
these leaders peoples. The CIA set up training camps specially 
for these terrorists to prepare them to carry out psychological 
warfare, sabotage and bloodshed, such as happened in El 
Salvador, Nicaragua, Angola and other regions. The CIA planned 
and administered America's wars and its intervention in foreign 
countries. The CIA was directly responsible for the defeats the 
United States sufferred in Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Bolivia and 
Somalia. It is they who completely disregarded the allegations 
propagated by American administrations concerning the protection 
of `human rights'. The CIA set up military dictatorships and 
lent support to dictatorships, the minority fascist regimes and 
aborted the national experiments of nations to ensure that these 
nations remained in servitude, injustice, repression without 
being able to achieve their freedom or progress. The 
trafficking in drugs between nations even the United States 
[sentence as received]. This is the most heinous crimes 
committed by the CIA as well as its relations with drug 
trafficking gangs the most notorious being the Medeilin gang in 
Colombia and the Contra gangs in Nicaragua. In addition, there 
is the CIA's links with the Mafia. 
  These incidents and links have multiplied until becoming 
outright terrorism organised against independent nations by 
imposing economic, military and scientific restrictions and 
threatening to starve these nations and brandishing the threat 
of direct military intervention. They use financial pressure, 
stir up problems and plot coups thus, the targetted nations find 
themselves victims of this terrorism of the CIA. This is why 
the world is constantly in a state of anxiety and trepidation in 
response to these actions carried out by the CIA, actions which 
appear to be the precursor to the establishment of a world 
dictatorial police system under the control of the United States 
where freedom, justice, and democracy have no worth and where 
colonialism will be restored. 

