Language: <F P=105> Hindi </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Shankar Dayal Sharma at the Central </F>
Hall of Parliament in New Delhi -- live] 
  [Text] Honorable members: Welcome to this session of 
parliament. As I address you in this new year, I sense that the 
country is today in a different frame of mind from the one last 
year. We faced many difficulties at the beginning of 1993, but 
our people displayed tremendous resilience as the year 
progressed, and 1993 certainly ended on a note of optimism. 
There was steady progress on all fronts, as evident from the 
improved law and order situation; record food grain production; 
unprecedented levels of procurement; very high levels of food 
grain stocks; containment of the rate of inflation to the single 
digits; comfortable foreign exchange reserves; considerable 
reduction in the trade gap; increase in exports; improved 
performance in certain essential areas of the infrastructure 
sector; and increased flow of foreign investment, both direct 
and portfolio. All of this has symbolized and justified this 
emerging optimism. Clearly, we have regained our internal 
energy and our global confidence. We have reason and 
justification to be encouraged by our all-around performance. 
  We, however, still must work a great deal to achieve the 
targets set for our socioeconomic progress. On the basis of 
this hope, the government is moving toward its objectives in the 
year 1994. There has been a distinct improvement in the law and 
order situation. The rebellious situation in the northeast is 
under control. The successes achieved in Punjab last year have 
been further strengthened. The elections in the country's five 
states and the national capital area were conducted peacefully. 
The government is determined to maintain the success of these 
improvements and is trying to initiate this process in the 
remaining significant sectors. 
  Around this time last year, the Ayodhya issue had cast its 
long shadow on the national scene. There was a great deal of 
concern among the people about the possible fallout of the 
demolition and the riots that followed. Thanks to the inherent 
wisdom and sagacity of the Indian people, the grim predictions 
that were being made have been proven wrong. The atmosphere has 
improved considerably, and we can hope for a lasting solution to 
the dispute. Proceedings are continuing in the Supreme Court on 
the reference made to this case under the Constitution. The 
government will take appropriate measures in light of the 
Supreme Court's opinion. The Ayodhya issue is the most 
convincing demonstration in recent times of the danger inherent 
in mixing communalism and politics. It is of utmost importance 
to correct this aberration and keep both religion and politics 
in their legitimate domains. Our secular state demands nothing 
less. The need is to consider the matter fully and take 
effective steps to settle it. The government would welcome 
proposals in this connection. 
  In Jammu and Kashmir, we are pursuing a policy of taking 
firm 
action against terrorism. This year, the police and security 
forces have scored considerable achievements in their 
antiterrorism operations. Steps have been taken to improve 
their competence. All efforts are being taken to ensure that 
the maximum restraint is exercised while using force. The local 
administration and the security forces in cooperation with the 
people commendably solved the grave crisis at the Hazratbal 
shrine. The settlement of this crisis reflects the government's 
attitude of restraint. Whenever it is felt that excessive force 
has been used during any particular incident, an immediate 
enquiry is ordered and action taken. The operation against 
terrorists will continue with a view to restoring law and order. 
At the same time, appropriate measures are being taken to tone 
up the administration; development and economic activities have 
been intensified to generate employment opportunities; and the 
mechanism to redress grievances has been strengthened. We are 
deeply concerned about the difficulties of the common people. 
We are also pursuing steps to bring about effective involvement 
by the people in dealing with matters that concern us. Jammu and 
Kashmir is an inalienable part of India and we will foil all 
attempts from across the border or from any other side to create 
instability. 
  In the northeast, the setting up of the interim Bodoland 
Autonomous Council in pursuit of the Bodo accord marks a 
positive step toward meeting the aspirations of the tribal 
population. The Assam Government took prompt action in 
Kokharajar and Bongaigaon Districts when there was an outbreak 
of violence against non-tribals. In Manipur, the government 
took action under Article 356 of the Constitution in the wake of 
violence between Nagas and Kukis and the general disruption of 
law and order. This demonstrates the government's ability to 
deal sternly with disruptive elements. 
  The National Human Rights Commission has been set up with 
the 
former chief justice of India as its chairman. Commission 
members include a former judge of the Supreme Court and a former 
chief justice of the high court. The constitution of the 
commission reflects that we are firmly committed to taking 
immediate and clear action on the human rights issue. The 
commission has started its work in earnest. 
  In order to strengthen the executive's accountability to 
parliament, 17 department related standing committees of 
parliament were established in April 1993 to make detailed 
examinations of legislation, demands for grants, annual reports 
of ministries, and national basic long-term policies presented 
to the house. This will greatly facilitate parliament's work. 
  The country had its share of natural calamities. The scale 
of damage in the Maharashtra earthquake stands out among these. 
In every instance, the government responded with commendable 
alertness and provided prompt relief. The governments of 
several other countries, the World Bank, and other institutions 
promptly offered assistance, and we are grateful to all of them. 
A massive reconstruction program in the earthquake affected 
areas of Maharashtra is being taken up with an outlay of 10 
billion rupees. Nongovernmental organizations are being involved 
with the reconstruction program as appropriate. 
  The economic reforms introduced in 1991 gained momentum last 
year, and have been consistently pursued. Still, much more 
needs to be done. The government is aware that reform is an 
irreversible and continuous process that must be implemented 
with determination and foresight, keeping the responses and 
circumstances in the country constantly in view. As a result of 
this approach, the progress in implementation has been steady, 
firm, and based on general consensus. We will hasten this 
process with care. Based on the performance and prospects of 
the public and private sectors, the areas reserved for the 
public sector have been trimmed. More industries have been 
delicensed. The new export-import policy announced on 31 March 
1993 is an attempt to streamline procedures and liberalize 
exports in agriculture and services, where the country has a 
competitive advantage. The 1993-94 budget provided fiscal 
incentives for investment in priority areas. In drawing up the 
reform package, the government stressed reform in the financial 
sector. Financial institutions need to be restructured and 
strengthened to enable them to take on the new responsibilities 
imposed by expanded activity in the private sector. The 
unification of the exchange rate and the floating of the rupee 
in March 1993 were important policy changes. The fact that the 
rupee has remained steady since it was floated is testimony to 
the government's good judgment in the matter. 
  The basic economic indicators show that, although the year 
began in a difficult environment, the performance of the economy 
during 1993-94 has been satisfactory. In 1992-93, the gross 
domestic product is estimated to have grown by 4 percent. In 
1993-94, the government expects the growth rate to remain at 
about the same level. The inflation rate dropped below 6 
percent for a short period during this year, and the highest 
level was 8.4 percent. 
  Global investors have shown growing confidence in the Indian 
market. Direct foreign exchange investment approved since the 
introduction of the new industrial policy was approximately 130 
billion rupees in terms of equity by the end of 1993. Total 
investment in these projects is estimated to be on the order of 
650 billion rupees. The significant point about these 
investments is that the bulk have been proposed in sectors such 
as power, oil refining, food processing, the metallurgical 
industry, electrical equipment, chemicals, electronics, and 
other priority areas. Only 7 percent of the proposed 
investments will be in products that can be categorized as 
consumer goods. The investment inflow will be spread over a 
period of three to four years, which is the gestation period for 
the megaprojects. 
  The government continues to place a great deal of emphasis 
on 
export promotion. The resulting changes in trade policy, 
coupled with the floating of the exchange rate and the general 
liberalization of the economy, have yielded results. Exports 
have shown good growth, recording an increase of around 20 
percent in dollar terms between April and December 1993, 
compared to a little over 3 percent in the corresponding period 
of 1992. 
  The government attaches the highest priority to the 
development of agriculture. The timely provision of adequate 
inputs and the creation of a structure that provides for the 
timely announcement of prices -- which in turn promote higher 
production to meet the domestic needs of the country fully and 
provide for exports -- are the major objectives of the 
government. In keeping with the overall strategy the plan 
outlay for the Department of Agriculture and Cooperatives has 
been raised by 26.6 percent from 10.5 billion rupees in 1992-93 
to 13.3 billion rupees in 1993-94. The production of foodgrains 
during the 1992-93 period was 180 million tons, which was more 
than 1991-92 production by 7.1 percent. Food grain production 
for the fall of 1993-94 is expected to be 99 million tons, and 
the prospects for the spring are excellent. 
  The government is encouraging the diversification of the 
agriculture sector by emphasizing horticulture, aquaculture, oil 
seeds, pulses, and other commodities that have export potential. 
This will be done without detriment to the interests of our own 
consumers. Steps are being taken to revitalize the rural 
cooperative credit system as well as marketing, processing, and 
other services essential to farmers, especially in remote areas. 
Extension services will be broadbased, keeping the new 
priorities in agriculture in view, including greater involvement 
by the voluntary organizations. As a measure to reduce the 
poverty level, our agricultural strategy will aim at increasing 
agricultural production in the rain-fed areas through an 
integrated strategy of soil and water conservation, the 
increased use of agricultural inputs such as organics and 
biofertilizers, and improved technology. 
  During the eighth plan period, 11 billion rupees have been 
allocated for the restructured National Watershed Development 
Project for rain-fed areas. About 3 million hectares of land 
will be treated for sustainable production of food, fodder, 
fuel, and fiber through dry-land farming technology. The 
household production system will diversify as a consequence, and 
ultimately the income level and employment opportunities of the 
watershed community will improve. The project will also enhance 
the availability of ground water, which will consequently 
prevent drought in the project area. A total of 250,000 micro 
watersheds have been identified for development in rain-fed 
areas, and work has started on them. 
  The capacity to manufacture nitrogenous fertilizers has been 
increased, and more is being planned. Because the availability 
of raw materials required for further production is limited 
within the country, efforts are being made to set up joint 
ventures abroad, particularly in the Gulf and West Asia. The 
government will continue to take all measures required to bring 
about a balanced application of soil nutrients so that 
production levels are sustained. 
  As part of the agricultural policy, states have been advised 
to remove all intra- and interstate restrictions on the movement 
of food grains. The government's commitment to safeguard the 
interests of the consumer remains as strong as ever. The 
central issue price for the revamped public distribution system 
areas remains as much as 500 rupees less per metric tonne than 
prices in the general public distribution system, thus 
increasing affordability for the poor. At the inception of the 
scheme in 1992, it was expected that 10,580 new fair price shops 
would be opened in the revamped public distribution system areas 
to strengthen the delivery system. Compared to this, 11,681 new 
fair price shops have been opened in this area, exceeding the 
target. New warehousing space of 181,296 tonnes has been also 
created or rented since the inception of the scheme. A midterm 
review of the revamped public distribution system has revealed 
that nearly 1.5 million metric tonnes of additional food grains 
have been provided to rural areas compared to what used to be 
provided before the inception of the scheme, thus adding a new 
rural dimension to the public distribution system. With record 
food stocks of 22 million tonnes in the central pool grids on 1 
January 1994 -- resulting from stepped up procurement efforts -- 
the government is comfortably placed to augment coverage further 
in this area should it become necessary. 
  The government is determined that no section of the 
population -- regardless of whether it is women, children, 
minorities, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, or backward 
classes -- should remain outside the mainstream of development. 
In all areas of development of the poor, resource allocations 
were enhanced during 1993-94 compared to the previous year. The 
revised outlay for the Ministry of Rural Development increased 
by 56 percent, while the planned outlay for the Welfare Ministry 
was raised from 8.8 billion rupees to 9.8 billion. 
  The Jawahar Rozgar Yojana employment scheme has been 
strengthened in the 120 most backward districts. Subsidies 
under the Integrated Rural Development Program were enhanced by 
1,000 rupees per household. The program of providing improved 
tool kits for rural artisans, started in 1992-93, was extended 
to 100 more districts in 1993-94, thus covering all 162 
districts in the country and benefiting 230,000 rural artisans. 
  Comprehensive programs for the welfare and development of 
weavers have been evolved. They include housing, work sheds, 
handloom development centers, quality dying units, training, 
improved practices, and provision of working capital. These 
programs -- with a total outlay of 10.372 billion rupees -- 
started during the year. The scheme for handloom development 
centers and quality dying units, launched toward the end of 
1993, seeks to merge and expand existing units and establish new 
ones. Against the 1993 target of 120 centers and 20 units, 213 
centers and 94 units have been approved; 25 centers and 25 units 
have already started operating. 
  The government has formulated three new and innovative 
schemes to benefit the poor, particularly rural women, and urban 
youth. 
  The employment assurance scheme, introduced in 1,752 of the 
most backward and remote blocks of the country, where 170 
million of India's poor live, will provide rural laborers with 
assured wage employment for 100 days during the lean 
agricultural season. The scheme will continue to make 
employment opportunities available to village people at a fuller 
level. 
  The women's empowerment scheme will strengthen the position 
of rural women by enabling them to gain and exercise control 
over their earnings and household resources. Already, more than 
400,000 women have opened accounts under this scheme in rural 
post offices. This scheme, along with the National Women's 
Fund, will greatly enhance self-employment opportunities for 
rural women. 
  An employment scheme has been launched to provide sustained 
employment in micro enterprises to educated urban youths. About 
195,000 applications have been received so far from youth in 
different states. So far, 41,275 applications have been 
processed and recommended to banks; about 2,000 have been 
approved. During the current year, the scheme will cover 40,000 
beneficiaries. From 1994-95 onward, it is intended to cover 
220,000 beneficiaries per year, thus covering a total of 700,000 
beneficiaries over the remainder of the eighth plan period. The 
Reserve Bank of India has been instructed to support the program 
fully. The scheme provides for a 22.5 percent reservation for 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and 27 percent for other 
backward classes, with preference given to women. 
  A significant role has been envisaged in all of these 
programs for nongovernmental organizations to generate awareness 
and promote effective implementation. To monitor progress in 
the implementation of the programs for weaker sections, and to 
provide the direction and thrust required, the prime minister 
has set up a special cell in the prime minister's office. This 
special cell will receive feedback from the responsible 
departments as well as information based on field visits and 
independent evaluations, in order to remove all possible 
bottlenecks from the programs. A special committee of 
secretaries responsible for the implementation of these three 
programs has also been set up to supervise the coordinated 
implementation of these programs in the field. 
  Communications facilities will be further extended in rural 
areas. In 1993-94, 46,800 village councils will be connected by 
telephone. It is proposed that public telephones be provided to 
72,000 villages during 1994-95. In the schemes for the welfare 
of scheduled castes, special central assistance allocations for 
the special component plan were augmented in 1993, and their 
scope was expanded to include schemes for infrastructure 
development in areas with 50 percent or more of the population 
coming from scheduled castes. An important landmark during the 
year was the passage of the National Commission for Safai 
Karamcharis [Sanitation Workers] Act, which will assist in the 
rapid implementation of the liberation and rehabilitation of 
safai karamcharis. The National Commission is being constituted. 
  The government is fully alert to the situation arising out 
from the atrocities against the scheduled castes in certain 
parts of the country. Protection for the scheduled castes under 
the law as well as the effective implementation of programs for 
socioeconomic development meant for them will be ensured. 
During 1992-93, nearly 2.1 million scheduled caste families and 
800,000 scheduled tribe families were assisted in crossing the 
poverty line by the 20-point program. During 1993-94, the total 
number of assisted families is likely to rise to 2.7 million 
scheduled caste families and 900,000 scheduled tribe families. 
A scheme of educational complexes in areas where tribal female 
literacy is very low was initiated during the year. Thirteen 
such complexes have been sanctioned so far. The turnover of the 
Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India 
rose from 220 million rupees in 1991 to 860 million rupees in 
1992-93. This is expected to be much higher this year. 
  The National Backward Classes Finance and Development 
Corporation has made significant advances this year. During 
1993, it sanctioned loans worth 800 million rupees, and it 
proposes to double its operations in the coming year. The long 
awaited reservation of vacancies for other backward classes in 
Indian Government services became a reality on 8 September 1993, 
when the present government issued orders for a 27 percent 
reservation for the backward classes. With this, one of the 
most important aspirations of the other backward classes in the 
country was met. Work relating to the publication of the works 
of Babasaheb Ambedkar in regional languages was taken forward, 
and two volumes each were brought out in Hindi, Tamil, and 
Gujarati. The work in other languages is proceeding well. 
Eight chairs have been sanctioned in different universities to 
undertake research on Babasaheb's philosophy. 
  The new Islamic Endowment Bill 1993 was introduced in 
Parliament in August 1993, replacing the existing Islamic 
Endowment Act 1954 and Islamic Endowment Amendment Act 1984. 
This will, among other things, provide for the more democratic 
composition of the Islamic Endowment Board, for the Islamic 
Endowment Tribunal to decide issues relating to Islamic 
endowment matters, and for better protection and management of 
Islamic endowment property. A National Minorities Finance and 
Development Corporation will become operational this year, with 
an authorized share capital of 5 billion rupees for promoting 
the economic development of minorities. The modalities are 
being worked out. 
  In my last address to you, I referred to the review of the 
1986 national policy on education undertaken in 1992 and the 
modifications effected in that policy. The government continues 
to give very high priority to literacy and primary education 
based on innovative strategies for a total literacy campaign 
backed by a post-literacy campaign and a new district specific 
and community- oriented approach to primary education. All 18 
districts in Kerala and Pondicherry have achieved total 
literacy. In the 32 districts that have already successfully 
concluded the total literacy campaign, post-literacy campaigns 
have been launched to ensure that the newly-literate do not 
lapse into illiteracy. At present, 238 total literacy campaigns 
are underway in 258 districts. The new district primary 
education program emphasizes participatory planning and 
management and focuses on the education of girls. It seeks to 
enhance the full effectiveness of the schools through inputs in 
teacher training and decentralized management. India played 
host to the Education for All summit of the world's nine highest 
population countries. Our commitment -- as well as that of the 
international community -- to achieving education for all by the 
turn of the century was reaffirmed there. On this occasion, the 
prime minister announced the government's decision to raise the 
outlay for education to 6 percent of gross domestic product by 
the turn of the century. This will be kept in view while 
formulating the ninth five-year plan. Besides this, the 
government aims to achieve the objective of education for all 
through segregated target setting and decentralized management. 
  Because of the sustained efforts of the Indian Government 
and 
the state governments in implementing the national family 
planning program, the annual population growth rate is 
declining. The annual average exponential rate of growth in 
1981-91 was 2.14. The annual rate of increase decreased to 1.9 
percent in 1992. 
  The crude birth rate, which was 41.7 per 1,000 from 
1951-61, decreased to 29 per 1,000 in 1992. The crude death 
rate, which was 22.8 from 1951-61, decreased to 10 in 1992. The 
total fertility rate, which was 5.97 from 1951-61, decreased to 
3.6 in 1991. The infant mortality rate for the country as a 
whole has decreased from 146 per 1,000 live births from 1961-79 
to 71 in 1992. While these are significant achievements, the 
increase in population is still staggering. The government 
attaches the highest importance to reducing the population 
growth rate. There is a national consensus to promote family 
welfare. For this, multidimensional and multisectoral efforts 
involving state governments, opinion leaders, nongovernmental 
organizations, and all sections of society are essential. All 
political parties must unanimously exhort the people to adopt 
the small family norms and transform the family program into a 
mass movement. The National Development Council [NDC] has 
endorsed the recommendation of the Committee on Population it 
set up earlier. The NDC also decided to hold wider 
consultations with the chief ministers and opinion makers on the 
future course of action needed to implement the NDC's 
recommendations. This will be done shortly. 
  We are fully aware of the links between the development 
process and protection of the environment. The need for the 
conservation and wise use of natural resources is reflected in 
our major river cleaning and pollution abatement programs, as 
well as in our forest and wildlife policies. While 
participating in the continuing international debate on 
biodiversity, climate change, and increasing desertification, we 
have kept in focus the basic issues -- raised at the 1992 Rio 
summit -- of access to resources and technology. Within the 
government, our development efforts will take full note of all 
our environmental concerns. 
  The space program has made a steady progress. We had a 
failure in the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle's flight, but this 
has been put to good use. The data collected has been analyzed 
and has proven the effectiveness of the complex systems 
involved. The next flight of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle 
is planned for August or September 1994. There has also been 
progress in the development of the Indian geosynchronous 
satellite launch vehicle which will enable the launch of INSAT 
class satellites in coming few years. The successful launch and 
commissioning of INSAT-2B last year -- within a year of 
commissioning INSAT-2A -- is a demonstration of our 
capabilities. The INSAT-2B has enabled Doordarshan [Indian 
television] to augment its services with five satellite 
channels. This has strengthened the programs broadcast by 
Doordarshan in regional languages. 
  India has a strong and large scientific and industrial 
infrastructure. It also has demonstrated its capability in 
several high technology fields. In this context, I am sure, the 
honorable members will join me in applauding the successful 
demonstration of high technology in the launch of the Agni 
missile last Saturday. [applause] 
  The pace of technological changes and the need to shift to 
technologies that are environmentally compatible imposes various 
demands on us. Restrictions placed on the transfer of 
technology require us to rely more on our own talents. The 
government is committed to encourage this to happen by tapping 
the great potential that the country possesses. 
  In the context of the emerging economic scenario, the 
benefits of research will be harnessed for use by our 
industries. A boost will be given to exports of high technology 
products. The thrust will be on information technology and 
genetic engineering and biotechnology. Priority will also be 
given to advanced materials and devices for use of solar and 
other nonconventional energy sources. 
  Our Armed Forces maintain their constant vigil on our 
borders to safeguard our country's territorial integrity. The 
nation is proud of them and of the defense scientists and 
engineers who have contributed commendably to our defense 
preparedness. Progress in the indigenous development of arms and 
ammunition and the diversification of defense production units 
is proceeding fast. In addition to their normal duties, the 
Armed Forces have been assisting civil authorities in 
maintaining law and order whenever required and in 
counter-insurgency operations. They have also been helping in 
rescue and relief operations in times of natural disaster. 
Their performance in these areas has been exemplary. The 
government remains committed to providing better facilities and 
conditions for serving and retired Armed Forces personnel. 
Those posted in field areas have recently been granted higher 
allowances. It has been decided to extend the benefit of the 
onetime pension increase scheme to an additional 200,000 
pensioners. 
  As a result of sustained international marketing, the 
government has succeeded in instilling confidence among the 
international community that India is one of the safest tourism 
destinations in the world. This resulted in all time records 
for tourist arrivals in December 1993 and January 1994, 
registering increases of 23.8 percent and 28.4 percent, 
respectively, over the same months in 1992-93. 
  The government's foreign policy over the past year focused 
on 
securing our economic interests in our relations with countries 
abroad while continuing to promote our political and security 
interests. The significance of our economic reforms was 
effectively conveyed abroad. Our relations with our neighbors 
remained cordial, and our interaction with Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
the Maldives, Nepal, and Sri Lanka in various fields recorded 
good progress during the year. 
  In the case of Pakistan, however, its support for terrorism 
and subversion in Jammu and Kashmir and anti-Indian activities 
worldwide seriously hampered our efforts at normalizing 
relations. The prime minister offered Pakistan a dialogue aimed 
at establishing good neighborly relations as envisaged in the 
Simla agreement. Bilateral talks have since taken place, but 
the stridency of Pakistan's anti-Indian statements have grown, 
thus adversely affecting efforts at improving bilateral ties. 
There are no quarrels between us and the people of Pakistan. 
We feel that for good relations between our countries, the 
Government of Pakistan should give up its negative approach and 
cooperate with us to normalize India-Pakistan relations in 
accordance with the Simla agreement. 
  Our relations with China have improved markedly. The prime 
minister's visit to China in September 1993 and the signing of 
the agreement on maintaining peace and tranquility along the 
line of actual control have broadened these relations to a new 
stage of development. The expert group set up under this 
agreement held its first meeting recently, reflecting the desire 
of both sides to maintain and continue interaction on this 
complex issue. 
  India values the South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation [SAARC] as an instrument of regional cooperation 
consistent with the objectives of its charter. The prime 
minister attended the SAARC summit in Dhaka last year. SAARC 
has recorded progress in dealing with certain important issues 
of common interest, such as poverty, terrorism, population 
growth, problems related to the status of women, children, 
youth, and drugs and psychotropic substances. We continue to 
play an active role in SAARC with a view to promoting 
socioeconomic and other objectives in accordance with the SAARC 
charter. 
  We have traditional ties with the United States in a number 
of areas, from education and science and technology to culture 
and sports. We have also cooperated with the United Nations on 
issues relating to disarmament, such as the Comprehensive Test 
Ban Treaty. The response from the United States to our economic 
liberalization policy has been positive and U.S. investments in 
India over the past two years were very substantial. We look 
forward to working with the United States toward mutual 
understanding on those issues which need enhancing as this will 
reflect the vibrant, democratic, and secular ideals of our two 
countries. 
  Relations with the Russian Federation continued with mutual 
understanding and cooperation based on the rich traditions of 
our past friendship. Despite certain difficulties the two 
countries face, both sides sought to promote cooperation in the 
political, economic, commercial, and other fields. The goodwill 
and understanding that underpin our relations reinforce our 
joint efforts and help to identify possibilities for further 
cooperation in various fields in today's changing context. 
  Special attention has been given to strengthening relations 
with the Central Asian region. The prime minister paid a very 
successful visit to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan in 1993. The 
Uzbek and Kazakh presidents also visited India during the past 
year. A number of accords have been signed between India and 
these two countries in fields ranging from political cooperation 
and science and technology cooperation to trade, civil aviation, 
and culture. 
  A concerted effort was made to forge a new era of closer 
cooperation with ASEAN and the East Asian countries. New 
economic links were established and trade was increased. The 
commencement of a sectoral dialogue between India and ASEAN was 
a notable development. The prime minister's visit to Thailand 
in April 1993 gave a new impetus to Indo-Thai relations. 
India-Singapore relations were qualitatively upgraded, and 
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore visited India as the 
guest of honor at our Republic Day celebrations in January this 
year. Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed of Malaysia and President 
Suharto of Indonesia also visited India in December 1993. Our 
ties with Vietnam were reinforced with the vice president's 
visit to Vietnam in September 1993. The government continued to 
make sustained efforts to enhance economic and other links with 
Japan. The prime minister's visit to the Republic of Korea in 
September 1993 with a view to lending further momentum to 
bilateral and economic ties with that country received a 
positive response. 
  Our traditionally cordial relations with the Gulf countries 
are now marked by increasing economic interaction. Our prime 
minister's visit to Oman and Iran in September 1993 laid the 
foundation for an expanding relationship in the name of mutual 
economic benefit. 
  We welcomed the signing of the declaration of principles on 
interim self-government arrangements between Israel and PLO in 
September 1993 as a notable step toward peace and stability in 
West Asia and the restoration of the legitimate rights of the 
Palestinian people. 
  The importance that India and the European Union attach to 
further developing mutually beneficial relations in diverse 
fields was symbolized by the cooperation agreement on 
partnership and development concluded on 20 December 1993 and 
the Indo-EU joint statement of political dialogue. High-level 
dignitaries who visited India from Europe during the past year 
included the president of Ireland, the king of Sweden, and the 
prime minister of the Netherlands. The prime minister recently 
paid a very successful visit to Davos, Switzerland and Germany. 
In Davos, the prime minister addressed a worldwide audience of 
industrialists, political leaders, and academics. As a result, 
appreciation of India's policy and potential has grown. The 
visit to Germany has given further impetus to bilateral ties and 
has strengthened economic cooperation. The state visits I made 
to Ukraine, Turkey, and Hungary in July 1993 were a 
manifestation of our desire to consolidate our cooperative ties 
with these countries. These visits were the first by an Indian 
president to these countries. 
  During the year, we had interaction with the countries of 
the 
Sub-Saharan region, including visits by presidents or prime 
ministers of Burkina Faso, Mauritius, Tanzania, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe. We have noted the positive developments in South 
Africa, and look forward to the early establishment of majority 
rule there. 
  India continues to play an active role in shaping the global 
agenda on issues pertaining to political and security patterns, 
economic and social developments, human rights, environment, and 
population in the various meetings of the United Nations, the 
Nonaligned Movement, and other international bodies. On these 
issues we have taken the lead in articulating the specific 
concerns of the developing countries with a view to promoting a 
global consensus. 
  The year 1993 was used to consolidate the gains of economic 
reform and the political initiatives of the government. We 
entered 1994 with the optimism of accelerating our pace of 
economic growth, strengthened by the reassuring verdict of the 
people in favor of reforms and against the forces of communalism. 
  I am confident your debates and deliberations in the course 
of this session and beyond will take the nation forward to 
fulfill the aspirations of the people. I commend you in your 
task and wish you all success. Hail India! 

