BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by reporter Li Xiaozhun (2621 1321 6150): "The </F>
Qiandao Hu Incident Should Not Impair Cross-Strait Ties"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong, 7 Apr (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE) -- The 
incident of the death of Taiwan compatriots on the Qiandao Hu in 
Zhejiang has shocked, and attracted the attention of, the 
country and the whole world. Taiwan public opinion had hoped 
that the mainland side would try its best to deal with the 
aftermath of the incident, quickly discover the cause of the 
incident, and make the greatest possible efforts to console the 
relatives of the dead. All these demands are reasonable. 
However, before the whole thing has come to light, it evidently 
is not cool-headed enough and is emotional, with efforts made 
only to criticize the mainland for intentionally withholding the 
truth and even to incite the termination of cross-strait 
exchanges and relations. The Taiwan authorities also have made 
the decision to stop sending tourist groups to the mainland. 
  In the course of Taiwan compatriots making tours of the 
mainland in recent years, the Baiyun Airport incident, the 
Putian road accident, and several other incidents have occurred 
as a result of natural calamities or human negligence. These 
accidents have done considerable damage to tourism of both sides 
of the strait, and in particular, they have left irremediable 
sadness among the family members of the dead. On neither side 
of the strait do compatriots wish to see such accidents. This 
is particularly so in the case of the recent Qiandao Hu 
incident, in which 24 Taiwan compatriots and eight mainland 
compatriots died. Such a tremendous misfortune, and the 
reaction and resentment triggered by it among various circles in 
Taiwan, are understandable. It stands to reason that family 
members of the dead have put forward -- before the cause of the 
accident has been clarified -- various questions; some demands, 
including demands that are not quite realistic; and blame in 
severe terms. 
  According to media reports, the current Qiandao Hu incident 
is quite odd and human causes are not ruled out. However, there 
are many questionable points in the incident which cannot be 
proved for a short while yet, and the side concerned should be 
given enough time to carry out a careful investigation. Media 
reports on the recent incident show that in handling the 
incident, both sides of the strait have shortcomings. The 
mainland side did not have sufficient transparency in carrying 
out its investigation and making proofs, did not appropriately 
satisfy the demands put forward by family members of the dead, 
and was not skillful enough in its approach. As a result, the 
relatives of the dead were full of doubts, misgivings, 
criticism, and blame, and the outside world raised many 
questions. The mainland side should speedily examine those 
aspects and improve them. 
  On the other hand, Taiwan's organizations concerned did not 
confine the discussion to the matter at issue, and vicious 
criticism is not the way to solve problems. Moves such as 
making the decision to terminate tourist exchanges between the 
two sides of the strait and declaring the mainland a high-risk 
region for tourism were even more emotional. The Qiandao Hu 
incident was only an unfortunate incident in which Taiwan 
compatriots died while making a tour on the mainland. Both 
sides should coolly and reasonably make joint efforts to deal 
with the aftermath of the incident, and should not magnify it. 
Still less should political color be intentionally applied to 
this purely chance occurrence in the people's livelihood, nor 
should the development of relations between the two sides be 
impeded. Otherwise, things will not accord with the aspirations 
of compatriots on the two sides of the strait. 

