BFN 

  [Text] Vientiane, April 9 (KPL) -- Their Majesties King 
Phumiphon Adunyadet and Queen Sirikit with Her Royal Highness 
Princess Maha Chakkri Sirinthon yesterday afternoon visited the 
km 22 Agricultural Development and Service Center, the project 
established under the patronage of the King of Thailand, where 
the king and President Nouhak Phoumsavanh jointly performed the 
opening of the center. 
  Also present at the ceremony were Thai Prime Minister Chuan 
Likphai and Thai ministers who joined the king in his visit to 
Laos, and several Lao ministers and senior officials. 
  Located at km 22 on Luang Prabang Road, Vientiane 
Prefecture, 
the agricultural development center was established under the 
financial support of the king of Thailand. 
  On arrival at the center, Thai Prime Minister Chuan Likphai 
in his capacity as president of the project coordination 
committee made a report to the king on the background of this 
project. 
  Lao Foreign Minister Somsavat Lengsavat, responsible for the 
implementation of the project on the Lao side, then presented a 
report on the implementation of this project. He said that the 
king of Thailand had agreed with the Lao PDR [People's 
Democratic Republic] to jointly build this center as a 
commemorative establishment for the late President Kaysone 
Phomvihan and as a symbol of the neighbourly friendship between 
the people of Laos and Thailand. 
  He said, in this project the Lao Government had allocated a 
274 million kip input, and the work started with survey and 
economic feasibility study on an area of 52 hectares to be 
covered by the project, which was followed by the installation 
of a power supply system to serve the center and people of 
Na-gnang. 
  A four-kilometer road from road 13 north to the center was 
repaired and asphalted, a club house was built and equipped with 
water supply system, and an irrigation weir was built on Houai 
Son Tai, able to irrigate about 200 hectares during the rainy 
season and six hectares in the dry season. In addition, a 
survey of forest areas on the nearby Phou Phanang mountain was 
made. The government has already made it a forest reserve. 
  He said along with the infrastructure construction, the 
project had promoted the production among the local people 
living in the vicinity of the center. A new rice variety and 
the rice growing technique were introduced in 1993 at the 
irrigation area. Experiment was made on creating model families 
of farmers in cultivation and livestock at Ban Na-gnang, Ban 
Nason, and Ban Nam Kiang. Cattle vaccination was carried out 
and cattle epidemic preventive methods were introduced to the 
people at five villages nearby the center. He said that less 
than one year later, the area around the center had a new 
improved image. 
  Speaking on the occasion King Phumiphon Adunyadet of 
Thailand 
said: The queen and I feel very pleased and greatly honoured to 
have been invited to pay an official visit to the Lao People's 
Democratic Republic on this occasion when we have participated 
at the opening ceremony of the Friendship Bridge. 
  The king said that the welcome his party received made him 
feel that he was among good friends who were most familiar with 
each other as well as understand one another very well dating 
back into the distant past. 
  The king said to this effect: In reality the Lao and Thai 
peoples have long enjoyed friendly ties going into the 
centuries. The relationship between our two peoples and states 
are so closely intertwined that they cannot be separated. This 
is because we are neighbouring countries with both our peoples 
being Buddhists and having similar kinds of customs, traditions 
and cultures, to such a point that our two nations have a 
well-known reputation of being close relatives. Such intimate 
and long-establishment and promotion of diplomatic relations as 
well as for the carrying out of joint projects between the 
Kingdom of Thailand and the Lao People's Democratic Republic, 
which today have met with satisfactory results. [sentence as 
received] 
  "The Thai people have watched and followed with great 
interest the development in various fields of endeavours in the 
Lao People's Democratic Republic. Thus, we are highly pleased 
and gratified to have witnessed that in the last decade the 
country has been able to preserve in good order her national 
integrity and characteristics as well as maintain every feature 
of her national livelihood. Furthermore, she has been able to 
further develop and improve herself for greater prosperity and 
advancement. Such prosperity and security will not only result 
in the benefits and happiness for the people of your country, 
but will also play an important role in the establishment of 
peace and security for all nations in this region of the world. 
I am, therefore, pleased to be able to state most clearly that 
under the wise and circumspect guidance (of the Lao leaders) as 
well as the able administration of the Lao Government, the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic will continue to make progress 
towards the achievement of full prosperity and happiness". 
  After planting a commemorative tree at the center, the king 
and the queen with President Nouhak Phoumsavan visited the area 
around the Houai Son irrigation. After that, the king and the 
queen together with the princess returned to Vientiane. 

