Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Strengthen Cross-Strait Economic </F>
and Trade Exchanges, Work Together To Boost the National 
Economy"] 
  [Text] On 5 March, the Sixth Session of the Eighth NPC 
Standing Committee examined and passed the "PRC Law on the 
Protection of Investment by Taiwan Compatriots" (hereinafter the 
Protection Law). This is the first special law involving Taiwan 
formulated by the NPC. 
  In recent years, relations between the two sides of the 
Taiwan Strait have been developing continuously, their economic 
and trade exchanges have been increasingly brisk, and the two 
sides have made remarkable achievements. As China continues to 
pursue the policy of reform and opening up, the huge potential 
of its economic development and the broad prospect it 
demonstrates has been drawing numerous investors from Taiwan 
like a strong magnetic field. Taiwan compatriots have kept 
investing on the mainland and their investment has increased 
speedily. At the end of 1993, there were more than 20,000 
investments made by Taiwan compatriots on the mainland with a 
total agreed investment of over $20 billion. 
  The state has always adopted a positive and encouraging 
attitude toward Taiwan investment on the mainland, and pursued a 
preferential policy to protect the legitimate rights and 
interests of Taiwan businesses investing on the mainland. In 
1988, the State Council's "Regulations on Encouraging Investment 
by Taiwan Compatriots" were promulgated. These administrative 
regulations are supported by vast numbers of Taiwan compatriots. 
Over the past few years, Taiwan- funded enterprises and Taiwan 
investment have increased speedily. The formulation and 
implementation of the Protection Law once again shows that the 
state attaches great importance to the development of 
cross-strait economic and trade exchanges and demonstrates its 
sincerity in vigorously promoting them. 
  Over the years, Taiwan-funded enterprises on the mainland 
have grown from scratch and are now mature. However, anything 
has a course of continuous improvement in its development. As 
Taiwan investment on the mainland has speedily increased, some 
new circumstances have appeared and new problems have to be 
seriously studied and resolved. The Protection Law which has 
been passed was formulated after incorporating the reasonable 
opinions of Taiwan compatriots and relevant Taiwan quarters on 
the basis of fully summing up the experience since the State 
Council's "Regulations on Encouraging Investment by Taiwan 
Compatriots." The Protection Law standardizes by legal means 
the better and conscientious resolution of problems often 
encountered by Taiwan compatriots in their investment. This not 
only enhances the protection for investment by Taiwan 
compatriots and for their other legitimate rights and interests, 
but is beneficial to improving the legal environment for Taiwan 
compatriots to make investments on the mainland and will further 
strengthen the confidence of Taiwan compatriots to invest on the 
mainland. 
  In the world today, economic regionalization is speeding up 
and economic competition is becoming increasingly acute, so the 
two sides of the Taiwan Strait must not neglect the necessity of 
cross- strait cooperation. Help from others is no better than 
help from oneself, and this is required for national 
self-strengthening. Economic and trade exchanges between the two 
sides of the Taiwan Strait are not only objectively necessary, 
but also have broad prospects and are very promising. The 
economies of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait have their own 
characteristics and advantages and are strongly complementary. 
Strengthening cross-strait economic and trade cooperation and 
combining and supplementing each other's advantages will surely 
benefit each other and lead to common prosperity. The fact that 
Taiwan entrepreneurs come to invest on the mainland in 
accordance with the mainland's industrial policy plays a 
positive role in the mainland's reform and opening up and 
economic prosperity and also brings along Taiwan's economic 
growth and injects new vitality into Taiwan's economy. 
  There is no denying the fact that the Taiwan authorities 
still create many obstacles to economic and trade cooperation 
between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, making their 
economic and trade exchanges unsmooth. We sincerely hope that 
the Taiwan authorities will base themselves on the overall 
interests of the Chinese nation, have the future in mind, have 
the 21st century in mind, be broadminded, discard prejudices, 
remove obstacles, join hands with the other side of the strait, 
and make concerted efforts to invigorate the economy of the 
Chinese nation. 

