Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Combating the Illegal Drug Trade"] </F>
  [Text] To combat the drug trafficking problem in our 
region, the International Drug Control Board (IDCB) has urged 
Iran, Pakistan and Turkey to pool their resources and fight the 
smuggling of illegal narcotics. 
  Drug prices have recently dropped. Latest reports say that 
the price of Hashish has fallen from 200,000 to 90,000 rials per 
kilo in the last two years. Meanwhile, Iran's anti-drug forces 
seize tons of contraband drugs and make hundreds of drug-related 
arrests each month. 
  To compensate for their losses resulting from low narcotics 
prices, the traffickers are smuggling greater volumes and are 
expanding their overseas markets despite the risk of 
imprisonment and execution. 
  The IDCB's declaration, last Tuesday, suggested that the 
best 
way to eradicate drug smuggling is for Iran, Pakistan, and 
Turkey to start harmonious regional and international campaigns 
aimed at combating the cultivation, production, trafficking, 
distribution, and consumption of illegal narcotics. 
  Since in this region Pakistan and Afghanistan are the main 
producers of drugs, it is incumbent upon their governments to 
pay more attention to this problem by confronting the smugglers 
and weeding out corrupt government officials who facilitate the 
cultivation and transport of illegal drugs. 
  Khorasan and Sistan-Baluchestan provinces, bordering with 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, provide fertile grounds for drug 
smugglers. Almost 70 per cent of drug arrests in Iran are made 
in these two provinces. 
  According to informed sources, several groups in Afghanistan 
are fighting over control of areas where Poppy is cultivated. 
Drugs are the only source of foreign or even domestic 
currencies in the area. Extreme poverty has always been the root 
of many evils. Afghanistan is in dire need of international 
financial help to return to cultivation of its traditional crops 
and give up producing poppy. It also needs to be reminded that 
if no efforts are made to arrest corrupt officials and local 
leaders who supply the smugglers with contraband drugs, the 
international community is prepared to take punitive measures 
against it. 
  Pakistan and Iran also need to pursue their policy of 
eradicating drug-related businesses. They must also increase 
their efforts towards identifying and arresting officials who 
collaborate with drug lords. Recent arrests in Khorasan are 
quite promising, but the public must also be made aware, through 
advertising campaigns, of the damage that narcotics can inflict 
on individuals and societies. 
  Iran is the gateway through which drugs from Pakistan and 
Afghanistan, as well as from South and West Asia, reach Western 
Europe and the United States. All countries concerned should 
help in this fight against narcotics. International 
intelligence agencies must freely, and without attaching any 
political strings, share all relevant information with Iran 
enabling it to crush smuggling operations within and through its 
territory. 
  International intelligence agencies could supply Iran with 
satellite information pinpointing opium cultivated lands and 
smuggling routes. 
  International cooperation is the only way to break down the 
power of local drug lords and to once and for all put an end to 
illegal farming and smuggling of narcotics. 

