BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fathi al-Barqawi: "'Arafat: Opposition Factions </F>
Request Participation in the Palestinian Authority"] 
  [Text] Tunis -- Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat has 
told about 30 members of Fatah's Revolutionary Council that some 
of the PLO's opposition factions are beginning to retreat from 
their hardline positions on the joint Declaration of Principles 
signed in Washington on 13 September. He added that some of 
these factions which had opposed the peace process are now 
asking to join the National Authority Council which has begun 
running the affairs of government in the Gaza Strip and Jericho 
area. 
  At an unexpected meeting of the Revolutionary Council, 
'Arafat urged the conferees to return to their homeland 
Palestine as soon as possible. He also told them that a World 
Bank delegation he met with last Friday suggested giving the PLO 
$10 million out of the $42 million agreed upon at a meeting held 
in the French capital Paris about two weeks ago, and that he 
rejected the offer which was a violation of what was agreed and 
which may be the main reason which has so far delayed 'Arafat's 
return to Palestine. The PLO is believed to be in dire need of 
the funds to make the necessary preparations for the work of all 
the institutions which almost begin from zero. 
  According to some members of the Revolutionary Council of 
Fatah, the largest Palestinian faction, 'Arafat, in a speech to 
the conferees, talked about the issue of human rights in 
Palestine. He said that the people who suffered occupation, 
coercion, and humiliation, hundreds of thousands of whom 
suffered detention in Israeli detention camps and some of whom 
were tortured and killed by Israeli soldiers, were entitled to 
full freedom in an atmosphere of democracy and partisan 
plurality. He stressed the need for the consolidation and 
development of the Palestinian Human Rights Committee which has 
so far been operating in Tunisia awaiting transfer to 
Palestinian territory. He said that the committee could be 
developed because it is closer to understanding the people's 
needs. That was seen as a veiled criticism of the Citizens 
Rights Committee headed by Hanan 'Ashrawi who had, for two 
years, worked as spokeswoman for the Palestinian negotiating 
delegation. 'Arafat put more emphasis on the need to provide 
two fundamental elements, namely security and bread, citing the 
Koranic verse "feed their hunger and safeguard them against 
fear." He said that the initial days of the Palestinian 
Authority in what is known as the autonomy areas showed that the 
Palestinian National Authority must start from zero in security 
and economic sectors, and even the simplest services. At the 
meeting, which was attended by Major General Nasr [Yusuf], 
commander of the Palestinian police forces, 'Arafat ordered that 
no Palestinian citizen should be arrested, not even on spying 
charges, without reference to the official authorities. That 
remark was aimed at some factions which are trying to set up a 
parallel authority. Major General Yusuf, who submitted a 
comprehensive report on security in Gaza and Jericho, spoke in 
detail about his experience since assuming his post, especially 
in the Gaza Strip. He listed the positive and negative aspects 
and stressed the need to control the situation and contain all 
problems. He said that despite the meager available resources, 
a good mechanism has been put into operation, thanks to the 
solidarity and support of the masses. 
  According to Fatah sources, 'Arafat gave instructions that 
the committees which had been formed by the Revolutionary 
Council at its latest session should begin their work. Three 
committees will in fact begin their work as of Saturday in his 
personal presence. They are the committees for the unification 
of organizational rules, assessment of available qualifications, 
and popular organizations. 

