BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 27 (KCNA) -- "Please uphold with 
loyalty respected Supreme Commander General Kim Chong-il, our 
life and soul, destiny and future," said Senior Colonel of the 
Korean People's Army Mun Chong-hwa, who was the head of a 
department at Kim Il-song University of politics, to 
soldier-students at the last moments of his life when the 
university just opened after vacation last year. 
  The Korean People's Army soldiers uphold Comrade Kim 
Chong-il 
with loyalty and filial piety, shouting earnestly the loyal 
slogan "We serve comrade supreme commander!" 
  They are a fort and a shield defending comrade supreme 
commander with the high pride and honor of being revolutionary 
soldiers of Comrade Kim Chong-il, a great iron-willed brilliant 
commander. 
  Only recently, many soldiers including Yu Kyong-nam and Hong 
Kyong-ae protected portraits of the great leader President Kim 
Il-song and the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, laying down 
their lives without hesitation at critical moments. 
  An officer, Hwang Yong-chun, has remained faithful to the 
leadership of comrade supreme commander, serving as a private at 
one post for more than 20 years, with a resolve to uphold the 
leader with arms till the end of his life. 
  The People's Army has produced many heroic soldiers who 
dedicated all their wisdom and strength to implementing orders 
and instructions from comrade supreme commander and even laid 
down their precious youth and lives unhesitatingly while 
devoting themselves to the performance of their military duties. 
  An airman, Chon Chi-ho, with the unshakable creed that he 
had no right to die before implementing orders from comrade 
supreme commander, did not loosen his grip on the control lever, 
firmly defending the airspace of the motherland till the last 
moments of his life. Sin Chong-nam, a company commander, 
devoted himself body and soul to performing military duties of 
his company, traveling to and from posts and drill grounds on 
the backs of his comrades-in-arms, although he had lost his legs. 
  Heroes of the '90s like Kim Kwang-chol and Han Yong-chol who 
fulfilled training orders from comrade supreme commander, saving 
their comrades-in-arms by covering handgrenades on the point of 
explosion with their bodies were also produced by the People's 
Army. 
  People's Army soldiers continue to write letters pledging 
loyalty to Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
  Recently, Yi Chang-ung and his six brothers and one sister, 
Kang Myong-il and his four brothers, Pak Yong-chol and his 
seven brothers and many other People's Army soldiers sent 
letters of loyalty to comrade supreme commander, vowing to be 
revolutionary soldiers defending the general with arms in the 
van. 
  Indeed, the Korean People's Army is ranks of loyalty and 
invincible revolutionary Armed Forces entrusting all their 
destinies to Supreme Commander Comrade Kim Chong-il and fighting 
with a single determination to become guns and bombs defending 
comrade supreme commander with their lives. 

