CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Demand for Lean Production in </F>
Assembly and Handling Technology"] 
  [Text] Assembly and handling are, also from a 
business standpoint, important components of all manufacturing. 
During production, parts and tools must be available at the 
right time and at the right machine. Flexibly automated 
solutions for all requirements are helpful with this. 
  The integration of sensors, electronics, image and data 
processing in assembly and handling technology leads to cost 
reduction even for small lots. Lean production here as well. 
That does not, however, mean simpler or trimmed-down technology, 
but rather more automation, more flexibility, yet in less 
complex and thus more easily comprehensible units. 
  Demands for shorter cycle times, greater reliability and 
availability, greater precision with consistent quality and 
lower costs can for the most part only be met with automated 
assembly and handling. [Working conditions which] take their 
toll on workers' health, such as heavy, noisy, monotonous 
activities, can be minimized or eliminated entirely. Procedures 
carried out in extremely dangerous environments can, in fact, 
only be done with automation. 
  Automation in Assembly Becomes Increasingly 
Extensive 
  In 1992 the German assembly, handling and industrial robots 
(AHI) industry had sales of 3.9 billion German marks [DM] 
compared with DM4.1 billion in the previous year. In 1993, there 
was no impetus in either the domestic market or in exports, so a 
decline of 5 to 7% in sales is to be expected. Along with 
assembly technology and handling technology--including 
industrial robots--standard components and peripherals for 
systems technology are also part of the AHI industry. "We 
estimate the 1992 sales for this group at DM1.1 billion," says 
Dr. Ing. Heinz Muno, director of the Assembly, Handling, 
Industrial Robots (AHI) trade association in Frankfurt am Main. 
This corresponds to a 26%-share of the industry's total 
sales. 
Standard components and peripherals round out assembly and 
handling equipment as complete systems. 
  Assembly technology and handling technology each received 
about DM1.4 billion, or 37% apiece. A shift in this share 
is 
becoming apparent for 1993. Continued development of sensor 
technology and control and process control technology is making 
automation of complex assembly processes progressively easier. 
The proportion of business done in assembly technology and 
standard components and peripherals is increasing 
correspondingly, while handling technology has already reached a 
high level of automation. 
  The export quota for the approximately 200 mostly mid-sized 
companies in the German industry averages 35%. The 
importance 
of the countries of the European Community as trade partners for 
these companies can be illustrated with the example of 
industrial robots. For 1992, exports came to 181 million German 
marks, 75% of which remained within the internal market. 
Belgium, Luxembourg and Italy were in first place as buyer 
countries with 18% each, followed by France at 15%. 
  Machine building is gradually rebounding from the depths of 
the recession. The assembly and handling technology companies 
are providers and outfitters for the entire industry. Because of 
this, however, they are also dependent on the economic situation 
of their buyers. The difficult worldwide economic situation 
correspondingly affects foreign as well as domestic demand in 
this field of automation. 
  Important consumer areas such as machine building and the 
automobile and the electronics industries have for some time 
been experiencing substantial setbacks in incoming orders. For 
German machine building, for example, talk is of the deepest 
recession in the last 40 years. The initially normal cyclical 
slowdown in the economy has become aggravated by the fact that 
since 1992 all other industrial nations--and thus trading 
partners--have also found themselves in a tailspin. Yet the 
beginning of the decline in economic activity was certainly 
variable in the individual countries: first the symptoms of 
weakening in Great Britain, Scandinavia and the United States; 
then Germany's drop, and finally the dramatic decline in Japan. 
  In 1993, the demand for machines in West Europe as a whole 
declined about 8%. That, however, only resulted in a loss 
of 
5% for production, since exports to North and Latin 
America, 
Asia and East Europe as well have gone up. Because of the great 
importance of the internal market as a sales arena for European 
companies, the increase in exports to countries outside the 
Community cannot compensate for the weak demand in the home 
market. Some European countries have, however, already reached 
the bottom of the recession, while others are already even able 
to record a growth in machine production. Among these are the 
Scandinavian countries (with the exception of Denmark), Great 
Britain, Ireland and Italy. 
  Exports and thereby--at long last--machine production, 
especially in Italy, are profiting from the [currency] 
devaluations in the course of last year's turbulent monetary 
conditions. Low interest and pressures to modernize and 
streamline could also contribute some impetus. German machine 
production can assume for 1994 a mild revival of output of 
2% 
in real terms. This is supported substantially by overseas 
exports. The West European demand for machines will probably 
stagnate. 
  Machine Production Will Emerge from the Recession in 
Better Shape 
  The same is true for domestic demand to the extent that it 
is 
not dependent on exports. The cyclical fluctuations in the 
economic situation could be surmounted by 1995 and 1996. Machine 
production might count among the winners, not least because many 
companies are using the recession to restructure. They will 
emerge from this process in stronger condition. 
  The companies of the AHI industry stand by their customers 
as 
reliable partners in automation with innovative and customer- 
specific solutions and appropriate service provisions. "Module 
technology" permits flexible planning of production and simple 
reorganization--a contribution to the competitiveness of the 
buyers. German machine production has forged for itself a 
leading roll in international competition with its top level 
accomplishments in technology. More than 20% of the 
exports 
worldwide come from Germany with about 15% each from the 
USA 
and Japan. 
  German machine production also has to thank for its position 
its subcontractors and suppliers who for their part provide 
high-tech products. The newest developments in the automation of 
assembly and handling processes as well as an overview of the 
international state of technology are being offered by the more 
than 200 exhibitors at the approximately 13,000 m[.sup]2[/] 
exhibition area of the Assembly, Handling, Industrial Robot 
Trade Show being held in conjunction with the Hannover Trade 
Show from 20 to 27 April 1994. 
  Running parallel to this, the 25th International Symposium 
on 
Industrial Robots is taking place from 25 to 27 April. Practical 
examples will illustrate diverse and efficiency-increasing 
possibilities for using industrial robots. In addition to 
assembly and handling technology, themes include robot 
components, control systems, image processing, surface 
technology, welding, bonding, and new areas of applications such 
as service robotics. 


