Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By political editor Chip Tsao] </F>
  [Text] China's top official in Hong Kong said last night 
the mainland's ultimate aim was a fully and directly elected 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government 16 years 
after 1997. He said the intention was to make the fourth 
legislature directly elected. Lu Ping, the director of the Hong 
Kong and Macao Affairs Office, said the aim was part of China's 
drive to implement the principle of "Hong Kong people ruling 
Hong Kong". 
  Speaking in Shenzhen, Lu said: "It is also our ultimate aim 
that the chief executive of the SAR government will eventually 
be returned by 'one-person, one-vote'." China has already 
appointed 274 Hong Kong people to serve as its first group of 
advisers on the running of Hong Kong's nine district or 
municipal boards. Lu tried to calm fears that Beijing would not 
approve a directly elected legislature, saying that the 
universal franchise in Hong Kong would only need "registering" 
with China's National People's Congress. 
  Addressing Rotary International's 34th district conference, 
Lu gave reassurances that Hong Kong would have autonomy in its 
own affairs 16 years after 1997 -- with the exception of defence 
and foreign affairs, which would be the responsibilities of 
China's central government. Lu said the Chinese leadership had 
repeatedly pointed out that no department in the central 
government or any province would be allowed to interfere in Hong 
Kong's affairs. 
  He said issues like the construction of the new airport 
would 
become "domestic affairs." "All this is stated in the Basic 
Law," he said. Lu said it was his job at the Hong Kong and 
Macao Office to promote the Basic Law in and outside Hong Kong, 
making sure that all Chinese officials stick to Hong Kong's 
future mini-constitution. 
  Hong Kong was a "golden bridge" for China to establish links 
with the West, he said. "China needs a place which practises 
capitalism to act as a bridge to establish economic links with 
the west," he said. But he warned against trying to turn Hong 
Kong into a "political bridge" to change the socialist system in 
China. 

