Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brussels (DPA) -- According to Finance Minister 
Theo Waigel, the Federal Government still has to discuss 
Germany's contribution to the European Union [EU] purse. On the 
sidelines of the EU finance ministers' meeting in Brussels, 
Waigel said the Federal Government was currently forming its 
final opinion on the issue. The financial contribution was at 
this year's "agenda of European work." People in Germany were 
constantly criticizing that Bonn was transferring much more 
money to Bonn than Germany gets back. 
  Waigel said the Federal Government was abiding by the 
financial resolutions adopted at the summit meeting of heads of 
state and government in Edinburgh in late 1992. There it was 
agreed to increase the EU funds step by step until 1999. Theo 
Waigel said that "opportunities for variation, however," do 
exist not least as far as returning funds are concerned. With a 
balance of some 22 billion German marks [DM], Bonn is the EU's 
number one net payer, German critics have argued. 
  Waigel still does not rule out putting off the start into 
European Monetary Union. "We are not forced to do it in 1996," 
the minister said. In view of the weak European economy and the 
rising budget deficits in the member states, some countries were 
having difficulties to meet the conditions for the start into 
the common currency. Despite a short-term increase in the debt 
burden, Germany intends "to meet all criteria by 1995 or 1996, 
at the latest." 
  All "12" are seriously trying to surmount the hurdles for 
monetary union. In the current economic situation, however, the 
starting conditions have become more difficult "at a higher 
negative level," Waigel said. In the view of experts, no member 
state was currently meeting all conditions regarding inflation, 
capital market interest rates, budget deficit, and state debts. 
  According to the finance minister, by taking over the debts 
of the Berlin Trust Agency next year, Bonn will "for a short 
period" surpass the debt threshold for monetary union (state 
debts must not go beyond 60 percent of the gross domestic 
product). Yet, through consolidation and tax increases in 1995, 
Germany would, at the same time, "take the burden off the 
capital market, which is what counts," Waigel said. 
  Moreover, the finance ministers agreed on the use of the 
so-called monetary reserves of the Union's budget, which the 
members states have to provide in the event of monetary 
adjustments -- for agricultural prices, for example. Contrary 
to fears that the funds in the agricultural budget might not be 
sufficient for the coming years, Waigel held the view that there 
is still enough room to maneuver. 
  The EU finance ministers protested against U.S. plans to 
charge foreign banks fees for bank regulation. They unanimously 
adopted a demarche to be sent to Washington. The U.S. plans 
were infringing on GATT world trade regulations and might 
unilaterally make non-American credit institutions pay heavily. 

