Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Gennadiy Charodeyev report: "Five Japanese Captains </F>
Convicted in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk"] 
  [Text] The scandal between Moscow and Tokyo over the 
detained Japanese fishing boat Yunimaru and its captain Keiichi 
Noto, who was wounded by Russian naval border guards, is flaring 
up with renewed force. 
  About a month ago (see IZVESTIYA issue No. 233) our border 
guards entered the South Kurils Gulf -- Russian territorial 
waters -- where they intercepted a Japanese schooner which had 
been fishing for crabs. During the attempt to detain the 
poachers the latter offered armed resistance. The border guards 
commander gave the order to open fire. Captain Noto received 
slight wounds and the crew members raised their hands in 
surrender. 
  The Japanese press considered the Russian border guards' 
actions a national insult. The newspapers are demanding the 
immediate return of the captain, the trawler, and the crew. The 
Japanese are particularly incensed at the fact that the shooting 
happened in a zone which they regard as their own territorial 
waters. 
  "Such logic is categorically unacceptable to us," Grigoriy 
Karasin, director of the Foreign Ministry Information and Press 
Department, told IZVESTIYA. "The waters around the South Kurils 
belong to Russia, and Russian laws apply to them." 
  Meanwhile in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk the simultaneous trial of the 
captains of five Japanese fishing vessels detained while fishing 
illegally in Russian territorial waters has ended. The border 
violators have been ordered to pay a total fine of 20,000 
dollars and 400,000 rubles. Four of the captains have been 
given two-year suspended sentences; only one of them will be 
spending six months in a Russian jail. 
  The prosecutor has protested against the Yuzhno-Kurilskiy 
Rayon Court decision and expressed indignation at the 
"unjustified leniency of the sentence." The case has been sent 
for reexamination at a higher judicial level. 
  Prof. Kamil Bekyashev, a specialist in the sphere of 
international maritime law, believes that the Russian prosecutor 
has grounds for appealing against the court's ruling. Under our 
laws people found guilty of poaching especially valuable species 
of fish and in large quantities are supposed to be deprived of 
their liberty for up to four years. A suspended sentence is not 
allowed. 
  "We believe," Grigoriy Karasin stressed, "that poaching not 
only damages the fish stocks of the South Kurils Gulf but also 
has an adverse effect on the whole range of Russian-Japanese 
relations, and that includes the negotiations on a peace treaty. 
Border troops will be guided by the laws on Russia's state 
border and on the economic zone." 
  The number of violations of Russia's maritime border by 
Japanese boats engaged in poaching in this area is not 
diminishing. According to Foreign Ministry figures there were 
7,558 such violations in 1991, 7,932 in 1992, and 7,690 in 1993. 

