BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Stepan Khmara, people's deputy of Ukraine, </F>
head of the Ukrainian Conservative-Republican Party; place and 
date not given; from the "Current Interview" feature] 
  [Text] Vybir: What is your forecast as to the next 
President of Ukraine? 
  S.Kh.: I consider that Ivan Plyushch has the best chances 
from those candidates who are at the moment. He has some 
negative features, has made quite enough mistakes, but the one, 
who does not want to work, does not make mistakes. Plyushch 
thinks of the Ukraine's interests and he is the only real 
patriot of Ukraine from those who registered as candidates for 
presidency. 
  Vybir: If the parliament agrees to postpone the presidential 
elections, will it favour to Mr Kravchuk? 
  S.Kh.: Postponing the elections would do a favor to 
Kravchuk, 
and harm to Ukraine. Mr. Kravchuk will participate in the 26 
June elections not on his own will. He first of all wants to 
keep his post. He has not managed to rule the state efficiently, 
cannot guarantee the territorial integrity, he as the head of 
the executive power in fact does not exercise this right in 
Ukraine's favor. He would better ask for the resignation 
himself. But people like Kravchuk would not do it. One must be a 
person to do this. 
  Vybir: Does Mr. Kravchuk have chances to be re-elected to 
President? 
  S.Kh.: I hope this will not happen. I will not work in 
Kravchuk's favor saying that he might. If I do, it might give 
him support, no matter how small. 
  Vybir: From your speeches we can conclude that you are for 
elections of the heads of regional councils by the direct voting 
in regions. 
  S.Kh.: I consider that the heads of regional councils must 
be 
elected by the direct voting in regions, though it is clear that 
for our right bloc the results are not going to be consoling 
everywhere. But the communists are afraid of the direct 
elections for heads of regional councils. They are maximalists 
and understand that in the Eastern Ukraine they are going to 
have the communist majority among the heads of regional 
councils. Results of the direct voting may bring alternative. 
  Vybir: Are not you afraid of "Meshkov-ization" of Ukraine?" 
There might appear 26 "mini-Meshkov-s"... 
  S.Kh.: "Meshkov-ization of Ukraine comes from 
"Kravchuk-ization." Lack of activities and power in the central 
power bodies cause separatism in Ukraine's outlying districts. 
From the other hand, it is possible to introduce the provision 
to the law that the parliament can fire a head of regional 
council on the application of the Supreme Court, if he causes 
damage to the country or violates the Constitution. 
  Vybir: But if you win in the question of the elections by 
the 
direct voting in regions, and the left-oriented forces having 
the majority in the parliament, limit the powers of the central 
presidential power, is it possible the situation of all powers 
be concentrated with local councils? 
  S.Kh.: The left-oriented forces have the majority, but it is 
not a constitution majority. In order to limit the presidential 
powers, it is necessary to have 300 votes "for," and this is not 
real. 
  Vybir: Thank you. 

