CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Writing in the 19 March Paris weekly LE 
POINT, commentator Alain Duhamel analyzes the diminishing 
popularity of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur one year after his 
"majestic" accession to power. Balladur, he notes, has become 
the target of the political and trade-unionist Left and of those 
of his friends who are also his rivals. In mid-career, the head 
of the government is enduring both the attrition stemming from 
the economic crisis and the "perverse" effects of his possible 
candidacy for the presidency, Duhamel contends. Despite his 
assets--his unifying style, reflectiveness, and pragmatism, his 
firm liberal convictions and his flexibility--Balladur also 
needs luck and the ability to "embody a certain dynamism" in an 
"electric" climate where the least error is costly. He is 
therefore advancing cautiously, for "if he manages, he 
disappoints and frustrates, and if he innovates, he triggers off 
lightning," Duhamel comments. As a result, he has been unable to 
clarify the nation's prospects and impart a feeling of movement 
needed for a revival of the economy. 
  Still another disadvantage under which Balladur is laboring 
stems from the approach of the presidential elections, Duhamel 
continues. If Balladur were not implicitly a contender for the 
presidency, he could govern more easily. As it is, the 
presidential rivalry between him and Jacques Chirac, leader of 
the Rally for the Republic (RPR), is cramping Balladur's style 
despite the two men's essentially similar convictions and 
origins. Each is trying to dissuade the other from running, and 
while Balladur is more popular with voters, Chirac is more 
appreciated by party cadres. "The most determined of the two 
will win," Duhamel concludes. 
  In his regular column in the 25 March Paris daily 
LIBERATION, 
Duhamel argues that the satisfactory result Balladur and his 
government obtained in the cantonal elections in the face of 
student protests against the Job Training Contract (CIP) is not 
"incoherent." The RPR and the French Democratic Union (UDF) 
obtained the same results as in the March 1993 legislative 
elections because of public satisfaction over the Socialist 
defeat last year, the absence of credible alternatives at 
present, and Balladur's personal image which remains "enviable." 
Moreover, student violence can only consolidate the conservative 
electorate and anchor it more solidly on the Right, Duhamel 
continues. Nevertheless, Balladur's relationship with the young 
in light of his decisions on professional training and hiring 
practices will remain difficult. While the most troublesome 
provisions of the labor law have been withdrawn, tempers have 
not cooled. Duhamel adds that so far, no government, regardless 
of its political orientation, has devised a satisfactory 
settlement for this type of "explosive" social situation. In 
fact, Duhamel contends that a social dialogue is not really a 
"French specialty." While Northern European countries have set 
up systems of cooperation, arbitration and permanent debate, 
France remains a "prodigiously archaic" nation in this field. 
"The style of local authority, traditional centralization, the 
state's domineering behavior, and the mercantilism existing in 
both the Right and the Left lead to a persistent 
underdevelopment in social relations," Duhamel comments, adding 
that the "on this point, the French exception remains intact." 

