BFN 

<F P=106> [By a special correspondent in Beijing: "Beijing Plans To </F>
Accuse Yuan Hongbing and Zhou Guoqiang of Subversion"] 
  [Text] A source has disclosed that the relevant mainland 
departments are considering a new charge of "inciting 
counterrevolutionary propaganda" against noted dissident Wei 
Jingsheng. They also plan to accuse another two dissidents Yuan 
Hongbing and Zhou Guoqiang of "subversion." It is very likely 
that these dissidents will be sentenced to two to five years 
imprisonment. 
  The source said that mainland authorities are very angry 
about what Wei Jingsheng said and did after he was granted 
parole, terming him "a man who is refusing to mend his ways 
despite repeated admonitions." As early as March, CPC General 
Secretary Jiang Zemin told the public security organs to keep 
the pro-democracy figures, "who thought they had backing from 
foreigners," strictly under control and take resolute measures 
when necessary. 
  Reportedly, the mainland authorities were most embarrassed 
by 
Wei Jingsheng, who successfully eluded security personnel on 26 
February and met with Shattuck, U.S. assistant secretary of 
state, who was on a visit to Beijing. Prior to that, Wei 
Jingsheng mysteriously disappeared for two days, which made the 
authorities think that he had attempted to flee abroad. After 
the incident, the departments concerned tightened their control 
over Wei. Nevertheless, Wei continued to give frequent 
interviews to Western reporters. According to the departments 
concerned, what Wei has said and done constitutes a violation of 
China's law. 
  It has been reported that the authorities will accuse Wei 
Jingsheng of "inciting counterrevolutionary propaganda." But 
the sentence has not yet been determined. 
  At the same time, Yuan Hongbing, a lecturer in Beijing 
University's Law Faculty who is suspected of establishing an 
underground "illegal organization," and Zhou Guoqiang, a 
pro-democracy figure who set up a "Labor Union" and launched a 
signature drive, are to face prison. The Judicial Department 
plans to accuse them of the crime of "subverting the government." 
  The source disclosed that Yuan Hongbing, Wang Jiaqi (who 
fled 
to Hong Kong on 15 April), and Zhou Guoqiang set up an 
underground trade union called the "Labor Union" earlier this 
year. More than 100 people joined the union which was uncovered 
by the relevant Beijing departments. A number of people 
involved in the case have been detained since February for 
interrogation. However, the aforementioned initiators will be 
sternly punished. 
  Reportedly, the moves planned by the mainland authorities 
will be announced in the near future. The final decision 
depends on the changes taking place in the international 
political atmosphere. 

