No   4 

   This is the fourth in a series of media notes based on the SALAM 
newspaper column "Hello, SALAM," exploring the social problems 
facing the Iranian public.  Among the issues and complaints 
discussed are:  unemployment and the high cost of living; the 
exchange rate and the rising dollar; subsidies, the economic 
situation and class disparity; the invitation extended to King Fahd 
to visit Tehran; retirees and political parties.  The selections 
from the column published below are translated in full, including 
responses from SALAM when provided. 

   On Unemployment 

   Caller:  I am self-employed, but have been without work for a 
year.  I have a wife and two children.  My 100,000-toman deposit 
with the landlord has been exhausted during this last year and the 
landlord wants to kick us out.  I wonder what to do with my wife and 
two children.  I cannot tell anyone about my situation and do not 
want to beg.  I simply want to find a job for my wife and me so we 
can work and save our children.  God is my witness that if it were 
not for my wife and children, I would commit suicide.  Please tell 
us if there is anywhere we can go to get a job so that we can meet 
our basic needs.  (SALAM, 17 Feb) 

   On the High Cost of Medication, the Lack of Pharmacies 

   Caller:  Why does a tetanus shot, which last month cost 20 
tomans, now cost 550 tomans?  Tell me, what is our problem, low 
prices or overcharging?  (SALAM, 17 Feb) 

   Caller:  I represent a group from the city of Arsanjan in Fars. 
I have a question for Dr. Marandi, the Health Minister, as well as 
Dr. Nowbakht, his deputy in charge of medication.  Why should a city 
and its suburb of 40,000 have only one pharmacy without even a 
pharmacist, while a nearby city with the same population has three 
pharmacies?  Some people want to open a pharmacy in this city but 
the provincial deputy in charge of these matters will not give his 
approval.  (SALAM, 26 Feb) 

   On the Free Islamic University, Shahid Beheshti University 

   Caller:  I am a so-called economics major at the Free Islamic 
University of Tehran.  Unfortunately, I have to inform you that the 
atmosphere at this university is more like the military than a 
university.  Its atmosphere is not university-like, but rather, 
commercial.  Its disciplinary measures are not appropriate for a 
student's personality.  Their behavior is harsh, degrading and 
unislamic.  All that is missing is for them to use a stick on the 
students.   There is no sign of a conference or a seminar at this 
university.  It is necessary to hold regular seminars on current 
cultural, economic and social issues in these fields at these 
universities to change the students' indifference toward social 
issues.  (SALAM, 17 Feb) 

   Caller:  I am the father of a student at the Free University of 
North Tehran.  For the last two terms, they collected 33,100 tomans 
and 34,500 tomans respectively for the field of fisheries and the 
environment.  Now, they show us 26,340 tomans past due for the new 
term, while they showed our account cleared at that time.  We are 
mostly badly off and will have difficulty assuming this expense. 
Are these people supposed to do whatever they want.  The Ministry of 
Sciences says that the university is free and free to do what it 
wants.  Please pass this on to the officials.  (SALAM, 21 Feb) 

   Caller:  Several days ago, the students at Shahid Beheshti 
University assembled from 8 to 2pm to draw attention to the adverse 
condition of the dormitories.  Why didn't you publish anything about 
this in the newspaper? 
   SALAM:  That news was in the Wednesday 23 February issue, number 
804, p 2.  (SALAM, 1 Mar) 

   On the High Cost of Living 

   Caller:   As an expert in a governmental organization, I used to 
earn 80 thousand tomans.  They forced me into retirement yesterday. 
My salary dropped to 15 thousand tomans.  Who should I complain to? 
It is impossible to see the head of the organization or his deputy. 
Who should look into this matter?  (SALAM, 19 Feb) 

   Caller:  I am one of hundreds who spent the most precious years 
of his life with the defense industries.  Welding and lathing, I 
rose to a supervisory position in charge of the factory.  I was 
retired with a monthly salary of 9,000 tomans.  Because of the hard 
and exhausting work, I have lost 50 percent of my eyesight and 
health.  I am not able to work anymore.  I pay 10,000 tomans rent 
for one room and an unsanitary kitchen for my wife and sick daughter 
to "pass the night in," not to "live in."  To feed my family, I go 
all over Tehran.  I have been arrested several times by the police. 
Many of my co-workers are in the same situation.  (SALAM, 20 Feb) 

   Caller:  Tell our officials about the underpriviledged class 
fasting, in Ramadan, and having to buy chicken for 270 tomans a 
kilo.  Has the cost of the dollar risen because of Ramadan so that 
other goods can be increased proportionately, or is it because of 
Now Ruz?  The New Year bonus for civil servants would be thus 
absorbed.  With the rise of the dollar, the government made the 
money it was going to give out as new year bonuses.  Otherwise, it 
makes no sense for the dollar to reach 250 tomans in the absence of 
any economic or political event.  (SALAM, 21 Feb) 

   Caller:  I have been a newspaperman for 35 years.  I am 
spokesperson for Route 11 of Amiriyeh, which has 50-60 members.  The 
conditions forced upon us by city hall regarding the newsstands are 
unjust and unbearable.  First of all, everyone of us at different 
times, has paid as much money as one pays for a shop.  Legally, we 
own them.  We have even paid the taxes on them.  Furthermore, 
newspapermen, in spite of their hard work, are among the most 
deprived classes of the society.  There are old newspapermen among 
us with 50 years of service in this business, and they still can't 
afford to buy a motorcycle.  And, there are those who, if sick only 
for a day, couldn't buy their daily bread.  This is while we are 
deprived of many services, including health insurance.  With all of 
this, how can we pay 350,000 tomans to the municipality along with 
rent?  And that, for something that is ours and we have worked for. 
One family for several generations has spent its time and youth for 
this.  At any rate, these conditions are intolerable for us and we 
are not able to pay such an amount.  We ask you to convey our 
complaints to anyone who will hear us.  (SALAM, 23 Feb) 

   Caller:  Mutton is 600 tomans per kilo.  What are families who 
have not eaten meat for months supposed to do?  (SALAM, 28 Feb) 

   On the Operation of Hospitals 

   Caller:  On 14 February, Shari'ati Hospital cancelled all 
scheduled surgical operations because of the death of one of the 
physicians.  Unfortunately, this had disastrous effects.  Please 
send a reporter there immediately to see whether it is right to 
cancel all surgical operations because of one doctor's death. 
(SALAM, 19 Feb) 

   On the Economic Situation 

   Caller:  As an Iranian, I have a suggestion for improving our 
economic situation.  The government should stop, for 3-4 years, 
importing goods such as chocolate, cosmetics, crystals and varieties 
of expensive ball point pens, the shortage of which would make no 
difference to society.  The import of luxury items that have no 
other use except decorative ones should be stopped, and instead of 
spending foreign currency on these items, it should be spent on 
medications, sugar, cooking oils and the needs of the people. 
(SALAM, 21 Feb) 

   Caller:  In a country where there is a shortage of medication, 
and where the people have difficulty buying bread and meat, what is 
the reason for the excessive importation of the latest-model luxury 
cars, using dollars that should be spent on reconstruction?  (SALAM, 
28 Feb) 

   On the Single-Exchange Rate, Price of the Dollar 

   Caller:  In view of Dr. 'Adeli's statement last year that the 
single-exchange rate will force down the price of the dollar to 100 
tomans, I would like you to publish his address in the paper so that 
we can go and trouble him for some 100-toman dollars. 
   SALAM:  Go to The Central Bank, but you can be certain that he 
will not give it to you for less than 200 tomans.  And, we add that 
last year they used the price of the dollar at 100 tomans in the 
overall budget.  The previous economic minister was asked why they 
had estimated the dollar at 100 tomans while it was selling for 140 
tomans at the time.  He had said it was done to force the price 
down.  He was asked why then they had not estimated it at 50 tomans 
to force it even further down, if that was going to be the effect. 
You can see that the increase in prices and their fluctuations pay 
no heed to the officials' statements.  They continue to go up with 
no intention of coming down.  (SALAM, 23 Feb) 

   Caller:  Do something about the rising cost of the dollar because 
it has become a major problem.  It effects the price of everything 
and causes great difficulty for travelers wanting to go abroad. 
(SALAM, 24 Feb) 

   Caller:  I sold $2,000, transferred from abroad, in Eslambol 
(street where many of the moneychangers are located) on Monday for 
240 tomans.  After an hour, I bought it all back at 230 tomans.  I 
made 20,000 tomans, the equivalent of one month's salary.  I just 
wanted to say that the economic situation is great.  (SALAM, 28 Feb) 

   On Class Disparity 

   Caller:   In Wednesday's paper you wrote about class disparity in 
America.  Why are you talking about America and other countries? 
Why don't you say anything about your own country?  Isn't there 
disparity in our country?  Haven't some people amassed millions of 
tomans during these past 10 years?  Why isn't anyone investigating 
how they came into this money?  (SALAM, 23 Feb) 

   On Subsidies 

   Caller:  Every time I hear about subsidies, I am surprised. 
These gentlemen talk as if they have sold their private properties 
to provide subsidies to the people.  Please shed some light on this. 
Aren't subsidies paid for from the country's per capita income. 
What happens to the oil, the gas, the copper, the uranium and the 
iron that we have?  Don't they belong to the Iranian people?  Do we 
still give free oil to Syria?  (SALAM, 24 Feb) 

   On the Value of Iran Khodrow Stocks 

    Caller: Please write something about the Iran Khodrow 
(transportation) stocks.  Before the revolution, the stocks were 
bought and sold on the market for 600 to 700 tomans.  At that time, 
the price of a peykan (one of the cars assembled in Iran) was 38,000 
tomans.  After 15 years, considering that the price of a peykan is 
around 2,000,000 tomans, they have set the price of each share at 
340 tomans, while the prices of most other company stocks have 
increased.  This is unjust and inequitable toward previous 
stockholders who purchased these stocks with workers' salaries. 
Please do not let them violate people's rights.  (SALAM, 24 Feb) 

   On the Invitation extended to King Fahd 

    Caller: 1. In view of the words of Imam (Khomeyni), who said 
that we might be able to close our eyes on everything, but not on 
the killings of the Hajj pilgrims, then what is the meaning of the 
invitation extended to Fahd to come to Tehran? 
2.  What is the story behind erasing the slogans: "Death to Saddam" 
from the city walls because of the recent discussions between 
Iranian and Iraqi delegations?  This does not serve any purpose 
except to pain the martyrs' families.  As a member of a martyr 
family, I strongly object to this. 
   SALAM:  The feelings and the emotions of the distinguished 
martyrs' families not only should not be overlooked, but should also 
be respected and honored.  However, all those pains and afflictions 
are for the benefit and to the advantage of the Islamic countries, 
and the Muslim nation of Iran.  Then, at all times, the situation 
should be assessed and if the time comes that in order to safeguard 
those same interests and benefits, we should make peace with Iraq 
and normalize the situation, the conventions of the two countries 
should be observed, too.  Would it be appropriate for Iranians going 
on pilgrimage to Najaf and Karbela in Iraq, to face slogans against 
our country's officials?  (SALAM, 26 Feb) 

   On Advertisement of American Cigarettes 

   Caller:  What is the meaning of advertising American cigarettes 
on buses?  (SALAM, 28 Feb) 

   On Retirees 

   Caller:  Ask our officials what is the difference between the old 
retirees and the new ones that there are such differences in 
salaries?  Why should we be humiliated before our sons-in-law and 
our children?  (SALAM, 28 Feb) 

   On Political Parties 

   Caller:  I would like to ask the esteemed officials of the 
Interior Ministry to please list the names of the 76 political 
parties for which they have issued licenses, so that those who would 
want to can join them.  (SALAM, 28 Feb) 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, PERSIAN GULF/ 
SOUTH ASIA BRANCH AT (703) 733-6574) 
ENEAG/28 Apr/ECON/NEASA Division/ta 28/1744z apr 

