BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by Major General Herzl Budinger, </F>
Air Force commander, on the occasion of Air Force Day by Yariv 
Ben-Yehuda on 27 June; place not given -- italicized passages 
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Ben-Yehuda] Referring to the 
German television report, according to which Ron Arad was held 
captive by Syria from 1987 to 1989, Major General Herzl Budinger 
said: As far as I know, their investigation is wrong, erroneous. 
  [Budinger] I am a veteran participant in working and 
discussion teams on Ron Arad's condition and the possibility of 
bringing him back home, but in none of these discussions did I 
hear of or receive information about that possibility, and I 
think it is erroneous. I can say for myself that I have never 
received such information. 
  [Ben-Yehuda] Gen. Budinger went on to say: The premises 
concerning Ron Arad's condition have not changed, and the odds 
that he is alive today are high. 
  [Budinger] Pieces of information received from diverse 
sources, which can never be cross-checked, indicate in a very 
reliable way that Ron Arad is probably alive and is being kept 
somewhere in the Middle East -- either by Iranians or by 
organizations controlled by Iranians. 
  [Ben-Yehuda] Is the interrogation of Mustafa al-Dirani 
making satisfactory progress? 
  [Budinger] It is, as far as I know. The investigation 
has elicited a great deal of information, which is still 
sensitive and cannot, therefore, be shared with the public. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Ben-Yehuda] The chief addressed what he termed the Air 
Force's highly accelerated procurement process. As we all know, 
the first batch of F-15I, Israel's future combat aircraft, will 
be received in 1997. Prior to that, procurement will follow a 
very crowded timetable. 
  [Budinger] Beginning in August 1994, the first surplus 
F-16's will start arriving. In September, they will be joined 
by Black Hawk helicopters. A few months later, the second batch 
of F-16's will be received, the total being some 50 aircraft. 
At a later stage, we will receive F-15's. 
  [Ben-Yehuda] Replying to reporters' questions, Gen. Budinger 
addressed the possibility of withdrawal from the Golan. He said 
that no staff work is under way on the possibility of withdrawal 
from the Golan, but he confirmed that a brief discussion had 
been held on the possibility of handing the Americans a 
procurement list for the event decisions concerning the Golan 
are made and processes take place. Israel will seek restitution 
for the loss of early warning systems scattered throughout the 
north by acquiring equivalent systems, probably including AWACS 
[Airborne Warning and Command System]. 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1500 GMT on 27 June 
adds: "Referring to regional armament, Budinger said the Air 
Force is monitoring the operating methods of surface-to-surface 
missiles being purchased by the Arab countries. Budinger said 
that if these missiles cause serious damage to the Israeli home 
front, Israel will consider striking at the enemy's home front. 
Budinger also said the Syrian Army has resumed its links with 
Russia and is continuing to purchase Russian weapons. Gen. 
Budinger told our correspondent Karmela Menashe that Iran is 
turning into the next nuclear power, and Israel cannot deal with 
this issue on its own -- international bodies have to deal with 
this issue. Budinger also said that over the next few weeks the 
first helicopters will arrive in Gaza and Jericho. They will be 
mainly used by the Palestinians to convey officials between the 
two regions. Budinger added that an Air Force representative 
attends all the meetings with the Palestinians and every 
Palestinian flight between Gaza and Jericho will depend on 
Israeli approval and control. The air force commander also says 
that Israel and Jordan have held preliminary discussions 
regarding the flight of Jordanian planes through Israeli 
airspace. He said that if an agreement is reached on the issue, 
it will be possible to determine an aerial corridor without 
harming Israel's security."] 

