BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 21 Jun (NA) -- Foreign Minister Guido 
Di Tella today emphasized "the importance" of the meeting 
Presidents Carlos Menem and Bill Clinton will hold on 24 June 
because "it is a good signal for investors." 
  Di Tella justified the presence of entrepreneurs Armando 
Gostanian and Mario Falak, barber Tony Cuozzo, and golf coach 
Fidel de Luca in the presidential entourage, which is in Canada, 
on the grounds that they "are close to the president and he 
wants them to come. Period." 
  In statements to Radio Continental, Di Tella this morning 
explained that "empty seats on the presidential plane do not 
mean savings," in an attempt to justify the presence of those 
people in the official entourage. 
  The minister added: "It is good for Argentine taxpayers to 
pay for a trip for Menem to meet Clinton because of the 
meeting's significance. This meeting will add new political 
significance to our relations with the United States." 
  Concerning Menem's visit to Canada, Di Tella emphasized that 
the nuclear cooperation agreement is the most important accord 
to be signed. He explained that this cooperation "is possible 
because Argentina has become a nonproliferation country," adding 
that "in the past, with our proliferation policy, we had no 
chance to have access to technology or cooperation." 
  Di Tella thus alluded to a government decision to deactivate 
the Condor-II missile project and other suspicious nuclear 
developments. 
  "In his meetings with Canadian officials, Menem always 
refers 
to the current Argentine situation and the economic changes. He 
thus paves the way for entrepreneurs, who are the ones who then 
engage in partnerships, credits, or joint projects," he said. 
  Di Tella said he doubted that President Menem will attend 
the 
game the Argentine and Nigerian soccer teams will play in the 
world tournament on 25 June because of the changes in the agenda 
after confirmation of the meeting with U.S. President Clinton. 

