BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Dong Huifeng (5516 2585 1496): "Wang </F>
Fengchao Speaks About Xi Yang's Case"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 29 (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--Wang Fengchao, 
deputy director of the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office, today said that Xi Yang's case is completely 
unrelated to freedom of the press when he met the visiting Hong 
Kong "Labor Day" trade union delegation. 
  He explained: First, Xi Yang's activities were not normal 
news covering activities. According to the regulations 
concerned, Hong Kong and Macao reporters should first submit 
applications to the XINHUA Hong Kong Branch before they come to 
the mainland to cover news and should then obtain the 
concurrence of the units that they want to interview through the 
Chinese Journalists Association. Last year, Xi Yang applied to 
cover news about the Hope Project, the Sino-British talks, and 
the meeting of the Preparatory Working Committee; he did not 
apply to cover economic and financial news. However, he used his 
personal connections and stole state economic and financial 
secrets from Tian Ye. Tian Ye was not an interviewee. Xi Yang 
was not engaging in "normal news gathering," and he "entered the 
forbidden zone by mistake." 
  Second, Xi Yang worked as reporter on the mainland for eight 
years and was well aware of the difference between normal news 
gathering and stealing secrets. 
  Wang Fengchao pointed out: According to the written law on 
the Chinese mainland, three types of penalties would be meted 
out to those who stole state secrets like Xi Yang: 1) over 10 
years' imprisonment, 2) life imprisonment, and 3) death. 
Because Xi Yang showed a repentant attitude, a less severe 
penalty was meted out to him, and he was sentenced to 12 years' 
imprisonment. 
  Wang Fengchao said: Since last year, over 1,000 Hong Kong 
reporters have entered China to cover news, but only Xi Yang has 
had trouble. This shows that most people were aware of the 
regulations, and the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office did a 
great deal of work. It made announcements about these 
regulations four times. At present, control over the news 
gathering activities of Hong Kong and Macao reporters on the 
mainland is rather relaxed. They only need to go through the 
application procedure. Interviewees bear the responsibility for 
the contents of all approved interviews. We continue to welcome 
Hong Kong and Macao reporters to conduct normal news gathering 
as they have done in the past. 
  Wang Fengchao answered the visitors' questions about the 
localization of civil servants and retirement guarantees. 
  He reiterated the relevant provisions of the Basic Law and 
said: We agree that the civil service localization process 
should be accelerated, but changes in the employment system for 
civil servants will lead to major changes in Hong Kong's civil 
service system. During the transition period -- especially the 
late transition period -- the fewer changes the better. Only 
the 20-plus senior officials should be chosen from among the 
Chinese residents who are permanent residents of Hong Kong 
without foreign right of abode. Foreigners who hold the identity 
card of a permanent resident of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region can be civil servants at all other posts. 
It is hoped that the current civil servants will remain in Hong 
Kong after 1997 and will continue to serve the Special 
Administrative Region [SAR]. 
  As for the issue of retirement guarantees, Wang Fengchao 
said 
that, after 1997, the SAR Government will formulate the relevant 
policies on its own according to the provisions of the Basic Law 
and the economic conditions and social needs of Hong Kong. 
  The 20-member Hong Kong "Labor Day" trade union delegation 
headed by Chan Wai-han will return to Hong Kong on 2 May. 

