CSO 

<F P=106> [Accountability Report on the Work of the Council of the </F>
Association of Russian Banks in 1991-1993 by S. Ye. Yegorov, 
president of the Association of Russian Banks] 
  [Text] The Fourth Congress of the Association of 
Russian Banks was held in the Hall of Columns of the House of 
Unions in the city of Moscow on 21-22 May 1994. It heard the 
report of the Council of the Association of Russian Banks and 
summed up the association's activity in 1991-1993. 
  The congress elected the association's leading bodies 
for the next 5 years and determined the amounts of membership 
dues for 1994. 
  Sergey Yefimovich Yegorov was elected president of the 
association. 
  The Council of the Association was elected. 
  Dear participants in the congress! 
  We have gathered to hold a regular congress at a time quite 
difficult for Russia. Despite the steps taken to reach civic 
accord, the political fight is being aggravated. I also have to 
state with regret that the situation in the economy continues to 
worsen. The intensification of the decline in production in 
material production sectors, primarily in industry, and the 
worsening financial instability are the most conclusive evidence 
of this. 
  Judging by everything, Russia is entering a new and, 
possibly, the most crucial and complex stage in the 
implementation of reforms--a period, which will be accompanied 
by mass bankruptcies and a rise in unemployment. It is no 
accident that I begin my address with a description of the not 
very joyful situation in which the country is, because it is 
difficult to overestimate the public role that the banking 
system as a whole and the system of commercial banks in 
particular plays today. The degree of our participation and 
influence on the adoption of appropriate decisions by state 
structures will largely depend on how we see the situation 
arising in the country, what ways of getting out of the crisis 
we are able to outline and propose, what is the degree of our 
consensus on these matters, and how seriously and unitedly we 
intend to implement our views. 
  Obviously, I need not speak about the causes predetermining 
the situation in which the country is. I will permit myself to 
mention only those that hang, literally with weights, on the 
ailing legs of our economy and the absence of a decision on 
which will inevitably have the most negative effect on the 
interests of all, including those present at this congress: 
  --the unwinding and self-reproducing spiral of nonpayments, 
which clearly attests to the systems crisis in the economy; 
  --the lack of any price regulation, which threatens to lead 
before long to complete noncompetitiveness on foreign markets 
even of goods of our traditional raw-material export; 
  --the excessive level of interest rates, which threatens to 
stifle not only industry, but also any trade, in the very near 
future; 
  --the anti-investment environment (sociopolitical, economic, 
and legal); 
  --the lack of sources of foreign financing for economic 
restructuring. 
  Discussing the results of activity of the Association of 
Commercial Banks and its council, we must not merely remember 
the situation existing in the country, but also try to formulate 
our view of possible and expedient solutions of the urgent 
problems that I have mentioned above. 
  As I have already said, the activity of the Association of 
Russian Banks and its council, as well as of all commercial 
banks, during the period under review took place under 
conditions of a deep sociopolitical crisis in society, 
unprecedented decline in the economy, disarray in monetary 
circulation, and extremely high inflation rates. On top of it 
all the situation began to be aggravated by the payment crisis. 
I will cite only several facts: According to the data of the 
State Committee for Statistics, in 1993 the gross domestic 
product decreased by 12 percent as compared with 1992 and by 30 
percent as compared with 1991. National income decreased to more 
than one-half. Prices rose 10-fold. In 1993 monthly inflation 
was at the level of 15 to 20 percent. The federal budget deficit 
totaled 25 trillion rubles, or more than the revenue part of the 
budget. Unemployment officially recorded by the State Employment 
Service makes up approximately 1 percent of the total labor 
resources (750,000 people), although hidden unemployment is 
estimated by experts at 10 to 11 million people. A total of 33 
million people live below the minimum living standard. 
  In March of this year the government has worked out some 
measures to stabilize the situation and government forecasts for 
1994 presuppose a certain improvement in the situation: 
reduction of inflation to one-half, halt in the rates of decline 
in production (8 to 10 percent), stabilization of investment 
volumes, and the federal budget deficit at a level not over 6 
percent of the gross domestic product. However, the results of 
work during the first quarter of this year do not confirm the 
reality of these measures: Industrial output decreased by 24.9 
percent as compared with the first quarter of 1993 and in March, 
by 27.4 percent as compared with March of last year. This is a 
record decline in production during all the years of 
restructuring. 
  At the same time, it is obvious that an improvement in the 
economy will not occur automatically. There is a need for the 
continuation and intensification of reforms and their correction 
in a number of directions on the part of the government and the 
parliament and, of course, it is very important that commercial 
banks be really drawn into this process of correction and 
development, in particular, of the goal-oriented program for 
financial stabilization. 
  Today we are worried by a fundamental question: Will reforms 
develop in the economy and society? Banks are directly 
interested in their continuation, because a new credit system 
has appeared as a result of economic transformations and, in 
turn, without an adequate banking system reforms are simply 
impossible. 
  Undoubtedly, significant changes have already occurred in 
the 
economy. The command and distribution system has been destroyed. 
Price liberalization, establishment of an infrastructure of the 
market economy, and privatization of state property are real 
facts. 
  At present, however, the state of economic reforming has 
seemingly come to a standstill. The market in its varieties is 
developing poorly. This concerns financial and stock markets, 
the manpower market, and the land and real estate market. The 
tax system tries to an ever greater extent to improve 
entrepreneurship in all its forms. The state permits itself the 
luxury of not paying for products under its orders and does not 
settle accounts concerning preferential credit with banks. In 
our credit and banking sphere we observe attempts at a direct 
command by authorities at all levels and a return to the 
distribution system. 
  The decree dated 4 March of this year "On the Situation of 
the Russian Economy and Prospects for Its Development in 1994" 
provides for the implementation of a moderately tight credit and 
monetary policy in the current year. In principle, we agree with 
this, but it is important to determine methods of realizing this 
direction. We do not understand the circumstance that the 
government credit commission determines the allocation and 
distribution of centralized credits. In a number of oblasts and 
krays this procedure spreads and local credit commissions are 
also established there, trying to command banks. This is direct 
confirmation of the return to the distribution economy and 
disregard for market mechanisms. 
  Adopting any decisions concerning reforms, bodies of state 
management seem not to note the newly established 
entrepreneurial sectors of the economy and do not lean on their 
unions, groupings, and associations. Yet it is precisely here 
that all problems of entrepreneurship are accumulated and they 
are ready to participate in the drafting of fundamental 
documents on economic development. 
  Basic directions in credit and monetary policy are developed 
and decisions on it are adopted by a narrow circle of workers in 
the system of the RF Central Bank. As experience shows, it 
suffers from very important miscalculations. In our opinion, 
representatives of all participants in the market economy, 
primarily commercial banks, which are the financial and economic 
base for the market economy, should participate in the drafting 
of this document. We have been saying for a long time that a 
banking committee should be established from among bank 
representatives, scientists, and entrepreneurs. For now, 
however, this remains only a wish. 
  Reforms need competent state administration and the 
parliament must establish the legal basis for reforms as quickly 
as possible. 
  Informing you about the state of Russia's economy and 
finances and analyzing the conditions under which commercial 
banks have to operate, I assume that every bank, when working 
out the strategy of activity for the current year, should take 
into account the economic processes that are taking place not 
only on the scale of activity of a specific bank, but also the 
processes that are developing at Russia's macroeconomic level. 
  Despite the very complex conditions under which banks have 
to 
operate, the new credit system is developing and adapting to the 
market to an ever greater extent. Reform in the banking sphere 
outstrips transformations in other economic sectors. As of 1 
April 1994 there were 2,041 banks with 4,660 affiliates (without 
the Savings Bank) in Russia. Last year the Central Bank 
registered 306 independent banks, or almost as many as in 1992. 
The declared authorized capital of commercial banks exceeds 1 
trillion rubles and in 1993 it increased 10-fold. The amount of 
assets is more than 110 trillion rubles. At the end of 1993 the 
amount of banks' credit investments totaled 24.5 trillion rubles. 
  A total of 11 banks, the authorized capital of which 
exceeded 
10 billion rubles, appeared in Russia for the first time. 
  I would like to especially stress the qualitative changes in 
bank operation. Undoubtedly, these are not the banks that were 4 
or 5 years ago. They, like sponges, absorb everything that is 
advanced in world banking experience, primarily modern banking 
technologies. A number of banks have become members of the SWIFT 
international settlement system, have mastered plastic cards in 
settlements, have introduced fundamentally new forms of bank and 
personnel management on the basis of modern computers, have 
greatly expanded the range of services provided to clients, and 
have improved services for the public. As of 1 April of this 
year the share of the population's deposits rose to 40 percent 
of the total amount, while in the Savings Bank it decreased to 
60 percent. 
  The figures cited above seemingly point to a large number of 
banks. However, an analysis shows that our economy is by no 
means saturated with credit institutions. If we exclude Moscow 
banks and banks of two and three other large economic centers, 
it will turn out that in the absolute majority of administrative 
regions there is one banking institution per region and 
sometimes not even this. This will not help economic 
development, small and medium-size business, farming, and the 
entire entrepreneurial sector. 
  Under conditions of high inflation rates there is also a 
problem with the amounts of banks' ownership capital. The 
authorized capital of more than two-thirds of the total number 
of banks is below 500 million rubles. Although in the economy 
there should also be small banks, an increase in bank liquidity 
is connected to a considerable degree with the amounts of 
ownership capital. We realize that under conditions of the 
shortage of funds literally in all economic sectors it is not 
simple to do this. Nevertheless, it is necessary to increase 
bank capital. 
  Incidentally, the campaign for summing up bank activity in 
1993 indicates that the absolute majority of banks assigned the 
basic amount of profit for an increase in their capital and the 
amount of dividends was determined much below inflation rates. 
  However, solving the problem of increasing bank capital, we 
must take into account the real financial resources of the 
economy, which are extremely meager in all its sectors. 
Furthermore, it is necessary to have the entire "assortment" of 
banks--large, medium-size, and small, which world practice 
confirms. The orientation of the Central Bank only toward large 
banks is highly disputable. You know that as of 1 March of this 
year the Central Bank set the minimum amount of the authorized 
capital of newly established banks at 2 billion rubles and in 5 
years they must increase ownership capital to 5 million ECU (10 
billion rubles), as is now accepted in the European Community. 
Under conditions of the acute shortage of funds this task is too 
difficult for the overwhelming number of peripheral banks--this 
will require 30 trillion rubles. 
  The Central Bank has permitted the establishment of new 
banks 
with authorized capital ranging from 500 million to 2 billion 
rubles for the performance of a limited range of operations. 
They have no right to keep clients' current accounts and to 
attract funds for a period of less than 1 year. Clients will 
hardly need such "banks." 
  In addition to the negative consequences noted above, the 
decision of the Central Bank will lead to the fact that the bulk 
of currently operating banks will be in a difficult situation. 
Many of them clearly realize that they will not be able to 
increase the amount of capital to 5 million ECU within the 
planned period and, therefore, have no prospects for further 
development. As is well known, a lack of prospects always is a 
destructive force. Banks are already informing the Association 
of Russian Banks that there will not be an increase, but an 
outflow, of capital from such banks, because shareholders are 
not interested in investing funds in an unpromising business. 
  As I have already stated above, the Association of Russian 
Banks, undoubtedly, supports the direction toward an increase in 
the capital of banks and in their liquidity. However, it is 
advisable to solve this problem in stages, depending on the 
financial resources of economic regions and with due regard for 
the sphere of bank activity, as we proposed last year. We 
informed the State Duma and Central Bank Chairman V. 
Gerashchenko of our position. It is important that participants 
in the congress also express their opinion on this matter. 
  I want to submit for your discussion a matter concerning 
various nonbanking organizations, which, having no licenses, 
attract and place funds, that is, perform the same functions as 
banks do, but without licenses. These are financial companies, 
funds, financial and industrial concerns, and so forth, which, 
advertising the computation of a high interest--700 to 1,000 
percent and higher--withdraw large amounts of the population's 
funds for questionable operations. These organizations are 
registered in the Ministry of Finance, but are not subject to 
supervision. Their deposits are not insured. People who deposit 
funds in them are subject to risk. Such organizations discredit 
the banking system before the population, their activity does 
not conform to banking legislation, and often simply swindlers 
are at work in them. The Association of Russian Banks addressed 
a proposal to the Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance, and the 
State Tax Service to prohibit them from performing banking 
operations. The Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance 
supported our opinion and we hope that we will be able to 
jointly solve this problem. 
  There is another "burning" question. For many banks it is 
now 
the question of life or death in the literal sense of this word. 
In the current year a significant number of banks may cease 
their existence for three reasons: owing to the nonreturn of 
loans and general insolvency, loss of substantial funds in 
operations with forged letters of advice and "Rossiya" checks, 
and unprofitable activity. These are new phenomena in Russia's 
banking system and they require serious thought. It cannot be 
permitted that the collapse of one bank should entail the 
bankruptcy of other banks and their clients. For banking 
activity, which is connected with a high risk, in Western 
countries the bankruptcy of several banks is an ordinary 
phenomenon. However, a mechanism for the prevention of 
bankruptcy and support of banks, which experience difficulties, 
operates in all countries. 
  If a bank has temporary difficulties with payments not 
through its fault, it is necessary to provide for measures so 
that losses for other banks and, especially, for depositors be 
minimal. Unfortunately, this subject, essentially, has not been 
studied in our country, primarily at the Central Bank. When 
financial complications arise, the Central Bank uses only one 
remedy--deprivation of licenses. Essentially, preventive and 
therapeutic measures with a sick bank are not taken. Of course, 
every bank, first of all, should have its own reserves for the 
recovery of losses on loans. However, in world practice other, 
external, methods of support for banks, when they have 
difficulties, with the participation of central banks and 
governments have also been developed. 
  Our Central Bank has collected substantial amounts of money 
of commercial banks in three funds: in reserve accounts, in the 
bankruptcy insurance fund, and in the deposit insurance fund. 
However, during past years this money has virtually not been 
used for the support of banks experiencing difficulties. 
Probably, this can be attributed to the fact that an entire 
package of measures concerning state regulation of the banking 
sphere has not been formed in our country. 
  For example, in the United States, in order to maintain 
current liquidity, commercial banks can receive loans in the 
Federal Reserve System. This method is very effective and prompt 
in order not to cause a mass withdrawal of deposits from a bank 
experiencing difficulties. However, the insurance deposit 
corporation is the main body providing support for banks. It 
performs its functions by three methods. The first: It issues 
sureties or guarantees to a bank experiencing financial 
difficulties. Second: It carries out the merging of banks, which 
arouse apprehension, with bigger ones. Third: It makes insurance 
compensation payments to owners of deposits through the 
bankruptcy procedure. 
  The Association of Russian Banks has persistently sought the 
separation from the Central Bank of functions connected with 
deposit insurance into an independent organization. In January 
of this year the Central Bank has adopted the decision to stop 
collections of money from banks into this fund. However, there 
is no deposit insurance committee or corporation. The 
Association of Russian Banks is preparing its proposals on this 
matter and we ask the State Duma, the government, and the 
Central Bank to take into consideration the acuteness and 
importance of this problem. 
  Discussing bank liquidity, we cannot keep silent about the 
quality of credit portfolios and the credit issue procedure. We 
recommended that commercial banks establish strict technology 
for the adoption of a decision on these matters. In our opinion, 
for this purpose credit committees consisting of highly skilled 
and principled specialists should be set up in all banks and a 
specific procedure for the preparation of materials for the 
committee meeting and personal responsibility for their quality 
should be established. As international and domestic practice 
has shown, the solution of such, as well as other, problems 
connected with individual management of bank assets is extremely 
dangerous and sooner or later will lead to bank failure. The 
difficulties, into which some commercial banks have gotten now, 
are connected precisely with this. 
  A financial market has begun to emerge in Russia. From the 
very beginning the Association of Russian Banks either initiated 
its organization itself, or helped its establishment in various 
forms by commercial banks. Moscow, St. Petersburg, and 
Novosibirsk interbank currency exchanges actively operate now. 
The Interbank Financial House, the Organizational Bank, 
subdivisions of the "Delovaya Rossiya" [Business Russia] Bank, 
and so forth have been established for trade in credit 
resources. The privatization of state property and the 
transformation of enterprises and banks into joint-stock 
companies strengthen the stock market. However, the refinement 
of the mechanism of the financial market and expansion of the 
volumes of transactions on it require additional efforts and 
initiative on the part of all participants in the market, 
including commercial banks. 
  Overdue payments are not only a big economic, but also 
social, problem. Owing to nonpayments, many enterprises are shut 
down and organizations of the social sphere stop their 
operation. There is a real threat of bankruptcy of enterprises 
and banks. 
  The government has repeatedly examined the state of overdue 
debts. A few days ago the Federal Council also discussed 
measures and adopted a decree, which took into account proposals 
by the Association of Russian Banks. However, despite 
resolutions and directives, as yet nothing has been done in 
reality and mutual debts make the economy and the population's 
social living conditions feverish. 
  Following the government report the Federation Council 
adopted a decree dated 7 April of this year "On the Crisis of 
Insolvency in the Russian Federation Economy," which reflected 
proposals by the Central Bank and our association for the 
restoration of solvency of enterprises. The realization of this 
decree will also make it possible to strengthen the financial 
situation of banks. It has a number of serious provisions: 
introduction of state wage regulation, reduction by the Central 
Bank of the discount rate of interest on credits, and 
reservation of funds for wages in accounts of enterprises. Their 
fulfillment can significantly affect mutual relations of banks 
with clients. Banks, which attract medium- and long-term 
resources with a high interest, should give thought to how the 
decision on lowering the discount rate of the Central Bank will 
affect their profitability. At the same time, however, they must 
take into consideration that such a measure can noticeably 
revive the credit activity of banks. Undoubtedly, wage 
regulation will affect primarily the banking system, because the 
highest wage level is in our sphere. 
  The Federation Council instructed the government to provide 
for measures to replenish the circulating capital of enterprises 
and to offset mutual debts. The association repeatedly addressed 
such proposals to the government and the former Supreme Soviet. 
We consider it to be a positive fact that superior bodies of 
power have finally understood this important problem and it will 
find its solution. At the same time, the question arises why the 
government, repeatedly discussing the problem of nonpayments, 
did not make a decision. After all, to regulate mutual relations 
in the area of the economy, in fact, is the function of the 
government, not the legislative function of the parliament. 
  At the same time, the Federal Assembly confirmed the need 
for 
an unconditional fulfillment of the president's edict dated 19 
October 1993 "On Improving Settlements in the Economy and 
Increasing Responsibility for Their Prompt Execution." As you 
remember, in this edict emphasis was placed on the processing by 
banks of promissory notes of enterprises on overdue debts. I 
would like to exchange views and to hear your proposals on how 
to best carry out such an operation, taking into consideration 
that the conditions necessary for the introduction of the 
promissory note turnover do not yet exist in Russia. 
  The Central Bank with our participation should work out 
forms 
of settlements between enterprises and banks. Advance payments, 
or the so-called prepayment, cannot remain the prevalent form: 
They maintain sellers' dictate with respect to purchasers of 
products and lead to a vast growth of debts. Buyers, 
transferring advances, lose control over their funds. They are 
not left even with a document confirming the receipt of money by 
suppliers. It is quite clear that the settlement system hampers 
the development of market relations, not to mention that it 
withdraws a vast amount of money from the turnover. 
  The International Coordinating Committee for Improvement in 
Russia's Payment System was established a year go. This 
committee includes representatives of the RF Central Bank, of 
the Association of Russian Banks, and of a number of commercial 
banks, as well as of such international organizations as the 
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Commission of 
the European Communities, and central banks of the United 
States, France, Germany, and England. Proposals for the 
organization of intrabank settlements, interbank clearing, a 
system of transfer of big payments, and an informatization 
system, for the development of new financial tools, including 
promissory notes, and for the training and education of 
personnel in the field of settlements and informatization have 
been developed within the framework of this committee by now. It 
is only necessary to speed up the realization of these proposals. 
  The Association of Russian Banks will inform their members 
as 
work at the indicated sections is completed. 
  The organization of mutual economic relations and 
determination of optimum forms of mutual interstate settlements 
at the level of both central and commercial banks is a vitally 
important problem, which politicians and managers of banking 
systems in near abroad must solve. Life forces commercial banks 
to search for methods of settlements, essentially, blindly. The 
chief thing is that it is not clear along what path to build the 
system of mutual settlements: To completely give up the idea of 
the ruble zone of the new type and to give preference to 
payments in national currencies, or to find other variants 
combining both? In order to discuss this entire set of problems, 
the Association of Russian Banks, together with the Central Bank 
of Russia and the International Economic Savings Bank, plans to 
hold a banking conference "Possible Ways of Forming a System of 
Mutual Settlements With States in Near Abroad." 
  The poor state of accounting is one of the unsolved problems 
in banking. This is connected not only with the shortage of 
skilled accounting personnel, but also with the obsolete account 
plan and the absence of an efficient normative base and of 
methodological support for the financial reporting of banks. 
  At the end of last year commercial banks, as an experiment, 
began to draw up new financial reporting and new accounting 
standards. However, there are no new normative documents 
conforming to new banking legislation. The account plan and 
accounting and reporting rules approved in 1987 have become 
obsolete. Moreover, they come into conflict with a number of 
laws, in particular with the fundamentals of civil legislation, 
with the Law "On Ownership in the Russian Federation," and with 
the Law "On Banks and Banking Activity." 
  In our opinion, the accounting of commercial banks should 
gradually approach international standards. This means that 
accounting should be reliable and ensure a real evaluation of 
the results of activity and of the assets and liabilities of 
banks and the safety of the banking document turnover. In 
accordance with existing legislation the methodology of 
accounting is determined by the Central Bank, but its efforts in 
this, obviously, are insufficient. 
  We realize that the Central Bank has difficulties in 
connection with the departure of skilled personnel and we are 
ready to appeal to banks to establish a group from among 
specialists of commercial banks for the preparation of the 
necessary documents. 
  Since the beginning of reform investments have dropped by 
more than 50 percent. Undoubtedly, the decline in production, 
change in forms of ownership, and, especially, inflation have 
affected this. Owing to this, banks participate in investments 
approximately at the rate of 4 percent of all the credit 
investments. 
  On 21 March of this year the RF Government approved the 
"Temporary Statute on Financing and Crediting Capital 
Construction." We welcome such a step by the government. 
However, it concerns only state enterprises. Therefore, the 
distributive principle prevails in it. In our opinion, a system 
for granting credits for these purposes on the basis of an 
arrangement between clients and commercial banks with state 
support by means of interest on credit, so that enterprises may 
receive loans, as now, at an annual interest of 13 percent, 
would be an effective measure. 
  In our opinion, the government has not taken advantage of 
all 
the opportunities to attract funds for investments. The 
Association of Russian Banks has analyzed ways of reviving 
investment processes from this standpoint and addressed a 
special note to Government Chairman V.S. Chernomyrdin. For banks 
that put money in investments it is necessary to lower 
obligatory reserves, to make tax policy more favorable, to set 
apart the keeping of funds earmarked for these purposes, and so 
forth. Unfortunately, our proposals have not yet found a real 
way out. In our opinion, it is necessary to once again return to 
this matter, taking into consideration that the investment 
capacity in Russia's economy makes up 15 to 20 trillion rubles, 
while capital investments now total approximately 7.0 trillion 
rubles. 
  The association attentively examined the plans for the 
possible direction of investments prepared by the RF Ministry of 
Economics. In our opinion, the policy of big investment projects 
(with a recovery of 5 to 12 years), which prevail in these 
programs, will intensify inflation. Therefore, it does not 
correspond to the possibilities and tactics of implementation of 
investments. In our opinion, this plan, first of all, should 
contain projects primarily connected with an increase in 
consumer goods, processing of agricultural products, and 
production of equipment for small and medium-size business. This 
will make it possible to realize them more rapidly and to 
increase the mass of commodities and national income, which will 
actively promote a reduction in inflation rates. Such projects 
will accelerate the return of funds put in investment programs. 
  There is another source of investments, but it is of the 
nature of political decision-making. Unfortunately, Russian 
money circulates all over the world and one should not be 
surprised at this. The experience of other countries indicates 
that, when in a country there is a high level of inflation, 
extremely high interest rates, and unstable legislation and 
internal political situation, there is an outflow of capital. 
Fear of the possibility of regular confiscations from Russian 
entrepreneurs should be added to this--this is a fully 
understandable matter. Therefore, one should hardly be surprised 
that the currency earned by our entrepreneurs disappears from 
the country. If the political and economic situation and 
legislation in Russia had been more stable, undoubtedly, these 
dollars would have worked for our economy, that is, the 
effectiveness of investments in Russia's economy is very high. 
According to various evaluations, the amount of these funds in 
foreign banks ranges from 20 to 40 billion dollars. In order to 
return this vast amount of money, Russia's authorities should 
examine the method of guaranteeing owners of capital its safety. 
This path is more preferable to waiting to receive dollar 
credits from international financial organizations. In our 
opinion, a joint statement by the president, the Federal 
Assembly, and the government on guarantees to entrepreneurs 
returning capital to the country could be one of such measures. 
The Federal Assembly should adopt laws on such guarantees. It 
would not be superfluous to back such guarantees with our 
state's international obligations. 
  The economic situation also dictates an energetic decision, 
possibly, by involving commercial banks or their leading group 
in the problem of settlement of the country's foreign debts to 
the London Club. No matter how unpleasant the idea of increasing 
our debts to Western creditors may be, we must realize that, 
without settling the problem of rescheduling our debts and 
without readiness "to betray principles," we will not find 
foreign sources of financing our investment projects. 
  The regulation of the activity of commercial banks is one of 
the most complex problems of mutual relations of two links of 
one banking system. The contradictions arising in our country 
are also inherent in different forms in other countries with 
long existing banking systems. The problem lies in seeing to it 
that contradictions are not serious and are regulated in a 
civilized manner. 
  What matters worry our banks now? They are methods of 
supervision, the determination of economic normatives of 
activity, and the creation of favorable conditions for 
partnership relations of commercial banks with Central Bank 
organizations. A stable activity of commercial banks should be 
regulated by long-term normative documents of the Central Bank 
so that Central Bank organizations do not interfere in the 
current activity of banks. However, telegrams, which regulate 
current activity, as before, predominate in normative documents 
of the Central Bank. In European countries and the United States 
during the preparation of decisions on important matters central 
banks discuss them with commercial banks and bank associations. 
We, however, find out about decisions adopted by the Central 
Bank only when telegrams have already been sent to regional 
administrations of the Central Bank. The demand to increase as 
of 1 March the minimum amount of the authorized capital for new 
banks to 2 billion rubles is characteristic of this subject. 
  In principle, relations of commercial banks and of the 
Association of Russian Banks with the Central Bank have improved 
slightly, but remain complex. This concerns the regulation of 
the activity of commercial banks by the Central Bank, opening of 
affiliates, availability of consultations, and a flexible 
approach to difficulties arising in commercial banks. 
  The independence of the Central Bank often leads to direct 
arbitrariness with regard to commercial banks. Let us recall the 
writing off, without investigation, of funds from correspondent 
accounts of banks in connection with forged payment documents, 
entry of payments of over 100 million rubles in individual 
accounts, introduction of control by banks over the expenditures 
of clients' funds used by them for wages, exchange of money when 
banks were presented with a fait accompli and the population 
directed its anger at them. 
  At times the Central Bank is blindly guided by 
recommendations of international financial organizations, which 
are good in an established market economy. As before, the 
Central Bank issues an abundance of all kinds of constantly 
changing instructions and letters, which at times it is 
difficult to understand. 
  Previously, there was the practice of exaction of interest 
on 
credits once in a quarter. In the current year the Central Bank 
gave the instruction to exact interest from commercial banks 
every month. Such an instruction put many banks, especially 
those crediting seasonal sectors of the economy, in a difficult 
situation. Banks have been deprived of the possibility to 
maneuver their resources during the quarter and suffer great 
losses. 
  I have already discussed above the need to create fair 
conditions for the support of commercial banks on the part of 
the Central Bank, when for independent reasons temporary 
difficulties arise, so that two links of a single credit system 
may operate as partners and find mutual understanding. In all 
fairness it should be said that many chiefs of main 
administrations assist in the efficient operation of commercial 
banks in their regions. However, we receive constant complaints 
against formalism and even arbitrariness on the part of some of 
them with regard to commercial banks (Krasnodar Kray and Rostov 
and Novosibirsk [former chief of the main administration] 
oblasts). 
  The Executive Board of the Association of Russian Banks took 
part in the preparation of a number of normative documents by 
the Central Bank. Such a coordination, in the process of which 
there is a discussion of fundamental problems with associations 
of commercial banks, is useful, but is used very rarely. We 
again address to Mr. V.V. Gerashchenko the proposal to acquaint 
the association with drafts of normative documents so that the 
position of commercial banks may be taken into consideration. 
With such an interaction the quality of normative documents will 
improve. 
  Bringing normative documents of the Central Bank promptly 
and 
accurately to the notice of commercial banks is of great 
importance for their execution. Now this is done by a primitive 
method, with great delay, and often in distorted form. In a 
number of cases main administrations do not send copies of 
normative documents of the Central Bank, but give instructions 
in their statements. The Association of Russian Banks considers 
such a form of communication of normative documents undesirable. 
We ask Mr. V.V. Gerashchenko to include in the plan of 
distribution of normative documents all banks with the use of 
electronic mail and to introduce systems codification, which 
will be used by banks to control the receipt of Central Bank 
documents. 
  The laws on banks and banking activity adopted 3 years ago 
played their positive role. However, it must be stated that many 
of their provisions no longer meet the real needs of practice 
and a large number of problems have not been regulated at all at 
the legislative level. In connection with the intensification of 
economic reform and with due regard for the accumulated 
experience there is an urgent need to create full-weight banking 
legislation. 
  The Council of the Association of Russian Banks actively 
worked with the former Supreme Soviet and the president's 
administration on the preparation of new legislation. The 
association sent several versions of changes in and supplements 
to banking laws. 
  The question of how to act is now being discussed: To follow 
the path of making changes in and supplements to existing laws, 
or to draft fundamentally new ones? When solving this problem, 
apparently, we must take into account the fact that thus far the 
main law for all economic subjects has not yet been adopted--the 
Civil Code--and there is no concept for the further development 
of Russia's banking system, which should become the base for new 
banking legislation. 
  It seems that in this connection we must use both ways of 
solving this problem: While continuing to insist on the 
introduction of urgent amendments in existing laws, to actively 
produce material for new legislation. 
  We believe that a legislative base for seriously reforming 
the upper level of the banking system is needed. A number of 
functions now performed by the Central Bank divert its forces 
and attention from the solution of problems of credit and 
monetary policy and the combination of the partner and 
controller of commercial banks in one body gives rise to a 
formal administrative attitude on the part of the Central Bank 
apparatus toward banks. It is advisable to separate some 
functions of the Central Bank and to form independent bodies; 
for example, for deposit insurance and supervision over the work 
of commercial banks. 
  There is a proposal for the establishment of the National 
Council on Banks, in which all participants in the credit and 
monetary process--the Central Bank of Russia, commercial banks, 
representatives of the association, of the Ministry of 
Economics, and of financial bodies, and entrepreneurs--should be 
represented. This proposal deserves an examination and a 
corresponding legislative affirmation. Clarifying the concept's 
basic provisions, it is necessary to work out a draft law on 
Russia's banking system and to submit it to the State Duma for 
consideration. 
  It is important to more fully utilize useful foreign 
experience in the management and legal regulation of the 
monetary and credit sphere as a whole and in the organization of 
the central banking system, as well as the system of commercial 
banks, maximally stimulating the mastering of world banking 
standards in banking. However, this should be done with due 
regard for our specific features and, most important of all, 
real possibilities. 
  Speaking of the improvement in legislation regulating the 
activity of the commercial banks themselves, it must be said 
that laws should be of the nature of a direct effect and not 
consist of references to instructions of the Central Bank, the 
State Tax Service, and other departments. We assume that 
direct-effect laws regulating the system and procedure of 
payments, principles of crediting, mortgage, and problems 
concerning the development of competition and restriction of 
monopolism in the banking sphere and on bank holdings are 
needed. The top-priority ones include the problem of legislative 
regulation of the procedure for the formation of reserves in the 
Bank of Russia and the conditions of their use. 
  In work on improving banking legislation we count on the 
help 
of deputies of the State Duma, especially those that previously 
worked in commercial banks. In the new parliament the interests 
of banks are represented more competently than in the former 
Supreme Soviet. In the parliament the banking system cannot be 
in the background, as was before, but should act as an 
independent economic category, which in the West now is called 
the banking industry. The Association of Russian Banks supported 
banker candidates during elections, although we did not 
participate in political parties. Eight former bankers are 
represented in the Committee on the Budget, Taxes, Banks, and 
Finances. We hoped that in the Duma there will be an independent 
committee on banks. Unfortunately, however, leaders of political 
fractions did not listen to our opinion, proceeding from their 
party positions. Now, however, the structure of the committee 
has already been determined, we have established business 
contacts with it, and we will actively work together. 
  The unstable tax policy creates serious complications for 
the 
formation of the new banking system. Last year banks paid more 
than 1 trillion rubles in taxes. The tax burden does not make it 
possible to form ownership capital and to establish the material 
and technical base for banks. The high level of taxes and cost 
of credit undermines shareholders' interest in investing funds 
in banks, because they receive low dividends as compared with 
inflation rates. 
  The Association of Russian Banks pays much attention to the 
tax protection of banks both at the federal level and the 
microlevel, coming out in support of every bank. At the 
beginning of last year we managed to greatly reduce the tax on 
bank property and during the fourth quarter, to lower the 
taxable base of securities, certificates, and a number of other 
revenues. The Association of Russian Banks appealed to the State 
Duma and the Ministry of Finance in connection with a number of 
taxes and matters concerning them are being examined. 
  In its nature the tax on bank income was unfair and tougher 
than on profit. Any revenues were taken into account, but 
expenditures connected with the receipt of revenues and wage 
funds were not. The Association of Russian Bank attained the 
introduction for banks as of 1 January 1994 of taxation on 
profit as for all enterprises. If everything is calculated, it 
can be said without exaggeration that we managed to "save" many 
hundreds of billion of rubles for banks. 
  However, the general level of taxation on all economic 
sectors has risen during the current year. Furthermore, 
according to the president's edict, local bodies were given 
authority to introduce additional taxes. In connection with this 
the share of taxes paid into local budgets increases 
considerably and we recommend that you protect bank interests by 
common efforts in oblasts, krays, and republics during the 
preparation of draft decrees by local bodies. 
  In 3 years the Executive Board of the Association of Russian 
Banks organized the training of more than 7,500 people, 
including those that study now, in regular educational 
institutions. With the association's participation a network of 
base educational institutions, which have received teaching 
licenses, has been formed and measures to improve the skills of 
the teaching staff and study programs and to expand subjects 
have been implemented. 
  Together with the Finance Academy, the Central Bank, and a 
number of commercial banks, as well as French and English 
centers for personnel training, the Moscow Banking School was 
established. With the Academy of the National Economy imeni G. 
Plekhanov we participated in the establishment and work of the 
"Mirbis" School. The association itself carries out course 
activities for a number of professions: with lawyers, 
accountants, "key workers," and workers engaged in contacts with 
the public. 
  At the beginning of the current year the Academy of 
Management and the Market was established with our 
participation. A course on banking was prepared within its 
framework and it will be guided by the Association of Russian 
Banks. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is 
the program coordinator and sponsor. 
  We have managed to solve another important problem: To 
establish under the Association of Russian Banks the Center for 
Banking Consultations, the expenditures on the maintenance of 
which will be financed basically at the expense of Russian banks 
and the European Economic Community (5 million ECU). Consultants 
from Western banks and Russian specialists will work in the 
center. We have also come to an agreement with a number of 
foreign banks about the preferential training of our bank 
specialists. 
  Probably, however, all this will be insufficient. Therefore, 
we recommend that in cities, where there are higher and 
secondary specialized institutions, including former tekhnikums 
of the USSR State Bank and now schools of the Central Bank, you 
establish a course network and that you organize your own 
schools in big banks. A number of banks already have such 
schools and we are prepared to assist in their establishment. 
  The criminogenic situation is worsening in the country. 
According to the data of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in 
1993 more than 110,000 crimes were uncovered in the economic 
sphere. This is one-fourth more than during the previous year. A 
significant number of violations have been uncovered in currency 
exchange centers. Counterfeiters have also become more active. 
This problem has reached the state level. 
  According to the data of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, 
last year more than 5,000 crimes were committed in financial and 
credit systems. More than 2,000 criminal cases concerning forged 
letters of advice and other monetary documents are being 
investigated now. During these years 20 bank workers were 
killed. In connection with N.P. Likhachev's murder at the call 
of the Association of Russian Banks banks held a protest action. 
  Taking into consideration the increase in the criminogenic 
situation, three times we addressed a request and a demand to RF 
President B.N. Yeltsin to take measures concerning bank safety. 
On his instruction the Ministry of Internal Affairs, jointly 
with the Association of Russian Banks and the Central Bank, 
worked out a special plan of measures connected with bank 
safety. However, banks themselves must increase vigilance and 
establish their own internal protection system. This is the 
world banking practice. The Executive Board of the Association 
of Russian Banks distributed a number of approved 
recommendations on this matter to all banks. 
  The criminalization of Russian entrepreneurial activity is 
largely connected with major problems in existing legislation. 
That is precisely why many bank clients and sometimes mere 
adventurists calmly conclude transactions, knowing in advance 
that they will not be able to fulfill their terms and that the 
law will not punish them for this. The rights of all 
participants in the economic turnover are poorly protected now. 
In this connection there is an acute need to revise the Civil 
Code, legislation on the regulation of the activity of 
joint-stock companies, and legislation protecting the rights of 
creditors and, primarily, banks. 
  However, the criminogenic situation has now picked up speed 
to such an extent that individual sectors of the market economy, 
including the banking system, are not able to cope with it. A 
special federal program on this problem and the use of the 
entire state power are needed. 
  We pay special attention to the legal protection of banks. 
In 
1993 the Legal Department of the Association of Russian Banks 
sent more than 400 written replies to commercial banks. The 
jurists of the Association of Russian Banks participated in the 
examination of a significant number of legal actions and helped 
banks to win them. For the purpose of a better orientation of 
bank jurists 79 consultations and councils were provided for 
them. The Legal Department, jointly with the Department for 
Personnel Training of the Association of Russian Banks, 
conducted several seminars of jurists of commercial banks, in 
which more than 500 people were retrained. 
  As you know, an arbitration tribunal was established under 
the Association of Russian Banks. Banks have begun to use its 
services quite actively. The activity of the arbitration 
tribunal is characterized by the following data: A total of 28 
pieces of material were sent to it, the total amount of demands 
for relief being 4,179.5 million rubles and 439,700 dollars. 
Four judgments were rendered and claims in the amount of 2,705.8 
million rubles out of 2,710.0 million demands for relief were 
satisfied. 
  The existing pension system of social insurance cannot 
ensure 
the standard of living that a person had when working in a bank. 
In connection with this the problem of creating in banks a 
mechanism of additional nonstate pension security becomes 
urgent. Today, however, about 150 nonstate pension funds 
function in various economic sectors. A number of banks 
(Inkombank, Menatep, Tori-Bank, and so forth) have also begun 
the formation of pension funds. For now, however, this process 
is slow. We recommend that banks examine this matter and we are 
prepared to coordinate their efforts for the establishment of 
the indicated pension funds. The RF President's Edict No 1077 
dated 16 September 1992 "On Nonstate Pension Funds" serves as 
the legal basis for this. However, for a stable operation of 
these funds an edict alone is obviously insufficient. Government 
decisions on developing a system of nonstate pension security 
and on granting tax privileges to funds are needed. Taking into 
consideration that in the very near future in nonstate pension 
funds tens of billions of rubles can be accumulated and used for 
investing, the funds themselves can become a powerful factor of 
stability both in the economy and in the social sphere. 
  The revival of Russian entrepreneurship is inseparably 
linked 
with the revival of noble traditions of charity in our country. 
Owing to the efforts and material support of various commercial 
structures, including banks, many spheres of public health, 
social security, science, and culture deprived of state 
financing continue to operate. Russia's banking system advanced 
further than other sectors of the market economy. Banks received 
the opportunity to carry out large-scale charitable actions and 
to help those that, owing to various reasons, were below the 
poverty line. This is not only our good deed, but our civic duty. 
  From the very beginning of its activity the association has 
actively supported all good initiatives by bankers. Good deeds 
by banks include assistance to the poor, sick, old, and orphans, 
many saved human lives, restored temples, and so forth. 
  We are grateful to our banker colleagues, who did not leave 
unanswered many recommendations and requests, which the 
Association of Russian Banks addressed directly to them, gave 
assistance to dozens of people, and supported several most 
interesting journals, which were on the verge of disappearance, 
and the restoration and decoration of temples. 
  Many banks support fine arts, helping artists and galleries. 
Some of them create their own collections. The Association of 
Russian Banks, especially in order to help banks, established an 
expert art council, which includes excellent specialists, and 
banks can ask the Association of Russian Banks for competent 
assistance in these matters. 
  Your charitable and sponsorship activity should not dry up. 
It points specifically to the participation of commercial banks 
in Russia's spiritual revival. 
  The First Congress of Banks, at which the Association of 
Russian Banks was established, was held 3 years ago. At that 
time 65 banks joined it. Today the Association of Russian Banks 
has 790 banks in its ranks, that is, it increased 12-fold. The 
combined authorized capital of banks--members of the Association 
of Russian Banks--makes up 52 percent of all the banks. Almost 
all big banks are members of the Association of Russian Banks. 
  However, there are still potentials for a closer 
consolidation of Russia's commercial banks and they should be 
utilized. 
  The protection and representation of the interests of banks, 
creation of a favorable atmosphere for growth and improvement, 
and active participation in the establishment and strengthening 
of Russia's new national banking system were the main directions 
in the work of the Council and the Executive Board of the 
Association of Russian Banks. Without false modesty it can be 
said that all of us managed to do a great deal. The Association 
of Russian Banks has become the headquarters of commercial 
banks, to which people turn with joy and sorrow and, the chief 
thing, for help. The fact that two foreign commercial banks 
operating according to Russian laws have joined it also points 
to the association's prestige. 
  The management of the Association of Russian Banks has been 
working for business connections with bodies of state 
administration and the solution of problems of the banking 
system through them. During that time meetings with RF President 
B.N. Yeltsin, several meetings with RF Government Chairman V.S. 
Chernomyrdin and his deputies, and regular meetings with V.V. 
Gerashchenko, chairman of the Central Bank of Russia, his 
deputies, the management of tax inspectorates, the Ministry of 
Finance, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were held. Business 
relations with deputies of the State Duma and of the Federation 
Council, primarily with the Committee on the Budget, Taxes, 
Banks, and Finances, were established. As a rule, we find 
support everywhere. 
  The Council of the Association of Russian Banks consisting 
of 
27 people, which was elected at the First Founding Congress, 
worked actively and held its meetings on the dates determined by 
the Charter of the Association of Russian Banks. Fundamental 
problems concerning the activity of the banking system were 
discussed at meetings. During those years 17 meetings were held, 
at which 138 questions were discussed. According to the subjects 
they can be unified into the following three groups: 
  --improvement in banking legislation and coordination of 
bank 
activity--147 questions; 
  --representation and protection of bank interests in bodies 
of executive and legislative power--161 questions; 
  --social and organizational questions--74. 
  For immediate work on the fulfillment of decisions of 
congresses and of the council an executive board with a small 
staff--only 26 people--was established. The executive board 
carries out work on the fulfillment of decisions of congresses 
and of the council and conducts correspondence with bodies of 
state power, banks, courts, and so forth. In 1993 and during 3 
months of 1994 alone the board's total document turnover was 
about 2,000 letters. 
  What have the Council and the Executive Board of the 
Association of Russian Banks managed to do in the last 3 years? 
  1. To help the new banking system to become firmly 
established and to hold a firm place in the business world as 
the most organized, consolidated, and actively operating 
organization and to establish business contacts with the Central 
Bank, the government, the parliament, and the president. 
  2. To gain a firm position as an active protector of 
interests of commercial banks. To make the Association of 
Russian Banks the professional lobbyist body of commercial 
banks. The association tries to prevent the emergence of 
problems, which can do damage to the new banking system, from 
whomever they may originate, and actively comes out in the 
defense of commercial banks. It made a number of fundamental 
protests and statements, which explained the position of the 
Association of Banks and commercial banks in the economy and 
society. 
  3. To promote the introduction of advanced technologies and 
computer hardware into banking. 
  4. To create conditions for the training, retraining, and 
qualification apprenticeship of banking personnel both in the 
country and abroad. 
  5. To establish bodies for the protection of commercial 
interests of banks of the internal banking community, primarily 
the arbitration tribunal. 
  6. To provide banks with the necessary information, which is 
an important condition for their orientation in commercial 
activity, and to ensure the publication of the Information 
Bulletin. The first issue of a "thick" journal, BANK, will be 
published in the very near future and a banking encyclopedia is 
being prepared for publication. 
  7. To familiarize banks with world banking experience and 
with the application of world banking standards in their work 
and for this purpose to hold several international conferences 
on various aspects of banking, meetings, and negotiations with 
our foreign colleagues. 
  8. To represent the new banking system in the business world 
of various states, as well as in the World Bank, in the Economic 
Commission of the European Economic Community, and in the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. To establish 
business relations with banking associations, central banks, and 
commercial banks in the United States, England, Germany, 
Hungary, Bulgaria, Poland, France, Australia, Japan, 
Czechoslovakia, Sweden, Finland, Ireland, and other countries, 
which promoted an improvement in the Russian banking system. 
  9. To expand the number and to improve the quality of 
services provided by the Association of Russian Banks to 
commercial banks. 
  10. To transform the Association of Russian Banks into a 
competent partner of the Central Bank, as is being done in all 
foreign countries, and to become an active participant in the 
establishment and improvement of Russia's new economic and 
banking system. 
  New times also raise more complex, new problems before the 
banking system and the Association of Russian Banks. It is 
necessary to enhance the association's role and status and to 
expand the sphere of its influence during the elaboration and 
examination of fundamental questions concerning the development 
of the economy and banking. In our opinion, it would be correct 
if the Association of Russian Banks had the right of legislative 
initiative and state bodies were obliged to examine, jointly 
with the Association of Russian Banks, fundamental plans for the 
development of the economy, credit and monetary policy, and so 
forth. 
  More and more regional banking associations and unions are 
now being established, including with the help of the 
Association of Russian Banks. This structure is very important 
for the solution of problems connected with the activity of 
commercial banks, which arise in localities, and, first of all, 
for contacts with local administrations. We have not yet found 
the optimum solution of the status of these organizations. Now 
they are organized as independent, administratively not subject 
to the Association of Russian Banks. On the one hand, this is 
good, because this does not tie them to any obligations. 
However, with such a situation there is a certain isolation from 
the general banking movement and, although we involve them in 
the elaboration of some problems, advise them of the work plans 
of the Association of Russian Banks, and invite them to meetings 
of councils of the Association of Russian Banks, probably, this 
is insufficient. Perhaps we should give thought to making them 
regional departments of the Association of Russian Banks without 
violating democracy or tying them within a strict administrative 
framework. 
  Dear colleagues! 
  I reported to you on the work done during these years. Very 
many problems lie ahead, which the new Council of the 
Association of Russian Banks and the entire banking community 
will have to solve. Basically, they are known to us, but many 
will appear anew. I would like to end my report on an optimistic 
note. Undoubtedly, we will advance, reform the economy and 
society, and gradually get out of the crisis. Russia has all the 
conditions for this. 

