Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Howard Foster and Richard Palmer: "Bungled </F>
United Kingdom Trap Lets in &pound;1 Billion of Cocaine"] 
  [Text] British and American drug enforcement officers have 
allowed up to &pound;1 billion-worth of cocaine into the United 
Kingdom in a bungled operation to trap a Colombian drugs cartel. 
  The drugs, hidden in lead ingots, were brought into Britain 
in cargo ships from Venezuela by a front company, which, 
according to lawyers and customs officers, was financed by the 
CIA, the American intelligence service. 
  CIA and British police officers who monitored the shipments 
allowed the drugs in because they hoped to gain valuable 
intelligence on senior figures in the Colombian cartel. However, 
they failed to tell British Customs and the undercover operation 
was ruined when their key informant was arrested by customs 
investigators, who seized 900 kilograms of cocaine with a street 
value of &pound;200m. 
  The case raises serious doubts about a policy that appeared 
to allow criminals to profit from drug smuggling in pursuit of 
more important targets. It has since emerged that at the same 
time, the CIA in Caracas, Venezuela's capital, allowed more than 
900 kilograms of cocaine into the United States in a similar 
operation, now the subject of a US Justice Department inquiry. 
  Details of the role of the drugs enforcement agencies in the 
cocaine shipments emerged during a &pound;40m trial at Newcastle 
crown court, which ended last Thursday when Joseph Kassar, a 
Manchester businessman, was jailed for 24 years for trafficking. 
  Kassar was the only one of nine original defendants to be 
convicted for importing cocaine from Venezuela via Felixstowe 
docks in January 1992. One died in prison, four were acquitted, 
two face a retrial and another, Brian Charrington, had no 
evidence brought against him. 
  Much of the trial collapsed after it emerged that 
Charrington, a Middlesbrough garage owner, was an informant for 
the police number two regional crime squad based in Cleveland. 
Lawyers for the other defendants want an inquiry into the case. 
Kassar's solicitor, Keith Dyson, said: "The involvement of the 
number two regional crime squad and its relationship with Brian 
Charrington and his role as an informant who was allowed to 
profit from the crime must be the subject of a major 
investigation." 
  Customs investigators had decided in 1989 to target 
Charrington, 37, who was already suspected of importing large 
quantities of cannabis into Britain from Amsterdam and Morocco. 
He had become increasingly wealthy, running a Bentley, a 
Rolls-Royce, two private jets and a deep-sea diving boat while 
selling second-hand cars from a forecourt in Middlesbrough. 
  Undercover customs officers involved in Operation Fullbloom 
followed Charrington and his associates around Europe and to 
Caracas, where he was watched entering the offices of Conar 
Corporation, a small shipping agency. 
  The company sent several shipments of cocaine to Britain and 
other parts of Europe which Customs failed to find. In January 
1992, a 900-kilogram consignment of cocaine was found hidden in 
lead aboard a ship, the MV Adviser, which had sailed from 
Caracas to Felixstowe. 
  The drugs were removed and the lead allowed to travel into 
Britain to lure out the British gang members. In March 1992, 11 
men were arrested. Charrington was taken into custody in June 
when he returned in his private jet to Teesside airport from a 
trip to France. 
  During seven months in jail before his trial, Charrington 
refused to talk to investigators about his role in the cocaine 
smuggling. He also declined to comment on almost &pound;2.5m in 
banknotes discovered in the loft of his Teesside home. These had 
traces of cocaine, cannabis and heroin on them. 
  According to senior customs investigators, there was no 
evidence of police involvement on computer records held, by the 
National Drugs Information Unit. 
  But in November 1992 investigators realised their hopes of 
nailing the man known as Target One were about to sink. Two 
officers of the number two regional crime squad drugs 
wing--Detective Inspector Harry Knaggs, now retired, and 
Detective Sgt Ian Weedon--said they would give evidence that 
Charrington was a long-term informant. 
  In January 1993, the Crown Prosecution Service said it was 
offering no evidence against Charrington and he was freed. After 
celebrating his release, he disappeared. He is believed to be in 
the Far East. 
  Police and Customs blamed each other for the debacle, but 
there were further damaging disclosures about the extent of 
trafficking taking place with full police knowledge. Tim Devlin, 
Conservative MP for Stockton South and parliamentary private 
secretary to Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, revealed 
details of six other consignments of cocaine due into Britain, 
taking the street value up to &pound;1 billion. 
  Devlin said Charrington had been one of Britain's best drugs 
informants and could have closed down half the Colombian 
cartels. He said the authorities had intended to collapse the 
case against Charrington to provide him with further cover. 
  "The whole thing is a monumental cock-up," Devlin said. "It 
has all been screwed up because the jolly old Customs think they 
are cleverer than anyone else." 

