Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In 1995 and 1996, Deutsche Bundespost's postal 
service, in conjunction with well-known industrial partners, 
will conduct large-scale trials with electric vehicles powered 
by a zinc-air system. 
  The field trial, preparations for which began back at the 
beginning of 1994 [as published], will be based on the Greven 
mail center near Muenster in Westphalia. The large-scale trial 
grew out of studies by the postal service as to how part of its 
diesel vehicle fleet could be replaced by propulsion systems 
that caused less pollution. A novel zinc-air power system 
emerged as a promising prospect, although it is not without its 
expert critics as regards the overall ecobalance. 
  However, initial tests, involving outside inspectors, on the 
new power system installed in a trial vehicle went off 
successfully at the TUeV [Technical Monitoring Board] for 
Bavaria and Saxony, its power and output values, which far 
exceeded those of conventional batteries, and its ecological 
acceptability proving particularly attractive. 
<H5>  Autonomy Range Considerably Extended </H5>
  The trials centered on use in the postal service, where 
requirements are three or four times higher than in the private 
transport sector. Whereas electric vehicles with an accumulator 
weight of 350 kg have had a range of about 40 km to date, the 
new technology permits journeys of at least 300 km. 
  The large-scale field trials scheduled to begin in 1995 will 
set out primarily to establish whether the zinc-air power system 
is economically viable and what its infrastructure requirements 
are. The latter is necessary because the power cells cannot be 
charged like conventional storage batteries: The electrodes 
have to be changed. The "worn-out" electrodes are subsequently 
regenerated, after which they are ready for reuse. This is why 
large-scale field trials can only be performed with major fleet 
operators such as the postal service. 
  In addition to the postal service, in the role of project 
leader, and Electric Fuel Limited, the inventor of the zinc-air 
system, other well-known firms have agreed to take part in the 
field trial. Some firms and town councils also want to 
participate in the trial with parts of their own fleets. 

