Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [TEXT] In seven years, Germany intends to be getting 2,000 
megawatts of electricity from wind power, more than ten times 
today's level. To manage this increase, more facilities must be 
built in the interior of the country. 
  For mountain enthusiasts, the Hirtstein is a thoroughly 
insignificant hill in the Erz Mountains. In contrast, Dr. 
Wolfgang Daniels, Director of the Dresden firm of SachsenKraft 
GmbH, perceives a milestone in the hill. Not only are the first 
wind energy installations of Saxony there. But for the first 
time in Germany, after trials in the Eifel, a privately run wind 
field was developed on the crest of a low mountain range. 
  Connected to the power supply grid a good year ago, the 
mills 
already provide two million kilowatt hours--more than the 750 
inhabitants in neighboring Satzung can use. Wind power could 
admittedly play a much greater roll in Saxony. Wolfgang Daniels, 
together with the Dresden engineering firm of Joerg Kuntzsch 
&amp; 
Partner, co-initiator of the Hirtstein wind field, worked out a 
wind atlas for the free state (publication date: March 1994). 
  Wind Fields In the neighborhood of the Hirtstein 
alone, 12 additional wind fields could be established. Four 
projects are actually already in the planning and authorization 
stages; among them are those at the Oberwiesenthal border and in 
Joehstadt, where installations with a total rated output of 3.5 
MW are to be erected. 
  "Naturally it is not our goal to plaster the upper Erz 
Mountains nature preserve with modern windmills," says Wolfgang 
Daniels to ward off objections. But there, where it is possible 
and economically sensible, the mountain wind should be used to 
produce clean energy. Decentralized wind power installations 
could, according to Daniels, meet up to 50&percnt; of the 
electric 
power needs in some administrative districts in the Erz 
Mountains. Saxony's Minister of the Environment Arnold Vaatz 
even considers half the state to be suitable. 
  Without opening up new regions of the interior to wind 
energy, the goal of the Federal Ministry for Research and 
Technology cannot in any case be achieved. According to 
assertions from Bonn, the 2,000 MW limit should be reached in 
the year 2,000. Wind energy would then still only come to a 
modest 0.2 to 0.4&percnt; of the electric power produced in 
Germany 
today. Still, that would mean an annual reduction in 
CO&lt;inf&gt; 2&lt;/inf&gt;  emissions of around four million metric tons. 
<H5>  Oekostrom Project in Saxony: Windmills On the Hirtstein. </H5>
  Germany's neighbor to the north, Denmark--the world market 
leader in the business of wind energy--is much further along. 
Finn Hasted, certified engineer and Director at Elkraft, the 
Danish producer of energy installations, knows that by the turn 
of the century 2.5&percnt; of the country's electricity needs 
should 
be met by windmills. The Danes are increasingly going into the 
ocean--they are even already experimenting with 1 MW off-shore 
installations. 
  In order for Germany to make progress in the business of 
wind 
energy, it is especially important, according to Bernd Neumann, 
the Undersecretary of State in the Federal Ministry for Research 
and Technology (FMRT), to further reduce the costs of energy 
production from wind installations. Even without government 
promotional measures--the FMRT development program is to expire 
in 1995--they must become competitive. Because of the high cost 
of the installations, wind energy today still costs, relative to 
the kilowatt hour, up to five times as much as conventionally 
produced electricity. 
  Promotional rates and conditions for the installations 
costing between 1,000 German marks (rated output: 0.07 kW) to 
1.5 million German marks (600-800 kW)--almost 100 types are 
available on the market--have until now varied greatly from 
state to state. Dr. Daniels is also skeptical then regarding the 
effectiveness of federal promotional politics: "It doesn't lead 
to any real introduction into the market." Getting on the market 
is also hampered by the slow process of obtaining authorization 
and by resistance on the part of public utilities to the 
unwelcome competition from private wind power operators. 
Although obligated for more than a year by the energy supply law 
to pay producers 16.53 pfennigs per kilowatt hour, the public 
utilities continue to try to push down the price; or they pay, 
but slowly. 
  Wind power installations in the interior, according to 
Daniel's counterproposal, should in general be compensated by 
150 percent of the avenge end-user price (27 pfennigs) per 
kilowatt hour. For example, Aachen: here, since September 1992 
per council decision, Oekostrom must be compensated for 
costs--still against continuing resistance on the part of local 
producers of electricity. 
  Such compensation would also help the eastern part of 
Germany 
to catch up with windmills. At the end of 1992 the propellers of 
around 1,200 wind power installations were rotating in Germany, 
only a few of these in the new states. The leader here, as west 
of the Elbe, has long been the North. By April 1993 there were 
43 installations in the costal state of 
Mecklenburg-Vorpomerania, according to the Institute for Solar 
Energy Production Technology at the Polytechnic in Cassel 
(ISEPT). In Sachsen-Anhalt there were just eight, in Saxony 
seven and in Thueringen only two. 
  In Brandenburg five windmills have by now fed 1.5 MW of 
electricity into the public grid. 
  In summer the Potsdam Ministry of the Environment presented 
a 
study on the wind potential of the country, which was worked on 
by the Kraftwerks- und Anlagenbau AG [power station and 
installation construction company] in Berlin, the Kuntzsch 
engineering firm in Dresden and the Green League. The first wind 
field in the Brandenburg brown coal region is to be on the tip 
of a 300 meter tall overlay near Cottbus. Ten wind power 
installations each with a 500 kW output will send electricity 
over a five kilometer long underground cable to the Jaenschwalde 
power station, from where it will enter the VEAG grid. This 
capacity--five Danish and Dutch wind power installations--was 
placed on the Hirtstein within a period of a year by the 
Daniels/Kuntzsch duo. Rated output: 1,025 kW at a wind velocity 
of 10 to 13 m/s. 
  Unexpected stresses from the weather and surprising 
technical 
difficulties created problems. "Quickly changing wind 
directions, frost, snow accumulation and sleet made it hard to 
manage rotor wings and control technique," Daniels remembers. 
The operators defrosted the rotors with 300 W halogen lamps, and 
in the future UV lamps are also supposed to be installed. 
  With the mills made by the producer Micon which have 
actually 
been tested in practice, switching generator levels did not work 
at first and the hydraulics of the windbrakes leaked. Downtimes 
quickly grew to 15&percnt;--two million kWh less than predicted. 
  Still, Daniels is certain that wind energy production on the 
crest of the Erz Mountains is proving its worth: "A few hundred 
windmills could soon be turning on both sides of the 
German-Czechoslovakian border. This could check the poisonous 
fumes coming from the brown coal power plants in the Bohemian 
basin, which are killing the forests in the Erz Mountains." 
  In the meantime, the wind power pioneers have even won the 
support of the locals in the Erz Mountains. At first they had to 
take a good look at a citizen's initiative. The most important 
counter arguments: Windmills are too loud, they have a negative 
affect on the landscape, and they are a danger to birds. 
<H5>  Shutter Mills </H5>
  The last objection has been refuted by studies carried out 
since 1984 in Holland and Lower Saxony and by experience in 
Denmark and Sweden: High-tension lines and lighthouses kill more 
birds. As for noise, Daniels concedes that "the beating of the 
rotor wings can be heard at distances of 200 meters." Improved 
operation, higher aerodynamics of the wings, and soundproofed 
gondolas are still challenges for engineers. 
  Through personal conversations and the invitation to 
evaluate 
and discuss the wind field project, the project planners are 
finally bringing about a swing in opinion. Since it is been 
clear that the project is useful to the community and is not 
costing them money, acceptance is assured. When the mills stop 
now, Daniels reports, "the people living in Satzung call me even 
in Dresden and ask why Snub-nosed Karl, White Lady, Jolly Hans, 
Mazzebille [as written] or Old Hannes are not running." 

