BFN 

  [Text] Smaller volumes of soil, up to 500 tonnes in 
particular, can be freed of hydrocarbon contamination in a 
tank-type cleansing reactor using a biological process. The 
separate processing of individual soil batches also has the 
advantage that each owner's soil batch remains separate and can 
thus be returned to the original spot. 
  HGN Hydrogeology Norhausen's plant centers on a completely 
covered tank-type cleansing reactor in which the pollutants are 
degraded. The reactor can be transported on a container truck. 
Tank capacity is designed for a maximum of seven cubic meters, 
so the reactor can be loaded onto a truck even when full. 
  Soils contaminated with aliphatic, aromatic, and halogenated 
hydrocarbons in concentrations up to 30,000 mg/kg dry weight can 
be treated. A built-in soil air extractor also makes it 
possible to eliminate volatile aromatic and halogenated 
compounds. 
<H5>  Pollutant Degradation in Just a Few Weeks </H5>
  The microflora native to the polluted area is generally used 
in the reclamation operation. Microorganism activity is 
enhanced and pollutant degradation accelerated by adding a 
nutrient solution and forced air ventilation. Only in special 
cases is it necessary to add purpose-bred organisms. The 
treatment time depends on the degree of contamination: usually 
the pollutants are degraded within a few weeks. 
  Compressed air is forced in to aerate the soil through 
perforated hoses laid longitudinally along the inner wall of the 
reactor. The exhaust air is extracted from the housing, 
filtered through activated carbon or a biofilter, and discharged 
into the atmosphere. Water -- with or without the added nutrient 
solution -- trickles out of an irrigation system installed in 
the hood covering the tank. Once it has seeped through the soil, 
the water is drawn off through the tank's perforated double 
base, after which it is reconditioned in a central water 
purifying plant outside the reactor and recycled into the 
reactor. 

