Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Ivan Vaclavik, press spokesman for the Slovak </F>
Ministry of Transport, Communications, and Public Works: "Split 
Time for the RFE"] 
  [Text] The exhausting 11-hour talks, from 0900 to 2100 [as 
published], only confirmed that Radio Free Europe's [RFE] 
broadcasting in Slovakia is a complex technical and legal issue. 
Even RFE Deputy Director Gary Thatcher agreed when Vladimir 
Zeman, the director general of the Communications Section at the 
Slovak Ministry of Transport, Communications, and Public Works, 
emphasized that not once during the several-hour talks was it 
mentioned that it is a political matter. The participants in 
the talks between the RFE and Slovak Telecommunications 
expressed it even in the accord memorandum, and both interested 
parties can now peacefully concentrate on the technical side of 
RFE broadcasting in Slovakia. 
<H5>  The Frequencies Situation Is Becoming Clear </H5>
  It should be noted that the Geneva plan originally assigned 
the 1287 kHz frequency on medium-wave to transmitters in the 
Czech Republic, while the 1521 kHz frequency is used by Slovak 
transmitters. There is just one catch. Presov was assigned the 
same frequency as the Czech transmitters, while the "Slovak" 
frequency has also been assigned to the Ostrava transmitter. 
However, everything was settled at the talks between the Slovak 
Ministry of Transport, Communications, and Public Works and the 
Czech Economics Ministry. Both parties agreed there that the 
1287 frequency belongs to the Czech Republic and the 1521 
frequency belongs to Slovakia. That is the precise reason the 
Slovak Telecommunications offered the RFE a different frequency 
on the AM band. But the RFE representatives do not want it. 
<H5>  They Insist on the Original Contract </H5>
  They insist on the original contract even though the Slovak 
side points out that the RFE broadcasts in Slovakia on a 
frequency that does not belong to us. Hence, the broadcast is 
illegal. Eventually, the two interested parties agreed that 
Slovak Telecommunications will apply through the Ministry of 
Transport, Communications, and Public Works at the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) in Geneva for an investigation of 
the entire affair, and its decision should then be sufficient 
reason to change the contract in effect. Because of this, 
Slovak Telecommunications retracted its original decision on the 
termination on 31 January 1994 of RFE broadcasting in Slovakia 
from the transmitters in Presov, Poprad, and Velke Kostolany. 
<H5>  They Insist on 1287 kHz </H5>
  It is in the interest of the Slovak Republic that the entire 
broadcast network be placed in line with the law as soon as 
possible. The RFE representatives have opposed all of the 
provisions, however, and that made the talks difficult. It is 
paradoxical that the Slovak side kept offering a different 
wavelength on the AM band but the RFE insists on the 1287 kHz. 
Why has it remained obfuscated? 
  According to RFE Deputy Director Gary Thatcher, they heard 
the arguments that the current contract could cause a conflict 
in international agreements in the context of the assigned 
frequencies. They acknowledged (several proposals by the Slovak 
party on) the possible ways to settle these problems. The RFE 
is still willing to take part in the search for a solution that 
would satisfy both parties. Thatcher indicated that one 
feasible solution could be a change of the frequency for the RFE 
programs. 
  So far, however, as RFE Slovak Broadcast Director Ivan Cikl 
phrased it, "We (the RFE--editorial note) are convinced that the 
contract is valid until the end of 1995, and one of its articles 
even refers to the possibility of further expanding the term of 
its validity." 
  In any event, it is important that RFE broadcasting reaches 
the legal status required by international regulations. 

