Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] When talks on intellectual property rights resume 20 
Dec. in Tokyo, U.S. negotiators will again urge Japan to resist 
proposals spearheaded by Japanese business and academia to ease 
copyright protection of computer programs. 
  The U.S. government and a group of major U.S. computer and 
software firms fear that Japanese companies are seeking changes 
in the nation's copyright law that would make it easier to study 
or copy computer software for commercial purposes through a 
practice known as decompilation. 
  They suspect the intent is to help Japanese firms catch up 
in 
a field dominated by Americans by allowing companies to freely 
analyze each others' programs. 
  International Business Machines Corp., Apple Computer Inc., 
Word Perfect Corp., Microsoft Corp. and others say their 
competitive edge in a market worth tens of billions of dollars 
annually could be severely harmed by weaker protection of their 
intellectual property. 
  Yet at hearings last week held by an advisory panel to the 
Agency for Cultural Affairs charged with reviewing software 
copyright law, it became clear that the U.S. computer industry 
is not of one mind. 
  That's because a group of some 30 U.S. companies, led by Sun 
Microsystems Inc. and Storage Technology Corp., believes 
Washington should not oppose Tokyo on certain copyright changes 
now under consideration. 
<H5>  EC Debate </H5>
  The conflicting U.S. views underscore the controversy and 
confusion surrounding proposals to clarify protection of 
computer software under Japanese law. The issue has previously 
sparked intra-industry conflict in the European Community, where 
limited decompilation for the purpose of creating a compatible 
program is permitted. 
  Decompilation is a procedure that reverses the process of 
writing software. By ``translating'' the ones and zeros that 
computers understand into more readable language, it is possible 
to learn how a program works. 
  Often, a company makes this readable code available to 
software publishers -- say firms that plan to write new programs 
that will work together with the first -- under carefully 
phrased contracts that limit the use of the code. 
  Some in Japan favor leaving the Japanese law as it now 
stands, even though it is somewhat unclear on the issue. Some 
favor loosening current protection to allow decompilation, even 
without a business contract, for the sole purpose of ensuring 
``interoperability.'' 
  But the most vocal Japanese are those who want decompilation 
to be permitted for any reason -- and they are represented by 
Keidanren, Japan's most influential business organization. 
  Backed by leading electronics firms such as Fujitsu Ltd., 
Keidanren submitted a report to the advisory panel in September 
recommending that ``copying and modifying of programs with 
reverse engineering should be allowed regardless of purpose.'' 
  ``IBM and other companies want monopolies even as they 
advertise open competition. Fujitsu and other leading Japanese 
electronics companies favor unlimited decompilation'' in order 
to encourage open systems, said Fujitsu director Katsuro Yamaji. 
  One U.S. group, known as the American Committee for 
Interoperable Systems (ACIS), is backing the Japanese -- at 
least part way. Representatives of this group told the advisory 
panel that it favors revising the law to allow decompilation for 
the purpose of ensuring smooth interoperability. 
&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  John Scroppo, vice president of Storage Technology's Japan 
arm, said that U.S. firms often need to sell products in Japan 
that are compatible with those of major Japanese makers. 
Scroppo's firm sells data storage devices to Hitachi Ltd. and 
other big Japanese vendors that have proprietary software. If a 
vendor won't provide information that allows products to work 
together, Scroppo said, U.S. and Japanese companies should be 
able to resort to decompilation. 
<H5>  U.S. Precedent </H5>
  Permitting decompilation benefits computer users, he said, 
because ``the end result is increased innovation, 
interoperability and price competition.'' 
  Scroppo and other proponents of decompilation have taken 
heart from recent U.S. court cases in which decompilation was 
ruled permissible for the purpose of creating interoperable 
systems. 
  Opponents of the practice, however, contend these cases do 
not set a wide precedent for decompilation. 
  Indeed, IBM and its powerful allies fear that giving even an 
inch would encourage Japanese companies to take a mile. They 
worry that instead of looking at the decompiled software just 
for interoperability purposes, the Japanese firms would be able 
to quickly introduce near-copies of the original programs. 
  ``If permitted, decompilation would allow a second-comer to 
undercut sales of the original program without making the 
corresponding R&amp;D investment,'' Marshall Phelps, an IBM vice 
president, told the committee last week. 
  Timothy Langley, director of government affairs at Apple 
Japan Ltd., claimed the opponents ``represent the major voices 
in the U.S. information industry.'' The 13 original companies in 
the group, since joined by more than 20 others, chalked up 
revenues of $14 billion in Japan in 1992, he said. 
  The U.S. government has strongly supported this group, with 
a 
senior U.S. trade official describing the possible weakening of 
Japan's software protection as ``an issue of the gravest 
concern.'' 
  The official said the U.S. government ``must also consider 
and protect the totality of U.S. economic interests,'' noting 
the risk to intellectual property rights extends beyond software 
to other industries. 
  It is unclear whether the fissure in the U.S. side will 
influence the advisory committee to recommend that the 
government proceed with amending the copyright law. Committee 
officials said last week that they will continue to study the 
issue but have taken no position yet. A report will be filed 
after February, one official said. 
  Seeking to assure the other U.S. firms, Peter Choy, Sun 
Microsystems' deputy general counsel and ACIS chairman, said his 
group ``would not support any change that would make it easier 
for companies to engage in piracy'' of computer programs. If 
Japanese law were ``clarified to permit reverse engineering, 
including decompilation, for legitimate purposes,'' he said, 
``we are confident it would not foster piracy.'' 

