Profiled 

<F P=102>   94WD0336A Lima SI in Spanish 4-10 Apr 94 pp 26-29--FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94WD0336A </F>
<F P=104>  Lima SI </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article signed "J.A.M.": "Drug `Capos' and Families in </F>
Peru"] 
  [Text] Recent reports from the DIRANDRO [National Antidrug 
Division of the PNP (Peruvian National Police)] and the DEA 
[Drug Enforcement Administration] confirm the fact that, since 
the capture of Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera, the control of the 
drug traffic in the Peruvian jungle is now being exercised by 
two firms: that of the "Cachique [also spelled "Cachiche"] 
Rivera Brothers," and that of "El Ministro." 
  Each of these large firms has the family of il 
capo [the chief] as a basic core of its structure, in the 
Italian Mafia style. 
  However, in the case of the drug traffickers' firms, the 
chief's blood relatives are, in fact, the basic elements. 
  There are plenty of examples. The pivotal element in the 
"Vaticano" firm is the Chavez Penaherrera family. The Cardenas 
family has continued to develop in a business left to it by the 
chief of the "Mosca Loca" clan. 
<H5>  Cachique Rivera Brothers </H5>
  The leadership of this group is held by Abelardo Cachique 
Rivera, who uses two aliases: "El Negro" or "Teniente." 
  The other members of the family involved in the business 
are: 
Segundo Gaudencio, aka "Capitan"; Nicolas, aka "Mayor"; and 
Adolfo, aka "Alferez." The firm's staff also includes one of the 
sisters, Margarita, and the father himself, Gaudencio Cachique 
Sajami. 
  The family has two trusted confidants: Wildoro Vargas 
Fasanando and Claudio Fernandez. The latter, known by the alias 
"Kilo" or "Gordo Kilo," is responsible for collecting the money 
produced by drug sales in Lima. 
  The Cachique Rivera brothers have something of which no 
other 
firm can currently boast: the support and backing of the "Cali 
Cartel." 
  Abelardo Cachique has been the only Peruvian drug trafficker 
called upon by that cartel's "capos" to revise the strategy for 
transferring drugs from Peru to Colombia. 
  The brothers themselves are providing the Cali Cartel with 
information on the Peruvian firms' degree of reliability. 
Furthermore, it is the Cachique brothers' responsiblity to carry 
out any settlement of accounts decided by the Colombians. 
  Another exclusive role of this firm stipulated by the 
Colombian Mafia is the monopoly for installing cocaine 
hydrochloride processing laboratories in Peru. The Colombians 
provide the materials at low prices. 
  The Cali Cartel capos discovered to have relations 
with the Peruvian firms are Francisco Herrera, Fernando Estrefa, 
and the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers. 
  Known as a collaborator of the Cali Cartel in Peru is Edwin 
Vela, a resident of Aucayacu. Vela is coordinating the flights 
to Cali with an individual known as "El Hawaiano." 
  The Cali Cartel has recently put the following type of 
insurance for its consignments into effect: The Peruvian firms 
implicated must give the cartel in advance, as a guarantee, a 
shipment of 50 kg of pure cocaine basic paste. Any shortage 
found upon receipt of the shipment is deducted from that deposit. 
  Not only that, the supplier firm must send a personal 
representative to the cartel. That person must pay with his life 
if the firm should default. 
  It has been learned from a police source that, right now, 
the 
cartel has in captivity the representative of a firm that failed 
to send the total shipment within the time period promised. 
  Until last year, the Cachique Riveras's center of operations 
had been established in the Pozuzo-Oxapampa-Pasco zone. They 
acquired an extensive area in Yuya Pichis, near Pichis Palcazu. 
  As for the organization of the firm's henchmen, their 
mission 
was limited mainly to providing personal protection for the 
family clan, and to ensuring the security of the flights. 
  In January of this year, however, after "Vaticano's" arrest, 
Abelardo Cachique decided to purchase 30 FAL rifles and to 
increase the security force to 36 men. 
  In 1993, the firm had a network of five houses in Lima, 
worth 
$500,000 and located in upper class neighborhoods: two in the La 
Encantada and La Campina de Chorrillos urban complexes; two more 
in San Borja (Breton and Tiziano Streets); and a last one in El 
Sol de la Molina. 
  As the police have discovered, this year members of the firm 
have spent the night at a residence in the Miguel Grau de 
Salamanca urban complex (Chanchaque Street, block H, lot 17), in 
Lima. 
<H5>  Deceased Members </H5>
  Between 1990 and 1993, several drug trafficking associates 
of 
the Cachique Riveras met with strange deaths. Here are a few of 
them: those known by the aliases "Satanas" and "Peaje"; Juan 
Davila, aka "Clavo," who died in Lima; and "Negro Soto," a 
Colombian with whom Abelardo Cachique was running drugs from 
Saposoa to Aucayacu. 
  For two years, from 1990 to 1992, the firm had the Pampas 
Yurac-Aguaytia-Ucayali zone as a collection center. Two or three 
flights were taking off from there weekly, bound for Colombia. 
  During that same interval, the hideouts for washing the 
paste 
were located in Boca de Santa Ana, Aguaytia, and 
Carachama-Ucayali. A short time later, another was equipped in 
the Pozuzo River valley. 
  Both this year and last, the Cachique Riveras have been 
using 
Boca Manu and Madre de Dios as sites for shipping to Colombia 
via Brazil. They have had the authorized runway in Madre de Dios 
at their disposal. 
  During 1990, they were using km 19 of the Marginal Highway 
for this purpose. They put the Sacramento and Libertad sections 
of the Federico Basadre Highway to the same use. During 1992 and 
1993, the drugs were shipped to Colombia leaving from the Pozuzo 
River bend. 
  This year, they have been using clandestine airstrips 
constructed in La Union and Barranca, in the Biabo River valley. 
The drugs are run from there to the mouth of the Manu River, at 
which point they are shipped to Colombia. 
  Although it does not appear as a shareholder, the Cachique 
Rivera firm owns an aerotaxi company that runs drugs from 
Aucayacu, Palmapampa, Bellavista, and Pichis Palcazu, according 
to a DEA report. 
  It was said that, because of the police harassment, Abelardo 
Cachique Rivera had taken refuge in Colombia. However, reliable 
sources claim that he is currently traveling freely through San 
Francisco, Palmapampa, Atalaya, and Puerto Prado (on the edge of 
the Ayacucho jungle). 
  At exactly 1630 last Wednesday, 29 March, a small plane 
chartered as an air express carrier by Abelardo Cachique Rivera 
was intercepted by FAP [Peruvian Air Force] Tucano aircraft 
assigned to the 42nd Air Group based in Pucallpa. 
  While flying along the Ucayali River, the small plane, with 
registration OB-9066, belonging to TATSA (Tarapoto Air 
Transport), was forced to land at the Iquitos airport. Having 
arrived from Palmapampa and San Francisco, it was flying with 
Islandia, on the Ayaviri River (at the Brazilian border), as its 
destination. 
  No drugs were found on the plane, but the sum of $435,000 
was 
discovered. The police arrested the Colombian citizens Marcelino 
Lesmes, Jhon Hayru, Anibal Palomares, and Martha Garcia. Two of 
them were reported to be chemists from the Cachique Rivera firm. 
<H5>  "El Ministro" </H5>
  It is currently the number two firm. In this instance also, 
the type of firm organized on the basis of a family clan appears 
to have been implemented. The chief is Waldo Vargas Arias, alias 
"El Ministro." The second in command of the organization is his 
brother, as yet known only by the nickname "Samurai." 
  Vargas Arias began developing his business in 1988, from a 
hideout set up in the locality of Uchiza, opposite the "Gallos 
del Sol" shed. He later ran drugs from various sites in Huallaga 
(Paraiso, Progreso, Alto Manteca, and Puerto Pizana) to Bajo 
Huallaga (Chazuta, Pongo Isla, Huimbayoc, Yarina Pelejo, and 
Navarro), all areas with clandestine runways. 
  During 1993, he moved his center of operations to the 
locality of Lagunas, with an airstrip at his disposal. This 
year, he has been using those in Yarina and Pelejos; but he 
recently decided to take over the Bonilla and Yumbatos airfields 
in the near future. 
  According to the DEA, Waldo Vargas has at least one small 
plane from the Halcon, S.A., aerotaxi company at his disposal. 
The source even gives the aircraft's registration number: 
OB-1229, and the pilot's descriptive name, "Mucura." "El 
Ministro's" front men in this firm are said to be the brothers 
Miguel and Carlos Farro Perez. Carlos Farro's sister-in-law, 
Isolina Mansilla, is "El Ministro's" housemate. He was captured 
with her in Pongo Isla. 
  "Jilguero" is in charge of all security matters. His other 
nickname is "Martin." He is the military trainer of the 
henchmen, among whom "Pirulin" is notorious for his 
cold-bloodedness. 
  The police have managed to learn the specific names of 
several of the firm's collaborators: Edgardo Castillo, William 
Garzon, Jhon Gonzales, Jose Landazuri, and Ali Gonzales, of 
Colombian nationality. The Peruvians include: Jose Pena Saldana, 
Fernando Saldana Chavez, and Gonar Garcia Guerra. 
  "El Ministro" is a long-standing ally of the terrorist 
groups. At one time he was with the MRTA [Tupac Amaru 
Revolutionary Movement] members in Sauce; and, on another 
occasion, with the patrol groups in Huimbayoc and Navarro, in 
Bajo Huallaga. He is currently with the SL's [Shining Path 
members] in Lagunas. 
  "Samurai", "El Ministro's" brother, has just recruited 
subversives who have contributed weapons (FAL's and others). 
This heightened fire-power has enabled his group to subjugate 
other small firms. 
  Smaller firms collaborating with him are those of "Canario," 
"El Profe" in Pongo de Caynarachi, and "Ojitos" in Huimbayoc. 
  Some sources claim that he is operating with the Cali 
Cartel, 
specifically, with the Rodriguez Orejuela family. 
  Ten days ago, the police came close to capturing him near 
Yurimaguas. The areas in which he is known to be currently 
moving are Huimbayoc, Yarina, and Lagunas, where he is always 
followed by six heavily armed henchmen. 
<H5>  [Box, p 28] </H5>
<H5>  Members of `El Ministro's' Firm (descriptive names) </H5>
  Memo (Pirulin) Colombiano Miguel (David) Don Marcos 
(Nacional) Chicho (Negro Izula) Cone (Tony) Gatillo (Boquita) 
Lucho (Elastico) Chevas (Dangelo) Marcos (Juanito) Mascara 
(Lancero) Gato (Buho) Mariel Alto (Pizana) Canillita (Micki 
Martin) Pelbes (Frijolito) Gorgojo (Jazmin) Percy (Chino) 
Veintiuno (Sierrita) Lambayecano (Tiburon) Harry (Brea) Dios Mio 
(El Ciego) Ripio (Balde) 
<H5>  [Box, p 29] </H5>
<H5>  Members of the Cachique Brothers Firm </H5>
  Armando Rivera Tanga Isminia Espinoza Ascensia Gladys 
Escalante Aguilar Maximo Ricardo Santos Ponce Alex Ruiz Toledo 
Maria Sanchez Rios Adrian Condor Meza Cesar Coronel Chavez 
Victor Castillo P. Miguel Angel Santos Ponce, among others 

