Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Beijing Central Television Program One 
Network in Mandarin at 0805 GMT on 22 December broadcasts the 
11th in a series of 13 lectures on "Deng Xiaoping's Theory of 
Building Socialism With Chinese Characteristics." An editorial 
report describing the content of the 10th lecture in the series 
was published in the Political &amp; Social section of the 23 
December Chian DAILY REPORT, page 18. 
  The 11th lecture, which lasts for 25 minutes, is entitled: 
"The Four Cardinal Principles Are a Political Guarantee for 
Modernization Construction, Reform, and Opening Up," and is 
given by Professor Cai Changshui (5591 7022 3055), executive 
deputy head of the Theoretical Department of the Central Party 
School. 
  Cai begins the lecture by explaining the need to adhere to 
the four cardinal principles -- namely, the socialist road, the 
people's democratic dictatorship, leadership of the Communist 
Party, and Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought. Then, he goes 
on to elaborate the vital bearing of these principles on the 
unification of the nation, the prosperity of the country, and 
the victory of socialism in China. He stresses these 
principles, which were put forward by Deng after the Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee and which form 
the main component of the party's basic line, as the cornerstone 
of the nation and the prerequisite for building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. 
  Discussing the great importance of these principles for the 
smooth progress of China's reform and opening up, Cai maintains: 
All reform and opening up policies are formed on the basis of 
these principles, which are the major criteria for judging 
whether a policy measure is correct or not. These principles, 
which guarantee the socialist orientation of all reform and 
opening up measures, must be formulated and implemented under 
the guidance of Marxism- Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought and Deng's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, and 
under the leadership of the Communist Party. Moreover, the 
implementation of principles and policies must be guaranteed by 
the powerful weapon of the people's democratic dictatorship. 
  Emphasizing the connotation of these principles in the new 
era of establishing a socialist market economic structure, Cai 
explains how these principles can guide the emancipation and 
development of productive forces, in the implementation of a 
diversified ownership system with public ownership as the 
mainstay and new distribution system of allowing some people to 
become well off before common prosperity is achieved; in the 
construction of the legal system and institution of multi-party 
consultation system led by the CPC; in the strengthening and 
improvement of the CPC's leadership; and in the analysis and 
solution of new problems by integrating Marxism- Leninism-Mao 
Zedong Thought with realities in China. The lecture ends at 
0830 GMT. 

