CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Let Us Be Consistent With the Language of These </F>
Parliaments"] 
  [Text] Some 80,000 meetings were held, each averaging four 
hours of debate. Speeches numbered in the hundreds of thousands. 
They were a veritable hurricane of ideas, these parliaments held 
at our work centers. 
  The major result of these exemplary discussions, at which 
each and every individual could and did express his opinions on 
crucial issues ranges far beyond any exercise in participatory 
democracy in the fullest sense of the term and far beyond any 
economic measures that might result from them. It is, first and 
foremost, the expression of an ideology vital to Cuban workers, 
the demonstration of a political culture and lifestyle that 
withstands the test of difficult times. 
  Every assembly was a frank diagnosis of an extremely complex 
economic situation. Workers engaged in an unblinking dissection 
of their working and social life at the present time, finding 
scant reason for rejoicing or celebration. 
  Transcending the most obvious causes associated with the 
collapse of the European socialist model and the intensification 
of the Yankee blockade, the most striking fact to emerge was 
that our work centers are frequently hampered by a lack of 
discipline and organization. Little use is made of the 
communities' power to control and manage. What one sees instead 
is a laid-back, accommodating, conservative, bureaucratic style, 
rather than a much-needed initiative and fighting spirit that 
seem to be caught up in a web of obsolete procedures, styles, 
methods, and mechanisms. 
  There is among the workers a great expectation of 
transformation, a visible perception that we must update and 
reform our model of productive and economic organization in 
order to remedy old errors and adapt the country to a situation 
far different from the one we enjoyed until only recently. It 
must be noted, however, that Cuban workers were speaking about 
transformations without ever waving the white flag of surrender. 
When the word "transformation" is used, the question is how to 
perfect socialism, how to make it strong enough to protect it 
from defeat. 
  There was no talk of capitalism, private property, or the 
market economy at the assemblies. Criticisms of errors and 
complaints about shortcomings were never made for the purpose of 
identifying ineffectiveness with socialism because the workers 
understand that shoddiness, bureaucracy, idleness, lack of 
economic control and discipline, administrative incompetence, 
and inadequate work incentives are unrelated to socialism unless 
an attempt is being made to deny, immobilize, and destroy it. 
  The essential humanism and equality characterizing the 
Revolution were nobly defended. No one objected to the universal 
right to education and health. The vice of excessive 
egalitarianism was condemned, however, i.e., distributing all 
that is produced and even that which is not produced, failing to 
note that some contribute more than others and that some 
contribute nothing at all! In just a few weeks of national 
debate and with the wind at our backs (provided by the clear and 
sincere language used to analyze the situation), the 
"parliaments" at the work centers greatly reinforced our 
awareness that we must become, once and for all, a nation of 
tenacious producers, leaving behind the shadow of dissatisfied 
consumers that we cast, even during the years preceding the 
special period. 
  Indeed, in order not to espouse mendacity, we must admit 
that 
Cuban society has throughout its history gradually created in 
many population groups a mentality of dissatisfied "takers," 
ever willing to demand things of society, paying little heed to 
what was given in exchange, serving it far less than we should 
have, and abusing the right to make demands upon it. 
  Without becoming discouraged, ever generous and firm, marked 
by a serenity that rules out hasty solutions just as it does 
inert, passive resistance, the Cuban workers used the 
parliaments to strengthen their will for victory. 
  Furthermore, backed by the might of many, the birth of a new 
language and a new economic mentality struggling to be expressed 
and demanding consistent action were evident. 
  For the workers' movement, the first requirement is the 
practical promotion of solutions suggested everywhere. We must 
cultivate and promote the trust which the workers have placed in 
the belief that it is they who own the economy and rule the 
country. 
  It is obvious that from here on in, this battle for the 
economy is destined to become a struggle against old ways of 
thinking and habits--held by the workers and management--that 
tend to hinder efficiency and stand in the way of using 
resources properly, something our workers can and want to do and 
of which they are capable. 
  We therefore understand that it is the prime duty of trade 
union leaders to go back over and over to the centers where they 
held the parliaments, to return there continually so that, 
joining with rank-and-file organizations, they can confront 
problems, help search for solutions, and boldly and courageously 
see what was done wrong. This is the wish of all blue-and 
white-collar workers and intellectuals, whether they toil in 
services or productive tasks, the wish of an entire nation 
saying once again that it seeks no other alternative than the 
Revolution and that, in this time of danger and sacrifice, 
transcending all difficulties, it continues to cast its vote for 
socialism. 

