Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A.Ye. Denisov, N.P. Moiseyenko, V.A. Nuzhdin, </F>
M.M. Chernyshov, N.K. Shishkin and V.G. Yakovlev under the 
rubric "Combined-Arms Battle": "Combat Operations of Ground 
Troops Subunits"] 
  [Text] "The Tank Battalion in Battle," "The 
Motorized-Rifle (Tank) Battalion in Battle," "The 
Motorized-Rifle (Tank) Company in Battle," "Movement and the 
Meeting Engagement," "The Fundamentals of Command and Control in 
Battle," "The Commander's Battle Map," "Field Proficiency," 
"Tactical Exercises..." 
  Many commanders of subunits and units remember these 
and other textbooks and reference works published in prior 
years. Intended for officers of the Ground Troops, they have 
made an inestimable contribution to their professional training 
and to the process of improving methodological mastery. 
  But time does not stand still. Military doctrine and, 
naturally, views on the organizational development of the Armed 
Forces of the Russian Federation, the preparation of the Army 
and Navy to repel aggression and methods of warfare have 
changed. Our doctrine has now gained a clearly pronounced 
defensive thrust. Reform of the Armed Forces is underway, and as 
a consequence the standard structures and regulation provisions 
on the organization and waging of battle are being clarified and 
the capabilities of the troops are changing. 
  This has made it necessary to review the programs of 
training, and make adjustments in the educational process and, 
first and foremost, the training of the officer corps. 
Meanwhile, as can be seen from your letters, dear readers, a 
scarcity of the corresponding literature is being felt in the 
units and subunits. 
  The Commander-in-Chief of the Ground Troops, foreseeing 
the development of events, has in a timely manner pointed the 
scientific-research institutions, the main and central 
directorates of the Armed Forces Main Command and the leading 
military higher-educational institutions toward eliminating this 
information vacuum. 
  Taking the urgency of the problem into account, 
VOYENNYY VESTNIK has taken an active part in this important 
work. We are planning to publish this year in the pages of the 
journal the most important and fundamental provisions of 
contemporary combined-arms battle.[.sup]1[/] The discussion 
will concern defense by subunits in the next few issues. The 
operations of the battalion, company, platoon and squad (tank), 
defense in the woods, in the city, in northern regions, at water 
crossings... You will find out about all of this from our 
features. Follow the journal. Try to make use of the advice of 
experienced military specialists in practice. 
<H5>  I. Defense </H5>
<H3>  1.1. The Aim and Conditions for Going Over to the Defensive 
and the Requirements for It </H3>
  The aim of defense is to repel an attack by superior enemy 
forces, inflict maximum losses on him, hold important areas or 
objectives and create favorable conditions for going over to the 
offensive. It is achieved by firepower against the enemy by all 
weapons on the approaches to the forward area; the repelling of 
the attack of his tanks and infantry and the stubborn retention 
of the positions, strongpoints and defensive areas occupied; and 
the timely shifting of fire and the utilization of terrain 
features, local objects, water obstacles and populated areas. 
  The defending side possesses a series of advantages over an 
attacking enemy: The occupation of advantageous positions and 
lines, in most cases ahead of time, the careful engineer 
preparation of the positions and their camouflaging. All of this 
makes it possible to make the fullest possible use of the 
capabilities of firepower and the protective features of the 
terrain, and to prepare for maneuver carefully. The 
effectiveness of nuclear strikes and the efficacy of enemy use 
of high-precision weaponry (VTO) are reduced by roughly two 
thirds, according to calculation, simply by digging in. 
Moreover, defenders make widespread use of mines, explosives and 
other impediments and set up obstacles. 
  Defense can be static or mobile, depending on the combat 
mission, composition of forces and weaponry, and the nature of 
the terrain. Static defense is considered to be the principal 
type. It is conducted by means of inflicting the greatest losses 
on the enemy in the course of holding prepared areas, and is 
employed in places where the loss of territory is impermissible. 
  Mobile defense is organized to inflict losses on the enemy, 
win time and preserve one's own forces. It is waged via 
successive defensive battles at layered lines that are planned 
in advance, in combination with brief counterattacks, and 
permits the abandonment of some portion of terrain. 
  A battalion takes part in the mobile defense of a brigade or 
regiment in certain cases, or conducts it independently when 
assigned to operations in the forward defensive area. In mobile 
defense the battalion, interacting with other subunits, forces 
the other side to advance in a direction in which a solid static 
defense has been organized, or facilitates drawing the enemy 
into areas where favorable conditions may be created for 
counterattacks, the delivery of fire and his defeat. 
  Defense is conducted intentionally when more active and 
decisive operations are not expedient, as well as when forced as 
a consequence of a resultant unfavorable situation. It may be 
prepared in advance before the start of combat operations--which 
is particularly typical of the initial period of a war--or 
organized during the course of battle. The conditions for going 
over to the defensive, include the presence or absence of 
contact with the enemy, the nature of his pressure, the 
condition and logistical status of subunits, time reserves, the 
time of year and day and the state of the weather. 
  In the absence of contact with the enemy, subunits may go 
over to the defensive during a period of threat as part of 
troops covering a border line (to support bringing up and 
deploying defensive forces), as well as be part of the main 
forces to engage in defense at the principal defensive lines in 
depth.[.sup]2[/] 
  Subunits furthermore go over to the defensive in sectors 
where the main forces will be coming up, deploying and going 
over to the offensive, as well as where an offensive is not 
envisaged for some reason, but offensive actions by the enemy 
are possible, or along maritime coastlines and on islands in 
operations as part of second echelons or reserves. 
  Subunits go over to the defensive in immediate contact with 
the enemy as part of covering forces or forces repelling his 
incursion at main or other advantageous defensive lines, in the 
repelling of counterattacks during an offensive, to consolidate 
lines taken, cover flanks or in an unfavorable outcome to a 
meeting engagement. 
  The defense is organized in such cases during the course of 
battle, and the subunits are subject to active enemy firepower. 
They will frequently have to repel his attacks as well. The 
preparation of emplacements and trenches at the forward edge 
using special engineer equipment is thus exceedingly 
problematical. Time to prepare the defense will moreover by very 
limited, and all issues will have to be resolved in a short 
time. Difficulties also arise in the creation of fire patterns, 
the organization of coordination, the placement of obstacles and 
the assurance of concealment, since the positions being prepared 
are under surveillance by the opposing side. 
  What are the decisive factors in the successful arrangement 
of defense? They are, first and foremost, the speed with which 
the commanders make the decision to go over to defense, and the 
selection of the methods of organizing it with a regard for the 
specific features of the concrete situation taking shape. The 
taking of immediate steps to counter enemy reconnaissance, and 
his attempts to subject them to fire and go over to the attack. 
The maintenance of continuous command and control, and timely 
reaction to changes in the situation. 
  It is particularly important to organize surveillance 
quickly, allocate alert-status firepower, camouflage vehicles 
and engineer structures, dig emplacements and put in minefields 
in concealed fashion. Advantageous sectors of terrain, its 
contours and natural obstacles--rows of hills, rivers, streams, 
canals, ravines, populated areas and embankments, among 
others--should also be utilized a widely as possible. 
  The contemporary defensive battle is typified by exceptional 
intensity, brought about by the determined nature of the aims of 
the opposing sides. An attacking enemy will constantly strive to 
augment his efforts to win success by bringing additional forces 
into battle and outflanking the defenders in order to attack 
them from the flanks and the rear. 
  Defense has become a highly dynamic type of battle as a 
consequence of the equipping of troops with vehicles and 
powerful weaponry. Rapid changes in the positions of the sides 
and the overall situation are entirely likely even when waging a 
static defense, not to mention a mobile one. The changes could 
moreover sometimes arise unexpectedly, especially at night, in 
rain or fog, in heavy snowfall and the like. 
  The involvement of various types of armored vehicles and 
helicopters on both sides is typical of modern combined-arms 
battle. The attackers will have primarily tanks interacting with 
motorized infantry, ground-attack aviation and helicopters as 
the basis of the strike forces. The helicopters, aside from 
supporting tanks, are able to drop airborne assaults and 
air-mobile forces in the rear of the defenders. This 
circumstance makes it essential to devote attention not only to 
repelling attacks from the front, but from the flanks and rear 
as well. The likelihood of the appearance of commando groups and 
the placement of reconnaissance and signaling gear in the depth 
of the defense should also not be ruled out. Camouflage and 
security, that is to say, cannot be neglected. 
  Contemporary defense combines the stubborn holding of 
important, key strongpoints by one portion of the forces and 
flexible maneuver by the other portion in order to create a 
reliable, all-round defense, especially when the threat of 
encirclement exists. The long range and recently increased 
accuracy of firepower have required the dispersion of battle 
formations. The problem of reliable coverage, by fire by and 
maneuver, of the increased intervals between neighboring 
positions, as well as the performance of maneuvers in the event 
of the threat of a breakthrough by the enemy between them, has 
consequently become more acute. 
  The widespread application of high-precision weaponry has 
become typical in an offensive, and the subunits could 
consequently suffer considerable losses. VTO is able to strike 
reliably not only visually observable targets (that is, those 
located on the line of combat contact of the sides), but also to 
destroy targets located in depth in the defense with no less 
effectiveness. Whence the increased requirements for the 
protection of troops and the stability of command and control. 
The task of maintaining communications has become more 
difficult, since wire lines could be disabled in the first 
minutes of battle, with radio communications suppressed by 
jamming. The creation of redundant channels, the provision for 
switching to other frequencies and the use of signals and mobile 
means have all gained particular urgency at the 
battalion--company--platoon levels. 
  Defense should be stable and active due to the equipping of 
foreign armies with highly effective vehicles and armaments, and 
be able to counter strikes by all types of weaponry, attacks by 
tanks and infantry and combat enemy airborne assaults and 
air-mobile and commando groups. It should be antitank, anti-air 
and anti-assault, echeloned in depth and ready for prolonged 
battle under conditions of the use of all types of weaponry, VTO 
and means of electronic warfare. The subunits are obligated to 
defend stubbornly the positions they occupy, even outside of 
tactical communications with their neighbors, as well as when 
encircled. They do not have the right to leave them and retreat 
without an order from the senior commander. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UMA-010C-67A>           Disposition of Battalion </FIG>





    Stability and vigor in defense are achieved through the 
endurance, steadfastness and stubbornness of the troops and 
their high moral spirit; continuous reconnaissance, the timely 
uncovering of enemy preparations for an offensive and the 
possible sectors for attacks; the careful camouflaging of the 
battle formation of the subunits and the confusing of the enemy 
pertaining to the arrangement of the defense, and operational 
intentions through their artful and varied arrangement. 
  These requirements are also met by the skilled use of 
advantageous conditions of the terrain and its engineer 
preparation, the careful organization of firing patterns 
(especially antitank in combination with systems of engineer 
obstacles, strongpoints and firing positions) and the creation 
of solid air defense. 
  The successful resolution of these tasks depends as well on 
the timely maneuvering of the subunits, firepower and fire to 
threatened sectors, and on the immediate destruction of an enemy 
that has penetrated along with his airborne assaults. Especially 
great significance is assigned to the use of unexpected tactics 
able to stun the enemy, put him in a difficult position and 
force one's own will and initiative onto him. 
  As for counterattacks, the experience of warfare shows that 
they are quite effective if they are carried out unexpectedly. 
They are expedient at the battalion level, meanwhile, only in 
conjunction with counterattacks carried out according to the 
plan of the senior commander. An independent decision to carry 
out a counterattack by a battalion commander is justified only 
if inconsiderable enemy forces have penetrated into the defense, 
and it is made with the permission of the brigade or regimental 
commander. 
<H5>  1.2. The Place and Role of Subunits in Defense </H5>
  The place of motorized-rifle and tank subunits in the 
defense 
is understood to mean their position in the order of battle of 
the troops. They engage in defense in the first or second 
echelon of the units (subunits), in the sector of concentration 
of their principal efforts or in another sector, comprising 
combined-arms and anti-assault reserves. 
  The battalion may defend in the forward defensive area by 
operating as a forward detachment, and in the creation of a 
forward position could receive the mission of defending it. 
Motorized-rifle and tank subunits are also involved in 
operations as armored groups and fire ambushes. The battalion 
may be designated as the rear guard in a disengagement and 
retreat from the battlefield, and the company as a rear or flank 
march security force to cover the main forces. 
  The first-echelon battalion of a brigade or regiment 
prepares 
and takes up the defensive in the first position in readiness to 
repel an attack in front of the forward edge or if it 
penetrates, as well as to hold an important area and create 
conditions for the defeat of the enemy. 
  The second-echelon battalion defends in the second position, 
as a rule in an important sector in readiness for the solid 
holding of the area occupied, for the reinforcement or 
replacement of subunits in the first echelon in the event they 
lose their fighting ability, and for the execution of 
counterattacks and the destruction of airborne assaults and 
air-mobile groups. 
  A tank battalion and motorized-rifle battalion in the second 
echelon in infantry fighting vehicles prepare one or two firing 
lines to repel enemy tanks and motorized-infantry by firing in 
place. The tank battalion of a motorized-rifle brigade or 
regiment is usually used to reinforce the motorized-rifle 
battalions, or is in the second echelon. The motorized-rifle 
battalion of a tank brigade or regiment is intended chiefly for 
the reinforcement of the tank battalions. It can also operate 
independently, taking up defense in the first position or in the 
forward defensive area (in a forward position). 
  A motorized-rifle or tank battalion allotted to the forward 
defensive area is given the task of restraining an attack by 
superior enemy forces, forcing him to deploy prematurely and 
attack in an unfavorable direction, inflict losses on him and 
gain time for the preparation of the defense. Subunits defending 
a forward position are given the task of confusing the enemy 
relative to the outlines of the forward edge of the defense, not 
permitting him to make a surprise attack on the subunits in the 
first echelon, repelling reconnaissance in force and forcing the 
premature deployment of the main forces. 
  The combined-arms reserve takes up the position indicated, 
conducts reconnaissance of airborne enemy forces, sets up 
anti-assault obstacles, and prepares fire ambushes in readiness 
to destroy airborne assaults in areas of possible landings and 
in likely sectors of their operations. 
  The first-echelon company of the battalion defends a 
strongpoint at the first and second trenches, fires on the enemy 
using all means and does not permit the breach of the forward 
line. The second-echelon company defends a strongpoint at the 
third (or fourth) trench, does not permit a breach of the first 
position and, when conditions are favorable, destroys attacking 
subunits that have penetrated the first and second trenches by 
counterattacks. The tank company (or motorized-rifle company in 
IFVs) moreover prepares one or two firing lines that could 
coincide with the lines of deployment for counterattack. 
  A motorized-rifle or tank platoon, as a rule, defends as 
part 
of a company. It may be positioned in the first or second 
echelon, at the center or on one of the flanks of its battle 
formation; in the concentration sector of the main forces or in 
another sector; it may be in battalion reserve, be assigned to 
combat security, an armored group, a combat reconnaissance 
patrol or a fire ambush. In retreat it may operate as rear or 
flank march security forces, and in disengagements as part of 
covering subunits and in screening forces. 
  The squad or tank defends as part of the platoon, as a rule. 
A tank, IFV or APC (the latter two without assault forces) may 
be assigned to operations as part of an armored group. With 
assault forces they can be part of fire ambushes. The tank or 
IFV may also be assigned as alert-status weapons, an 
alert-status vehicle or roving firepower. The squad or tank 
occupies a position (firing position) at the center or on one of 
the flanks of the platoon strongpoint. One squad takes up a 
position in depth 100-200 meters behind the trenches for the 
purpose of steadying the defense at the strongpoint of the 
motorized-rifle platoon defending in the most likely sector of 
enemy attack. 
  Subunits from other branches of the troops are attached to 
the motorized-rifle and tank subunits. A tank (motorized-rifle) 
company, artillery battalion or battery, subunit of antitank 
weapons, air-defense or engineer (up to a combat-engineer 
platoon) subunits, and sometimes a flamethrower platoon or 
company, may thus be attached to a motorized-rifle or tank 
battalion carrying out defense in the first echelon in the 
sector of concentration of the main efforts of the brigade or 
regiment. 
  A motorized-rifle company is reinforced with a mortar 
(artillery) battery, tank, antitank and grenade-launcher 
platoons, and combat-engineer and flamethrower squads. The tank 
company may receive an artillery battery, a motorized-rile 
platoon and a combat-engineer squad. A battalion or company in 
defense may also be supported by the fire of an artillery 
battalion or battery. 
  A motorized-rifle platoon may be reinforced with a 
grenade-launcher, antitank, flamethrower, air-defense and, 
sometimes, combat-engineer squads, chemical-warfare and 
reconnaissance troops and a tank. A tank platoon may receive a 
motorized-rifle squad. 
  The attached manpower and equipment usually take up a 
position in the battle formation where they are able to realize 
their combat capabilities with the greatest effectiveness, 
without disrupting the disposition of the principal subunit. 
  If the composition of a motorized-rifle battalion includes 
grenade-launcher and antitank subunits, they usually remain 
subordinate to the commander, operating in their full complement 
in support of the first echelon. An antitank platoon is used in 
a tank-hazardous section therein, to repel attacks by tanks and 
other armored vehicles, as well as to cover an open flank during 
counterattacks. It may be attached to companies in the first 
echelon on closed or rugged terrain. 
  The role of motorized-rifle and tank subunits in defense is 
determined by the combat mission and the place they occupy in 
the battle formation of the defending troops. Motorized-rifle or 
tank subunits, interacting with each other, with subunits of 
artillery and other branches of the troops and special troops, 
perform their principal mission for the immediate destruction of 
the enemy in close-range battle. The leading role in achieving 
victory belongs to them. 
  Motorized-rifle subunits, possessing a great deal of combat 
independence and universality, are able to perform the task of 
holding the areas, lines and positions they occupy, repel 
attacks by advancing troops and defeat them on various types of 
terrain and in any weather. Tank subunits, possessing great 
resistance to the destructive effects of nuclear and other types 
of weapons, create a reliable defense in the shortest possible 
time. They strengthen its vigor, and are able to counterattack 
effectively and destroy forces that have penetrated. 
  The role of motorized-rifle and tank subunits, at the same 
time, can be an equivocal one depending on their place in the 
battle formation. The subunits in the first echelon, defending 
in the sector of concentration of the main forces, are 
performing the most difficult tasks, since the stability of the 
defense as a whole depends on them. They fight the main enemy 
forces, repel their attacks and hold the sectors of terrain on 
which the outcome of the battle frequently depends. Subunits 
defending in another sector actually perform an auxiliary role. 
They keep the enemy in a constant state of tension, and 
undermine his maneuvers by means of their own vigorous actions. 
  The role of subunits can change in the course of various 
stages of the battle. The brunt of repelling an enemy attack, as 
has already been mentioned, falls to the lot of the first 
echelon. But if he penetrates into the defense and reaches 
positions in depth (to the second or third trenches in the first 
position or to the second position, for example), the outcome of 
the battle defends on the actions of the second echelon. The 
forces and weapons brought in to make counterattacks play the 
decisive role in carrying them out. The significance of the 
stubborn holding of the positions occupied by the subunits of 
the first echelon in the counterattack sector, however, is not 
reduced therein. 
  (To be continued) 
Footnote 
  1. Going over to defense by subunits at these lines during a 
period of threat is preceded by their advance preparation. The 
engineer preparation of the positions, and not only the 
organization of defense, are carried out in peacetime wherever 
possible (on proving grounds, areas where land is taken etc.). 

