CSO 

    [Editorial Report] Prime Minister Cavaco Silva's activities 
and policies have been the subject of commentaries in the 
Portuguese press. 
<H5>  Visit to China, Repercussions for East Timor </H5>
  Writing in the 18 April Lisbon daily DIARIO DE NOTICIAS, 
political analyst Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa characterizes Cavaco 
Silva's recent visit to China as his "return to `realpolitik.'" 
Cavaco Silva went farther than other European leaders in 
deemphasizing the issue of human rights, saying that on this 
issue there is only a "difference in emphasis" between China and 
Portugal. Rebelo de Sousa notes that in a recent speech, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Durao Barroso defined national 
interest as the main criterion for Portuguese foreign policy. 
The prime minister's statements during his China visit suggest 
that the government has already chosen its policy on East Timor, 
Rebelo de Sousa writes. If "realpolitik" is considered more 
important than human rights in China, the same ought to apply to 
Indonesia. The problem of East Timor is thus reduced to 
realpolitik that takes into account Indonesia's importance, the 
international context, and Portugal's real influence in the 
area. This might lead the Indonesian Government to accept 
regional autonomy for East Timor and the Portuguese Government 
to agree to it as a basis for discussion "without losing face in 
the long term." If this is in fact Portuguese policy, the 
government should make it clear so that no illusions are 
cherished about Portugal's role in the East Timor issue, Rebelo 
de Sousa concludes. 
<H5>  "Cavacoism" Criticized </H5>
  In an article in the 14 April Lisbon weekly VISAO, former 
Social Democratic Party (PSD) deputy and now PSD critic Helena 
Roseta accuses Cavaco Silva of arrogance and secrecy in 
government decisions. In presuming he is "infallible," the prime 
minister "disdainfully ignores the vertiginous changes taking 
place in the world" and expects from the people "obedience, 
discipline, faith, and gratitude." "Cavacoism" persists in a 
"simplistic" and "authoritarian" approach to an increasingly 
complex and uncertain world. The role of "national savior" that 
Cavaco Silva has arrogated to himself is incompatible with a 
modern vision of society, Roseta notes. His "patriotic and 
moralistic fundamentalism" is a genuine "disease of power," a 
virus that the country should urgently shake off, she concludes. 
<H5>  No Cavaco Silva Presidency Seen </H5>
  According to Jose Antonio Saraiva's "Politics 
Portuguese-Style" column in the 9 April Lisbon weekly EXPRESSO, 
Cavaco Silva will not be a presidential candidate at the end of 
President Mario Soares's current term. Cavaco Silva would like 
to be seen in history as the prime minister who ensured 
political stability, economic recovery, and Portugal's 
integration into Europe, Saraiva writes. He would thus be 
reluctant to give up leadership of the government at a time of 
crisis, when the European Union is undergoing what is perhaps 
its "most turbulent" phase. Having excluded himself from the 
race, Cavaco Silva would like to support the candidacy of 
Socialist Party luminary and Lisbon Mayor Jorge Sampaio, Saraiva 
contends. This would allow him to maintain "a certain tension" 
in the relations between the prime ministership and the 
presidency, a prospect that is not "displeasing" to him, as a 
"subservient" PSD president would not be in his interest. 
According to Saraiva, however, Sampaio could not attract the 
support of the PSD, a party already divided by the opposition of 
some members who reject any departure from social democratic 
ideals. The same problem would apply to another candidate, 
former President Ramalho Eanes, Saraiva contends. Other 
potential candidates mentioned by Saraiva are Minister of 
Defense Fernando Nogueira, a "logical choice for the Cavacoist 
apparatus," Francisco Pinto Balsemao, a PSD party founder, Joao 
de Deus Pinheiro, a former minister, and General Vasco Rocha 
Vieira, who is now governor of Macao. 

