Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 21, BNS -- The leader of Estonia's 
opposition Coalition Party denied reports that the party had 
suggested to begin coalition talks with the governing Pro 
Patria, and added that a respective proposal had come from Pro 
Patria. 
  Coalition Party leader Tiit Vahi termed the noise created 
around possible cooperation between his party and the senior 
party in the governing coalition, the Pro Patria, as "hysteric" 
fuss. Those in Pro Patria, like (Prime Minister) Mart Laar, 
(Economics Minister) Toivo Jurgenson and MP Jaanus Betlem who 
are most actively opposed to possible cooperation apparently 
thought that if the other half of Pro Patria will reach an 
agreement with the Coalition Party, they will be left outside, 
Vahi said in an interview with BNS. 
  Vahi also dismissed as untrue the accusations that his party 
was dominated by former leaders of Communist state industries 
and collective farms. He said several members of the Coalition 
Party leadership, such as deputy head of the parliament's 
defense commission, Peeter Lorents, Tallinn Town Mayor Jaak 
Tamm, Ambassador Riivo Sinijarv and academy member Endel Lippmaa 
had never been members of the Communist party. Vahi said he 
himself had joined the Communist party in his time only to 
retain his post as chief engineer in a state company. 
  The Coalition Party leader also hit back at the accusers, 
saying things were not better with Pro Patria itself. He said 
the ruling party had promoted many enough former Communist youth 
organization activists and former Communist officials who are 
now sitting in the same offices that they occupied a few years 
ago when the central Tallinn house now used by a number of state 
institutions was still the Communist Party headquarters. 
  But Vahi also stated he will continue talks with politicians 
from Pro Patria who are concerned about what he called Estonia's 
bad standing in the fields of foreign, interior, defense and 
social policy. He said his party's cooperation with Pro Patria 
would be something that is absolutely normal. 
  Vahi's remarks came after a series of statements and 
eventual 
accusations in connection with possible changes in the 
coalitions scheme in view of next year's elections. 
  The Pro Patria board on March 14 issued a statement saying 
the party estimated the wish of the Social Democrats, the Rural 
Centrist Party, the Coalition Party and other political parties 
to cooperate with Pro Patria. 
  The deputy leader of Pro Patria's faction in the parliament, 
Karin Jaani, on March 15 told BNS cooperation between Pro Patria 
and the Coalition Party was not topical. She said Pro Patria 
was ready to hold talks with all political forces if necessary, 
but added that the party was having no intention to start 
coalition talks with the Coalition Party in the near future. 
  Prime Minister Mart Laar, also the chairman of Pro Patria, 
said implementation of the policy of the Coalition Party would 
bring about a sharp rise in taxes and end the radical economic 
reform. "It is difficult for Pro Patria to find things in common 
with 'red' directors and former collective farm leaders," Laar 
said. 

