BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Son Ki-yong] </F>
  [Text] With the United States and the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) welcoming North Korea's new overture, South 
Korea reacted cautiously, apparently concerned that the last 
chance to clear up suspicion over the North Korean nuclear 
program might be lost due to Pyongyang's still ambiguous 
commitment to nuclear transparency. 
  "The government's official position on the new development 
will be set tomorrow (June 18) after Carter briefs President Kim 
Yong-sam on the outcome of his trip to North Korea," a spokesman 
told reporters following an early morning session of the 
Coordination Committee for Unification and Security Policies. 
  North Korean leader Kim Il-song hinted at the possibility of 
the North committing to its nuclear transparency during talks 
with former U.S. President Jimmy Carter and U.S. President Bill 
Clinton expressed willingness to resume dialogue with Pyongyang 
if it freezes its nuclear program. 
  Seoul's nuclear policymakers appear to be perplexed over 
Pyongyang's sudden overture and Washington's positive reaction 
and initially took a wait-and-see approach to the new 
development. 
  So far, South Korea has ruled out any dialogue with North 
Korea unless Pyongyang first takes constructive action leading 
to the clarification of all suspicion of its nuclear weapons 
program. 
  Shifting into a hardline stance with threats of sanctions, 
the Seoul government wanted North Korea's complete compliance 
with the international community's call for nuclear transparency. 
  Even though it would contribute to reducing tension on the 
Korean peninsula, the resumption of dialogue, which comes 
without a firm North Korean commitment, will only prolong the 
current nuclear impasse, officials have said. 
  "We will watch developments. We will hold further 
consultations with the United States after receiving Carter's 
briefing on the outcome of his visit to the North," Foreign 
Ministry spokesman Chang Ki-ho said. 
  "We are not in the process of resuming dialogue with the 
North. We are still pushing ahead with a plan to seek U.N. 
sanctions against North Korea," he added. 
  Chang said that the government will push the two-pronged 
strategy combining sanctions with dialogue for the time being. 
  The spokesman revealed that Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu 
had 
telephone conversations with U.S. Security of State Warren 
Christopher three times early yesterday morning, turning up [as 
published] the wording of a statement issued by U.S. Assistant 
Security of State Robert Gallucci. 
  "Through the telephone talks, the government's position was 
included in the statement," he added. 
  The statement said that the United States is ready to engage 
in a third round of high-level U.S.-North Korea talks under 
proper circumstances. 
  However, he refused to comment on the timing of a third 
round 
of talks, saying that "the statement reaffirms the basic 
positions for a third round of talks by South Korea and the 
United States." 
  In May, the United States tried to resume the high-level 
talks because North Korea agreed to additional inspections of 
its nuclear facilities. But the North's replacement of spent 
fuel rods at a five-megawatt reactor without international 
monitoring raises tension and the United States declared that 
the basis for dialogue had crumbled. 
  When asked about what would be a new basis for the 
high-level 
talks, Assistant Foreign Minister Choe Tong-chin said that there 
should be "arrangements for special inspections" before the 
high-level talks are held. 
  After the replacement of fuel rods which virtually crushed 
the possibility of tracing the exact amount of plutonium 
possessed by Pyongyang, South Korea and the United States have 
demanded that North Korea accept special inspections and 
voluntarily disclose its nuclear-related activities. 
  Meanwhile, Nuclear Ambassador Kim Sam-hun said that it is 
noteworthy that North Korea indicated its intention of accepting 
special inspections at its two undeclared nuclear sites for the 
first time. 
  North Korea has so far refused to accept inspections at the 
two facilities, believed to be nuclear waste storage, claiming 
that they are "military facilities." 

