Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jose Bastos Moreno] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia -- Deputy Luiz Henrique, president of the 
PMDB [Brazilian Democratic Movement Party], has started a debate 
on an alternative presidential candidacy to that of PT [Workers 
Party] leader Luis Inacio Lula da Silva. He has already talked 
with Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso (PSDB) 
[Brazilian Social Democracy Party], and has arranged meetings 
with Sao Paulo Governor Luiz Antonio Fleury Filho (PMDB), Rio de 
Janeiro Governor Leonel Brizola (PDT) [Democratic Labor Party], 
and former Sao Paulo Governor Orestes Quercia (PMDB). Luiz 
Henrique is formulating a proposal for an alliance of the PMDB, 
PSDB, PDT, and PTB for the successor to Itamar Franco, based on 
suggestions made by the presidents of regional party branches 
and by government leader Pedro Simon. 
  "We must find a name with popularity on the streets," Luiz 
Henrique said. 
  MDB Deputy for Rio Grande do Sul Antonio Britto, who will 
run 
for governor in his state, said he is striving for the alliance, 
because he believes that "the alliance will have to be made, 
either today as a gesture of greatness, or tomorrow from 
necessity." 
  "May God permit that the alliance be made through 
greatness." 
  Recife Mayor Jarbas Vasconcellos (PMDB) said that for 15 
days 
Simon has debated his proposal with the main PMDB leaders. 
Vasconcelos, who according to Simon is one of those who should 
participate in the debates, said he has already adopted a 
position on the subject: The candidate must enjoy popularity on 
the streets, and in this regard PSDB Senator Mario Covas is 
currently a good option, despite the fact that he has declared 
himself a candidate for the governorship of Sao Paulo. 
  Despite his continuing work for an alternative candidacy to 
that of Lula, PMDB Senator for Rio Grande do Sul Pedro Simon, 
the government leader in the Senate, yesterday said at Planalto 
Palace that a ticket made up of the president of the PT and of 
PSDB President Tasso Jereissati would be the favorite for the 
election. 
  Simon said: "I am not against the PT, and I believe Tasso as 
Lula's vice president would make a good ticket." 
  Simon advocated the Lula-Tasso ticket while denying that he 
has proposed the creation of an alliance between the PMDB, PSDB, 
PDT, and PTB. According to Simon, the only objective of his 
proposal for the formation of a coalition of social democratic 
parties is to prevent "the appearance of a new Collor." 

