BFN 

<F P=106> [Maria Bogdanova report: "Anatoliy Sobchak Will Command </F>
Troops -- "Administration Chiefs Will Become Governors General"] 
  [Text] A response has been received to a letter by St. 
Petersburg Mayor Anatoliy Sobchak asking the president to grant 
him emergency powers to fight crime. Security Council Secretary 
Oleg Lobov has advised the mayor that his wish to use army units 
to combat crime does not contradict Russian military doctrine. 
  Oleg Lobov's letter makes it clear that a presidential edict 
is pending which will grant troop control functions to all 
regional administration chiefs, equal to Anatoliy Sobchak's. In 
fact, this is nothing new in Russia's history: In the past, 
governors were not obliged to ask the emperor's permission to 
use troops. As is known from school textbooks, however, the 
army has successfully acted against mutineers and strikers but 
failed to catch Vladimir Dubrovskiy. Observers fear that 
18-year old law enforcers on city streets can themselves fall 
victim to criminal gangs hunting for firearms. 
  As for the military's being used to reinforce large police 
operations, here one can apparently count only on fire support. 
Yet automatic rifle fire in the streets, far from calming the 
city, is fraught with inadvertent casualties. On the whole, it 
is obvious that the real effect from using the army to fight 
crime will be minimal. 
  This naturally suggests that the incumbent governors, just 
like their predecessors, will be able to use the army most 
effectively only to control demonstrators, pickets, and 
strikers. There is actually nothing terrible about this 
provided such actions are unauthorized or violate the voters' 
normal life. Oleg Lobov's letter, however, says that the draft 
edict provides for "legal foundations for using military units 
by the executive bodies of Russian Federation components to 
resolve separate tasks of combating crime and maintaining public 
order." Meanwhile, given the Russian governors' varying 
political complexions, it is likely that each of them will have 
his own assessment of the situation: One may deem dangerous a 
public rally by library workers in support of the democrats; 
another, by pensioners advocating a return to socialism. 
Moreover, expanded troop control powers make administration 
chiefs even more independent. Amid the unabated separatist 
trends of some regional leaders, this also looks rather dubious. 

