BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Views" column: "It Must Understand"] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou's trip to the 
United States offers the opportunity to raise the Greek problems 
and Greek views on the critical issues in the Balkans, but also 
to make the U.S. leadership understand our country's positions 
and the positive role it can play for peace in the region. 
  The U.S. leadership must understand that Greece is the only 
factor for stability in this inflammable region. Its positive 
actions in dealing with the crisis have proved this. 
  It must understand that Greece is neither threatening nor 
provoking anyone. On the contrary, it is being threatened and 
provoked by its neighbors. 
  It must understand that with Skopje's [The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia--FYROM] insistence on using a Greek name 
and Greek historical symbols as well as being "irredeemable," 
Skopje is provoking the feelings of Greeks. No solution can be 
found if Skopje does not bend in its intransigence. 
  It must understand that occupation of half of Cyprus cannot 
continue and Turkish intransigence cannot obstruct the finding 
of a solution. Turkey is not limiting its actions to this but 
escalates its provocations against Greece every chance it gets. 
  It must understand that Greece wants friendly relations with 
Albania and has no reason for causing tension. Its only demand 
is to protect the rights of the Greek minority. 
  It must understand that Greek-American relations can develop 
even further for mutual benefit as well as peace and economic 
development in the region. 
  It seems that the U.S. leadership is particularly interested 
in economic cooperation. Greece has already developed 
initiatives in the Balkans and achieved serious business 
cooperation in most countries. 
  There is no other country in the region with more advantages 
and desire for peace that would support any U.S initiative for 
peaceful economic cooperation. 
  A spectacular change in the U.S. position cannot be 
expected. 
It is expected, however, that U.S. President Bill Clinton will 
keep his preelection promises and support Greek rights. 

