Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  Technical Development Towards Application Reactors </H5>
  In order to develop necessary techniques in time for the 
application of FBRs, a long term planning of research 
development is necessary along with plant demonstrations. The 
following will point out the development of concrete goals and 
directions for the important techniques. 
  Reactor Core: In order to advance towards the best way for 
the general public to understand safety, it would be necessary 
to work together to diversify the reactor suspension system and 
raise reliability for reactor cores. At the same time, it is 
necessary to find a specially unique policy that will grapple 
the upgrading of the reaction core characteristics: 
  -- The development of reactor core design that applies to 
the 
negative reactivity input factors contributed by passive 
features such as expansion and curving. 
  -- The embodying of thoughts on the creation of a new 
reactor 
core concept under the setting that it can withstand unusual 
situations while retaining a stable condition. 
  -- The sophistication of analysis and evaluation techniques 
concerning the reactor core movements during unusual situations. 
  -- The sophistication of reliability of the reactor 
suspension mechanism by diversification of the core suspension 
system. 
  The Removal of Heat of Decay: The attainment of reliability 
in removing the heat of decay together with reliability in the 
core characteristics and reactor suspension system contributes 
in a large way to the safety upgrading of the nuclear reactor. 
With FBRs, due to the fact that the cooling material sodium has 
a high boiling temperature, it is possible to use low pressure 
design. Since the operational temperature is high, the 
dispersion of heat into the atmosphere as the final heat sink is 
possible. In addition, the natural physical phenomena of 
circulation by difference in density can be easily utilized. 
Consequently, there are many merits that can be realized in 
acquiring highly reliable system for the removal of heat of 
decay. 
  In order for technical developments to take place, these 
merits are to be made use of and the goal is the upgrading of 
reliability through simplification and diversification of the 
system: 
  -- The development of analytical and evaluation methods for 
natural physical phenomena such as natural circulation. 
  -- The technical development of system design and plant 
design utilizing natural physical phenomena. 
  -- The development of passive/static equipment and its 
method 
of control. 
  The Integration and Simplification of Equipment: By 
integrating and simplifying the nuclear reactor and the cooling 
system equipment which consumes a large portion of the plant 
construction cost, large improvements in savings can be 
anticipated. 
  1) The development of an electromagnetic pump and the 
integration of cooling equipment. 
  Electromagnetic pumps contain no moving parts such as 
rotating parts, and therefore, it can acquire high reliability. 
It can be relocated with large degree of freedom, and also 
installation into the cooling system equipment is easy etc. It 
possesses various merits in the process of integrating 
circulation pumps and heat exchangers. 
  These merits are to be utilized for technical developments 
and while raising reliability, a rational integration of cooling 
equipment should materialize, and the goal for improving its 
economical aspect should be possible: 
  -- The development of a large capacity immersion 
electromagnetic pump. 
  -- The demonstration of reliability in the integration of 
large capacity cooling system equipment. 
  2) The simplification of upper reactor structure and the 
fuel 
exchange facilities. 
  In FBRs where sodium is used for cooling, it is necessary to 
perform fuel exchange without opening the nuclear reactor 
container. Since it involves complicated structure consisting of 
rotating plugs, the simplification of the upper reactor 
structure will contribute to economical savings. The upper 
reactor structure has to maintain the control drive mechanism 
and consequently it requires high rigidity. Therefore, a unique 
and simplified upper reactor structure combined with shock proof 
technique would be very effective. 
  There are various ideas under consideration for the 
simplification of the upper reactor structure such as 
eliminating the rotating plugs and resituating the reactor core 
upper structure equipment to upper and lower levels and 
performing fuel exchange but the goal is to use what is 
considered the most economical method of elastic fluctuating 
form upper level reactor structure: 
  -- The development of the elastic fluctuating form upper 
level reactor structure. 
  Fuel: In regards to fuel development, it is to attain lower 
power generating cost, increase in the margin of safety or the 
compacting of the core, the goal is for the sophistication of 
fuel. 
  -- The development of high temperature creep strength and 
swell resistant superior pipe covering material. 
  -- The development of hollow fuel. 
  Removal of Secondary Sodium (Intermediate Heat Transport) 
System: In regards to improving the economics for FBRs, the 
integration and simplification of equipment mentioned above 
would be an effective method, but the most unique way would be a 
plan that has to do with eliminating the secondary sodium 
(intermediate heat transport) system that is characteristic to 
the FBR and that was built to accompany using sodium for cooling 
material. 
  In order that the elimination of the secondary sodium can 
take place, it would have to be by using highly reliable double 
pipe steam generating equipment and a damage detector system 
which will prevent sodium-water reaction accidents from 
happening along with a completely equipped logic and data so as 
to avoid the assumed mode the double pipe could simultaneously 
become damaged. At the same time, by hypothesizing the situation 
where a penetration leak may occur, a leak detection technology 
to cope with the situation, an accident control system and the 
development of safety evaluation techniques are going to be 
needed: 
  -- The development of a double pipe steam generator and the 
demonstration of its reliability. 
  -- The development of damage detective system that is 
adaptable and reliable. 
  -- The development of control technology and evaluation 
technique for sodium-water reaction accidents. 
  Shock Proof: By using the shock proof design, and comparing 
it with the shock resistant plan, it is possible for the nuclear 
reactor and cooling system equipment to be made lighter and 
simpler. In addition, the plant designs can be normalized which 
all leads to large cost savings. At this point, the horizontal 
shock proof technique is in the process of being the perspective 
choice, but looking towards FBR application, it is desirable to 
develop a three dimensional shock proof technique. 
  In the field of technical development, in combination with 
equipment development for shock proof elements, the goal is to 
standardize shock proofing: 
  -- The establishment of horizontal shock proof technique and 
the development of three dimensional shock proof technique. 
  -- The establishing of a standard shock proof plan. 
  Sodium Middle Structure, Equipment Inspection and Repair 
Technique: In the case of FBRs, equipment inspection and/or 
repair of the nuclear reactor systems structure has the problem 
of being more difficult compared to the inspection and repair of 
sodium middle structure equipments of LWRs because of its usage 
of high temperature, opaque and active sodium. 
  From the viewpoint of FBR reliability and plant availability 
factor, it is necessary to plan for further sophistication of 
inspection and repair techniques. 




