Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Feature": by Wang Nan "U.S. Motown Crackles With Energy] </F>
  [Text] Detroit, Michigan, March 13 (XINHUA) -- For Lorrie 
Carlton, a Detroit resident since her teenage years, the late 
1980's was a piece of sad memory for the city and its people. 
  "At that time, it was the highest in unemployment and the 
lowest in self-esteem," she said of the America's "motown", 
whose recent fate is a mix of decline and rebound. 
  When the leaders of the Group of Seven Nations (G-7) 
gathered 
at the sprawling Cobo Center today for the first jobs summit, 
the city, however, was crackling with the excitement and energy 
that it hadn't witnessed in a long time. 
  With the country's auto industry, now more lean, efficient 
and profitable then 10 years ago, on a steady and forceful way 
back, Detroit, long a manufacturer's showcase for America, is 
finding itself on the world map again. 
  The big three automakers are all headquartered in and near 
Detroit and are the major employers in the metropolitan area, 
with total population at four million. They all turned profits 
in 1993, the first time since the recession. 
  "The city is going through a fundamental, very deep, and 
sometimes very painful changes. Now it is in a Renaissance," 
said Robert Giles, editor of the DETROIT TIMES. 
  When President Clinton announced last month that Detroit 
would be the venue for the G-7 jobs summit, he praised Detroit 
as a city "reaching out to the future in investment and economic 
growth." 
  Detroit's turnaround, local people said in recent 
interviews, 
came along with the painful restructuring of auto industry and 
the gradual adaptation to a new world economy characterized with 
intense global competition. 
  The city's new mayor Dennis Archer, in his widely supported 
campaign last year, said that Detroit's "only choice is to face 
the challenge of global competition head-on, and continually 
improve ourselves so that we will be competitive in this global 
economy." 
  The state of Michigan, where the city of Detroit is the 
capital, lost some 100,000 jobs out of its 900,000-people 
workforce in the 1980's in wake of corporate downsizing. 
  "Jobs have come back into the auto industry and its related 
suppliers industry, although not at the rate they would have 
been in the 1960's and 1970's," said Von Logan, the deputy 
director on finance and management in the Michigan Employment 
Security Commission. 
  Unemployment rate, the core subject for the two-day G-7 
meeting, was as high as 15.5 percent in Detroit in the whole of 
1980's, one of the highest across the nation. It now dropped to 
eight percent, a little above the national average. 
  Detroit remains a small town, then a small city until well 
into this century when Henry Ford put together a group of 
technical experts to mass-produce cars that provided mass jobs 
for workers with even minimal skills. 
  "Detroit's workers are already beyond the no-brain, 
repetitive tasks that Henry Ford pioneered in the 1920's," said 
John Lippert, a FREE LABOR PRESS writer. "We're working in 
teams, learning new skills in space-age factories." 
  "We're a symbol of hope: we changed. We're tough. We're 
competitive," he said. 
  Worker retraining, central issues for the G-7 summit, are 
being tested in Detroit with praise. "We have a change in the 
complexion of the workforce," said Ron Dix, manager of Marketing 
Communications for Detroit Center Tool Inc.. 
  The United Auto Workers (UAW) and the big three automakers 
have established job training funds to help the workers laid off 
from auto assembly lines to learn another skill and find a new 
job. "It's not easy," said UAW's president Owen Beiber. 
  Called the Labor Market Information On-Line, the city's job 
service is no longer satisfied with merely providing the 
insurance benefits of 293 U.S. dollars for a newly dislocated 
worker for 26 weeks. All the people need now is a computer and 
a modem and they can have access to the on-line system. 
  Connecting the heartland of America with Canada, the U.S. 
largest trading partner, Detroit is now not only a world leader 
in automobiles and transportation manufacturing, but also moving 
high gear on the information superhighway. 
  "Not only do we build cars here, we are also the center of 
automotive research and development," said John Engler, the 
governor of Michigan. 
  Detroit, where a black man invented the traffic light some 
100 years ago, "stopped at the red light for too long, and now 
it goes green," said Bill Kast, chairman of the Michigan 
International Trade Authority. 
  The automotive centers located in the city now include those 
those of Chrysler, Ford, General Motors, Honda, Mazda, Hyundai, 
Nissan, Volkswagen and Saturn. "They help our business to be 
more efficient and competitive," Governor Engler told reporters 
who came to cover the G-7 summit. 
  Many people, on the other hand, are looking at the other 
side 
of the city - its rising criminal offenses, more young people 
out of work too early, and the painful restructuring of local 
economy that sees no end. 
  "It's the here and now that matters most to many 
Detroiters," 
commented a recent editorial of the METRO TIMES, a weekly local 
newspapers on the highly publicized jobs summit. 
  "We should be aware that how fragile this recovery is now," 
Timothy Leuliette, senior vice president of ITT Corp., said at a 
seminar on Sunday [13 March]. "Not everyone is taking part in 
the recovery." 
  In Detroit, 46.7 percent of the black kids cannot find jobs. 
Thousands of auto workers are now seeing a decline of their 
wages. 
  Others complain that the city's adaptation to a new world 
"now that Detroit's automotive heyday has passed, we think of it 
as being as ancient and as hopeless as the Roman Empire. 
Nothing could be further from the truth," said Jack 
Lessenberry, a local columnist. 

