Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by reporters Zhou Shuchun (0719 2885 2504) and </F>
Chen Yonghong (7115 3057 4767): "To Be on Good Terms With 
Neighboring Countries and Establish Peaceful Order at Home -- 
China's Diplomatic Main Theme"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 25 Dec (XINHUA) -- Soon after Chairman Li 
Ruihuan of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC] ended his trip to South Asia, Pakistan's 
Premier Benazir Bhutto paid a visit to China. This not only 
reflects the close relationship between China and Pakistan, but 
also demonstrates to a great extent a key goal of China's 
foreign policy in 1993 -- attaching great importance to 
bordering areas, being on good terms with neighboring countries, 
and establishing peaceful order at home. 
  This year witnessed remarkably frequent exchanges of visits 
by the leaders of China and its neighboring countries. Among 
more than 30 heads and government leaders of foreign states who 
visited China this year, more than 10 are from Asian countries, 
with most of them from closely neighboring countries. Meanwhile, 
high-ranking Chinese leaders visited 10 neighboring countries. 
Visits to neighboring countries by new Chinese party and 
government leaders after assuming their positions prove that 
China attaches great importance to its relations with 
neighboring countries. 
  South and Southeast Asia became hot spots this year in 
China's diplomatic drive. Chairman Qiao Shi's trip to five 
ASEAN countries represents the first visit ever to ASEAN 
countries by a Chinese parliamentary leader. Meanwhile, heads 
or government leaders of five ASEAN countries visited China one 
after another, as did the ASEAN secretary general. Such 
high-level exchanges push ties between China and ASEAN countries 
to a closer, firmer, and riper stage. It stands to reason that 
this year is termed the "ASEAN year" in China's diplomatic 
efforts. 
  Chairman Li Ruihuan's trip to three South Asian countries 
marks the first visit ever by a CPPCC leader. In addition, the 
chairman of the Vietnamese Communist Party paid a visit to 
Beijing -- the first time ever since 1995. The premiers of 
India and Laos as well as the King of Nepal also came to China. 
  Meanwhile, Hu Jintao and Liu Huaqing, respectively, led a 
Chinese government delegation to visit friendly country Korea 
and our largest neighboring country, Russia. Leaders of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, including the president of 
Kazakhstan, also came to visit one after another. The Chinese 
Government's diplomatic agenda also shows that China attaches 
great importance to Mongolia and the five Central Asian 
countries. 
  Since Japan's new cabinet was formed, it has confirmed on 
many occasions that it will work hard to develop friendly 
relations between Japan and China. Following a visit by its 
minister of finance, an important member of Japan's cabinet will 
come to visit in the near future. Under new circumstances, the 
relations between China and Japan will develop in a sustained 
and stable manner. 
  Undoubtedly, close contacts not only help deepen mutual 
trust 
and good-neighborly ties between China and its neighboring 
countries, but also provide new momentum to expand their mutual 
economic ties and trade as well as scientific and technological 
cooperation. This will positively influence the promotion of 
peace, stability, and development in the region. Many leaders 
of neighboring countries said clearly that the "theory of the 
China threat" is absolutely unfounded, and that China's 
development and the expansion of cooperation with China conform 
to the common interests of the region. 
  Meanwhile, negotiations between China and some neighboring 
countries on pending border issues have achieved marked 
progress. Following positive results achieved at negotiations on 
Sino- Vietnamese borders, China and India signed an agreement on 
maintaining peace and tranquility in the border areas under 
actual control. This is the first agreement reached by the two 
countries since 1981, when talks on border lines began, marking 
a substantial step forward in two countries' efforts to solve 
the border issues. Besides, China has achieved new progress in 
talks on arms reduction in border areas and strengthening trust 
in military issues with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and 
Tajikistan. 
  By unswervingly adhering to an independent foreign policy of 
peace, China has entered its best era in terms of relations with 
its neighbors. Without doubt, this is extremely important for 
today's China in accelerating its modernization drive. 

