BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 6 Apr (NOTIMEX) -- The Cuban 
Government has accepted Colombia's conditions for supplying oil 
at international market prices beginning in July, Cuban 
Ambassador Jesus Martinez Revelo reported today . 
  In statements to Colombia's Radio Network (Caracol), the 
diplomat said his country promised to get the letters of credit 
demanded by the state-owned Ecopetrol [Colombian Petroleum 
Enterprise] to formally sign an agreement for the sale of crude 
oil. 
  The Colombian oil company said the guarantees offered by the 
island's government two weeks ago to finalize the negotiations 
were unsatisfactory. 
  Guido Nule, Colombian energy and mines minister, announced 
in 
February that his country would supply Havana with between 
15,000 and 20,000 barrels of oil per day at international market 
prices. 
  According to the company's president, Juan Maria Rendon, the 
proposal from Fidel Castro's government to cover the cost of the 
transaction with sugar through a third-party transaction lacks 
the backing of a letter of credit. 
  Nevertheless, the Cuban diplomat explained that he recently 
met with Rendon and promised to get the letters of credit 
demanded by the state-owned business 
  "We will do whatever is necessary to defend our country's 
interests while reaching an agreement with Colombia in this 
matter," Martinez said, while emphasizing the Colombian 
Government's "positive attitude" toward Cuba. 
  Colombia's announcement that it would sell oil to the island 
displeased exiled Cubans in Miami, who threatened to boycott 
Colombian products if the negotiations are finalized. 
  Diplomatic relations between Colombia and Cuba were restored 
in October 1993 after a 12-year suspension. 
  Relations deteriorated in March after Santa Fe de Bogota's 
EL 
TIEMPO published a report on an alleged meeting between 
guerrilla leaders and a Colombian bishop in Havana, a report 
that was later denied by the same newspaper. 
  If the negotiations are completed, the Cuban Government will 
receive the first oil shipment in July, thus allowing it to meet 
one of that Caribbean country's most critical needs. 

