CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Zou Qingli [6760 3237 7787]: "Decision </F>
Made on Supply Arrangements for Three Gorges Hydropower 
Generators That Combine Solicitation of Bids From Foreign 
Countries With Domestic Cooperation"] 
  [Text] I learned on 26 March 1994 from the State Council's 
Three Gorges Project Construction Commission Office that China 
will adopt an arrangement involving solicitation of bids from 
foreign countries in conjunction with the cooperation of 
domestic enterprises to design and manufacture the large power 
generators required for the Three Gorges project. 
  According to chief engineer Li Shouren [2621 1343 0088] from 
the Ministry of Machine-Building Industry, the Three Gorges 
project will require a total of 26 large mixed flow-through 
turbine generators with unit capacities of 700MW. The water 
turbine rotors will be about 9.85 meters in diameter. They will 
be among the world's largest hydropower generators in dimensions 
and will involve relatively high design and manufacturing 
technology requirements. During the past several years, China's 
machine-building industry has done many preliminary attacks on 
key technical problems and other preparatory work to develop the 
hydropower generators for the Three Gorges project, and it now 
basically has the capability of manufacturing this type of large 
hydropower generator. 
  Taking into consideration the possibility of using foreign 
investments for the Three Gorges project, to ensure that the 
technology and quality of the generators in the Three Gorges 
project attain advanced world levels and spur further 
improvement in China's power generation equipment development 
levels, the State has decided to carry out international bid 
solicitation around 1996 to develop the 26 large hydropower 
generators needed for the Three Gorges project. The first 12 
generators will utilize a supply arrangement involving joint 
design and cooperative production by the foreign businesses that 
win the bids, Harbin Generator Plant, and the East China 
Generator Plant. The foreign businesses will have overall 
responsibility in the areas of technology, quality, delivery 
schedules, and so on, to the proprietor, the China Chang Jiang 
Three Gorges Project Development Corporation, while the 
cooperating plants on the Chinese side will be responsible to 
the foreign businesses. During the process of joint design and 
cooperative production, the Chinese manufacturing plants must 
gradually increase the proportion of their responsibility and 
gain an understanding of generator design and manufacturing 
technology. The last 14 generators will mainly be produced 
domestically with the Chinese plants assuming responsibility for 
supplying the equipment to the proprietor. 

