Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 7 Feb (MENA)--Following the session of talks 
he held with Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat and Israeli 
Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres and the bilateral session between 
Peres and 'Arafat tonight, Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa said that 
the two parties tried to find a solution to specific points 
regarding the Declaration of Principles. Musa refused to enter 
into the details of these points. He said that the talks, which 
went on for 90 minutes, were good, and he stressed the desire of 
the two parties to work seriously to reach an agreement. 
  Musa said the meeting that began today between the 
Palestinian and Israeli delegations will successfully reach 
solutions to the remaining problems. 
  He added that Egypt is not pressuring any of the parties. 
Its only hope is that the two parties will succeed in 
overcoming the obstacles. He said he cannot set a time limit 
for reaching agreement because there are many problems. 
  Musa noted that the two parties are discussing major issues, 
and when they solve them it will be possible to find solutions 
to the other issues. 
  In a statement after the session of talks, Palestinian 
President 'Arafat expressed his appreciation for the Egyptian 
role, and said that Foreign Minister Musa will continue his 
efforts to push the peace process forward to a comprehensive and 
just peace. 
  He said that he sensed a real desire on the part of Shim'on 
Peres to reach a final agreement. He added: We were about to 
reach such an agreement in Davos. We agreed to resume the talks 
in Cairo under the auspices and with the support of President 
Husni Mubarak. 
  He expressed the hope that the talks will end tomorrow, 
Tuesday, noting that both parties desire to reach agreement on 
the measures to implement the agreement as soon as possible. 
  Israeli Foreign Minister Peres said he hoped the talks will 
end tomorrow, adding that the two delegations had come with good 
intentions of reaching an agreement and not to bargain. They 
sense their responsibility. They also made some progress in 
Davos, Peres said and explained that what was agreed upon in 
Davos is acceptable and they intend to continue with it. 
  Peres said that in Davos 'Arafat proposed setting up two 
small committees [words indistinct] consisting of three members 
from each side to begin working to overcome the remaining 
obstacles. He added: We are here for important and positive 
work. He said that he speaks on behalf of the Israeli 
Government and that he represents the Israeli Government's 
policy. 
  He added: We will listen carefully to everything the PLO 
chairman has to say, and he will listen carefully to what we 
have to say in order to try to narrow the differences and 
resolve the outstanding problems. 

