BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Industry Minister Gerard Longuet by </F>
Pierre-Angel Gay, Philippe Labarde, Michel Noblecourt, and 
Roland-Pierre Paringaux; place and date not given: "An 
Interview With Gerard Longuet"] 
  [Excerpt] [LE MONDE] The high technology which we are 
exporting represents few jobs, and the consumer products which 
we are importing destroy many. Isn't the 80 billion-franc [Fr] 
trade surplus a Pyrrhic victory? 
  [Longuet] No, it is a genuine victory. A true performance. 
These results (Fr1,300 billion of exports, Fr87 billion surplus 
in 1993, and already more than Fr15 billion for the first 
quarter of 1994) point to the high level of competitiveness 
achieved by our industry. Because exports are above all 
products, technology, and hence industrial activity. It is 
because we need to export that I condemn the myth of the 
post-industrial society. 
  It is true that an employee in the clothing, footwear, and 
toy sectors frequently produces under Fr500,000 a year in 
turnover, a figure which is doubled by the high-technology 
sectors. This means that the structure of our exports is not 
the most favorable for employment. But it corresponds to 
international specialization. It boosts our industrial 
competitiveness. It creates jobs in the service sector. 
Overall, it helps improve our standard of living. 
  Rebalancing between the various sectors is done through 
taxation and social contributions. This is why we are able to 
retain labor-intensive industries. As a liberal, I would prefer 
this rebalancing to take place via consumption and prices. But 
France is not just a market, it is also, and especially, a 
community. In this way Toulouse is benefiting from worldwide 
success of Airbus, but close by, we are trying to preserve the 
textile industry at Mazamet and the clothing industry at Ariege. 
  [LE MONDE] How does one facilitate these transfers? 
  [Longuet] Today, everything points to the fact that job 
creation is blocked by excessive social security taxes. The 
basic level of these contributions was decided during a period 
of labor shortage, whereas, for the last 10 or 15 years, we have 
been experiencing a job shortage. We must therefore change 
policy. We must demand less of producers and more from 
consumers, less from businesses and more from the citizen, less 
in terms of social security and more from taxes. [Former 
Socialist Prime Minister] Michel Rocard's government had begun 
to do this with the CSG [General Social Contribution], and we 
are continuing on this path. 
  It is this truth which underlies the introduction of a 
"social VAT [value-added tax]." But this project is both 
limited and in part unjust. Limited, because increasing VAT by 
1.5 points -- the maximum possible -- would bring in no more 
than Fr40 billion. In part unjust, because a tax on consumption 
is certainly the least courageous and has the least 
redistributive effect. Rather, what we need is for French 
people to be made increasingly responsible for the cost of 
social benefits. We need to create capitalization-based pension 
systems to supplement distribution schemes, and a more 
economical health care system. 
  [LE MONDE] How do you reply to Philippe de Villiers [head of 
the "Other Europe" European election list] when he promotes the 
closing of borders to a certain extent? 
  [Longuet] That he is wrong! We live in a world in which 
ideas, people, goods, and capital can freely move. This 
progress explains the doubling of our living standard since the 
Treaty of Rome [was signed in 1957]. The higher a product's 
added value, the more global its market. What domestic market 
could justify Airbus, the TGV [high-speed train], or even the 
pharmaceutical industry? 
  What is the truth about our foreign trade? We have a trade 
deficit with the major industrialized countries and a surplus 
with most of the newly industrialized and developing nations. 
We have a deficit with the United States, Japan, and Germany, 
that is with countries with standards of living and levels of 
technology which are comparable to our own. We have a surplus 
with the rapidly expanding newly industrialized countries, 
which, admittedly, sell us consumer goods, but which purchase 
the capital goods in which we specialize: energy, transport, and 
telecommunications equipment. For us to be rich, our partners 
need to be rich. To be able to sell to them, we also need to 
buy from them. 
  [LE MONDE] After the signing of the GATT agreement at 
Marrakesh, you made the threatened labor-intensive industries 
one of your priorities. How are you proceeding with this? 
  [Longuet] I am fighting to have the World Trade Organization 
include a "social clause" based on three parameters: a ban on 
work by children of school age; a ban on unpaid forced labor, 
i.e., that of prisoners; and the freedom to join trade unions 
and to engage in wage negotiations. 
  [LE MONDE] Is not the latter condition a form of 
protectionism? 
  [Longuet] We are fully aware that, in many cases, the sole 
advantage of a poor country with no industrial or commercial 
capacity is its low salary levels. But when these countries 
develop and earn money, we would like to see this distributed 
equitably and passed on to the employees so that they too can 
become consumers and, why not, consumers of our products. Let 
us take India as an example. In this country with nearly 1 
billion inhabitants, 100 million perhaps are already world 
market consumers. We are asking India to open up its market to 
us if it wants France, in return, to open up its borders. This 
is what all the discussion of the dismantling of the Multifiber 
Agreeement is about. 
  In the global economy, the major industrial powers who 
control technology, capital, and the major markets also set the 
rules for world trade. These are the major democracies. It is 
they who supply the capital which the developing countries need. 
Capital which requires legal stability and social peace in 
those places where it is invested. Countries which wish to take 
part in world trade will inevitably have to develop toward 
systems based on the rule of law and, I hope, toward democracy. 
[passage omitted] 

