BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Janine Lazarus] </F>
  [Excerpts] Police believe agents of Mosad -- the Israeli 
secret service -- assassinated a Johannesburg man because he was 
supplying Middle Eastern countries with hi-tech chemicals that 
could be used in the manufacture of nuclear weapons. The shock 
claim came from a senior police source this week during a 
WEEKEND STAR investigation into the brutal slaying almost three 
years ago of British immigrant Alan Kidger. 
  His horribly dismembered body was found in the boot of his 
luxury car, which had been abandoned in Soweto by car thieves. 
They had stolen the car from a Hillbrow street, unaware of its 
grisly contents. 
  The bizarre circumstances of his death -- the body also had 
been smeared with an oily, black substance -- baffled police. 
Media interest in the mysterious circumstances of the case 
intensified after the car belonging to the police's chief 
investigator was blown up by a limpet mine while parked in his 
driveway at home. 
  But now, for the first time, chief investigator 
Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Landman has revealed the 
internationally explosive nature of his inquiry. He is 
convinced the death had something to do with the murky world of 
secret deals related to weaponry. Kidger's involvement, in fact, 
could have become a threat to the international balance of power. 
  "We believe he was working for foreign governments and the 
nature of that work had something to do with the production of 
arms that required hi-tech chemicals," said Landman. 
  "Alan Kidger was involved in supplying these chemicals to 
Middle Eastern countries. The chemicals are used in the 
production of nuclear weapons. 
  "There is one thing for sure: this guy was dumped for a 
reason. 
  "He wasn't a gambler or involved in drugs. The murder was a 
hit aimed at sending a clear message. Nothing other than a hit. 
"It involved something only a government would be interested 
in." 
  Asked to respond to the claim of Mosad's role, a spokesman 
from the Israel Embassy said yesterday that it was the first 
time he had heard such a story. "It seems to be an imaginary 
story, and I cannot confirm it. I'm sure Mosad is not involved 
in any such activity." 
  Asked if he knew about all activities that Mosad were 
involved in, he replied: "No. Do you? 
  "I can assure you Mosad have not been involved in killing 
anyone in South Africa," he added. 
  South African police have been in touch with detectives in 
Britain, but no arrests have been made. The investigation, said 
Landman, will now switch to Europe and elsewhere. 
  "It is very important that the investigation continues, not 
only in South Africa, but in other countries because Kidger 
travelled extensively." 
  Described by police as one of the most gruesome murders on 
the Reef in years, 48-year-old Kidger was found with his torso, 
buttocks, arms and legs amputated in the boot of his car near 
Orlando Stadium on November 9 1991 -- two days after he went 
missing. 
  Two car thieves who had apparently stolen his white BMW 
728i, 
which had been dumped in Hillbrow, drove it to Soweto to remove 
the radio and speakers. Once there, they opened the boot and 
found the dismembered body. 
  A post-mortem established that Kidger died as a result of a 
blow to the head. There was virtually not a drop of blood left 
in his body. 
  "Who would go to such extreme lengths to do something like 
that?" asked Landman. "And why leave the body in Hillbrow as an 
advertisement? Was it a warning?" 
  The body had been "professionally" dismembered and the oily 
black substance that covered it contained what some chemical 
experts at the time though to be a high percentage of mercury. 
Landman said the substance, according to police forensics 
report, was alkyd resin -- a black substance used as isolator in 
paints with a high lead content. [passage omitted] 
  Kidger, a marketing manager for Thor Chemicals in Alberton 
-- 
an international chemical producing company -- was "high trained 
in the use of chemicals that can be used in the production of 
armaments." [passage omitted] 
  In July 1992 a Government inquiry into Thor Chemicals ended 
dramatically amid allegations that workers at the Cato Ridge 
factory were deliberately poisoned by unknown saboteurs who 
"spiked" breathing equipment with a massive dose of mercury. 
Desmond Cowley, chairman of Thor's parent company, Thor 
Holdings (UK), linked the poisioning to "a long list of events 
which we know were sabotage, including the brutal murder of 
Kidger." [passage omitted] 

