CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Konovalov, IZVESTIYA correspondent: "The </F>
Som Is Not Sinking. Why?"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Kyrgyz Currency Has Grown in Importance and Is Helping </H5>
Stabilize the Economy 
  The person with a ruble feels differently today in 
the different republics of the former USSR. With Russian money 
in the pocket, you feel in some places almost like an American 
with dollars who has access to all of the good things and 
commodities. Your purchasing power suddenly turns out to be much 
higher than that of a majority of the people around you... And 
you can exchange rubles practically on every corner. Moreover, 
right here next to you, higher exchange rates will be offered, 
and every respect will be shown to you, but mainly--to your 
money. 
  But then in Bishkek, you immediately notice that your ruble 
is not a bit more respected than the local som, which, 
incidentally, just turned a year old since its birth. Of course, 
there are exchange centers, but in contrast, for example, to 
Kiev, Yerevan, or Baku, they still have to be looked for and, 
indeed, the ruble does not cause a customs hullabaloo here. In 
any case, a som-dollar exchange is much more popular here than a 
som-ruble exchange. 
  When you drop by a store or the market, you understand why 
this is so. There is everything here that there is in Moscow, 
and prices are approximately the same in converting to the 
dollar: Some food products are cheaper; on the other hand, some 
of the imported industrial products are more expensive. But the 
earnings of Bishkek residents in the same conversion are 
somewhat lower on the average than for Muscovites, but not as 
much as in a majority of other republics. But the main thing is 
that the exchange rate of the som and ruble has not changed now 
for many months. 
  It is an evident fact: In contrast to a majority of its CIS 
colleagues, the som does not yield to the ruble--with respect to 
the dollar, their rates of exchange change in parallel. In 
addition, with the lowering rates of inflation recently, the som 
even started to take the lead over its Russian colleague. The 
task was set at the end of this year to bring the rates of 
inflation down to 4-5 percent a month, after the recent 15-17 
percent. However, in the last month the rates of inflation have 
already amounted to 4.9 percent. 
  It is still early to talk about world recognition of Kyrgyz 
currency. But the year-old som has already gained a reputation 
in the post-Soviet space that is quite good. The Moscow banking 
market, where Kyrgyz currency is purchased at a stable rate of 
exchange, also confirms this. But the som looks like quite a 
delicacy on the Central Asian monetary table. The trade turnover 
in this region is rather active, and the som more and more 
confidently is squeezing out its neighbors as the most 
preferable means of mutual settlements. 
  Few could predict such a turn of events a year ago. The 
appearance of the som in the world was met, as the saying goes, 
ambiguously in Kyrgyzstan itself, among its neighbors, and in 
Russia. And there were enough predictions regarding the quick 
crash of the new currency. And, after all, such predictions 
cannot be refuted in logic. But under conditions of the severe 
financial deficit, which is common for all of the republics of 
the former Union, any structure becomes a lobbyist. The sad fate 
of a whole series of other national currencies is known. 
Nevertheless, how was it possible to keep the som afloat? 
  One against all--is the way the position of the 
National Bank of Kyrgyzstan was characterized in the course of 
last year. After all, as is well-known, everyone needs money. 
But under conditions of a very severe financial deficit, which 
is common to all republics of the former Union, any structure 
becomes a lobbyist. But any kind of weakening in 
financial-credit policy is fraught with a jump in inflation, 
which is dangerous for the national currency. It was the task of 
the National Bank, which is granted exceptional powers in 
Kyrgyzstan, to oppose the onslaught of all possible lobbies, 
first of all as the only manager of emissions, credits, and 
regulation of the som exchange rate. 
  The exclusiveness of the position of the bank is in its 
independence from the power structures. Neither the parliament, 
nor the government were able to influence the bank and to 
dictate any kind of decision to it. Of course, a not unimportant 
role is played here by the support of the president who, without 
interfering in the policy of the National Bank, guarded it 
against any pressure. 
  This arrangement of forces is good for the economy, when the 
chief banker is powerful and competent and his team is a match 
for him. This is exactly the way it turned out in Kyrgyzstan. 
Kemelbek Nanayev, the chairman of the board of the National 
Bank, is one of the recognized fathers of the som, a key figure 
for financial and economic reform of the republic in general, 
and also a person with a firm character. Entire legends make the 
rounds here about Nanayev's mutual relations with the branches 
of authority, about the unsuccessful attempts to subordinate it, 
and about the pressure and blackmail on the part of both the 
authorities and lobbying structures. The criterion for him was 
the conformity of the money supply to commodity resources and 
the effectiveness of the programs under which credits were 
issued. But to put it more simply, it was written on the banner 
of the National Bank: Live according to one's means, no matter 
how difficult this turns out to be. 
  It was possible to survive a year. And the results are 
evident. However, a new attack on the bank is now starting, and 
this means on the som and on reforms as well. An attempt is 
being prepared to subordinate the bank to the government at the 
forthcoming session of parliament, and to remove from the bank 
part of the authority to manage currency emissions. 
  What could result from this can be seen from a recent 
scandal, which involved the resignation of the minister of 
finance who instructed that credit be issued from budgetary 
resources to a cousin. If other than bank structures receive 
access to emissions and credits, in essence, the printing press 
will be turned on, and the som will quickly lose its value and 
its reputation, which were earned with such difficulty for a 
year. 
  As for the team that was organized around Nanayev, it, 
perhaps, is one of the most powerful among the central banks of 
the former Union. Over a short period, a large group of 
specialists went through training and a probationary period 
abroad. These are mainly young and broadly educated people who 
work in close contact with very large world banks. 
Specialists-experts of the Central Bank of Japan are now working 
on a project to modernize the banking system of Kyrgyzstan, 
which is calculated for five years and being financed by 
favorable credits of the Japanese Government. 
  Perhaps the competence and independence of the banking 
structure of the republic is a decisive factor in the success of 
the reforms. It is for this reason that a tough policy is 
maintained in financing only directions that are effective, 
promising, and a priority for the economy of the republic. What 
kind are they? 
  These are agriculture and the food industry, light industry, 
the fuel-energy complex, the mining industry, the 
electrotechnical and microelectronics branches, and tourism. As 
President Akayev says, these branches should become the 
locomotive of the development of the economy of Kyrgyzstan. 
  It is amazing for our common usual practice, but Kyrgyzstan 
was able to maintain a 100 percent movement toward priority 
financing for a year. It is also amazing, because this occurred 
under conditions not of a totalitarian, but a rather democratic 
regime. And, judging by everything, the guarantor turned out to 
be the role and personality of President Askar Akayev, which 
have not yet been appreciated for their merits. 
  The president wrote a book, which is already 
typical for our practice as well. However, Akayev stands 
somewhat alone in this. He set forth his ideas about the economy 
of the republic and its prospects. But economics is a new field 
for the scientist-physicist. 
  Akayev's image as a soft democrat oriented on Russia is a 
little deceptive. I ascertained that he was succeeding in 
achieving his objectives by remaining within the framework of 
democracy and not arguing with the other branches of authority 
and political forces. For example, Akayev tried to give the 
Russian language the status of a second state language. It did 
not happen. But he afterwards achieved ratification of a 
constitutional norm that prohibited discrimination against 
people on the basis of not knowing the local language, which is 
being drawn up into laws and denotes, in fact, the very same 
real effect as the recognition of Russian as a second state 
language. 
  It is also the same in the economy. The mutual relations of 
the president with the government and parliament are 
complicated. But the system of laws, decrees, and edicts are 
used by Akayev in such a way that reforms are moving without 
delay, and the most exacting experts from international 
organizations invariably ascertain their dynamism and promise 
and guarantee the effectiveness of Western investments in the 
Kyrgyz economy. 
  It is for this reason that an attack is now being mounted 
against Akayev. The former and current opponents of reform 
understand that only by removing the president will it be 
possible to disrupt the balance that has developed between the 
authoritative structures and to acquire access to favorable 
credits and to the corrupt economic leadership. And so, already 
on behalf of the president, his statements about his alleged 
reluctance to put forth his candidacy for the next term are 
being carried even in the Moscow press. Possible successors are 
also being named. The blow against reforms that is being 
prepared can be ruinous for the economy of the republic. After 
all, the promises of solid financial assistance from abroad are 
based exactly on the present dynamism of reforms. 
  The farmer is feeding himself, the city, and even 
foreign countries, because he became the boss. There were 
11 large collective farms not long ago in Chuiskiy Rayon. Two 
are left now. The rest are individual peasant farms. One of them 
belongs to Dzhusur Suleymenov. He has 200 head of cattle, a full 
assortment of equipment, good earnings, and a permanent channel 
for the sale of products--through state purchases and through 
the market. The state purchases, however, are being reduced 
steadily, and only grain remains, comprising approximately 20 
percent of the production. 
  This kind of dynamic does not intimidate the farmers. The 
market is established. In addition to the fact that the state 
has become concerned about the organization of a network of 
markets and middleman structures, there is also a good outlet 
abroad. Customs restrictions on the export of products have been 
removed from neighbors and Central Asian republics. There 
already are orders and contracts with the far abroad--most of 
all for meat. The Kyrgyz peasant is coming into the world market 
today with his own products. As the same Dzhusur said, the local 
national currency--the som--is quite reliable in these 
operations, and it is preferable to the ruble, in any case. 
  The problem of property in Kyrgyzstan is being resolved for 
the peasants in a rather original way. And it is here, perhaps, 
that the peculiarity of Akayev's approach to complicated 
economic problems revels itself. He insisted on the introduction 
of private property in land. It did not happen. The transfer of 
land for use for 50 years was approved. But a law was just 
approved on the possibility of selling the right to land use. As 
a matter of fact, a market in land is already being established, 
albeit only in a compromise variant. 
  The effect of agrarian reform is evident. There is an 
abundance of products in the markets and in the stores. The 
export of foodstuffs is starting. The farmers are getting on 
their feet and are forming their own capital. And all of 
this--within a year in the introduction of the som and the 
beginning of agrarian reform. 
  So that industry would not go bankrupt, 
unprofitable enterprises are declared insolvent. This process 
has just started, and the implementation of presidential edicts 
and other legislative acts is proceeding under strict control. 
In general, this system of control in Kyrgyzstan is rather 
unique in its effectiveness for the post-Soviet space. This 
practice is especially significant in comparison with the 
Russian discord in legislative differences of opinion where not 
much is coordinated with anything and conforms to anything. 
  To bring edicts, decrees, laws, and constitutional norms 
into 
conformity with one another, and to achieve their implementation 
is what Dzhanysh Rustenbekov, the manager of the president's 
staff, works on 24 hours a day. It is not surprising that he 
also turns out to be a target for the opposition. Accusations 
have already been heard about his participation in corruption, 
but they were not corroborated. However, this is a key element 
in the work to stabilize the som and the economy as a whole; 
therefore, no end of the attacks is in sight. 
  Work is now going on in Akayev's staff on the resolution of 
the republic's most painful problem--the industrial economy. All 
of it has been oriented on the USSR. Practically all of it is 
defense. Now there are two solutions--cooperation with Russia in 
the creation of joint enterprises and in the process of 
bankruptcy. Both processes have started. Enterprises that do not 
show promise are being closed, and contracts are being concluded 
with Russia on the reanimation of unique production. In one and 
the other variant, dramatic turns and a struggle lie ahead. But 
the strength of the som, which is still dynamic and becoming 
more and more weighty, has a decisive significance. What will 
happen further depends not only on the state of the economy, but 
also on the political situation in Kyrgyzstan. 

