Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [NODONG SINMUN 3 February commentary: "We Do Not Utter </F>
Empty Words"] 
  [Text] The process of peacefully resolving the nuclear 
issue on the Korean peninsula is now facing a grave challenge. 
We are at a crossroads as to whether the nuclear issue on the 
Korean peninsula will be resolved peacefully through talks or 
whether it will develop into a factor that aggravates tension. 
This entire situation is fully related to a mean act of 
betrayal by the United States. 
  A DPRK Foreign Ministry spokesman released a statement on 31 
January and made clear its position on the current crisis. In 
the statement, we made it clear that if the United States 
overturns its promise to us after all, we will no longer be 
bound to our promise to the United States; that if the United 
States does not intend to hold DPRK-U.S. talks, we have no 
intention of going through all the trouble [kutaeyo] of holding 
talks; and that if the United States intends to choose another 
way, we would choose a countermeasure commensurate with it [kue 
sangunghan taeung pangdo]. This position of ours stems from the 
unshakable will and faith of the Korean people, who consider 
national dignity and sovereignty to be their lives, and defend 
them to the end, and do not yield to any pressure or blackmail. 
  The mean act by the United States of having broken faith 
leads us to make only one choice [uriro hayogum tallinun halsu 
opke mandulgo itta]. In the two rounds of DPRK-U.S. talks, the 
United States promised not to use nuclear forces or any other 
forces or resort to threats to use them. In the 18th contact, 
the United States publicly expressed its intention of 
discontinuing the Team Spirit joint military exercises as part 
of its measure to remove its nuclear threat against us and 
agreed to open the third round of talks and resolve, in a 
package deal, the problematic issues concerning fundamentally 
resolving the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. The United 
States also promised us that inspections would be conducted to 
purely guarantee the continuity of safeguards [sunsu tamboui 
yonsoksong pojangul wihan]. However, shamefully, the United 
States overturned its promise to us. The United States tries to 
conduct the Team Spirit joint military exercise and other 
large-scale nuclear war exercises against our Republic at all 
costs and tries, foolishly, to conduct full-scope inspections 
[chonmyon sachal] tantamount to a return to the treaty [Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty], not inspections to purely guarantee 
the continuity of safeguards. 
  If the United States intends to overturn its promise to us, 
we will no longer be bound by our promise to the United States. 
It is a gangster-like logic that one side may go back on its 
promise and the other side must keep it. We cannot sit back and 
watch the maneuvers of the United States to isolate and stifle 
[korip apsal] us. 
  If the United States sticks to its attitude as today, we 
cannot but reconsider our promises to the United States, such as 
the unilateral suspension of the effectuation of the withdrawal 
from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty [NPT], freeze of all 
the nuclear activities, and renunciation of the 
graphite-moderated reactor system. 
  The United States, more than anyone else, will be well 
aware of what the abandonment of such a promise signifies. We 
have never thought, even for a moment, that the DPRK-U.S. talks 
is a gift to us by the United States. We have never wanted 
anything from the United States. Also, we were not ignorant of 
the ulterior motive of the United States. All we hoped was that 
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula would be resolved 
peacefully in accordance with the expectation of our people and 
the world's peace-loving people. This is why we consistently 
insisted on negotiations with the United States. 
  If the United States does not have the will to resolve the 
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula through talks, then we 
have no intention of going out of our way to hold the talks. We 
are not indebted to the United States at all, and we will 
continue to live without being indebted to the United States. 
  It is a very foolish calculation, if the United States 
thinks 
that we will beg for the talks. Currently, the United States 
even set a time limit and said that it will be inevitable to 
move toward the road of taking sanctions if we do not receive 
the International Atomic Energy Agency's demand to accept a 
full-scope [chonmyon] inspection. The United States is trying 
to frighten someone. The United States is not the only one that 
has measures. The right of choice is not only limited to big 
powers either. We have ways for countermeasures against any 
other option by the United States. 
  What we are saying is not empty talk. We do not like to make 
empty talk. In reality, when the United States and the 
international reactionary forces set about to infringe upon the 
nation's dignity and the country's sovereign right, we answered 
them by announcing to withdraw from the NPT. When the United 
States and the South Korean puppets launched the Team Spirit-93 
joint military exercise, we took a resolute measure by 
announcing a semi-state of war. 
  Our unchanging will is that we do what we say we do. 
Defending to the end the country's sovereign right and the 
nation's dignity is the firm determination of our people and the 
People's Army. We are completely prepared politically, 
ideologically, militarily, and materially to cope with any kind 
of unexpected situation. 
  The United States must not miscalculate our will and 
determination, and must not underestimate our might. If the 
United States comes forward with the attitude of putting 
pressure on us, our attitude for taking a countermeasure will be 
a hundred times stronger, and this will be carried out into 
practical action. 
  It will be good for the United States to have a correct 
understanding of our Republic, our people, and the People's 
Army, and act with discretion. There will only be shameful 
defeat for those who are acting rashly and thoughtlessly. 

