BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 6 May (EFE) -- Members of a commission of 
government and opposition deputies created to investigate human 
right violations have received threats. Concern over the 
threats increased following the suspicion that a group of 
policemen and a prosecutor were responsible for torturing 
several individuals. 
  Ivan Miranda, Press Workers Federation secretary general, 
said today: "Government and other public office officials are 
creating a climate of terror among press workers." 
  The deputies denounced a police structure operating outside 
of the law. 
  Jorge Justiniano, legislator and leader of Democratic 
Socialism Alternative (ASD), has reported "a repressive police 
superstructure that puts everyone in a dangerous state of 
juridical insecurity." 
  Other members of the commission, including ruling party 
Deputy Luis Eduardo Siles and Ramiro Barrenechea of the 
indigenous movement Eje Pachacuti, said they have received phone 
threats. 
  Barrenechea went even further. He said one third of all 
legislators are being spied on and persecuted by members of 
state security organs. Interior Minister German Quiroga sharply 
rejected the accusation characterizing it as "irresponsible." 
  Commission members recently questioned more than a dozen 
people who had been arrested on charges of drug trafficking or 
terrorism. They all said they had been illegally arrested, 
interrogated, and tortured in alleged clandestine police centers. 
  They agreed that prosecutor Jose Nemtala was responsible for 
their alleged illegal arrests and torture. 
  Nemtala, a drug trafficking case prosecutor assigned to the 
Special Police Investigation Corp (CEIP), testified before the 
congressional commission on 5 May. He denied all charges 
against him by individuals indicted on charges of trafficking or 
terrorism. 
  Nemtala did recognize having acted illegally when he 
arrested 
journalist Judith Munoz a few days ago. Her release was ordered 
without charges several days after Nemtala ordered her arrest 
without court permission to interrogate her on her alleged links 
with terrorists and, specifically, on the murder of two U.S. 
members of the Mormon Church. 
  Nemtala said he ordered the arrest based on indications of 
her alleged responsibility mentioned in a report produced by the 
FBI. 

