BFN 

  [Text] President Suleyman Demirel has received the leaders 
of the opposition parties separately at the Cankaya Mansion and 
discussed internal and foreign developments. Within the 
framework of his meetings, Demirel met yesterday with Democratic 
Left Party leader Bulent Ecevit and today with ANAP [Motherland 
Party] leader Mesut Yilmaz and Prosperity Party [PP] leader 
Necmettin Erbakan. 
  In a news conference after the hour-long meeting with 
Demirel, Yilmaz said that he primarily explained to the 
president his evaluations and proposals on economic issues. 
Yilmaz pointed out that he stressed to Demirel that no 
concessions should be made on the free market economy while 
overcoming the economic crisis. Yilmaz said that the stability 
program cannot succeed without a monetary program, a foreign 
exchange policy, and free foreign currency reserves. 
  [Begin Yilmaz recording] These shortcomings have not been 
eliminated yet. On 5 April, the honorable prime minister 
promised that she would announce the monetary program in 15 
days. A month has passed, and there still is no monetary 
program. It is impossible to trust such a government or its 
stability program. It is impossible to achieve stability or 
succeed in the program without trust. In brief, under the 
administration of Ciller and her team, Turkey has been in a 
vicious circle for a month now. I conveyed these concerns to 
the president, and he told me that he will communicate these 
warnings to those concerned. [end recording] 
  ANAP leader Yilmaz further stated that the annual increase 
in 
the wholesale and consumer prices is the highest in Turkey's 
history. Pointing out that wholesale prices increased by 32.8 
percent in April, Yilmaz said that the increase in the salaries 
of civil servants for the coming six months is less than 30 
percent. Pointing out that the inflation rate since January is 
double the increase in civil servants' salaries, Yilmaz added: 
This is what the government deems fit for its civil servants, 
those it had promised would not be crushed by inflation. 
  In answer to questions, Yilmaz said that he did not repeat 
his views on the new government to the president; however, he 
added, he conveyed to the president his doubts about the present 
government's trustworthiness and said that the worsening 
situation can be prevented by removing this government. Yilmaz 
said that Demirel noted the importance of solving this issue in 
the Assembly and within the framework of the Constitution. 
  In answer to another question, Yilmaz said that Demirel 
accords great importance to the democratization efforts and to 
the amendments envisaged in the Constitution and laws and 
expressed his wish that ANAP, as the main opposition party, will 
also contribute constructively to these efforts. Stating that 
he explained to Demirel that for him, the economy is the main 
issue and that ANAP is opposed to the authorization and tax laws 
under discussion in the Assembly, Yilmaz said that ANAP is ready 
to cooperate in the democratization process as it has in the 
past. 
  Demirel later received PP leader Necmettin Erbakan. In a 
news conference after his hour-long meeting with Demirel, 
Erbakan said he had an extremely favorable meeting with the 
president in which the country's urgent issues, as well as the 
general situation, were discussed. Claiming that the country is 
being governed with "Take a loan and eat" logic, Erbakan said 
Turkey should return to the principle of "Produce and prosper" 
without any loss of time. Pointing out that a trustworthy 
infrastructure together with a clever mobilization for 
production are necessary to achieve this principle, Erbakan said 
that for this, Turkey needs a government that is driven. 
Erbakan said Turkey is basically a rich country and added that 
it has all the elements necessary -- a young and hard-working 
population -- to overcome the issues. Erbakan said that the 
solutions to these issues will be achieved legally and added 
that parliament itself will put forward the solution. 
  Stating that the people exhibited their common sense on 27 
March by indicating where they thought the solution lies, 
Erbakan stated that early elections will solve the problems. 
Erbakan indicated that there is a possibility of forming a new 
government in the event that early elections are not held. 
Erbakan said he hopes such a government will be formed, thereby 
freeing the country from its problems. 
  Erbakan said: In the event that a new government is not 
formed, we want to solve the issue by holding early elections. 
In any event, our principal condition is that the problems be 
solved within democratic laws and on legal grounds. We have 
faith that both our nation and parliament have the capability to 
solve this issue. In order to achieve these solutions, all the 
deputies must set aside their party politics, put the nation's 
interests first, and work together. 

