CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Elisabeth Nordgren: "Waiting for the Good Old </F>
Days"--introductory paragraphs in boldface as published] 
  [Text] All indications are that a fifth column is 
being built up in the Baltic states. Talks on the withdrawal of 
Russian troops from Estonia and Latvia have come to a 
standstill, and Russian military forces totaling some 5,000 men 
are still in those two countries. 
  The several tens of thousands of retired officers 
living all over the Baltic states are also staying prepared for 
an emergency. 
  In addition, even very young Russian officers are being 
pensioned off at a fast pace just now so that they can stay in 
Estonia and Latvia as civilians. 
  Since unemployment among the Russian residents is also 
high in those countries, discontent is on the rise. 
  Another result of the worsening economic and social 
situation for the Russian population in the Baltic states is 
that over half the Russians here voted for the extremist 
Zhirinovskiy in the last Russian parliamentary elections. Since 
those Zhirinovskiy supporters want the Soviet Union to return in 
one form or another, this also means that the Baltic states 
would be incorporated into that Greater Russia. 
  Today HUFVUDSTADSBLADET is beginning a series of 
articles examining the situation of the Russian population in 
the three Baltic states. The first country we will look at is 
Estonia. 
  The assembly hall at the Russian Officers Club in downtown 
Tallinn was chock-full. Close to 1,000 people, most of them 
elderly and resolute Russians -- pensioners, the unemployed 
young, Russian war veterans, and retired officers -- had 
gathered to discuss their rights, housing problems, and pension 
issues. The galleries were also full. There were no vacant seats 
left for all those pouring in later. Also present on the podium 
was a representative of the Estonian Government. An excited and 
tense mood prevailed in the hall, where there were many 
supporters of Zhirinovskiy. 
  Nikolay Stepanov, a retired officer who is chairman of the 
Officers Club, complained about the intolerable situation of war 
veterans. 
  "We have a hard time not only economically but also 
socially. 
The two military hospitals that used to be here have been turned 
over to the Estonians. And now it is expensive to go to the 
hospital. There is nothing left. And our recreational hotel is 
gone." 
  Stepanov is one of many typical examples of how the former 
Soviet military have ended up in a no-man's-land where they have 
been "forgotten" by the Russian Ministry of Defense, which is 
not paying officers' pensions. But neither is it up to the 
Estonian authorities to take responsibility for those tens of 
thousands of military who represent a foreign power but are 
staying in the country camouflaged as civilians. 
<H5>  Fifth Column in Baltic States </H5>
  It looks as though Russia is using that strategy to create a 
fifth column in the Baltic states, since younger and younger 
officers are being retired and settling in the Baltic states as 
civilians. 
  In fact, it is the retired officers who were stationed in 
the 
Baltic states who feel that they have lost the most as a result 
of the Soviet Union's collapse. 
  But it is not just the Soviet Russian officers who have been 
stripped of their privileges. The officers' wives also feel 
harmed. They have lost their priority status in access to 
housing and in lines at the shops. Tatiana Lasuvkina, an 
officer's wife who was born in Sebastopol, lived at a military 
base in Latvia, and now lives in Estonia, is worried that she 
will lose her apartment. In the Soviet era, officers were always 
given the best apartments in the countries where they were 
stationed. And now they do not want to relinquish those 
apartments to Estonians. In addition, the Soviet Union allowed 
its retired officers to choose the country they wanted to live 
in as pensioners. This made Estonia, with its high standard of 
living compared to the rest of the Soviet Union, one of the 
countries most popular with retirees. 
  Moreover, the fact that over half of the Russian population 
living in Estonia (600,000 people, including the military) voted 
for Zhirinovskiy in Russia's latest elections makes this a good 
breeding ground for the kind of invasion of Estonia that 
Zhirinovskiy supporters are campaigning for. And now things have 
also grown more difficult because the talks between Estonia and 
Russia regarding the withdrawal of Russian troops from Estonia 
have broken down, and Estonia and Latvia are both being 
threatened with economic sanctions if the Russian population's 
situation in both countries does not improve. 
<H5>  Zhirinovskiy: Savior in Time of Need </H5>
  Piotr Mihailovich Rozhok, the leader of Zhirinovskiy's 
supporters in Estonia who is now under indictment for inciting 
rebellion against Estonia, is awaiting trial in Tallinn. Rozhok 
himself says he is working for equality and is not guilty of 
breaking any laws. 
  "I don't understand what I am being tried for. I have never 
been guilty of incitement. But I have always defended the 
Russian population's rights here in Estonia. The most important 
thing for me is that Estonia's inhabitants should be equal." 
  Under Estonian law, Zhirinovskiy's Liberal Democratic Party 
cannot operate in Estonia, but Rozhok maintains that the party's 
principles are spreading through the country. Rozhok is betting 
on Zhirinovskiy because he stood up and defended the Russians' 
rights in Estonia. 
  "Our common principle is defense of the Russians' interests. 
Now, of course, the Russians have been completely humiliated. 
The Russians are being exploited more than any other minority 
here in Estonia. We pay 55 percent in taxes in this country, but 
where does the money go: What is the money used for?" Rozhok 
wonders. 
  Rozhok is 100-percent certain that Zhirinovskiy will be 
Russia's next president after Yeltsin, and he also says that the 
Russian presidential election is going to be held as early as 
this fall. 
  "Those who oppose Yeltsin have already shown their strength. 
And the Russian people will never forgive Gorbachev and Yeltsin 
for what they did to the Soviet Union and Russia." 
  Rozhok also says that the Baltic states will become part of 
Russia because they cannot survive without Russia. 
  "We will appeal to the Estonian people for Estonia's 
connection with Russia," says Rozhok, who threatens an economic 
blockade of Estonia if the country violates human rights. 
<H5>  Zhirinovskiy Supporter -- and Unemployed: `No Equality in </H5>
Estonia' 
  Out in the Tallinn suburb of Mustamae lives the young 
Ilnitskiy family. Andrey Ilnitskiy, the father, is a 
Zhirinovskiy supporter who has been unemployed for a year and a 
half. His wife Irina, who is of Estonian-Russian background, 
works as a kitchen maid at a hospital. Their daughter Olga, 
eight years old, goes to a Russian school, and the youngest 
girl, three-year-old Katia, goes to a day nursery. 
  Andrey Ilnitskiy was born in Estonia but cannot speak 
Estonian. Nor has he bothered to seek Estonian citizenship; 
instead, he keeps his Russian passport. That is his way of 
protesting. 
  "There is no equality in Estonia," says Andrey. "But I still 
want to keep on living here. My friends are here, this is where 
I grew up, and I don't know if things would be any better 
somewhere else." 
<H5>  For Russian-Estonian Understanding </H5>
  Ilnitskiy dreams of an Estonia where the Russian and 
Estonian 
residents can live in mutual understanding. He also feels that 
Russian should have official status as the second national 
language. The Russian population should also be given Estonian 
citizenship automatically, with no language test or waiting time 
required. 
  The Ilnitskiy family's two daughters speak Russian to their 
father and a little Estonian to their mother. But otherwise, the 
family "lives" entirely in Russian and does not read Estonian 
newspapers. Wife Irina grew up using both Russian and Estonian 
(her father is Estonian) and went to the Russian school. Now the 
Estonians do not want to pay for Russian-language schools, Irina 
says. Schools and day nurseries must both be paid for by the 
parents themselves. Nor is Russian-language higher education 
available any longer in Estonia. 
  In the hospital kitchen where Irina works, there are both 
Estonian and Russian employees. Irina points out that there has 
been harmony between Estonians and Russians. But the new chef 
wants to get rid of the Russian employees. 
  Andrey formerly worked as a technician at the Volta plant 
with its 2,000 employees. He was also deputy chairman of the 
union. The Volta plant is typical of the Moscow-run plants from 
the Soviet era that have been taken over by the Estonian state 
and now operate at half their capacity. The result is that many 
Russian workers are now unemployed. 
<H5>  No Job Without Estonian-Language Proficiency </H5>
  "It is really hard to find a job here in Tallinn," says 
Andrey. "And when I go to the employment office, I am 
immediately turned away because I can't speak Estonian. In fact, 
the language issue caused me to miss out on a night watchman's 
job that I had my eye on. Also, my Russian name does not go over 
well." 
  In the meantime, Andrey works at odd jobs, but mainly the 
family lives on what his wife earns. Since there is also no 
unemployment insurance to speak of and food prices and rents 
have gone up, times are hard for the Ilnitskiy family. The 
Ilnitskiys currently pay 500 Estonian kroons (about 200 markkas, 
or nearly half the average monthly wage) in rent, but they have 
left the heating bill unpaid. 
  "Tomorrow is shrouded in mystery, and I don't believe I will 
find a permanent job for a long time. But I try to survive day 
by day." 
  The apolitical Russian Social Foundation has now been 
established by the Russian residents to try to collect funds for 
those in need. Since there is no Russian representative in the 
Estonian parliament, it is difficult for the Russian residents 
to protect their interests, even though there are 27 Russian 
members of the Tallinn City Council. But Andrey is hoping that 
the parliamentary elections a year from now will change things. 
He also believes that Zhirinovskiy will speed up the 
negotiations with Estonia regarding increased assistance for the 
Russian residents. 
  "Unfortunately, Russian-Estonian cooperation has ended, but 
thanks to Zhirinovskiy's Estonian colleague Piotr Razhok 
[spelling variation as published], Zhirinovskiy is well informed 
about what happens here." 
  According to Andrey, the tense situation for Estonia's 
Russian population is what drove the people to vote for 
extremists. 
  "It is not the Russian population, but the Estonian 
Government that is responsible for the fact that we voted for 
Zhirinovskiy and now find ourselves in this situation. But at 
least there are a few Estonian members of the Estonian 
parliament who are trying to do something for the Russian 
population." 
  Certainly Andrey Ilnitskiy does not believe there will be 
another Soviet Union, but what he does believe in is a trade 
alliance between Russia and Estonia that will preserve Estonia's 
sovereignty. 

