Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jamal Khashuqji: "Yemen: 'Abd-al-Majid </F>
al-Zandani, an `Afghan' in Decision Making Positions"] 
  [Text] After President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih and the other 
members of the Presidential Council swore the constitutional 
oath, came the turn of new council member Shaykh 'Abd-al-Majid 
al-Zandani. He rose with his impressive stature in traditional 
Yemeni costume and stood out from the others by his thick, 
hennaed beard. Putting his right hand on the Koran, he said: "I 
swear by Almighty God that I will maintain the Book and the 
Sunnah, and that I will maintain the republican system." Before 
he could continue the oath, voices of surprise and even 
disapproval rose from the benches of Parliament; for the shaykh 
had not adhered to the constitutional text, but had added the 
clause, "maintain the Book and the Sunnah." However, he 
continued reciting the oath, disregarding the shouts and 
mumbling. His tone of voice changed. He began to emphasize the 
words, as if defying the objecting deputies: "And I will respect 
the Constitution and the law in what does not violate the Book 
of God and the Sunnah of His Messenger." And, "I will tend the 
interests of the people and maintain the unity, independence, 
and territorial integrity of the country to the best of my 
ability." This behavior came as no surprise. The shaykh is known 
for his strong and vehement positions that have moved him 
throughout his long political life to disagree not only with the 
government, but with others in the Islamic ranks. He is famous 
for following a policy of brinkmanship. Thus far, he has 
succeeded with it. 
  The opposite of what happened would have surprised us more. 
In 1991, the shaykh almost halted the reunification process 
when, under the slogan of "constitutional change before 
unification," he led hundreds of thousands of Yemenis in the 
largest demonstration that modern Yemen had ever witnessed. 
Although unification was a popular demand, the shaykh's 
popularity and speaking ability helped him stand in the way of 
unification and its constitution without losing his broad 
popular base. The Constitution and unity survived, but the 
Yemeni Presidential Council, which at the time was composed of 
the [General] People's Congress and the Socialist [Party], 
appended a clause stipulating that Islamic shari'ah was superior 
to the provisions of the Constitution. 
  The battle of the Constitution has not been the only one in 
the shaykh's life. His Presidential Council appointment, which 
received support in advance from all parties, came as a sign of 
the extent to which positions in Yemen have changed. Yesterday's 
enemies are today's allies. The many lines of contact among the 
three main political parties prevent any analyst from drawing 
easy inferences, however logical they may seem. However, 
al-Zandani's election will not be the end of the road for the 
main leader of Yemen's Islamic movement, who began his political 
life with "the free Yemenis" (Ahrar al-Yaman) in 
Cairo. The project of an Islamic state is the movement's goal, 
although it does not say so explicitly, contenting itself with 
allusive language about an "Islamic society" and an "Islamic 
constitution." One recalls that Hasan al-Banna, the founder of 
the Muslim Brotherhood, chose the land of Yemen as a model land 
for his dream. He might have succeeded in the matter, had it not 
been for the English presence and the Arab League. 
  Yemen's Islamic movement has learned much from its 
accumulated experiences, which began with the 1948 revolution, 
when a Hashimite nominee for the imamate, 'Abdallah ibn 
al-Wazir, attempted to take over the government by force and 
implement a reform program with the assistance of the Muslim 
Brotherhood. The latter had no Yemeni organizations at the time, 
but were represented by an Algerian adventurer named al-Fadil 
al-Wartani. The movement failed, having established in Yemen a 
bad precedent of change by violence and bloodshed. 
  The present-day movement traces its ancestry to the former 
in 
some of its reform ideas and is linked to it by the historic 
figure of "Abu al-Ahrar" (Judge Muhammad al-Zubayri). However, 
it became separated from it in name after the inheritance of 
their grandfather's movement was left to the al-Wazir family. 
The new movement, which will soon be able to celebrate the 
fortieth anniversary of its founding, was characterized by its 
having been started by Yemeni youths who formed the first 
nucleus of the Muslim Brotherhood. However, they never surfaced 
publicly with their organization, but preferred to take cover in 
the shadow of powerful figures, foremost among them Judge 
al-Zubayri. 
  These young people were active in Yemeni expatriate 
communities in the fifties, especially in Egypt, where they 
became disciples of the Muslim Brotherhood's first generation 
and carried their ideas to imamist Sanaa with returning 
students. Shaykh 'Abd-al-Majid ibn 'Aziz al-Zandani was one of 
the latter. He taught pharmacy in the fifties in Cairo (he was 
slightly over twenty years old), where he arrived after spending 
several months in Aden. "British" Aden at the time was teeming 
with trade and liberal ideas, unlike the conservative imamist 
north, where the shaykh spent the first two decades of his life 
in the Ba'dan district of Ibb governorate, about 170 km south of 
the capital. His father had left his native village of Zandan, 
which is affiliated with the Arhab tribes, when the shaykh was 
still a baby. 
  Thus he spent his childhood in Ba'dan, a Shafi'i 
agricultural 
area, away from the Zaydi tribal milieu to which his tribe of 
Arhab belonged. Arhab is a division of the mother tribe Bakil, 
the traditional rival of the Hashid tribe, which has strong 
influence in Yemen today and is headed by Shaykh 'Abdallah ibn 
Husayn al-Ahmar, speaker of the House of Representatives and 
leader of the Yemeni Grouping for Reform, to which Shaykh 
al-Zandani belongs politically. 
  It is difficult to assign the shaykh to any particular 
school 
of Islamic law, although he is a jurist expert in the 
[different] schools and their rulings. He prefers to classify 
himself as a follower of the Book and the Sunnah. His opponents 
accuse him of "Salafiyah" and of prejudice against Yemen's 
majority Zaydi legal school. The shaykh has never hidden his 
severity against "doctrinal deviations" in the criticisms he has 
voiced in his lectures. These are recorded on dozens of cassette 
tapes distributed not only in Yemen, but among young people of 
the "awakening" in various Arab countries. Thus it appears that 
the majority have accepted his view as a "reformer." 
  Shaykh al-Zandani spent a number of years in Egypt. He never 
finished his pharmacy course, since politics turned his 
attention away from it, but his studies were sufficient to 
strengthen his interest in religious subjects. He pressed on to 
become a leading expert on the scientific inimitability of the 
Koran. He founded a group concerned with the subject within the 
Islamic World League in Mecca. The group held conferences and 
published books. In Cairo, the shaykh chose the path of the 
Muslim Brotherhood, which he still continues to follow. With 
this goes a populist dimension that makes him resemble the 
Algerian leader Abassi Madani. This has led several times to his 
removal "by mutual agreement" from the organization, since the 
Muslim Brotherhood has another golden rule that goes, "The 
individual can accommodate what the group cannot." Some 
historians make al-Zandani the founder of the movement in the 
north. This is unwritten oral history, for the Muslim Brothers 
of Yemen have not yet written their history. Everyone, however, 
agrees that he was one of the founders, though he assumed 
leadership officially only briefly between 1971 and 1975. The 
shaykh, and the Brotherhood with him, preferred to work in the 
framework of broader organizations or agencies. When the 1962 
revolution took place, they supported it and went along with it 
energetically; but they rallied around Judge al-Zubayri, a 
symbol on which Yemenis agreed, particularly since they were 
confident of their relation with him, having been fellow 
students in Cairo. Al-Zandani became al-Zubayri's assistant and 
lieutenant during years that were decisive in Yemen's history. 
He prepared a special program over Sanaa radio entitled "The 
Revolution and Religion." In it he dealt with a sensitive 
subject to Yemeni consciousness: for although the ruling imam 
had been a tyrant, he continued to hold a legitimate claim for 
many Yemenis, especially for the majority Zaydis. 
  The position of al-Zubayri, and with him the youths of the 
Muslim Brotherhood, was idealistic and too hard for anyone to 
accept. Historically, they were against the imamate, but they 
also opposed the Egyptian intervention and military rule; so 
they aroused hostility to themselves among republicans and 
monarchists, or at least among leaders in both camps. 
Al-Zubayri, and al-Zandani with him, were forced to leave Sanaa, 
which was no longer safe. They sought refuge or became active in 
the tribal areas. Naturally, they chose their own tribe of 
Arhab, to which al-Zubayri, like al-Zandani, belonged. In 1964, 
they founded Hizballah. Al-Zubayri began to expose in his 
powerful poetry the corruption of the Yemeni revolution and its 
failure to realize the people's hopes. Both men called for the 
Egyptians to leave. However, the movement ended with the 
assassination of its founder, Judge al-Zubayri, who fell victim 
to an intertribal clash. Some accused Amir Muhammad ibn 
al-Husayn of arranging the assassination; others accused 
generals in Sanaa, and suspicions also hung over the Egyptians. 
  As civil war continued, the Muslim Brothers stepped aside 
because they were too weak to influence events in the absence of 
al-Zubayri. After the 1967 defeat, calm returned to a Yemen 
racked by the woes of war and the Egyptian army. Judge 
'Abd-al-Rahman al-Iryani took power on 5 November. The Muslim 
Brothers seized the opportunity and began building their 
organization in absolute secrecy. They made efforts to dominate 
education, entered the army and police, and reached sensitive 
positions the effects of which they are still reaping. 
  The main role in this organized activity fell again to the 
Muslim Brotherhood's two real founders in Yemen as a whole. The 
first of these was the southerner 'Umar Salim (Tarmum), who 
migrated to the north after the Socialists took power in his 
country. He fell out with the movement in 1982 and was 
marginalized until he died in isolation last year. The second 
was Yasin 'Abd-al-'Aziz (al-Qabati), the organization's present 
leader. However, al-Zandani, with his powerful, popular 
personality, emerged anew to be appointed general overseer of 
the Brotherhood in 1971. The shaykh once again sought out 
religious scholars. The Brotherhood founded a scholarly 
organization as a grouping of religious scholars. It was headed 
by a well-known judge, Ahmad Salamah. Al-Zandani remained in the 
leadership of the Brotherhood, whose existence no one 
acknowledged. The shaykh became active again as a political 
opponent of al-Iryani. This was something that the Brotherhood 
could not tolerate, as it needed good relations with the 
government. Al-Zandani was therefore removed from the leadership 
(Yasin 'Abd-al-'Aziz took his place) and returned to working 
behind the scenes--this time in the Ba'dan area where he had 
grown up. 
  A second, peaceful coup then took place. Lieutenant Colonel 
Ibrahim al-Hamdi, who took power, extended the hand of peace to 
the Islamic movement and allowed the establishment of an office 
of direction and guidance, headed by al-Zandani. 
  During the period of bloody coups, with the murder of 
al-Hamdi and of (al-Ghashmi) and the coming to power of 
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, the situation in the north was 
unfavorable, especially with the increasing influence of the 
National Front, a leftist opposition movement armed by 
"comrades" in the south. The front almost created a state for 
itself inside Yemen in the Khubban region, which it made its 
base and whence it began expanding, with Sanaa, naturally, as 
its goal. 
  The undeclared Yemeni civil war began in the late seventies. 
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih untied the hands of the Muslim 
Brotherhood in the confrontation. They declared a jihad and 
embarked on a real war against the communists. Yemenis still 
have a legacy of heroic songs and stories they tell about the 
battles. 
  The reward consisted of 370 Brotherhood-run institutions 
throughout Yemen with an independent budget and permission for 
Muslim Brothers to infiltrate education, the army, and the 
police. They participated strongly in drafting the national 
covenant, an Islamic constitution that was never implemented. 
After these gains, al-Zandani again left the scene in a 
voluntary emigration lasting about 10 years. There are two 
versions of why he emigrated. The first is that relations 
between him and the leadership soured, so that it became 
necessary for him to leave. The second is that the movement, no 
longer able to tolerate the shaykh's fanaticism and the 
disagreements it caused the movement with government agencies, 
asked him to leave. He spent most of his years of emigration in 
Saudi Arabia, either in Mecca or in Jeddah, where he was active 
with the Islamic World League. He devoted his attention to the 
Afghan jihad, becoming one of its proponents. He made long trips 
to Afghanistan and entered front-line areas with Arab mujahidin, 
among whom Yemenis formed the second largest group, after 
Saudis. He became an adviser and mediator acceptable to most of 
the Afghan leaders. The present Afghan president and his prime 
minister are considered to be his personal friends. 
  His appointment to the Presidential Council may have an 
additional meaning. Yemen's rulers, or at least President 'Ali 
'Abdallah Salih, do not have the complex of sensitivity 
prevalent in many Arab countries to the Islamic movement. In 
Peshawar, relations between al-Zandani and the Palestinian 
Shaykh 'Abdallah 'Azzam became strong. When the latter was 
assassinated in 1989, his disciples and Arab mujahidin followers 
pressed al-Zandani to succeed him in the leadership. However, 
events in al-Zandani's country were fermenting again. The 
Socialists in the south had accepted unification, but had 
imposed a secular constitution, instead of the north's "Islamic" 
constitution, which had never been implemented. 
  After the Gulf Crisis, al-Zandani returned to Yemen by way 
of 
Sudan, where he had a friend, Shaykh Hasan al-Turabi, with whom 
he spent time discussing "the great Islamic concern." Having 
returned to Yemen with the ideas of the Islamic Front, 
al-Zandani announced in September the establishment of the 
Yemeni Grouping for Reform, following an alliance between the 
Islamic movement and the powerful leader of the Hashid tribe, 
'Abdallah al-Ahmar, although the shaykh's name did not appear on 
the grouping's founding committee. 
  Al-Zandani confirmed his popular leadership anew at the 
January 1993 "Unity and Peace" conference, for which he 
mobilized the various forces supporting him. Then he completed 
his battle crowned by the constitutional oath-taking. 

