BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Social Dumping: European Union </F>
Plodding Along Behind U.S. Steamroller"] 
  [Text] Brussels -- "Social dumping" whizzed to the agenda 
of world trade talks like a comet. Some three months after the 
conclusion of the Uruguay Round, where the issue was not even 
brought up, it has now hit the charts. 
  The United States thoroughly ruined the atmosphere on the 
evening before the official signing of the GATT agreements in 
the Moroccan city of Marrakech. President Clinton insists that 
a reference to the problem be included in the ministerial 
statement marking the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, and 
setting the tone for the World Trade Organization (WTO), which 
is to be established soon. The U.S. envoy in Geneva thus pinned 
down almost all other 118 participants against their will. 
  The European Union (EU) looked the other way for a while. 
Still, Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan also has only two 
things on his mind these days: The promotion of his book on the 
future of Europe in general and of himself in particular, and 
the "Worldwide Social Partnership." This is his euphemism for 
stopping social dumping through new agreements between the 
industrialized nations and their emerging competitors. 
  Social dumping is a relatively vague concept. However, both 
the EU and the United States recently found out that they are 
faced more and more often with products from countries which 
gain a comparative advantage because they do not have to worry 
as much about employee rights and working conditions. They are 
not only concerned about direct competition, but also about the 
indirect loss of employment through investments. 
  In the meantime, the developing countries are turning 
massively against the U.S. steamroller, which intends to level 
the "global playing field," and behind which Sir Leon is 
plodding along so enthusiastically. They fear that the 
industrialized nations are looking for a new pretext to screen 
off their own markets. They agreed to the request to put 
environmental dumping on the agenda, but feel the issue of 
social rights does not fall within the competence of GATT. This 
issue should be dealt with by the International Labor 
Organization (ILO), and as far as the prevention of child labor 
is concerned, by UNICEF. 
  "A nontariff and protectionist trade barrier": This is how 
the Philippine ambassador to the EU labelled the plan for a 
social clause earlier this week, during a hearing of the 
European Parliament. Zutshi, Indian envoy to GATT, warned the 
United States in Geneva that it risks all attainments of the 
Uruguay Round and jeopardizes the multilateral trade system. 
  Brittan knew that the developing countries would react this 
way. There is no doubt in his mind that action must be taken in 
the social field, the only question is how and when. However, 
since "we cannot make any progress without the developing 
countries," he proceeds with more caution than the Americans. 
His unsolicited advice to Washington is this: "We should be 
careful not to undermine our own positions by taking 
ill-considered and hastily implemented initiatives." 
  The European Commission contributed to the hearing by 
arguing 
that the developing countries and emerging industrial nations 
should be very pleased with a social clause in the world trade 
regulations, which the EU pursues out of sheer altruism. "Our 
message will be convincing, if we can show that the measure is 
neither protectionist, nor dictated by self-interest, nor 
opportunistic," Brittan claimed. 
  The EU aims at the worldwide implementation of the ILO 
standard on employee rights "basically because it is the right 
thing to do, not because we expect some material benefit from 
it," he assured. However, he failed to be truly convincing. 
Brittan did not hesitate to utter threats by referring to the 
European labor unions. 
  In a common statement on the "social dimension of 
international trade," the unions suggested that one GATT clause 
refer to the ILO standard. Countries which do not meet the 
standard, would get two years to straighten things out. Then a 
decision would be taken on possible sanctions. "It seems to me 
that this is the proper approach," Brittan said. 

