BFN 

  [Text] Jerusalem, April 10 (AFP) -- The occupied 
territories are to remain closed at least for another week and 
18,250 foreign workers will be imported to replace Arab labour, 
the Israeli government announced Sunday [10 April]. 
  The closure, which was enforced last Thursday after Islamic 
militants killed eight Israelis and wounded about 50, will be 
reviewed at next Sunday's weekly cabinet meeting, Environment 
Minister Yosi Sarid told journalists. 
  "We cannot allow terrorism to influence the peace process 
and 
put it in jeopardy," he said as Israel and the PLO resumed 
negotiations in Cairo to try to launch Palestinian autonomy in 
the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho. 
  Israel would recruit 15,000 east European workers for the 
construction industry and 3,250 farm labourers, mainly from 
Thailand and Turkey, to take over from Palestinians, Labour 
Minister Ora Namir said after the cabinet session. 
  It would take three to five weeks to organize the imported 
labour, she said. 
  The government would also grant 13-dollar daily subsidies to 
each of 4,000 Israeli workers, who are paid more than 
Palestinians. 
  Communications Minister Shulamit Aloni warned earlier Sunday 
that the ban could spark "the start of a famine" and should be 
lifted this week. 
  "We cannot cause the start of a famine by a imposing a total 
indefinite ban on two million Palestinians," Aloni told Israel 
radio. 
  "We are responsible for the economic backwardness of the 
territories and we have exploited them during 27 years of 
occupation." 
  "The ban should be lifted straight after the Independence 
Day 
holidays (on Thursday) [14 April]," Aloni said. 
  The West Bank and Gaza Strip have been officially sealed 
since the end of March 1993 following a wave of killings, but 
the restrictions were greatly relaxed in the months before the 
Hebron mosque massacre. 
  Authorities tightened the ban after the February 25 
slaughter 
of 30 Moslems by a Jewish settler, in a bid to prevent revenge 
attacks. But in recent weeks more than 25,000 Palestinians 
received new work permits for Israel. 
  Before the 1993 ban, some 100,000 Palestinians worked in 
Israel. 
  Palestinian earnings in Israel represent about one-third of 
the Gross National Product of the territories. 

