Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ownership Transformations Minister Wieslaw </F>
Kaczmarek by Ada Kostrz-Kostecka; place and date not given: "Is 
There a Danger of Paralysis of Foreign Investment in 
Privatization?"] 
  [Text] [Kostrz-Kostecka] Just three capital privatizations 
have taken place since the beginning of the year: the sale of 
the Goleniow Furniture Factory, the Dzialoszyn Cement Plant, and 
the Sugar Products "San" plant. Are you not afraid that 
revenues from privatization, which were included in the budget 
law for this year, may not be realized? 
  [Kaczmarek] No, I am not. It is enough to just take a look 
at revenues from the sale of the Sugar Products San plant, which 
are over 600 billion zlotys. More privatization projects are 
being prepared, and another big transaction is under negotiation. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] There is a debate going on currently, 
which, on the one hand, concerns who is supposed to make the 
privatization decisions, and, on the other, expresses a desire 
to limit foreign investment. Does that debate not contribute to 
foreign capital being less interested in our country? 
  [Kaczmarek] Recently, there have been more and more cases of 
politics and economics going their own separate ways. And I am 
sorry to say this, but I think one cannot worry over various 
statements because there is no danger of paralysis in these 
investments. I also think that foreign investors who are 
interested in Poland do not take such views seriously, either. 
The number of questions on companies being privatized is proof 
of that. What is important is what the U.S. Commerce Department 
said on 28 January, when it presented an analysis of countries 
with the highest investment potential and developmental 
possibilities over the next several years. In the European 
market, only Poland and Turkey were named; in Asia--China, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, and South Korea, and, in South 
America--Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico. The London Club's 
behavior is another positive message because it is proof of 
their conviction that we are stable. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] But, if a division of privatization powers 
were to take place, which was sought during a debate on a new 
privatization law, among others, by the Industry, Foreign 
Economic Cooperation, and Transportation Mjinistries, that could 
make the entry of foreign investors more difficult. 
  [Kaczmarek] I think this is more about being in power just 
for the sake of it, rather than about implementing specific 
strategic privatization goals. I would understand taking such 
measures if we had a specific policy for reconstructing foreign 
trade, an industrial policy, a policy of reconstructing 
different branches, and if the point was to have power to 
implement these goals. But we have no such programs. I spoke 
with Minister Pol and think his goal is to look for solutions 
with the aim of carrying out a policy of commercialization, 
which, for him, is clearly separate from privatization, and I 
agree with him on that. But I disagree with the view that 
privatization is to be implemented at specific ministries. I 
think we do not appreciate the fact that, for a foreign 
investor, a "green fields" situation--that is, building a 
factory from scratch--is more worthwhile. The tobacco industry 
is a classic example, where specific forces do not allow for 
privatization of state-owned tobacco plants, but Reynolds will 
build a factory from scratch. Or, to cite a different 
branch--Philips, which is building a battery and car-battery 
plant. There are more and more examples indicating that foreign 
investors prefer to build from scratch instead of restructuring 
state-owned companies. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] Is the Ownership Transformations 
Ministry not to blame a bit for the fact that decisions about 
selling companies, particularly to foreign investors, take so 
much time? My feeling is that, especially in those cases, one 
seeks assurances in the form of many documents, so as to 
eliminate in due course anyone having reservations about the 
transaction. After all, the sales that were recently 
implemented were prepared over a long period of time. 
  [Kaczmarek] I do not think that is the case. Usually, the 
process takes quite a long time, usually six to nine months, and 
you must also take into account the big replacement level of 
staff in the ministry, which is not conducive to decisionmaking, 
either. Consider also that, in such cases, there is practically 
no tolerance for making mistakes, and that is why everything is 
examined very carefully several times. Volumes of contracts are 
getting bigger and bigger, compared with the initial ones, 
which, by the way, were done in pioneer fashion and thus were 
definitely far from perfect. Even if there is a provision in a 
contract, which by the way is a positive thing--such as in the 
case of the San factory--to the effect that the investor does 
not conduct any talks that could possibly influence his 
investment policies vis-a-vis San, that means that proper 
conclusions have been drawn from past experiences. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] Many new investors may emerge as a result 
of the implementation of the National Investment Funds [NFI] 
program. When can we expect them? 
  [Kaczmarek] Hearings before the Selection Commission of 
candidates for companies managing the investment funds have been 
completed, and, right now, financial offers are being evaluated. 
So the time schedule is being observed; we are even ahead of 
it. A ranking of companies based on individual scores could be 
presented as early as the first half of April. After getting to 
know the documents and opinions of the commission's individual 
members, I will be able to select some companies, with the 
proviso that the commission will suggest to me a certain order 
to be followed. There will probably be 15 funds, so this is how 
many companies will be needed. The commission also reviews 
offers by candidates for members of governing boards. Because 
there are 6,800 candidates, I agreed with the commission's 
chairman that a certain selection must be done, which would be 
guided by accepted criteria, and that about 800 people must be 
selected. Then, about 200 people will be selected after talks, 
and, from among them, I will select 105 representatives of the 
Treasury. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] What kinds of guarantees are there that 
really good companies will be selected that would first 
restructure the companies covered by the program and then 
privatize them successfully? In your selection, do you intend 
to be guided by the companies' size and reputation or by their 
familiarity with the market? There are, for instance, several 
little-known companies that have already done some things in 
Poland and know the situation, but, on the other hand, it is 
possible that there will be cases of "Marriott brigades," 
meaning that a well-known company sends over young employees to 
see whether they fit. If they do not, there is no big loss for 
the company because Poland is a marginal market for the company 
anyway. 
  [Kaczmarek] The mechanism goes both ways because there are, 
for instance, little-known companies that use the names of 
several dozen famous people on their list of references, but, in 
fact, these people do not participate in the project in 
question. Only the wisdom and skills of the commission members 
can prevent such mistakes from happening. I think the program is 
popular enough that a company of some reputation will not be 
willing to risk losing it. As for the "Marriott brigades" 
description, it was applied more often in cases involving 
certain consulting companies. Investment banks that are taken 
into account in that case tended not to participate in the 
"brigades" because the banks have been watching Poland only from 
a distance up to now. So, in that case, the point is to create 
new institutions of the capital market. That is one of the goals 
of the NFI program. 
  [Kostrz-Kostecka] What kind of supervision will there be 
over the companies' activities after the program is implemented, 
funds are established, and contracts with managing companies are 
signed? Could it not happen that they will immediately sell a 
majority of companies at low prices because they will think it 
not worthwhile to restructure them? 
  [Kaczmarek] Reservations contained in the contracts prohibit 
the sale of companies during a specified period of time, so that 
would be a breach of contract. But one obviously cannot rule 
out the possibility of a bankruptcy emerging in that group, in 
which case something will have to be done. Perhaps it will be 
necessary to sell one bad company to get the money to 
restructure some other companies. 

