BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by AERA editorial board staff member Nobuo </F>
Kobayashi: "180 Days of Discord Between Ozawa and Yamagishi"] 
  [Text] It seems that Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] 
General Secretary Ichiro Ozawa, the strongman of the Hata 
administration, and Chairman Akira Yamagishi of the Japan Trade 
Union Confederation [Rengo], a big organization of eight million 
members, are generally thought to be on friendly terms with each 
other. 
  However, Shinseito, Nihon Shinto [Japan New Party], the 
Democratic Socialist Party [DSP], and others formed a new 
parliamentary group Kaishin [Renovation] on 25 April, 
immediately after the nomination of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata. 
When the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] bolted from 
the coalition government in opposition to the formation of 
Kaishin on the following day, 26 April, Chairman Yamagishi said 
at once at a press conference concerning SDPJ's action: "I can 
understand the SDPJ's action and would like to support it." 
That remark made one wonder: "Has his relationship with Ozawa 
changed?" 
  When asked about the matter, Chairman Yamagishi said in 
reply: "Ozawa is a neo-conservative and I am a social democrat. 
From the beginning he has lived on the other side of the river, 
and I have come more and more to feel the distance." 
  In April, three attempts were made to arrange a meeting 
between the two men, but Chairman Yamagishi refused all of them. 
It is said that not only has Yamagishi never had a meeting with 
Ozawa since the beginning of this year, but also that he has not 
talked with Ozawa over the telephone at all. 
  Ozawa and Yamagishi played the lead roles in establishing 
the 
Hosokawa coalition government last summer, which put an end to 
the one-party rule of the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP]. 
However, it seems that the relationship between the two men has 
completely cooled, judging from Yamagishi's remarks. Are they 
really at odds with each other? 
  Let us set the hands of the clock back one year. On 20 
February last year, Ozawa and Yamagishi had a meeting. That was 
an important move which heralded the collapse of the LDP 
administration. The meeting was arranged by Tokai University 
Professor Kenzo Uchida, who is a common friend of the two men 
and one of the brains of former Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa. 
  Ozawa told Yamagishi that the then Hata faction was 
determined to bolt from the LDP, and Yamagishi promised Ozawa 
that he would exercise his influence over the SDPJ. Thus, they 
reached a fundamental agreement concerning the establishment of 
a non-LDP coalition government. Professor Uchida says: "It is 
like the alliance between Satsuma and Choshu in the Meiji 
Restoration. Each had his own intentions and the two men got on 
well with each other until the passage of political reform 
bills." 
  The two men then had two meetings after the establishment of 
the Hosokawa administration, but, as Yamagishi says, they have 
not met since 16 December last year. 
  In fact, a meeting was once arranged for the two men on 4 
March this year. A mediator at that time was Dietman Akira 
Fukida, who was a leader of the Kato group built around 
Agriculture Minister Mutsuki Kato. Kato and others joined 
Shinseito in April, but they were regarded as "Ozawa's detached 
force" at that time. However, the Ozawa side asked for a 
postponement just before the scheduled meeting, and talks 
through this route were stopped. 
  At that time, the problem of the reshuffle of the cabinet 
was 
on the boil. It is not clear why the meeting was postponed and 
came to naught. When urged to have a meeting again and again by 
different sources, Yamagishi betrayed his strong dissatisfaction 
by saying: "Ozawa is rude and is contemplating divide-and-rule 
tactics." 
  Then came the post-Hosokawa period in April. Yamagishi named 
three mediators: besides Professor Uchida mentioned above, 
Rengo Secretary General Etsuya Washio, a strongman in Rengo, and 
Chairman Mototaka Ito of the Japan Postal Workers' Union. 
(more) 13 Jun SN/mercado/murphy sm171406.007 su 14/1341z Jun 
BT 
#1991 
NNNN 
UNCLAS 4XX 
WARNING: FOUO -- DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS, THE 
  FOLLOWING ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. 
GOVERNMENT 
  CONSUMERS 
WARNING: JAPANESE MEDIA PROJECT 
REF: ow1406134094 tokyo aera japanese 13 jun///postal 
workers' 
  union. 

