BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Christian du Brulle: "Weapons Trafficking </F>
Discovered in Brussels] 
  [Text] Travelers' checks stolen from the Commercial Bank of 
Rwanda in Kigali totaling $10 million (340 million Belgian 
francs [BFr]) might have been used by "honest" Western 
businessmen to purchase weapons illegally for the Rwandan Army. 
  This hypothesis seems to have been confirmed by the arrests 
in Brussels by investigating Judge Patrick Mandoux. In 
addition, this clandestine network, which aimed to bypass the UN 
embargo on weapons sales in the region, allegedly is directed by 
the Rwandan Embassy in Kinshasa with the help of Zairian 
Civilian Guard officials. 
  The trafficking was discovered in Brussels on Thursday [2 
June] when employees of a Brussels bank tipped off police. Two 
clients were trying to cash traveler's checks amounting to $1.4 
million (BFr47.5 million). The bank employees became suspicious 
because the clients carried this large amount of checks in a 
travel bag. In addition, the checks had not been signed a 
second time as is usally the case. 
  The police immediately intervened. Didier, 43, a Belgian 
residing in Ohain but born in Luluabourg (Zaire), and Fred, 59, 
a U.S. citizen residing in Binza, a residential area of 
Kinshasa, were taken to Ohain by police inspectors. Documents 
describing the extent of this huge arms trafficking were seized 
during a search of Didier's house. The checks stolen in Kigali 
have been given to several teams of Western businessmen to be 
negotiated in Europe. The money is to be used for purchasing 
weapons on behalf of the provisional Rwandan Government. Fake 
documents certifying the validity of the stolen traveler's 
checks had been forged by the cabinet of the Rwandan interior 
minister. 
  Moreover, in order to bypass the UN embargo, a fake 
certificate from an official of the Zairian Civilian Guard 
stated that the weapons were negotiated on behalf of the 
Civilian Guard. In case problems were encountered, the teams 
sent to Europe were to explain that the money was intended for 
the purchase of medicines and medical equipment for the Rwandan 
refugees who had fled their country. 
  A first team of "businessmen," recruited by top members of 
the network, was caught in London a few days ago with $900,000. 
A second team was arrested with $1.4 million in Brussels on 
Thursday. Finally, a third team was discovered with stolen 
traveler's checks in Waterloo on Friday. 
  Meanwhile, the Zairian Embassy in Brussels told us that 
President Mobutu has not financed any operation aimed at 
providing weapons or ammunition to the Rwandan Government forces 
(...) Tutsis and Hutus who have acquired Zairian nationality 
are full Zairian citizens. They thus enjoy the same protection 
as any other Zairian national. This also is the case for Rwandan 
nationals of Tutsi origin who sought refuge in Zaire, Ambassador 
Kimbulu said. He denied that some Tutsi refugees who managed to 
reach Goma were executed by Rwandan soldiers. 

