Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lithuanian Foreign Minister Povilas Gylys in </F>
Vilnius by Nikolay Lashkevich; date not given: "Lithuania Does 
Not Claim Kaliningrad Lands, Foreign Minister Povilas Gylys 
Says"] 
  [Text] Kaliningrad Oblast, which is separated from the 
motherland by hundreds of kilometers of Lithuanian territory, 
has become a source of tension between Lithuania and Russia. 
  The people of Kaliningrad complain about the border and 
customs barriers being erected by Lithuanian functionaries, and 
of the problems of providing the oblast with all the essentials; 
the Lithuanians complain of the militarization of the oblast, 
and some influential Lithuanian politicians are unable to 
renounce territorial claims. 
  But what is the stance of official Vilnius on the 
"Kaliningrad question"? Lithuanian Foreign Minister Povilas 
Gylys replies to IZVESTIYA. 
  [Gylys] First of all I wish to officially state that we have 
no territorial claims against Russia. We do not aspire to 
Kaliningrad lands. The position of the Lithuanian leadership 
should be separated from that of individual politicians. The 
problem lies elsewhere -- the oblast is one of the most 
militarized regions in Europe and perhaps in the world. 
Therefore, I hope, Russia will understand our concern. 
Lithuania would like to have guarantees of its security. On 
the other hand, Russia is undoubtedly seeking to maintain vital 
links with Kaliningrad Oblast. 
  [Lashkevich] The problems of the transit of Russian Army 
troop trains, it would appear, could seriously spoil relations 
between the two countries. Everyone well remembers incidents of 
troop trains being delayed on the Lithuanian border. In this 
way suspicion, wariness, and ill-will arise. It is obvious that 
the issue of the transportation of military equipment and arms 
from Kaliningrad Oblast and back should be resolved urgently. 
  [Gylys] We have received proposals from Russia on this 
account. They are being discussed. The main thing is that 
these military transit shipments should not present any danger 
for us, either on the criminal level (contraband and trade in 
narcotics, weapons, and metals) or on the ecological or 
political levels. Let me stress that Lithuania, in advocating 
the demilitarization of the oblast, opposes the use of pressure, 
let alone threats, in official policy. We do not feel any 
aggressive aspirations from Russia or any real threat from that 
country, and we hope that Russia will adhere to the concomitant 
tactics of political behavior. 
  [Lashkevich] Russian citizens complain of the difficulties 
they experience while traveling through Lithuanian territory. I 
have seen letters from Kaliningraders denouncing the arbitrary 
behavior of Lithuanian customs officers and functionaries. What 
does Lithuania plan to do to ensure that obstacles are not 
placed in the way of the free movement of citizens? 
  [Gylys] Inhabitants of Kaliningrad Oblast can travel to our 
country without visas -- on the basis of residence in 
Kaliningrad Oblast, which is indicated on their identity cards. 
It is possible that visas will be introduced in the future, but 
here too there are plans to alleviate the transit problems of 
Kaliningraders; we will perhaps introduce a system of annual 
visas. It is not in our interests to close the borders. 
Kaliningrad trains include separate "Lithuanian railcars," in 
which railroad officials try not to accommodate transit 
passengers. These cars are inspected, but the others are not. 
However, today we are not guaranteed against people without 
documents, in pursuit of self-seeking goals, including of a 
criminal character, alighting in Lithuania by making use of the 
transit line. There are already examples involving arms 
smuggling. In the case in question our delegations need to 
reach agreement on the technical questions. This concerns also 
the movement of economic freight. 
  [Lashkevich] Until now it appeared that Lithuania would 
avoid the fate of its Baltic neighbors, which are quarreling 
with Russia over border posts. However, the example of the 
conflict situation over the DF-6 oil deposit near Nida covered 
recently by IZVESTIYA suggests the reverse.... 
  [Gylys] As far as borders on dry land are concerned, both 
sides are essentially close to signing the relevant agreements. 
But in the Baltic Sea.... Here our positions greatly differ. 
We hope that the forthcoming round of talks will help to settle 
this dispute. What worries us? Russia has begun oilfield 
development work and thereby presented Lithuania with a fait 
accompli -- the deposit is ours, they claim. Meanwhile work has 
begun in the disputed region. Let me stress, I would not wish 
to declare that this section of the sea belongs to Lithuania, 
but I would not like to prematurely recognize it as belonging to 
Russia. This is yet another hotbed of tension which could rouse 
political passions in our country. Let us first resolve the 
juridical aspect of this question, and then, if the need arises, 
tackle the exploitation of the deposit. 
  [Lashkevich] You constantly call for the negotiations 
process to be intensified. But talks are proceeding very 
lethargically. Why is this? What are the immediate prospects 
for dialogue? 
  [Gylys] We must place dialogue on a firm, permanent footing. 
We are ready to talk to Russia on any topic, and will strictly 
uphold our obligations. But what is stopping Russia from 
responding on a mutual basis is not for me to judge. In 
November, as is well known, we signed a treaty on 
most-favored-nation status in trade. And what happened? It 
does not need ratification. All that is needed is to exchange 
diplomatic notes on the fulfillment of treaty obligations. 
Russia did not send its note. I cannot rule out that political 
passions will soon flare up in Lithuania and people will begin 
to say: Here we see the true face of Russia. This is not to 
the benefit of our relations. 

