Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gintautas Jankauskas under the "Justice: Roads </F>
and Mistaken Paths" rubric: "Drug Addicts and Drug Business in 
Lithuania] 
  [Text] For some reason, law enforcement officials are not 
too much inclined to speak about the flourishing drug business, 
the daily growth of drug addicts, and the increase in the crime 
rate committed by them in Lithuania. Statistical reports about 
detained drug users, a few groups of drug traffickers or 
disclosed crimes, or the confiscation of a few kilograms of 
narcotics barely reflect one-tenth of the actual situation. 
  According to the statistics of medical institutions, there 
are 495 drug users and 58 toxicomaniacs recorded in Lithuania. 
Another 262 drug addicts are registered for drug prevention. 
It is unclear what criteria are followed in recording drug 
users. It is obvious, however, that the presented figures are a 
drop in the ocean. According to the specialists from the 
Interior Ministry subunit for control over illegal drug 
production and trade, the number of drug addicts and 
toxicomaniacs in Lithuania is at least ten times larger. 
  The most widespread current drugs in Lithuania are of the 
floral origin produced from poppies. These are opium extract 
and acetylated and pure opium. Last year, the police 
confiscated 963.2 kilograms of ground poppy heads. The fact 
that a kilogram of pure opium allows one to produce as much 
drugs as 900 kilograms of ground poppy heads proves that these 
figures are ridiculously small, while the imports of opium into 
Lithuania is a reality. The police seized 9,525 milliliters of 
pure opium concentrate and 633 grams of pure opium over the last 
year. This year, an entire kilogram of pure opium was found on 
two Kyrgyz residents. According to police officials, the 
imports of pure opium to Lithuania began considerably recently. 
Operative police information show that most often this drug 
reaches our country from Uzbekistan through the Belarusian 
border. 
  The use of marijuana (finely chopped leaves of cannabis) is 
spreading in Lithuania. True, the police managed to confiscate 
only 4.575 grams of this narcotic. They also detected 1.7 grams 
of hashish. Thus far, no synthetic drugs have been discovered 
in our republic. However, they are hardly not in use here. For 
example, back in 1992, a Lithuanian carrying 9 grams of such a 
drug was detained in Denmark. 
  The police frequently confiscate strong pharmaceuticals from 
toxicomaniacs. For example, last year they found 3,780 
"Radedorm" and 371,440 "Metandrostenol" tablets, and others. 
  Police information shows that during last year's operation 
"Poppy '93," they destroyed 6,897 and 158 square meters of poppy 
and cannabis plantations, respectively. However, the poppies 
grown in Lithuania are hardly the key substance for drug 
production. The chief drug traffic reaches Lithuania from the 
southern republics. Currently, the drug business is becoming the 
chief object of activities for most organized criminal groups. 
According to last year's police investigation, every 10th 
organized criminal group in Lithuania engaged in the drug 
business as well. The fact that last year the police succeeded 
in detaining 41 Russian, 10 Azeri, six Ukrainian, four Uzbek, 
and four Georgian residents who tried to sell drugs in Lithuania 
shows that the activities of groups engaging in drug trade are 
very developed. Moreover, several Danish and British citizens 
were arrested as well. 
  Foreign drug traffickers are most often detained only with 
the aid of special police operations, while cases when such 
people are "hooked" at border customs check points are very 
rare. In general, one is left with the impression that drug 
traffickers, particularly southern residents, can slip through 
customs whenever they like. A law on migration has been 
adopted. However, when the police detain some residents from 
the southern republics, it turns out soon that they have arrived 
in Lithuania without any documents or on old Soviet passports. 
This is what the customs stamps in detained persons' passports 
prove. Getting to Lithuania, drug traffickers try to settle 
here for as long a period of time as possible: They set up 
organized gangs, buy apartments in other people's names, 
conclude fake marriages, and so on. Detaining such a foreigner, 
the police often do not know what to do with him or her: 
Deportation from Lithuania requires finances. Pitifully, money 
for such purposes has not been assigned. 
  According to operative police information, there were about 
10 organized criminal groups in Lithuania engaging in drug 
production and trade in 1993. By applying the law on preventive 
detention, some of them were split or even dissolved (a 
five-person group in Anyksciai). A few members of a gang have 
already been detained in Vilnius this year. 
  The police managed to disclose 302 crimes linked with drugs 
in 1993. The largest number of such crimes, 95, were committed 
in Vilnius, 31 in Alytus, and 18 in Visaginas. Charges were 
brought against 157 persons. Incidentally, every sixth of these 
offenders is a female. It is interesting to note that the age 
of the majority of those arrested is between 30 and 49 years of 
age. 

