Language: <F P=105> Hungarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hungarian Prime Minister Peter Boross by </F>
Lorinc Szendrei in Budapest; date not given: "The New Prime 
Minister Promises Constitutional Order and Stability -- 
End-of-Year Interview With Peter Boross"] 
  [Excerpts] Lasting dialogue between the government and the 
citizens that elected it is a natural element of democracies. 
In his first speech, recently elected Prime Minister Peter 
Boross promised that the dialogue would be continuous. He also 
used our end-of-year interview for this. We curiously awaited 
his views on the parties' election struggle, the Hungarian 
Democratic Forum [MDF] that has come through an internecine 
struggle, the further tasks of economic transformation, and 
relations between Hungarians living beyond the border and the 
mother country. In addition to the answers that were to the 
point, he often reacted to our questions with questions. He was 
indicating that he does not see himself or his government as 
infallible or in possession of eternal truth. This is how many 
problems of politics, the economy, current affairs, and mainly 
the nation, were discussed in the prime minister's office where 
the portrait of Jozsef Antall is displayed. 
  [Szendrei] After you were sworn in as prime minister and sat 
back in your place, [Parliamentary Chairman] Gyorgy Szabad gave 
you the opportunity to speak. I watched you from the 
journalists' seats. You did not react immediately. Can you 
recall what you were thinking about? 
  [Boross] I had to decide a very simple matter: from where I 
should present my brief speech. I decided on the podium. 
  [Szendrei] In your maiden prime ministerial speech, you 
promised order. This put many people at ease, while others 
became alarmed. What kind of order did you mean? 
  [Boross] I usually add that I am talking about the 
constitutional order. Many of my statements prove that I always 
think about the legal order and the constitutional order. In my 
view, all our recognition can be attributed to this. The 
letters and telegrams of condolence received by the government 
also welcomed this in the first place. I believe that the 
majority of Hungarian people also find the situation that we 
managed to create in the interest of constitutional and legal 
order, attractive. At the same time, I know that some people do 
not recognize the significance of this. I hope that we will 
never have to learn to appreciate the security of order at a 
time when it is shaken or lost in the country. It is the 
government's task to ensure that the institutions and 
organizations operate correctly, supplies are continuous, and no 
alarm is created through disorderly behavior. Actually, the 
difficult task of transformation demands internal peace in the 
country. This is the way I am in favor order and not the way 
some people try to add certain overtones to my way of thinking. 
It is my basic principle that everything should be decided at 
the place that has the authority from our constitutional 
institutions and our legal system to do so. Politics should not 
be done in the streets! The world also appreciates this. Let 
us just think, when is the often mentioned foreign capital 
inflow continuous? When does a foreign businessman decide in 
our favor? When he finds peace and security here. Already as 
interior minister, I said that I have to act without hesitation 
if the constitutional and legal order is violated in some way. 
In addition to the peaceful life of Hungarian citizens, world 
political and economic interests also have to be taken into 
consideration. If I sometimes say this in a somber voice or 
with flashing spectacles, then the imaginations of a very small 
group of people immediately start to operate and they ask, for 
example, if the elections will be held in time. They will. 
This is my message again. This is also part of the order. 
  [Szendrei] With a view to the coming new year, I would like 
you to lay out your cards. What can we expect from you, will 
you play in a team or will you rather rely on yourself? 
  [Boross] I will decide whatever I have to decide. At the 
same time, even as a minister, I held consultations. Sometimes 
I did not accept the advice. However, this is not typical. As 
we are aware, according to the Hungarian constitutional rules, 
the prime minister has a particular position. Nevertheless, the 
government is working. Independent people who are capable of 
decision-making are working in this government. It is a bad 
decision-making system if someone wants to have authority in 
issues that are not his business. I have always been very 
careful to avoid this. The person or the area that is 
authorized in the particular case should always make the 
decision. It follows that I do not usually discredit 
ministerial decisions. Undoubtedly some decisions have to be 
made by the prime minister, but I make sure that the government 
operates as a body. Naturally, in addition to this, I fulfill 
the functions that the Constitution assigns to the prime 
minister. 
  [Szendrei] In the past year, the life of the 
coalition-leader MDF has been upset by internal fighting many 
times. We have also seen resignations. Can the party continue 
to weaken or can you be sure that unity will be established? 
  [Boross] I can say with a clear conscience that it is 
unnecessary to expect further conflicts within the MDF. We have 
passed a period in which we have been strengthened and our unity 
has been established. The speed and the system of the 
nomination for the prime ministerial position also showed this. 
With the segregation of the Hungarian Justice and Life Party 
[MIEP], the MDF has been freed from fruitless and often 
emotionally motivated debates. Separation is always painful, 
but it can only be advantageous if it is unavoidable. The lines 
have been cleared with the establishment of the MIEP. Among 
other things, it can be seen that the MDF is not identical to 
the party that was shown -- often provocatively, even before the 
international public -- by the party's minority. Now we have a 
clear situation. There is an MIEP and an MDF. 
  The MDF has freed itself from the situation where various 
statements cast a shadow over it. After the nomination, which 
was done in a very definite and democratic framework, everyone 
acknowledged the votes. The main speaker of the party that had 
separated from us actually announced, in front of Parliament, 
that he, to a considerable extent, agreed with the opinion of 
the opposition Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] and the 
Federation of Young Democrats [FIDESZ] on the issue of the 
nomination. These kinds of statements were made by Istvan 
Csurka, therefore it is not surprising that I was unable to win 
his vote. This is how the situation is clear. We are no longer 
forced to work together in disharmony, trying to hide the 
differences of views. We have come to the end of a natural 
process. We now have order in the MDF, but the leadership never 
demands automatically unified thinking and actions from the 
membership. 
<H5>  Elections Are Not a Joust </H5>
  [Szendrei] In the "Letkerdesek" [vital issues] program on 
television you mentioned that demagogy might also play a 
significant role in the elections. How big is the danger that 
the MIEP, using demagogy, will gain large popularity and push 
the electors to the right? 
  [Boross] First of all, in addition to the MIEP, the other 
side is also prone to demagogy. Naturally, I hope that sober 
reasoning will characterize the campaign. At the same time, we 
can sadly expect the danger of demagogy, I again emphasize, also 
from the left. Generally it is difficult to draw the line 
between demagogy and irresponsible promises. I hope that these 
elements will not dominate the election preparations. This also 
depends on to what extent the Hungarian public accepts 
high-sounding false slogans. I dare not make predictions. 
However, I can certainly say that demagogy and overtly extreme 
campaigns have never been successful in Hungary. It is 
impossible to win more than 10 percent of the votes this way. 
The vast majority of our citizens are perfectly aware of the 
value of loud voices. 
  [Szendrei] Many things have been coordinated and even a code 
of ethics has been drawn up. In your view, what is needed to 
keep the elections clean, correct, and easy to overview? 
  [Boross] Politicians and the printed press that is 
influenced by political groups will have a vast role in this. 
Generally, the press in Hungary is independent, but we know how 
this is to be interpreted. If honest self-moderation prevails 
then we will not be the ones to spoil a better-than-expected 
atmosphere in the election campaign. The consensus will be 
upset if certain newspapers use a different tone in spite of the 
gestures of the political groups that influence them. I would 
like to trust that their styles can be brought closer together 
and I expect an honest competition, although not a joust. 
Otherwise it will be hell on earth. Everyone has lists and 
files, slander can be published. This would make me very 
disappointed. I would not like to fight in an arena where many 
participants do not adhere to the rules of the game. 
  [Szendrei] You also assign an important role to the press. 
Recently, especially the television and radio have been loud 
with skirmishes. In your progam, you promised a quickly 
completed media law and settlement of the leadership issue. In 
your view, what kind of media should we have? 
  [Boross] The world of communication has great significance. 
Remember that at the end of 1990, the chairman of the television 
banned screening an interview with the prime minister. I guess 
I need not prove how absurd this is. Even this could happen 
here. This is unprecedented. Therefore, we have to start from 
the premise that the radio and television are national media. 
The adjective is not accidental. They have to deal with 
universal issues that affect the country and the nation, and 
they cannot be workshops for polemics that are inclined to be 
partisan. The country's affairs have to be shown. In the years 
following 1990, the Hungarian media did not strive to keep equal 
distances. On the contrary, they were characterized by some 
kind of anti-government bias. This was coupled with the serious 
financial interests of certain people. I do not like these 
conditions because these are dishonest and unnatural. Secret 
interests are hiding behind these conditions. I especially do 
not like it when militant journalists bombard the tired 
citizens, who wish to rest and entertain themselves, with 
disputes about the media's internal conflicts. These battles 
evoke unnatural reactions. Therefore, order has to be 
established, good programs have to be made, and these have to be 
offered to the audience in time. Everyone has to be familiar 
with the basic elements of discipline in the public service 
institutions. 
<H5>  More Poor, More Rich </H5>
  [Szendrei] I believe that many people are much more 
interested in their own fate than in the media struggle. 
According to estimates, some 2 million people are living below 
the subsistence level. The fate of the elections and of 
democracy could be decided because of the increased poverty. 
  [Boross] It is irresponsible to talk about general 
impoverishment. Statistics have to be used carefully. The 
numbers do not distinguish between people living on 10,000 
forints pension in villages where they have a small garden or 
land, and the old people in Jozsefvaros [Budapest district]. 
The calculations prove to be very superficial. From the 
numbers, I can even sense an intention to idealize the 
circumstances of the 1980's. However, if we look at 10-year-old 
newspapers, we can see that even they were writing about 
impoverishment. 
  [Szendrei] Do you doubt that poverty in the country has 
increased in the past three years? 
  [Boross] I and not trying to avoid this question. We have 
to start from the premise that the process of the change of 
ownership caused much upheaval in Hungary. It has to be 
admitted that an official selection has also been started and 
there are indeed more poor people, but there are also more rich 
people. However, this process of polarization started as early 
as in the 1960's. At that time, though, the newspapers, 
directed from the party center, did not write about rich people. 
Therefore, yes, we can see that there is a strata that is 
becoming poor and we have to aid them from the state's welfare 
fund. However, I do not think it likely that we have to provide 
for 2 million people. In my view, we have to pay more 
attention, through various methods, to approximately 1 million 
people. Ill-fated people will always exist. However, we have to 
distinguish between these people, too, because in addition to 
the needy, people who take the benefits to the pubs also emerge. 
They cannot be lifted out of their deviant lifestyles through 
financial support or actions. In my view, in their case, the 
initiative of the local governments is useful when they give 
food and warm clothing to families with many children. 
  [Szendrei] In addition to poor families, the government and 
the country are also poor. This issue can be approached many 
ways; I will summarize it in two words; budget and state 
administration. 
  [Boross] It cannot be denied that the budget deficit is 
depressing. This can be reduced in a number of ways. For 
example, as it has been done in some countries, the living 
standards suddenly decreased while the deficit was being 
reduced. Our society would not have tolerated this. The 
problems of the state administration mainly appear on the 
revenue side. Naturally, I am not saying that the expenditure 
side should not be reviewed. However, let me add that those who 
cry out for the rapid reform of the big distribution systems, do 
not necessarily know what they are talking about. From a state 
budget point of view, the health service can be made cheaper if 
the citizens pay more. 
  [Szendrei] People have already noticed this because, for 
example, the hospitals cannot even always give the basic drugs 
to the patients, and their relatives go to the pharmacies for 
the drugs. 
  [Boross] This might be so or it might not be, but the main 
point is that hospitals operated without financial restrictions 
for decades. An adequate level of medical work can also be done 
with careful financial management. The Hungarian institutions 
have to learn this, and I could, already now, mention many good 
examples. 
  [Szendrei] When the state administration expenses are 
criticized, it is often mentioned that state institutions are 
not frugal, either. 
  [Boross] I would like to hear this general criticism in more 
concrete terms. People who demand cheaper public administration 
might not even understand its professional components. 
<H5>  In a Squeeze, Inside and Outside </H5>
  [Szendrei] I know that this is your pet topic. 
  [Boross] It is indeed, because the establishment of modern 
public administration was one of the crucial elements of our 
development in the 19th century. If someone wants cheaper 
public administration, he might be surprised when looking at its 
budgetary details. Some 65 percent of expenditure is on wages. 
When can this be reduced? If we dismiss at least 20,000 public 
service employees. If someone wants this then he should come up 
with this program! The staffing of our public administration is 
not high in European terms. 
  [Szendrei] In that case, how can the position of the budget 
be improved? 
  [Boross] For example, in the area of tax controls and tax 
discipline. Taxes have to be paid! In addition to establishing 
more balanced budget conditions, this also makes it possible to 
reduce the public duties and the payment obligations of 
entrepreneurs. I claim that the often-mentioned levies, rather 
than the taxes, are the biggest problem for entrepreneurs. The 
36- percent company tax cannot be said to be high, but the level 
of public dues prevent increased employment. The labor force 
has become expensive. Therefore, the level of expenses has to 
be reduced. When talking about increasing the revenue, we must 
not forget about the customs. This is not easy, either. 
Hungarian customs control was based on the transactions of a 
few dozen export- import companies. In the market economy, this 
number increased 1,000-fold. It takes years for the customs 
authorities to establish an adequate infrastructure for the new 
tasks and for well-trained experts to work in this field. 
Well-trained customs officers cannot be created overnight. 
However, an encouraging process has also begun in this area. 
The main point is that if the gross domestic product increases 
-- as we can already see in industry -- then the problems of the 
budget decrease. 
  [Szendrei] Let us remain with the macro-economy. Foreign 
trade was a success story for two years. In 1993, our income 
from exports decreased almost dramatically. How can we regain 
our lost foreign market positions? 
  [Boross] By saying as much, that this is a big problem, I 
acknowledge that we have to take this seriously. However, what 
can be the solution? 
  [Szendrei] This is what I would like to know. 
  [Boross] Well, you see, this is the governmental role. You 
would not ask this question of the opposition. 
  [Szendrei] I will not forget to ask them when they are in 
government.... 
  [Boross] Do not be pessimistic.... Let us face the facts. 
In 1993, western recession reached such levels that brought 
serious political problems to the surface. Unemployment above 
20 percent is not unknown. The situation is similar in other 
countries that are approaching the European Community. 
Industrial output is falling in countries where this was 
considered impossible. Let us just look at the German economy. 
It is a natural consequence that the market tightens. This has 
especially negative effects on countries that are forced to 
export, and Hungary is one of these. The eastern part of Germany 
is in no better position. Billions have been invested in 
developing the eastern German industry, but the public mood 
cannot be called cheery there, either, because of the lack of 
markets. Let us return to Hungary. For three years, our 
balance of payments was positive. You can look at the data from 
the 15 years preceding this. When did we last have three such 
years? 
  [Szendrei] Agricultural Minister Janos Szabo recently gave 
an interview to MAGYAR NEMZET. According to him, the facilities 
of Hungarian agriculture reach the world standard, but the 
results are way below this. When can the changes in agriculture 
bring results and when can we expect the Hungarian agricultural 
products and processed goods to reach their old fame? 
  [Boross] The fact that 1 billion forints were lost because 
of reduced agricultural exports is the first and most depressing 
premise. It is not only a slogan, it is true that the drought 
caused immense problems. This government cannot create rain, 
either. However, it is encouraging that the land is protected 
by a thick layer of snow just now. If 4 million metric tons of 
grain is produced then we can be satisfied. We do not need 
more. The world market is saturated. If Ukraine launches 
itself then we will have another competitor. Hungarian 
agriculture can become more successful if we produce more 
labor-intensive and special varieties. The market requires 
modern types of fruits and vegetables, and I could list many 
products that the disintegrating cooperatives stopped producing. 
New quality is needed! The possibility of this lies within the 
changing ownership conditions. In spite of the difficulties, 
the farmers are still willing to produce, which is proved by the 
fact that the autumn-sown area is equal to the average of the 
past 10 years, and the use of chemical fertilizers has 
increased. It is definitely positive that the purchase of 
agricultural machinery is showing an increasing trend. 
<H5>  Without Stray Intentions </H5>
  [Szendrei] Many educational institutions are struggling with 
their tasks amid uncertainties. What can the government do to 
ensure that the new generations acquire the intellectual 
ammunition to build the future in secure circumstances? 
  [Boross] We have already been making great efforts to 
improve the conditions of basic education. Just to mention one 
fact, we built 2,000 gyms in the past three years. We have also 
restored numerous schools. In the three years, the number of 
students entering higher education increased three-fold. 
Therefore, we have moved off from the low point where Hungarian 
higher education was in the socialist system. We have an 
education law. It is possible that this is being criticized for 
various political reasons, but it exists. We will have a basic 
national curriculum in January. The adjective is also important 
here. Apart from the fact that some people tried to create 
confusion in certain cases, secure conditions prevail in 
Hungarian education. I am not saying that we cannot and need 
not create even better conditions. As for the level of 
education, this depends on the teachers. I still remember the 
teacher of the town middle school whom everyone greeted. 
  [Szendrei] The nation and the adjective national are given a 
prominent role in your thinking. The neighboring countries 
often accuse the Hungarian government of ringing irredentist 
tones when, at international forums, it speaks up for the rights 
of Hungarians living beyond the border. How can the two 
demands, namely good-neighborliness and tolerance guaranteed by 
rights be met? 
  [Boross] This requires elaborate political maneuvering. We 
cannot ignore the consequences of the fact that the Hungarian 
nation lives within the current borders of the country. 
[sentence as published] We have to acknowledge this and it is 
also included in our Constitution that we are responsible for 
the Hungarians living beyond the border. For all Hungarians. 
It is infinitely important to create trust in our neighbors 
that we do not have vagrant intentions. The accusation of 
irredentism emerges against us when the leading political 
circles of the neighboring countries have a guilty conscience, 
because of their policies regarding the Hungarians. Looking at 
the countries in the neighborhood where serious polemics can be 
heard, we can confidently state that it is not Hungary that can 
be qualified as nationalist. 
  [Szendrei] Does this mean that, similarly to Jozsef Antall, 
you also claim to be the spiritual prime minister of 15 million 
Hungarians? 
  [Boross] This is natural. All governments have to be aware 
of the fact that Hungarians are living in a larger area than 
what is included within the state borders. Without being 
suspected of having aggressive intentions, we have to deal with 
the way Hungarians are living in other places. We have to know 
whether they are given the necessary conditions if they want to 
live their lives as Hungarians. This is also part of the 
individual rights, because if someone was born a Hungarian, then 
it should not depend on the state borders whether he can remain 
a Hungarian. This indeed is an organic part of the rights of 
freedom. [passage omitted] 

<H5>    Before Vital Voting] </H5>
  [Szendrei] We are facing a new year. In addition to the 
usual good wishes, what do you wish for the country in 1994? 
  [Boross] Naturally I also hope for a happier new year, which 
we could do with. I wish for the public to make a wise decision 
at the 1994 elections. The effects of this decision will be 
very important. We are facing a historic vote. I believe that 
the way of progress will be shown by the trend of the MDF, which 
I also represent. We promise balance. I trust that the 
citizens can see from the four years of governmental work that 
we can adequately handle the promising slogans. We will also 
have to sum up the past three years in 1994. We will have to 
examine where we have to correct our work. I wish that the 
Hungarian public be satisfied with us. 

