CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Edwin Fernandez: "Puyo--Focus of Dialogue"] </F>
  [Text] Puyo--The dialogue between the government and the 
leaders of the Indian organizations in the Amazon region 
concerning the oil activity being pursued in the region has 
begun in Puyo. 
  At the first meeting, to which the authorities and 
representatives of the Indian and peasant organizations were 
invited on the initiative of Minister of Energy Francisco 
Acosta, attendance exceeded all expectations. 
  The meeting was described as "historic." This was the first 
time in more than two decades of oil operations in the Amazon 
region that the government has invited representatives of the 
people who are feeling the impact of this activity to 
participate in discussions. 
  The unprecedented number of persons present at this forum 
included tenant farmers, Quichuas, Achuars, Shuars, and 
Huaoranis, all speaking the same language and evidencing the 
national spirit characteristic of all the citizens of Ecuador. 
  This occasion also gave Minister Acosta an opportunity to 
explain the scope of the seventh round of bidding for the right 
to prospect for and exploit oil in this country. 
  Nine blocks of up to 200,000 hectares in area located in the 
Provinces of Sucumbios, Napo, Pastaza, and Morona Santiago in 
the Amazon region are involved in this process. 
  In the course of the bidding process, norms designed to 
ensure strict preservation and protection of the ecosystems and 
biodiversity in the region, as well as the cultural identities 
of the Indian peoples, have been established. 
  Acosta assured those present that the government will 
require 
the companies to complete environmental rehabilitation or to pay 
compensation if environmental damage has been done. 
  Although he did not refer to it directly, the minister 
dismissed the possibility of a moratorium suggested by several 
Indian organizations for a period of 15 years before proceeding 
with the round that has already been announced. "Oil production 
accounts for 50 percent of the state budget and 46 percent of 
Ecuador's foreign-exchange income. And so our country is 
dependent on the extraction of oil. 
  "As a government official and a minister, I cannot avoid my 
responsibility to the history of the country by failing to carry 
forward the oil prospecting needed to find new reserves." 
  With a view to the drafting of an overall plan for 
environmental management and subsequent supervision of it, the 
Ministry of Energy has decided, on the basis of an agreement 
with various Indian organizations, to establish a 
Socio-Environmental Monitoring Commission. 
  It will be enacted into law by means of a ministerial 
resolution. The commission will be made up of the minister of 
energy and a representative of the PETROECUADOR [Ecuadorian 
State Petroleum Enterprise], the prefects in the Amazon region, 
municipalities, Indian organizations, and ecological groups. 
  Following the address by Minister Acosta, representatives of 
the Indians and the peasants, one after another, set forth their 
positions concerning the hydrocarbon activity. 
  Despite the differences among the organizations, their 
representatives agreed that to date, the oil operations have not 
contributed to the development of the Amazon region. 
  They reiterated that the settlements located near the oil 
wells remain without such basic projects and facilities as 
environmental protection, health infrastructure, 
electrification, telecommunications, and roadways. 
  The wealth taken out of the bowels of the earth in the 
Amazon 
region has served to finance the execution of projects in the 
country's large cities exclusively, the indignant 
representatives pointed out. 
  They categorically rejected the suggestion that the 
Monitoring Commission include only a single interlocutor 
representing the Indian organizations. 
  They suggested that one person be appointed to represent 
each 
block. 
  The minister said that these and other suggestions will be 
analyzed carefully before a response is provided, which might 
occur at the next scheduled meeting, in April. 
  Acosta expressed satisfaction with the results achieved and 
the information obtained. "The responses show that the people 
accept the seventh round and the efforts of the government to 
safeguard the environment in this vulnerable and fragile region." 

