Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 14 (XINHUA) -- The spokesman of the 
Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council said today that the 
enforcement of the law on the protection of investment of Taiwan 
compatriots will promote the economic and trade exchanges 
between the mainland and Taiwan. 
  In his comment on the law approved by the Sixth Session of 
the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress 
(NPC), Li Qingzhou, the spokesman of the office, noted that the 
law will further strengthen the confidence of Taiwan compatriots 
in investing in the mainland. 
  He said that the law, the first of its kind in the country, 
is significant in the economic and trade relations between the 
mainland and Taiwan and it marks an improvement of the 
mainland's protection of the investments of Taiwan compatriots. 
  In recent years, with the progress of the relations across 
the Taiwan Straits, the economic and trade relations between the 
two sides have become closer. 
  He said that Taiwan compatriots' investments in the mainland 
are on the increase. 
  In 1992, projects funded by Taiwan compatriots and 
investments in them exceeded the combined sum for past years. 
  In 1993, the number of newly-approved Taiwan 
businessmen-funded projects reached more than 10,000 and the 
contracted investment funds were more than 10 billion yuan. 
  He noted that investments from Taiwan compatriots have not 
only played an important role in economic development on the 
mainland, but also have become one of the important factors in 
promoting economic growth in Taiwan. 
  The spokesman stressed that the central government in China 
has always attached importance to the protection of the legal 
rights of Taiwan compatriots regarding mainland investments and 
has adopted preferential policies for such investments. 
  In 1988, the State Council issued the regulations on 
encouraging Taiwan compatriots to invest. 
  He said that the "law on the protection of investment of 
Taiwan compatriots" was based on the regulations and absorbed 
the suggestions from Taiwan compatriots and related sectors in 
Taiwan. 
  The spokesman said that his office will make efforts to 
encourage localities to enforce the law. 
  He said that the related authorized non-governmental 
organization is also willing to hold talks with its Taiwan 
counterpart on the question of the rights and interests of 
Taiwan businessmen on the mainland. 
  He stressed that it is a general trend to enhance the 
economic and trade exchanges and cooperation across the Taiwan 
Straits and that the Chinese Central Government has always 
actively promoted economic and trade cooperation between the two 
sides. 
  He noted that the law passed by the NPC Standing Committee 
shows the sincerity of the central government in this aspect. 
  He called on Taiwan authorities to remove the obstacles to 
Taiwan compatriots' investing in the mainland. 

