BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, June 4 (XINHUA) -- Shanghai is forcing the 
pace of developing itself into an international and trading 
center to lead the Chang Jiang river valley and the whole 
country in economic growth. 
  A municipal official said that this, China's largest 
metropolis has expanded the use of foreign investment from 
industries to banking, foreign trade, commerce, real estate 
trade, consultancy, information and other economic sectors over 
the past few years. 
  At present, Shanghai has economic and trade relations with 
180 countries and regions. Business people from more than 50 
countries and regions have invested in Shanghai, which houses 
branch institutions and representative offices of 90 of the 
world's top banking organizations. 
  While absorbing foreign funds, technology, natural resources 
and talented people, Shanghai exports capital, technology, 
natural resources and qualified people. 
  It also encourages its enterprises to set up businesses and 
companies overseas. 
  Last year saw the city make headway in investing overseas 
while importing a record amount of capital. 
  In addition to issuing stocks overseas and absorbing direct 
foreign investment, Shanghai has concluded 592 contracts on 
borrowing foreign loans worth of 511 million U.S. dollars. 
  As a result of exporting 200 million U.S. dollars-worth of 
technology items a year, the city has imported a total of three 
billion U.S. dollars-worth of technology items. 
  The city imports 13 billion yuan-worth of raw materials used 
for production from the international market each year. 
  So far, 2,260 financial organizations from other parts of 
the 
country and overseas have opened businesses and offices in 
Shanghai. 
  According to statistics, the total transactional volume of 
securities topped 500 billion yuan last year, that of foreign 
exchange climbed to 5.3 billion yuan, and interbank loans to 323 
billion yuan. 
  The 2,600 foreign-funded commercial offices are busily 
undertaking international business in shanghai, which hosts more 
than 100 international exhibitions and receives tens of 
thousands of business people from all corners of the world a 
year while sending hundreds of trading delegations abroad. 
  In addition, the import and export volume via the port of 
Shanghai amounted to a record of 30.9 billion U.S. dollars-worth 
last year. 
  A survey shows that shanghai's more than 1,000 enterprises 
and research institutions which are empowered to export their 
products and import their needs, and 4,000 foreign-funded 
enterprises that have already gone into operation are making 
great contributions to the city's foreign trade and economic 
relations. 
  To meet the demand on world markets, Shanghai has started 
reforming its systems of enterprise management, prices and 
marketing. It has set up a number of state markets in line with 
international conventions. 

