BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Agata Nowakowska: "Alone, or With SLD?; Before </F>
OPZZ Congress"] 
  [Text]To be with the government, or just next to it? 
-- A few days before a congress by the All-Poland Trade Unions 
Agreement [OPZZ], there are two views clashing in the trade 
union: Wisniewski says: "Let us create our own trade union club 
in the Sejm," while Manicki says: "Let us continue to stick 
with the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD]." 
  Shortly after the government was formed, OPZZ Chairwoman Ewa 
Spychalska made threatening statements to the effect that she 
will not give even an umbrella handle to Pawlak's government. 
But now OPZZ firmly stands behind the government. 
  OPZZ remembers well what happened to "Solidarity" -- an 
attempt to elude the responsibility for "Solidarity"-derived 
governments, ended in bringing Suchocka's cabinet down. 
"Solidarity" paid an enormous price for that. 
  But OPZZ's rank and file like the idea of sticking to the 
Polish Peasant Party and the Social Democracy of the Polish 
Republic [SdRP] less and less: The government does not 
listen to us. We are helpless. OPZZ does not have its own 
ministers but we sure get a kick in the pants when the 
government does something wrong -- such opinions were 
voiced during Spychalska's meeting with the rank and file in 
May. Spychalska toured the country before the OPZZ congress. 
She intends to run for chairwoman again. 
<H5>  Time for Own Label </H5>
  OPZZ Deputy Chairman Stanislaw Wisniewski thinks that it is 
time for the trade union's own label. He wants to suggest to 
the congress that a divorce with SdRP take place, followed by 
the establishment of the trade union's own deputies club in the 
Sejm. Over 460 delegates will make a decision on that shortly. 
  Wisniewski was the only one to be in favor of a protest 
against the government's version of the budget. He was thrown 
out of SLD for that. Now, he intends to run for OPZZ chairman. 
  Would a farewell to the coalition be the trade union's 
success? 
  Wisniewski thinks it would. The advantage gained would be 
"going about freely," without the constraints of the club's 
voting discipline. Attempts to force trade unionists to act 
this or that way -- as in the case of the budget, or popiwek 
[enterprise tax on above-normative pay] -- would never happen 
again. 
  Wisniewski's idea for an efficient OPZZ is about making a 
"yardstick" out of the trade union. He thinks that the 
coalition, after it is weakened by the trade unionists' 
departure, would have to make efforts to gain OPZZ's support in 
the Sejm. 
  But even without the trade unionists, the coalition enjoys a 
majority in the Sejm. There are 60 trade unionists among the 
298 "governmental" Sejm deputies. On top of that, a majority of 
the trade union's members prefer to be under the protective 
wings of SLD, and they are not very eager to establish a weak 
little club. 
<H5>  Suicidal Secession </H5>
  Will Wisniewski succeed at the congress? It is not very 
likely. It seems that a majority of OPZZ members think along the 
same lines as Maciej Manicki, another deputy chairman (he has no 
intention of running for OPZZ chairman) who is opposed to such a 
secession: 
  That would be suicide. Even if the congress decided to 
sever OPZZ's ties with SLD, 30 Sejm deputies would leave, at the 
most -- Manicki says. 
  In his view, "Solidarity" was able to shift the balance of 
votes in the Sejm of the previous term because Suchocka's 
government was a minority one, whereas the coalition now in 
power does not need OPZZ that badly at all. 
  Manicki is aware that among the rank and file, not everybody 
is happy with the OPZZ-SdRP alliance. But to leave SLD 
altogether would weaken our efficiency even more -- he 
says. So far, we succeeded in blocking, for instance, the 
popiwek. 
<H5>  Bound by Fear </H5>
  According to Aleksander Kwasniewski, an SLD leader, the idea 
of OPZZ leaving SLD has no chances whatsoever of materializing. 
Both groups are strongly tied to one another by the fear of a 
defeat by the postcommunists. 
  While Wisniewski speaks about the trade union's excessive 
concessions, Kwasniewski speaks about OPZZ paying back its debt 
-- it is thanks to SdRP that there are so many trade 
unionists/Sejm deputies in the Sejm. The SdRP leader has his 
own reliable men in the trade union and he is hoping that Ewa 
Spychalska -- his positive heroine -- will be reelected OPZZ 
chairwoman. 
<H5>  A Roundtable With "Solidarity" </H5>
  OPZZ chiefs differ on their positions vis-a-vis the 
government but they are united on a dream of friendship with 
"Solidarity": The government is just a government and 
there is a whole river separating it from trade unions. We 
should build a bridge across the river along with 
"Solidarity" -- Wisniewski says. Only together, can 
we maneuver the government out. Manicki has similar views. 
He thinks that both trade unions have the same demands and they 
represent the interests of the same people. 
  Wisniewski is an enthusiast of a "trade union round table" 
session during which decisions would be made on what to fight 
for together, and how. In the meantime, the old divisions 
between OPZZ and "Solidarity" remain. Joint measures are not 
undertaken. It is easy to win with "Solidarity" when it goes it 
alone, and the government wins with OPZZ equally easily: First 
it makes promises, then it forgets them. 
  According to Wisniewski, OPZZ has made several attempts at 
reconciliation with "Solidarity," which ignored the moves. But 
OPZZ is also to blame, to some extent. Failure to support 
"Solidarity"s strikes was a mistake. 
  Recently, Manicki made an offer to "Solidarity" for a joint 
strategy for defending a demand coming from trade unions 
concerning a 40-hour work week. There was no reply, either. 
  A decision on which option will prevail -- to go it alone, 
or 
to continue to stick to SLD -- will be made at the OPZZ congress 
in a few days. 

