Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] London -- The Islamic Salvation Front [FIS] 
abroad yesterday condemned the Algerian security forces' killing 
last Saturday of Sid Ahmed Mourad [Djaafar El Afghani], leader 
of the Armed Islamic Group [GIA]. It stressed that "there can 
be no solution except complete submission to the will of the 
people." 
  It is the Front's first comment on the killing of El 
Afghani, 
whose group's statements persistently criticized the approach of 
dialogue with the authorities and vehemently attacked FIS 
leaders. 
  Well-informed sources interpret the FIS condemnation of the 
GIA leader's killing as "a clear attempt to intercept any 
accusations which could be leveled at it in the future to the 
effect that it was behind his betrayal." 
  This condemnation comes while Shaykh Mahfoud Nahnah, leader 
of Hamas [Islamic Society Movement], attacked circles "claiming 
to belong to the Islamic tendency," accusing them of killing the 
preacher Shaykh Mohamed Bouslimani, a prominent Muslim 
Brotherhood leader. The authorities accuse the GIA of killing 
the preacher, who -- according to Shaykh Nahnah -- refused to 
issue a fatwa sanctioning acts of murder. 
  Shaykh Rabeh Kebir did not sign the FIS statement. This is 
in 
the knowledge that he has been officially notified by the German 
authorities of the decision to ban him from pursuing political 
activities. The statement, which carried the signature "the 
Executive Committee abroad," accused the ruling regime in 
Algeria of "escalating assassination operations against innocent 
citizens throughout the homeland in the hope of terrorizing and 
intimidating people further." 
  The statement added that "the cowardly criminal operation 
carried out by the repressive authorities against the mujahid, 
leader, martyr, and Sword of Islam Djaafar and a group of his 
aides -- who were the elite of the mujahidin, heroes, and 
martyrs -- reflects the aims of the regime, which is oppressing 
the Algerian people by fire and sword. Let the regime and its 
supporters know that, whenever a leader falls in the arena of 
honor, a new leader succeeds him and follows the same line." 
  The statement pointed out that these operations come while 
the regime continues to talk about looking for negotiated 
solutions to the crisis afflicting the country, which is caused 
by the regime." 
  The statement concluded: "There can be no solution to the 
political problem in Algeria except complete submission to the 
Algerian people's will to build a just, Islamic state that will 
rid people of oppression, repression, and corruption and restore 
to them their dignity and freedom." [passage omitted] 
  Observers say that FIS statements condemning Djaafar El 
Afghani's killing may be designed to cut short the possibility 
of having an accusing finger pointed at it for revealing the GIA 
leader's whereabout. These observers attribute the possibility 
of such an accusation against it to reports about a dialogue 
being conducted between it and the authorities and the 
possibility that the authorities may have asked it to halt 
violence in return for political concessions demanded by the FIS. 
  There are reports in Algeria to the effect that members of 
armed groups are informing against one another and that many 
members of these groups are falling as a result of this. There 
is also widespread talk that the Algerian authorities have been 
able to infiltrate the GIA. 
  Djaafar El Afghani assumed the group's leadership last year 
after its leader 'Abd-al-Haqq al- 'Ayayidah was arrested in 
Morocco and handed over to Algeria. Al-'Ayayidah has still not 
been tried. 
  AL-HAYAH yesterday received a statement from the GIA in 
which 
it announced the death of its leader, pledging to continue the 
"jihad." It also stressed that it "will -- God willing -- 
continue its jihad until God proclaims this religion or until we 
die for the sake of it. The conspiracies of the Jews, 
Christians, and apostates will not change it (the group). Nor 
will the sayings of the atheists who have sold their consciences 
to the East and the West affect its determination." It also 
said that El Afghani "is not the first leader to fall, nor will 
he be the last. It is God's will, and this is our road to make 
this religion prevail -- the road of jihad and martyrdom. There 
is no other road." 
  With regard to the security situation, FIS sources have said 
that six Army personnel were killed and 19 wounded the day 
before yesterday in an ambush set up by "mujahidin" in the 
mountains around al-Qall city the day before yesterday. The 
sources said that security forces "took revenge against unarmed 
citizens, killing al-Sayyid Kebir (60), uncle of Shaykh Rabeh 
Kebir." [passage omitted] 

