BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Arpad Goncz to a session of the new </F>
National Assembly in Budapest -- live] 
  [Text] Esteemed House, my dear friends: I respectfully 
welcome you, the freely and democratically elected deputies of 
the new Hungarian Republic's second National Assembly. 
  First, let me point out with praise -- I hope that you agree 
-- that the indisputable fact that the 1994 parliamentary 
elections were held on time, in a fair manner and, as regards 
its implementation, faultlessly and smoothly, proves the 
strength and maturity of our democracy. The high turnout in the 
two rounds proves our nation's interest in the shaping of its 
own fate and a resolute intent and consciousness in expressing 
its political opinion. Grateful acknowledgments are due to all 
the voters, the leaders and the parties' parliamentary 
candidates who took part in the elections, the leaders of the 
National Election Committee, which organized the elections -- 
and by name, particularly Dr. Prof. Janos Nemeth -- and its 
members, all leaders and members of the local election 
committees, the National Election Office, which prepared the 
elections -- by name, Zoltan Toth and Dr. Ilona Palfy -- and 
their excellent colleagues, all staff of the Ministry of 
Interior and of the local governments who took part in the 
election work, and all those thousands of voluntary workers 
without the generous contribution of whom we would not be able 
to sit here today. 
  Let me also thank the six parliamentary parties' designated 
deputies for the series of talks, which was completed within a 
short time and which required mutual good will and flexibility, 
with which they prepared today's founding session, together with 
the expert support of the National Assembly's secretary 
general's office and the National Assembly's office. I feel 
that this series of talks projects the new National Assembly's 
resolute work style, which is expected to be ready for 
interparty coordination. 
  The National Assembly is our country's highest 
constitutional 
body which is answerable to the people of the country -- and let 
me add, to the future of the country -- for its legislative 
work. It performs its work under the nation's eye and hearing; 
and what it passes determines our daily life. Its base is the 
past, its test is the present, and its judge is the future. 
Voters pass judgment on it every day, even though they will 
express their collective opinion only in four years' time, at 
the next elections. 
  No one can cast doubt on the legitimacy of your work. 
However, you have to fight for its recognition day by day during 
the debates with your words and votes. It depends on you how 
the citizens of the country -- Hungarians and non-Hungarians -- 
pass judgment on the functioning of our democracy. And not only 
our country's citizens, but Hungarians throughout the world, our 
compatriots living beyond the borders, who are not linked to us 
by legal ties, but by the past, the common language and culture, 
as well as by the millions of threads of a common fate and by 
their vital interests. 
  I ask you not to forget for a second that the legislative 
work and responsibility of the National Assembly do not raise 
you above the country, society, but oblige you to serve it. The 
whole of the National Assembly and each of its members are 
undissoluble members of society. Although it shapes society 
unceasingly, at the same time it changes, itself, and it is a 
mirror of society. Although most of the National Assembly's 
legislative work is embodied in legal form, in everyday life it 
turns into human and economic relations. What directly follows 
from this is that an indispensable tool and real breeding ground 
in your daily work is the thorough knowledge of the unmasked 
social reality. No ideology can substitute this. 
  It is not my task to sum up or simply to try and refer to 
the 
experiences of the four-years' work of the previous National 
Assembly. I will not answer the question, which keeps being 
raised, whether the nation voted for or against something. 
However, I can safely say that it voted for a future it expects 
to come, and that it wants to look forward to a certain, 
predictable and peaceful future. As soon as possible. A 
future, which takes it ahead in time, not back. It is ready to 
bring over to its future as much from the past -- any past -- as 
is necessary to make the future more stable, in a social and 
economic sense, in accordance with its moral value judgment. 
  The natural wisdom of the nation demands social justice, 
sober equality of opportunities; it does not expect miracles or 
wait for plums to fall into its mouth. However, what it expects 
is palpable good intention, true words, dialogue, a say in the 
fate of property and fairness in public life. You can be sure 
that the nation will recognize this, or the opposite of this, in 
words, in ink or on screen. 
  My recent discussions with the leaders of the six 
parliamentary parties and the tough debates and the outcome of 
the coalition negotiations convinced me that both the future 
government coalition and the future opposition parties are well 
aware of the country's problems, our tasks, which are not easy, 
and they form a similar opinion of the priorities of the 
National Assembly's tasks. Thus, they are ready for a fruitful 
dialogue and for constructive debates and cooperation. 
  Finally, I ask God to bless the work of the National 
Assembly. From my heart I wish, for all members of the House, 
that what they do as parliamentary deputies should turn to the 
advantage of our country, even when measured by the strictest 
judgment of their conscience. 

