BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 28 KYODO -- A government advisory panel 
studying the nation's overall development blueprint urges the 
government to take actual steps toward the relocation of the 
functions of the capital from Tokyo, according to the draft 
report by the panel obtained Saturday [28 May] by KYODO NEWS 
SERVICE. 
  The National Land Development Council also calls for a 
reprogramming of the government's development policy to enhance 
exchanges and alliances among regional communities, the draft 
report said. 
  The council's final report on its review on the nation's 
1987 
comprehensive development plan stressed the need for a 
reassessment of the traditional roles for the central and local 
governments as well as reorganizations of local communities. 
  The report, which should serve as the basis for the next 
development blueprint, is scheduled to be submitted to Prime 
Minister Tsutomu Hata on June 16 after approval by the council. 
  The report points to drastic changes in social conditions 
since the 1987 program, citing a declining birth rate, the 
dragging recession and the yen's upswing. 
  It advises the government to pay more attention to "exchange 
population," or the number of people who travel around at home 
or abroad. 
  As measures to boost local exchanges, it proposes the 
development of highways that connect local core cities, faster 
railway transportations, and new railway networks and better 
access to airports. 
  The council lauds proposed new corridors in the east and 
west 
Japan and along the Sea of Japan coastline as possible 
incubators for cross-regional intercourses. 
  In light of the increasing role that Japan should play in 
Asia, the report urges the creation of new economic areas 
surrounding the Sea of Japan or the Yellow Sea. 
  It also proposes nurturing "small global cities" that enjoy 
direct international exchanges in some specific fields. 
  To respond to the shift of production overseas by 
manufacturers and the increasing share of software industries, 
the report advocates the creation of higher-grade service 
industry through developing high-capacity, high-speed 
telecommunications networks utilizing the technology of optical 
fibers and telecommunications satellite. 
  The report also drew attention to environmental protection, 
and exhorts Japan's active involvement, not only domestically 
but globally, in the issue. 

