Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Alfredo Vega] </F>
  [Text] Amid almost total secrecy, General Martin Balza -- 
the Army Chief of Staff -- on 7 February invited the commanders 
that participated in the Malvinas War to visit him in his office 
in Libertador Building. 
  The objective was to obtain precise information as to how 
the 
chart mapping the minefield planted during the war had been 
handed over to the British. 
  According to reliable Army sources, Balza's decision follows 
the publishing of an article in the British newspaper THE 
ECONOMIST which indicated that the Argentine generals refused to 
give the information to President Carlos Menem. 
  General Mario Benjamin Menendez, the governor of the islands 
at that time; General Oscar Jofre; and Colonel Manuel Dorrego, 
all of whom are retired, participated in the highly confidential 
meeting. 
  It was learned that Dorrego told Balza that he -- as the 
most 
senior officer of the Army Engineer Corps and on Menendez' 
orders -- had handed the chart to Major Thompson, and engineer 
officer of the British Army. 
  Dorrego added that one week later, while detained in San 
Carlos, several British officers asked him if he could redraw 
the chart because they said Thompson had lost the original. 
  Army sources confirm that the incident was reported to the 
Fourth Commission, which preceded the UN General Assembly. On 
that occasion, Argentine delegates, diplomats, and military men 
slapped the British representative with responsibility for the 
matter. The British delegates did not deny it. 
  Asked by LA NACION on 8 February, Balza admitted that the 
meeting had been held. He said: "Between 19,000 and 20,000 
antitank and antipersonnel mines were planted on the Malvinas, 
in addition to those planted by the British." He added that 
reports of allegedly concealing the information "are completely 
untrue and despicable. The honor of Argentine generals and the 
subordination of the Army to the constitutional power cannot be 
questioned." 
  Balzo said: "The details have for some time been in the 
hands 
of the Foreign and Defense Ministries." He admitted that the 
Argentine officers did not retain a copy of the report, and that 
a receipt for the file does not exist. "The circumstances did 
not permit asking for a receipt," he said. 
  Dorrego confirmed for LA NACION that on 15 June 1982, one 
day 
after the end of hostilities, he gave Thompson the information 
on the rows of mines, because no complete minefields were ever 
planted. He said he handed over the information at the request 
of Menendez in accordance with the Geneva Convention. 
  He explained: "It was a brief meeting that took place at 
about 1900 in the building occupied by the British staff in 
Puerto Argentino. I gave him a pink file. Thompson asked me to 
sit down. He read the file, asked me if anything was missing, 
and then thanked me. One week later in San Carlos, a colonel 
asked me to whom I had given the file because they could not 
find it." 
  According to Dorrego, the file was complete and fully 
detailed, "because when we planted the mines we thought we were 
going to win the war, that we would have to clear the mines 
ourselves." 

