BFN 

  [Text] Details of a plan to revise the long-term program 
for development and utilization of nuclear power, which is a 
foundation for Japan's nuclear power development, have been 
decided. Taking into consideration concern both at home and 
abroad about Japan's use of plutonium, the government plans to 
delay operation at reprocessing plants that extract plutonium 
from spent nuclear fuel, and multiplication of plutonium at 
fast-breeder reactors. Moreover, by promoting consumption of 
plutonium at conventional nuclear power plants, the government 
intends to emphasize its policy of not leaving surplus 
plutonium. While the government intends to maintain its 
long-term nuclear fuel recycling policy, it will shift the 
nuclear power program for the first time to that which will give 
top priority to nuclear nonproliferation measures. 
  This will be the first revision of the long-term program for 
development and utilization of nuclear power in seven years. 
The Atomic Energy Commission's panel on the long-term program 
(chaired by Shoichiro Kobayashi, chairman of the Kansai Electric 
Power Co., Ltd.), which has been working on the revision, has 
compiled reports worked out by subcommittees on major topics and 
has finished its actual discussion. The panel is scheduled to 
work out a final report around June. 
  According to the draft of the final report, the timing for 
putting fast-breeder reactors to practical use will be changed 
from "between 2020 and 2030," as stipulated in the current 
long-term program, to "around 2030." The panel will spell out 
the intention of not sticking to multiplication of plutonium, 
stating the need for "a flexible policy on multiplication of 
plutonium from the viewpoint of the balance between demand and 
supply." 
  Moreover, the government plans to promote consumption of 
plutonium (plutonium thermal use) at conventional nuclear power 
plants in an effort to effectively decrease plutonium produced 
at the Rokkasho Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing Plant (located in 
Rokkasho village, Aomori Prefecture), which will start operation 
after 2000; and plutonium to be transported from the UK and 
France after being reprocessed in those countries. To that end, 
conventional nuclear power plants for plutonium thermal use will 
be increased by "10 units around 2000 and by about 15 units in 
the first half of the 2000's." 
  Of approximately 30 tons of plutonium to be transported from 
foreign countries in the future, several tons will be used for 
research and development purposes, and the rest will be consumed 
at nuclear power plants. Of 35-45 tons of plutonium to be 
collected in Japan between 2000 and 2010, 15-20 tons will be 
used for research and development purposes, and 15-20 tons will 
be used at conventional nuclear power plants. These "supply and 
demand plans for plutonium" will be stipulated for the first 
time in the long-term program for nuclear power development and 
use. 
  Meanwhile, based on the view that the "actinide recycle" 
system--which burns plutonium mixed with long-lived radioactive 
wastes at fast breeder reactors--is useful for preventing 
nuclear proliferation, the governmental Power Reactor and 
Nuclear Fuel Development Corp. and other institutes intend to 
tackle new research and development of the system. 
  The Rokkasho Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing Plant, which is now 
under construction, will operate as scheduled. However, the 
government has decided to greatly delay operation of the second 
reprocessing plant--which was originally scheduled to start 
operation around 2010 according to the current long-term 
program--and it will "make a decision on the operation around 
2010." 

