BFN 

  [Text] Belem, 10 Jun (EFE) -- The OAS on 10 June reaffirmed 
its intention to become the "world's most peaceful continent" in 
approving several resolutions that will oblige the 34 member 
countries to control and reduce armaments. 
  During the last session of the 24th Assembly of the OAS, 
which closed today, and by acclamation, the delegations approved 
a resolution by which they commit themselves to fight against 
the proliferation of weapons and to eradicate nuclear tests in 
the continent. 
  A few minutes afterward, upon petition from Canada, the 
Assembly approved another resolution obliging the 34 nations to 
eradicate from the hemisphere the mines that still remain in a 
number of countries where armed conflicts took place, which can 
still cause casualties among the civilian population. 
  According to the Nicaraguan delegation, it will be necessary 
to eradicate some 130,000 mines that remain intact after the 
civil war, and which now indiscriminately threaten the 
campesinos who try to return to their land. 
  In assessing and then closing the OAS Assembly, Brazilian 
Foreign Minister Celso Amorim said that "we are the planet's 
most peaceful continent. We do not suffer from external threats 
of a military nature. We consider it important to continue to 
develop measures to strengthen confidence in the most diverse 
spheres in our process of pledged cooperation." 
  The resolutions that were approved today by the delegations, 
which have been meeting since 6 June in the Amazon city of Belem 
do Para, in northern Brazil, are contained within the spirit of 
the so-called Declaration of Belem, which was signed on 7 June 
by the foreign ministers of the member countries. 
  In the declaration the foreign ministers of the OAS member 
countries express "their determination to continue to contribute 
toward achieving the international community's objective of 
overall and complete disarmament under efficient international 
control." 
  The document adds that an attempt to reach this objective 
should be made "through efforts leading to the reduction and 
elimination of weapons of mass destruction, and through making 
it easier to switch dual-purpose materiel and technologies to 
peaceful purposes." 
  Through the first resolution, which was approved today by 
the 
plenum of the General Assembly, the region's countries promise 
to avoid the proliferation of all kinds of weapons of mass 
destruction in order to achieve peace and world security. 
  With this decision the OAS members are obliged to support 
the 
efforts of the United Nations and the negotiations of the 
Disarmament Conference in favor of the "objective of overall and 
complete disarmament under efficient international control." 
  They also promise to support "the quick approval of a treaty 
on the complete banning of nuclear tests." 
  The United States, which is the only country that signed the 
treaty and also carries out nuclear tests, has declared a 
unilateral moratorium on the practice, but has threatened to 
again carry out tests if other countries do not stop theirs. 
  The resolution on limiting the proliferation of weapons 
urges 
the region's countries that have not yet done so to adhere -- as 
it is appropriate -- to the binding international treaties on 
the prohibition and nonproliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. 
  The agreements to which the document refers are: the Treaty 
for the Proscription of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, or the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, that was signed in 1967; the 1970 Treaty on 
the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons; and the 1925 Geneva 
Protocol, which proscribes bacteriological weapons and the use 
of toxic asphyxiant gases in times of war. 
  "We reject weapons of mass destruction. The signing of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty by Argentina, Brazil, and Chile confirms South 
America as a non-nuclear area. We hope that the American states 
that have not yet signed (the Treaty of) Tlatelolco will do so 
as soon as possible. Our objective is overall and complete 
disarmament," said Amorim, who presided over the OAS General 
Assembly. 
  The ratification of the resolution on the nonproliferation 
of 
weapons will oblige the member countries to sign the UN 
conventions on banning the development, production, and storage, 
and on the destruction of bacteriological and toxic weapons and 
of chemical weapons, signed in 1972 and 1993 respectively. 
  In addition, the member countries approved another 
resolution 
committing themselves to being very clear-cut in their 
negotiations regarding conventional weapons. 

