BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Francisca Stella Faga datelined Sao Paulo] </F>
  [Text] The Brazilian Government has already spent more than 
$1 million preparing projects for the Amazon region to be 
financed under a pilot program of the G-7 countries--the seven 
most developed countries in the world. Yet, the Rain Forest 
Trust Fund, which is administered by the World Bank, has not to 
date disbursed a single cent from the $1.5 billion promised by 
the G-7 in 1990. 
  This was one of the many examples cited yesterday in Sao 
Paulo by Sergio Amaral, chief of the Finance Ministry staff, who 
until recently served as the Environment Ministry's main 
coordinator of negotiations for financing environmental projects. 
  Amaral believes the long list of failures to use the 
resources committed by organizations like the World Bank and the 
G-7 shows "Brazil is perhaps not fully capable of taking 
advantage of the opportunities created in this field, which 
today ranks high on the international agenda," despite the fact 
it has "turned the pressure exerted against us into a political 
victory." 
  Commenting on the Amazon Pilot Program, Amaral noted that 
the 
problem does not lie only in the delay in disbursing the 
resources donated to the Brazilian Government, but in the fact 
that G-7 member countries have suspended their bilateral 
cooperation because they were already committed to the 
multilateral program. Brazil thus lost cooperation at bilateral 
level without being compensated through disbursements from the 
above fund. He said the World Bank has spent $500,000 from the 
trust fund in financing missions and in disseminating 
information on a program that still remains on paper. 
  The General Environment Facility (GEF)--which has been 
administered by the World Bank since 1990 and which finances 
projects to avoid global warming and to preserve biodiversity, 
international waters, and the ozone layer--should be another 
major source of resources. The GEF had $1.2 billion. It 
allocated $30 million to Brazil in 1991. During a lecture at the 
Institute for Advanced Studies at the University of Sao Paulo, 
Amaral noted that Brazil had submitted seven projects in 1993, 
but nothing has yet been disbursed. 
  No private donations have come to Brazil through the debt 
conversion mechanism, Amaral added. He noted that more than $80 
million was rapidly obtained in Bolivia in this way. Brazil was 
slow in making this operation feasible and its legislation was 
inadequate, and so the value of debt bonds rose and nothing 
happened, he said. 
  Amaral cited as another failure the case of the National 
Environment Program (PNMA), which was created in 1990. Three 
years later, in December 1993, the PNMA had disbursed only $20.5 
million of the $117 million promised by the World Bank. 
  Amaral blames these poor results largely on the way 
Brazilian 
political instability, the fiscal crisis, and inflation have 
affected international cooperation. Brazil has been unable to 
use many loans granted under advantageous conditions because the 
Treasury has not authorized the respective matching funds. 
  Amaral also charged that Brazilian Government organizations 
were not prepared to negotiate and absorb the volume of foreign 
resources that become available since the mid-1980's. 
  IBAMA [Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Natural Resources], which was created in 1989, has experienced a 
high managerial turnover: It had nine presidents in just four 
years. The Environment Secretariat, which later became the 
Environment Ministry, has had six different heads since 1992. 
IBAMA has not had trained teams either. 
  Amaral noted there has been poor planning, overambitious 
managers with unrealistic goals, imprecise projects, unrealistic 
deadlines, and extremely complex bureaucratic paperwork. One 
project involving environmental management and technology that 
would have received $25 million had to be discontinued because 
it was not possible to clearly define its objective. 
  Amaral believes the Brazilian Government was not the only 
one 
that made mistakes. He said: "The World Bank's technical teams 
markedly increased their demands, were counterproductive, and 
unduly interfered with the planning and implementation of 
projects." 
  He noted that in the case of the PNMA, the IBAMA director 
for 
ecosystems had to prepare seven different versions of an annual 
operations plan for conservation units to meet the World Bank's 
successive demands. 
  This delayed the program and discouraged the Ibama experts' 
team. To avoid canceling the bidding that those who were 
coordinating the program had prepared together with the World 
Bank, a manual on documents and standard procedures for the 
biddings was approved by the bank after several months of 
discussion. When tested for the first time in an international 
bidding for the purchase of informatics equipment, however, the 
procedures were rejected by the World Bank. To everyone's 
surprise, the bank preferred INCRA [National Land Reform and 
Settlement Institute] procedures. 
  Amaral said the experiment with the Pilot Program for the 
Amazon Region is even more frustrating. The World Bank, which is 
used to large projects, has been having difficulties in 
organizing small projects with the participation of the local 
people. Just as the negotiations are about to be concluded, new 
demands are frequently made and guidances modified during the 
negotiation process. 
  In a meeting held at the end of March in Brussels to 
evaluate 
the Pilot Program for the Amazon Region, the Brazilian 
Government did its best to show how these issues harmed the 
decisionmaking process. The World Bank reaction was positive, 
admitting that procedures should be expedited. 

