Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ivan Andreyev under the "Cooperation" rubric: </F>
"Lithuania Switches to NATO Standards. Authorities Discuss 
Prospects for Relations With North Atlantic Bloc Experts"] 
  [Text] A NATO delegation arrived in Vilnius yesterday to 
hold consultations with the Lithuanian leaders, who signed the 
"Partnership for Peace" program last week. 
  Vytautas Landsbergis, leader of a coalition of right-wing 
opposition parties in the Lithuanian Seimas, who recently 
appears to be learning to find a common language with the 
centrists on matters of ensuring the republic's security, said 
that he welcomes the authorities' steps, particularly the 
initiative to hold the consultations. Mr. Landsbergis believes 
that "recent statements by Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev, the goings-on in Belarus and its statements addressed 
to Lithuania give ample reasons to talk about a threat to its 
territorial integrity." 
  Vytautas Landsbergis, as usual, did not forget to reproach 
the Lithuanian authorities for continuing talks with Russia on 
military transits through Lithuanian territory to Kaliningrad 
Oblast, which may drag the republic into CIS military 
cooperation. "Military transport movements to Russia's Baltic 
enclave," he concluded, "are permissible only on the basis of 
one-time, not long-term, agreements." 
  Meanwhile, President Brazauskas said on the eve of the North 
Atlantic bloc experts' arrival that Lithuania was ready to 
switch to NATO weapons standards. Until recently, the 
Lithuanian Republic (unlike Estonia, which has already switched 
to NATO standards, and Latvia, which has only made statements to 
that effect) has stated its commitment to weapons standards 
adopted in Russia upon buying a significant share of military 
property from the outgoing Russian Army. Now, however, Mr. 
Brazauskas said, as it signed the "Partnership for Peace" 
program, Lithuania would have to switch to weapons in service in 
NATO countries. Funds required for so costly an operation have 
evidently not yet been found, hence for the time being the 
government will use the money earmarked for culture, education, 
and health. 

