BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 10 KYODO -- Japan's economy has been in 
a slump for 37 straight months since May 1991, the longest in 
postwar history, the Economic Planning Agency (EPA) said in a 
monthly report Tuesday [10 May]. "The Japanese economy is going 
through an adjustment phase and showing an overall slump, 
although there are some bright signs," the EPA said. 
  The phrase is exactly the same as the one used the previous 
month when the agency noted "bright signs" of recovery for the 
first time in nine months. This month's report drew public 
attention as to whether or not the agency recognizes any major 
changes for the better. 
  Yoshio Terasawa, EPA director general, told reporters after 
a 
morning cabinet meeting, "The economy is now in a very severe 
state." 
  Meanwhile, Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii said, "I don't 
think the latest EPA report is pessimistic." 
  In its latest report, the agency cited as a positive sign 
the 
upturn in personal expenditures, particularly household spending 
on durable goods such as videocassette recorders, television 
sets and washing machines. Other bright spots included new 
housing starts, which continued above 1.5 million units per 
month over the past several months, and corporate confidence, 
which appeared to have stopped deteriorating. 
  However, the agency said corporate earnings continued to 
drop, resulting in weak private-sector investment in plant and 
equipment. 
  Although some progress is seen in inventory reductions, 
industrial output remained lackluster, dropping from 
previous-year levels by a range of 3.0 to 4.4 percent per month 
between January and March, it added. 
  An agency official said that it is premature at this point 
to 
assess the economy as clearly picking up. 
  Industrial production in April and May is likely to decline 
by more than 2 percent from year-earlier levels, according to a 
survey of manufacturers, the official pointed out. 
  Personal spending could deteriorate again because the 
general 
earnings environment remained weak with relatively small 
increases in monthly wages and bonuses and as the employment 
situation continued to be difficult, he added. 

