Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Press statment by IFP President Mangosuthu Buthelezi on the </F>
SAPA PR wire service on 16 February] 
  [Text] 
<H3>  Mr Mandela's Press Statement About Amendments to 
the Constitution </H3>
  I take the greatest exception to the content and tone of the 
opening paragraphs of the press statement that Mr Mandela issued 
prior to his departure for the Netherlands. The ordinary reader 
of these paragraphs would justifiably infer from what he said in 
them that anybody opposing the constitution and the election 
under it are `steeped in the politics of the past -- the 
politics of racism, ethnic chauvinism and violence'. 
  I oppose the 1993 constitution because it is fatally flawed 
as a democratic constitution and any election under it must be 
rejected as undemocratic. We reject the constitution on 
universally accepted constitutional principles. 
  No constitution which dictates that it be replaced by 
another 
constitution drawn up and piloted through a new constitution 
making process by a ruling political party, would be accepted by 
any democratic people in the world. Constitutions should be all 
about limiting the power of the state and maximising the power 
of the people. Dogs do not muzzle themselves and ruling parties 
do not write constitutions which are designed to ensure frequent 
changes of government through the electoral process. 
  Every democratic constitution relies on special majorities 
before constitutions can be amended. Instead of this 
universally accepted norm the 1993 constitution has in it 
deadlock-breaking mechanisms which dictate that the only 
constitution that will be put to a panel of experts and before 
the electorate in a referendum could, and probably will, be 
adopted by a 50.1 per cent majority -- the majority of a ruling 
party. These are some of the fatal flaws in the constitution 
which have nothing to do with racism. 
  As far as the rest of the document is concerned I comment as 
follows: 

  -  Until we have a wording of the constitutional principle 
which is different to the principle agreed to by the ANC but 
rejected by the AVF [Afrikaner National Front] and the Freedom 
Alliance, there is no way forward on this issue. 
  -  Mr Mandela refers to provisions for provincial finances which 
were agreed to in negotiations with the Freedom Alliance. No 
such agreement exists. Nor has it ever existed. It was one of 
the issues on which there were repeated deadlocks. 
  -  Mr Mandela refers to a constitutional provision which allows 
provinces to adopt their own legislative and executive 
structures, but fails to tell the world that the new 
constitutional text adopted by a constitutional assembly could 
scrap the best that a region could produce in making these 
determinations. 
  -  Mr Mandela says that in order to grant greater security to 
newly elected democratic provincial governments, amendments 
should be introduced which ensure that they will not suffer a 
lessening of the powers granted to them under the 1993 
constitution. 

    What earthly use is it to be guaranteed less than the powers 
you have, when what is proposed you have is ridiculously 
inadequate. 
  All Mr Mandela is doing is placing before the public 
constitutional proposals which led to the deadlock in 
negotiations, and introducing them as breakthrough proposals 
which the ANC is prepared to make. What utter hypocrisy. Mr 
Mandela's statement amounts to no more than cheap politicking on 
life and death issues. 
  Mr Mandela concludes by warning of strong action against 
those who 'use force to disrupt' elections and says that action 
will be taken against them. I and the IFP [Inkatha Freedom 
Party] and the kwaZulu government will oppose the constitution 
and the proposed election under it and we will do so with every 
available democratic means at our disposal. That is our 
democratic right and we will do so. 

