BFN 

  [Text] On Friday the State Duma made a third attempt to 
adopt a resolution on Russia's federal budget for 1994. It was 
successful. The government-submitted draft budget was adopted 
"in principal." As many as 225 deputies voted for the 
resolution, 57 - against, and 21 abstained from voting. During 
the previous rounds of voting the draft resolution failed to 
collect the necessary 225 votes. 
  An extraordinary sitting of the State Duma Council convened 
by speaker Ivan Rybkin just after the budget's adoption 
coordinated changes in the draft resolution which was later 
approved by the deputies. 
  The resolution proposes to the government to revise the 
draft 
budget within two weeks by introducing changes into the budget's 
major characteristics in accordance with the recommendations of 
the lower chamber's committee and to determine the budgets for 
the 3rd and 4th quarters of 1994 separately. 
  The document states that the draft budget submitted by the 
government does not coincide with the prognosis of the country's 
social-economic development for 1994 and does not correspond to 
the priorities in social-economic policy announced in the 
Russian president's address to the Federal Assembly and the 
program of the Russian government entitled Development of 
Reforms and Stabilization of Russian Economy. 
  Deputies also believe that the expenditure part of the 
federal budget does not contain appropriations provided for by 
presidential decrees and government resolutions adopted this 
year. The deputies also pointed out that the draft budget 
provides for reduction of expenditures of the constituent 
members of the Federation with the simultaneous expansion of 
expenditures and strengthens tax pressure on producers. The 
resolution also proposes to the government to submit a draft of 
the federal budget for next year this September. 
  In the course of the debates leader of the Liberal 
Democratic 
Party [LDPR] Vladimir Zhirinovskiy declared that his faction 
would support the draft budget only if the parliament speaker 
reported to the Russian president the request of the LDPR to 
dismiss three ministers. Zhirinovskiy "is dissatisfied" with 
the activity of Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev, Vice Premier 
Anatoliy Chubays, and Interior Minister Viktor Yerin. 

