BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds by </F>
presenter Jon Snow in London; from the "Channel Four" news 
program -- live] 
  [Text] [Snow] Could you characterize what you think has 
actually happened today, where are we in the process, is there 
as Ken Maginnis [Ulster Unionist Security Spokesman] seems to be 
asking, is there indeed a process? 
  [Reynolds] There are two processes going on: First of all 
there is the peace process, and both governments are both agreed 
very strongly and firmly today that we continue the search for 
peace in Ireland and that is what the vast majority of the 
people in Ireland and indeed the British people will want us to 
do. We are disappointed that violence still continues and 
escalates. We have said quite clearly to the paramilitaries on 
both sides today -- not on one side but on both sides because 
there has been vicious sectarian murders over the last number of 
weeks, and in fact Loyalist violence has to take responsibility 
for the majority of the deaths that have taken place since the 
first of January -- so we repeat our message and our call to 
both communities. I fully support James Molyneaux's [Ulster 
Unionist Leader] call for immediate cessation of loyalist 
violence, and we repeat that same message to Sinn Fein today. A 
message we want to hear from Sinn Fein is a cessation of 
violence, that is the next logical step on the road to peace. 
The Downing Street declaration represents very significant 
progress between the two governments. The clarification is off 
the agenda, nobody has anything more to say about that, the next 
logical step has to be a cessation of violence by both sets of 
paramilitaries to allow the political dialogue to commence. 
  [Snow] Well of course there are unionists who are saying 
actually that the clarification process does have something. 
There is still something to say about it -- and that is Gerry 
Adams in thanking you for getting the British Government to 
clarify -- you actually pushed the British Government to do more 
than they would want to have done. 
  [Reynolds] I don't need the thanks of anybody to do what I 
believe is right in the search for peace on this island; I have 
said that from the very start. I have given clarification at 
the very start to advance the peace process. I have said that 
if there was any renegotiation being asked for by Sinn Fein or 
anybody else I wouldn't support it at all. The questions that 
were there were responded to by the British Government, he 
[Adams] has already admitted today that there is no more 
clarification -- it's off the agenda. Quite clearly the next 
step and the next question we want answered from Sinn Fein and 
from the Republican movement and from the Loyalist 
paramilitaries is a cessation of violence, because it's quite 
clear from where we are at today that there isn't a single 
vestige of justification left for either paramilitaries to carry 
out these sectarian murders that are going on. What is the 
justification in anybody's mind, in anybody's conscience to go 
out and shoot in cold blood just because they profess a 
different religion to their own no matter which side you come 
from? It must be clear to everybody that the only way ahead for 
a solution to this problem is for all parties to get around the 
table. We are proceeding with our work behind the scenes to 
have the framework document ready. What indeed Mr. Maginnis and 
the Unionist leadership would do well is to take on their own 
responsibility of leadership and to tell their own 
paramilitaries as indeed James Molyneaux did, that the road 
ahead is by political dialogue and not by sectarian violence. 
  [Snow] Well now what is your reading of what's happening 
inside Sinn Fein, because some are saying the need for 
clarification was really something which was designed to see 
whether they could increase the number of doves, if you like, 
inside Sinn Fein who were prepared to see a peace settlement and 
outweigh the number of hawks. Some people said it was 60-40 in 
favor of the Downing Street declaration, that the clarification 
may have moved that up to 70-30, what do you think is happening? 
  [Reynolds] I have heard that as well but I have no 
information to suggest which is right or which is wrong. But 
one thing is certain from our meeting today that is there is a 
clear message gone out that no paramilitary organization is 
going to bolster or improve their position by carrying on 
violence. So I'm not in a position to answer your question 
whether it's 60 per cent or 70 percent. But I think whatever 
percentage it is we want a cessation of violence and we want it 
now. 
  [Snow] Are you optimistic that that clarificatory process 
has 
moved the argument on, and that we are in a better placed 
position to get a positive answer from Sinn Fein today than we 
were two weeks ago? 
  [Reynolds] Well I have always believed that there will be 
many blockages along the road to peace, I have always believed 
it would be a rocky road, but it's our responsibility to remove 
those road blocks out of the way. The road block of 
clarification has been removed, there maybe other difficulties 
along the way but both governments are committed to follow the 
road to peace and the search for peace, and that's what people 
want us to do. I don't know how far it has moved -- the 
percentage up or down, I am not in a position to know that, I 
don't have any information. But what I do say is that it now 
appears to everybody and every responsible person thinking about 
this that the blockages that were there have gone, the reality 
is that now is the time for a cessation of violence, that is the 
only logical step that I can think of. 
  [Snow] What happens if Sinn Fein does say no? 
  [Reynolds] We continue anyway, whether they say yes or 
whether they say no. The two governments are not going to wait 
around, waiting for paramilitaries to make up their mind. We 
are going ahead with the political process with the framework 
for the talks that can allow people to come back around the 
table. And after all it is the two Unionist parties at the 
moment who have taken a standoff position in relation to 
political dialogue. So on the one hand it's a bit disingenuous 
to talk about the two governments should get into the political 
process when the two parties that are really standing off this 
situation are the two Unionists parties, they have to examine 
their own position. 
  [Snow] One final question, at the weekend Archbishop Eames 
speaking very much for the Protestant community in the north 
talked of a real climate of fear. There are others in the 
nationalist community who in the spate of Loyalist killings talk 
of a terrible climate of fear. There is not much time to play 
with at the moment is there? This is heading for some serious 
trouble if things don't come good in really a matter of weeks? 
  [Reynolds] One would hope that it wouldn't get any worse 
than 
it is, but what the Downing Street declaration did was to 
address the fears and concerns of both communities in an 
even-handed way. The fears of uncertainty in relation to the 
possibility of being coerced into a united Ireland -- which was 
a genuine fear of the Unionist community -- that has been 
addressed quite clearly and unequivocally. The question of the 
principle of consent on which the Downing Street declaration is 
grounded was another very, very important factor and an area of 
concern to the Unionist population. Those have been answered by 
a solemn declaration of both governments. The second-class 
citizenship of the nationalist community, the fear of how they 
would be treated in future -- it was not acceptable for them to 
be treated the way they have been treated over the last 50 
years. Those fears and concerns were addressed there too, so 
there has to be an equal treatment of both communities, a parity 
of esteem in relation to both communities, those were the issues 
that were the concern. Now there will always be and always have 
been people with different vested interests to stop a peace 
process, but the two democratically elected governments are not 
going to be deterred, or be blackmailed or whatever into 
dropping a peace process in the face of some of this terrorist 
blackmail that is going on -- we are not going to do it, and the 
sooner the people realize that and get the message straight to 
them that the day is over for a cessation of violence, [as 
heard] the two governments are going to move ahead with or 
without the paramilitaries. 

