Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by NARODNA ARMIYA correspondent Lieutenant-Colonel </F>
Serhiy Chornous: "`We Need To Preserve What Has Been Done and 
Move On to New Solutions--Said President of Ukraine Leonid 
Kravchuk in a Discussion With a NARODNA ARMIYA Correspondent 
During a Visit to the Exhibition of the Achievements of the 
Scientists of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine"] 
  [Text] A shirt from basalt, a most common mineral. 
But not that simple. A shirt such that neither a bullet nor a 
criminal's knife can penetrate it. And the gloves! They look 
most ordinary, like wool, like thousands of others. But not at 
all! One wearing them can confidently grab the blade of a knife 
and boldly snatch it away out of the hands of a criminal--it 
will not cut you. That is also the strange power of the scarf 
that protects the neck of the wearer against injury from knives 
and from the sharpest razor. And what use is an antenna that 
deploys like an umbrella! This is, however, a special antenna, 
for special communications... We should not talk about that 
aloud. 
  All of these and many other wondrous things could be 
seen at the exhibition of the "Scientific and Technical 
Achievements of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in the 
Interests of Defense and Security," which was a substantial 
portion of the general exhibition devoted to the 75th 
anniversary of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. Seventy-five 
scientific organizations were represented by 1,300 exhibits. 
  President of Ukraine Leonid Kravchuk, Minister of 
Defense of Ukraine General of the Army of Ukraine Vitaliy 
Radetskyy and representatives of interested agencies and 
institutions visited the exhibition, as NARODNA ARMIYA has 
reported. Here is a little more detail on some of the exhibits 
that made up the show. 
  There are some 130 SS-19 liquid-fueled heavy missiles in 
Ukraine today. There are more than three thousand tonnes of 
highly toxic fuel in their tanks. One one-thousandth of a 
milligram in a liter of water is a deadly poison. The latest 
missiles -- the solid-fueled SS-24 -- are a real problem. They 
cannot simply be lifted out of their silos. They must be kept at 
a temperature of 5.35 degrees Celsius, after all. No such 
salvaging technology exists around the world. A question faces 
Ukraine: What to do with the missile fuel, sell it? There is no 
one to sell it to. Blow it up? Not safe. Burn it up? Too 
expensive, very much so. The missiles turned out to be made 
without a thought toward the technology for destroying them. 
There is no such technology. 
  No, there is such a technology! That is what the scientists 
of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and enthusiasts from the 
Yuzhnoye KB [Design Bureau] have said. They have developed a 
unique technology for the conversion of the highly toxic missile 
fuel into a safe powder that can be stored for years, without 
harming either the health of people or nature. This substance 
could even be converted quickly and easily, if necessary, back 
into the fearsome missile fuel heptyl. 
  Ukrainian scientists are also engaged in solving problems of 
salvaging the SS-24 missiles. They have successfully resolved 
this difficult engineering task as well. This technology, as 
with everything that is ingenious, is simple. A reagent is 
poured into a solid-fuel engine of the missile, and two 
substances are obtained not long afterward. They are not 
explosive, not harmful and are even useful for everything 
living. These substances can be used as fertilizer in 
agriculture. Judge for yourself -- roses placed in a solution of 
this substance last for months. 
  The Institute of Electric Welding imeni Yevhen Paton had a 
large exhibition. One's attention is directed toward a welded 
metal object. Its volume is just 2.5 liters. It is easily 
accommodated in an ordinary briefcase. But if necessary, it 
unfolds like an accordion into a rigid, airtight structure with 
a volume of 150 liters. This wondrous metal tank can withstand 
space loads as well. The unique technologies of this scientific 
collective have made it possible to manufacture welding guns in 
the briefest instant. This invention is widely utilized in 
shipbuilding and other sectors of machine building. Specialists 
were also surprised by a material with... memory. A metallic 
item that is like a piece of paper, crumpled up and placed on a 
table. But amazingly, it unfolds before our eyes and becomes as 
it was before. This invention has also been brought into being. 
  The range of scientific achievements of the Institute of 
Electric Welding is quite broad. It is worth noting that 
enthusiasts have developed a technology for elemental welding 
that is already being employed successfully in electronics. 
Romantics of science from the leading institute have also 
astonished the world with the fact that they have made the 
impossible a reality. They can weld steel, copper and aluminum 
elements. These metals still cannot be joined to each other 
around the world. But the Kiev specialists are welding them... 
by explosion. The people from Paton have safely harnessed the 
explosion for the economy, and have forced it to work for the 
good of man. They have developed a technology for cutting by 
explosion. Much of this was already known. The blades of a 
helicopter in trouble are "blown off" with an explosion so that 
the crew can eject from the craft. The hatch on the Nakhimov 
motor vessel that sank was also blown off with the aid of an 
explosion. The canopies of military aircraft are also jettisoned 
by a directed explosion in ejections. This technology was 
developed for saving the crew on the famous Buran as well. 
  They are able to weld titanium and ceramic objects at the 
Institute imeni Paton. This scientific establishment is 
undoubtedly a leader in the welding of armor. 
  The scientists at the exhibition demonstrated a technology 
for the remelting of gun barrels. The metal retains its quality 
therein, which is not identical in various parts of the barrel. 
This makes it possible to economize a considerable amount of 
funds. And nearby is an unusual exhibit. It is an aerial bomb. 
Its "jacket," or casing, has certain qualities. It splits into 
fragments upon explosion, and as the designer envisaged, even 
the empennage of the bomb is transformed into a deadly fragment 
of a certain weight and shape. 
  The scientists have also developed an electron-beam device 
that makes it possible to weld fuel tanks for the heaviest 
missiles in the world, and the weld seams are even stronger than 
the material therein. 
  Engine parts rebuilt with electron-beam welding serve longer 
than new ones. Instruments and devices for welding in space, 
under water and in the field could be seen here. The latter is 
without gas or electricity. And the use of pincers that increase 
human strength by 20 times help to join parts firmly. 
  Technologies were also shown that have no analogues around 
the world. Specialists from the West thus displayed considerable 
interest in those inventions. Specialists from the U.S. Customs 
Service expressed the intention of procuring the individual 
protective gear that was mentioned above. Armored vests with 
traditional composite materials, ceramics and titanium, for 
example, cannot "hold" a bullet. This often leads to shock for 
the person being protected. Worse things can happen as well; the 
force of the bullet ruptures the internal organs of the person. 
That does not happen with the armored vests made from the fabric 
manufactured with basalt. 
  A most unusual box, and far from a simple one, was also 
presented for viewing at the exhibition. This is a "perpetual" 
box. It does not burn or decay. This invention is for the 
military, since some ammunition is being stored in Ukraine today 
on open sites, and the boxes with their deadly contents are 
rotting. Tare made from basalt is light, and cheaper as well, 
than the wood that is used today in the military. 
  The Scientific-Research Institute of Problems of Materials 
Science imeni I.M. Frantsevych demonstrated engine parts made 
from `tikat'. This new material does not melt at temperatures of 
1,350 degrees. Specialists from the institute, along with 
scientists from the United States and Germany, are building a 
new engine from the new material. It will be an engine for the 
twenty-first century. There is already an agreement. The Plant 
imeni Malyshev Production Association in Kharkiv has moreover 
already manufactured an internal-combustion engine in which all 
of the most important parts are made from this material. 
  The inventiveness of the Institute of the Physics of Metals 
of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine has reached heights that 
have not yet been conquered by their colleagues from the highly 
developed countries of the world. The exhibits speak eloquently 
for the specialists of the institute. Here are two pieces of 
armor -- one is 45 mm thick, of the steel that is used today for 
the manufacture of tanks, armored personnel carriers and 
infantry fighting vehicles. Next to it is armor 16 mm thick from 
superhard steel. It is no less strong than the conventional 
armor that is thicker and almost three times heavier. This is 
armor from ceramics, combination armor, from polymers and the 
technology developed to weld them. 
  The Institute of Superhard Materials demonstrates plates of 
altinite -- a ceramic anti-shaped charge tank armor. The 
scientists of this institute are working on the Tank-90 program. 
  The Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Academy of 
Sciences 
of Ukraine also showed its inexhaustible capabilities. Its 
staffers, like sorcerers, are able to develop and manufacture 
paints with assigned characteristics for any taste and color -- 
anti-radiation, anti-corrosion... As well as those that conceal 
hardware from the all-seeing eye of radar. 
  Specialists from the Institute of Problems of Mathematical 
Machinery presented a significant exhibit. Reviewers directed 
attention to their interesting and profound developments in the 
automation of operational control for staffs, as well as 
neurocomputers that work on the operating principles of the 
human nervous system. 
  The exposition of the Institute of Sociology of the Academy 
of Sciences of Ukraine was interesting in the depth of its 
research. The state of the armed forces and the sentiments and 
hopes of its personnel were reflected in figures and graphs as 
in a magic mirror. 
  The variety, importance and scientific value of the 
exhibits presented at the Science Expo Center have not removed 
from the agenda the question of bringing to life the great 
achievements and accomplishments of the scientists of Ukraine. 
What ways should be taken? What priorities should be defined? 
How can the mighty scientific potential of the state be 
preserved, and the production capacity of the 
military-industrial complex of Ukraine be utilized, so that 
science and the defense industry are working for the good of the 
Ukrainian people? 
  The NARODNA ARMIYA correspondent addressed these 
questions to Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of 
Ukraine and President of Ukraine Leonid Kravchuk. 
  They must be modern and efficient and inexpensive," 
answered Leonid Makarovych. "I say inexpensive, allowing for our 
capabilities today. That which we can do today must be done -- 
current research and that which has already been done must not 
be lost. And, naturally, we must proceed to new solutions. 
  "We are destroying the nuclear weapons, the matter is 
clear there. We are not able to manage, utilize or provide 
properly for those weapons. But the security of the state must 
be guaranteed. We must therefore seek out new ways and develop 
other types of protection that support the defense of the 
country. 
  "There was a great deal that was interesting at the 
exhibition. I think that today we will be supporting the highest 
priority projects, with a regard for the fact that they will 
work to the maximum effect for defense and security tomorrow. 
That is the most efficient way." 

