BFN 

<F P=106> [All names as received] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 16 May (EFE) -- Russia and Argentina further 
strengthened their links today. Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev and Argentine Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella signed 
agreements which stress that relations between their two 
countries extend beyond the bilateral level and into the 
international field. 
  Russian-Argentine relations are "an important element in 
Russia's relations with Latin America due to Argentina's 
importance in the region," Kozyrev said as he received his 
Argentine counterpart. 
  At the end of the first part of the negotiation, Di Tella 
praised Russia's "extraordinary progress" in the last few years, 
stressing that the two countries now share a "philosophy" which 
makes possible the discussion of security issues--as was done 
today--"in the same language." 
  The basic document signed by Kozyrev and Di Tella is a 
preliminary agreement on the "bases for Argentine and Russian 
Federation relations." The Argentine foreign minister said the 
two countries' presidents will sign a definitive agreement in 
Moscow in six months to one year. 
  The two officials also signed a protocol for "consultation" 
between their respective foreign affairs departments and an 
agreement to eliminate the visa requirement for diplomatic and 
service personnel. 
  Di Tella arrived in Moscow from Saint Petersburg for a 
three-day official visit at the invitation of his Russian 
counterpart. He visited Turkmenistan on 12 and 13 May. 
Turkmenistan is a former Soviet Republic located in Central Asia 
where Argentine companies have important investments. 
  Kozyrev recalled that Argentina is this year a nonpermanent 
member of the UN Security Council while Russia is a permanent 
member. He added that this is reason enough for the two 
countries to maintain close bilateral and "global" relations. 
  Kozyrev said that Argentina is one of the "key" countries in 
Latin America, adding that Russia is currently strengthening its 
relations with the region and is sponsoring Russian cooperation 
through regional political institutions, particularly the OAS 
and regional countries' economic groups. 
  Spokesman Mikhail Demurin said recently that Russia 
considers 
Argentina to be "its largest and most promising partner in Latin 
America." 
  Di Tella said that Argentina and Russia are old friends, 
adding that never before during this century relations have been 
better than now. Di Tella described what is occurring in the 
Russian Federation as "admirable," stressing that Russia 
deserves to be respected as "a great power." 
  The Argentine minister added that Russia and Argentina are 
part of the new world process which is based on peace, 
cooperation, and mutual respect. 
  Di Tella's entourage includes numerous foreign officials, 
leaders of the ruling and opposition parties in Congress, and 
several entrepreneurs. Argentine Ambassador to Russia Juan 
Carlos Olima, Coordination General Under Secretary Andres 
Cisneros, and Foreign Policy Under Secretary Rogelio Pfirter are 
among those who accompanied the foreign minister during his 
meeting with Kozyrev. 
  After the meeting, which lasted more than an hour, the 
Russian foreign minister offered a luncheon in honor of his 
counterpart and his delegation. 
  International Economic Relations Secretary Jorge Campbell, 
International Cooperation Director General Eduardo Perez, and 
Argentine entrepreneurs met meanwhile with Vladimir Karastin, 
the foreign economic relations vice minister, and Russian 
entrepreneurs. 
  Russia's new situation "demands much imagination in order to 
do business. We now need to know each other better," Campbell 
told EFE. Campbell was an expert Argentine negotiator with the 
former USSR. He emphasizes the favorable changes taking place in 
Russia. 
  Argentine entrepreneurs told their hosts about their desire 
to do business through a counterbalanced trade mechanism. 
  Di Tella will meet later today with Yegor Gaidar, "the 
father" of Russian reform and leader of the "Russian Option" 
party; and with Grigory Yablinski, a notable economist and 
member of Boris Yeltsin's moderate opposition. 
  Tonight the foreign minister will have a chance to speak 
with 
the entire spectrum of Russian politicians who have been invited 
to a reception at the Argentine Embassy. 

