BFN 

<F P=106> [By XINHUA reporter Zou Qingli (6760 3237 7787): "Increase </F>
All People's Awareness of Paying Taxes"; from the special column 
"Taxes Are Everyone's Concern"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 24 Apr (XINHUA) -- XINHUA editor's note: 
As China introduced a new taxation system at the beginning of 
this year, strengthening the collection and management of taxes 
has become a task of top priority, while the collection of taxes 
has demanded the entire society's understanding and support. In 
order to enhance understanding and communicate with the entire 
society on issues related to taxes, XINHUA will, beginning 
today, introduce a new special column, "Taxes Are Everyone's 
Concern." The column will carry reports on outstanding 
taxpayers and the role of tax revenues in the national economy, 
as well as tax evasion cases of individual taxpayers. (End of 
editor's note) 
  Along with economic and social development, more and more 
people have somehow begun to understand what taxes are. Often 
they are most aware of the need to pay individual income tax 
when an individual's income reaches a certain level. The 
salaried working stratum, those with an 800 yuan or more monthly 
income are, after all, very few. Therefore, some people are 
"indifferent" toward this tax category, which should be of 
obvious concern to the people's livelihood, and may know even 
less with regard to other kinds of taxes. 
  As a matter of fact, the moment one becomes a member of 
society, taxes will accompany him or her for the rest of their 
life. We must arouse all people's awareness to pay taxes! 
<H5>  I </H5>
  In a civilized society, each and every individual is bound 
to 
play two roles, i.e., as a laborer and a consumer. As a 
laborer, one creates social wealth, part of which is delivered 
by the enterprise or work unit to the state in the form of 
taxes. As a consumer, one buys goods, which include costs and 
profits, in addition to taxes. All taxes paid are like tiny 
streams which form an enormous river to replenish the state 
treasury and build the mansion of the Republic. 
  Taxes concern everyone in a thousand and one ways. An 
individual is a citizen as well as a taxpayer who fulfills, 
consciously or unconsciously, the duty of paying taxes, while 
enjoying, tangibly or intangibly, the benefits of taxes he or 
she has paid. When one buys a pack of quality cigarettes, he or 
she pays taxes with 60 percent of the purchase money; by the 
same token, 20 percent of the money paid for a color TV set 
actually goes to taxes. Meanwhile, when one walks on a 
boulevard and breathes the fresh air purified by the green 
invested by society, he or she is enjoying the benefits brought 
about by the taxes he or she has paid. 
  Macroscopically, taxes are revenues obtained from society by 
the state in order to perform its functions. In 1993, the state 
revenues totaled some 511 billion yuan, of which 400 billion 
yuan, or nearly 80 percent of the total, was derived from 
various taxes, while 95 percent of Beijing municipality's income 
derived from tax revenues. Tax revenues, which come from the 
people and are spent on them, keep the giant state apparatus in 
operation, safeguard national security, and maintain social 
stability, peace, and order. Microscopically, taxes paid by an 
individual to the state in various forms are repaid to him or 
her by the state accordingly through educational, health, 
cultural, recreational, and other services; through roads, 
communications, and other infrastructure invested in and built 
by the state for production and everyday needs; and through 
various direct and indirect state subsidies and benefits. 
  Taxes paid by each and every individual lump together and, 
under unified state plans, create a more convenient and 
comfortable living environment for all of us. 
  II 
  Prior to reform and opening up, China implemented a policy 
of 
unified financial receipts and allocations by the state. 
Moreover, as tax revenues had no direct bearing on the 
interests of units or individuals, the overwhelming majority of 
people knew only vaguely "the need to pay taxes by everyone," a 
concept rather prevalent in Western developed countries. Most 
industrial workers were not aware of taxes, and farmers selling 
hogs were confused about the need to pay animal slaughter tax; 
while plant directors and managers generally complained about 
excessive taxes, and individual business operators grumbled at 
heavy taxes. Hence, when encountered by tax collectors, 
taxpayers often bargained or went into hiding. 
  While tax awareness is rather weak among a segment of the 
population, some individuals have a strong "intention" to evade 
taxes. Some individual industrial and commercial units operated 
without a license, wrote unauthorized receipts, or printed 
receipts without permission in order to evade taxes. According 
to rough estimation, taxes unlawfully retained by individual 
business operators last year amounted to 26 billion yuan. Some 
state- and collectively-owned enterprises took the opportunity 
of signing contracts to inflate costs and delay tax payments, or 
evaded taxes by hiding and underreporting their business volume. 
As of the end of last June, taxes in arrears by enterprises 
alone totaled 10.9 billion yuan. Some popular singers, dancers, 
and movie stars, while receiving high remuneration for their 
performances, have no intention whatsoever of paying individual 
income taxes. "Whoever wants to make a fortune must live on tax 
loopholes" has become a slogan for some people wanting to get 
rich. 
  A new type of criminal has emerged in society following the 
state taxation and foreign trade reform -- tax swindlers. 
Colluding with some culprits outside Chinese territory, they 
unscrupulously swindle huge amounts of state export tax refunds. 
In the first eight months of 1993, the procuratorial organs at 
various levels in China prosecuted 25 tax swindle cases 
involving some 110 people, uncovered six criminal gangs, 
arrested 45 criminal offenders of all kinds, and confiscated 3.5 
billion yuan in fake receipts used by criminals. These lawless 
elements swindled more than 100 million yuan in export tax 
refunds from the state. 
  Huge fortunes that were supposed to go to the state 
coffers were lost like this. 
  It has been learned that an alarming amount of tax receipts 
that were supposed to go to the state coffers were illegally 
retained and became lost. According to a rough estimate, tax 
receipts lost annually in this way amount to at least 100 
billion yuan, an amount that is more than the total annual 
revenues of treasuries at the county level, more than the total 
annual state power expense, or enough to pay for 80 Yanpu 
bridges, five Beijing-Kowloon Railways, or two Three-Gorge 
projects... [ellipsis as published] 
  The huge amounts of lost tax receipts reflect an irrational 
distribution policy. While dodging tax, individually-owned 
businesses enjoy the economic environment and all sorts of 
conveniences provided by the state. Managers of some large 
enterprises who default on paying tax on the one hand take 
advantage of the spacious quarters subsidized by the state on 
the other. A few TV and movie personalities who evade tax have 
no qualms whatsoever about drawing all sorts of benefits and 
subsidies. 
  Evading tax is like cutting out a piece of the 
collectively-owned fortune created by all of us. Not satisfied 
with that, the tax evaders also want a share of what is left. 
This kind of behavior should be condemned by the whole of 
society, and it is certainly within the power of the state to 
punish them. 
  One heartening development is that conscientiously paying 
one's tax has become a civilized conduct in the minds of many 
people. Self-employed businessmen in Guangdong have become 
noticeably more willing to pay tax. They paid a total of 3.1 
billion yuan in tax from January to October last year. In 
Beijing, self-employed people have been sighted forming long 
queues waiting to pay tax. Things have also improved with 
regard to tax evasion by entertainers, which had aroused bitter 
complaints among the masses. Mandatory tax collection in 
accordance with law is being closely integrated with enhanced 
public awareness of paying tax according to law, and this 
development has helped advance China's tax collection work. 
<H5>  III </H5>
  Collecting money for the state -- this is the heavy 
responsibility on the shoulders of tax collectors. 
  China's taxation departments have 600,000 cadres, staff 
members, and other employees whose job is to collect 350 to 400 
billion yuan yearly in assorted taxes from the nation's 30 
million businesses and individual taxpayers. Some taxpayers are 
"watermelons" and some are "sesame seeds." A large enterprise 
may pay tens, even hundreds, upon millions of yuan in tax a 
year. "Sesame seeds," which each pay a relatively paltry sum, 
eventually result in huge amounts of taxes collected. The 
smallest tax bill for small taxpayers could be as little as a 
few cents. As the watermelons cannot be overlooked, so every 
sesame seed should also be picked up. From the bustling city to 
the remote countryside, the broad ranks of tax collectors have 
to "trek across mountains and rivers, make house calls to 
thousands upon thousands of households, talk themselves hoarse, 
and endure hardships of every description" to collect the 
fortune for the state cent by cent. 
  Sometimes they have to travel up hill and down dale for 
hours 
to collect a few cents of tax. To collect tax according to law, 
sometimes they have to endure, in addition to hardships, all 
sorts of grievances, and even face the test of life or death. 
  In Zhushan County, Hubei, special tax officer Fan Quanhe 
died 
an honorable death when he -- while carry out his official 
duties -- was stabbed in the heart by a tax evader armed with a 
butcher's knife. Soon afterward, tax collector Zheng Xinhua in 
Pujiang County, Zhejiang, was killed instantly when he was 
pushed down from a moving car while he was searching for 
smuggled cigarettes... [ellipsis as published] According to 
figures compiled by the State Administration of Taxation, there 
were 16,920 cases of violence involving tax evasion from 1987 to 
1992. Of the 14,298 cases involving physical abuse of tax 
collectors, 1,963 persons became permanently disabled as a 
result of severe wounds, and two were killed. 
  China today is short of 300,000 tax collectors. Many of the 
30,000 or more grass-roots tax offices in cities and villages 
all over the country do not have a suitable office. Tax 
collectors do not have superior means of transportation and 
communications. Tax collectors riding on bicycles often have to 
tail tax evaders riding motorcycles or driving automobiles... 
[ellipsis as published] In spite of this, the republic's tax 
collectors stand fast at their posts and dedicate themselves to 
tax collection. Beijing city alone has 7,000 tax collectors who 
collect 18 billion yuan in tax annually, averaging 2.5 million 
yuan per tax collector. Since 1990, the national tax receipts 
have grown at an average annual rate of over 10 percent, topping 
400 billion yuan in 1993. With their services, they have made 
major contributions in exercising macroeconomic regulation and 
control, and in safeguarding the national interest. 

