BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: Israeli officials have continued to make 
statements on the possibility of making progress in the talks 
with Syria following the break. Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq 
Rabin has said that Syria's demand for full Israeli withdrawal 
from the Golan in return for full peace is unacceptable. He 
claims that Israel has agreed, in principle, on a withdrawal in 
the Golan, and that there is some kind of connection between 
peace and withdrawal on the one hand, and between security 
arrangements and the timetable of this withdrawal on the other. 
It is known that the Israelis make these sorts of statements on 
specific occasions, and deliberately make ambiguous statements 
to delude the world public, to deceive it, and to conceal the 
true nature of Israel's hostility to peace. However, these 
statements no longer deceive anyone. More than 27 months after 
the Madrid conference, the Washington peace talks are still at 
square one and there is no sign of any change in the Israeli 
position. In fact, Rabin has rejected the principle of full 
withdrawal from the Golan and went back to singing his old tune 
on withdrawal in the Golan. He is talking about a partial 
withdrawal, which Syria rejected from the very beginning, and 
with which it cannot deal at all, especially since it 
constitutes a violation of Syria's clear rights and sovereignty 
on its territory. It is also a violation of the UN Security 
Council resolutions, the basis of the Madrid conference, and the 
essence of the U.S. initiative based on the land-for-peace 
formula. 
  Syria has said many times that it will accept no compromise 
in the Golan or partial or phased settlements, and that peace 
and occupation cannot go together. However, the Israeli rulers, 
who focus their efforts on devouring the occupied Arab 
territories, adopted the policy of maneuvering and 
procrastination, and of torpedoing the peace efforts from within 
the Washington talks. They sought to split the negotiating Arab 
ranks in an attempt to undermine the principle of a just and 
comprehensive peace on all fronts of the conflict. They believe 
that they can succeed on the other fronts of the conflicts just 
as they have succeeded in dragging the Palestinian side into a 
partial agreement that is completely at odds with the desired 
peace. 
  Subjugating the occupied territories to a full military 
siege, and escalating confrontations, clashes, and acts of 
violence, proves to anyone seeking the truth that the separate 
agreement did not bring peace. In fact, it has further 
complicated the situation and made it even more volatile. The 
Israeli officials have thus far done nothing other than stab the 
international peace efforts in the back. In fact, they will be 
exposing the peace process to grave danger if they insist on 
their intransigent stands and their rejection of a full 
withdrawal from the Golan and the other occupied territories. 
  It is clear that the U.S. Administration's huge financial 
and 
military aid to Israel contributes to Israel's intransigence. 
The U.S. Administration has claimed that this aid will actually 
encourage Israel to join the peace process once it is reassured 
about its alleged security problems. What is happening is just 
the opposite, for Israel has become more intransigent in evading 
the requirements of the peace process. At the same time, its 
security demands have increased. Observers who have followed 
developments in the Middle East believe that the U.S. 
Administration is responsible for a great deal of the stumbling 
in the peace process, for why would Israel, which is essentially 
saturated with a hostile and expansionist spirit, submit to the 
will of peace while it is receiving unlimited financial and 
military aid? 

