BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh at the </F>
closing ceremony of the fifth session of the 23 June National 
Assembly in Hanoi -- recorded] 
  [Summary] "After nearly a month of active work with a high 
sense of urgency in an democratic atmosphere and with high sense 
of responsibility to the people, the National Assembly has 
successfully completed its working plan for the fifth session. 
As it had been determined that the major task for this session 
was to be legislative work, the National Assembly reserved most 
of its time and energy for the consideration and approval of 
important laws, namely: the Labor Code; the Amended Law on the 
Organization of People's Councils and People's Committees; the 
Amended law on the Election of People's Councils and People's 
Committees; the Law on the Transfer of the Right of Land Use; 
the Law on Encouraging Domestic Investment; the Law Amending 
Some Provisions of the Military Obligation Law; the Law on 
Companies; and the Law on Private Business. 
  "The National Assembly also contributed suggestions to the 
draft civil code to help the compilation agency further its work 
before the National Assembly discusses this important code in 
the next session." 
  The National Assembly chairman then explained the 
significance of the newly passed laws against the background of 
the current renovation process. He urged the government and 
agencies concerned to issue relevant documents and directives to 
administer the enforcement of the new laws. He also urged the 
National Assembly deputies, government agencies, and mass 
organizations to step up their education campaigns to help 
people better understand and observe the state laws. 
  "In this session the National Assembly also passed an 
important resolution to ratify the United Nations' 1982 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, to which we are a signatory. 
Through the ratification of the United Nations' 1982 Convention 
on the Law of the Sea, the Socialist Republic of Vietnam has 
demonstrated its determination to join with the world community 
in building a just legal order so as to encourage development 
and cooperation at sea. The SRV also affirms its sovereignty 
over various areas of internal water and territorial seas as 
well as its sovereignty and jurisdiction over areas of water 
adjoining the territorial seas, the exclusive economic zones, 
and the continental shelf of Vietnam on the basis of the 
stipulations of the convention and other principles of 
international law." 
  The National Assembly chairman also reported that during the 
session, the assembly discussed the government reports on 
various tasks, including the implementation of National Assembly 
resolutions in the first six months of 1994. He hailed the 
achievements recorded during the period, but pointed out that 
there is still a huge amount of work to do in strengthening the 
monetary system, attracting more income for the national budget, 
practicing thrift, solving unemployment, suppressing social 
vices, and so forth. 
  Concluding his speech, the National Assembly chairman urged 
people of all social strata to contribute to consolidating the 
national unity bloc by striving for excellence in their duties 
to record greater achievements in the period to come. He then 
thanked the party leaders, the government, the public media, and 
all voters for their support for the National Assembly in its 
fifth session. 

