Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Urban guerrilla group, November 17, has claimed 
responsibility for the assassination against former National 
Bank of Greece governor Mikhail Vranopoulos, saying it had 
planned several attempts against his life over the last six 
months. 
  In a proclamation sent late yesterday to the private Sky 
television station, November 17 said it had decided to "execute" 
Vranopoulos as the second most culpable person -- after former 
prime minister Konstandinos Mitsotakis and before former 
National Economy Minister Stefanos Manos -- in the "criminal" 
sale of the Iraklis General Cement Company to an Italian-led 
consortium. 
  It said the attack on Vranopoulos should also serve as a 
warning to individuals in either the private or public sector 
involved in specific privatisations. 
  Former National Economy and Finance Minister Stefanos Manos 
is also named along with Mr Mitsotakis and Vranopoulos as 
responsible for `defrauding' the Greek people and the 
dissolution of the Greek cement industry. 
  The six-and-a-half page typed proclamation, stamped with the 
group's trademark red five-pointed star, was dated June 1993. 
This was preceded by three paragraphs explaining that the 
attack had been planned for June but that the group had been 
forced to call off that attempt as well as others in July and 
September. 
  Developments in the Iraklis case since June are analysed in 
an addendum dated December 1993. 
  Mr Vranopoulos was replaced as National Bank of Greece 
governor by the new socialist government election in October. 
His police protection was removed on September 6 after a review 
of his request for removal deemed he was no longer a potential 
target. 
  In a postscript, November 17 also claims responsibility for 
several terrorist attacks since last winter, including 
explosions at the Moskhato, Maroussi, Petroupoli and Peristeri 
tax offices, a bazooka assault on the Nea Filadhelfia and 
Kaminia tax officials' cars in Ilisia, Pangrati, Patissia, Ayia 
Paraskevi and Yalatsi. 
  The group warns senior tax officials it will strike against 
them without warning. 
  17N [as published] claims that the PASOK government is not 
interested in a thorough investigation into the Iraklis case, 
because, the proclamation alleges, Prime Minister Andreas 
Papandreou was given, before 1989, a villa on the island of 
Patmos as a "gift" from the owner of the Khalkis Cements 
company, Mr Kioseoglou, in order to avoid the kind of 
investigation the former owners of Iraklis had had. 17N 
concludes this has made Mr Papandreou a sort of "hostage" of Mr 
Mitsotakis. 

