SUMMARY 

                                Recent Iraqi media treatment of the UN-imposed sanctions and of 
President Saddam Husayn's assumption of the prime ministry 
reflects Baghdad's judgment that while it has good chances of 
winning an end to sanctions, it must in the meantime take strong 
measures to deal with a severe economic crisis, both to allay 
domestic discontent and to sustain the credibility of its 
campaign to lift the sanctions. 

                           END SUMMARY 

   Official Iraqi statements about the UN Security Council's March 
and May reviews of the sanctions have been increasingly 
optimistic.  An "official spokesman," reporting on a joint 
meeting of the Revolution Command Council (RCC) and Ba'th Party 
Command held on 29 May to evaluate the latest sanctions review, 
asserted that while some UN Security Council members expressed 
"positive positions" in March, in May "the overwhelming majority 
of the Security Council member states call[ed] for acknowledging 
the progress made in applying Security Council resolutions and 
stress[ed] the need to discuss the lifting of the blockade as 
soon as possible" (Iraqi News Agency [INA], 29 May).  In contrast 
with a corresponding Iraqi official statement in March, which 
merely expressed hope that Security Council members who favor 
lifting the sanctions "may grow into a majority" and cautioned 
that it is too early "to know for certain whether or not there is 
serious and imminent hope for lifting" the sanctions (INA, 27 
March), the spokesman said in May that the U.S. position, "the 
principal obstacle to lifting the blockade," has been "isolated" 
and that the international community is "stepping up its demand 
that the unjust blockade . . . be lifted." 

   In a press conference on 1 June, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq 
'Aziz expounded at length Baghdad's optimistic assessment (Al- 
'Iraq, 2 June). (See Note 1)  Describing the March review as "a 
substantial" and "crucial" change, he characterized the May 
review as "progress on the path to lifting or easing the 
blockade." Buttressing his position, he said that "the level of 
both listening to, and understanding of, the Iraqi viewpoint" is 
"much higher and deeper than ever before."  He noted that Iraqi 
envoys have been able to make visits that "until recently were 
out of the question," citing his own visits to Austria and Spain 
as examples.  He assessed visits to Iraq by "major entrepreneurs 
who are heavyweights in their countries" as a tribute to "Iraq's 
steadfastness" and acknowledgment that "the blockade will be 
lifted."  While refusing to predict a date at which the sanctions 
will cease, 'Aziz characterized the forthcoming July review as 
"very important and possibly decisive" and cited the French UN 
envoy as saying "the time will come very soon" to discuss lifting 
the sanctions. 

(Note 1)  'Aziz may have given the press conference partly in 
order to respond to a minority Iraqi view, occasionally expressed 
in Babil, the daily owned by Saddam's son 'Udayy.  For example, 
an article by Mazhar 'Arif claimed that "the blockade will 
continue" and that "only our poor media have swallowed up the lie 
that the review this month is better than it was two months ago, 
and that it will be even better in July" (Babil, 21 May). 

   'Aziz also expressed confidence that the United States would not 
veto a resolution lifting the sanctions.  He argued that because 
the sanctions resolutions were based on "the so-called 
international consensus," a U.S. veto would dramatize the 
dissolution of the consensus and deprive the sanctions of their 
"legal and logical" basis.  In such circumstances, he said, 
states who want to do business with Iraq "would not comply" with 
the resolutions.  He claimed that "luckily" Americans are 
"pragmatists" and that eventually the U.S. Administration will 
reluctantly "admit its failure." 

   'Aziz emphasized that Iraq's brightening prospects of lifting the 
sanctions are due mainly to its "steadfastness," a term used in 
Iraqi media to connote adherence to the regime's positions and 
rallying around Saddam.  'Aziz contrasted the favorable hearing 
he now gets from foreign states with the situation in 1991 and 
1992, when, according to him, even representatives of countries 
with "vested interests in Iraq" did not listen to him because 
they thought that "Iraq would not hold out." 

Economic Crisis 

   Despite these expressions of optimism about the sanctions, alarm 
about the state of the domestic economy appears to have played 
the key role in Saddam's decision to assume the prime ministry on 
29 May.  The RCC statement announcing his assumption of the post 
attributed the move to the need to "reinforce the heroic 
steadfastness of our great people" against "the unjust blockade" 
by demonstrating "exceptional interest in economic issues and the 
citizens' lives" (INA).  The full gravity of the situation was 
brought out in two articles by Salah al-Mukhtar, chief editor of 
the Information Ministry's daily Al-Jumhuriyah, who confessed 
that in recent months, many of the government's efforts to ease 
"the negative economic impact of the blockade so citizens do not 
despair" had been "ineffective," thus necessitating Saddam's 
becoming prime minister to "dispel darkness and despair and 
create hope" (Al-Jumhuriyah, 31 May).  In a subsequent article, 
al-Mukhtar said flatly that before Saddam became premier, "food 
prices had skyrocketed," the "vast majority of citizens could not 
afford to buy basic supplies," and "many people despaired as they 
saw their situation getting worse and their income slipping 
through their hands just one day after being paid"  (Al- 
Jumhuriyah, 4 June).  In another effort to counteract despair, 
Saddam's press secretary 'Abd-al-Jabbar Muhsin responded to 
"those who claim that despair is justifiable" by arguing that 
Iraq's problems emanating from its two last wars are not "the 
manifestations of decadence" but rather "the signs of [laudable] 
ambition" (Al-Oadisiyah, 7 June). 

Saddam Speeches 

   Addressing the cabinet after assuming the post, Saddam himself 
indicated that the people had grounds for complaint.  He said 
that "when onions, potatoes, or tomatoes become scarce, [Iraqis) 
make an issue out of this."  He also referred to unspecified 
negative "phenomena that I noticed in the state departments" that 
ministers must work to "overcome" (Baghdad radio, 30 May). 

   Saddam argued that allaying popular discontent is the key to 
eroding the sanctions.  He claimed that "the Iraqis weaken their 
position when they grumble too much and when their patience is 
disrupted," because then even countries sympathetic to Iraq "will 
no longer be enthusiastic about insisting on shortening the time 
for lifting the blockade."  Accordingly, he argued that the more 
the ministers increase the people's patience, the better Iraq's 
chances of ending the blockade with minimal concessions -- in 
"the way we wish."  Saddam emphasized that "additional patience 
and efforts" are required precisely now because Iraq has entered 
the "last 10 days of Ramadan," i.e. the endgame of the struggle 
over the sanctions. 

Saddam Directly in Charge 

   Evidently addressing popular criticism, Saddam sought to show 
that he knows and cares about people's problems and that he is 
personally taking charge to insist on effective state action.  In 
discussing high prices, he proclaimed several times that he is 
not "unaware of things" and that he "follow[s] up people's 
lives."  He insisted that "we must revive and reactivate the 
state." 

   Saddam continued these themes in subsequent speeches.  Addressing 
top Information Ministry officials and his son 'Udayy on 8 June, 
Saddam said, "it has become clear to everyone that the leadership 
has begun to take care of some details."  Evidently responding to 
complaints that the Ba'thist leadership had grown old and 
ineffective, Saddam said that "it is impermissible for the Ba'th 
state to age, grow old, or become flabby.  It should remain 
youthful and wise at the same time" (Baghdad radio).  In remarks 
to the cabinet on 15 June, Saddam said that the cabinet must 
engage in "hard work" that will be "felt by all citizens," who 
should see that "their state has become more active and vibrant." 
Discussing red tape but evidently also alluding to bribery and 
corruption within the bureaucracy, Saddam said that "mistakes and 
deviations" must be "rapidly and firmly" corrected.  He added 
that "we must work to make the deviant constantly feel that he 
will not go unpunished regardless of how long this might take" 
(Baghdad radio). 

New Spending 

   In his effort to deal with popular discontent, Saddam has 
embarked on major new spending.  He ordered substantial increases 
in the salaries of state employees, Armed Forces personnel, and 
Internal Security Forces, as well as transportation allowances 
for such personnel and family allowances for their wives and 
children (Baghdad radio, 12 June).  To overcome farmers' 
reluctance to sell their produce to the government, Saddam nearly 
doubled the prices the government pays to farmers (Baghdad radio, 
13 June).  He also increased the income of various categories of 
retirees (Baghdad radio, 12 and 2O June).  Finance Minister Ahmad 
Husayn has said that the new benefits for state employees alone 
will obligate the state treasury for an additional 15 billion 
dinars a year (Baghdad radio, 14 June).  According to an Iraqi 
estimate cited by Reuter, the increases in prices paid to farmers 
will amount to another 3O billion dinars a year (16 June). 

   To protect the consumer from inflation, Saddam has ordered 
stringent efforts to enforce official prices.  On 2 June, Baghdad 
radio reported that the RCC adopted a decree "authorizing the 
party section commands and the people's councils in the regions 
to close wholesale and retail shops if their owners violate the 
prices announced by the state's competent  agencies."  Earlier, 
the director of the Economic Crime Combat Department said that on 
28 May his organization began a campaign to stabilize prices at 
marketplaces, and that "this campaign will continue nonstop, to 
put an end to whoever is deluded into tampering with the people's 
subsistence" (Al-Jumhuriyah, 31 May). 

Raising Revenue 

   Apparently to offset the new expenditures, Saddam has ordered an 
effort to increase state revenue, rationalize public spending, 
and reduce energy consumption at all state institutions (Baghdad 
radio, 11 June).  The government has tripled the artificially low 
price of gasoline and raised the price of lubricating oil by 
nearly 14-fold (Reuter, 16 June).  On Saddam's instructions, 
wealthy merchants have been given "a chance to voluntarily 
contribute to the importation of food" (INA, 18 June).  A group 
of "businessmen and industrialists" have "voluntarily" 
contributed $2.275 million "to finance food imports" on condition 
of being repaid after the embargo is lifted.  Trade Minister 
Muhammad Mahdi Salih, who announced these contributions, added 
that this first group of contributors will be followed by others. 

   Saddam has also adopted a number of measures to diminish the 
demand for dollars.  He has nearly tripled the foreign travel 
tax, added 91 products to the list of officially prohibited 
imports, and issued new bank regulations slashing the amount of 
cash Iraqis may take out of the country from $300 to $50 (Babil, 
19 June; Reuter, 23 June). 

Draconian Penalties 

   To curb crime, which has grown in step with the country's 
economic troubles, and to support its economic policies, Baghdad 
has introduced the Koranic punishments of hand amputation and 
foot amputation for many types of theft, including car theft, and 
for some types of robbery (Baghdad radio, 4 June).  The religious 
affairs minister praised the new penalties because "the rule of 
God is better than all other rules in achieving deterrence" 
(Baghdad radio, 5 June).  Later, Baghdad radio announced that the 
same Koranic punishments would be meted out to "those who sell 
foreign currency outside the officially licensed offices," to 
"farmers who deliberately fail to deliver grains to the marketing 
centers," and to "merchants who stockpile items listed in the 
ration cards with the aim of monopoly and tampering with prices 
in departure from the fixed price" (13 June).  In addition, the 
Ministry of Trade has been authorized to seize and operate any 
flour mills that "do not comply with the production plan in terms 
of the required quality and quantity" (Baghdad radio, 23 June). 

   Media treatment and initial reports suggest that Baghdad will not 
shrink from applying the new penalties.  Saddam's son 'Udayy, in 
a Babil editorial under the pseudonym Abu-Sirhan, (See Note 2) 
endorsed amputation for theft, emphasizing that "the important 
thing is to see the competent agencies stringently implement the 
decree" (5 June).  He stressed that the decree must not become a 
dead letter, a fate he claimed was suffered by a decree that 
prescribes execution for brothel madams.  The Ba'th Party daily 
Al-Thawrah, arguing that the public must be able to distinguish 
between honorable war invalids and ignominious thieves, advocated 
tattooing a plus mark on the cheek of the amputated criminal, on 
a part of the face where hair does not grow (9 June).  On 22 June 
Baghdad radio announced that two "culprits" had been sentenced to 
hand amputation for stealing carpets from a mosque. 

(Note 2)  The hypothesis that "Abu-Sirhan" is a pseudonym used by 
'Udayy is based on the assumption that only 'Udayy could directly 
attack nearly all Iraqi leaders other than Saddam.  Abu-Sirhan's 
articles have contained extremely harsh criticisms of the 
cabinet, emphasizing the "gap" between Saddam's "way of thinking 
on the one hand and the implementing tools on the other" (Babil, 
20 and 22 January 1994); have claimed knowledge of Saddam's 
movements and intentions (Al-Jumhuriyah, 2 January 1992); and 
have dared to point out flaws in the Iraqi national character 
(Babil, 1 June 1994).  In Babil, Abu-Sirhan's articles appear on 
page 1 and are referred to with respect even by deputy ministers 
(Babil, article by Information Ministry First Under Secretary 
Nuri Najm al-Marsumi, 3 February 1994; Babil, 9 May 1994). 

Saddam's Gamble 

   Saddam appears to have gambled that his measures will curtail 
further economic deterioration long enough to enable him to gain 
a major victory in eliminating the sanctions.  This expectation 
was made explicit in an article by Al-Jumhuriyah chief editor 
Salah al-Mukhtar, who predicted that the United States is 
"inevitably about to lose another strategic conflict" because 
Saddam personally has started to lead "the blockade-breaking 
battle" (Al-Jumhuriyah, 31 May). 

Initial Results 

   Although Saddam achieved a short-term success, he does not seem 
to have reversed the long-term trend toward a weaker dinar and 
higher prices.  INA on 5 June reported a dramatic decline in 
vegetable and other food prices since Saddam became prime 
minister, and both Iraqi and Western media reported that the 
dinar's exchange rate had rebounded from 510 to the dollar on 29 
April to 435 to the dollar in early June.  Salah al-Mukhtar 
attributed this success to "the feeling that supervision, sound 
measures, and strict judgment have returned" (Al-Jumhuriyah, 4 
June).  However, while the official exchange houses were still 
offering no more than 445 dinars to the dollar on 21 June, Babil 
reported that the dollar was worth between 10 and 25 percent 
more, or as much as 550 dinars, on the black market (21 June). 

Implications 

   Since he could have applied all the recent measures without 
becoming prime minister, thus partly insulating himself from 
blame in case of failure, Saddam evidently judges that a victory 
on the sanctions issue is near and that he can stave off economic 
collapse until then.  At the same time, he has decided that 
drastic measures, including both carrots and sticks, are needed 
to deal with enormous popular discontent with current economic 
conditions and crime. 

(AUTHOR:  BUDER.  OUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6094) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/SDJ 28/1817Z JUN 

