Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Thomas Buerke: "Light Purifies Water -- </F>
UV-Lamps Can Be an Alternative to Chlorine -- Pilot Plant 
Planned Near Bonn"] 
  [Text] Mankind has been able to control a number of 
epidemic diseases, such as cholera, by disinfecting drinking 
water. Chlorine has been the main agent used for this purpose 
for about 100 years. In the more recent past, however, 
scientists have acknowledged that these additives also give rise 
to the formation of a number of harmful by-products, such as 
chloroform. This was why the Federal Research Minister set up a 
joint research product six years ago to examine the feasibility 
of using ultraviolet light to disinfect drinking water, for 
which it provided total funding in excess of 6 million German 
marks. Not long ago, the multidisciplinary research team 
demonstrated that plants of this type can be built on an 
industrial scale as well. 
  Actually, there have been UV disinfecting plants since the 
beginning of the century, though only for fairly small 
throughputs and primarily for use with well or spring water, 
which is relatively untainted. The multiyear studies set out to 
create the technical prerequisites for an industrial-scale plant 
capable of purifying large volumes of water from lakes and 
reservoirs, where the main problem is biological contamination 
caused by plankton, which constitutes organic matter that 
subsequently reacts with chlorine to form harmful substances. 
  The test system was built by scientists at the Max Planck 
Institute of Radiation Chemistry in Muelheim. It basically 
comprises a UV lamp similar in shape and size to a neon tube, 
which is inserted into a stainless steel pipe. The water flows 
through the space between the lamp and the inner wall of the 
pipe, where it is exposed to UV radiation. 
  The researchers optimized their plant over long series of 
tests until it was possible to kill off sufficient quantities of 
the main bacteria and viruses. An important condition for 
success in this respect is that all the water in the flow pipe 
must be evenly exposed to uniform radiation. Moreover, 
researchers from the Free University of Berlin Hygiene Institute 
have also established that no substances that could have a 
mutagenic effect on human beings occur in UV-treated water. 
  Nevertheless, technical limitations also emerged. For 
example, if the water has too high an iron or manganese content, 
radiation precipitates these elements, which then form a thin 
film on the glass wall of the lamp. In extreme cases this 
halves the intensity of the radiation after only 500 operating 
hours. Care is also needed when treating water with a high 
nitrate content, as toxic nitrite can be formed. However, this 
problem can be avoided by using a special UV lamp in such cases. 
  A general drawback is that -- unlike the procedure used with 
chemical additives -- the water is, of course, not further 
disinfected in the mains after radiation, so it is possible that 
germs may reform there. It still has to be established whether 
recontamination of this type occurs or not. 
  Be that as it may, in certain conditions the UV method 
constitutes an alternative to chemical disinfection. A pilot 
plant will thus be set up at the Wahnbach reservoir, whose 
waters supply about three-quarters of a million people in the 
Bonn area with drinking water. 

