BFN 

<F P=106> [Part five of a judicial reform series by Victor Andres </F>
Ponce] 
  [Text] Before the new Judicial Branch Organizational Law's 
issuance, the Supreme Court or the higher courts handled both 
jurisdictional and administrative matters. As a result, the 
management of resources, which was looked upon as a secondary 
issue, was bad. 
  Higher courts' members had to worry whether some given court 
needed a desk, a typewriter, or more personnel. The results of 
this type of management are staring at us: extremely bad 
infrastructure and management conditions. 
  Court buildings and the quality of Peruvian justice declined 
simultaneously. All one needs to do to agree with this 
assessment is take one look at the mounds of files on the 
tables, the shortage of typewriters, the courtrooms' small size, 
and put it together with the sluggishness of legal procedures 
and the lack of sentences. 
  In other words, bad management is also partly to blame for 
the shortcomings of Peruvian justice. 
<H5>  Judicial Branch Management </H5>
  As has been pointed out in previous parts of this series, 
one 
of the main innovations of the new Judicial Branch 
Organizational Law is the separation between jurisdictional 
issues -- which are dealt with by a Supreme Court plenum -- and 
managerial and administrative issues. The Executive Council was 
created to handle the latter. This council has several bodies. 
The Office of the General Manager is one of the most important. 
  Thus, for the first time in the Peruvian judicial branch's 
history there will be a general manager to handle administrative 
matters, taking these matters out judges' hands. 
  The new Judicial Branch Organizational Law gives the general 
manager the same rank as that of a Supreme Court member, which 
means that he has a seat on the Executive Council and can voice 
his opinion but does not have the right to vote. This will lead 
to greater integration and better coordination. According to a 
source, "this is the first time that a professional other than a 
lawyer or judge will hold the rank of Supreme Court member." 
  To better carry out his duties, the Office of the General 
Manager will have a personnel manager, a computer systems 
manager, an organizational manager, and an infrastructure 
manager. 
  The Office of the General Manager was created, among other 
things, to make the judicial branch a financially more dynamic 
organization capable of generating on its own much more funds 
than it does nowadays and to tap new sources of funds. Another 
reason was, of course, to manage these resources rationally and 
technically. All this is absolutely new for an institution 
used to obscure management. In the next part of this report, we 
will provide further details on the progress made in this area. 
  The establishment of the Office of the General Manager, 
however, has awakened some jealousy, especially in the lower 
courts. Certain judges feel they are losing power with every 
minor administrative decision made or there is a power beyond 
them organizing the courts. Our source stated: "It is not a 
question of taking power away from the judges but of seeking 
logical and effective management." 
<H5>  The Infrastructure Problems </H5>
  One of the new management's main challenges is to resolve 
the 
infrastructure shortage. Roberto Alvarez, who is in charge of 
the Judicial Branch Research Center, said: "We now have 400 
more judges than we had in the seventies but no new courts have 
been built. The problem stares at us: The space that a single 
judge used in the seventies is now shared by four judges." 
  In the country's capital, the old Justice Palace houses most 
of the courts. 
  It is well known that the palace was built toward the end of 
the thirties and has suffered from the earthquakes that took 
place in 1949, 1966, 1970, and 1974. The building's structure 
has been severely damaged by these quakes. 
  The only efforts to make it less of a warren were the 
opening 
of new courts in northern Lima, the project to open other courts 
in southern Lima and Chosica, and the transfer of 30 civil 
courts to the building at the intersection of Arenales Avenue 
and Dos de Mayo Street. 
  According to projections by the Office of the General 
Manager, the ideal area for a court to carry out its tasks 
adequately is 140 square meters. The current average area in the 
courts is 20 square meters. The criminal court's situation is 
alarming: mountains of papers, one judge, four secretaries, two 
administrative employees, and the public, and they all have to 
squeeze in to do their work and process the documents. 
  The same situation prevails in civil court, but with the 
additional burden that many secretaries work in the court's 
basement because there is no room in the judges' offices, and in 
some cases they work in the office on Azangaro Street. 
  In the provinces the courts work in facilities donated by 
the 
municipalities, and some of them have no water or electricity. 
Regarding equipment, the situation is also poor. In only a few 
cases is there more than just a typewriter. 
  In some places there are cases when the judge buys the 
equipment from his own pocket. 
  In this regard, it is worth commenting that among the new 
management's immediate plans is the adaptation of small 
facilities to decentralize the courts. A source who knows the 
problem said: "There is no need for judicial palaces. The idea 
is to build court facilities." 
  The delay in installing the criminal courts in the building 
that housed the Economy Ministry and the civil courts in the 
building that housed the Education Ministry also will be solved. 
It also is known that the Popular Bank, Agrarian Bank, and 
Industrial Bank branch buildings are about to be transferred to 
the judicial branch. 
<H5>  The Administrative Personnel Problem </H5>
  The judicial branch has 4,700 employees. Of that amount, 
4,000 are "jurisdictional administrative" personnel (they carry 
out work related to the administration of justice) who include 
court secretaries, secretaries, and court reporters for higher 
courts and the Supreme Court. The jurisdictional administrative 
personnel have two problems. They must have a law degree to 
fulfill the new Judicial Branch Organizational Law's requirement 
to carry out their tasks. And the other problem is their 
salaries. For example, a court secretary only earns 350 soles. 
  It is known that the management will make a general 
evaluation of the "jurisdictional administrative personnel" and 
then will make a public call to fill positions based on 
qualifications. But regarding salaries, there is still no 
solution to this problem because the judicial branch has 
obtained very little additional resources in the 1994 budget. 
  The last problem is very serious because the secretaries are 
the link between the judges and the litigators. This link allows 
them to become corrupt by asking for money to expedite the 
process and sometimes getting money on behalf of the judges who 
are not even aware of it. 
  In the Court of Appeals' case, the problems of the 
administrative personnel get worse. 
  There are four secretaries in every criminal court and, 
according to them, their two administrative assistants are not 
enough to support them in their task of processing incoming 
cases. 
  Something similar happens in civil court, which has two 
secretaries and two administrative assistants. Regarding the 
case of the 15 courts resolving cases with the old Code of 
Procedure, there are six secretaries, provisional ones, to 
expedite the process. 
  Is there enough or an excessive number of employees? 
Everything seems to indicate there are not enough. But what 
happens if the courts are equipped with computers? In the 
previous reports it was indicated that computers can save 50 
percent in court work. In this regard, informatics could reduce 
the number of "jurisdictional administrative personnel." 
<H5>  Conclusions </H5>
  The report comes to the conclusion that the judicial 
branch's 
administrative system is as important as the quality of judges. 
There can be no reform of justice if there is no new 
administration of human and material resources. The new Judicial 
Branch Organizational Law has favorably resolved this historic 
deficit in the courts. 
  Regarding the main problems to be faced, there is the 
alarming deficit of court facilities and equipment, and the 
situation of court employees. The new requirements demand that 
jurisdictional administrative personnel have a law degree, that 
they be able to handle court procedures, and be well paid. To do 
that it is certainly necessary to have more resources, which 
will be our topic in the next report. 

