BFN 

<F P=106> [By correspondent Wang Min (3769 2549) ] </F>
  [Text] Hong Kong, 19 Apr (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE) -- To 
protect the legitimate rights and interests of audiovisual 
publishers and maintain order in audiovisual markets, Guangdong 
Province launched this afternoon a unified operation to rectify 
audiovisual markets across the province, focusing on halting the 
illegal copying and selling of compact and laser discs. 
  Shenzhen, acting on the operation plan of the provincial 
authorities, formed inspection teams consisting of personnel 
from Shenzhen City Cultural Inspection Contingents, the Shenzhen 
City Administration for Industry and Commerce, and the Shenzhen 
City Public Security Bureau. Such teams were deployed to all 
the city's five districts at 1300 this afternoon and 
simultaneously launched massive searches for the illegal copying 
and selling of compact and laser discs. The inspection teams 
concentrated on sites notorious for the copying and selling of 
compact and laser discs, such as the Shenzhen Railway Station 
shopping mall, the Luohu Port shopping mall, and Renmin Road, 
South. At the Shenzhen Railway Station and Luohu Port shopping 
malls, this reporter found that most of the compact and laser 
discs sold by all the vendors were pirated copies, poor in 
quality and printing. The management at the railway station 
shopping mall was particularly confusing. Many album sellers 
did not have licenses to sell cultural items, or even the 
necessary business licenses. Of the pirated compact discs, the 
largest number were of Hong Kong and Taiwan singers, but some 
were overseas classical music, recent famous mainland songs, and 
songs by mainland singers. The inspection teams seized, in one 
fell swoop, thousands of pirated compact disc copies at a shop 
called "B2" in the Shenzhen Railway Station shopping mall. A 
large red banner hung in front of the shop, on which was written 
"Original Polygram Compact Discs." 
  A Shenzhen City Cultural Bureau official said that the 
operations were meant to protect intellectual property rights, 
safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of copyright 
holders, and protect the interests of lawful operators, while 
cracking down on the illegal practices of illegal operators and 
cleaning up the Shenzhen audiovisual market. This official 
stressed that they would insist on carrying out such operations 
in order to genuinely protect the legal rights of copyright 
holders. 

