Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Angel Paez from the "Research Unit"] </F>
  [Text] Peruvian Demetrio Limonier Chavez Penaherrera, alias 
"Vaticano," and Colombian Waldo Simeon Vargas Arias, alias "El 
Ministro" -- two of the greatest drug traffickers in the country 
-- have held a top-level meeting seeking to end confrontation 
between their two groups and to set the basis for a possible 
initial agreement to organize the first Peruvian drug cartel, 
Colombian style. 
  National Police Antinarcotics Board sources have said that 
these two criminals are responsible for 60 percent of the drugs 
that are sent to Colombia for direct distribution by the Cali 
Cartel. 
  The meeting was held during the end of September, supposedly 
on the Colombian border, following an extended dispute initiated 
by "Vaticano," who tried to remove his competitor from the 
extensive coca territory he dominates between Pongo Isla, San 
Martin Province, Department of San Martin, and Lagunas, Upper 
Amazonas Province, Loreto Department. 
  The Peruvian trafficker handles the main drug operations in 
the Upper Huallaga, namely in Aguaytia, Sion, Saposoa, and 
Campanilla, San Martin Department. 
  The substantial difference between the two, according to 
U.S. 
Embassy antinarcotics officers, is that "El Ministro" is one of 
the greatest buyers of cocaine paste while "Vaticano" is fully 
occupied transporting drugs to Colombia. 
  The same sources reported that both are independent, but 
work 
directly with the Cali Cartel, headed by the brothers Gilberto 
and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela. 
  Skirmishes between the two mafia bosses reportedly began on 
the orders of "El Ministro," who wanted to pay less for the drug 
than the high price paid by "Vaticano" in his area of influence. 
  The Peruvian established a price of $800 per kg of cocaine 
paste, while the Colombian was offering only $600, and this 
enabled him to purchase larger quantities. 
  But the coca producing peasants began to sell to "El 
Ministro" in spite of the lower price he was offering because 
transporting the drugs to the distant places where "Vaticano" 
purchases the drug by speedboats represented additional cost and 
risk due to the presence of security forces which have increased 
control in the zone dominated by the Peruvian drug organization. 
  The confrontation became more heated due to the growth of 
"El 
Ministro's" business who, from being a purchaser, began to work 
in the most profitable business of shipping large amounts of 
drugs, thus poaching on "Vaticano's" turf of transporting the 
paste abroad. 
  "El Ministro" was becoming "Vaticano's" most dangerous 
competitor when the latter, from El Sauce where he had 
established his general headquarters, moved to Pampa Hermosa, 
Upper Amazonas Province, Loreto Department. 
  In El Sauce, where there is an important landing strip, "El 
Ministro" joined the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, MRTA, 
to obtain their protection. When the Army moved in, the 
trafficker tried to bribe the head of the detachment, an officer 
known as "Juan Pablo," but even so the trafficker and the 
subversives were expelled from the ares. 
  The Colombian has a very good nose for the drug business. He 
began early in the 1980's as a "mule" of the Medellin Cartel 
branch in Leticia, Colombia, which was headed by Evaristo Porras 
Ardila, but immediately began his own business. He found that 
coca plantations were increasing considerably in the provinces 
of Upper Amazonas, Loreto, and San Martin, San Martin Department. 
  Coca plantations increased considerably because of the 
migration of colonizers and peasants who, coming from the Upper 
Huallaga, were forced to leave their coca plantations because of 
the National Police antinarcotics units. 
  The cocaine paste tablets produced by the peasants of 
Shanusi, Alfonso Ugarte, Yumbatos, Jorge Chavez, Shapajilla, 
Bonilla, Sargento Lores, Pintoyacu, Copal, Carachama, San Juan, 
San Miguel, Naranjal, Davilsillo, Nuevo Lamas, and 
Pintoyaquillo, were taken to Pampa Hermosa, San Martin Province, 
Upper Huallaga, the main collection center for the region. 
  But the clandestine airport between km 40, by the bridge 
over 
the Shanusi River, and Pampa Hermosa was destroyed by the Air 
Force. 
  This incursion prompted an increase in the security forces, 
preventing the normal flow of drug flights to Colombia. 
  "El Ministro" then moved from the depleted market of Pampa 
Hermosa to Huimbayoc, his new drug collection center. He made 
Pongo Isla his general headquarters and Yarina his center of 
operations because it has an airport with official permit. In 
this area the people do not have the money even to move around 
in boats, but there are air-taxi companies that render services 
to that town. 
  Pongo Isla then was renamed Leticia by the Colombian 
trafficker, in honor of the people from his country where Porras 
Ardila taught him the art of drug trafficking. 
  By making Huimbayoc his collection center, "El Ministro" 
recovered the power he lost by abandoning Pampa Hermosa. He now 
purchases coca paste from the peasants of Pucalpillo, Progreso, 
Miraflores, Paraiso, Yarina, Navarro, Reforma, Inayuca, Alto 
Coritayacu, Dos de Mayo, Santa Marta, San Francisco, Santa Zona 
Matador, San Antonio, Guineayoc, and others. 
  An unexpected event stopped "El Ministro's" dangerous bull 
run. On 15 May, a group of agents from the National Police 
Command from Upper Amazonas, Yurimaguas, entered his operations 
center in Pongo Isla and arrested him, his girlfriend Isolina 
Mansilla Acosta, alias "Charito," and two of his henchmen. 
  "El Ministro" was taken aboard his own boat to Yurimaguas 
where in a matter of hours he reached an agreement with his 
captors: He paid $100,000 for his freedom. 
  After lengthy investigations by the National Police 
Inspector's office and by the Antinarcotics Board with the 
cooperation of the Upper Amazonas Provincial Control Department, 
the bribed policemen were jailed, fired, and are currently 
facing trial. 
  The Colombian continued his business following this sudden 
fright but convinced peasant defense patrol members from coca 
production districts like Huimbayoc and Navarro to provide him 
with protection. 
  So much so, that when a National Police antidrug patrol 
arrived in Huimbayoc on 16 August, the peasant defense patrol 
members welcomed the security forces, who arrived by helicopter, 
with gunfire. 
  Two members of the defense patrols died in the shootout and 
97 kg of cocaine paste and large amount of chemical precursors 
were seized. But Isolina Mansilla Acosta, alias "Charito," 
daringly accused police agents of attacking private property and 
of murdering peasant defense patrol members. 
  Ironically, the peasant defense patrols were provided with 
weapons by the Huallaga Front headed by Peruvian Army General 
Eduardo Bellido Mora. Dinandro [Antidrug Division] Report No. 
162-DADAH-SL, dated 10 August that is, six days before the 
police incursion states: "(Waldo Simeon Vargas Arias) is 
reportedly living in Huimbayoc and Navarro, Tarapoto Province, 
San Martin Department. He would be living with Isolina Mansilla 
Acosta. They purchase large amounts of drugs, approximately 10 
tonnes, to be processed and transported aboard clandestine 
planes to Colombia." 
  The report adds: "The traffickers reportedly rely on the 
support of townspeople and peasant defense patrol members to 
provide them with security in all their activities, using long- 
and short-range weapons." 
  A high-ranking Dinandro source has confirmed the 
intelligence 
report obtained by his agents concerning the support to 
traffickers by some peasant defense patrols who were armed by 
the Army. 
  The source said: "Like in Upper Huallaga, the traffickers 
want to lead the people against the security forces. They have 
achieved this to a certain extent," adding: "For this reason, 
there must be better control of the peasant defense patrols, 
especially those that received weapons from the state." 
  As if the police action were not enough, "El Ministro" 
received an unexpected attack from "Vaticano's" Pongo Isla 
fortress. He was forced to flee, leaving on the road two of his 
henchmen who murdered by "Vaticano's" group. 
  The Colombian then settled in Pelejo, another collection 
center with a clandestine airport and surrounded by coca 
plantations cared by the people of Papaplaya, Rumiyarina, San 
Luis, Santa Elena, Asuncion, Caimito, Pamplona, Pelejillo, and 
mainly Reforma. 
  After no more than a month in Pelejo, another incursion by 
"Vaticano" forced him to move further north, to Lagunas, yet 
another trafficking stronghold. 
  But "El Ministro" is no fool. He knew his competitor was on 
his heels and, before leaving Huimbayoc, he left the brothers 
Carlos Enrique and Miguel Angel Farro Perez to run the business 
in Lagunas. The first task was to refurbish the run-down Lagunas 
municipal airport to transport the drugs. 
  When the Colombian arrived in Lagunas everything was ready. 
The Farro Perez brothers had signed an agreement with the 
municipality of Lagunas to repair the airport in exchange for 
installing a branch of the Halcon aero-taxi company. Once the 
airstrip became operational the sleepy jungle district was 
revived because of the traffickers' flights. 
  "El Ministro" knew the Farro Perez brothers would not fail 
him because, among other things, they are his relatives. 
  The Colombian drug trafficker's girlfriend, Isolina Mansilla 
Acosta, was born in Rupa Rupa, Huanuco, on 3 June 1959. She is 
the sister of Sara who is the wife of Enrique Farro Perez, the 
Halcon aero-taxi representative in Lagunas. But that is another 
story. 
  A Dinandro intelligence report dated August 1993 states that 
the Colombian gang involved in "the exploitation of cocaine 
paste for international trading" includes "Isolina Mansilla 
Acosta and the individuals known as `Gatillo,' `Nacional,' 
`Caballo,' `Lancero,' `Montana,' `Gorgojo,' `Memo,' `Boquita,' 
`Tiburon,' `Dangelo,' `Miguel,' `Ventiuno,' `Balde,' `Cone,' and 
`Sierrita.'" 
  Also mentioned in the report are "`Gato,' `Tony,' `Dios 
Mio,' 
`Cocharun,' `Brea,' `Canillita,' `Lucho Buho,' `Juanito,' 
`Harry,' `David,' `Negro Izula,' `Micky Martin,' `Chino,' `Don 
Marcos,' `Hueso,' `Frejolito,' `Comadre,' `Pirulin' (who is 
known as one of the most blood thirsty Colombian hired killers 
in the zone), `Chevas,' `Pizana,' `Pelbes,' `Ripio,' `Jazmin,' 
`High Mariel,' `Burro,' `Elastico,' `Mascara,' `Lambayecano,' 
`Chocho,' `Coro,' `Percy,' `El Popular Coco,' `Percy,' `Coro,' 
`Marcos,' and `El Ciego.'" 
  When "El Ministro" arrived in Lagunas he found the airport 
ready to transport the drug elaborated by coca producers in 
Shambuyacu, Tiphisca, Miraflores, Santa Cruz, Providencia, 
Pucate, Naranjal, and other neighboring areas. 
  Following this recovery by "El Ministro," the Peruvian 
citizen "Vaticano" could do nothing but close an agreement and 
yield to the pressures of his Colombian bosses. 
  A report compiled in Lagunas said that a light plane with a 
Colombian license number landed at the recently repaired 
airstrip around 1800 during the middle of September. The plane 
carried the pilot and one passenger, whom some people identified 
as "El Ministro's" brother. The individual carried a message 
from the Cali Cartel: Waldo Vargas Arias had to negotiate with 
Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera to avoid threatening the drug supply. 
  From that date "Vaticano" was unable to touch the 
Colombian's 
business between Pongo Island and Lagunas while "El Ministro" 
would not buy drugs in Campanilla, Saposoa, Aguaytia, and Sion, 
which are the Peruvian areas of influence. 
  At the same time it was agreed that "El Ministro" would 
continue to operate more as a drug collector than drug 
transporter. 
  In exchange the "Vaticano" allowed "El Ministro" to contact 
Shining Path leaders in Upper Huallaga to hire their protection 
following disappearance of the MRTA from the area. 
  For the two drug traffickers, this was an agreement for the 
equal distribution of business. No one knows how long it will 
last because "El Ministro" becomes stronger every day and 
threatens to remove "Vaticano." 
  In light of the actions by the antinarcotics forces, the two 
drug traffickers may join forces to establish a stronger 
organization with a unified command and an army of hired killers 
like the Colombian cartels. 
  To confirm if the agreement is being fulfilled, "Vaticano" 
sent two of his hired Colombian killers -- "Chuck Norris" and 
"Rambo" -- to the area under the control of "El Ministro." They 
periodically report to him details of the movements of his 
competitor. 
  The first Shining Path flags appeared in Puente Shanusi at 
km 
40 of the Yurimaguas-Tarapoto highway two days before the 
referendum. Just 10 days ago new flags were raised by 
subversives in Pampa Hermosa and Alianza announcing their 
presence and showing the power of "El Ministro." 

