Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Yesterday, Health Minister Jaime Freundt-Thurne 
Oyanguren announced that his department is adopting preventive 
measures to avert another cholera outbreak, especially during 
the coming summer season. 
  Freundt-Thurne stressed that the Health Ministry has set as 
its priority the population's education, to prevent its exposure 
to contracting this disease again. 
  He claimed that, for this purpose, the status of sanitation 
is being improved with the installation of water and sewerage 
services, in some instances financed with Fonavi [National 
Housing Fund] resources. 
  He added that the incidence of cholera cases on the national 
level has been reduced through the sanitation measures being 
implemented. He admitted that the virus has ceased to be of 
epidemic proportions, and has become endemic. 
  He mentioned that, in the latest statistics for the week of 
10-16 October, 622 cases of diarrheal diseases were officially 
reported. He remarked that 83 of them were confirmed as cholera, 
but that no deaths were reported. 
  The vice minister of health, Eduardo Young Motta, for his 
part, confirmed those figures, adding that the number of acute 
diarrheal diseases for the year in Lima alone is 28,550, with 22 
fatalities. 
  In order to coordinate its preventive action, the Health 
Ministry is scheduling a series of activities with the 
municipalities, associated particularly with the control of 
street vending, considered a leading contaminating agent. 
  According to a timetable that is due for approval within the 
next few days, samples will start to be taken of foods sold on 
the streets, and a widespread community health education 
campaign will be intensified. 
  At the same time, doses of rehydrating salts are to be 
distributed, free of charge, among health centers and medical 
stations, especially those in human settlements. There are also 
supplies of serum for treating the serious cases that may appear. 
<H5>  The Main Propagating Factors </H5>
  The use of nonpotable water, consumption of contaminated 
ocean products and vegetables, and a lack of personal hygiene 
and sanitation in the home are the main factors spreading 
cholera, which afflicts persons of any age or social status. 
  Cholera, the scientific name of which is vibrio 
cholerae, is of bacterial origin. Its virus was discovered 
in 1884 by the scientist Robert Koch. 
  The current pandemia began at the end of January 1991, when 
it struck the population of Chancay primarily. Spreading rapidly 
among the coastal populations, weeks later it reached the 
interior of the country. Next, the epidemic extended to Ecuador 
and, subsequently, to the rest of South and Central America. 
There were even some ``imported cases'' treated in the United 
States. 
  The Peruvian experience in dealing with this disease evoked 
the interest of Latin American specialists, who came to Peru to 
learn about the treatment systems for eradicating the disease in 
their countries. 

