Language: <F P=105> Kazakh </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Amanzhol Qoshanov, academician, director of the </F>
Economic Institute of the Republic of Kazakhstan National 
Academy of Sciences, and Aytym Abdirakhmanuly, doctor of 
philogical science: "Let Us Consolidate the Terms of the Market 
Economy Correctly"] 
  [Text] Kazakhstan has become a sovereign nation, an 
independent state. Along with other CIS countries, our republic 
has gone over to a market economy. The Republic of Kazakhstan 
Law on Language was ratified and became effective from 1 July, 
1990. State policy directions for the development of the Kazakh 
language and other nationality languages of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan in the period up until the year 2000 have been drawn 
up and are being carried out. The Kazakh language has been made 
an official language. A republic language committee has be 
formed to set in motion and control these major tasks. All these 
major activities have brought forward major problems such as the 
development of the terminology of the Kazakh language and the 
creation of technical language. 
  Our republic has entered into the difficult and complex road 
leading to a market economy. During the present era of 
transition, we must assume a policy direction, master this vital 
world economic system, and lead our nation to a life of 
abundance. For this reason, we must advance not only enterprise 
but also economic science and education. Along with the objects 
and material base (foundation) of the market economy, we must 
also bring together and perfect its economic infrastructure. For 
that reason, we must learn and teach the market economy and 
develop it on a scientific and theoretical basis. To achieve 
this goal we must write a scientific literature and manuals. 
  It is well known to the people that there is a scientific 
literature and basic terminology, and that there are manuals, 
explanatory dictionaries, and handbooks for a general scientific 
language. There can be no doubt that all of them will have a 
favorable influence upon the mastery of a market economy, its 
study and teaching, and upon the development of science in this 
sector. If previously only specialists understood and promoted 
problems and terminology of the market economy, today life and 
livelihood demand that the whole people know about them. For 
example, hundreds of terms are used in the market economy 
including the following: letter of advice, autarky, hard 
currency deposits held in foreign banks, acceptor, excise duty, 
shareholder, alonge, lessee, barter, business, exchange, 
bonification, broker, brokerage, note, devaluation, dead weight, 
demonetization, dumping, deflation, dollar, discount, 
investment, encashment, inflation, commerce, consulting, 
consortium, concern, courtage, licentiate, leasing, marketing, 
management, know-how, offered, policy, privatization, claim for 
replacement of defective goods, refaction, book-keeping balance, 
spot, transaction, transferred, bill of exchange. 
  The terms of the market economy are connected with the 
terminology of work, of jurisprudence and general political and 
social terminology. However, in the case of the economic sector, 
to date only two dictionaries have appeared: 1) M. Abdirov, T. 
Qulqashev, S. Tolybekov: "Oryssha-Qazaqsha Terminologiya Sodigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Terminological Dictionary], 7 volumes, 
editor-in-chief, A. Abdirakhmanov, "Economika, Philosofiya," 
Almaty, 1962; 2) M. Nasyrova, "Alewmettik-ekonomikalyq 
Terminderding Oryssha-Qazaqsha Tusindirime Sodigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Explanatory Dictionary of Socio-Economic 
Terminology], "Qazaqstan," 1968, 1979. Since it is 25-30 years 
since these dictionaries have appeared, they cannot be obtained 
today and it is clear without saying that they are not up to the 
needs of the present. 
  The Republic of Kazakhstan National Academy of Sciences, as 
it advances a market economy, its terminology, and technical 
language in our republic, while bearing in mind the needs for 
development and consolidation, has composed "Naryqtyq 
Ekonomikanyng Oryssha-Qazaqsha Tusindirme Sozdigi" 
[Russian-Kazakh Explanatory Dictionary of the Market Economy] 
(20 pages in size) under the authorship of leading officials of 
the Economic Institute (Academician A. Qoshanov, Doctor of 
Economic Sciences Q. Qashmuratov, Candidate in Economic Science 
Ye. B. Saghymbayev) with the participation of linguists 
(responsible linguistics' editor A. Abdirakhmanov). In our 
article we felt it suitable to offer for an exchange of views to 
republic intellectuals on certain scientific hypotheses and on 
our suggestions arising out of our experience in creating the 
dictionary mentioned above. 
  Hitherto, whereas standard economic terminology developed in 
close connection with terminology in the political-social sector 
as closely connected systems, now many terms in the market 
economy sector are newly created and brought to life. 
  What is the present state of terminology in the Kazakh 
language? We completely agree with the following viewpoint of 
Academician A. Qaydarov who just recently wrote a detailed 
article on the subject: 
  "The terminology of the Kazakh language is in a 
crisis (emphasis by the authors, A.Q and A.A.) today 
to a certain degree in connection with various objective and 
subjective circumstances. Instead of established scientific 
principle providing directions to the terminological process, 
and taking the lead, it lags behind, and terminological practice 
remains under foot." (A.T. Qaydarov, "Qazaq Tili 
Terminologiyasyna Zhangasha Kozqaras" [A New View of the 
Terminology of the Kazakh Language] Q. R. U. GH. A.[Republic of 
Kazakhstan National Academy of Sciences] KHABARLARY, Language 
and Literature Series, No 1, 1993, p 4). 
  Academician A. Qaydarov suggested 11 principles in this 
article as his conclusions for providing new directions for the 
terminology of the Kazakh language, regulating it, and further 
developing it. However, in our view these principles group along 
two (there could be more or less) basic lines. The first is to 
use to the utmost the internal possibilities of the mother 
tongue in creating terminology. The second is to establish new 
terms based on other terminology. (For example, whereas the vast 
majority of loan words at one time in history were from Arabic, 
Persian, and Mongolian, most borrowed words in the 19th and 20th 
centuries are from Russian or from other European languages via 
Russian.) However, if we carefully analyze these two overall 
principles, the ways in which terminology is constructed by 
semantic, phonetic, and grammatical means, and the various 
linguistic paths through which terms come in from other 
languages, the number of principles could be increased further. 
Thus there is the need to supplement the principles suggested by 
A. Qaydarov and also to consolidate some. For this reason we 
consider the two lines discussed above as scientifically proper 
in the question of the creation and consolidation of the 
terminology of a market economy. 
<H3>  1. Using to the Utmost the Internal Possibilities of the 
Mother Tongue in Creating Market Economy Terminology </H3>
  Inherent in this principle is one of those things creating 
the most difficulty in Kazakh scientific terminology: 
instability of terminology. Thus one of the most important goals 
in consolidating terminology is to stabilize that terminology in 
terms of its lexical meaning and to employ a given term always 
with the same meaning. Below we will discuss some unstable 
terminology and make some specific suggestions about how to 
unify these expressions. 
  The term "arbitration" occurs in Kazakh as arbitrazh, 
torelik, qazylyq, and sarapshylyq. In my view we should continue 
to use the international term arbitrazh as it is. The reason is 
that an arbitrator is concerned about disputes when industries, 
units, and organizations sign contracts, change them, modify 
them, carry them out, and make decisions regarding compensation 
when one party to the contract has caused harm to the other. For 
this reason, since arbitration is an institution of state 
importance and scope, the word should be used as is. Among the 
synonyms mentioned, the word sarapshy must be established as an 
equivalent to "expert" since a expert is a specialist with 
expertise in some sector. 
  The word "lease" occurs frequently as zhal or zhaldaw, and 
lessee as zhalger. At present we must make the words zhaldaw and 
zhaldawshy equivalent to nayem, and nayemshcik. It is proper to 
use zhaldaw (zhal) alone to replace the above arenda or nayem. 
This is because the two words have the same meaning but are 
different. Arenda is from Latin and nayem is from Russian. There 
are the words broker, makler, posrednik in Russian and all of 
them are given in Kazakh by the word deldal alone. The time has 
come to classify these words. The English word broker is an 
individual who is a middleman for goods, exchange, and funds 
exchange, or it can be a firm. The German word makler is a 
person who acts as a go-between when trade and financial 
contracts have been signed. ("Sovremennyy Slovar Inostrannykh 
Slov" [Current Dictionary of Foreign Terms], Moscow, "Russkiy 
Yazyk," 1992. The etymologies and meanings of foreign words used 
here are from this dictionary.) Looking at these meanings, a 
broker is not an individual, a broker is also a firm and an 
organization; however, a makler is a person. For that reason we 
suggest using these terms as follows in Kazakh: broker for 
"broker," deldal for "makler," and kelistirushi for "go-between." 
  The Russian terms voznagrazhdeniye, oplata, plata, and 
platezh are used improperly in Kazakh. Thereby voznagrazhdeniye 
means "reward," oplata, "remuneration," plata, "pay," and 
platezh, "payment." When we examine these words in context using 
them in this way seems correct. 
  The Russian words dogovor, kontrakt, kontsessiya, pakt, 
sdelka, and soglasheniye are, as a rule, sometimes represented 
in Kazakh as shart, sometimes as kelisim. Let us put things into 
order: dogovor is a shart ["agreement"], kontrakt is kontrakt, 
pakt is pakt, sdelka is mamile ["a treaty, pact, verbal 
agreement; a deal"], soglasheniye is kelisim ["agreement, 
contract"]. By a decision of the Kazakh State Terminological 
Committee, sdelka is kelisim; however, birzhavaya sdelka is a 
birzha mamilesi ["financial agreement"]. We must look at these 
terms again and define sdelka as mamile. Thereby soglasheniye 
will remain, regularly, kelisim. 
  It would be proper to use the following terms used in an 
irregular manner in the market economy as follows: dolg should 
be borysh ["debt"], dolzhnik should be boryshqor ["debtor"], 
zadatok, kepildeme ["security, deposit"], zadolzhenosty, 
bereshek ["debt"], zayem, zayem (state) kredit, nesiye ["debt, 
obligation"], and ssuda, qaryz ["loan"]. 
  Another group of terms used incorrectly are terms connected 
with profit and loss and accounting in economics, work, 
financing, and jurisprudence. They have not been systematized to 
this day and are each used differently when employed. Thus, for 
us to prove that this is the case could not be done even in a 
long report. We offer specific suggestions thinking that these 
terms should be used as follows: dokhod, 1) tabys ["income, 
profit"], 2) tusim ["yield, gain"], vyruchka, tusim, zatrata, 
shyghyn ["loss"], prikhod, kiris ["profit, gain, income"], 
rasxhod, shyghys ["expense"], pribyl, payda ["profit"], raschet, 
yeseptesu ["settle accounts"], schet, yesepshot ["account, 
accounting"], uchet, yesepke alu ["take into account"], ubytok, 
ziyan ["loss"]. 
  No equivalents have been established for terms such as the 
Russian words zakaz, zayavka, and porucheniye, often encountered 
in daily life. We suggest that they be used as follows: zakaz, 
tapsyrys ["order"], zadaniye, tapsyrma ["assignment, task"], 
zayavka, otinim ["that which is desired, requested"], 
zayavleniye, 1) otinish ["request"], 2) malimdeme 
["announcement"], porucheniye, tapsyrym ["assignment, task"]. 
  The terms zona and region used in daily life are only 
represented in Kazakh by aymaq. The word region, originally 
taken from Latin and in recent years spread throughout the world 
and established through the English language, corresponds nicely 
to Kazakh aymaq. This is because the meaning of the two words is 
"a large area combining several oblasts of a country or even 
several countries in terms of economic geography." (Loc. cit., p 
516). Moreover, since zona, taken from Greek, retains the 
economic-territorial meaning, that should be kept as is. Thus we 
should use aymaq for region and zona for zona. 
  One of the fundamental services of the market economy is 
connected with trade, as is well known. However, the terminology 
of this sector is altogether entangled and has not been 
distinguished. We are not going to examine the terminology of 
the trade sector term by term, nor research it, but we suggest 
the proper use below: kommertsiya, kommertsiya, kommersant, 
kommersant, kommercheskaya torgovlya, kommertsiyalyq sawda 
["commercial trade"], kommercheskiy, kommertsiyalyq 
["commercial"], spekulyatsiya, alypsatarlyq ["speculation"], 
torgi, sawdagha salu ["trade in something"], torgovlya, sawda 
'["trade, trading"], torgovets, sawdager ["tradesman"]. 
  The words kompaniya, kompanon, and tovarishchestvo used in 
the market economy also need Kazakh equivalents. The term 
kompaniya means a union of industries in trade, production, 
transport, and other sectors. For that reason, we should use the 
Kazakh word seriktestik ["group of friends"] for it, and 
seriktes ["friend, comrade"] for kompanon and seriktik 
["camaraderie"] for tovarishchestvo. 
  We need to regulate terms associated with supervision, 
control, and testing in social life. For example, we must use 
them as follows: Kazakh baqylaw ["observe, control"], for 
kontrol, baqylawshy ["one observing, controlling"], for 
kontroler, qadaghalaw ["review"] for nadzor, tekseru ["check, 
test"] for reviziya. 
  The word metod and the terms developed from it are not used 
correctly. For this reason the time has unquestionably come to 
use the word adis ["means"]. There is no need to reform the use 
of the word using metod, adis, tasil ["means, method"]. In our 
view the time has come to use, for the words developed from 
metod, adisteme ["systematized"], for metodika, adisnama 
["theory of method"], or metodologiya, for metodologiya, and 
tasil for priem. The Kazakh word adisnama can certainly confer 
the idea of "the study of scientific means for knowing" and I 
think that it will become normal use. However, it seems as if, 
for the present, the term metodologiya will continue to be used 
along with it. 
  The terms rezerv, resurs, and fond are frequently used 
primarily in the press along with the word qor ["resource, 
stock, fund"]. We think that they should be specified and used 
as follows: nakopleniye, qorlanu ["accumulate stocks"], rezerv, 
rezerv, rezervnyy fond, rezerv qor, resurs, resurs, fond, qor. 
  In practice the words obespecheniye and strakhovaniye are 
altogether confused. The should be used as follows as defined by 
the State Terminological Commission: obespecheniye, 
qamsyzdandyru ["insure against something"], obespecheniye 
sotsialnoye, alewmettik qamsyzdandyru, strakhovaniye, saqtandyru 
["protect"]. 
  The following often-encountered terms should be used without 
confusing them: oborot, Kazakh aynalym ["turnover"], 
obrashcheniye, aynalys ["turning around"]. In practice, when 
these terms are translated, we have often observed that because 
of the lack of the appropriate dictionaries, or because of 
uncertain meanings, certain terms are switched. We will only 
mention a few of the terminological combinations necessary for 
their proper use: optovyye tseny, kotere satu baghalary (tolayym 
satu baghalary) ["prices for sale in bulk"] (either), 
roznichnyye tseny, bolshek sawda baghalary ["prices for separate 
sales"], poshlina, bazh salyghy ["customs' duty"], tomozhiya, 
keden ["tax"], rentabelnost, paydalylyq ["profitability"], 
effektivnost, tiimdilik ["advantageousness"], etc. 
<H3>  2. Use of Terms From Other Languages in Consolidating 
Terminology for the Market Economy </H3>
  In general in Kazakh up until the time of the October 
Revolution words were introduced from Persian, Arabic and 
Russian, and a few from Mongolian. Typically among them was the 
entry of political and economic terms. We have no space here to 
characterize them all. 
  Terms in the modern Kazakh language for the market economy 
created on the basis of European languages are introduced and 
used through Russian. We will not be able to save ourselves from 
this and we need not lose the habit. For example, the rapid 
growth of the internal market economy within the Kazakhstan as a 
nation, and the very great increase in the establishment of 
commercial and marketing relations with foreign countries have 
demanded the use of hundreds of word in the market economy 
sector. They include words such as: abandon, aval, advance, 
advantage, letter of advice, autarky, admonition, agio, actuary, 
share, at par, auditor, out right, bonus, bordereau, broker, 
currency, warrant, slogan, dekort. 
  To be sure, we cannot just accept such foreign terms and we 
must strive to find Kazakh equivalents. Although there are many 
such words, finding and using Kazakh equivalents for such words 
have begun to occur. For example, there are a number of 
[replacement] terms now being used very nicely in practice, but 
there are still only a few. They include: arenda, Kazakh zhal, 
zhaldaw, arendator, zhalger, devalvatsiqa, baghasyzdanu 
["devaluation"], inflyatsia, qunsyzdanu ["become valueless"], 
monopoliya, monopoliya (dara iyelik) ["individual ownership"], 
privatization, zhekeshelendiru ["make private, individual"], 
prezentatsiya, tanystyru ["act of making known"]. 
  From this perspective, only a few words have been created as 
equivalents to international terms and terms with those meanings 
in Russian. In so doing we should not seek for new words but for 
single words in Kazakh equivalent to two such words. For 
example, shaghym ["complaint"] for zhaloba and pretenziya, 
buyryq ["edict"] or tsirkulyar and prikaz, ulgi ["pattern, 
model"] for shablon and obrazets, etc. 
  In conclusion there stands before the republic complicated 
tasks in the creation, development, and consolidation of terms 
of the market economy, in the popularization of the ideas in the 
scientific literature, in textbooks, in the pages of the press, 
on radio and television, and other mass media, and in the 
creating of terminological and explanatory dictionaries and 
handbooks for this sector. We have shared some of our practical 
thoughts with you regarding correct consolidation of terminology 
for the market economy, a key area of these tasks. 

