Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Xining, January 7 (XINHUA) -- Chinese researchers 
have developed six new super-heavy-ear wheat strains after more 
than two decades' efforts by genetic breeding. 
  The newly-developed strains have many improved properties, 
which can be steadily inherited, said Xie Junfeng, who heads the 
group for wheat genetic breeding research of the Northwest China 
Institute of Plateau Biology under the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences. 
  The research group also made effective use of chromosomal 
variation of small wheat apical ear to increase the number of 
small wheat ears. The experiment has helped to find a new way 
of optimization through crossbreeding in the field of wheat 
genetic breeding. 
  The achievements passed a recent state appraisal. 
  Since China applied chromosomal engineering to wheat 
breeding 
in the 1950s, the country has been blessed with a group of 
improved varieties of wheat featuring fine characteristics such 
as strong disease resistance. But all these varieties proved to 
have only small plants and light ears. 
  In 1972, Xie and his fellow researchers discovered that 
chromosomes of wheat underwent variation under the special 
growing conditions on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and cultivated a 
base material called "plateau 2d monomer" and achieved good 
results including heavy wheat ears in experimental planting. 
  The six wheat strains have been developed based on "plateau 
2d monomer", which means that China has made a major 
breakthrough in the breeding of super-heavy-ear and 
super-high-yield wheat. 
  According to the researchers, a large number of 
super-high-yield varieties of wheat will be crossbred in the 
next three to five years, as the six newly-developed wheat 
strains have all the excellent properties needed for hybridizing 
more new super-high- yield wheat varieties. 
  Trial planting of two new spring wheat varieties obtained 
through successful crossbreeding, which have been grown on dry 
farmland, have achieved the desired objectives of high yield and 
good quality. 
  The local government of Qinghai is adopting measures to 
spread planting of these two hybrid wheat varieties. 

