BFN 

  CENTRAL BANK DEFENDS FORINT: The Hungarian National Bank 
(MNB) has intervened heavily on the Hungarian money market to 
defend the forint over the last two days. Speculative buying by 
commercial banks was growing and banks were expecting a 
devaluation in the forint. The MNB regularly tests market 
conditions by buying and selling foreign exchange on the 
interbank market. Hungary's foreign exchange reserves of more 
than $7 billion have enabled the central bank to continue to 
meet the commercial banks' demand. The commercial banks' 
purchase has not eaten into the central bank reserves because 
the foreign exchange bought by the banks has been returned to 
the central bank in the form of deposits. In January and 
February, the central bank was a net buyer on the inter-bank 
market, buying $70 million more Forex than it sold in January. 
This sum was slightly less in February. Selling is expected to 
exceed buying in March as the current account deficit may only 
be partly financed by direct foreign cash investments. The 
current account deficit is expected to amount to between $2 
billion and $2.5 billion this year, as against $3.4 billion in 
1993. The central bank estimates that the capital inflow will 
cover the deficit during the year. (Budapest MTI in English 
0851 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  BANK AGREEMENT WITH SLOVAKIA: An agreement on the mutual 
acceptance of the Hungarian forint (HUF) and Slovak koruna (Sk) 
in tourist traffic was signed by the two countries' central bank 
presidents. Under its terms, Hungarian citizens will be allowed 
to take Sk4,000 per person per occasion to Slovakia, instead of 
the previous Sk1,000, while the amount of florints Slovak 
tourists can bring to Hungary has been raised from HUF2,000 to 
HUF10,000. The sale of foreign currency follows the free-market 
practice in both countries: Hungarian and Slovak commercial 
banks run non-commercial accounts in forints and korunas, and if 
a surplus accumulates lastingly in one of the countries, it will 
be possible to use it for commercial deals. (Budapest MTI in 
English 1352 GMT 30 Mar 94) 
  GLASUNION HALTS GLASS PRODUCTION: Glasunion Kft. (limited) 
will stop its plate glass production by 24 March, thus ending 
all plate glass production in Hungary. Glasunion has been 
operating since early last year with the assets of plate glass 
manufacturer Salgotarjani Sikuveggyar, which had previously gone 
bankrupt. The limited company was set up with HUF867 million 
founding capital. The company also manufactures processed 
products such as windscreens, and hardened and heatproof glass. 
Out of total capacity of 8 million square meters a year, only 6 
million square meters were produced last year because of the 
aging technology. Half of all output was exported. Due to 
spending on modernization, which became necessary last year, 
Glasunion closed 1993 with a loss. The net turnover was HUF1.4 
billion last year, of which exports, mainly to Western Europe, 
made up HUF560 million. It also exported indirectly to Russia 
through a $800,000 order for windscreens for Ikarus buses. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0718 GMT 24 Mar 94) 
  MALEV SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE SUBSIDIARY: Malev shareholders at 
an extraordinary general meeting on 26 March approved the 
setting up of a wholly owned off-shore subsidiary and a sale and 
lease-back agreement concluded with the company. The Hungarian 
airline, Malev, registered the Aircraft Leasing Company (MALCO) 
in the Cayman Islands late last year. The company has 
registered capital of $2. Malev transferred the ownership of 
two Boeing 767-200ERs, which it purchased last year, to MALCO 
for $1 each and is now leasing the aircraft back. Last year, 
Malev took out a $123 million loan with a maturity of 12 years 
to finance the purchase. Malev can now avoid listing this loan 
in the balance sheet in forints, something which would have a 
negative impact because of forint devaluations. The loan will 
now appear in MALCO's balance sheet in US dollars. (Budapest 
MTI in English 1302.GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  CHINESE RETAILERS FLOURISH: Nearly 40 Chinese restaurants 
operate at present in Budapest, and their number is expected to 
rise to over 100 in two years. Chinese retailers dealing in 
clothing articles are estimated to number 500. Most Chinese -- 
about 40,000 to 50,000 -- stayed in Hungary between 1990 and 
1991, but many times more Chinese passed through the country in 
transit. Stricter entry and residence conditions in effect for 
the last few years have brought down the number of Chinese 
living here to between 5,000 and 10,000. Most of them run 
catering businesses or clothing shops. Chinese restaurants, led 
by Taiwan in business turnover, have an annual turnover of 
several hundred million forints, and obtain half of their raw 
material requirements from Hungarian suppliers. There are 
several Chinese clothiers who sell 300-500 containers of goods a 
year. Some Chinese having settled in Hungary are accumulating 
capital at a rate that they will be able to unleash a new wave 
of ventures within a few years. (Budapest MTI in English 1031 
GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  ELECTRICITY DIVERSIFIED: Ten years ago, Hungary imported 25 
percent of its electricity from the Soviet Union, now the CIS 
states supply less than 10 percent of total Hungarian demand. 
This continuing partial dependence prompted the Visegrad 
countries to set up their own electricity club, CENTREL, in 1992 
as a preliminary move towards joining the electricity 
organization bringing together Western European states, UCPTE, 
within a few years. Hungary's present link to UCPTE, via 
Austria and the rump Yugoslavia, works at low capacity with a 
technically temporary link- up. Parliament passed an energy 
policy plan one year ago to ease the country's excessive 
reliance on the former Soviet Union. Today, Hungary has become 
the least dependent in Eastern Europe on the Soviet successor 
states for electricty supplies: Last year the country imported 
a tenth of its overall consumption of 34-35 billion kilowatthour 
(KWH). The energy plan for this decade anticipates a rising 
need for energy due to a slow increase in industrial and 
agricultural production. To facilitate the country's linkage to 
the Western European electric energy system, from this summer 
regional electricity boards and power stations are to be 
partially privatized with the participation of Western European 
companies. Joining UCPTE is vital to the four Visegrad 
countries to lessen dependence on eastern imports and ensure 
greater technical security. After the UPCTE members decided in 
1992 to support their joint admission, the four energy companies 
set up their own professional club in October 1992. The first 
step to membership was to regulate the transmission frequency of 
the four national electricity systems to meet UCPTE standards, 
because the parallel mode of operation, which ensures the best 
linkage, cannot be applied at frequency fluctuations larger than 
UCPTE levels. After a two-day successful CENTREL network test 
late last September, full linkage is expected in 1997 at the 
earliest. Hungary's electricity system is presently connected 
to the UCPTE circuit with a direct-current insert which 
equalises frequency fluctuations. A 400 kilovolt (KV) branch 
from Szeged (southern Hungary) to rump Yugoslavia and 220 KV 
line between Gyor (W Hungary) and Vienna enable Hungary to 
export power in lieu of Austrian capital invested earlier in the 
hydroelectric Danube dam project, and to transfer Ukrainian 
power deliveries to Austria. The Munich-based Bayernwerke, 
Germany's leading energy supplier and an old business partner of 
the Hungarian Electricity Board, will help set up technical and 
organizational conditions for the link-up under a cooperation 
agreement signed recently in Budapest. (Budapest MTI in English 
0824 GMT 29 Mar 94) 
  DROP IN UNEMPLOYMENT: The rate of registered unemployment 
continued to fall in February, the National Labor Center said. 
At the end of this February there were 630,600 registered 
jobless in Hungary -- 10,300 fewer than in the previous month 
and 74,400 fewer than the maximum of 705,000 in February 1993. 
In the past year the rate of unemployment has dropped by 0.2 
percentage points, to 12.6 percent. Compared to January 1994, 
3,500 more, altogether 26,300 new vacancies were registered in 
February, most of them in agriculture. Altogether, 54,700 
vacant jobs were awaiting the unemployed in February, of which 
44 percent were taken in the course of the month. (Budapest MTI 
in English 0800 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  JANUARY PRODUCTION RISES: The volume of industrial 
production rose in January, according to the Central Statistical 
Office. Based on data from ventures employing more than 20 
workers, industrial production was valued at 170.2 billion 
forints (HUF) at current prices in the first month of the year, 
up 10.5 percent on the December 1993 figure, and 13.5 percent 
higher than a year ago. Industrial sales were valued at HUF160.2 
billion, within which domestic sales totalled HUF124.6 billion, 
exports HUF35.6 billion. Domestic sales rose by 8.4 percent, 
exports by 31 percent over one year. (Budapest MTI in English 
0655 GMT 31 Mar 94) 
  TREASURY BILLS: The stock of two treasury bills of one year 
maturity -- the interest paying and the public treasury bills -- 
reached HUF44.9 billion forints earlier in March, according to 
information from distributors received on March 22 by the 
Finance Ministry's Securities Office. These bills are primarily 
designed for sale to the public. The office has since reported 
that the current stock is around HUF43.7 billion, because 
although HUF6.6 billion worth of interest paying T-bills have 
expired, a new series was issued in March to a value of HUF5.4 
billion, and there have been no significant redemptions. The 
stock of the two types of securities increased by 85 percent 
from the end of last September, which shows that the public has 
been directly financing the budget at an increasing rate. Of 
the two types of T- bills, the outstanding stock of the 
so-called public treasury bills is HUF14.1 billion. The stock 
of interest paying treasury bills is estimated at HUF29.6 
billion. These securities have been issued monthly since 
October, following issues in December 1992 and last March. This 
year, roughly two times as many such T-bills have been sold as 
in October-December last year, even though the state bonds, 
which ensure investment allowances, represent increasing 
competition. The new interest paying T-bill series, issued 
monthly since October last year, have been sold at face value at 
an interest rate of 23 percent, but no interest is paid in the 
case of premature redemption. Of the public T-bills sold by the 
Ministry of Finance, two series have been issued. From the 
first (1993/I), HUF8.42 billion worth were sold between August 
23 and November 31, and HUF6.709 billion worth were still 
outstanding at the end of March. These bear an annual interest 
of 19 percent, and can be redeemed with 10 percent after two 
months, 11 percent from the 181st day, 13 percent from the 270th 
day, and 15 percent thereafter. The second public T-bill series 
has been for sale since November 1 last year and February 10 
figures showed the stock standing at HUF7.431 billion. This 
series pays an annual interest of 21 percent, and redemption 
rates 1 percentage point higher than for the 1993/I series. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1807 GMT 1 Apr 94) 
  R&amp;D PACT WITH IRELAND: The Irish Minister of Enterprise 
and 
Employment Ruairi Quinn and Minister Without Portfolio Erno 
Pungor signed an agreement on bilateral cooperation in research 
and development. The two countries will deepen research and 
development links in biotechnology, agriculture, food 
processing, computer software, telecommunications, and energy 
management. They will hold joint seminars, and exchange 
experts. The Irish minister said his country supported Hungary's 
attempts for a more intensive role in European Union science, 
research, and technology programs such as the Eureka and Cost 
projects. (Budapest MTI in English 1446 GMT 5 Apr 94) 
  TRADE AGREEMENT WITH SLOVENIA: Trade with Slovenia will be 
fully exempted from customs duties in seven years, as set down 
in a bilateral agreement signed by Hungarian and Minister of 
Foreign Economic Relations Bela Kadar and his Slovenian 
counterpart Davorin Kracun. Under the agreement, customs levies 
are to be dismantled in three phases. The first group includes 
goods from all categories, which will be immediately freed from 
tariffs. The medium and long-term lists cover sensitive 
products from the viewpoint of industry protection. In January 
1995, the tariffs of all goods on the medium-term list will be 
reduced to two-thirds, and a year later to one-third of the 
present rate, with complete lifting in 1997. Long-term list 
tariffs will be gradually dismantled, with an annual 15 percent 
reduction from 1995 to 2001. This list is mainly comprised of 
textiles, ready-made clothes, metallurgical products, and 
vehicles. (Budapest MTI in English 1219 GMT 6 Apr 94) 
  FEBRUARY EARNINGS: Average gross monthly earnings in 
businesses with more than 10 workers were 27,819 forints (HUF) 
in February this year. Manual workers earned HUF21,442 a month 
on average, and white-collar workers HUF41,816, the Central 
Statistical Office reports. Average earnings were highest -- 
HUF52,379 -- in the financial sector. The minimum monthly wage 
was raised to HUF10,500 from HUF9,000. Income tax is levied on 
gross earnings and never exceeds 44 percent. Contributions to 
the health and pension insurance schemes and the unemployment 
fund are deductible. On average net earnings are 50 to 70 
percent of the gross figure. (Budapest MTI in English 1301 GMT 
7 Apr 94) 
  GAS PIPELINES: In 1994 Hungary expects to use 10 billion 
cubic meters of natural gas, half imported from Russia. Since 
increasing imports make it essential for Hungary to diversify 
its sources of supply, the country plans to construct a 140-km 
gas pipeline between Gyor and Baumgarten in eastern Austria. 
With an annual capacity of 4.5 billion cubic meters, the 
pipeline will be the first to connect Hungary with the Western 
European gas network. The project is expected to cost HUF25 
billion, or $245 million. Strong reliance on continuous energy 
supplies makes the Hungarian economy particularly vulnerable. In 
1993 the country imported 5.2 million tonnes of crude oil and 
almost 5 billion cubic meters of natural gas -- exclusively from 
the former Soviet Union. At the same time, it consumed 6.5 
million tonnes of crude oil and over 9.5 billion cubic meters of 
gas. This year Hungary will import 2.8 billion cubic meters of 
natural gas from Orenburg and 2 billion cubic meters from 
Yamburg, through two branches of the Brotherhood pipeline. The 
total length of Hungary's high-pressure gas network is 4,800 km. 
Diversification of energy imports is all the more important 
because Hungary's gas consumption is expected to sharply 
increase and, because of cheaper imports, the country's energy 
program cannot count on an increase in energy production. Since 
1989 local authorities in the underdeveloped regions have 
invested over HUF10 billion in expanding the gas network, and 
the central budget has contributed HUF4.5 billion to the 
project. As a result, hundreds of thousands of new consumers 
have been provided with natural gas, bringing their total number 
to 2 million. By 1996, local authorities are to invest another 
HUF20 billion, and the central government HUF5 billion, in gas 
pipeline construction, so as to integrate hundreds of thousands 
of more homes into the network. The first step to diversify gas 
purchases and deliveries was a contract signed in Vienna in 
mid-February by Austria's State Mineral Oil Company (OVG-AG) and 
the Hungarian Oil and Gas (MOL) Rt on the construction of the 
Gyor-Baumgarten pipeline under a Hungarian Government guarantee. 
The construction of the $245 million project started in March 
and is to be completed by October 1996. Three- fifths of the 
costs are to be borne by the Austrian side. If all goes 
according to plan, Hungary will receive 3 billion cubic meters 
and Austria the rest through the pipeline. In late January, MOL 
signed a contract with the Essen-based Ruhrgas company, which 
will supply Russian gas to be purchased by West European 
companies. Since the Baumgarten pump station in Lower Austria is 
directly linked to the European network, Hungary will thus have 
access to west and south European sources. In another 
development, Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Slovakia, and Slovenia plan to construct a gas pipeline between 
Krk, Croatia, and Vienna. The feasibility study for the project 
is being prepared. The new pipeline will only be used to 
capacity in case of emergency, as Hungary's long-term energy 
policy scheme gives priority to buying energy resources from the 
former Soviet region. In the spirit of this endeavor, both 
sides have launched talks on prolonging contracts for gas 
deliveries from Yamburg and Orenburg. (Budapest MTI in English 
0932 GMT 12 Apr 94) 
  FARM SUBSIDIES BELOW AVERAGE: The Producers' Subsidy 
Equivalent (PSE), which is the ratio of agricultural subsidies 
to producer prices, was 5 percent in Hungary in 1992, according 
to a report by the Agricultural Research and Information 
Institute. The indicator includes indirect subsidies based on 
the difference between prices on the domestic and foreign 
markets. The indicator for OECD countries was between 3 percent 
and 77 percent for 1992. According to the report, the subsidy 
per hectare was HUF2,627 in 1992. In OECD countries the average 
subsidy was HUF37,000 calculated at the official U.S. dollar-HUF 
exchange rate. The subsidy per agricultural producer was 
HUF24,000 compared with an OECD average of HUF800,000. The 
Consumers' Subsidy Equivalent (CSE), which is the ratio of 
consumers' subsidy to producer prices, was minus 3 percent in 
1992. This means consumers contributed 3 percent of the subsidy 
on farm gate prices. The indicator for OECD countries was 
between minus 2 percent and minus 67 percent. The per capita 
consumer's contribution to agricultural subsidies was HUF590 in 
1992, compared with an OECD average of HUF13,500. While in OECD 
countries the PSE indicator fell by 2.13 percent per annum 
between 1987 and 1992, it decreased by 34.1 percent a year in 
Hungary for the same period. Researchers say that the critical 
situation of agriculture, including its lack of profitability 
and the establishment of privately owned farms, require an 
increase in the level of agricultural subsidies. (Budapest MTI 
in English 1629 GMT 8 Apr 94) 
  FOTEX STOCK ISSUE: The FOTEX is to end the biggest East 
European capital raising maneuver on 18 April. Some 50 percent 
of the $100 million new issue is expected to be sold in the 
United States and the rest in Europe. The 20 million FOTEX 
shares to be issued will be have to be paid for on 19 April and 
trading will begin on 21 April at the Budapest and Vienna stock 
markets, on the pink sheet of the New York NASDAQ, and in 
London, Frankfurt, and Munich. (Budapest MAGYAR NEMZET in 
Hungarian 12 April 94 p 8) 
  CURBS ON HEAVY TRAFFIC: Nationwide restrictions on heavy 
traffic for weekends all year round and seven days a week for 
the summer period will not come into effect before next summer 
at the earliest. This year's restrictions will only affect the 
Lake Balaton area, particularly Highway 7 along the southern 
coast and Highway 71 along the northern coast. Trucks weighing 
over 12 tonnes will have to use signposted alternative routes 
between June 15 and September 10 and from Friday midnight to 
Sunday midnight. The extension of the ban to the whole of 
Hungary is also hindered by a lack of truck parking facilities, 
with only one Hungarian border able to cope with large numbers. 
For the time being, the ministry cannot finance developing safe 
lorry parking areas with social amenities. (Budapest MTI in 
English 1517 GMT 11 Apr 94) 
  BOND ISSUE IN ITALY: In keeping with the strategic aim of 
establishing a presence on all major international money 
markets, the Hungarian National Bank (MNB) is planning to issue 
bonds in Italy in the amount of 150-200 billion lira. According 
to MNB Deputy Chairman Frigyes Harshegyi, the idea has drawn a 
favorable response in Italy. The MNB is presently able to raise 
loans by issuing bonds on 10 major international money markets. 
Half of the bank's credit stock, worth approximately $11 
billion, came about by this method. A date has not been set for 
the MNB bond issue. (Budapest MTI in English 1321 GMT 14 Apr 94) 
  BASE, REPO RATES: At its recent meeting, the Central Bank 
Council decided to leave the central base rate at 22 percent. 
However, an increase in repo rates cannot be ruled out. The 
view of the MNB is that it should not pump liquidity into the 
economy, despite the liquidity shortage on the interbank market. 
Cash-flow figures on the balance of payments and foreign trade 
still show no improvement, which indicates surplus income 
outflow that is reflected in a deterioration of the balance of 
payments instead of a rise in inflation. Part of the surplus 
income, however, does not stay in the banking system long or 
does not enter it at all. The huge financing requirements of 
the central budget and public finances in general still play a 
dominant role on the money and capital markets. However, 
government securities can now be sold, if not necessarily at the 
time of issue, as they bear an interest rate above inflation. 
The central budget's liquid assets have fallen significantly 
from their high level at the end of 1993, but the central bank 
has given no other type of financing to the central budget in 
the first quarter of this year. Although the central bank is 
obliged to buy unsold, newly issued bonds under the 1994 Budget 
Law, it has had no difficulty in selling them. As a result, the 
MNB's 1994 80-billion forint (HUF) budget financing obligation 
has not been used so far. Because the government is 
increasingly selling its securities directly to the public or to 
companies, the money does not stay with the banking system. The 
high level of demand for imports is another reason for the 
forint shortage on the interbank market. Commissions to banks 
paid by companies on foreign exchange purchases for imports have 
caused a forint shortage, which may be strengthened by 
speculation on devaluation of the forint. Inflation and 
personal income figures show real incomes increasing in the 
first quarter of 1994. In addition to public sector pay rises, 
net wages have risen as a result in changes in the personal 
income tax system. Hence, a significant part of the import 
demand is likely to be for consumption. Such imports 
deteriorate the external balances without providing any basis 
for producing more export goods. As a result, the external and 
internal imbalances in the economy cannot be cured through 
monetary means alone. In addition to a tight monetary policy 
and an interest rate policy designed to encourage saving, budget 
restrictions are also necessary, but can only be expected after 
the May general elections, the MNB states. The MNB decided to 
increase repo interest rates at the end of March mainly to avoid 
"reopening the repo-tap," as well as to dampen banks and their 
clients' devaluation expectations by making financing more 
expensive. In the months following September 1993, the central 
bank had no choice but to leave the repo facility open at an 
increased interest level in order to help finance the budget, 
which was in difficulty as a result of decreasing savings. Repo 
channels closed in December as the average yield of government 
securities increased. In the week of the March repo-rate 
increase, the average yields of 30 and 90-day discount treasury 
bills again came close to the cost of repo loans of similar 
maturities. The central bank wants to avoid releasing surplus 
liquidity by again making it profitable for banks to finance 
discount treasury bill purchases from repo loans -- that is, to 
allow central bank money to flow out through the repo channels 
to banks, the central budget, and then on. The central bank 
should attempt to improve the external balances through 
regulating liquidity in accordance with its 1994 monetary policy 
guidelines, the MNB Council decided. The central bank intends 
to neutralize the effects of cuts in the compulsory reserve rate 
by introducing reverse (passive) repo auctions in the near 
future. The 1-percent reduction in the compulsory reserve rate 
in March resulted in a HUF9 billion relative surplus liquidity. 
A rise in the interest rates on repo loans cannot be excluded 
if the need arises, an MNB official said, adding "I would like 
to draw attention to the fact that continuously increasing 
deposit interest rates, which stimulate savings, may make it 
possible that lending and money market rates will not reflect 
changes in repo rates." Most members of the Central Bank 
Council felt that there was no justification for an increase in 
the central bank base rate, which indicates their belief that 
inflation could fall. (Budapest MTI in English 1515 GMT 15 Apr 
94) 
  NO MNB RESCHEDULING: Hungary will remain adherent to the 
policy of servicing foreign debts on schedule, MNB Chairman Akos 
Peter Bod said. He was responding to political party views that 
Hungary should follow Poland in rescheduling foreign debts. 
According to Bod, Hungary is in no position to ask for 
rescheduling because its large hard-currency reserves allow for 
due payment of interest and repayment on capital loans. As a 
result of the MNB's debt-management practice, much of the former 
short-term credits could be replaced by loans of longer 
maturity. Capital inflow has gathered speed recently, providing 
resources for economic transformation. Preliminary calculations 
show a major balance-of- payments deficit for January, but 
inflation is under control and consumer prices are not expected 
to rise by more than 18 percent this year. Major changes in the 
structure of foreign debts were reported. The stock of MNB's 
foreign debts has not increased in recent years. The 
indebtedness level of Hungary's commercial banks and companies 
is stabilizing, indicating that some of the foreign resources 
financed the projects that will facilitate export increases in 
the future. (Budapest MTI in English 1527 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
  SHARE PURCHASE SCHEME: On 18 April, 501,806 shares paying 
the normal plus 1-percent dividend of Sopron Brewery will be 
offered through the Preferential Share Purchase Program (PSPP), 
formerly known as the Small Investor Share Purchase Program. 
Sopron Brewery has registered capital of HUF1.352 billion. Any 
Hungarian over 18 who is a resident of Hungary is eligible to 
purchase state property up to a face value of HUF100,000 through 
an interest-free, five-year loan from the state. The PSPP also 
allows repayment of the loan through compensation coupons. Of 
the 501,807 shares currently owned by the State Property Agency 
(AVU), 300,000 shares are being offered through the PSPP. If 
the shares are exchanged for compensation coupons (CC), the rate 
is 10 CCs with a face value of HUF1,000 each for four shares. 
Through the program, small investors can purchase either five 
or 10 Sopron Brewery shares if the loan is repaid in cash. A 
total of 16 shares can be registered for CCs. The AVU offered 
201,806 for cash. Hungarian individuals are eligible for 30,000 
of those shares, while the remainder is targeted at 
institutional investors. The issue price in both the PSPP and 
the cash offer is HUF3,800 (380 percent face value). The packet 
offered by the AVU consists of preference shares, granting a 
one-third voting right. The majority owner of Sopron Brewery is 
the Austrian Brau Union, holding a 76.48-percent voting right 
and a 51.3 percent stake. Sopron Brewery plans a net sales 
turnover of HUF3.275 billion this year, as compared to HUF2.727 
billion in 1993. The company continues to enjoy a 100- percent 
tax exemption this year, as a result of which its profit is 
predicted at HUF597 million in 1994, as opposed to HUF530 
million last year. (Budapest MTI in English 1229 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
  FOOD INDUSTRY PRIVATIZATION: Foreign capital of almost $2 
billion has arrived in Hungary through the privatization of food 
companies and interest among domestic and foreign investors is 
still high. Foreign companies have also invested $600-700 
million in food companies and a further $400 million is expected 
to be invested in development. The privatization of vegetable 
oil, confectionery, tobacco, and sugar industries has been 
completed. Tenders have been invited for the sale of almost all 
of Hungary's grain and dairy companies, but the privatization of 
meat companies is lagging behind. Even following new 
investment, the meat industry will not be as large as it was. 
The livestock population has fallen considerably in recent 
years and the 1,000 recently established small slaughterhouses 
and meat processing plants have undercut the prices of the older 
meat complexes. As a result of surplus capacity and the general 
lack of working capital, at least three large meat comapanies 
will have to be closed down next year. Although no final 
decision has been made, it is thought that meat processing 
companies in Szekszard, Pest-Nograd, and Miskolc are the most 
likely candidates. Following consolidation, Hungary's grain 
companies are now operating profitably and the involvement of 
foreign capital is not seen as essential. It is thus planned 
that the majority of these companies will be sold to local 
investors or small investors through the Budapest Stock 
Exchange. (Budapest MTI in English 1621 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
  TRADE TALKS WITH SLOVAKIA: Amidst an overall decline in 
exports by both countries, trade turnover with Slovakia has 
increased markedly. Slovak and Hungarian ministry officials 
exchanged views on accelerating the implementation of the free 
trade agreement between the Visegrad countries in order to clear 
the way for an agreement aimed at further trade liberalization 
to be signed in the near future. In 1993, trade between the two 
countries amounted to more than $365 million: Hungarian exports 
to Slovakia were valued at $128 million and Slovak exports to 
Hungary, $237 million. Slovakia is fifth on the list of 
Hungary's trading partners. The growing list of joint ventures, 
including the more than 350 firms in Slovakia with Hungarian 
interests, figure prominently in these results. The value of 
Hungarian capital invested in Slovakia is about $2 million. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1610 GMT 13 Apr 94) 
  CR ECONOMIC TIES DISCUSSED: Business links between Hungary 
and the Czech Republic (CR) were the subject of talks between 
Hungarian and Czech ministry officials. The negotiating 
partners were satisfied with the development of bilateral trade, 
which last year totalled $433 million. Hungarian exports were 
worth $169 million, with imports at $264 million. To date, 
nearly 120 Hungarian joint ventures and representations have 
been registered in the Czech Republic, with a total capital of 
$1 billion. Both sides to the talks expressed the intention to 
renew the legal and economic conditions for bilateral business 
ties. (Budapest MTI in English 1328 GMT 15 Apr 94) 
  COST OF LIVING: The Central Statistical Office estimates 
that a two-parent family with two children living in Budapest 
required a monthly net income of HUF50,600 in March to maintain 
an acceptable standard of living. The figure is HUF500 more than 
the amount required in February. The figure was HUF50,100 in 
February and HUF49,400 in January this year. The national 
average per capita figure needed was 12,650 in March, HUF120 
more than in the previous month. Those who are of working age 
and live alone in cities needed the highest per capita income 
HUF17,700, while a family with four children living in the 
country required the lowest per capita income of HUF9,980. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0951 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
  FOREIGN CURRENCY DEPOSITS: The growth in personal foreign 
currency savings slowed dramatically in March. Hungarian 
National Bank (MNB) figures show that new deposits exceeded 
withdrawals by only 800 million forints (HUF) in March. The 
total value of personal foreign currency deposits increased by 
HUF15.1 billion in the first quarter of the year. The amount 
held in personal foreign exchange deposit accounts was 
HUF219.740 billion (slightly over $2 billion) at the end of 
March. New deposits totalled HUF30 billion in March and HUF29.2 
billion was withdrawn. (Budapest MTI in English 1546 GMT 21 Apr 
94) 
  EXPORTS INCREASE: The economy is showing signs of an upward 
trend that could be termed as a modest recovery. The first 
three months saw exports amounting to $2.15 billion, 4.1 percent 
more than in the same period last year. Imports totalled $2.91 
billion, 9.2 percent more than a year ago. Customs statistics 
show a $757 million deficit in the foreign trade balance for 
this period. Two thirds of Hungary's exports went to Germany, 
the successor states of the Soviet Union, Austria, Italy, and 
the United States. In the same period, direct foreign 
investment exceeded $300 million, somewhat less than in the 
first quarter of last year. (Budapest MTI in English 1037 GMT 
27 Apr 94) 
  CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT: The current account deficit stood 
at $378 million at the end of January, the National Bank of 
Hungary (MNB) reports. As a result of a surplus in the capital 
account, the country's balance of payments showed a $853 million 
surplus. The trade balance showed a deficit of $389 million in 
January, with exports amounting to $605 million and imports 
totalling $994 million. In December, exports amounted to $747 
million and imports totalled $1,047.7 million, resulting in a 
deficit of $300.7 million. Direct foreign cash investment 
amounted to $88 million in January, while long-term capital 
inflow was $1,476 million. International reserves stood at 
$7,539.2 million at the end of January, compared with $6,736.2 
million at the end of last year. Total direct cash investment 
amounted to $5,661.6 million at the end of January, up from 
$5,575.9 million at the end of December, 1993. Foreign debt 
totalled $25,698.8 million at the end of January as against 
$24,560.2 million at the end of last year. (Budapest MTI in 
English 1433 GMT 26 Apr 94) 
  VACCINE TESTING FACILITY: The veterinary vaccine 
manufacturing company, Phylaxia-Sanofi Oltoanyagtermelo Rt, 
officially opened a HUF60 million animal testing facility on the 
site of the company's headquarters in Budapest on 21 April. 
With the opening of the new facility, the company had brought 
production of veterinary vaccines up to internationally accepted 
standards. He said that since the company was established in 
1991, a total of HUF667 million had been invested in order to 
improve and control quality. This includes the HUF184 million 
which is expected to be spent this year. Phylaxia-Sanofi Rt is 
the only company in Hungary which produces veterinary vaccines. 
Half of the French company Sanofi's veterinary vaccines are 
manufactured in the Budapest factory. Sanofi Sante Nutrition 
Animale currently holds 36 percent of Phylaxia-Sanofi, the 
Hungarian company Chinoin Pharmaceuticals 15 percent, and the 
Austrian company, CA Hungary Investment, 49 percent. The 
registered capital has remained at HUF900 million, with the 
company having a shareholders' equity of HUF1.028 billion at the 
end of last year. Phylaxia-Sanofi has a 25 percent share of the 
HUF2.5 billion domestic market for veterinary products and a 
50-percent share of the market for veterinary vaccines. While 
the company is also involved in distributing veterinary 
products, 70 percent of turnover is from sales of the company's 
own products. (Budapest MTI in English 1543 GMT 21 Apr 94) 
  CORPORATE FOREIGN DEBT: The net direct foreign debts of 
Hungarian companies stood at $1.871 billion at the end of March, 
Hungarian National Bank (MNB) figures show. At the end of 1993, 
the corresponding figure was $1.825 billion. In the first 
quarter, Hungarian companies took out foreign loans totalling 
$261 million and repayments totalled $215 million. At the end 
of March, the total amount of foreign credit was $2.777 billion, 
of which $906 million had been repaid. Hungarian companies owed 
$408 million to foreign joint venture partners or parent 
companies. Of the net total debt at the end of March, loans of 
less than one year maturity accounted for $566 million as 
compared to $1.305 billion in longer term loans. (Budapest MTI 
in English 1536 GMT 22 Apr 94) 
  OTP SHARES APPLICATIONS: Applications for HUF8.83 billion 
worth of shares in the OTP Bank had been submitted by the close 
of subscription on 22 April. The demand for exchanging 
compensation coupons for shares was so great that the State 
Holding Company (AV Rt) doubled the original amount of shares 
offered, from HUF2.3 billion to HUF4.6 billion. The original 
recipients of compensation coupons submitted applications for 
HUF7.879 billion worth of shares. OTP manages the subscription. 
Only the original recipients of compensation coupons are to 
receive shares in the allocation, which will be carried out by a 
"card dealing" method, with shares to be "dealt" to subscribers 
until the supply is exhausted. A total of 60,000 people applied 
for shares. The exchange rate was three OTP shares for two 
compensation coupons. An estimated 40-45 percent of the shares 
are to be repurchased by OTP Broker at 70 percent of the value. 
The shares offered in OTP represent a 20 percent stake in the 
bank's registered capital. (Budapest MTI in English 1009 GMT 26 
Apr 94) 
  INCREASED STATE OTP EQUITY: The state will raise the 
registered capital of the savings bank OTP Rt to HUF28 billion 
by contributing HUF5 billion worth at par consolidation state 
bonds. As a result, the state-owned stake will grow from 75 
percent to almost 80 percent. The capital injection is 
necessary to carry out modernization, including the installation 
of an integrated computer network. If the bank's warranty 
capital is not raised, it will exceed the investment limit fixed 
by the banking law which states that the bank's total investment 
in real estate, movables and securities cannot exceed the 
warranty capital. As a result of this the bank's warranty 
capital will be HUF41 billion, HUF28 billion of which will be 
registered capital, HUF5 billion reserves and HUF5 billion the 
subordinated loan. The state granted the subordinated loan in 
December, under the bank consolidation scheme. At the same 
time, the bank subscribed HUF5 billion worth at par of credit 
consolidation state bonds, bearing identical conditions with the 
loan. OTP will hold its general meeting on April 28. The 
balance sheet total in 1993 was HUF830.9 billion, 10.1 percent 
up from the previous year. Pre-tax profits were HUF1.18 billion 
(HUF1.9 billion in 1992). The profits before risk provision was 
HUF13 billion. The bank filled its risk provision to 100 
percent, while its capital adequacy ratio was 15 percent 
according to Hungarian accounting standards. International 
accounting will result in a slightly lower figure. (Budapest 
MTI in English 1757 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  RISE IN ENTERPRISES: In the first quarter of 1994, the 
number of enterprises in Hungary continued to grow. According 
to the Central Statistical Office (KSH), 1,595 start-up ventures 
were registered in the country during the month of January. 
This number rose to 1,846 in February and declined slightly in 
March, to 1,258. Over the same period, 477 enterprises ceased 
to exist, 39 were liquidated, 144 ceased business, and 294 were 
restructured. As a result, at the end of the first three 
months, there were 89,860 economic units acting in the country 
as legal entities -- 5 percent more than at the end of last 
year. 10 percent of the start-ups were cooperatives; 1 percent 
were companies. 35 percent of these enterprises specialized in 
commerce or the service sector, and 20 percent in industry. At 
the end of March 1994, the number of private entrepreneurs was 
709,310 -- 3 percent more than at the beginning of the year. Of 
these 35 percent were artisans, 35 percent retailers, 28 percent 
professionals, and 2 percent farmers. As many as 99.8 percent 
of the self-employed work alone or with only a few assistants, 
KSH data show. (Budapest MTI in English 1001 GMT 26 Apr 94) 

