BFN 

  [Text] Kaiga, May 29 (PTI) -- Experts investigating the 
dome failure of the atomic plant here have described as 
"primature and highly regretable" [quote as published] last 
week's announcement by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) 
that the incident was caused by alteration of construction 
procedure of site without approval. 
  "As of now, we have not unearthed evidence of any lapse in 
construction practice at site and we are surprised how AERB came 
to this conclusion," chairman of the six-member expert 
committee, Mr. C. H. Surendar, told a visiting reporter. 
  He said that all documents obtained by the committee showed 
that each stage of construction of the dome had "the approval of 
the STUPP consultants who supplied the design" and that the 
contractor, Larsen and Toubro [L and T], had meticulously 
followed the procedures. 
  Some committee members said the hasty pronouncement by the 
AERB and subsequent "uninformed doomsday editorials" in 
newspapers caused a setback to the investigation that will take 
at least two months to pin-point the cause of the dome collapse 
and suggest remedial measures. 
  Nuclear Power Corporation Managing Director S. K. Chatterjee 
said over the phone that AERB's "conjecture" at this stage was 
"least expected" and assured that the Kaiga project will not 
suffer any delay and that the incident "is no cause for concern 
about safety." 
  Chief executive of STUPP Consultants are already in France 
for discussions with the parent company and Mr S.M. Pradhan, an 
engineer of the L and T described AERB's verdict as "outrageous". 
  DESIGN FAILURE: Without wanting to be drawn into a 
controversy, Kaiga project director Mr. Paramahamsa Tewari said 
he totally "ruled out any deficiency in construction procedures, 
quality control and on-site supervision." He said the cause of 
dome failure lay elsewhere, probably in the design which the 
AERB had approved. 
  Mr. Tewari said if materials used were sub-standard, the 
entire dome would have collapsed, which was not the case. 
  During the past two days, the committee examined all the 
records pertaining to construction methods and quality control 
practices and also identified the places from where to take 
samples of concrete for analysis. 
  "We are looking at everything, including possible defect in 
the design of the pre-stressed dome," Mr. Surendar said before 
his departure. The calculations of the STUPP Consultants will 
be rechecked and the behaviour of the dome -- until it failed -- 
will be simulated in a computer to find out what exactly went 
wrong. 
  To a question whether there could be a release of 
radioactivity if the dome had failed after the Kaiga plant had 
been commissioned, Mr. Surendar said there should be no such 
fear since "a fully pre-stressed dome cannot collapse". The 
incident in Kaiga happened when pre-stressing was partial. 
  Enquiries at the site revealed that chunks of concrete from 
the under-side of inner containment dome came tumbling down from 
a height of 40 metres at 11:40 a.m. and again at 12:40 p.m. on 
May 13. 
  The dome had used up 1300 tonnes of concrete and only eight 
percent of its (104 tonnes) had come down from 15 percent of the 
area and not 40 percent as reported by AERB, the experts said. 
  According to AERB, the dome collapsed because concrete was 
poured at different times instead of in "one go" giving rise to 
three "radial" joints not in the original design. AERB also 
alleged that the dome was pre-stressed by tensioning cables in a 
sequence different from the one suggested by STUPP consultations. 
  On the other hand, the expert committee has found that the 
tensioning sequence had not been altered and "the concrete pours 
had been done with the approval of the designers." 
  Contrary to the AERB's assertion that the radial joints led 
to dome collapse, the project engineer pointed out that no 
concrete had peeled off the joints that were still intact. 
  FIRST INCIDENT: Although it is the first incident of its 
kind in India pre-stressed domes under construction had failed 
at least in two place in the United States, according to Mr. 
Surendar. 
  Beginning with the Madras atomic plant, all nuclear power 
reactors in India have been using pre-stressed structures for 
containment. The one under construction in Kaiga was the fifth 
pre-stressed dome designed by the same consultant. 
  Mr. Surendar said that Kaiga dome was slightly different 
from 
others in the sense it provided four holes of 4.2 metres 
diameter each for lowering steam generators and taking them out 
to facilitate servicing and repairs. He, however, ruled out any 
connection between provision of these holes and the dome 
collapse. 
  The only other difference is that while the Madras dome was 
designed to withstand an internal pressure of only 16 pound per 
square inch, the Kaiga dome was designed for 25 pounds. This 
necessitated the use of very high tensional force (280 tonnes 
per square centimetre) on the cables used for pre-stressing the 
concrete. The force used for pre-stressing Madras dome was 
about 40 tonnes per square cm. 

