BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Press, Regulation, and Their Inclinations"] </F>
  [Text] Let us take the opportunity to touch on government 
regulation No. 20/1994 on Shareholdings in Foreign Investment 
Companies. Let us specifically examine several facts about the 
process of formulating a law on the national press and its 
existence in the country. 
  Recently, following his meeting with President Suharto, 
Information Minister Harmoko said that the issue of opening the 
media industry to foreign capital is in reference to Press Law 
No. 11/1966. In a working meeting with Parliamentary Commission 
II [Roman numeral two] on Wednesday, 8 June, Minister/State 
Secretary Murdiono reiterated that the new law on foreign 
investment is not meant to affect Press Law No. 11. 
  It is a fact that Press Law No. 11 1966 was issued much 
earlier than the Law on Foreign Investment No. 1/1967. Article 
13, Sub-Article (2) of the press law reiterates that capital for 
press companies should be fully state-owned. On the other hand, 
Article 6 of the Law on Foreign Investment opens the mass media 
sector to foreign investors on the condition that they do not 
become wholly- owned foreign enterprises. 
  The question that arises now is why did policymakers not 
fairly consider and look into details of the press law when they 
formulated the Law on Foreign Investment No. 1/1967? However, 
there are people who feel that there is no need to create a 
controversy over the law on foreign investment and the press law 
because the two laws regulate two different points. Law No. 
11/1966 deals with press regulation, while Law No. 1/1967 
regulates the mass media industry. It is common knowledge that 
the mass media cover much wider areas than the press. 
  The fact that the government is in the process of producing 
a 
draft bill on broadcasting lends support to the above statement. 
This means that the electronic media is regulated by an 
exclusive law and the print media is regulated by the press law. 
  When electronic media and print media are regulated by their 
respective laws, there is a tendency for journalists working for 
electronic media to be affiliated with journalists from the 
print media under the Indonesian Journalists Association (PWI). 
  We should take lessons from our past experience in 
connection 
with the issue of allowing foreign capital to enter the media 
industry. This is because in the 1960's, when the industry was 
widely opened to foreign capital, the foreign investors insisted 
on a revision of the Code of Laws on Trade pertaining to the 
right to votes for companies' shares. As we all know, Article 
54 of the Code of Laws on Limited Companies imposes a limit on 
the freedom of votes. Even if a person owns 100 percent of the 
shares in a company, his right to vote is limited to six shares 
only. 
  The foreign investors tried to make a breakthrough on this 
rule -- they wanted unlimited freedom of votes. The foreign 
investors' wish was achieved via Law No. 14/1971 that does not 
impose a limit on votes. In other words, the law fixes a 
one-share-one-vote system. With the issuance of Law No. 
14/1971, existing limited companies have the options either to 
observe the limited votes according to the Code of Laws on Trade 
or to opt for the one-share-one-vote system under Law No. 
14/1971. 
  The foreign investors have a strong influence and we are 
worried about the mass media industry opening up to them, even 
if they do not wholly-own the enterprises. If the foreign 
investors come from countries that adopt a liberal democracy, 
there is a strong possibility that they will want the media 
industry that they have invested in to adopt a liberal press. 
  As we all know, our national press does not adopt the 
antagonistic competition attitude the way a liberal press policy 
does. On the other hand, our national press adopts the 
symbolism of the mutually supportive and not the mutually 
terminative. In this connection, the openness implemented by 
some countries that adopt a liberal press is certainly not 
interpreted in the same manner by the Indonesian press. Our 
national press believes in expanding the positive interaction 
between the government and the people. 
  Based on this understanding, it has always been stressed 
that 
the atmosphere of openness that has been developed over the last 
several years should not be abused. Such abuse can be found in 
the form of trying to develop a style of news reporting that 
gives priority to freedom rather than responsibility. 
  One of the characteristics of a liberal press is to spread 
antagonism, which usually leads to conflicts and competition 
between one agency and another and sets one official against 
another. 
  Lately, several observers and some board members of the PWI 
have anticipated that there is a lack of understanding about the 
openness policy by some newspaper journalists. This can be seen 
from the way their news reports are written. Among other 
things, it has been stressed that the atmosphere of openness 
that has been developed should not be polluted by a reporting 
style that projects a negative thinking [preceding two words in 
English] and totally ignores the principles of positive thinking 
[preceding two words in English]. It is within this context that 
we would like to underline President Suharto's warning in 
Lampung on Thursday, 9 June that the mass media is facing 
competition. He said action should be taken against such a 
style of news reporting because it will become a threat to 
national stability and finally disrupt the development process 
if it is allowed to continue. 

