BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Environmental Protection Minister Janos </F>
Gyurko by Janos A. Szilagyi; place and date not given: "No 
Breakthrough on the Bos Issue"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
  Szilagyi: After the fall of the 
Meciar-government, which represented a rigid position also 
regarding the Bos river barrage issue, many people hoped for an 
improvement in relations and progress in settling the Bos issue. 
Did the meeting in Bratislava justify these positive 
expectations? 
  Gyurko: Regarding the inter-ministerial 
cooperation, the Slovak side showed a constructive attitude. 
They showed a positive approach toward solving the common 
environmental and nature protection problems, and gave up the 
planned construction of the dangerous waste incinerator plant in 
Parkany, which would strongly pollute the air in the 
Dorog-Esztergom area. We decided to create a joint cooperation 
committee within 30 days to tackle concrete issues, a committee 
led by the two public administration state secretaries. I 
cannot report, though, on serious progress in the Bos issue. 
However, it is a promising development that these talks were 
held in a better atmosphere than previous talks. 
  Szilagyi: Did the two positions get closer to each 
other? 
  Gyurko: Very few concrete things were said, 
because the presentation of each side's position took up most of 
the time. At first, the Slovaks opposed the idea of maintaining 
the mediatory role of the European Union; instead, they 
suggested bilateral talks. Later, however, they gave up this 
idea. I made it clear that, at the talks on the distribution of 
water, we seek a temporary solution valid until the decision of 
the Hague International Court, and not a final solution. I also 
made it absolutely clear that Hungary continues to expect a 
solution to the problem from The Hague. I presented the latest 
decision of the Hungarian Parliament on the supply of water to 
the Szigetkoz area. In connection with this, I asked them to 
take concrete measures to protect the Hungarian natural 
environment and let more water in the main Danube and into the 
Mosoni-Danube branch. Mr. Hrasko promised to support the flow 
of some 20 cubic meters of water per second into the Mosoni 
Danube. This would signify definite progress in saving the 
Szigetkoz area, because we could redirect this surplus water in 
the various side branches of the Szigetkoz area and, thus, the 
costs of pumping would drop. [passage omitted] 
  Szilagyi: Did you also talk about the serious 
technical fault involving the sluice chambers at Bos and the 
subsequent halt in the navigation of the Danube? 
  Gyurko: The Slovak delegation said that the 
sluice chambers problem was an unpleasant development that came 
at the wrong time. It seems that the reports on the upcoming 
opening of navigation on the Danube are unfounded and it is 
possible that the repair works will last for another month. The 
task of the Danube committee may be to settle the issue and 
discuss the possible compensation demands. [passage omitted] 

