BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: Compiled by </F>
Nikolay Zherebtsov and Andrey Petrovskiy; edited by Vladimir 
Shishlin] 
  [Text] Commenting on results of his recent official visit 
to Moscow in an interview with the Kazakh TV and Interfax 
President Nursultan Nazarbayev said that his idea of creating 
the Euroasian Union is in essence "just an idea, not an official 
proposal." He explained that his idea had not been discussed 
with anybody and is a subject for discussions with CIS leaders. 
"We will see how leaders of the Commonwealth countries will 
react to it," Nazarbayev said. IF's note: The Kazakh leader put 
forward the idea at a meeting with Moscow State University 
professors in Moscow on Tuesday and continued the subject on the 
next day during his conversation with Russian mass media 
officials. Nazarbayev proposed to replace the CIS by a new 
union of states with single bodies for coordination of economic 
and military policies and a single currency. He proposed in 
particular to set up a single parliament, a council of defense 
ministers, a single defense complex, an executive committee of 
the union which would be appointed by the heads of the states. 
Nazarbayev also spoke in favor of a single citizenship for the 
Euroasian union residents. He proposed that the Russian 
language be given the official status. The Kazakh president 
categorically opposed associate membership in the proposed 
union. [no begin or end parentheses for IF's note] 
  Observers note that on the eve of his departure from Moscow 
Nazarbayev claimed that he had discussed the union issue with 
Russian President Boris Yeltsin. INTERFAX failed to get 
confirmation of the fact from official sources. 
  A joint communique on results of the talks between 
Nazarbayev 
and Yeltsin says that the sides "expressed readiness to promote 
efficiency of the CIS, in particular, through speeding up the 
formation of the economic union." 
  A high-ranking diplomat in the Russian Foreign Ministry told 
INTERFAX that Nazarbayev's proposal to creat the Euroasian Union 
on the basis of the CIS generates more questions than answers. 
  According to the diplomat, Nazarbayev's idea is 
"interesting." "Not every idea needs to be elaborated. For 
example, it is not clear what would be the result of its 
implementation for the CIS which has just received the status of 
an observer in the U.N.," the diplomat said. "If closer 
relations between two or more states of the CIS frightens other 
countries of the Commonwealth and finally lead to its 
transformation into a purely formal union, perhaps it would not 
be the best option." 
  He said that Russia is interested in the strengthening of 
the 
Commonwealth. "It is necessary to find ways to implement the 
proposals made by the Kazakh president serving this goal," the 
Russian diplomat said. 
  In the opinion of Ukrainian Foreign Minister Anatoliy 
Zlenko, 
Nazarbayev's concept needs to be carefully examined. 
  In an interview with Interfax Zlenko noted that for him the 
idea "is not new. People in Ukraine have studied it before." 
"At this stage I think "perhaps, there is something in this 
idea," the minister said [quotation marks, as received]. 
  At the same time, he said that the formation of such a union 
on the territory of the former Soviet Union should not envisage 
the creation of structures which would perform "functions of a 
supernational body or let's say would have the rights of an 
international subject." Zlenko pointed out that "if this union 
is based on structures similar to former ministries and 
departments of the Soviet Union, that is not the best way." 
  Let us remind you that earlier the CIS Executive Secretary 
Ivan Korotchenya called the initiatives of the Kazakh president 
on the creation of the Euroasian Union in an interview with 
Interfax "rather well-thought and exclusively useful and 
correct." Korotchenya believes that Nazarbayev's initiave would 
be put on the agenda of the CIS summit in Moscow on 15 April. 

