Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Gorbachev under the rubric "Carte </F>
Blanche": "The NATO Summit in Brussels: Time of Missed 
Opportunities"] 
  [Text] As it became history, the old year, which had seen 
so much anxiety and so many emotional experiences, left its 
problems unsolved. No solutions were found to them in either 
Russia, or the United States, or West Europe, or East Europe, 
which have been drawn into processes of profound changes. Nobody 
accomplished either domestic or key foreign tasks. 
  Therefore, the new year holds in store for us events that 
will have serious consequences. What consequences these will be 
depends on those on whom the responsibilities of the state to 
both their nations and the world devolve. 
  The NATO summit in Brussels which has just ended is one such 
event. I am afraid that it will be remembered as a meeting of 
missed opportunities. They could have finally pondered at the 
summit what Europe should be after the discontinuation of the 
cold war, and set forth the foundation of its common security. 
However, far-fetched and superficial problems and emotions 
prevailed over the fundamental tasks that were on the agenda. 
  The countries of East and Central Europe and the three 
Baltic 
republics are asking to be admitted to NATO. Fear of a revival 
of imperial claims by Russia and even aggression by it is the 
main argument. At any rate, this is what was seen on the surface 
and what the discussion was about. 
  However, this amounted to evading the main point, which is 
to 
make a determination as to what U.S. interests in Europe are, 
what the new essence of Europe itself is, and what is meant by 
this--between the Atlantic Ocean and Smolensk, between the 
Atlantic Ocean and the Urals, or between Vancouver and 
Vladivostok, and, finally, what Russia's place in a new Europe 
is. It is precisely these three issues that should have been on 
the agenda. As long as these issues are not clarified, in other 
words, as long as no answer is found to the question of what the 
world should be like after the cold war, the development of a 
correct strategy for this world will be impossible. The European 
Union, the United States, NATO, the Western European Union, CIS 
countries, and the countries of Central and East Europe will be 
doomed to hesitation, improvisation, and mistakes which pose a 
threat to all. 
  It is not possible to solve narrow problems without a global 
approach, either. I see both the hasty aspiration to move NATO 
borders eastward and the Partnership for Peace course as major 
dangers. 
  Let us begin with the former. Transforming the countries of 
East and Central Europe into members of the present-day NATO is 
a direct path toward new splits in Europe, toward "curtains" and 
demarcation lines. Whether they want it or not, this will mean a 
return to confrontation and, therefore, a thwarting of the 
positive processes that have been initiated in recent years, 
with great difficulty. 
  However, Partnership for Peace is not acceptable, either. It 
has been thought up in order to buy time. The United States does 
not wish NATO to expand because, among other things, this may 
bring about a weakening of the role of NATO as an instrument of 
American policy. This plan is being passed off as a cautious 
move to accommodate the countries of Central and East Europe. It 
is believed that it should not put Russia on its guard. However, 
let us call things by their true names. Partnership for Peace 
means bringing the NATO infrastructure closer to the borders of 
Russia gradually (it cannot be done any other way), with all the 
attendant consequences: joint military maneuvers and movements 
of NATO armed forces in immediate proximity to the borders of 
Russia. 
  Is it not clear that the aspiration of America, which is not 
openly acknowledged, to not just retain and reinforce its 
influence in Western Europe but to also expand its authoritative 
presence in the eastern part of Europe, is the subtext to this 
idea? The United States has not decided yet what its role is 
going to be under the new European conditions, but for now it is 
laying its hands on everything that appears within reach. We 
must tell our American friends: Such behavior geared toward a 
unipolar world cannot but cause irritation in Russia, which they 
wish in this manner to remove from the superpower framework. 
Under the pretext of the allegedly possible turn by Russia to an 
imperial policy, the United States itself gives us reason to 
suspect it of imperial intentions. At any rate, the course 
toward expanding NATO will be perceived in Russia as an attempt 
to isolate it. However, it is impossible to isolate Russia. This 
would amount to ignoring both history and reality and, 
therefore, it is not a policy. 
  They might refer to certain pronouncements to the effect 
that 
Russia may also join NATO at some point. However, this makes no 
sense. If the discussion is indeed about a security system for a 
"Greater Europe," then let us create and perfect the relevant 
structures of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in 
Europe. Of course, there would be a place for a profoundly 
transformed NATO among them. However, why impose an instrument 
which served the cold war for accomplishing a completely 
different task? 
  I will repeat once again what I told George Bush in London 
before the G-7 meeting in 1991: You must decide what kind of 
Soviet Union you wish to see. At present, Clinton must decide 
what kind of Russia he wishes to see. If the United States 
indeed wants Russia to participate in building a new Europe and 
developing a new world policy, the United States must learn to 
do business with Russia on an equal footing, and proceed from 
long-term interests and realistic assessments instead of giving 
in to momentary temptations to take advantage of Russia's 
temporary weakness. 
  The response in Russia will be negative otherwise, 
regardless 
of the position its government takes. An affront to its prestige 
and interests will run into resistance and indignation from all 
kinds of both government and oppositional circles--patriotic and 
nationalistic, conservative and reformist. Disrespect for Russia 
and resuscitation of the NATO bugaboo at its borders plays 
primarily into the hands of antireformist and anti-Western 
countries [as published]. 
  The assumption that today's and tomorrow's Russia will once 
again impose its imperial will on other countries by force is 
absurd. It is a consequence of major mistakes in assessments of 
the political and psychological situation in my country. It 
concerns me that politicians who are inclined toward this line 
of reasoning exist. The results of the December elections are 
used to confirm such apprehensions. 
  Actually, these results are an inevitable consequence of the 
erroneous course of reforms. The elections became an expression 
of a mass protest by the people. At present not only the Russian 
leadership but also those who have been urging it along this 
path for two years now should think seriously and 
self-critically. There already are some signs of such thinking. 
Even Yeltsin acknowledged the existence of extensive popular 
discontent, albeit without particular enthusiasm. Mr. Strobe 
Talbott, one of the principal apologists of a radical course in 
Russia, is now calling on the Kremlin to use "more therapy and 
less shock." In turn, U.S. Vice President Al Gore proposes not 
following IMF recommendations literally. Well, better late then 
never. However, it appears that in America they have not yet 
fully appreciated what is happening, and are not prepared to 
draw due conclusions from their own mistakes. President Clinton 
has excessively personalized his unconditional support for 
reforms by the shock-therapy method. He will now have to take a 
more realistic look at the Russian political panorama. 
  I have repeatedly warned, both at home and in the West, that 
the course of Gaydar and the radical democrats cannot bring 
about positive results. As the outcome of the elections 
testifies, by now most Russians have grasped that, first, the 
course of the president and the government has failed and, 
second, the West also shares the responsibility for supporting 
this failed course so unreservedly. At present, it is important 
to avoid steps that would promote the growth of anti-Western 
sentiment on the part of many Russians. 
  Does the outcome of the elections mean that fascism is a 
real 
threat in Russia? Does it mean that Zhirinovskiy or someone 
similar will end up in power? I absolutely do not believe so. 
This turn of events would run counter to the mentality of 
Russians, their experience in steadfast struggle against fascist 
aggression and occupation, and their life under totalitarianism. 
  Or else, has the West already decided that, between 1985 and 
the present day, Russia has failed to see and acknowledge 
democratic values, and that the lesson of the failure of the 
August putsch has been forgotten? Of course, there is a frenzied 
reactionary wing, people who wave a red cloth before the noses 
of the electorate exhausted by adversity. Such people or similar 
people exist in all democratic states, and it would be 
surprising if we did not have them. They cannot be mistaken for 
those who express the opinion of the people. 
  Of course, forces that are hard to characterize at present 
may get the upper hand, among whom there will certainly be the 
military--if no policy changes follow, if the poorest people are 
not protected, and if there is no support for domestic 
producers. I hope that this can still be avoided. If it comes to 
something of this nature, a presidential election and new 
elections to the parliament should immediately be held, and a 
government of broad popular support should be created. However, 
in any event it is absurd to talk about the possibility of the 
rebirth of an empire and aggressiveness with regard to the 
entire world. Not everyone in Russia has lost their mind. 
  Returning to the communist past is impossible. Forces that 
would be in a position to lead to this do not exist. It makes no 
sense to be anxious about it. However, it is also necessary for 
the West to respect the results of the elections, which make it 
clear that the Russian people demand a change in the current 
policy. Political support for reforms from the people is 
natural, but enough of advice on how to conduct reforms by 
methods that are impossible in our country. Russia needs 
clear-cut "rules of the game" in economic relations in order to 
attract private investment; cooperation is needed in 
rejuvenating our powerful machine building which, incidentally, 
will generate many additional jobs for the West. It is necessary 
to remove economic barriers and open Western markets to more 
than just our raw materials. 
  It is necessary to finally acknowledge that Russia will have 
to find its own path for a transition from totalitarianism to 
democracy. There are no precedents or analogies for such a 
transition. Three generations have grown up in a certain 
environment, and for this reason classical IMF models are not 
applicable here. They are meant for market economies in need of 
recovery. In this instance, at issue is the creation of 
everything anew on absolutely specific, historically conditioned 
grounds, and, not least, a fundamental transformation of the 
public mentality. It will be good for all if President Clinton 
has grasped this reality of ours when he comes to Moscow. 
  The present article was written at the request of the 
Italian newspaper LA STAMPA and made available for publication 
in Russian to NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA. 

