BFN 

<F P=106> ["The Decision of the Standing Committee of the Jiangsu </F>
Provincial People's Congress on Amending the `Procedures for 
Implementing the "Land Management Law" of Jiangsu Province' 
Adopted at the Sixth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the 
Eighth Jiangsu Provincial People's Congress on 22 February 1994"] 
  [Text] After examining the provincial people's 
government's "Amendment (Draft) to the Procedures for 
Implementing the `Land Management Law' of Jiangsu Province," the 
sixth meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth Jiangsu 
Provincial People's Congress has decided on the following 
amendments to the "Procedures for Implementing the `Land 
Management Law' of Jiangsu Province": 
  1. The name of the statute "Procedures for Implementing the 
`Land Management Law' of Jiangsu Province" is amended to 
"Procedures of Jiangsu Province for Implementing the `Land 
Management Law.'" 
  2. The first paragraph of Article 21 is amended to: 
  "Authority to examine and approve the requisitioning of 
land: 
  "(1) Where more than 1,000 mu of cultivated land, or over 
2,000 mu of other types of land, is to be requisitioned, the 
provincial people's government shall report the matter to the 
State Council for approval; 
  "(2) Where over 30 mu of cultivated land, over 3 mu of 
vegetable land, or over 50 mu of other types of land is to be 
requisitioned, the approval shall be made by the provincial 
people's government' 
  "(3) Where cultivated land between 3 and 30 mu, vegetable 
land not exceeding three mu, or other types of land between 10 
and 50 mu is to be requisitioned, the approval shall be made by 
the people's government of a city with district divisions; 
  "(4) Where cultivated land not exceeding three mu, or other 
types of land not exceeding 10 mu, is to be requisitioned, the 
approval shall be made by a county-level people's government. 
  "When the requisition of land for a construction project 
involves cultivated, vegetable land, and other types of land, 
the provincial, city, and county people's governments must abide 
by the previous paragraphs governing their authority to examine 
and approve the requisitioning of the land involved. In 
addition, with regard to the total number of mu in one 
requisition approval, the respective governments must not exceed 
their authority to approve the requisitioning of `other types of 
land.' 
  "Efforts must be made to avoid capital farmland protection 
zones when infrastructural construction projects such as 
transportation, water conservation, energy, and communications 
are to be undertaken; when it is absolutely necessary to 
requisition capital farmland, approval must be obtained from the 
provincial people's government. Where approval has been obtained 
for a construction project, land requisition examination and 
approval must be conducted in accordance with the provisions of 
the `Procedures.'" 
  3. The second paragraph of Article 29 is amended to: 
  "Where nonagricultural construction projects are to be built 
on the land of enterprises and institutions--such as state-owned 
agricultural, forestry, animal husbandry, and fish farms (plots) 
and government organs, mass organizations, schools, mines, and 
factories--or where their land is to be used for other purposes, 
the opinion of the competent department should be sought, and 
permission must be obtained according to law from the people's 
government at and above the county level in the locality where 
the land is located." 
  4. The first paragraph of Article 31 is amended to: 
  "According to development plans of towns (townships) and 
villages, where cultivated land or state-owned land is to be 
used in the construction of housing for rural residents, an 
examination should first be conducted by the town (township) 
people's government, and the matter must be reported to the 
people's government of a country level for approval; where the 
original housing land or other nonarable land is to be used, the 
town (township) people's government may grant approval. 
  "Cultivated land within capital farmland protection zones is 
not allowed to be used for the construction of housing for rural 
residents." 
  5. The first paragraph of Article 46 is amended to: 
  "Administrative disciplinary action laid down in the 
`Procedures' shall be decided and executed by the unit to which 
the party involved belongs or by a higher-level organ. 
Administrative penalties, the dismantling within a prescribed 
period of time of structures and other facilities on land used 
illegally, or the confiscation of the structures and facilities 
stipulated by the 'Procedures,' shall be decided by the land 
administrative departments of the people's governments at and 
above the county level, but they may also be decided and 
executed by a town (township) people's government according to 
law. Where the party involved does not agree with the penalty 
decision, it may, within 15 days after receiving the decision, 
appeal for reconsideration to an organ one level higher than the 
organ which made the penalty decision. If the party involved 
does not agree with the reconsideration decision, it may, within 
15 days after receiving the decision, file an appeal with a 
people's court. The party involved may, within 15 days after 
receiving the penalty decision, directly file an appeal with a 
people's court. If the party involved neither applies for a 
reconsideration nor files an appeal at the end of 15 days after 
receiving the penalty decision, and also refuses to carry out 
the penalty decision, the organ which made the penalty decision 
shall file an application with a people's court to force the 
execution of the decision." 
  These procedures take effect on the day of promulgation. 

