Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant General A. Lebed, published </F>
originally in DNESTROVSKAYA PRAVDA on 22 December 1993: "On True 
and Fake Professionals"] 
  [Text] It looks as though events in the Dniester 
Republic are reaching their apogee. Unquestionably, General 
Lebed remains the central figure in the uproar, persistently 
"finishing off" top Tiraspol officials with disclosures about 
their past and present. 
  Let us not analyze the motivation for the actions of 
the Russian general, who is indeed an extraordinary man. In this 
case we are interested, as they say, in the "process for its own 
sake." Therefore, we offer to our readers another article by the 
commander of Russia's 14th Army--this time from DNESTROVSKAYA 
PRAVDA of 22 December. Here it is: 
  DNESTROVSKAYA PRAVDA (No. 286) published an article by 
republic procurator B. Luchik "The End of Agent `Berzin.'" In 
it, among other things, the procurator unequivocally poses this 
question: "Someone apparently will have to be held to answer--in 
keeping with Russia's laws--for blowing `Berzin's cover." An 
absolutely correct conclusion. It is a pity, though, that the 
procurator's rounded statement is not directed straight at those 
directly at fault in this scandalous story. 
  We can forget about Bolshakov-"Berzin." His star has faded 
forever on both the political and entrepreneurial horizons of 
the Dniester Region. Now those who are to be held to answer by 
Russian law enforcement organs for selling state secrets have 
pause to think. In short, they should start preparing to spend 
time in a less pleasant environment. Many people detected in the 
procurator's unambiguous hint a finger pointed at Colonel M. 
Bergman. He transferred agent files to B. Luchik. Is this really 
true? If a wolf carries off a sheep from the flock, the one who 
is held responsible first is the shepherd and only then--if he 
is ever caught--the wolf. The "shepherd" of the former KGB's 
archives was and is Minister V. Shevtsov. And he was the first 
one to start the ball rolling. 
  Let us recall. A year ago, after Bergman's notorious 
interview to the weekly DNESTROVSKIY MERIDIAN, in which the 
military commandant "uncloaked" a former member of Riga OMON 
[Special Designation Militia Detachments], Antyufeyev, Minister 
"Shevtsov" immediately rushed onto television to clear his name, 
and in the heat of fervor "unmasked" Bergman by calling him, 
without proof, an agent of foreign special services and a KGB 
informer. He named his alleged code name--"Furmanov." 
  The "cocks" threw dirt at each other. Shevtsov, however, did 
not stop there and continued to wind up the unmasking campaign, 
striving to smear the commandant as much as possible with 
accusations of questionable veracity regarding unscrupulous 
conduct. 
  For instance, TRUDOVOY TIRASPOL some time later published a 
rambling statement made two years ago by former Tiraspol 
resident (currently U.S. citizen) Gelfand. The statement was 
allegedly extracted from the same KGB archives. How did this 
"document" get into Kondratovich's hands? There is only one way: 
It was placed there by Shevtsov or his people. 
  Keeping in mind the contents of the procurator's article we 
are commenting on here, Kondratovich has one of two options: 
either admit that he knowingly published a forgery and thus bury 
both himself and his tabloid by indirectly removing in the eyes 
of the public all accusations against Bergman, or tell about the 
channels through which Gelfand's statement found its way to his 
editorial offices. He will have to answer this question for the 
investigators anyway. 
  The fact that the aforementioned cases surfaced as a tool of 
revenge in Bergman's hands convinces me once more of an 
important conclusion: Shevtsov's office and the minister himself 
have turned the archives they inherited into a tool of blackmail 
and political surveillance over the politically suspect, while 
the Ministry of Security itself has deteriorated into a 
money-changing shop where morals and conscience are freely 
convertible into dirty money and willingness to be obsequiously 
obedient. The usual methods of a police state, where authority 
is propped up by bayonets. 
  One more circumstance is quite alarming. How many agents 
still undercover will rush to cover their tracks in the wake of 
the Bolshakov scandal; how many will surreptitiously hide at the 
bottom? How many more "Antyufeyevs" will be forced to transform 
themselves into "Shevtsovs"? There are many such files sold and 
"walking around;" sooner or later they will burst open in a fit 
of enmity, when rivals start pushing each other away from the 
feeding trough... 
  In his article the procurator writes that "it is 
impermissible to blow an agent's cover... This is not done among 
professionals." Quite correct. But the professionalism of the 
Dniester Republic's minister of security is rather doubtful 
anyway. A year ago an OMON member with a tarnished reputation 
came to the Dniester Region bringing a letter of recommendation 
from Comrade Alksnis. It was impossible to refuse Alksnis: He 
said they were about to take power in Russia at any time and 
would recognize the Dniester Republic. Shevtsov hustled and 
became a minister literally within a year, distinguishing 
himself in the field of disinformation and intrigues; he donned 
a general's uniform that was no longer in use anywhere. It is a 
hopeless task to appeal to vain people's conscience. But I 
personally cannot imagine how I would dare to put on a marshal's 
outfit if tomorrow, for instance, Dondushans announced secession 
from Moldova and called me under their banners as minister of 
defense. 
  I will never shake General Shevtsov's hand. Simply because 
this Nezavertaylo-like general has no honor or human decency. 
  The monopoly of the KGB archives allows him to actively 
influence the staffing of the republic state apparatus with 
persons of shady pasts, who, remembering their sins, will serve 
the powers that be faithfully and loyally and carry out their 
whims subserviently and without question. Fear of being unmasked 
suppresses everything human in them. As soon as one of them 
dares to mention his opinion, he will be immediately reminded of 
certain points in his biography, and if such free-thinking is 
repeated--they will let him have it. 
  Among those with a criminal past in our republic is a 
minister and a chief of a public organization; they address us 
from Dniester Republic television, prepare materials for 
Dniester Region radio. Watching the actions of this clique, I 
sometimes ask myself: Has the entire Kolyma moved out here? 

