Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Moscow Mayak Radio Network in Russian at 
1439 GMT on 17 March broadcasts a report by Kiev correspondent 
Vladimir Sokolov who reports on the official visit of Estonian 
President Lennart Meri to Ukraine. 
  Vladimir Sokolov begins his report by saying: "Concluding 
the 
visit, Presidents Lennart Meri and Leonid Kravchuk held a news 
conference for national and foreign journalists. They both 
pointed out that their talks were very friendly and that their 
was a coincidence of views on all issues. Lennart Meri stressed 
that Estonia and Ukraine had very similar problems of building 
statehood and of economic and social development following the 
acquisition of sovereignty and independence. However, Estonia 
has already overcome the most difficult period of the 
establishment of its economic and political independence, and 
has now entered a stage of all-round stabilization. 
  "Although the relevant agreements have been signed, economic 
ties with Ukraine are not yet sufficient. As for economic ties, 
Ukraine occupies only sixth or seventh place among Estonia's 
partner states which, of course, is far from meeting the 
potential for mutually beneficial exchange and new measures have 
been outlined for expanding and intensifying cooperation." 
  Sokolov continues: "Replying to a question from journalists, 
Leonid Kravchuk stressed that the talks touched on both the 
national security of the two countries and also their 
participation in strengthening international security. There 
was also a question about Leonid Kravchuk's attitude to the 
decree by Crimean President Yuriy Meshkov on holding a poll of 
the population on three issues. Leonid Kravchuk noted that he 
had suspended this decree only with regard to the holding of a 
referendum in the guise of a poll, and to the question on dual 
citizenship contained in it, since only the Supreme Council of 
Ukraine could decide such an issue. As for Meshkov's decree 
itself, he described it as a step toward unwanted confrontation 
and voiced the hope that common sense will prevail. Today, 
President Lennart Meri and officials accompanying him left Kiev 
for home." 

