Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ignacio Gutierrez A.] </F>
  [Text] Slightly over 16 kg of heroin base worth nearly 5 
million new pesos were seized yesterday by personnel from the 
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic [PGR] at the post 
office in the Mexico City International Airport [AICM]. No 
arrests have been made as yet. 
  The drugs were discovered in containers for hairspray and 
chocolate syrup, inserted in a shipment of packaged soap 
arriving from Bangkok, Thailand. The Federal Judicial Police 
director, Adrian Carrera, remarked that this was one of the most 
significant drug confiscations made in the nation's capital. 
  The amount of Thai heroin seized in Mexico City, combined 
with the shipments confiscated during January of this year in 
the towns of Tijuana and Ensenada, brings the present total to 
136 kg. 
  Investigations conducted previously resulted in the 
discovery 
that a large shipment arriving from Asia was to be stored in 
Mexico City for subsequent transfer to the United States. 
  The Interception Directorate of the PGR's National Institute 
To Combat Drugs ordered an operation with members of the 
counternarcotics police detailed to the AICM. The latter, in 
fact, detected the drug shipment at the Mexican Postal Service 
offices in that airport terminal. 
  At 1100, the MPF [Federal Public Prosecutor's Office] 
ordered 
the inspection procedure to be applied, including the shipment 
that arrived from Thailand. What was presumed to be hairspray 
and syrup came in a cardboard box with packages of toilet soap, 
and those hairspray and chocolate syrup containers were found to 
be filled with heroin. 
  The heroin base, with the technical name monoacetylmorphine, 
is an opium gum derivative used as a basic ingredient in 
processing heroin. To produce the narcotic, the 
monoacetylmorphine must be mixed with a liquid chemical reagent, 
known as acetic anhydride. 
  The Federal Judicial Police are continuing the 
investigation, 
and already have clues leading to the arrest of those who were 
to receive the drugs in Ensenada, Baja California. A probe is 
also under way to determine possible links between this shipment 
and others seized recently, because similar methods were used to 
move it from the Asian Continent. 

