BFN 

  [Text] The municipality sponsored a briefing according to 
the provisions set in the "PRC Environment Protection Law" on 3 
June, to release a municipal environmental bulletin, where Liu 
Jinsheng, director of the municipal environment protection 
bureau, announced: Along with rapid economic growth, the 
municipality realized stability in the overall quality of urban 
environment in 1993 and still maintained the high level scored 
in this regard over the past few years. The rate of urban 
sewage disposal, of industrial waste water disposal, and of 
popularizing urban heating supply, were obviously upgraded. The 
norms of building urban environmental infrastructures as well as 
the rate of popularizing urban gas supply, of increasing urban 
vegetation, and of improving garbage disposal, were upgraded in 
varying degrees. 
  The 1993 municipal environmental bulletin reveals that the 
density of urban air pollution, the daily average density of 
nitraoxide in the year, was 0.07 mg/cubic meter and that of 
carbon monoxide was 2.57 mg/cubic meter, which was the same for 
1992. The daily average density of sulfur dioxide in the year 
was 0.14 mg/cubic meter, showing a 2.2 percent decrease over 
1992. The monthly urban fallout was 13.2 tonnes/square km, a 
one tonne/square km decrease over 1992, and the best norm scored 
in this regard over the past few years. The total volume of 
waste gas and steam was 132.2 billion standard cubic meters, 
showing a 0.45 percent decrease over 1992. In 1993, the 
municipality continued to maintain the fine quality of water 
diverted from the Luan river. Of the 20 norms of keeping the 
diverted water clean, the rate of achieving the norms was 98.8 
percent. The diverted water has been one of the best sources of 
water enjoyed by large cities throughout the country. The rate 
of urban sewage disposal reached 26.43 percent to show a 6 
percent increase over 1992. The rate of industrial waste water 
disposal reached 81 percent, showing a 5 percent increase over 
1992. The two norms mentioned above have been at the advanced 
level scored by the large cities throughout the country. The 
average urban noise pollution in 1993 was 59.7 decibels, showing 
a 1.3 decibel decrease over 1992. The 17.7 square km of new 
municipal, small, residential districts free from noise 
pollution were built ahead of the target set in the 1994 plan in 
this regard. The 1993 volume of solid waste discharged by units 
throughout the municipality was 4.2 million tonnes. The rate of 
making use of solid waste in a comprehensive way reached 70.1 
percent, basically the same as in 1992, and the rate of 
conducting comprehensive management over this waste reached 96 
percent, showing an increase of 6 percentage points over 1992. 
The municipal's garbage volume was 1.89 million tonnes and the 
rate of harm-free garbage disposal reached 50.2 percent, showing 
a 5.2 percent increase over 1992. The municipal rate of 
achieving the standards in the auto gas control reached 73.9 
percent, showing a slight increase over 1992. 
  Of the fixed-quota targets in the 21 projects set by the 
state with regard to the comprehensive management of urban 
environment, the municipality fully fulfilled the seven targets 
including the smoke and dust control and industrial waste water 
disposal. It also made progress in the 12 targets, including 
the improvement of sources of potable water and the 
comprehensive management of industrial solid waste. All of 
these have laid a fine foundation for the municipality to become 
one of the 10 outstanding cities throughout the country in 
comprehensive environmental management. 
  During the briefing, Vice Mayor Wang Dehui delivered a 
speech 
in which he put forward the following three demands related to 
successfully carrying out the current work of environmental 
protection: It is hoped that the comprehensive management of 
urban environment will make the obvious upgrade or improvement 
of the quality of the municipal environment and the function of 
municipal carriers possible and provide a fine investment 
environment for the municipal programs of reform, opening up, 
and economic construction and a fine environment for 12th Asian 
Table Tennis Event and the 43d World Table Tennis Championships. 
  Liu Wenfan, vice chairman of the municipal people's congress 
standing committee, attended the briefing for the release of the 
municipal environmental bulletin. 

