BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 12 Apr (TANJUG) -- Radovan Karadzic, 
president of the Srpska republic, today visited positions of the 
Srpska republic's army on the Gorazde front. 
  At the Serb forces command post, General Ratko Mladic, 
commander in chief of the Srpska republic's army, briefed him on 
the situation on this part of the front. They then toured the 
front line together. 
  Karadzic did not hide his satisfaction with the army's state 
of preparedness and morale. During the tour, he answered 
numerous questions from soldiers. They focused on the current 
aggression by NATO forces. The United Nations has made a 
catastrophic mistake, Karadzic said. He added that Michael 
Rose, commander of the UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] will be 
remembered for his ignominious order to NATO -- that is to the 
United Nations -- to interfere in the conflict, thus siding with 
one of the parties in the civil war. 
  "They have aided the Muslims before, but this is the most 
direct form of support," Karadzic stressed. 
  In his address to the soldiers Karadzic said: "We have won 
and this is why there is so much anger against us. We won by 
protecting our people and our territory. They are now attacking 
us because they cannot stop us, and they have promised it to 
Muslim countries because their domestic interests are involved 
here. This is the twilight of the United Nations which is now 
under the dictate of one power." 
  The president of the Srpska republic added that some circles 
in the United States are behind this UN abuse and who have 
carried out their threats, thus "playing their last cards." 
"Now, they will have to send in ground troops to fight us," 
Radovan Karadzic said. 
  The Serb soldiers have said that they are prepared to fight 
to the last man. Radovan Karadzic told them: "You are not 
bare-footed Somalians. You are one of the most capable armies 
in Europe and they will consider their next step carefully." 
  Ratko Mladic, commander of the Serb army, described the 
current situation on the Gorazde battlefield as very positive 
and stressed the readiness of the Serb army to face every 
eventuality. The Serb army's morale is fantastic, Mladic 
stressed. He added he knows there will be further air strikes 
and that as far as he is concerned this is not news. 
  "Up to now, NATO has been waging a war against our people 
and 
the Srpska republic. They have been helping the Muslims and 
Croats in their fight against us with logistics, communications, 
equipment, advice. They have been stopping us where we were at 
our most powerful. Only now has NATO shed its mask," Mladic 
said. 
  "President Radovan Karadzic and I have issued an order that 
anything that flies over us and opens fire will be downed," 
Mladic said. 

