BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Washington correspondent 'Aqiva Eldar: "Photo </F>
Opportunism"] 
  [Excerpts] The Americans would have it coming to them if 
Yitzhaq Rabin and Yasir 'Arafat called off the signing ceremony 
at the last minute and sent Warren Christopher home without 
awarding him a free photo-op posing with success (see the 
handshake at the White House lawn after the Oslo agreement). He 
never lifted even the tip of his finger to merit a photograph of 
the agreement between Israel and the Palestinians, as would 
befit a statesman representing the last world superpower. From 
the moment it entered the White House, the Clinton 
administration kept on the sidelines of the political picture it 
inherited. Secretaries of state have been embarking on shuttle 
trips to the Middle East to consolidate political compromise 
(see Christopher's previous tours). 
  If Christopher returns from the Middle East without any 
achievement on the Syrian-Israeli track this time as well, the 
Clinton Administration will go down in the history of 
international relations as the administration which coined the 
term photo opportunism. On 13 September it earned a photo 
opportunity thanks to its hosting services. Seven months later 
it should be pointed out that the signing ceremony on the 
implementation of the September agreement had also been 
scheduled to be held in Washington. The day after the Hebron 
massacre Clinton invited all the sides to engage in a political 
drive under his auspices. Israel and the PLO chose Cairo and 
Paris instead and formulated yet another agreement without any 
U.S. assistance. 
  In his new book, "Diplomacy," Henry Kissinger offers an 
interesting explanation of this phenomenon. "The United States 
is the only world superpower that can intervene anywhere in the 
world," the former secretary of state writes. "On the other 
hand, its power has become more diffuse and there are fewer 
cases in which military power is relevant. The absence of 
substantive ideological or strategic threats has enabled nations 
to focus their foreign policies on issues affecting their 
national interests." Kissinger predicts that the world order 
will increasingly be based on reconciliation and a balance 
between conflicting national interests. 
  On the face of it, this explanation would seem to perfectly 
fit the new order emerging between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, which was amply more affected by the lessons of 
the intifadah and the Gulf war than by both the Bush and Clinton 
administrations. [passage omitted] 
  Clinton spends 15 minutes a day on an intelligence briefing, 
another 30 minutes on a morning session with his national 
security advisers, and the rest of the day he devotes to the 
question of health reform, welfare, and fighting crime. He 
answers nagging questions about Bosnia, Haiti, North Korea, and 
the massacre in Rwanda with firm pronouncements which become 
obsolete overnight. A State Department official told me that 
ethnic interest groups -- such as the Irish, the Turks, and 
Blacks (see Haiti) -- have become more prominent because of the 
administration's feebleness. 
  Last month the President was photographed with the Muslim 
and 
Croatian leaders who came to Washington to sign an agreement 
which the Serbians in Gorazde immediately turned into a mockery. 
Last week the administration tried to hitch a ride on the 
democracy celebrations in South Africa. It announced a special 
gift to the new government in Pretoria: the annual aid would be 
increased from $100 to $150 million -- less that the aid Israel 
gets in five days. 
  The peace process in the Middle East has so far provided 
Clinton with a podium free of charge, owing to the fact that it 
does not entail sending military troops there to enforce peace. 
The economic aid to the region has long become a matter of 
routine with the U.S. Congress and public opinion. As far as he 
is concerned, the most important point is that Israel did not 
need U.S. pressure to reach a compromise with the Palestinians. 
Consequently, the Jewish lobby and donors had nothing to carp 
about. 
  The transparent photo opportunism will reach its climax 
tomorrow with Christopher's presence on the podium in Cairo. 
From now on, the Americans will have to work for this honor. 
As Kissinger writes, the Syrians consider the Americans a key 
element to balance their and Israel's interests. Clinton will 
have to soften Congress' attitude toward the Syrian regime and 
attain its approval for sending U.S. troops to the Golan, and 
perhaps even to muster international consent to make Israel a 
member of the atomic club. 
  Clinton has presumably learned from the Geneva summit that 
smiling to the camera is not enough when al-Asad and Rabin are 
in the picture. He may very well be forced to take the plunge 
into the icy waters of a Palestinian state and the future of 
Jerusalem during his first (and last?) term in office . 

