CSO 

<F P=106> [Article signed "S.G.": "Security Forces: Redeployment in </F>
the Algiers Region"] 
  [Text] In the space of five days, security forces have put 
about 60 terrorists out of commission, two-thirds being in the 
Algiers area, the "zone" currently considered to be the most 
active and most dangerous when it comes to the resurgence of 
crime and economic sabotage. Indeed, throughout the entire 
period of the month of Ramadan, terrorists redoubled their 
ferocity by stepping up the number of murders of citizens and 
police officers and destroying numerous schools and industrial 
plants. 
  Among the criminals killed, several wanted "heads" have been 
identified. Here is proof that the "mouse traps" set up by the 
combined security forces have been very efficient and that even 
more spectacular results may be expected in the antiterrorist 
fight. 
  Furthermore, the killing of 57 dangerous criminals (all 
well-known fundamentalists) in a relatively short space of time 
is evidence of a general redeployment in recent days by the 
security forces, which seem to be going resolutely on the 
offensive. 
  So, for example, numerous roadblocks have again been set up 
at strategic crossroads, while certain areas such as Blida, for 
example, are under more sustained military surveillance. 
Round-up operations have also picked up, following the example 
of those carried out on the outskirts of the capital. In this 
same vein, it has been pointed out that yesterday the entire 
area stretching over the heights of the neighborhood called "The 
Orchards" was entirely surrounded by security forces. The reason 
for this was that a very active terrorist group was operating in 
that region and was even the cause of several altercations with 
security forces. So the residential "Orchards" neighborhood was 
serving as a refuge for this fearsome group that was terrorizing 
nearby areas such as Birkhadem and Kouba. So this entire zone 
was put under heightened, though discreet, surveillance. 
  It is the same for the Casbah, where terrorist groups, 
aided, 
it needs to be said, by several accomplices among its citizens, 
were growing with considerable ease. The old city was tending 
towards becoming a veritable ghetto in which residents found 
themselves completely terrorized. This area seems to have been 
retaken by the authorities, who have attempted to carry on the 
fight until the end to clean the Casbah of its dangerous 
criminals and allow citizens to resume their normal lives. 

