Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On 2 January, the government and the ruling 
coalition parties decided to start reviewing the land price tax, 
induced in 1992 to curb the rise in land prices, promote 
effective utilization of land, and to partially lower the land 
price tax. They will introduce a new rule to cut the tax 
one-third to one-fourth its current level. The areas covered by 
the tax reduction will include open space and green belts opened 
to the public and land used for public parking lots. Details of 
the new rule will be ironed out in the process of reforming the 
tax system for fiscal 1994 and will be retroactive to January 
1994. Although the fundamental tax rate (0.3 percent) will be 
maintained, some businesses that own wooded land helpful for 
enhancing the environment in the center of major urban areas, 
where land prices are high, will be eligible for a land tax cut 
of over 30 percent. Since the recession continues to drag on, 
real estate firms and distribution businesses are calling more 
than before for the tax cut. However, it seems that a 
relaxation of the tax will have actual and psychological impacts 
on the economy's stimulation as well. 
  Areas covered by the tax reduction include: 1) land used for 
public parking lots; 2) land open to the public and therefore 
having high public interest; 3) green belts inside factory lots 
and other areas helpful for enhancing the environment; and 4) 
land covered by regional comprehensive city planning. The 
government plans to reduce land price tax on public parking lots 
and land open to the public from one-third to one-fourth its 
current level depending on the degree of how much they are used 
by the public or needed for public interests. 
  The revision is aimed at mitigating the burden of the land 
price tax to help promote the quality of life-oriented policies 
launched by the Hosokawa administration, while maintaining the 
tax's main purpose of achieving effective use of land and 
curbing land price increases. It is mainly designed to 
substantially reduce the tax on land in metropolitan areas, 
where many public parking lots and open spaces exist. 
  Distribution businesses, which operate in metropolitan areas 
on the basis of city planning, will benefit most from the lower 
tax rates. It is expected that some companies will be able to 
make more than a 30 percent cut. The government and the 
coalition parties are making final coordinations to incorporate 
land mobilization measures [tochi ryudoka taisaku], including 
partial easing of the tax on profits made from land sales, into 
the business stimulation package to be worked out in 
mid-January. Land is taxed at 0.3 percent of its value 
(estimated value of inheritance tax) as of 1 January each year. 
The government expects the revenue from the land price tax for 
fiscal 1993 to reach 623 billion yen. However, the government 
charges no tax on the land, which costs less than 30,000 yen per 
one square meter or below one billion in total (1.5 billion yen 
when they are owned by individuals or minor business 
enterprises). Because of this, there was severe criticism that 
the tax was a major burden for business enterprises -- 
particularly real estate firms, distribution businesses and 
financial institutions, which own large lots of land or stores 
in the center of major urban areas where land prices are high. 
  Moreover, some companies pointed out that the purpose of the 
land tax was achieved to some extent when the bubble economy 
collapsed. In addition, these companies were dissatisfied with 
the possibility that 1994 revaluation of fixed assets is 
expected to increase their tax burdens. Therefore, they were 
strongly urging the government to review the land price tax from 
a viewpoint of mapping out economic measures as well. 

