BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sao Paulo "special correspondent" Luis Ocampo </F>
Alonso] 
  [Text] The seizure of the largest shipment of cocaine ever 
confiscated in Latin America (7.5 metric tons) at Alborada 
ranch, located in Tocantins, western Brazil, at the beginning of 
June and the arrest of 14 drug traffickers linked to the Cali 
cartel enabled the U.S. DEA and Brazilian Federal Police to 
discover one of the leading money laundering networks operating 
in the Western Hemisphere. 
  Address books and computer diskettes the aforementioned drug 
traffickers had in their possession were instrumental in 
establishing that the drug money route started in the United 
States (New York) and Colombia and joined up in Ciudad del Este 
in bank accounts at a branch of The Bank of the Netherlands. 
The holder of these accounts is Nasrat Mohamad Jamil Rassoul, a 
well-known "border manager" of Lebanese extraction who owns real 
estate and businesses in Ciudad del Este--the capital of Alto 
Parana Department--and Foz do Iguacu. From Ciudad del Este, 
the dollars were transferred through several operations to 
another account that Rassoul himself had at the Bamerindus Bank 
in Foz do Iguacu. From there the money was once again 
transferred to the Bank of Brazil agencies located in different 
Brazilian cities to several account holders, many of whom were 
fictitious. 
  Brazilian and U.S. investigators asserted that all the 
financial resources used by the gang busted in Tocantins to 
purchase the aforementioned ranch, several aircraft, motor 
boats, cars, and even to set up at least three companies that 
would act as a front for their activities came to Brazil via 
Ciudad del Este. This means that movements in Rassoul's 
accounts amounted to more than $1 million in approximately 10 
months. Rassoul was seconded in his dealings by fellow 
countryman David Haddad (both are currently held in custody in 
Brasilia). The amount of money in those movements has led the 
DEA to suspect that some Paraguayan regional or national 
"high-ranking authority" might have facilitated the 
establishment and operations of the Cali cartel in Ciudad del 
Este. 
  Another detail that has caught the attention of DEA and 
Brazilian drug enforcement agents is the involvement of Samia 
Haddock Lobo, a Brazilian businesswoman (at present a fugitive 
from justice) in the dismantled drug gang. Haddock Lobo is a 
member of a very respectable Rio de Janeiro family that 
allegedly has properties and investments in Paraguay. Antonio 
Mota Graca, the entrepreneur's husband, escaped from a Sao Paulo 
prison approximately two years ago. He was in prison on drug 
trafficking charges. Brazilian Federal Police sources think Mota 
Graca is hiding somewhere in Paraguay. 
  If all this was not enough, Brazilian journalists following 
the Tocantins case told NOTICIAS that one of the passports used 
by arrested Colombian citizen Vicente Rivera Ramos, son of one 
of the Medellin cartel's big shots, was stamped several times by 
our country's immigration authorities, indicating that his trips 
between Colombia, Brazil, and Paraguay were frequent. It is not 
too credible to maintain that the international drug trafficking 
"big shot" visited our country frequently simply because he was 
attracted by the beauty of our women or the sweetness of our 
polkas and guaranias [national folk music]. 
  Central Bank, Federal Revenue Office (the central tax 
collection organization), and Federal Police authorities in the 
neighboring country are concerned with the volume of drug 
trafficking operations in Brazil, and in the next few days will 
start a large joint operation to exchange information, trying to 
detect any money laundering scheme used in the country. No one 
doubts that the U.S. DEA will follow the Brazilian 
anti-narcotics operation very closely and that one of the 
study's main targets will be precisely the Ciudad del Este-Foz 
do Iguacu axis. 

