Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jean Luckenson; passages within quotes in Creole </F>
-- live] 
  [Text] Several rightist political groups have called for a 
demonstration on 4 February against the embargo ordered by the 
international community to promote a return to constitutional 
order. Alarmed by the harmful and criminal consequences of the 
illegal embargo imposed by the international community and 
Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide that is destroying the Haitian 
nation, those parties and socioprofessional organizations say 
they are staging this demonstration on 4 February to show that 
all social components in the Haitian nation require the 
immediate lifting of the embargo and the establishment of a new 
order in Haiti for a Haitian solution to the crisis. This 
solution should be worked out by the authentic representatives 
of the true country. In this spirit, the parties and 
organizations calling for this demonstration confirm their 
interest in and consent to the principle of holding a true 
national conference through which all political sectors and 
social strata -- bar none -- will be able to express themselves 
freely on the future of their country as soon as the embargo is 
lifted. 
  The political parties and professional groups have invited 
all adherents, all members, all employees in both public and 
private sectors, peasants, representatives of the nine 
departments, and all patriots in general, without distinction as 
to political sensitivity, to participate massively in the 
demonstration to begin this morning at 1000 at the Colomb Quay 
and proceed to the Haitian parliament and the General 
Headquarters of the Haitian Armed Forces in Place du Marron 
Inconnu. 
  Among the parties listed as adhering to the movement are: 
Democratic Movement of the Haitian Youth, of Gerard 
Mecklembourg; Liaison of Democratic Forces Federative Party, of 
Daniel Narcisse; Mobilization for National Development [of 
Hubert De Ronceray]; Revolutionary Front for Haitian Advancement 
and Progress, of Louis Jodel Chamblain and Emmanuel Constant; 
and PNR [expansion unknown], of Claudette Gourdet. Other parties 
such as the Haitian Party of God, the Haitian Christian 
Democratic Party, the Alliance for the Rebirth of Haiti, and 
unions such as the Union of Independent Drivers have joined with 
this demonstration movement which has already begun. Let us 
listen to Jean Luckenson from the streets of Port-au-Prince: 
  [Luckenson] "On 4 February at about 1100, hundreds of young 
men and women occupied the streets, demonstrating against the 
embargo. At the head of the demonstration is a big red-and-black 
flag and one guinea-fowl emblem. On the flag is written: Up with 
Duvalier for life. The demonstration began at the Red Cross, 
then went down La Saline Boulevard. The demonstrators were 
bearing placards on which were written such slogans as: Down 
with Aristide; Up with Article 149, the sole solution; and We 
need a revolutionary government. The demonstrators were 
chanting." 
  [Demonstrators chanting] "Down with necklacing; we must end 
this matter; down with necklacing; down with embargo; [words 
indistinct]" 
  [Luckenson] "We must tell you that several trucks coming 
from 
the Artibonite area, from L'Estere, Gonaives, and Saint-Marc 
brought people to [participate in] the demonstration. We are on 
the spot, we are there, we will inform you at the appropriate 
moment. This was Jean Luckenson from downtown Port-au-Prince for 
Signal FM Radio." 

