CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Avdeyev, KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA </F>
correspondent: "Japanese Operating Illegally in Russian Waters. 
Lieutenant Colonel Oleg Petrov: The Kuril String Has Been 
Stretched to Breaking Point"] 
  [Text] South Kuril Islands--On the evening of 15 April two 
Japanese fishing schooners burst at terrific speeds into our 
territorial waters and, taking into account the power of 
additional mounted motors, rushed to the southern shore of the 
island of Kunashir. They penetrated five and seven miles deep 
into our territory. It was little more than a mile to the shore. 
The radar stations at border observation posts fixed the place 
of entry and information about the violators was sent to a 
patrol helicopter. 
  The commander of the helicopter crew turned his vehicle 
around and began to pursue the targets. On the radar monitoring 
lines there was a large amount of interference suddenly out of 
nowhere and a couple of minutes after entering the zone of the 
violation the helicopter crew saw only the rapidly moving 
targets headed back to the shores of Hokkaido and they were 
forced to report that, as always, the violators got off free. 
  Along the border in the Japanese territorial waters 15 more 
boats like these stood waiting under the protection of a ship of 
the UBM--Japan's administration of security in the sea. 
  On that same morning there had been another such entry of 
Japanese ships into our territorial waters. Again two 
helicopters from the South Kuril Border Detachment base flew out 
in response to the alarm. But they did not manage to apprehend 
the violators either. And through channels of Japan's diplomatic 
department came information about Russian helicopters firing on 
Japanese schooners. During the night the helicopters again flew 
out to make an arrest and again returned empty-handed. 
  During a meeting the detachment chief, Lieutenant Colonel 
Oleg Petrov noted in passing that the Japanese had made four 
such trips during the 24-hour period. "They wait us out until we 
are tired." He had almost no doubt that yesterday's violation 
was purely to provoke us. The radar interference, in Petrov's 
opinion, was most likely created by the ship's guard. "The Kuril 
string has been stretched to breaking point," he said. "And the 
problem will not go away of its own accord...." 
  The end of April marked the beginning of the fishing season 
in the South Kurils. The border guards scheduled their operation 
"Fishing Season-94" to coincide with that. And although 
protection of the fish stocks in Russia's economic zone is a 
part of the daily duty of our border guards, during this period 
they increase the number of ships and flight-hours in the 
"crime" zone and work practically without resting. 
  During the past year alone in the zone covered by the South 
Kuril Border Detachment 9,000 illegal crossings of the state 
border of Russia were registered. The damage from the "industry" 
of Japanese poachers amounted to $160 million. 
  It usually goes like this: The schooner goes two or three 
miles into our waters, drops nets during the night, and returns 
to get them at dawn. The fish inspectors take something out of 
the rigging, the border guards take something, but most 
frequently the poachers leave with their catch. And they fish in 
the preserves and spawning regions. After this the crab and red 
fish will not reproduce here for a couple of years. 
  In Krabovaya Bay on Shikotan I met the captain of the 
Japanese schooner Yukimaru-68, Mr. Keiichi Noto. Rather, he 
should be called citizen, since he was under investigation by 
the local procuracy, was wounded in the leg by a Kalashnikov 
during his arrest, and his ship is among 20 others of the same 
kind that were being held at the facility of the outpost. For 
the first time in the entire history of our relations, at the 
request of the city of Nemuro the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Russia permitted him to meet with his relatives and a doctor 
from Japan. 
  The snow white ship of the "neighbors'" border guard dropped 
anchor in an out-of-the-way place in the bay and Noto's father, 
his wife, and his wife's brother boarded the border cutter to 
see citizen Noto. Our border guards transferred about a dozen 
and a half boxes of groceries from one vessel to the other. Noto 
was calm and self-confident. Even if our court were to sentence 
him for poaching and violating the State Border (which, for some 
reason, happens extremely rarely), Japan's legislation does not 
envision any punishment for such acts; they consider Russia's 
territorial waters to be alien territory. It is worse if they do 
their poaching at home--then they take away not only the fishing 
license but also the schooner and the fishing equipment. 
  In the district of Nemuro, which borders on Yuzhno-Kurilskiy 
Rayon, there are more than 5,000 small fishing vessels. And only 
39 of them have licenses to fish in our waters. They have 
exhausted their own fish stocks and prices have increased 
severalfold. And here the richest stocks have not been touched: 
The Russians are either dividing up quotas or looking for diesel 
fuel--but they do not fish at all. The free goods beg to be 
taken. The more so since one trip is quite enough to pay for the 
rental of a schooner and you can live for a whole year on the 
money you earn. A significant proportion of Nemuro's economy, 
according to our specialists, is made up of income from poaching 
in Russian waters. Practically all of this industry is 
controlled by the Japanese mafia--Yakuza. 
  Recently the border guards have been dealing with the 
overdue 
problem as never before. The government has issued them a little 
fuel, the law has more or less untied their hands and allows 
them to use force where needed. But what does force mean in this 
complex, not so much economic as political situation? We flew 
around the regions of the Minor Kuril Range in an airplane and 
helicopter and we saw one completely covered schooner--all the 
numbers and the name were covered up, and even the outline of 
the ship was concealed by a tent. It was clearly a poacher. He 
would defend himself to the death from the inspection group. If 
boarded, they would fight. 
  And in order to photograph it we barraged the sea for a half 
hour in hedge-hopping flight. Each hour of flying time, 
incidentally, costs almost 2 million rubles. Naturally, there 
are weapons on board. And every time as soon as our craft flew 
up to the border a pair of Phantom fighters would take off from 
the Japanese base and fly parallel to us. 
  Is it a long way from political standoff to 
military-political conflict... 
  "It is unreasonable to keep such large forces here just to 
fight against poachers," many sober-minded border guards said. 
"We could protect the border at a smaller price. We just have to 
reach an agreement with our neighbors. If they have no fish--let 
them fish here for now, but for money. Our fleet is standing 
idle anyway. So sell them licenses, assign them quotas, and 
designate the regions for temporary fishing. They will agree to 
this, believe me. And somewhere here we can look for a solution 
to the problem of the 'northern territories' as well." 
  As distinct from politicians, border guards also do work. 
They do not want to feed the Japanese mafia. Just because of 
their barrier the Japanese for the first time this year appealed 
to the Sakhalin administration to sell them fish. 
  Incidentally, when Japanese Foreign Affairs Minister Butomu 
Hata was in Moscow, poachers' schooners made no trips into our 
waters at all. And now they say that Mr. Hata is aspiring to be 
prime minister. Can we really not work something out?... 
  ...The day on which the ship carrying Captain Noto's 
relatives arrived in our waters in the Kurils was quite calm. 
But as soon as the ship departed during the night two 
helicopters again had to respond to the alarm: another raid in a 
manner traditional for poachers. We flew into the region where 
the violation was committed and after a couple of minutes of 
observation saw how two high-speed schooners were rushing out of 
our territorial waters. The border guards' ship was too late 
again. 

