BFN 

  [Text] The national on-the-spot meeting on selling the 
land-use rights of underdeveloped mountains, lands, beaches, 
grasslands, and water areas in order to improve the small 
valleys ended in Mudanjiang on 19 June. Zhou Wenzhi, vice 
minister of water resources, and Vice Governor Sun Kuiwen 
attended the conference. 
  State Councillor Chen Junsheng sent a letter to the 
conference. He said: The current practice of selling land-use 
rights of underdeveloped mountains, lands, beaches, grasslands, 
and water areas in order to improve the small valleys is the 
continuity and development of the implementation of the 
family-based output-related contract responsibility system in 
China's rural areas and a major move of using the market 
mechanism to mobilize thousands upon thousands of households to 
prevent soil erosion under the new situation. Its biggest 
advantage is to allow peasants to buy the land-use rights of 
underdeveloped mountains, lands, beaches, grasslands, and water 
areas in line with law in an effort to improve small valleys and 
let them boldly carry out diversified undertakings, inherit or 
resell the land-use rights. This will help promote the rational 
use of natural resources and further develop agricultural 
production. 
  At the conference, Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Shandong Provinces, 
and our province's Mudanjiang city and Muling County 
respectively introduced their experiences. 
  The participants visited the land-use right selling sites in 
(Fuqiang Village) and (Modaoshi) Town in Muling County to learn 
about the specific situations of these village and town after 
selling the land-use rights of underdeveloped mountains, lands, 
beaches, grasslands, and water areas. These wastelands caused 
by unplanned development have disrupted ecological balance which 
constitute a problem we must resolve. Muling County is located 
in the mountainous area. The reckless felling of trees in the 
mountains and unplanned development of wastelands in the past 
caused the soil eroded areas of Muling County to reach more than 
2.2 million mu. Last year, this county adopted the method of 
selling the land-use rights of underdeveloped mountains, lands, 
beaches, grasslands, and water areas to peasants. If they 
cannot attain the improvement standards within the set time, the 
land-use rights will be recalled. This will make peasants treat 
the land-use rights for improving wastelands and mountains 
which they buy as their own affairs and accelerate the progress 
of improving the underdeveloped mountains, land, beaches, 
grasslands, and water areas. While improving the underdeveloped 
mountains and slopes, peasants may plant grass and trees on the 
mountain slopes, and interplant some economic crops. In less 
than six months, this county sold more than 120,000 mu of 
land-use rights of underdeveloped mountains, lands, beaches, 
grasslands, and water areas, thus becoming one of the counties 
in China where the selling of land-use rights of underdeveloped 
lands is fairly good. 

