BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: Compiled by </F>
Nikolay Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskiy, edited by Vladimir 
Shishlin] 
  [Text] More than one third of those who have been, as of 
date, elected to the Ukrainian parliament agree with President 
Kravchuk that pre-term presidential elections will breed 
anarchy, further confrontation, and chaos. 
  One hundred and twenty of the total of 335 lawmakers have 
requested Kravchuk to suspend municipal, and call off the 26 
June presidential, elections. 
  Analysts feel the strong parliamentary support is indicative 
of the possibility of the postponement or suspension of the 
elections by the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet [Supreme Council]. 
Kravchuk may be expected to suggest that the Supreme Soviet 
postpone or call off the elections on 11 May when the Ukrainian 
legislature opens session. 
  Talking to newsmen Kravchuk doubted whether the parliament's 
moves to confirm the election day and define the head of state's 
prerogatives would be constitutionally valid now that only 335 
nominees had won seats in the 450-seat parliament. (The negative 
stand of 120 lawmakers makes it highly improbable that a 
resolution in favor of the elections pass -- IF). 
  But the Ukrainian Labor Congress urged the new body of the 
Supreme Soviet to see to it that the presidential elections be 
held as scheduled and insure the free expression of the people's 
will. 
  According to the Ukrainian Labor Congress, Kravchuk's 
foreign 
and domestic policy moves put under threat the territorial 
integrity of, and civic peace in, Ukraine. 
  The Ukrainian Labor Congress is a political party of 
left-centrist orientation. It won official recognition in 
September of 1993. The one-time chair of the parliament's youth 
commission Anatoliy Matvienko is its leader. 
  On Thursday Ukraine's Central Electoral Commission 
recognized 
former Prime-Minister Leonid Kuchma and Vice-Premier Viktor 
Pinzenik as presidential candidates. 
  Six men, including former speaker Ivan Plyushch of the 
national parliament, one-time Vice-Premier Vitaliy Lanovoy and 
Socialist leader Aleksandr Moroz, will be running for president. 
  According to the latest reports from Kiev, the Ukrainian 
Communist party, with its 80-odd seats in the new parliament, 
intends to support Moroz. IF Note: Communist leader Petr 
Simonenko sees his own nomination as untimely and explains it by 
the feeling of euphoria that reigned after his party carried the 
March 27 parliamentary elections. Simonenko told newsmen an 
analysis of the situation and views of the party's regional 
organizations moved the collective presidency of the party's 
Central Committee to call off his candidacy. That, according to 
Simonenko, was in full keeping with the Communists' negative 
view of presidency as such, in Ukraine. If the elections were, 
indeed, held, Simonenko said, the left-wing forces would have to 
present a united front and work for the election of Aleksandr 
Moroz. 
  In an interview with Interfax, Moroz said Friday that if 
Kravchuk decided to call off the June 26 elections, the 
Ukrainian coal miners would launch industrial action and force 
Kravchuk to revoke his own decision. 
  Moroz saw no legal grounds for the postponement of the 
presidential elections. If the president said he was out to 
protect the constitution, he said, let the president go a 
constitutional way about it. 
  But Moroz recognized the president's right to propose new 
legislation and suggest that the Supreme Soviet put off the 
elections. 

