BFN 

  [Text] Ankara--One of the most senior commanders of the 
outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in eastern Turkey is 
believed to have been killed by his aides within the 
organization for failing to adapt to the movement's radical 
stance, a senior security source said over the weekend. 
  Muslum Durgun, alias Doctor Baran, was the PKK's so-called 
military commander in the Tunceli (Dersim) region and died last 
month. Initial reports said that he committed suicide with a 
hand grenade during a security forces operation. 
  On Friday [8 April], the PKK-affiliated KURD-HA news agency 
confirmed the death of Durgun and also claimed that his death 
was the result of suicide -- an act that is not approved of by 
the organization. 
  The same day, members of Durgun's movement in Tunceli 
distributed leaflets to the local people accusing the PKK of 
being a "chauvinist and murderous" organization. 
  Reports reaching the Southeastern provincial capital of 
Diyarbakir had it that a serious rift had opened within the PKK 
in Tunceli and that a group of the militants had moved to the 
outlawed Workers' and Peasants' Liberation Army of Turkey 
(TIKKO) which uses Diyarbakir as its main base. 
  "Bullets of treason fired from the muzzle of `revolutionary 
violence' have killed him and have stabbed our hearts with 
pain," ran the communique, which was signed simply: 
"Revolutionaries from Dersim." 
  "This example of 'revolutionary justice' has sent our people 
into mourning," the communique said. 
  According to Baran's supporters within the PKK, this central 
committee member was killed by two of his assistants, codenamed 
Ekrem and Velet. Ekrem's real name is Hidir Sarikaya and he has 
reportedly been named the new PKK commander for Tunceli in 
replacement of Baran. 
  Baran's supporters said during the weekend that they 
regarded 
the PKK as a chauvinist organization based on Kurdish racism and 
involved in treason against the Kurdish people. 
  The communique accused the PKK central herarchy of 
"despotic" 
behaviour. 
  The Kurd-A statement, on the other hand, claimed that Doctor 
Baran had been heavily criticised in a recent congress of 
provincial PKK commanders. It implied that the main accusation 
against him was passivism. 
  Sources close to the PKK in Diyarbakir told the TDN [TURKISH 
DAILY NEWS] during the weekend that Doctor Baran had for some 
time been under fire for "not living up to expectations." He 
was reportedly accused of not being able to command his forces 
and failing to launch major attacks on Turkish targets. Some 30 
PKK leaders have in the past been the victims of ad hoc trials 
by the organization and afterwards killed. 
  A security source in Ankara told the TDN on Saturday that 
Turkey had monitored recent communications between PKK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan and his remaining commanders. He said that a 
debate had gone on for nearly four hours, contrary to the PKK's 
own security precautions, and that Ocalan had argued with the 
commanders regarding Doctor Baran's fate. He did not elaborate 
further. 

