Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Correspondent Mircea Dascaliuc report from Chisinau] </F>
  [Text] Today, the meeting of the Ministry of Interior 
Collegium of the Republic of Moldova was held in Chisinau. The 
meeting was attended by President Mircea Snegur. Minister of 
Interior Constantin Antoci read the report on the activity of 
the employees of the Ministry in the year 1993 and on future 
tasks. According to the report of the Press Service of the 
Presidency, in the speech made on this occasion, Mr. Mircea 
Snegur generally assessed the way in which the active personnel 
of the police forces fulfilled their specific tasks and said 
that, in order to return people's confidence, it is necessary to 
double the efforts made by the police force. 
  President Snegur said that 75 percent of the total crimes 
represent economic crimes and this means knife blows applied to 
reform. The president of the Republic of Moldova insisted on 
the need to train certain experts to obtain a high degree of 
qualification, emphasized the increasing role played by the 
National Police Academy `Stefan cel Mare' and expressed his 
belief that the police troops must be increased and not reduced, 
the way certain political formations suggest. 
  Also today, President Mircea Snegur signed the decree on the 
appointment of Mr. Aurelian Danila to the position of ambassador 
extraordinary and plenipotentiary of the Republic of Moldova in 
the Republic of Austria. Mr. Aurelian Danila is currently 
ambassador of the Republic of Moldova in Romania. 
  Also today, the discussions on the draft treaty on the civil 
and penal legal assistance between the Republic of Moldova and 
Romania began at the Ministry of Justice in Chisinau. The 
International Relations Service of the ministry and the 
commission that was approved through a decree issued by 
President Mircea Snegur, examine the proposals made in 
connection with this document. According to the announcement of 
the Press Center of the Ministry of Justice, the place and date 
of negotiations and the signing of the aforementioned treaty 
will be announced soon. 

