BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Chen Jinwu (7115 6855 2976)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 12 April (XINHUA) -- China's Patent Law 
has traveled an extraordinary journey over past 10 years since 
its promulgation on 12 March 1984. Thanks to the hard work of 
the last 10 years, China has established a legal system for 
safeguarding the normal operation of the patent system, 
including patent authorization procedures, patent agencies, law 
enforcement and judicial systems, patent information services 
and automation systems, patent work administration, as well as 
propaganda, training, and research concerning patent work. Such 
a legal system has been continuously developed and gradually 
improved during the course of actual practice. 
  At today's discussion meeting marking the 10th anniversary 
of 
the Patent Law, Gao Lulin, director of the China Patent Office, 
said: Since the promulgation of the Patent Law, patent 
application cases have fairly increased over the years. There 
were only 14,000 patent application cases in 1985. But the 
number reached to more than 77,000 cases in 1993, an increase of 
more than 4 times over 1985. As of the end of February 1994, the 
China Patent Office has received more than 370,000 patent 
application cases, including 320,000 cases from Chinese 
applicants and 50,000 cases from foreign applicants. 
  Gao Lulin said: The promulgation and implementation of our 
Patent Law not only has created a favorable environment for the 
transfer of foreign countries' advanced technologies to China, 
but also facilitated our scientific research institutes and 
institutions of higher learning introducing their inventions to 
enterprises and to rural areas. As a result, the promotion of 
new technologies has been accelerated. Under the protection of 
the Patent Law, some of our inventions have been introduced 
successfully on the international market. Some foreign 
manufacturers have been licensed to use our patented inventions. 
For example, the Quming Company in Xian has consecutively 
established cooperative ties with French and Canadian 
counterparts by adopting their technologies and in return 
allowing them to become a partner of the joint venture. Three 
famous foreign companies, including DEC and IBM, have been 
licensed to use the "five strokes" Chinese-character computer 
input technology invented by Wang Yongmin. 
  Gao Lulin continued: The revised Patent Law has enhanced 
China's patent protection standards, which is now basically on a 
par with international standards. By setting high protection 
standards, China has become a member of the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty. Such a move has facilitated the ability of Chinese 
people to apply for patent rights in foreign countries and vice 
versa. It also means that China's patent authorization 
procedures and relevant administrative work have reached 
internationally recognized standards. Law enforcement and 
judicial work, which integrates the trials of people's courts 
with the management of patent administrations, have effectively 
protected the legal rights and interests of the owners and 
relevant parties regarding patent rights. Patent agencies and 
patent information service organizations have provided a large 
amount of service to the society. In addition, they have 
continuously developed during the course of actual practice. A 
national patent administration system, which is composed of the 
China Patent Office as well as patent administrative organs 
under local governments, ministries, and commissions, has been 
formed. It has carried out a many tasks in guiding and pushing 
forward the development of patent procedures and conducted many 
useful explorations and experiments. 

