BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed NN/HA: "Switzerland In Favor of a </F>
Convention on Forest Protection"] 
  [Excerpt] New York, 16 May (ATS) -- The UN Commission for 
Lasting Development (CDD) opened its meeting on Monday [16 May] 
in New York. During the next 10 days, the 53 member countries 
will draw up a list of measures to be taken to accelerate the 
implementation of the commitments made in Rio in 1992. 
Switzerland will plead for more equitable trade and for a 
worldwide program on forest protection. It will also advocate 
maintaining the secretariats of three international conventions 
on the environment in Geneva. 
  Established after the Rio Convention, the CDD is the body 
entrusted with implementing the decisions made at the Earth 
Summit. Its second annual session will focus on promoting the 
implementation of specific measures in sectors like chemicals 
processing, environment-friendly production, export of dangerous 
wastes, and the transfer of "soft" technologies. [passage 
omitted] 
  Switzerland will be present as an observer. Under the 
leadership of Rudolf Baerfuss, deputy director of the Federal 
Office for Environment, Forests, and Landscape, the Swiss 
delegation will promote the drafting of an international 
convention on the protection of forests, Monica Linn Locher, the 
delegation's spokeswoman, said. The negotiations look difficult 
as many developing countries have expressed serious reservations. 
  The promotion of a more equitable worldwide and 
environment-friendly trade will also be supported by 
Switzerland. Switzerland advocates enhancing the role of the UN 
environment program to foster the ecological aspect of trade 
exchanges. In this context, the final preparations for the GATT 
negotiations are impatiently awaited. 
<H5>  Lobby for Geneva </H5>
  The Swiss delegation will take advantage of this opportunity 
to secure the international status of Geneva. It will strive to 
ensure that the provisional secretariats of the international 
conventions on climate, biodiversity, and deforestation are 
maintained in Geneva. The negotiations will be difficult. Bonn 
has applied to host the secretariat of the convention on 
climate, Madrid on biodiversity, Spain again and Kenya on 
deforestation. 
  Switzerland has some assets, Mrs. Linn Locher says. However, 
no decision will be made until the end of this year for the 
convention on biodiversity and until next year for the two other 
conventions. 

