Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ibragim Buriyev, secretary of the Social </F>
Progress Party of Uzbekistan: "Kyzylkum: An Ecological Chernobyl 
Not Far Away"] 
  [Text] The expedition ARAL-88 traversed the channels of 
rivers that flow to the Aral Sea. It was composed of ecological 
scientists, writers, journalists, lawyers, economists, medical 
personnel, and agricultural specialists from various republics 
of the former USSR. A great deal was written about this in 
newspapers and magazines. Television showed frightful film clips 
of seagoing vessels in the desert sand... 
  Five years passed, and in 1993 it was decided to verify 
whether anything at all had been accomplished with respect to 
the commitments once made by the heads of the Ministry for Water 
Management and the secretaries of the Central Committees of the 
Communist Party of Central Asian republics and appropriate 
oblast committees. The result was depressing: Exactly nothing 
had changed. 
  The fact that the Aral Sea is gradually drying up, turning 
into a desert whose dust is scattered over thousands of 
kilometers, has already become a commonly known, dreadful 
reality. But no one has as yet seriously raised the question of 
just what man is doing with the desert. And something horrible 
is happening! Countless lakes have been formed in Kyzylkum into 
which water discharges saturated with toxic chemicals and 
fertilizers flow off from reservoirs. This water penetrates the 
sand and goes into wells from which the residents of the desert, 
livestock breeders, drink and provide water to their livestock. 
  Still greater destructive influence on the desert's 
ecosystem 
is being exerted by the mining and metallurgy industry. For more 
than 30 years now uranium, gold, and other metals have been 
extracted in these parts. In the region of Uchkuduk alone, more 
than 1.5 billion cubic meters of earth has been turned over, 
shoveled up. The area is strewn as well with mountainous heaps 
containing unextracted radioactive isotopes (radium, radon) 
whose dust is carried by the wind. 
  Funds for land reclamation were built into the cost 
estimate. 
In time, however, it was decided to use these very funds (!) to 
lower the cost of extraction. Developers of the technology 
involving the underground leaching method for extracting uranium 
have time and again received state awards and prizes. Among 
those awarded is Academician B. Laskorin, in whose view the 
method is ecologically clean. Doubting this, I--at that time a 
worker in the party apparatus--asked him to officially confirm 
the ecological safety of the method. The academician refused. 
Even at that time, information reached me from other scientists 
that with the application of this method, a minimum of 20 
percent of sulfuric acid remains in the underground seams. The 
desert's subsoil waters have been the first to suffer from 
this--transformed over time into little reservoirs of sulfuric 
acid poisoning the living desert around them. In the meantime, 
it is well known that these underground waters constitute 
precisely the main source of water in Kyzylkum. 
  A similar situation has come about with respect to the 
extraction of gold. Academician Laskorin has declared its 
technology as well to be ecologically clean, self-contained, and 
safe. "Any harmful influence to the environment can be ruled 
out--there is a minimum of airborne discharge and the complete 
absence of any kind of sewage"--these are the words of the 
academician. 
  But can we agree with such assurances? For over 24 years 
now, 
gold has been extracted from the Muruntau Mine near Zarafshan. 
The cost of extraction in 1970 was only about 3 rubles per gram. 
The fact of the matter is that it never even occurred to anyone 
to include in this cost expenses related to damage inflicted on 
the environment--sodium cyanide comprises part of the "waste" of 
this process. (It was also originally envisaged that the ground 
would be protected from penetration by this toxin--disposal 
channels were supposed to be covered with concrete on top of 
double-layer synthetic sheeting. About 1 million square meters 
of sheeting was purchased to this end, but it never used for its 
intended purpose--no one knows where it disappeared to.) Toxic 
pulp was poured off into low-lying areas, precisely where a 
geological fault line runs... 
  Gold reserves located in Uzbekistan amount to approximately 
4,500 tonnes. Over the past quarter century, more than 1,000 
tonnes of gold have been extracted from Muruntau alone. 
  The government presently intends to double the output of 
gold. This means that in about 10 years, only half of the 
republic's gold riches will remain, and in another 20-30 years 
virtually nothing will remain of this precious metal which 
nature has so generously provided the land. In this regard, 
whereas in Russia and a number of other republics of the former 
USSR an active process of reorganization of the economy is 
underway, no fundamental changes in this sphere have taken place 
in Uzbekistan over its two years of independence. The same state 
enterprises remain, virtually the same ruling cadre are there. 
There is not even any talk about privatization of enterprises, 
etc. 
  Accordingly, all precious metals and raw material resources 
being extracted will continue to go, as before, toward filling 
up holes and attempts to keep the unhealthy economy afloat. 
  But let us return to Kyzylkum. Everyone now knows full well 
that for over 30 years the USSR Ministry of Medium 
Machine-Building exercised absolute rule in this region. This 
ministry was a state within a state and operated under the stamp 
"Top Secret." It is this monster of developed socialism that did 
everything it desired in Kyzylkum. 
  The ministry passed away, but the ecologically 
unsophisticated technology fostered deep inside it continues to 
function... 
  And one more example of man's "creative" activity in 
Kyzylkum--the fate of the Gazli natural gas deposits opened up 
more than 40 years ago. 
  Transcontinental gas pipelines were laid in record short 
time: Bukhara-Urals and Bukhara-Center. Gas was pumped at such a 
rate that the deposits are today depleted. At one time the 
center (Moscow) promised to build the most beautiful city in the 
country here. But the sum total of what the people of Gazli 
received in payment for their labor comes to three destructive 
earthquakes, arising due to sharply reduced gas pressure in the 
underground seams. Moreover, thousands of rural inhabitants who 
live near Gazli to this day are unable to have natural gas piped 
through to their homes. 
  Imperial ideologues often reproached Uzbekistan for 
subsisting on budget grants, of dependency. But since 1969 over 
1,000 tonnes of gold has been shipped to the center and Uzbek 
uranium has been transported to the Union for more than 30 
years. All this took place and continues to take place at the 
cost of ruthless plunder of the desert. We are taking everything 
that is possible and even the impossible away from Kyzylkum and 
the Aral region, destroying fauna and flora, irresponsibly using 
up the wealth we should be leaving to our children. In the 
pursuit of exhaustible natural resources (gas, gold, uranium), 
we are sacrificing our sources of inexhaustible resources 
(karakul fur, livestock, water, etc.). 
  What are we returning to nature in exchange for its riches? 
What inheritance are we leaving to our children and 
grandchildren? Arsenic? Cyanide? A ruined environment? A damaged 
genetic pool? 
  I posed these questions back in 1978 before the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan and before the 
CPSU Central Committee, but these difficult issues remained 
unanswered at that time. 
  I provided very detailed information to visiting officials 
from the center concerning the tragedy of the Aral Sea, its 
environs, and the desert of Kyzylkum. But these people were 
completely uninterested in the misfortune and needs of the 
region. 
  Instead of resolving ecological problems, they joined with 
investigators from the center under Ligachev's leadership and 
busied themselves with "putting things in order," deciding whom 
to arrest, exclude from the party, etc., and when. We do not yet 
know the full extent of the physical and moral damage inflicted 
upon the republic by such "landing force contingents." 
  Kyzylkum is an astonishingly rich area of our republic. The 
desert lacks only forest--it possesses an abundance of all other 
environmental resources. But in those places where just five 
years ago at least camel's thorn bloomed, today nothing grows. 
Inhabitants of the Central Asian republics have been sensing a 
change in climate for several years now. The Aral was talking to 
them! People's continued lack of action is both dangerous and 
criminal. 
  In previous times, citing secrecy considerations, the 
Ministry of Medium Machine-Building stood in the way. Time and 
circumstances forced us to develop the desert production of 
defense-oriented output. But now that the Cold War has ended, 
the empire has collapsed, and the newly independent republic is 
not in a state of military confrontation with other states, the 
time has come to change priorities, correct previously committed 
mistakes, and effect transition to the extraction of mineral 
resources using ecologically acceptable technologies. The 
tragedy of the Aral Sea and its environs lies partially on the 
conscience of the current leaders of countries of the region 
(many of whom occupied high-ranking and key positions previously 
as well in their republics). It is they who are obliged now to 
join forces, organize an all-encompassing study of the problem, 
and conduct immediate large-scale measures to save the Aral 
region, to improve the ecological environment and people's 
living conditions. Moreover, the scientific-technical potential 
and resources of the entire world community must be involved in 
this. 
  The desert has not yet become a dead zone. It still has its 
plant and animal world, and has been settled with people from 
time immemorial. But it is quite vulnerable and can easily be 
transformed into a truly lifeless space. It is impermissible for 
us to forget the frailty of the world of nature that surrounds 
us. Today's indifference to the tragedy of the Aral Sea and its 
environs, and to the problems of Kyzylkum (and of Karakum as 
well), is dooming us and our children to a new, ecological 
Chernobyl. 

