CSO 

  [Editorial report] Viturid, a powerful new immuno-stimulant 
claimed to be effective against both AIDS and cancer, has won 
the support of Russian Federation Health Minister Eduard 
Nechayev. Despite sponsorship offered by the U.S. government 
and a San Francisco hospital, the developer, Tamara Vorobyeva, 
has turned to the Russian Federation government for assistance 
in testing and perfecting the pharmaceutical, claimed to be 
worth ``billions of dollars.'' A NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA (6 Jan 94) 
article details Vorobyeva's resourcefulness and persistence in 
pursuing development of the drug despite her country's political 
and economic turmoil. 
  Said to be ten times more effective than standard U.S. and 
Soviet therapies, Viturid reportedly guarantees a complete cure 
for second-stage and even some third-stage cancers. Patients 
with fourth-stage osteogenic sarcoma and sarcoma of the lungs 
were among those reported cured (Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA No 4 Feb 
94). In clinical tests, tumors treated with Viturid became 
benign and then completely regressed. Viturid is also claimed 
to be effective against the human immunodeficiency virus before 
immunodeficiency occurs (Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA 6 Jan 94). 
It is also claimed to be ``extremely effective'' against a wide 
range of diseases, including psoriasis, ulcers, herpes, 
arthritis and salmonellosis (Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA No. 4 Feb 94). 
Press reports do not give the pharmaceutical's composition, but 
note that it possesses very low toxicity. Ninety percent of 
its toxic elements are excreted within 6 hours of administration. 
  An analytical chemist, Vorobyeva based Viturid on an old 
therapeutic recipe which she used to cure herself of stage III 
cancer. In February 1985 she applied for a patent for ``a 
treatment for cancer and AIDS.'' In July 1989 she received the 
state patent commission's certification that her invention was 
scientifically valid. In June 1990, Chairman Lepakhin of the 
All-Union Pharmaceutical Committee requested 50,000 rubles from 
Academy of Medical Sciences President Pokrovskiy to begin 
clinical testing of Viturid in Moscow. But deteriorating 
economic conditions then stalled progress for a year. 
  Thanks to the personal intervention of Ukrainian Health 
Minister Boris Spizhenko, clinical trials began in March 1991 at 
the Kiev Scientific Research Institute of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology. Successful results were announced in April 1991. A 
ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA article (25 Feb 92) reporting these results 
enthusiastically called on the Russian and Ukrainian Health 
Ministers to authorize production of the drug. To permit 
Vorobyeva to earn capital for further research, the Ukrainian 
Health Ministry approved Viturid for therapeutic use in less 
than the normal time. 
  The collapse of the Soviet Union forced Vorobyeva to return 
to Russia, where her patent claim had been filed, to try again 
to solicit support from the government. On 18 February 1992, 
Russian Vice Premier Aleksandr Shokin told the Health Ministry 
and the Academy of Medical Sciences to examine and support 
Vorobyeva's proposal for further research. The Academy promised 
help from the Moscow Scientific Research Institute for Oncology 
imeni Gertsen, on the condition that the inventor find the 
necessary capital, said to be millions of rubles. 
  In September 1992, Vorobyeva applied for a U.S. patent. 
According to press reports, the U.S. government quickly ``took 
her patent applications under its wing'' and granted her a three 
year work permit. A San Francisco hospital offered to conduct 
clinical tests in exchange for the right to use the 
pharmaceutical. Vorobyeva found this condition unacceptable and 
formed her own company in the United States, while continuing to 
solicit aid in Russia. 
  This time Vorobyeva may have found the support she needs. 
In 27 July 1993, she received four Russian patents for her 
pharmaceutical and for her treatment method. A fifth patent 
registering Viturid as an immunomodulator followed on 8 December 
1993 (Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA No. 4 Feb 94). Russian Health 
Minister Eduard Nechayev tasked his subordinates to confirm 
preliminary tests on Viturid by January 1994. Unable to support 
the inventor financially, Nechayev wants to commence use of 
Viturid for some diseases in order to finance full testing of 
all its possible uses. Clinical tests of Viturid by the Karelian 
Ministry of Health started in 0ctober 1992. The Russian Health 
Ministry is reportedly now preparing for industrial production 
of the new pharmaceutical (Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA No. 4 Feb 94). 

