Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by the KNDS Information Press Service: "Rhetorical </F>
Question: What Is Happening to the Ukrainian Radio?"] 
  [Text] The results of diversity which we have inherited 
from the empire have been seen in the Crimea, where 54 percent 
of voters trusted Meshkov, a former champion from KGB troops. 
The current situation in the Crimea could have been avoided if 
the state had a consistent information policy. 
  Many journalists, especially those working for the Ukrainian 
radio, could not passively follow the flow of events. With great 
difficulty, they were able to make Channel One of the Ukrainian 
radio very interesting and objective. A wide selection of news, 
commentaries and programs such as "Independence" and "Two-Way 
Connection" suggested that the Ukrainian radio was becoming 
highly professional and national. But it wasn't long before the 
journalists' freedom and the listeners' ability to get full 
information were curtailed. 
  From January of this year, Channel One has changed 
drastically and for the worse. Many people want to know what 
happened. 
  Following staff changes at the State Television and Radio 
Company, moral pressure became real. It was suggested that the 
popular program "Independence" should be shut down. The program 
survived, but some of the people who worked on it had to either 
bend to the will of the new management or leave. They chose the 
latter. The time allotted to information and commentary on 
Channel One was cut to just three hours per day. Most of the air 
time, just as on television, is now taken up by songs and 
symphonies. 
  Who are those new managers who so eagerly promote folklore 
while at the same time muzzling local information? The first 
vice president of the company is former party secretary of the 
television service Zinoviy Kulyk. His experience on the air is 
limited, but I think many still recall his interview with 
Mikhail Gorbachev on 7 December 1991. By responding "yes, yes, 
yes" to Gorbachev's aggressive comments, he greatly embarrassed 
Ukrainian journalism. 
  Viktor Pasak is one of the company's vice presidents. He has 
been on the air much more often than Kulyk. In 1990, when on the 
initiative of the democratic forces the Supreme Council in Kiev 
was being picketed and other mass measures were taking place, he 
constantly complained about their poor behavior from the 
television screen. More recently, he was the host on the 
television program "1 December", which was distinguished by its 
idiosyncratic selection of guest participants. Now, say 
journalists, he took under his control Channel One on the radio. 
  This is why interested listeners are now forced to obtain 
information about the true situation in Ukraine, especially in 
the regions, either from Radio Liberty or from foreign 
Ukrainian-language broadcasts. Radio Liberty is not under the 
control of the presidential cohorts at the State Television and 
Radio Company, and the new managers have not yet touched foreign 
broadcasts. Unfortunately, in Ukraine, only a few regions, such 
as the Donbass, Kiev, the Crimea, Lvov and Chernigov, can 
receive them. 
  Today, journalists and sociologists are trying to explain 
why 
many people become increasingly apathetic about processes 
underway in the country, as a result of which centrifugal 
processes emerge in the regions. On the one hand, the economic 
situation has an impact on this, but on the other, it is caused 
by the lack of statewide information policy. The low level of 
broadcasts compels people to seek information from alternative 
sources. In the Crimea and Donbass such sources strive to 
discredit the idea of state and to develop the syndrome of 
disdain for national essence. Can it be that managers of the 
State Television and Radio Company do not understand this? 
  In any case, it is yet another proof that old specialists, 
trained under the old regime, cannot hold managerial positions 
in areas that are of strategic importance for the state-building 
process. Especially not in the economy and the mass media. 
Moreover, ignoring the latter leads to losses in the economic 
sphere. 

