BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by News Research and Commentary Group] </F>
  [Text] The foreign minister of Bosnia-Herzegovina arrived 
yesterday in Tehran at the head of a high-level political 
delegation on an official visit. On his arrival in Tehran, he 
attended the Friday prayers and described the Islamic Republic 
of Iran as the best friend of the Bosnian nation. He thanked 
the Iranian people for their assistance to his compatriots. 
  The Islamic Republic of Iran is playing host to the Bosnian 
delegation and this is an indication of the ideological bonds 
between the two Muslim nations of Iran and Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
During the past two years, in which an unjust war in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina has sealed the fate of the defenseless people of 
this Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran has consistently 
expressed its support for the oppressed people of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and has welcomed the creation of conditions 
for a just peace. 
  At present, the Bosnian crisis is a conspicuous example of a 
struggle that, according to the country's foreign minister, has 
created conducive conditions for the involvement of all the 
progressive European countries as well as the intelligentsia. 
However, as far as the rights of the Bosnian Muslims are 
concerned, there has been nothing but a prejudiced approach and 
a discriminatory policy by the Western echelons. 
  From this vantage point, the unstinting support of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran is a help in healing the sorrows of the 
defenseless Bosnian people and a reliable catalyst for the 
continuation of resistance against the Serb aggressors. In the 
most difficult conditions, the Islamic Republic of Iran has 
risen up in support of the Bosnians and has encountered 
political pressure and restrictions as well as negative 
propaganda from the common enemies of the Muslim peoples of Iran 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The current peace talks in Geneva have not yielded any 
results and are merely being viewed as tactical and political 
moves on the part of Western officials. In any case, it is 
hoped that the relations between the two Muslim nations of Iran 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina, which are based on common cultural 
denominators and Islamic thinking, will broaden in the future 
and that the oppressed Bosnian nation will also be delivered as 
soon as possible from the clutches of injustice prevailing in 
the Balkans. 

