Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "mh": "Experts: Transrapid Financing </F>
Concept Is Unrealistic"] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 9 February -- While Thyssen-Henschel 
boss Winfried Haastert reported positive reactions in the United 
States to Bonn's basic decision made in December in favor of a 
Transrapid line from Hamburg to Berlin, renowned transportation 
experts on Wednesday [9 February] published a devastating 
statement regarding the project's financing and the basic 
scientific data that were used. 
  The Scientific Advisory Council at the Transportation 
Ministry, which is staffed with renowned transportation experts 
from German universities, sees clear deficiencies and risks 
regarding financing. Forecasts of demand, estimates of 
revenues, and the calculation of investment and operating costs 
are all based on "ideal framework conditions." 
  The development figures used for eastern Germany and Berlin 
are target forecasts, the realization of which is rather 
unlikely in view of current trends. In no case may one 
establish a private financing concept for the Transraid train on 
political wishful thinking. Nevertheless, if this is done, 
there is the obvious assumption that the involved companies 
expect the possibility of higher state participation than 
stipulated in the financing concept. 
  In estimating revenues, maximum estimates were linked with 
maximum demand; however, previous expert reports have shown 
demand clearly declining with high fares. Since Deutsche Bahn 
AG is porjected as the operator, a consolidated assessment of 
profitability will also have to be made. However, the estimates 
of profitability were not done on the basis of the 
transportation network but on the basis of individual routes. 
  Regarding construction costs, the scientists note that the 
additional costs, which are to be expected in particular for a 
viable line in the Berlin region -- which is, quite certainly, 
to be built underground -- have not been taken into 
consideration. Installations for operational purposes appear to 
be underestimated. 
  The greatest reproach of the scientists: No alternatives 
have been checked; thus, a conventional high-speed line with 20 
additonal minutes travel time or inclining trains [Neigezuege] 
with 40 additional minutes of travel time compared with the 
Transrapid could also achieve a high transportation value with 
clearly lower investments. 
  The Scientific Advisory Council deliberately did not comment 
on the technology politicy aspects linked with the project and, 
thus, also not on the forthcoming maturity of the Transrapid for 
serial production, which had been cited by Haastert and which is 
accelerated by a current "optimization program" subsidized by 
the FRG Research Ministry. 

