Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Eduardo Rodriguez-Baz and Ruben G. Abelenda] </F>
  [Text] Luanda, 16 Jan (PL) -- Cuban Foreign Minister 
Roberto Robaina said during an interview in Luanda with PRENSA 
LATINA: "I am the foreign minister of a people to whom I am 
strongly committed and of whom I want to be just another member." 
  Before leaving Angola, where he spent 48 hours doing intense 
diplomatic work and his few free moments walking the streets and 
speaking with fellow Cubans working in that country, Robaina 
agreed to talk with PRENSA LATINA reporters. 
  Robaina stressed that he does not want to be different from 
the foreign ministers of other states or to create a different 
image for himself since he has never studied how his 
counterparts behave. 
  "I do not think a foreign minister's life should be strictly 
protocol-oriented. I follow certain established rules of 
diplomacy, but I am always aware of my responsibility to 
represent Cubans at home and abroad." 
  Robaina said he rejects the idea of becoming a foreign 
minister for the outside. "I want to be foreign minister in my 
country, too," he said. 
  Robaina also noted that his work ties him to the Cuban 
people's history, and his desire to be a part of that people is 
a priority. Otherwise, he insisted, I could distance myself from 
them, and that would be a personal failure. 
  In his usual affable manner, the foreign minister said that 
diplomacy in the new world situation is somewhat complicated, 
but even more difficult are the problems and tasks confronted on 
a daily basis by his countrymen, who are now being subjected to 
a commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States. 
  In terms of personal satisfaction, Robaina said his first 
choice is the opportunity to explain throughout the world what 
Cubans are doing to resist the effects of the U.S. embargo, 
"although I am afraid that words cannot express all that is 
being done in our country," he said. 
  In Angola, he went on, I have confirmed that there is a 
great 
deal of admiration and respect for the efforts Cuba is making to 
defend the plan and the path that we have chosen, which gave me 
special satisfaction during this leg of my African tour. 
  "It is positive for the Angolan people to admire the 
achievements of the Caribbean island, but it is also very 
encouraging to know how much solidarity there is in the world 
for the Cuban cause," he explained. 
  Robaina said that there are extraordinary ties of friendship 
between Angola and Cuba, sealed with the lives of many sons of 
Cuba. 
  The foreign minister also alluded to those traditional ties 
as an accurate explanation for why the Cuban Foreign Ministry's 
diplomatic offensive in Africa "to explain our problems, what we 
are doing and how we will deal with the future," is so 
noticeable in Angola. 
  In response to a question about the time he spent as an 
international soldier in Angola, Robaina said his visit as 
foreign minister has allowed him to relive the time "when I 
attended the best school, the school of life; when I lived with 
Cubans and Angolans in difficult conditions that were quite 
different from the current situation." 
  Robaina said that during his stay in Luanda, both sides 
emphasized those very profound historic and mutual ties between 
the two peoples and governments. 
  "The only thing that has changed," he insisted, "is the way 
we must cooperate, a situation prompted by the current 
international situation." 
  Concerning Cuba's foreign policy, Robaina said that Cuba is 
willing to establish some level of relations with all nations, 
including the United States and South Africa, as long as basic 
mutual principles are respected. 
  In reference to the southernmost country in Africa, he said: 
"We Cubans begin with the premise of not getting ahead of 
events." 
  It is necessary now to follow closely the evolution of the 
political process faced by South Africans, which is being 
observed by this continent and the rest of the world, including 
Cuba, he said. 
  Robaina added that in due time his government will consider 
establishing diplomatic relations with Pretoria. In this regard 
he said some progress has already been made: "The Cuban people 
know a little about South Africans, and vice versa, because we 
encountered each other at a negotiating table to resolve 
stability in southern Africa." 
  Angola was the second stop on the Cuban foreign minister's 
first tour of this region. Robaina first visited Ghana, then 
continued his tour in Zimbabwe. His agenda includes stays in 
Zambia and Namibia. 

