Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Javier Bernales] </F>
  [Text] Havana -- Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina 
said his government's new orientation is that "without giving up 
the socialist plan we have chosen, we can trade with a 
capitalist world" because "we have no choice: Either we adjust 
ourselves to that situation and save the essence, or we will 
simply fall in the arms of those who want us to fall, losing the 
victories essential to us." 
  Robaina, 38, has assumed the responsibility of directing and 
developing Cuba's foreign policy, which he has done from an 
offensive position. 
  [Bernales] What is the restructuring of the Cuban foreign 
policy? 
  [Robaina] I would not speak about restructuring, but about 
the need to make a policy in line with the current times. It is 
necessary to take into account factors of the new situation in 
the world, in the area in which we live, and in our country. We 
simply want a foreign policy that reflects the real situation in 
the country, which is very difficult and complex, a policy that 
should not only envisage our problems but also explain our plan 
to the world. 
  [Bernales] What has been your reaction, as head of your 
portfolio, to the designation of a special observer for Cuba by 
the UN Human Rights Council? 
  [Robaina] We have absolutely nothing against the observer, 
but we do reject the mechanism because the designation was made 
on the basis that human rights are flagrantly and massively 
violated in Cuba. For us to accept the observer would mean 
agreeing with this position. 
  [Bernales] Changing the subject, Cuba's foreign trade is 
adjusting itself to the international free market system. Cuba 
has to adjust itself to the foreign capitalist system in order 
to maintain the socialist system on the island. How is this 
apparent contradiction being experienced? 
  [Robaina] It is very complex. For us it is clear that the 
point is to adjust ourselves to an economic model whose name I 
will not try to specify. If I am asked about it, I reply that 
the economic model is Cuban and also feasible. No one asks any 
questions about work in the education, scientific, or health 
areas. There are, however, major questions on a group of 
economic factors that have yielded no results. That is why we 
are trying to join a world in which the rules of the game are 
different from the ones by which we have traditionally directed 
our work. Joining that world, while keeping our own line and 
saving the essential factors, is the process on which we have 
embarked. It is very hard and very difficult, but by being alive 
it has begun to show at least that it exists, and the 100-odd 
entrepreneurs -- or non-entrepreneurs -- or the 100-odd 
businesses that foreign firms have opened in Cuba prove that we 
can trade with the capitalist world without giving up the 
socialist plan that we chose. There are difficulties, but it is 
possible to trade. 
  [Bernales] Please make a brief commentary on the progress in 
Cuban-Chinese relations. 
  [Robaina] There are fine relations with China; there is a 
high level of exchange and communication, which I believe had 
its crowning point with the Chinese president's recent visit to 
Cuba. In addition, China has many important experiences that we 
have to evaluate, without the idea of mechanically copying them 
but with the idea of studying them in order to make progress. 
  [Bernales] In the past four years, relations with Russia and 
with the former Soviet republics had to forcefully change for 
Cuba. How are they now? 
  [Robaina] There is high-level communication with Russia, but 
everyone knows that Russia is experiencing a tremendously 
complex internal process that has nothing to do with the level 
of communications with Cuba. There are more or less normal 
relations with the other former Soviet republics. But both the 
former Soviet republics and the former socialist countries are 
experiencing an internal process that calls for strong 
adjustments in order to define some of their foreign policy 
guidelines. 
  [Bernales] How are diplomatic relations with Chile, taking 
into account that there is no Cuban embassy in that Andean 
country? 
  [Robaina] Relations and communications are in good shape. 
Much noise has been made as to whether we were invited to the 
Chilean inauguration. It is an exclusively Chilean matter; they 
decided to invite a group of people based on concepts and a 
policy that we, like any other country, can respect. We are not 
desperate about our diplomatic relations, and we are not trying 
to accelerate contacts either. Our communications have reached a 
certain level. There is an increasing number of economic links 
that can be established. We should not despair. Everything will 
come in due time. The time will come when both Chileans and 
ourselves will find that conditions are appropriate; there is no 
need to hurry. What I can assure you is that having no 
ambassadorial-level relations is not an obstacle to fluent 
communication. 

