CSO 

  [Text] Coimbatore, Feb. 20--``India is leap-frogging in the 
most guarded area of space technology and, through its 
progressive self-reliant approach, it has shown to the world its 
capability in the launch vehicle technology,'' Dr. S.C. Gupta, 
Member, Space Commission, said on Sunday. 
  Delivering the GRD [expansion not given] endowment lecture 
at 
the PSG [expansion not given] College of Technology here, Dr. 
Gupta said that with the successful launching of SLV-3 
[Satellite Launch Vehicle] and the ASLV [Augmented Satellite 
Launch Vehicle] and the nearly-successful launch of the PSLV 
[Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle], the launch vehicle technology 
in India had truly arrived. Operationalisation of the ASLV and 
the PSLV was round the corner, as the ASLV-D4 would be launched 
by April and the PSLV-D2 in the middle of this year. 
  With the operationalisation of the PSLV, India would be able 
to launch its own remote-sensing satellites of one-tonne class. 
This was equivalent to launching 2.5-tonne class satellites on 
low earth orbits. This meant India had built up from 40-kg 
capability in 1980 to 100 kg capability in 1992 and would have 
2,500 kg capability in 1994. 
  Though much advancement had been achieved in the space 
technology economic and technological constraints were still 
felt. Funding was liberal but it was being done on a 
project-to-project basis. It was imperative to broaden the 
resource base. By involving academic and research and 
development institutions, on the one hand, and industries, on 
the other, the resource base could be enlarged. 
  To a question by Mr. G.R. Karthikeyan, managing trustee of 
the PSG Institutions, Dr. Gupta said India's approach was 
``progressive self-reliance'' in space technology. Whatever 
technology available elsewhere would be supplemented with 
domestic resources. The objective was to attain 
cost-effectiveness and time-effectiveness. 
  Mr. Karthikeyan suggested introduction of Tamil medium in 
management courses. 

