BFN 

  [Text] Dear friends, tonight at the government guest house 
in Hanoi, Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt, who is on an 
official visit to our country, held a news conference. A large 
number of journalists from various domestic and international 
news agencies, newspapers, and radio and television stations 
attended the conference. In opening the news conference, the 
Swedish Prime minister said: 
  [Begin Bildt recording in English fading into Vietnamese 
translation] I came here -- this is the first time a prime 
minister of Sweden has come to Vietnam -- in order to primarily 
broaden the relationship between the two countries. We have 
seen important political and economic changes in Vietnam, 
Sweden, and all of Southeast Asia. Therefore, we want to 
develop our relations so they can reflect these important 
changes. In the past, our relations consisted mainly of aid. 
Now they have developed to other areas such as technology 
transfer and economic cooperation. The development will be 
based on experiences obtained through the years of our 
relationship. 
  Experience shows that some countries receive significant 
amounts of aid from the world community but still have not 
developed much. And at the same time we have also seen other 
countries who scarcely receive any international aid, yet have 
progressed and obtained encouraging results. In the development 
of relations, economic renovation should be taken into account, 
and it will be reflected in the relations between Sweden and 
Vietnam in the future. 
  Today I had a discussion with His Excellency [H.E.] the 
prime 
minister, H.E. the president, H.E. the foreign minister, and 
H.E. the chairman of the National Assembly. Yesterday I visited 
Ho Chi Minh City, and today I visited various places in Hanoi 
where I witnessed the dynamic motivation of our Vietnamese 
friends, and the existence of this dynamic motivation proves 
that Vietnam is moving in the right direction. [end recording] 
  Prime Minister Carl Bildt then answered many questions 
raised 
by Vietnamese and international journalists. On a question 
about future relations between Vietnam and Sweden, the prime 
minister said: 
  [Begin Bildt recording in English fading into Vietnamese 
translation] We will have a detailed discussion concerning 
long-term strategy for development assistance here in Hanoi 
between Swedish and Vietnamese representatives at the end of 
April. In the past we decided on a total amount of aid and left 
it to the Vietnamese side to decide how to use it. This method 
has proven to be erratic at times and we have been looking for 
ways to change the situation. Now we will consider each 
strategic concrete need. We will continue to assist programs 
that have been initiated in the past, such as health programs. 
The assistance will be focused on areas that carry important 
significance for the economic renovation of Vietnam. We will 
assist the legal system to help Vietnam build a law-governed 
society. There should also be a banking and finance system that 
suits a market-driven economy. [end recording] 
  Also in the news conference, Prime Minister Carl Bildt 
answered many questions about his official visit to Vietnam. 
  Tonight at the Presidential Palace, Prime Minister Vo Van 
Kiet feted the Swedish prime minister and other guests in the 
delegation. 

