Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Two Bangkok Chinese-language dailies -- 
ZHONG HUA RIBAO and XING XIAN RIBAO -- on 17 and 18 March carry 
editorials commenting on Prime Minister Chuan Likphai's visit to 
Vietnam. 
  ZHONG HUA RIBAO's 17 March editorial on page 1, entitled 
"the 
Significance of Prime Minister Chuan's Visit to Vietnam," says 
that "Prime Minister Chuan Likphai led a large delegation of 
government and private representatives to Vietnam on 16 March 
for a 4-day official visit. The Prime minister's trip is in 
line with Thailand's foreign policy of promoting relations with 
neighboring countries and is aimed at settling historic 
problems, discussing investment cooperation and development of 
economic relations, and exchanging views on Vietnam's plan to 
join ASEAN." Issues which have to be settled between the two 
nations include their territorial water boundary and the return 
of Vietnamese refugees who still remain in Thailand. Such 
complicated issues can not be tackled with a few words. The 
editorial believes that to further improve their bilateral 
relations, the two countries will have to show their sincerity 
and hold consultations to find ways of settling the problems. 
  The editorial says that after the U.S. decision to remove 
trade sanctions against Vietnam, Vietnam hopes to attract some 
U.S. $120 million to 150 million worth of foreign investment 
during the remaining six years of the century to improve its 
infrastructure and to develop its industry so that it can 
achieve an eight percent economic growth rate. Vietnam can 
achieve its target if it can eliminate the corruption problem 
while developing its economy. "ASEAN countries welcome the U.S. 
decision to lift its sanctions against Vietnam. Thailand can 
serve as a gateway for foreign companies and banks to Vietnam. 
However, we should note that Vietnam has lower labor costs 
while its productivity is high. This can be a threat to 
Thailand's agricultural and textile exports. However, Vietnam's 
participation in the competition can help boost economic growth 
in the Southeast Asian Region. ASEAN will become a big market 
with a combined population of 400 million if Vietnam, Laos, and 
Burma become full members of ASEAN. They can greatly benefit 
regional development. Hence, ASEAN will not only attract world 
attention for its economic strength, but will also increase its 
influence in the international political arena," the editorial 
says. 
  The editorial believes that the six ASEAN countries will not 
reject Vietnam's participation. Conflicts can be removed 
through increasing contacts and promotion of mutual 
understanding. Vietnam will get financial, technical, and 
expertise assistance from ASEAN countries to achieve its 
economic development target. However, it is important for 
Vietnam to nurture trust in it among ASEAN countries. 
  The editorial concludes by saying that "the visit to Vietnam 
by Prime Minister Chuan and his delegation of political and 
military leaders and businessmen is significant for 
strengthening bilateral cooperation, removing conflicts, and 
encouraging the joint development and prosperity of countries in 
Southeast Asia, as well as expanding ASEAN into a bigger 
political and economic grouping." 
  XING XIAN RIBAO's 18 March editorial, on page 2, is 
entitled: 
"Thailand and Vietnam Must Create Mutual Trust on the Basis of 
Mutual Benefit and Sincerity." It says that Thailand and 
Vietnam were formerly suspicious of each other. Hostility 
between the two nations reached its peak when the communists 
took over South Vietnam. Mutual distrust has not yet been 
eliminated, although the Vietnam war is over and the two 
countries have normalized their relations. "Following changes 
in the world situation, the Indochinese countries are trying to 
reconstruct their countries, revive their economies, and attract 
foreign investment. As a result, Vietnam has become a focal 
point for investment." Thailand remains as the 12th biggest 
investor in Vietnam despite its proximity to Vietnam. This 
shows that bilateral cooperation has not achieved enough 
progress. Mutual distrust is one of the reasons. 
  The editorial says that "Prime Minister Chuan should have a 
broad vision. He must realize that Thai-Vietnamese relations 
will be an important point in the development of Indochina. As 
a result, it is necessary for Prime Minister Chuan to show 
sincerity about cooperation so that Vietnam can realize that 
Thailand is willing to be a close element in Indochina's 
development." 
  A big entourage of businessmen is accompanying Prime 
Minister 
Chuan to Vietnam. They can observe Vietnam's economic 
situation. In particular, the investment seminar jointly held by 
Thailand's Board of Investment and Vietnam's State Committee for 
Cooperation and Investment will enable private businessmen of 
the two countries to hold consultations and seek cooperation 
opportunities. 
  In conclusion, the editorial reminds Thai businessmen to be 
sincere and take into account the national interests of both 
countries when investing in Vietnam. They should refrain from 
exploiting Vietnam as foreign countries once exploited Thailand. 

