Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dispatch from Washington by unidentified correspondent] </F>
  [Excerpt] Washington is certain that the Arab-Israeli peace 
talks will resume. Despite the media blackout imposed by the 
U.S. State Department on the talks, the first meeting between 
heads of the Lebanese and Israeli delegations Suhayl Shammas and 
Uri Lubrani was tense because of Lubrani's remarks before the 
meeting. Lubrani reiterated the same Israeli stand, which 
sidesteps UN Resolution 425 and instead talks about a 
Lebanese-Israeli peace treaty. Ambassador Shammas once again 
voiced Lebanon's rejection of Israel's suggestion, adding that 
such remarks are bound to obstruct the U.S. endeavors to bridge 
the gap in views. 
  However, the second meeting between Shammas and Lubrani was 
more positive than the first. The heads of the Lebanese and 
Israeli negotiations got to the core of the talks. 
Specifically, they discussed the agenda of the coming round of 
talks scheduled for early next month. 
  According to reports leaked to our radio, the discussion 
focused in part on a possible mechanism to give momentum to 
bilateral negotiations in the coming round which, according to 
U.S. expectations, must be different from previous rounds in 
terms of the need to produce practical results. In this regard, 
the head of the Israeli delegation once again proposed the 
establishment of a Lebanese-Israeli joint military committee to 
discuss issues related to withdrawal and security in the border 
zone. 
  According to reports available to our radio, the Americans 
have a solution for this issue. It somewhat goes along with 
both the Lebanese and Israeli views. The U.S. draft solution 
could be summed up as follows: It goes along with Lebanon's 
demand while taking the Israeli position into consideration. In 
this regard, U.S. might provide guarantees of Israel's 
withdrawal from Lebanese territory, but it would be a phased 
withdrawal to gradually ensure security in the south. The last 
phase of Israel's withdrawal from the south would go hand in 
hand with the last phase of Israel's withdrawal from the Golan. 
  The U.S. proposal also goes along with Israel's demand, but 
it takes Lebanon's views into consideration. In this regard, 
committees may be formed, but they will not be called military 
or security committees. Instead, they will be called 
specialized committees and be composed of military and 
non-military figures and will be part of the negotiating teams 
and not separate from them. This is the U.S. draft solution that 
peace coordinator Dennis Ross may offer during a possible 
meeting with the heads of the Arab and Israeli delegations at 
the end of this week. [passage omitted] 

