Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kao Yuan (7559 0626): "A Group of Tibetan Nuns </F>
Denounce Communist China's Repressive Rule"] 
  [Text] People of the Tibetan Kangpa tribe are reputed to 
be either devout Buddhists or lawless people. The Buddhist nuns 
did not know to which category their Kangpa guide belonged when 
they tried to escape Tibet. The guide had ferocious features 
and carried a dagger inside his fur overcoat. He planned to 
lead the nuns on a dangerous winter journey to Nepal across the 
Himalayas. For his services, he took most of the money the nuns 
were carrying. 
  Before they set off, the guide took 800 yuan from one of the 
nuns, an amount equal to three months' worth of the average 
Tibetan's income. The guide also told them that if they were 
caught by Chinese soldiers, they must not reveal his function as 
a guide, otherwise he would lose his life. 
  The long journey across a world of ice and snow exhausted 
the 
nuns. They carried only some dried meat and barley as food, and 
wore only sneakers on their feet. Every one of them wore only a 
few loose blouses, one coat, and one blanket. It normally takes 
25 days to travel to Nepal, but the guide knew that the weather 
in December often turned bad and that if they met with 
snowstorms, the nuns certainly would be killed by the cold. 
  One nun said that on the journey, the guide continuously 
urged them to move faster. If there were Chinese guards, they 
could not even use a torch when moving at night. They passed 
somewhere very near Chinese guards' checkpoints, so if anyone 
had so much as coughed, they would have been arrested. They did 
not make a fire, and just slept on sand, rocks, and snow. They 
walked along some meandering trails, and passed narrow and 
dazzling plank trails built along the cliff faces when they 
approached Mount Everest. Anyone who fell from the plank trails 
certainly would have their bodies smashed to pieces. They 
braved the strong winds and moved ahead, but they consumed all 
the food on the 17th day and found it extremely difficult to 
continue the journey! On seeing the green hills of Nepal, the 
nuns hugged each other with untold joy. 
  Their happiness was transient, however, because they met 
Nepalese police who asked for bribes and said that the nuns 
would be repatriated to Tibet if they did not pay up. The nuns 
did pay, but they were still arrested and jailed for a number of 
days in Kathmandu. After that, their rescuers took them to 
India's Damoshara, where the Dalai Lama, Tibet's spiritual and 
political leader, lives in exile. 
  Two motives made the nuns face the hard journey across the 
Himalayas so bravely. First, they wished to pursue their 
religious belief under the leadership of the Dalai Lama. Many 
Tibetan people believe the Dalai Lama is the incarnation of the 
Buhhda. The nuns also wanted to tell human rights organizations 
about their sufferings in a Chinese prison, where they were 
tortured, beaten, and humiliated. Their testimony will expose 
the hypocrisy of the Beijing authorities' propaganda about the 
improvement of human rights conditions in Tibet. The Clinton 
administration was threatening to rescind China's 
most-favored-nation status unless Beijing stopped persecuting 
dissidents and respected Tibet's religion and culture. The 
story told by the nuns made people doubt China's willingness to 
relax its high-handed rule in Tibet. A number of Tibetans were 
put into prison for openly criticizing China's restraints on 
Tibetan culture. One of them protested for only for 90 seconds, 
shouting: "Long live the Dalai Lama" and "Freedom for Tibet." 
He then was taken away by the secret police. 
  For their protests, the nuns were jailed three years. In 
prison, they were beaten and were assaulted with electric batons 
on their tongues, breasts, and legs. 
  One nun said she was told that the Chinese Government had 
arrested a nun and cut her breasts off. She decided to do 
something because when she was only 15 years old she was 
arrested. She was also beaten when being interrogated under 
torture. 
  Another form of torture experienced by another nun was 
called 
"flying a plane." She was tied up by the thumbs, hung from the 
ceiling, and beaten. She also was assaulted with a cattle prod. 
She said that the policemen demanded that she put out her 
tongue; they then used a cattle prod on it. The attack made her 
lose consciousness. After she fell, they took her up and 
repeated the torture. 
  All the nuns were held in the prison most well-known to 
Tibetan people, which is located not far from Lhasa. In prison, 
they met a woman who had been jailed for participating in the 
1989 demonstrations for Tibet independence. There, the woman 
showed them how Chinese prison guards had used scissors to cut 
off her breasts. One of the woman's toes was cut almost off and 
was dangling on her foot. 
  After the nuns were released, they were not allowed to 
return 
to the monastery. Nuns and monks have always been the vanguard 
in opposing Chinese rule in Tibet, and they began their 
resistance as soon as Chinese troops had entered Tibet in 1950. 
Human rights organizations have said that 70 percent of 
prisoners in Tibet were Buddhist monks and nuns. 

