BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Germans Are Not Hostile to </F>
Technology, They Just Want Better Information"] 
  [Text] German industry is in a technology crisis. New 
products and intelligent technological solutions appear on the 
market only rarely. The profound restructuring of German 
industry can only be completed and the mass unemployment only 
overcome by means of innovation. But that involves more than 
the creation of new jobs in research. 
  Norbert Walter, chief economist of the Deutsche Bank, could 
not have expressed himself more clearly when, in a Deutsche Bank 
Research commentary, he complained about the continuing weakness 
of German industry regarding innovations "throughout all 
branches." Many German-produced goods are already out of date, 
and less and less new goods are being introduced, he said. 
  Walter insists a series of measures meant to guarantee the 
integrity of German research. In his analysis, the Deutsche 
Bank chief economist concentrates mainly on the need to change 
society's mentality, because "the current situation with science 
and research encourages a hostility to new technology in 
Germany." 
  There is no doubt that an openness to new technology is very 
important for an innovative climate in politics and the economy. 
The Association of German Industry [BDI] says in its "Theses for 
a Strategic Scientific Policy" that "innovations prepared by 
scientists, research organizations, and enterprises can only be 
implemented if the population accepts them." It is not without 
reason that the Bundestag's Bureau for Investigating the 
Consequences of Technology recently published a survey entitled 
"Is German Society Hostile to Technology?" 
  The results of this survey come as a surprise. It cannot be 
said that the Germans generally dislike new technology. 
Ninety-five percent of the respondents said that "technology 
guarantees the competitiveness of our industry." No particular 
enemy to new technology is to be observed in Germany. What can 
be observed, however, is that society's attitude to technology 
is very differentiated. 
  Mass technologies such as nuclear energy, aviation, space 
travel, and genetic engineering are subject to greater criticism 
than the technologies that are closer to the general consumer 
and used at one's place of work. But the only completely 
negative opinion concerns nuclear energy; up to 70 percent of 
the respondents spoke out against the construction of further 
nuclear power stations. On the other hand, they expressed 
various opinions about genetic engineering, according to the 
questions asked. There was no general rejection. 
  A comparison with the opinions of foreign societies is also 
interesting. According to the authors of the survey, the 
Germans score good points regarding both their expectations of 
the new technologies, and their views on the impact of 
scientific research for social development. Society's views in 
the United States seem more favorable than in Germany, but no 
"technological euphoria" is discernible among Japanese society. 
  The study reveals something that is no secret among economic 
organizations and research institutes, namely that the Germans 
are not hostile to technology; they just want to be better 
informed. But Frieder Meyer-Krahmer, head of the Fraeuenhof 
Institute for Systems Technology and Research, says it is wrong 
to believe that German society does not accept new technologies 
when, in fact, the world of science and industry and the state 
often fail to inform society of the effects and consequences of 
scientific innovation, or fail to discuss these things with 
society in good time. 
  If German society's hostility to new technology is open to 
doubt, one thing seems almost certain -- that the prerequisites 
for research and technology are not optimal. The process of 
issuing permits for new technologies is a very long one, and 
smaller enterprises have to go through difficult administrative 
procedures before they receive money for new equipment. The BDI 
calls for a better coordination of interministerial research 
policy and for a stronger integration of the research 
infrastructure. In the future, innovation policy must be 
considered a task for all political departments. For example, 
the reform of the health administration also has a bearing on 
medicinal research. But for some time now, the state has also 
held a series of new roles on the subject of innovation. 
  The BDI views the Ministry of Research and Technology as a 
supporter of technological innovation on account of its 
political attitude. As strong supporters of the newly formed 
Technology Council attached to the federal chancellor, German 
industrialists have abandoned their previous general stance 
whereby the state should rather keep away from technological 
policy. Peter Biesenbach of the Department of Research, 
Technology, and Structural Policy has a ready made declaration 
in this matter. In the next century, in matters regarding 
central technologies, it is not the decisions of consumers that 
will be important, but the decisions of politicians on the 
subject of the necessary infrastructure. Whether we are dealing 
with telecommunications, transportation, or genetic engineering, 
the introduction of new products onto the market will no longer 
depend on know-how, but on political conditions. 
Telecommunications provides a simple example. If the state 
offers no new telecommunications networks, it makes no sense for 
industry to produce new equipment. Proper planning is therefore 
the keyword, and this can only be done by means of dialogue with 
the state. 
  Meyer-Kahmer is in favor of a "total innovation strategy," 
whereby industry should concentrate on areas where "German 
strength combines with important future technologies." He 
mentions as examples environmental science, transportation, the 
chemical industry, and information technology. He would like to 
see a greater application of technology in the solving of 
problems and thus "detect fluctuations in demand in good time." 
Enterprises should also gear themselves to new industrial 
patterns more easily. For instance, the automobile industry must 
assume a new identity as a "mobility industry" that considers 
its task to be the supply of complete systemic solutions to 
satisfy the demand for mobility. Says Meyer-Krahmer: "To have a 
car or not to have a car is then no longer a question of 
survival, but of expediency." 
  This is worth considering. There are enough ideas on how the 
state, industry, and science can boost scientific innovation. 
Therefore the following principle applies to all concerned: 
Enough words have been said, now is the time to act. 

