Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, February 8 (XINHUA) -- Ambassadors of 16 
countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) will 
meet on Wednesday [9 February] in Brussels on how to stop last 
Saturday's massacre of civilians in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo 
from happening again. 
  The NATO ambassadors will face a tough time deciding whether 
to approve air strike against Serbian positions in Sarajevo or 
not. 
  A shell explosion Saturday at noon in a downtown Sarajevo 
marketplace has so far killed 68 people and wounded 200, all of 
them civilians. 
  The Bosnian Government accused Serbs of the shelling. The 
Serbs denied it, and the command of U.N. Peace-Keeping Force in 
Bosnia has not decided yet on who was responsible for the 
shelling. 
  U.S. President Bill Clinton Monday expressed support to a 
U.N. call for NATO approval of air strikes against Bosnian Serbs. 
  U.N. Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali Sunday asked the 
NATO to approve air strike on Bosnian Serbian positions around 
Sarajevo. 
  France Monday urged the European Union to impose an 
ultimatum 
on the Bosnian Serbs for either removing their artillery from 
the bills surrounding Sarajevo or facing Western military 
intervention. 
  But France's efforts failed at Monday's European Community 
foreign ministers' meeting, and instead, the EC asked the NATO 
to discuss at a regular weekly ambassadors' meeting on Wednesday 
"all means necessary" to immediately lift the siege on Sarajevo, 
air strike included. 
  Meanwhile, the option for air strike has been opposed by 
Russia, Greece and Canada. 
  Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev said on Monday that 
bombing Serbian positions will be the "least successful" 
response to the killing in Sarajevo. 
  Within the NATO, Greek Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias 
said after the EC foreign ministers' meeting that there was "a 
convergence of view that there is no alternative solution to the 
Bosnian peace plan of the European Union." 
  Canada, which participated in U.N. Peace-Keeping Operations 
in Bosnia, has also expressed opposition to the use of air 
strike. 
  The European peace plan aims to divide Bosnia-Herzegovina 
into three ethnic states. The Serbs and Croats have accepted 
the plan, while the Muslim side has rejected it. 
  Despite all these, the ASSOCIATED PRESS quoted an unnamed 
NATO source as saying that the sense at the NATO headquarters is 
that "there has to be a more muscular response, that they have 
to be serious about air strike" when NATO ambassadors meet on 
Wednesday. 
  The source said that any air strike on Serbian positions 
will 
only have political objectives, such as the withdrawal of the 
Serbs and putting under the control of NATO forces artillery on 
the hills around Sarajevo. 
  Aircraft-carriers of the United States, France and Britain 
are reportedly increasing their activities in the Adriatic Sea, 
and the NATO air bases in southern Italy are in full readiness 
for air strike. 
  If the NATO approves a definite plan to oust Serbian forces 
from the hills surrounding Sarajevo through air strike, it is 
expected to ask the U.N. secretary general to issue an order. 
  However, some NATO countries and Russia have asked Ghali to 
put the issue for discussion in the U.N. Security Council, where 
Russia has a power to veto any resolution. 
  Legally, Ghali needs not consult the Security Council 
because 
the latter has already adopted resolutions putting some Bosnian 
cities, including Sarajevo, under U.N. protection as "security 
zones." 

