CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Th. Kouloumbis, professor of international </F>
relations at the University of Athens: "The Turkish Provocation"] 
  [Text] The dimension of the Turkish threat has been 
systematically discussed in our country, where there is almost 
total agreement on the methods for confronting it. The main 
elements of deterrence Greece possesses are: a) Strong and 
battle-ready armed forces that ensure the Greek-Turkish balance 
of power; b) An active Greek participation in NATO, the Western 
European Union [WEU], and the European Union (EU), which 
strengthens our diplomatic, economic, and political support by 
removing the possibility of a Turkish military operation against 
us; c) A strategic dogma that prevents the country from 
embroilment in a simultaneous confrontation on two or more 
fronts east and north of our borders. 
  Let us discuss the aspect of the provocation concerning the 
"opportunity," that is, the way to find a mutually acceptable 
solution of a range of Greek-Turkish problems. 
  A future historical compromise with Turkey will free Greece 
from the burden of absolutely necessary defense expenditures. 
Reduction of these expenditures--of the order of 6 percent of 
GDP--will have immediate and positive repercussions on the 
attempt to stabilize and develop our economy to satisfy the 
Maastricht criteria and to avoid the marginalization of Greece 
in the steadily uniting EU. Additionally, the neutralization of 
the Turkish threat will strengthen our negotiating position in 
the Balkans and allow Greece to move with imagination and ease 
in shaping collective policy within the framework of the EU, the 
WEU, and NATO. A historical compromise will have similar 
advantages for Turkey, because it will open the way for its 
integration into the logic of democracy, mutual economic 
dependence, gradual "demilitarization" of Turkish society and 
its long-term harmonious integration into European structures. 
However, we must stress at this point that recent domestic 
developments in Turkey leave thin margins for optimism for the 
important issue we could call "Turkish democratic metamorphosis." 
  Greek-Turkish problems (most of which were created 
one-sidedly by Turkey within the context of a troubled and 
revisionist policy) include the continuing Turkish occupation of 
Cyprus, the demand that the Aegean continental shelf be divided, 
the contested Greek right to extend territorial waters and air 
space to 12 miles, the presently contested 10-mile limit of our 
national air space, the proposal for joint administration of the 
Aegean within the framework of the operational control of NATO 
commands, our contested right to the defensive militarization of 
the Aegean and Dhodhekanisos islands, and, finally, the 
increasing "demands" concerning the rights of the Muslim 
minority in Greek Thraki. 
  Even listing these "problems" is disheartening to the most 
optimistic observer. Nevertheless, the possibility of achieving 
a strategy of decreasing tensions (let us not hide the fact that 
a Cold War has existed in Greek-Turkish relations for the past 
20 years) is worthwhile and ought to be sought by Greece and by 
Turkey. At this juncture, we should again emphasize that the 
recent violations of human rights of the neighboring country's 
Kurdish minority do not lend themselves to an immediate 
rapprochement. 
  In spite of our reservations, we will bring this brief 
article to a close with a proposal for a dialogue with the 
neighboring country. 
  It must be mutually acknowledged that: 
  -- It is impossible to return to a climate of Greek-Turkish 
friendship (as in the 1930's) without a fair solution to the 
Cyprus problem. 
  -- A formula for the solution of the Cyprus issue 
presupposes 
that Greece will sacrifice the vision of Enosis, and Turkey will 
sacrifice the vision of Division, to produce an independent 
Cyprus Federation, which will become a member of the EU and NATO 
as soon as its foundation is agreed upon. 
  -- A formula for the solution of the problems in the Aegean 
precludes two extreme choices: Greece will not seek to turn the 
Aegean into a "Greek lake." For its part, Turkey will give up 
the claims aimed at dividing the Aegean by "imprisoning" our 
islands into Turkish areas of operational responsibilities. 
  -- Both sides understand that the implementation of a 
strategy aimed at achieving peace between Greece and Turkey will 
be a difficult and time- consuming process. As a result, the 
adoption of various "packages/confidence measures" in the Aegean 
and in Cyprus should not be excluded. On the contrary, an 
accelerated strategy of confidence-building measures (i.e., the 
reduction/removal of offensive weapons from the borders between 
the two countries) will lead to the creation of more favorable 
conditions to achieve peace. 
  As peace processes in areas of long-time confrontation 
(Palestine, Northern Ireland, and South Africa) are developing, 
it would be tragic if we were to fatalistically accept the idea 
that as Greeks and Turks, we are condemned to an eternal 
confrontation that so weakens the two sides. Perhaps the time is 
approaching for a Greek-Turkish "Oslo." 

