BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Chuangen (4545 0278 2704)] </F>
  [Text] Guiyang, 14 Jun (XINHUA) -- When Qiao Shi, member of 
the Standing Committee of the CPC Central Committee Political 
Bureau and chairman of the National People's Congress Standing 
Committee, inspected Guizhou, he pointed out: Guizhou must 
cherish the opportunity, proceed from its actual conditions, 
speed up the pace of development, continue to emancipate the 
mind, persist in reconstruction through its own efforts, make 
full use of its own favorable conditions, further arouse the 
initiative of the masses of all nationalities and the vast 
numbers of party members and cadres, and extensively absorb 
favorable factors in all quarters so as to enable a landlocked 
province which is not located in a coastal area, along the Chang 
Jiang, or in a border areas to gradually advance along the road 
of economic development with big strides. 
  Accompanied by Liu Fangren, Guizhou Provincial CPC Committee 
secretary; Guizhou Governor Chen Shineng; and Wang Chaowen, 
Guizhou Provincial People's Congress chairman; Qiao Shi drove 
more than 1,000 km between 7 and 14 June in his inspection tour 
of Duyun city, the capital of the Qiannan Bouyei-Miao Autonomous 
Prefecture; Kaili County; the capital of the Qiandongnan 
Miao-Dong Autonomous Prefecture, and the counties of Libo, 
Sandu, and Leishan, which are under the jurisdiction of the 
aforementioned two capitals. During his inspection tour, Qiao 
Shi visited factories, schools; villages inhabited by the Yao, 
Shui, and Miao minority nationalities; and some peasant 
households, and he got in touch with cadres, workers, peasants, 
and teachers of various nationalities to understand the 
situation of their production, livelihood, education, and 
efforts to become well-off. Qiao Shi was very pleased to see 
that these areas inhabited by minority nationalities enjoy 
economic development and social stability, that the living 
standards of the masses in these areas have been improved, and 
that various nationalities there get along with one another 
peacefully and harmoniously. At Miaoliang village in Sandu Shui 
Autonomous County, and at the Langdeshang village in Leishan 
County, Qiao Shi watched song and dance performances with a 
strong minority-nationalities flavor staged by villagers and was 
invited to dance with villagers of fraternal nationalities. 
  After having listened to work reports by the provincial 
party 
committee, the provincial people's congress, and the provincial 
government, Qiao Shi pointed out that now is an extremely good 
period for China's construction and development. He reviewed 
the modern history of China since the Opium War, analyzed 
various current international and domestic conditions favorable 
to China's economic construction, and encouraged everyone to 
gain a profound understanding of Comrade Xiaoping's important 
instructions so as to seize the opportunity to successfully 
promote Guizhou's economic construction. 
  Touching on Guizhou's economic work, Qiao Shi said: Guizhou 
is a landlocked province "which is not located in a coastal 
area, along the Chang Jiang, or in a border area." Mountains 
and hills account for 97 percent of its area. Impoverished 
people inhabit a relatively great portion of its area. Indeed, 
it faces big difficulties. True, it needs the central 
authorities' support and all quarters' help to solve these 
difficulties; however, in the final analysis, it must depend on 
itself. Above all, we must be aware of the fact that Guizhou 
has tremendous potential and many favorable conditions. It is 
necessary for Guizhou to closely rely on the masses of the 
people and to make full use of its favorable conditions to 
invigorate the economic sector and to successfully promote 
economic development. 
  The Guizhou provincial party committee and Guizhou 
Provincial 
Government always place agriculture and rural work at the top of 
the agenda of their economic work. Qiao Shi fully affirmed 
their practice. He said: Guizhou has achieved great successes 
in promoting agricultural development. However, it is still 
necessary for Guizhou to be more farsighted and to actually 
acquire a large-scale agriculture mentality when carrying out 
tasks in all fields of endeavor. Guizhou has very great 
potential for agricultural development. While doing a good job 
of grain production, Guizhou can develop animal husbandry and 
aquaculture and increase the output of orchards, tea, mulberry 
trees and silkworms, medicinal materials, and other cash crops. 
Meanwhile, it can develop town and township enterprises and, in 
particular, processing enterprises by basing itself on local raw 
and semifinished materials. After economic development has 
progressed to a certain extent, it can establish a group of 
small cities and towns in a planned way and under proper 
guidance to promote the development of rural areas to a higher 
level. The surplus labor force in rural areas can be organized 
to participate in the construction of highways, water 
conservancy projects, and other types of infrastructure so as to 
bring their role into full play. 
  Qiao Shi pointed out: Guizhou is endowed with very 
abundant resources and, in particular, with very abundant energy 
resources and nonferrous metals. Guizhou must make full use of 
its favorable condition -- "being endowed with a sea of coal 
south of the Chang Jiang." Meanwhile, it must also accelerate 
the tapping of its abundant water resources. It can build 
thermal power and hydropower stations at the same time. Because 
Guizhou already has a considerably solid foundation for the 
production of aluminum, coupled with adequate electric energy, 
the prospects for Guizhou's aluminum production are very good. 
Guizhou must strive to do a better job of building arterial and 
main highways to facilitate a linkup with major highways in 
neighboring provinces and regions, as well as in forming a 
network of them. Meanwhile, Guizhou must mobilize and organize 
the forces of all quarters to speed up construction in other 
fields. Of course, all these things must be carried out in a 
planned way and step by step. Close attention must be paid to 
vigorously developing, by every means possible, the projects for 
which the basic conditions already exist. 
  Qiao Shi stressed: Generally speaking, to accelerate 
development, Guizhou must rely on fully arousing the initiative 
of the 34 million people of various nationalities in the whole 
province. Meanwhile, it must strive to win the support of and 
help from the central authorities and relevant departments, and 
it must strengthen lateral ties and cooperation with fraternal 
provinces, municipalities, and regions. In addition, it must 
speed up the pace of reform and opening up, and do a good job of 
carrying out the construction of tangible- and 
intangible-investment-environment projects to attract more 
foreign funds and types of technology. In short, I hope that 
you comrades of Guizhou will further emancipate your minds, 
broaden your horizons, take a wider road, and adopt more methods 
in a bid to promote more rapid economic development in Guizhou. 
  Touching on the work of people's congresses, Qiao Shi 
stressed: It is necessary to strengthen the building of 
socialist democracy, laws, and regulations and to establish a 
legal system suited to a socialist market economy in accordance 
with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. He said: The missions undertaken by 
people's congresses are very heavy and important. The work of 
people's congresses at all levels, including legislation, the 
publicizing of laws and regulations, and the supervision of law 
enforcement, must be improved. He said: The forces from all 
walks of life must be mobilized to establish a legal system 
suited to a socialist market economy. It is also a process of 
broadly developing democracy. He pointed out: Improving the 
work of people's congresses at the grass-roots level has very 
important significance for strengthening party building, 
political power, and laws and regulations at the grass-roots 
level. 
  Qiao Shi expressed the belief that the people of various 
nationalities in Guizhou will surely be able to build Guizhou 
into a better province by adhering to the party's basic line, 
deepening reform, and opening up wider under the leadership of 
the provincial party committee and provincial government. 

