Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 5 Mar (XINHUA) -- The sixth meeting of the 
Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] Standing Committee, 
after a four-day session at which it completed all the items on 
its agenda, concluded at the Great Hall of the People this 
afternoon. 
  Chairman Qiao Shi presided over the meeting. 
  The meeting approved by vote Supplementary Regulations on 
Severely Punishing Criminals who Organize and Transport People 
Across the Border (Boundary) and the Law on Protecting 
Investment of Taiwan Compatriots. President Jiang Zemin signed 
presidential orders No. 19 and 20 today to promulgate the two 
sets of laws. The laws will go into effect upon the day of 
promulgation. 
  The meeting approved China's accession to the International 
Convention on Unifying Laws and Regulations on Ship Collision, 
the 1974 Athens Protocol on Transportation of Passengers and 
Their Luggage on Seas, and ratified the PRC-Thai Extradition 
Treaty and the PRC-Kyrgyz Consular Treaty. 
  It was decided at today's meeting that the following motions 
be submitted to the Second Session of the Eighth NPC for 
examination or voting. They include: the motions of empowering 
the Xiamen City People's Congress and its Standing Committee, 
and the Xiamen City People's Government to enact laws, rules, 
and regulations respectively for implementation in the Xiamen 
Special Economic Zone, the draft agenda of the Second Session of 
the Eighth NPC, and the draft namelists of the presidium and 
secretary general of the Second Session of the Eighth NPC. 
  The meeting adopted the report on the work of the NPC 
Standing Committee, which will be submitted to the Second 
Session of the Eighth NPC for examination; the draft namelist of 
nonvoting persons attending the Second Session of the Eighth 
NPC; and a report on credentials of the additional deputies 
elected through by-elections, which affirms the credentials of 
the nine newly elected deputies. Now there are a total of 2,980 
NPC deputies. The meeting also approved personnel appointments 
and removals. 
  Vice Chairmen Tian Jiyun, Wang Hanbin, Ni Zhifu, Sun Qimeng, 
Lei Jieqiong, Li Ximing, Wang Bingqian, Wang Guangying, Chen 
Siyuan, Lu Jiaxi, Buhe, Tomur Dawamat, Li Peiyao, and Wu 
Jieping; and Secretary General Cao Zhi attended the meeting. 
  State Councillor Li Guixian; Ren Jianxin, president of the 
Supreme People's Court; and Zhang Siqing, chief procurator of 
the Supreme People's Procuratorate, attended as observers. 

