BFN 

  [Text] Following is the text of the Statement of the 
Presidents of the Baltic States on Coordination of Actions 
vis-a-vis EU, NATO, Other International Structures, and in 
Strengthening Stability in Europe: [begin text] 
  We, the Presidents of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania met in 
Palanga, Lithuania on 25 March 1994, to discuss matters of 
mutual concern, in particular the integration of the three 
Baltic States with the economic, political and security 
structures of Europe. 
  We discussed our progress achieved to date in developing 
co-operation among our states in a number of fields. In this 
context, we noted the results of our Foreign Ministers' meeting 
in Riga on 23 March 1994, in particular the agreement in 
principle on the constitution of the Baltic Council of 
Ministers. We noted with satisfaction that the Free Trade 
Agreement between our states will come into force on 1 April 
1994 and we stressed the importance of continuing negotiations 
towards supplementing this agreement with a protocol on free 
trade in agricultural goods. 
  We also noted the progress made in deepening the cooperation 
between the Baltic Sea States during the last year. We 
expressed our conviction that the Council of the Baltic Sea 
States to be convened under the Estonian chairmanship in Tallinn 
on 24-25 May 1994 will stress the importance of discussing the 
establishment of the post of a CSCE High Commissioner on human 
rights and minority questions and of reaching agreement on 
international participation in the decommissioning of the 
Baldish nuclear facility. 
  We noted that the process of strengthening political and 
economic relations with the European Union should continue 
toward the aim of rapidly concluding Free Trade Agreements with 
the European Union, and expressed the hope that Association 
(Europe) Agreements would be subsequently concluded as soon as 
possible, and not later than the end of 1994. In this 
connection, we noted that associate membership status in the 
Western European Union would further contribute to security and 
stability in Europe. 
  We welcomed the efforts of NATO to strengthen ties with the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe and asserted that NATO 
is the main guarantor of security in the Baltic region. We 
expressed our conviction that increased cooperation with NATO 
within the Partnership for Peace programme will further enhance 
security and facilitate the Baltic States integration as full 
members. In this connection, we stressed the importance of 
President Clinton recently announced decision to lift the 
embargo on arms sales to the three Baltic States as a further 
confirmation of the rapid progress achieved in restoring 
democratic institutions and instituting market economies in our 
countries. 
  We hope that the Stability Pact initiated by the European 
Union will not only strengthen security and stability in Europe 
but also contribute to the advancement of the dialogue of the 
Baltic States with the EU and help us to promote full members of 
the EU on the same basis as the Visegrad countries and other 
countries with EU association agreements. 
  We also stressed the importance of the Ukraine's decision to 
join NATO's Partnership for Peace and expressed our conviction 
the Ukraine will pay an increasingly important role in ensuring 
continued stability and security in Europe and especially in the 
near vicinity of the Baltic Sea region. The recently concluded 
bilateral agreements signed between the Ukraine and Lithuania 
and Estonia respectively form a solid basis for further 
developing relations with the Ukraine in the economic, cultural, 
political and security fields. 
  We are reaffirmed our conviction that all Russian forces 
must 
be withdrawn from Estonia and Latvia by 31 August 1994. We 
called on the international community to continue monitoring the 
situation so that this date would be observed. The Presidents 
of Estonia and Lithuania welcomed the agreement on troop 
withdrawals initialed during the last round of Latvian-Russian 
negotiations. 
  We, the Presidents of the three Baltic States, expressed the 
hope that an agreement on troop withdrawals would be initialed 
at the upcoming Estonian-Russian round in April. 
  We stressed the need for international organizations to 
strictly monitor how the Skrunda radar facility will be 
utilized, to ensure that there are no negative consequences for 
those living in the area, that the facility will not be used as 
a military base, and that it will not compromise the sovereignty 
of Latvia. 
  The resolution of these outstanding issues will, we are 
convinced, stimulate more constructive and fruitful relations 
with Russia and increase stability and security in the Baltic 
Sea region. (end text) 

