BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, 15 Jun (AFP) -- The outgoing UN special 
representative to Rwanda on Wednesday [15 June] accused Rwandan 
rebels and the government of genocide against their own people 
in an ongoing ethnic bloodbath. "The reality is that the RPF 
(rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front) and the Rwandan Government have 
prepared for war and not peace and will have to bear their 
responsibility in history for the genocide they are inflicting 
on their own people," Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh said after 
resigning his post. 
  Up to half a million people have been killed in 
two-and-a-half months of ethnic and political carnage unleashed 
by the April 6 death of president Juvenal Habyarimana in a 
suspected rocket attack on his plane. "In this context of 
widespread hatred and violence, the peace mission of foreigners 
and the UN seems out of place and very risky," he said. 
  "The solution to the Rwandan drama will come neither from 
abroad nor from the United Nations. After the continuing 
bloodbath, I think it is already too late for the Rwandans to 
extricate their country from the present chaos by themselves," 
he said. "It is with sadness and pessimism that I leave the 
Rwandans reduced to this state of extreme distress through the 
fault of unscrupulous and short-sighted politicians," he said in 
a statement issued in Nairobi. 
  He dismissed accusations from the rebels, drawn from the 
minority Tutsis, that he backed the Hutu-majority government as 
an attempt to "find scapegoats to justify an insane war which 
they are pursuing against all good sense." Booh-Booh said he 
was happy to leave Rwanda, where the people "do not like each 
other." 
  UN Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali has appointed a 
Pakistani diplomat, Mohamad Sharyar Khan, to replace Booh-Booh, 
from Cameroon, whom he praised for his "devotion to peace in 
Rwanda." 
  The United Nations posted troops to Rwanda to monitor a 
ceasefire and political accord -- now in tatters -- reached 
between the government and RPF in August last year. The UN 
force was drastically reduced to just 450 men after Belgian 
peacekeepers were slaughtered in April. UN Secretary-General 
Butrus Butrus-Ghali has for a month been seeking to boost it to 
5,500 troops, mainly from other African countries. 

