Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valter Udam: "In Defense of Farm Economy and the </F>
Farm Law"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Farmer and the Status Quo </H5>
  Last December marked five years from the time the farm law 
was passed. Based on that law, close to 10,000 farms have 
emerged by now. Part of them are already viable, because they 
have been able to acquire the necessary agricultural and farm 
technology, and construct or renovate their production 
structures. The first cows raised on one's own farm are giving 
milk already. In agriculture, the production cycle is long, and 
it usually takes five to six years before any capital can be 
accumulated to expand production. 
  Five years ago, it was possible to start out with a 
relatively small amount of initial capital. A new tractor cost 
3,000 to 5,000 rubles, one could also buy used equipment 
cheaper, or rent it from the collectives. Building materials and 
other necessities could also be acquired cheaper. 
  Currently, the cost of a tractor is between 50,000 and 
60,000 
kroons, representing some 10 years of milk money for an average 
farmer. But what about production costs and upkeep of the 
family? The reader might suggest taking a loan. But, in that 
case, people in the cities could also start taking out loans to 
feed their families? The current sales prices of agricultural 
products do not cover expenses incurred for their production, 
not to mention the interest on the loan. This is why farmers are 
reluctant to take out loans, even though they are available in 
limited amounts. Our state and our people are not able to pay 
the farmer a fair price for his production. This is what has 
snagged the creation of farms. 
  It is not hard to foresee that this year, too, will bring a 
decrease in both the acreage planted and in productivity. Much 
of the fall plowing was neglected, and the acreage of winter 
grain amounted to about one third of that planted in previous 
years. A good portion of that, too, will probably have to be 
plowed under in the spring because the first shoots were not 
viable. Farmers and cooperatives based on collectives did not 
have enough money last fall to buy fuel for hauling organic 
fertilizers out to the fields, not to mention buying any 
mineral-based fertilizers. This is why, over the next few years, 
the fertility of the soil is bound to go down to the point where 
money made from the sale of agricultural products no longer 
covers the cost of tilling the soil. But, unfortunately, one 
cannot get something out of nothing! 
<H5>  Birth of the Farm Law and Its Current Status </H5>
  Five years ago when the farm law was passed, none of us 
believed that we could reach such absurdity. Back then, I was 
chairman of the Supreme Council agricultural complex commission 
or the only paid delegate to the council. This is why I had an 
opportunity to get involved in formulating legislative measures 
dealing with agriculture. Preparations for the farm law took 
more than half a year, it was passed after its third reading. 
Participating in this work, besides commission members (most of 
them specialists in agriculture) and members of the expert group 
(these numbered 32, most of them scientists), were also actual 
farmers--farm operators as well as representatives of 
collectives; well-known legal professionals of our republic, and 
representatives of government agencies. The bill of the farm law 
was up for public discussion. In the course of this work, our 
commission received more than 200 corrections and proposals. 
  Lately, for almost a year now, there have been efforts to 
wipe out all the work that was done back then, and leave 
agriculture, along with the farmer, without any protection. In 
fact, the farm law was declared void when the law to 
implement property rights was passed by Riigikogu 
[Estonia's parliament] recently. Up until now, it had been the 
only measure regulating all the problems dealing with the 
development of agriculture: Relations between state and local 
authorities, premises of economic and financial activity, issues 
linked to continuity of ownership, and much more. 
  According to the farm law, the founder of the farm was free 
of all taxation for the first five years. This is of special 
importance because agriculture is known for its slow turnover of 
capital and its long production cycle, the initial investment 
for starting a farm will not turn any profit for the first five 
years. This is the minimum amount of time it takes to cover 
direct production costs, feed one's family, and put aside money 
for the instalment and interest payments on the bank loans. 
  In the days of the independent Republic of Estonia, after 
the 
land reform, farmers were given long-term, low interest loans 
extended over 50 years, with payments starting five years after 
the loan was received. When formulating the farm law, we drew 
extensively on the legislation and experiences garnered from 
that era. Now, both Riigikogu and the government want to place 
the farmer right in the middle of an unregulated and untamed 
market economy. But agriculture, by its very nature, cannot 
compete with other sectors of the national economy without help 
from the state. 
  Naturally, we could not pass an ideal farm law five years 
ago, and we could not do it now. Life has a way of coming up 
with new problems constantly. During Estonia's republican era, 
over 200 corrections and amendments were added to legislation in 
the area of agriculture over a 20-year period. Ministers of 
agriculture were also changed frequently, but agricultural 
leadership and continuity of production were maintained through 
the most difficult of years. 
  Agriculture and farmers are in for some extremely difficult 
years. Those becoming landowners these days are predominantly 
city folk who have neither the will nor the ability to start a 
farm in the given situation. They lack both the mental and the 
material basis, and the experience that, in the older days, was 
passed on in the farm setting as part of family continuity. This 
is why land reform will not be completed in the years to come, 
but will go on for some time. The land will be changing its 
owners quite a few times before agriculture will really get 
going. By that, I am referring primarily to agriculture dealing 
with commercial production. You can find cottagers and hobby 
farmers in agriculturally developed countries, too, but these 
are not involved in solving the problems linked to the 
production of agricultural products. 
  Right now, it is not hard to foresee that prices of 
agricultural products on the world market will be going up in 
the years to come. Considering our standard of living, they are 
high already. In response to pressure from the United States, 
agricultural subsidies will be reduced by up to 20 percent over 
the next six years. Price increases will also be helped along by 
the reduction of subsidies to the export of agricultural 
products. People in wealthy countries can afford to pay for all 
that, but we are in for trouble. 
  Unfortunately, our politicians and our government could not, 
and did not even want to foresee this kind of development. Now, 
that agriculture is largely in shambles (which is the best word 
to describe it), there are some attempts to admit it, but it is 
too late already. I could not tell what we should be doing. I 
would like to emphasize, however, that the farm law should be 
left in force, with changes to be made as the situation 
warrants, and its provisions made to correspond to those of the 
property right law. 

