Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] General Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue, the civil service 
and labor minister, returned to Ndjamena yesterday after a visit 
to Libya where he delivered a message from the head of state, 
Colonel Idriss Deby, to his Libyan counterpart, Colonel Mu'ammar 
al- Qadhdhafi. This message pertained to the International 
Court of Justice at the Hague's verdict on the Aozou Strip. 
Gen. Kamougue reviews his visit with Edouard Hela: 
  [Begin recording] [Kamougue] As announced by the media, I 
paid a visit in the company of Ali Mamane Sane, adviser on 
international and legal affairs at the Presidency, to the leader 
of the Libyan Revolution, Col. Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi, to whom I 
delivered a message from the Chadian head of state, Col. Idriss 
Deby. We were in the Libyan capital from 15 to 18 February. 
  The day after my arrival, I had the honor to be received by 
the Libyan head of state. Since the message I delivered was 
meant for the Libyan leader alone, it would not be normal for me 
to disclose its contents. However, it can be easily imagined 
that this message had something to do with the decision of the 
International Court of Justice which confirmed the demarcation 
of our border with Libya and consequently ruled that the Aozou 
Strip belongs to our country. In addition to delivering this 
message to the Libyan leader, I made a certain number of 
comments regarding an exchange of correspondence between the 
Libyan leader and the Chadian head of state. 
  In regard to the reaction of the Libyan authorities, we were 
received in two ways. Concerning the protocol reception, I must 
say that one was correct. Regarding the basic problem, Libya, 
through its most authoritative representative -- Col. Mu'ammar 
al-Qadhdhafi -- has accepted the court's decision. However, 
this country has not reacted officially and clearly either in a 
communique or in an official statement to the court decision. 
This difference between the words of the Libyan leader during 
our discussions and the absence of any official reaction 
concerning the court decision has confused us regarding our 
mission. The government is equally perplexed. 
  [Hela] Gen. Kamougue, before your visit to Libya there was a 
report on the concentration of troops on the borders of the two 
countries and on the maltreatment of Chadians in Libya. Did you 
discuss this with the Libyan authorities? 
  [Kamougue] Indeed, we discussed this issue which we can 
analyze in two parts. First, I will refer to the reinforcement 
of Libyan Army presence in the Aozou region. By the time we 
arrived in Libya, our government had received news of the troop 
reinforcement. However, the Libyan authorities we met denied 
these reports and even said that their military presence in the 
region was being reduced and that their planes had started 
returning to their base in northern Libya. Must these 
assurances given by the Libyan authorities be taken by the 
letter? Like Saint Thomas, we must see before we believe. 
Consequently, we are not satisfied with this statement by the 
Libyan authorities. Right now, we still have doubts and even 
fears and strong reserves regarding Libya's assurances in the 
absence of concrete proof that can effectively make us believe 
these statements. That is the first point. 
  On the second point regarding the maltreatment of Chadians 
in 
Libya, we were informed of this before our departure. We can 
now confirm that some Chadians were rounded up even a month 
before the International Court of Justice's verdict. A total of 
365 Chadians were rounded up in Tripoli, Seba, and Benghazi; 165 
were from Tripoli alone. The Chadians, according to the 
explanations given by the Libyan authorities, were in an 
irregular situation because they had no residence documents in 
conformity with Libyan legislation. During the audience with the 
Libyan leader we spoke about the issue and asked to visit our 
fellow countrymen. This was done on 18 February. After this 
visit, we asked the Libyan authorities to release the Chadians 
before the meeting of our two foreign ministers. This demand 
was accepted by the leader of the Libyan Revolution at the 
proposal of the Chadian head of state. 
  [Hela] Knowing the unpredictable nature of Col. al- 
Qadhdhafi, and in view of the obstacles being put up just after 
the International Court of Justice's verdict which was 
unfavorable to Libya, do you not fear that Libya will seek to 
destabilize Chad? 
  [Kamougue] I think we should not despair; one day relations 
between Libya and Chad will be normalized. We on our part have 
chosen the path of law and justice and, consequently, we have 
rejected a solution through the force of arms. We dare believe, 
and we greatly hope that the Libyan Government and people will 
also set out on this path of peace, which is absolutely 
necessary not only for Chad but also for Libya considering the 
current difficult situation we are all going through. We 
therefore believe that it is not in the Libyan people's interest 
to maintain any rebellion on our borders. What I also believe 
is that no Chadian, wherever he may be -- whether inside or 
outside Chad -- should allow himself to be manipulated by Libya 
to destabilize his country. We do not have any reason to fear 
any destabilization at the moment, and as I have just said, we 
are very vigilant. We appeal to all Chadians, wherever they are 
-- whether inside or outside the country -- to be alert to this 
fundamental issue: their nation's survival. [end recording] 

