Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 1 Jan (XINHUA) -- The General Office of 
the State Council issued a circular yesterday urging localities 
and departments to put an end to the selling of public housing 
at excessively low prices and to exercise more effective 
leadership over the reform of the urban housing system. The 
circular urges them to carry out a general review of sales of 
public housing in the near future and to handle with care and 
skill the losses of state assets resulting from sale of public 
housing at excessively low prices. 
  It has been learned that the Third National Conference on 
Reform of the Urban Housing System adopted a housing reform plan 
which, in addition to establishing common reserve funds for 
housing, requires that public housing be sold in a planned 
manner under a unified State Council policy. It also repeatedly 
stresses that special care should be taken to prevent the sale 
of public housing at excessively low prices. Recently, 
government organs, enterprises, and establishments in some 
localities have, however, rushed to sell public housing at 
excessively low prices. This has resulted in huge losses of 
state assets. In some instances, proceeds from the sales were 
diverted to other uses. These transgressions are not conducive 
to the sound development of housing reform, and they tend to 
engender unhealthy practices. 
  To prevent the selling of public housing at excessively low 
prices, to steadfastly implement the unified policy of the State 
Council on urban housing reform, and to ensure the sound 
development of housing reform, the State Council General 
Office's circular stipulated: 
  1. All localities or departments must, without exception, 
halt the selling of public housing pending the promulgation of 
the "Decision of the State Council on Accelerating the Reform of 
the Urban Housing System." Any violations of the State Council 
regulations banning the rushed sale of public housing will be 
investigated thoroughly. 
  2. A review of housing already sold should be carried out. 
All formalities without exception must be suspended for housing 
that has been sold at a price lower than what is set out in the 
State Council policy but for which property rights transfers or 
ownership registration procedures have not been completed. 
Where there are losses of state assets due to the sale of 
public housing at excessively low prices, the localities or 
departments must formulate a plan to comply with the relevant 
State Council policy and carry it out in appropriately. 
  3. Improve the management of proceeds generated by sales of 
housing. Proceeds from housing already sold must be frozen at 
the units concerned pending further instructions. They cannot 
be used for any purpose. In case of violations, the person 
directly involved and the leaders concerned will be investigated 
for their responsibility. 
  The circular urges provincial, autonomous regional, and 
municipal governments to carry out a general review of public 
housing sales in the near future and to submit their findings to 
the State Council's Leading Group for Housing System Reform. 

