BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jesus Aranda] </F>
  [Text] Members of the Promoters of Solidarity with Cuba 
have taken over installations at the U.S. Embassy, displaying a 
casket containing a puppet of Uncle Sam and burning 
it, and they began staging a lightning demonstration 
against U.S. "imperialism" and Senator Robert Torricelli's 
presence in Mexico. 
  The grenadiers in charge of security around the U.S. 
installations did not know what to do; the protesters jumped 
over the huge chain-link fence located at the barrier in front 
of the embassy building. They were a mere meter and a half away 
from the door that accesses the embassy. 
  The appointment for media reporters presaged something very 
peculiar: "Two women will meet the reporter at 0930 at the 
Sanborns Restaurant to lead him to the place where the events 
will be staged." 
  At 1000 sharp, reporters followed the youths who were 
heading 
toward La Reforma Avenue; suddenly, a pickup truck 
stopped in front of the U.S. Embassy, and two youths quickly got 
out of the car and placed the casket with the effigy inside. 
  Members of the Promoters of Solidarity with Cuba appeared 
from many places and started chanting slogans against U.S. 
imperialism and Senator Torricelli: "The Zapatists burned the 
fax in which they were warned of your presence," they greeted 
him, whistling five times. 
  Following a minor incident in which certain drivers could 
not 
proceed by using the street parallel to La Reforma Avenue, 
traffic was completely halted. During this demonstration, which 
the group of youths called a "symbolic and peaceful" 
demonstration, members of the Promoter of Solidarity with Cuba 
such as Jorge Carrillo explained that this was not an act of 
provocation but, rather, a simple act protesting the meddling 
behavior of the U.S. Government in Cuba and the presence of 
Torricelli, against whom they wanted to enforce Article 33, that 
is, they wanted to expel him from the country as a persona 
non grata. The legislator was accused of meddling in 
Mexico's domestic affairs; this is why most of the slogans were 
aimed at him. 
  Meanwhile, Gustavo Hernandez Merida, second ranking official 
at the General Secretariat for Protection and Highways, spoke 
via radio to ask whether there was permission to stage this 
demonstration. There was a negative reply. He requested 
reinforcements, and minutes later, the 03021 and 03022 Patrols, 
whose agents remained on the lookout, arrived. 
  At 1025, the casket was dragged with a yellow chain, put 
atop 
the barrier, and left there "as a souvenir." Amid the billowing 
smoke emanating from the casket, the youths said goodbye to 
Torricelli by whistling five more times and quickly left the 
scene. 

