Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Salah Abar: "Pasqua at El Ayoun Asked Saudis and </F>
Moroccans To Quit Aiding Islamists"] 
  [Text] LE POINT, the French weekly, reports this week that 
[French Interior Minister] Charles Pasqua has asked Saudi and 
Moroccan authorities to "curb" the Islamists. 
  In exchange, Paris would promise financial aid to Algeria. 
This was the burden of talks held about a week ago in El Aaiun, 
capital of Western Sahara, between the French interior minister 
and his Saudi counterpart, Emir Nayif Bin-'Abd-al-Aziz Al-Sa'ud. 
Observers said the French initiative springs from the new 
strategy adopted just three months ago in Paris, following 
approaches from Algerian and Tunisian authorities. 
  [Tunisian] President Ben Ali reportedly has convinced the 
French to take steps to protect the Maghrebian zone from 
"Islamist turbulence." France is now convinced collapse of the 
Algerian regime would ineluctably drag the rest of the 
Maghreb--along with other Arab countries such as Egypt, Jordan, 
and Yemen--down the dangerous road to Islamism. 
  Also, according to reliable sources, a report prepared by 
French intelligence (DGSE [General Directorate for External 
Security]) supports Quai d'Orsay's assessment that France would 
undoubtedly become a battleground for rivalries between Arab 
modernists and Islamists, should Algerian fundamentalists come 
to power in Algeria. 
  France has a Muslim population of more than 4.5 million. 
This 
daunting prospect was responsible for steps taken by French 
authorities to defuse any possibility of an explosion in the 
Maghreb. 
  Place Beauvau (headquarters of the Interior Ministry) is 
convinced Algeria has two overriding needs: first, severance of 
the supply lines providing arms and money to the armed Islamist 
groups; %second, financial aid to revive its economy and 
alleviate popular discontent. 
  Paris believes the Saudis and Moroccans have a role to play 
on both fronts. 
  According to LE POINT, Pasqua spoke with Emir Nayif about 
the need for Franco-Saudi cooperation in the struggle against 
the Islamists, and in particular about the aid some Saudi 
princes continue providing to the FIS [Islamic Salvation Front]. 
Pasqua asked for an immediate halt to such aid. 
  The same message was delivered to the Moroccans, it has been 
learned. 
  FIS leaders have stated that "Afghans" forced to leave 
Pakistan have transited Moroccan territory on their way back to 
rejoin Islamist terrorist cells in Algeria. Everyone knows 
Moroccan authorities have quietly tolerated these Islamist 
"infiltrations," despite Rabat's decision last year to remand 
into Algerian custody Abdelhak Layada, a high-ranking leader of 
the GIA [Armed Islamic Group] arrested in Oujda. 
  According to LE POINT, Rabah Kebir and Anwar Haddam even 
approached Morocco with a proposal to recognize the 
"Moroccanness" of the Sahara to prevent establishment of 
[Islamist] staging bases on the kingdom's territory. 
  Pasqua has also initiated contacts to convince Iranian 
leaders to stop meddling in the affairs of the Maghrebian 
countries. The new French strategy was behind the decision to 
release two Iranian terrorists who were supposed to be turned 
over to Swiss authorities. 

