Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 28 Feb (DPA) -- Today, 
Colombian Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff said the U.S. 
Government is not interested in supplying evidence to condemn 
the chiefs of the drug trafficking mafia because it does not 
trust Colombian justice. In this manner, De Greiff reaffirmed 
the difficulties his office has encountered in its attempt to 
collect evidence in the United States against the main "capos" 
of the Cali Cartel, several of whom have expressed their desire 
to surrender and collaborate with authorities. "Colombia is 
being deserted. The United States is not interested in 
collaborating with Colombian justice although there are judicial 
exchange agreements," De Greiff pointed out. 
  The prosecutor general added that U.S. authorities are 
"withholding evidence" to reveal later should the mafiosos be 
captured in their country without taking into account that 
several of them are thinking about surrendering in Colombia. In 
the opinion of the director of the Colombian justice system, the 
government in Washington should change its strategy of 
withholding evidence and "open its doors" to criminals who wish 
to surrender and supply valuable information to defeat drug 
trafficking. 
  De Greiff confirmed that his office is still in touch with 
lawyers who claim to represent Gilberto Rodriguez, charged with 
being the leader of the Cali Cartel, as part of a rapprochement 
process, started last year and intensified in the past weeks. 
Talks between De Greiff and these lawyers have developed so 
smoothly that the prosecutor general and the media are not 
ruling out the possibility that Rodriguez, who is known by the 
alias of "El Ajedrecista," might surrender in mid-March. 
According to official reports, Rodriguez wants to take advantage 
of the decrees President Cesar Gaviria signed in 1990 offering 
substantial sentence reductions to drug traffickers and 
terrorists who surrender, confess to at least one crime, and 
effectively collaborate with the authorities. 
  Spokesmen for the Prosecutor General's Office claim that one 
of the difficulties facing this process is the lack of evidence 
to indict the mafiosos because many of the charges made in the 
past were leveled by the media and cannot be confirmed. Three 
men charged with being Cali Cartel leaders appeared before the 
Prosecutor General's Office in mid-January but were not held 
because there were no warrants for their arrest. 

