Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wang Laixi (3769 0171 0823)] </F>
  [Text] Harbin, 7 Jan (XINHUA) -- Li Ruihuan, member of the 
Standing Committee of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau 
and chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC], emphatically pointed 
out during his inspection of Heilongjiang Province: Spring 
Festival is a traditional holiday to which Chinese people attach 
great importance. Prior to the festival, cadres at all levels 
should visit the masses, particularly the enterprises and 
families with difficulties, hold heart-to-heart talks with them, 
provide warm services to them, do practical things to help the 
poor, and help them spend a nice Chinese New Year. 
  During the 4-7 January inspection, Li Ruihuan was 
accompanied 
by Sun Weiben, secretary of the Heilongjiang provincial party 
committee; Shao Qihui, governor of Heilongjiang Province; and 
Zhou Wenhua, chairman of the Heilongjiang provincial CPPCC 
committee. He inspected large state-owned enterprises, 
institutions of higher education, and scientific research 
institutes, and sought their opinions. He heard a report on the 
work of the provincial party committee and fully affirmed the 
achievements of the provincial party committee and the 
provincial government in leading the broad masses of cadres and 
the people in seriously implementing the guidelines of the 14th 
Party Congress and the "decision" of the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee, as well as in overcoming 
difficulties, promoting economic development, and maintaining 
social stability. 
  On the present work, Li Ruihuan said: We must see that 
China's present situation is very good. All localities are 
displaying great momentum in undertaking construction and 
seeking development and are maintaining a fairly high growth 
rate. Living standards have generally and remarkably improved. 
At the same time, we must also soberly realize that owing to 
various reasons, living standards for some people have not 
rapidly improved, and they are even having some difficulties. 
Under no circumstances should we forget them. We want to take 
greater steps to accelerate development, but in the final 
analysis, our purpose is to improve living standards. For this 
reason, we must consider the interests of people from all walks 
of life in the course of development. In particular, we must 
ensure that the masses will encounter no serious difficulties in 
basic everyday life. 
  Li Ruihuan said: While most people will no doubt benefit 
from the reforms, not every individual is entitled to benefit at 
the same time and to the same degree. If a reform measure 
changes the pattern of the masses' interests, we must undertake 
careful study and use every caution before promulgating it for 
implementation. After it is promulgated for implementation, we 
must closely follow changes in the situation and undertake 
necessary readjustments or supplementary work in good time. We 
should carefully observe the masses' feelings, seriously listen 
to their opinions, and strive to help them overcome 
difficulties. This is the way to conform to the fundamental 
purpose of our Communist Party and ensure the smooth process of 
reform and opening up. 
  He emphasized: Spring Festival is also known as "year's 
barrier." It is our duty to help the masses with difficulties 
pass the "barrier." Cadres at all levels should know who among 
the masses needs help, visit their homes and talk to them, and 
seek their criticism and suggestions, even if the criticism is 
not pleasant to hear. We should "send charcoal in snowy 
weather" and do all we can to help the masses solve practical 
problems. We should properly reduce other expenditures and use 
the money saved to meet the needs in this regard. 
  During the inspection, Li Ruihuan met with the responsible 
comrades of the CPPCC committees of Heilongjiang Province and 
Harbin City and exchanged views with them on how to strengthen 
democracy and the CPPCC organizations. 

