Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Shijiazhuang, March 16 (XINHUA) -- The unemployment 
rate in urban areas of northern China's Hebei Province was kept 
at 2.02 percent through the end of last year, lower than the 
national average of 2.6 percent. 
  Figures from the Hebei Provincial Statistics Bureau show 
that 
a total of 300,000 people were newly employed last year, pushing 
the total number of urban employed in Hebei to 6.99 million. 
  It is worth noting that the achievement was made under a 
market mechanism rather than government assignment, which had 
been long practiced before. 
  Officials said that labor markets have been established in 
every major city of the province. A contract worker employment 
system has been promoted in almost all state enterprises in the 
province. 
  More and more young people, especially college graduates, 
have begun to choose careers on their own. A recent survey by 
the Hebei provincial women's federation, for instance, shows 
that women changed jobs more often than men while in the past 
under a planned economy more men changed professions than women. 
  Economic effectiveness has become the major factor for job 
applicants in considering which enterprises they should apply 
to. Those offering higher incomes, including private 
enterprises, have become the favorite choices. Some urban 
residents have even chosen to work in rural enterprises. In the 
past the preference was to work for state enterprises and 
government organs. 
  Officials said that labor markets have also greatly helped 
those workers whose companies have gone bankrupt. For instance, 
over 200 workers left stranded by a wireless electronics factory 
which announced bankruptcy in Shijiazhuang, capital of the 
province, found reemployment very soon through introductions via 
a labor market. Only some 60 workers from the defunct factory 
remained unemployed. 
  A large number of rural laborers have entered cities looking 
for jobs. In Shijiazhuang alone, long-term rural laborers 
topped 200,000, working as drivers, chefs, boiler keepers and 
street cleaners. 

