Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Luis Sexto: "An Interpretation: Mine and Ours"] </F>
  [Text] Cuban public opinion, never idle even if a few 
ill-intentioned souls claim the contrary, has formulated a 
disturbing question in the face of the political decision to 
cooperativize state land: Is this a step backward or forward? 
  Theoretically speaking, from a clearly abstract position 
that 
is perhaps based on the rigidity of a manual, the state-owned 
agricultural enterprise, with its vast areas that stretch 
forever and its totalizing mechanization, is apparently a more 
advanced economic concept than a workers' cooperative. 
  The launching and completion of the agrarian reform was 
apparently marked by a rather covert conflict between the two 
concepts: Article 43 of the law promulgated in La Plata in 1959 
informed the INRA (National Institute for Agrarian Reform) of 
the suitability of organizing cooperatives on nationalized land 
to the extent possible. A few were in fact set up. Later on, 
thinking turned more to the formation of state-owned entities. 
At the time, the Cuban economy was able to rely increasingly on 
the advantages of the socialist foreign market, resulting in an 
exponential increase in the amount of machinery and consumable 
expenditures available for use on vast government-owned 
properties, initially known as farms and later as enterprises. 
That agricultural organization created citrus fruit plantations, 
rice paddies, and scientifically designed banana plantations, 
and also created poultry and dairy farms turning out enormous 
amounts of production. It erred in other ways, however. There 
was no direct, organic connection between the worker and the 
land. Excessively low wages could not keep man tied to farm 
production. Incentives such as housing and a reliable supply of 
consumer goods for workers were lacking despite the fact that 
communities were built and that the state market delivered eggs, 
milk, and fish to the far corners of the country. 
  The result was that the farm worker and his family headed 
for 
urban areas in search of more attractive options. Today, only 20 
percent of our population resides in rural areas. 
  Cooperativization tends to reverse this trend. 
  A debate over whether the enterprise is more socialistic 
than 
the cooperative would be futile now and serve only to heighten 
erudite pretensions. The fact is that Cuba no longer has the 
external advantages that enjoyed the benefits of specific laws, 
certain plans, and a number of social goals. Agriculture will 
have to make up for some of the machinery, fertilizer, and 
insecticides by means of innovations and solutions from man 
because what we need is a stimulating structure that will touch 
the individual and force him to reveal his true capabilities. 
  According to the cooperative concept, which is a bold, 
realistic, and flexible political measure, the worker is the 
direct owner of production. While the land remains under the 
state or the nation, a closer, more deeply felt, decisive link 
is forged between man and the land. Results and work are truly 
bound together, inserted into the framework of an independent 
community whose interests cannot, at the risk of inefficiency, 
allow paternalism. For their own sake, these same interests will 
encourage the worker to build his house and nourish himself from 
his own land without being forced to wait for his commercial 
ration. 
  It remains for the Basic Cooperative Production Units (UBPC) 
to accept the challenge of practice. In terms of hope, they 
promise to be efficient agricultural cells, now and forever. In 
a sense, practice has already handed down its verdict: A wage 
disconnected from productivity and production cannot create the 
feeling of social property in the worker's conscience. The 
profitable and recommendable experience of the farm cooperatives 
votes in favor of the UBPC. In them, the producer has 
efficiently combined two relations that once seemed 
unreconcilable: what is mine and what is ours. 

