Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Lina Szejner: "To Have Your Cake and Eat It: </F>
Poles Want Wage Rises, but Fear Inflation"] 
  [Text] It is true that the World Bank gave top marks to 
our draft budget and assessed the Government's financial 
discipline in positive terms; nevertheless, experts versed in 
economic processes maintain that both the budget and the 
government could be threatened by an... 
<H5>  ...Inflationary Surge. </H5>
  The end of last year was quite disastrous in this respect. 
It was estimated that during just a few weeks in November and 
December the zloty [Z] lost 10 percent of its value. According 
to Finance Ministry figures, in December the average price level 
for consumer goods rose by 5 percent in relation to November. 
On the other hand, compared with the price levels in December 
1992, December 1993 prices rose by as much as 37 percent. This 
means that the predicted value of the inflation index (as 
estimated at the beginning of the year) was exceeded by almost 5 
points. 
  In December last year food prices climbed most sharply (by 
6.9 percent). In the same period alcohol prices rose by 6.3 
percent, the prices of nonfood goods rose by 2.5 percent, and 
services cost us 4.2 percent more. 
  Within the category of food products, the highest price 
hikes 
were recorded for potatoes, vegetables, fruit products, fats, 
pork, and dairy products. Overall, the average price rise for 
these foods amounted to 24 percent, and very few articles 
retained their earlier prices. 
  The rise in the costs of services was caused mainly by the 
introduction on 1 December of official increases in the cost of 
central heating and hot water (by approximately 15 percent), 
electricity (approximately 10 percent), and gas (approximately 5 
percent). 
  Overall, in the course of last year the price of services 
went up most sharply (by some 38 percent). Industrial goods 
came second (with an increase of about 37 percent), and consumer 
goods rated third (over 35 percent). The share of food products 
in the monthly expenditure of the statistically average family 
amounted to 40 percent. In this situation it might have proved 
difficult to maintain the level of food consumption were it not 
for the fact that... 
<H5>  ...Wages Climbed To Keep Up With Prices. </H5>
  According to the Central Office of Statistics [GUS], in 
December the average net pay in enterprises rose to Z4,312,000, 
which, compared with November figures, represented an increase 
of 15.6 percent. Compared with December 1992, on the whole 
wages in enterprises were higher by 34.4 percent (79.3 percent 
in the raw materials extraction industry, 18.9 percent in the 
construction industry, and 19.4 percent in local municipal 
economy). 
  According to information published in statistical reports, 
by 
the end of last year a marked acceleration in pay increases was 
noted in comparison with the previous year. In December 1992 
net pay in six basic sectors of the economy rose by 9.3 percent 
while at the same time consumption prices rose by 2.2 percent, 
whereas the corresponding increases in 1993 amounted to 14.2 
percent and 5.6 percent. If this trend continues in the current 
year, it will be impossible to keep the inflation increase 
within the estimated limit of 23 percent. 
  "How is it," people wonder as they read the statistical 
reports, "that official figures suggest that our wallets get 
fatter and fatter all the time, while in reality we still find 
it difficult to make ends meet?" Well, the drawback of the 
practice of "averaging" statistical figures is that it 
theoretically assigns even income increases to everyone, whereas 
the truth is that not everyone has benefited from pay increases 
to the same extent. Some groups (such as miners or power 
industry employees of the) got a lot, while other groups 
(employees of the clothing industry or the budget-funded sectors 
of the economy) got hardly anything at all, or even nothing at 
all. Nor did pay increases depend on the economic condition of 
individual enterprises or their productivity levels and their 
employees' qualifications. Moreover, statistics take no note of 
pay figures in the private sector, which is notorious for being 
most secretive about its pay levels. Nevertheless, various 
sources indicate that bosses in private firms and joint ventures 
pay lower wages. Within their own pay structure, they let their 
technical supervision personnel earn the highest wages, while 
paying the lowest amounts to manual workers. Therefore it would 
probably be highly accurate to assume that it was precisely that 
group of employees (in addition to those employed by the 
budget-funded sectors of the economy) who did not get any share 
in the "statistical" pay increases. Furthermore, this group 
also includes employees of firms which are currently in the 
state of decline. 
  Nevertheless, the vast majority of enterprise heads did 
decide, under pressure from trade unionists and their own 
employees, to increase their work forces' pay. Those "upward 
pay adjustments" were most often effected on account of the 
abolition of the "popiwek" tax [on above-normative company 
wages], although some enterprises actually went into debt as a 
result of the adjustments. 
  Expert analysts looking at our financial situation have come 
to the conclusion that inflation is the most ominous factor 
which could put an abrupt halt to our economic growth. In order 
to curb its progress, the government will most probably decide 
to introduce, instead of the popiwek tax, a different kind of 
sanction against excessive wage increases. 
  Experts suggest that in our present situation we should 
quickly increase inflation rates as soon as possible. However, 
the authorities are reluctant to authorize such a move because 
it would make things difficult for investors. 
  According to reports published by Social Research Center, 
Poles view the abrupt inflation increases with mounting anxiety. 
A certain proportion of respondents predict that the 
dollar-zloty exchange rate could now soar high above the already 
announced ratio of 1:26,300. At the same time almost 50 percent 
of those questioned are convinced that wages will rise as a 
result of the abolition of the popiwek tax. Some are even 
determined to ensure wage rises through strikes, if such a 
measure were needed. However, those are not at all the same 
groups which did not receive their share of pay increases last 
December. 

