CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Position Taken by the National </F>
Electoral Committee: The MDF Can Be Blamed Always, for 
Everything"] 
  [Text] Recently the National Electoral Committee [OVB] once 
again accused the MDF [Hungarian Democratic Forum] of illegal 
conduct because it wanted to send letters to recipients of 
compensation, by taking advantage of an opportunity offered by 
the Compensation Office. The objection filed by the SZDSZ 
[Alliance of Free Democrats] was supported by the opposition 
members of the OVB, of course. 
  They did so, despite the fact that not only the largest 
ruling party, but also Fidesz [Federation of Young Democrats] 
and the MSZP [Hungarian Socialist Party] purchased the list of 
voters participating in the 1990 elections; with respect to the 
letter to be sent to recipients of compensation, the 
Compensation Office also notified quite a few other parties, 
thus also the SZDSZ and the MSZP, offering the services of the 
Compensation Office to mail their campaign materials to 
recipients of compensation. Only the MDF took advantage of this 
offer however, and therefore the matter became the source of 
serious disputes. 
  We asked MSZP manager Andras Toth "why the MSZP condemns 
MDF's conduct, when nothing illegal is involved? The ruling 
party took advantage of an opportunity also offered to other 
parties, but the other parties did not take advantage of it." In 
his response Toth said that "The truth is that Tamas Sepsey sent 
a letter to us in March, offering the services of the 
Compensation Office in forwarding various campaign 
advertisements to recipients of compensation, but we regarded 
this offer as questionable from a legal standpoint, and as not 
serving our purpose, so we did not take advantage of the offer." 
Andras Toth added that he agreed that primarily the Compensation 
Office should be blamed, but the party taking advantage of an 
opportunity not provided for by law should be blamed for taking 
the action. 
  Insofar as the letters mailed to the 1990 voters is 
concerned, one should wait until a court pronounces an affirmed 
judgment regarding the OVB's related determination. Meanwhile, 
it would be appropriate for the MDF to stop mailing the letters, 
according to Toth, adding that the MSZP clearly viewed this as a 
legal, and not as a political, matter, i.e., that its objection 
did not amount to an attack on the ruling party. 

