BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 7 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- Carlos Tello Macias, 
Mexican ambassador to Cuba, said in Havana today that the U.S. 
embargo against Cuba "hampers but does not impede or, much less, 
destroy" Mexico's relations with the Cuban Government. 
  The U.S. blockade, initiated three decades ago, "creates 
unnecessary friction" in the region. As such, Mexico "has again 
and again appealed to the United States to lift it," Tello told 
NOTIMEX. The U.S. commercial retaliation against Cuba "puts 
stumbling blocks" between Mexico and Cuba, "but those stumbling 
blocks can be overcome," said the 56-year-old diplomat and 
economist who this year assumed office as ambassador to Havana. 
"In exercising its sovereignty, Mexico can freely decide with 
what country to trade," even with third countries outside NAFTA, 
Tello said. 
  The ambassador said Mexican President Carlos Salinas' visit 
to Cuba next week will serve "to underline the deep ties of 
friendship" between the two countries and "the multifarious 
nature of the relationship." 
  Salinas will stay in Havana a little less than six hours, 
the 
ambassador said. "The hours will be few but intense, with 
cordial dialogue between the two delegations," he said. 
  Mexico is the country that holds the most intensive 
relations 
with Cuba in the areas of technological cooperation, education, 
culture, and sports. The two countries hold "important" 
relations in commerce, tourism, and joint investments, Tello 
said. 
  Salinas, the fourth Mexican president to consecutively visit 
Cuba, plans to hold a round of talks with President Fidel 
Castro, the diplomat reported. The signing of a specific 
document is also on the agenda. "Business deals between Mexico 
and Cuba continue at their own pace and rhythm" and are not 
conditioned "by a Salinas visit in this particular instance," 
Tello said. Mexico seeks to "strengthen and improve" the level 
of its relations with Cuba and "explore new forms" of 
cooperation, he said. He said the Mexican Government "is 
determined to strengthen its relations of all types with 
Caribbean countries" and that "Cuba plays a decisive role" in 
this project. 
  The creation of the Association of Caribbean States [AEC], 
in 
which all regional states and territories, including Cuba and 
Mexico, will participate, will be "the first firm step toward a 
policy of commercial rapprochement" in the area. 
  The AEC charter will be signed in Caracas late this month 
during a ministers meeting to prepare the summit of regional 
presidents and heads of state to be held in Barbados on 4 July. 
  With this organization, "the Caribbean will gradually 
participate in the integrationist effort" of the rest of the 
hemisphere, where Mexico participates with free trade treaties 
signed with Canada and the United States, as well as with Costa 
Rica and Chile, Tello said. 
  From Havana, Salinas will fly to Cartagena, where he will 
sign a free trade agreement within the framework of the 
so-called Group of Three with Colombian President Cesar Gaviria 
and Venezuelan President Rafael Caldera. 
  The 23 heads of state and government of Latin America, 
Spain, 
and Portugal will participate in the 4th Ibero-American Summit 
also to be held in Cartagena on 14 and 15 June. 

