BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Murid Hammad in Washington; from the "News at </F>
Ten" program] 
  [Text] His Majesty the king began his official visit to 
Washington with a meeting with U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher. 
  Today's talks are expected to have covered the Middle East 
peace process, particularly the Jordanian-Israeli track, in 
addition to developments in the Middle East and bilateral ties. 
  [Begin recording] [Christopher] Good morning. I'm very 
honored today to welcome to the State Department King Husayn, 
who is an old friend in so many different ways. We're at an 
important moment, I think, in the history of the Middle East. 
  The recent bilateral discussions here between Israel and 
Jordan, with the participation of the United States, indicate 
that there is room for very real progress in the Middle East, 
and I've congratulated the king on that progress and urged that 
we would do everything we could to try to assist in that 
situation. 
  Jordan has stood for progress in the Middle East peace 
situation and their bilateral track, I think, is one on which 
there are great opportunities for the two countries to work 
together. So, as always, it's a great pleasure to welcome the 
king here. We have many items to discuss -- their defense 
needs, the economic situation in Jordan, the path for 
democratization in Jordan. We have many items on which we have 
common interest, and, of course, many items on which we admire 
the king's leadership. So, Your Majesty, it's a great honor to 
have you here in the State Department. 
  [Husayn] Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Secretary. Thank 
you very very much indeed for your kind words of welcome, and 
I'm very pleased with the opportunity to meet with you today, 
sir, and hopefully in the next two days to meet with the 
President as well, and many of our friends here in Washington. 
  We are indeed optimistic as far as the future is concerned 
in 
our quest for a just, durable, comprehensive peace in the 
region. And we are very happy indeed that on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track we are about to begin to address the 
problems that were a part of the agenda worked out earlier on. 
And beginning with border demarcation, delineation, we hope 
this will take place on the ground there, and we appreciate 
certainly the role of our friends in supporting us and our 
efforts to arrive at this point. [end recording] 
  Today's talks were followed by a working lunch attended by 
the prime minister, the chief of the Royal Court, his majesty's 
political adviser, Prince Talal Bin-Muhammad, minister of state 
for prime ministry affairs, the minister of information, the 
minister of finance, and Jordan's ambassador in Washington. 
  On the U.S. side, it was attended by high-level delegation 
from the Departments of State and Defense, as well as President 
Clinton's national security adviser. 
  Sources from the Jordanian delegation told the News at Ten 
that today's meeting was fruitful and very successful. 
  Later tonight his majesty the king will meet U.S. Secretary 
of Commerce Ron Brown for talks that will center on trade 
relations between the two countries. 

