BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Silvia Aloisi: "Al-Qadhdhafi's Secret Weapon" -- </F>
all Libyan place names as published] 
  [Text] Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi's deadly secret is hidden in 
the sandy desert, at Tarhunah, 65 kilometers southeast of 
Tripoli. It is here that the Libyan leader is having an 
enormous installation built for the production of chemical 
weapons, thus complementing the existing production plant at 
Rabta. 
  For years the U.S. secret service had suspected al-Qadhdhafi 
of planning to build a second chemical plant. Rabta 
technological center's Pharma-150 plant was detected by the 
Pentagon in 1988, thanks to photographs taken by the Keyhole 
satellite. It was immediately defined as "the greatest chemical 
weapon production plant in the Third World. It was pointless 
for Tripoli's colonel to deny the facts and say th at the plant 
was only a harmless "pharmaceuticals factory." First Ronald 
Reagan and later George Bush repeatedly threatened to bomb the 
plant unless al-Qadhdhafi agreed to an international inspection. 
The use of force, however, proved unnecessary, since in March 
1990 the Rabta plant was half- destroyed by a mysterious fire, 
which the Libyan authorities attributed to Western-instigated 
sabotage. 
  The Tripoli government has not forgotten American threats 
nor, above all, the allied bombing of Iraqi military 
installations during the Gulf War and, subsequently, in 1993. 
Al-Qadhdhafi's decision to have the suspect plant and materials 
transported to a new secret site was therefore predictable. 
This, in fact, would enable him to open the doors of the 
entirely rebuilt Rabta plant to UN inspectors, as a sign of 
goodwill toward the West. 
  The construction of the new Tarhunah plant was entrusted to 
the Jowfe state-owned enterprise, a bogus company which was set 
up to purchase the necessary equipment for building the plant 
and manufacturing poison gas. The plant, which is scheduled to 
become operational by 1995, will be capable of producing mustard 
gas at the rate of 1,000 metric tons a year, Sarin gas (90 
metric tons), and Soman gas (1,300 metric tons). All of these 
substances are highly toxic to human beings: A small drop is 
enough to kill an individual within a few minutes. 
  Suspicions concerning Tripoli's intentions were aroused by 
the discovery, in England, of a Jowfe purchase order for two 
chemical production installations. The contract, worth half a 
million pounds sterling (approximately 1.2 billion lire), had 
been awarded to the Multinational Engineering Group company, 
which is part of the British APV company. The deal was 
camouflaged by means of a three-way operation: Jowfe contacted 
APV's Malaysian subsidiary APV Hills and Hills, which passed on 
the order to its parent company in London. In addition to the 
equipment, the order included materials for gas production and, 
in particular, pinacolone alcohol, the basic component for the 
production of Soman nerve gas. 
  Other toxic substances were supplied to Jowfe by the Belgian 
company Hassco, based in Ostend. Among them, ethylene oxide, 
used for manufacturing mustard gas and incendiary bombs, and 
dimethylamine, a component of Tabun nerve gas. It is difficult, 
however, to draw up precise accusations since many toxic 
products used for chemical weapons are commonly used as 
fertilizers or pesticides, and are therefore not included in the 
international list of "risk" substances whose export is 
forbidden. Ethylene oxide, for example, is used for the 
production of industrial resins and detergents. 
  However, the nature of the Tarhunah plant, which is 
officially presented as a petrochemical complex, also seems to 
be confirmed by the type of materials bought for its 
construction. Libya is currently subjected to an international 
embargo because of its involvement in the 1988 terrorist action 
against a Pan Am Boeing 747 over Lockerbie. Tripoli is refusing 
to extradite the two Libyan agents who are suspected of having 
planted the bomb in the airliner. However, getting round the UN 
embargo was easy: In fact, the Jowfe company obtained -- from 
Switzerland -- the technical specifications for the construction 
of parallel underground tunnels, 150 meters long, designed by 
the Sauer engineering company of Salzburg (Austria). This type 
of tunnel is commonly used in other secret military 
installations. Furthermore, Libya purchased chemical weapon 
production equipment whose internal components are covered with 
enamel or teflon -- materials that are extremely resistant to 
corrosive toxic substances. A sophisticated Swiss 
air-purification plant -- protected by special fire-resistant 
materials -- and a computerized system enabling instruments to 
function automatically are considered further evidence for the 
military intended use of the Tarhunah complex. 
  Libya did not subscribe to the international convention 
against the proliferation of chemical weapons, which was signed 
in Paris in January 1993, and it has always refused to have its 
chemical installations open to international inspection. The 
Tripoli government supports the position taken by the majority 
of Arab League countries, which make their possible adhesion to 
the convention conditional upon international inspection of 
Israel's secret nuclear installations. In fact, chemical 
weapons are considered the Arab countries' response to the 
Jewish state's nuclear potential. 
  The discovery of the Tarhunah plant may trigger off a new 
crisis between Tripoli's colonel and the West. The Libyan 
Government is already facing trouble on its internal front, 
following the violent anti-regime revolt which broke out last 
March in the small town of Bani Walid -- although al-Qadhdhafi's 
personal power does not seem to be seriously called into 
question. The colonel survived the administrations of his 
long-standing enemies, Reagan and Bush. But Bill Clinton may 
well decide that the moment has come to resume the hostilities. 

