Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Adolfo Salamanca, Colombian National Police </F>
commissioner, by unidentified reporter in Santa Fe de Bogota; 
date not given -- first five paragraphs EL TIEMPO introduction] 
  [Text] The government issued a new disciplinary code--some 
sort of Ten Commandments--for the National Police on 7 January. 
  The objective is to fight corruption. The person responsible 
for implementing this new code is Adolfo Salamanca, the 
country's first National Police commissioner. 
  The commissioner has received EL TIEMPO in his residence and 
spoke clearly. "The police," he said, "is the institution that 
violates human rights most often. I say this based on reports 
from the Attorney General's Office, which in 1991 reported more 
than 1,500 cases of police human rights violations." 
  "This means," he explained, "that errors are being 
committed, 
that the law is being infringed, and that the citizens' rights 
are being passed over, and this must be corrected. I am sure 
that the current police director wants this." 
  According to Salamanca, the police must recover its civilian 
role and end a militarization process that has deformed the 
institution's philosophy. He answered questions in the 
following interview: 
  [EL TIEMPO] How do you view the police high commissioner's 
mission? 
  [Salamanca] The commissioner must contribute to the 
strengthening of reform and coordination efforts to determine, 
evaluate, and prevent problems. 
  The commissioner has to order and supervise the 
investigations against members of the institution and personally 
receive complaints and proposals from the people. 
  [EL TIEMPO] There was strong resistance to the appointment 
of 
a civilian to that post, and some believe that your role there 
will perturb more than one person. 
  [Salamanca] The appointment of a civilian is in line with a 
worldwide trend. As errors, human rights violations, and police 
corruption have become known, there has been a growing trend 
toward citizens securing control and establishing supervision. 
  I believe that to the extent my own limitations allow, I 
will 
be able to contribute unselfishly, along with the Police 
Directorate, to enforce compliance with reform to change the 
institution's image so that the people may believe that police 
work means protection. The police form part of civilian society. 
The police force is civilian. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Have the police forgotten their civilian roots? 
  [Salamanca] I do not believe they have forgotten that. It is 
that as the police they have been assigned multiple functions, 
which are often beyond their own capabilities and mission, and 
as they have been identified as in the same genre of the 
military administration and the military forces, the way of 
acting and the work of police have been deformed. [sentence as 
published] It would be ideal if the police could walk the 
streets without carrying weapons. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What do you mean by "the way of acting and the 
work of the police have been deformed?" 
  [Salamanca] This is what the reports that produced the 
reform 
say. There are vices, such as the participation of some members 
of the institution in efforts to defend private interests. 
  There is also the militaristic approach with which the 
institution has been managed on certain occasions. 
  Also, no one ignores that certain police sectors have become 
independent and that as such they engage in illegal activities. 
This is what an author called the "autonomizing" of certain 
police sectors. 
  It is also evident that the people complain about the 
inefficiency, slowness, lack of opportunities, and lack of 
infrastructure the police must overcome in complying daily with 
elemental missions. 
  The police is also the institution that most often violates 
human rights, according to reports from the Attorney General's 
Office which in 1991 reported more than 1,500 cases of human 
rights violations by the police. 
  There is one additional fact: The largest number of cases 
against the state at the court for suits under administrative 
law arise from police actions. This means that it is evident 
that errors are being committed, the law is being infringed, and 
citizens' rights are being infringed, and this must be 
corrected. I am certain that the current director is interested 
in this happening. We must order and supervise investigations. 
We must report the results to the people. 
  [EL TIEMPO] There are announcements about all types of 
investigations in Colombia. Citizens are skeptical about 
results. What will change now? 
  [Salamanca] The current structures and functioning of 
control 
mechanisms have not been efficient enough to make results known. 
We are committed to making the results known. This situation 
must be corrected. 
  It is no easy task. I am aware of the many difficulties and 
risks that this entails, but we are committed. We are going to 
engage in a pedagogic endeavor, and I am sure we will be heard. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Any risks? 
  [Salamanca] Surely, as interests are affected and the people 
outside the law become afraid of an investigation and penalty, 
and in this, like in any other activity, there will be negative 
reactions, of course. 

