BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, 11 Apr (TANJUG) -- Radovan Karadzic, 
president of the Srpska republic, said this evening that Gorazde 
cannot be considered a protected zone because the Muslim forces 
in the towns of Gorazde, Zepa, and Srebrenica have not been 
disarmed nor has the area been demilitarized, as the UN 
resolution envisaged. 
  "Constant attacks on our territory have been launched from 
this area and our soldiers have been killed in the actions of 
the Muslim forces launched from the territory under UN 
protection," Karadzic told Serb radio and television. 
  "We do not want to negotiate any more about the territories 
for which our young men are dying, for the Muslim side has 
chosen the war option over the peace process, and will thus have 
to accept the war results as well," he added. 
  Speaking about the Srpska republic's stance regarding the 
current situation, president Karadzic noted that all contacts 
with the UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] have been suspended, 
including those with its civilian department. 
  "We want to establish exactly who in UNPROFOR is responsible 
and to what extent. We will then decide whether and with whom 
we will communicate. They cannot play a role of an impartial 
mediator and do what they are doing," the president said. 
  Speaking about the role of the United Nations and NATO in 
the 
new conditions in the former Bosnia-Herzegovina, Karadzic said 
he blames NATO less, for its role is one of a mercenary. 
  "They are not choosy about the means of achieving their 
goals 
-- today they shot at an ambulance clearly marked as a Red Cross 
vehicle, which is the best illustration of their role," Karadzic 
said. 
  Karadzic said that the United Nations is "dangerously 
nearing 
the point of no return." 
  "They will have to regain their soul, to return to a 
balanced 
an impartial policy. If they do not do this, nobody will allow 
the UN forces access to their territories," Karadzic said and 
continued: "We will now reconsider whether we will permit them 
any kind of activities in our territories." 
  Karadzic said that the cooperation between the civil and 
military authorities of the Srpska republic is excellent and 
that speculations in connection with this clearly indicate the 
interest of some centers in the West to destabilize the Srpska 
republic which, as he said, "shows how powerful a united nation 
is." 
  Asked about the situation in the immediate future, Karadzic 
said: "I think that we are winning. It is clear that we are 
winning and the anger of some international factors illustrates 
this best." 
  "They threatened to bomb us. We have rejected the pressure 
and now we have seen the implementation of these threats. We 
have seen what they did and the manner in which they did it, how 
precise they were, and now they are free to go home because they 
have used their last card. Their repertoire has been exhausted 
with this act," Karadzic said, pointing out that the Serb nation 
would never forgive its leadership if it acted in a cowardly 
manner. 
  "They would have never forgiven us if we had got scared and 
if our army had stopped. We have our goals. Gorazde is not a 
safe area. Gorazde is a Muslim forces' stronghold from which 
they have been attacking us and this was recently confirmed by 
UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali himself. Gorazde also belongs 
to the Serbs and they have the right to return to that town. We 
will protect the Muslim civilians, too, because wo are not 
waging a war against civilians but against the enemy, the Muslim 
army," Karadzic told Serb radio and television. 

