Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Right Way of Building New Asia"--KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, February 1 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN in a 
signed article today calls upon the Asian people to build a 
prosperous new Asia by expanding and developing South-South 
cooperation. 
  The article quotes the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song as 
saying: 
  "If the people of the Asian countries unite on the basis of 
independence and expand and develop South-South cooperation on 
the principle of collective self-reliance, they will be able to 
build a new, independent and prosperous Asia free from 
domination and subjugation." 
  Pointing out that it is the common cause of the Asian people 
to build an independent and prosperous new Asia freed from 
domination and subordination, the article says: 
  A right way of accomplishing this cause lies in that the 
Asian people unite on the basis of independence and expand and 
develop South-South cooperation on the principle of collective 
self-reliance. 
  Just as the Asian people are the masters of Asia, the 
building of a new Asia lies with the Asian people themselves. 
  The present situation requires the Asian people more 
urgently 
than ever to hew out the future of Asia as its masters in an 
independent way. 
  For the Asian people to unite on the basis of independence 
and expand and develop South-South cooperation is all the more 
urgent as the regionalization and bloc of the economy is being 
promoted in the world. 
  Only when they unite with each other and expand and promote 
economic exchange and cooperation can the Asian people push 
ahead with the building of a prosperous new Asia, winning in the 
fierce international economic trade competition. 
  They have full conditions and potentiality to develop 
South-South cooperation. 
  What is important is that all the Asian countries should 
cooperate with each other for common prosperity without 
selfishness. 
  It is necessary for them to firmly unite and actively 
cooperate with each other for the common cause, respecting and 
exchanging experiences on the principle of genuine independence, 
equality and mutual benefits. 
  If all the Asian people tap favourable conditions and rich 
potentials to the full by developing South-South cooperation in 
unity, they can bring about a rapid development of Asia and 
successfully build a new Asia of coprosperity. 
  It is the consistent stand of the DPRK to strive to expand 
and develop South-South cooperation, stresses the article. 

