Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Hyderabad, Oct l -- The Union Minister of State for 
Industries, Mrs. Krishna Sahi, stated here on Thursday that the 
Central government had issued instructions for the industrial 
units to comply with emission standards, latest by the year-end 
or face closure. 
  Inaugurating a national seminar on pollution control 
methods, 
organised by the Andhra Pradesh Central Public Sector Employees 
Federation (APCPSEF) here, the union minister said the Centre 
had announced a number of initiatives for industries to adopt 
pollution control measures. Apart from instituting awards for 
achieving maximum pollution control, the government had also 
extended concessions in duty on pollution control equipments, 
she added. 
  In addition, the government had embarked upon raising public 
awareness on environmental issues through education and 
publicity in mass media, she said. Even voluntary organisations 
could play a role in this aspect as only the government's 
efforts would not be enough, she pointed out. 
  Mrs. Sahi observed that though several safeguards were 
provided through legislations and enforcements, they were 
insufficient as awareness in public as well as among 
decision-makers was required to improve environment. 
  Stating that combating pollution did not mean halting 
industrialisation, she added that while this should be 
encouraged on one hand, an attempt should be made to strike a 
balance with nature and protect the environment. 
  The union minister said efforts were being made for paper 
manufacturers to switch over to agricultural wastes and bagasse 
as raw material instead of the traditional wood based activity. 
The paper industry based on wood would continue to be under 
compulsory licensing, she said adding that paper manufacturers 
from agricultural wastes would be delicensed. 
  Leather industry was one of the largest foreign exchange 
earners as well as a source of water pollution due to tanning of 
hides from raw to semi-finished stage, she said adding that the 
State governments have set up common effluent treatment plants 
for clusters of tanneries and were proposing to relocate the 
tanneries from the urban areas to minimise pollution. 

