Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  Arctic Fusion </H5>
  The ozone hole, the greenhouse effect, and climatic 
catastrophes continue to bring the Antarctic publicity as a 
crucible of weather. The fusion achieved between former East and 
West German polar researchers caused less of a sensation. 
  Polar researchers at the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar 
and Oceanic Research Bremerhaven made out well during "ceiling 
control," which in plain English means last year's freeze on 
national research institute budgets by the BMFT (Federal 
Ministry for Research and Technology). Mention of their 
participation in the international Global Change Program, which 
is aimed at studying global environmental change, protected them 
from the red pencil. 
  The Germans can make a traditionally significant 
contribution 
to tracking down global changes, especially in the Antarctic. In 
1976, GDR researchers set up their own research station to study 
solar-terrestrial relationships in the Schirmacher Oasis in 
Queen Maud Land, which later was given the name "Georg Forster." 
After the conclusions of this program, isotope physicists and 
chemists from Leipzig, geologists from Potsdam, and 
geomagnetists moved in. 
  The first Federal German station, "Georg von Neumayer," was 
built in 1981. With the German-German fusion of polar research, 
the question arose whether and how operation of the stations 
should be continued. Result: "Forster" is being renovated, but 
in the future it will only be used as a summer base. The budget 
afforded no more, especially since the old Neumayer station on 
the Ekstrom shelf ice in western Antarctica had to be given up 
and replaced by new facilities in 1992. 
  What too seldom works out in other cases went well here. 
East 
German polar research was given an exceptionally positive 
assessment by the Science Council. AWI director Prof. Gotthilf 
Hempel, chairman of the evaluation committee, even raved about 
"a pearl of former GDR Academy research." There was no 
duplication of West German goals. Structurally, of course, there 
were adjustment problems. Earlier, a maximum of six staff 
members of the Academy's Central Institute for Geophysics in 
Potsdam prepared and coordinated the expeditions logistically. 
Scientists from various institutions carried out the research 
itself. After unification, it was decided to expand the Potsdam 
working group to an AWI research center. The staff was increased 
to 40, 20 of whom are scientists. 
  Corresponding to the marine specialization of the AWI parent 
institute, continental activities went to the Potsdam group. In 
addition, atmospheric research using radio-equipped weather 
balloon ascents, radiation measurements, ozone exploration with 
lasers, and spectroscopic detection of aerosols are increasingly 
being undertaken. One group of the Bremerhaven scientists 
involved with this area has moved to Brandenburg. "Certainly the 
long tradition of East German research on the Antarctic 
atmosphere influenced this decision favorably," believes 
research center director Dr. Hans-Wolfgang Hubberten. GDR 
scientists, he acknowledges, "were the first to measure the 
vertical structure of the ozone hole continuously with balloon 
probes." This longest and most complete series of measurements 
will be continued in the future at the Neumayer station. "But 
aerological investigations as well as total ozone measurements 
on Spitzbergen will be made and evaluated by us," says 
Hubberten. His goal: To maintain the good image of the Potsdam 
research center and to polish it up with new ideas and findings. 

