Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Abulfaz Elchibey, the deposed president of 
Azerbaijan and leader of the People's Front, commented on the 
political future of current President Geydar Aliyev and the 
latter's desire to hand over the country to the Russians. 
  Claiming that various provocations are being made to disband 
the People's Front, which opposes this policy, Elchibey called 
on the democratic forces in the country to unite against Aliyev. 
  In his statement made at Keleki in Ordubadskiy Rayon where 
he 
has been exiled, Elchibey pointed out that many high-ranking 
officials of the People's Front were detained on trumped-up 
charges and vowed: "We will continue our struggle until 
Azerbaijan becomes an independent state." 
<H5>  He is Bringing the Russians Into the Country </H5>
  Noting that the Aliyev regime wants to silence not only the 
People's Front but also all democratic institutions, deposed 
President Elchibey said that the police is in control of roads 
leading to Ordubadskiy and reporters, in particular, are 
prevented from entering the region. 
  Speaking to a small group of reporters, Elchibey strongly 
criticized Geydar Aliyev and said the present government has 
achieved nothing. He said: "While in power we managed to expel 
nearly 30,000 Russian soldiers from the country. Now, Aliyev 
wants to reintroduce them into the country. Despite his 
expressed opposition to this in statements abroad and on 
television, he is underhandedly exerting enormous effort in this 
direction. The Russian troops that are to be brought to the 
republic, ostensibly to protect the peace, will cause new 
bloodshed." 
  Stressing that Azerbaijan has regressed in economic and 
political fields since the Aliyev administration assumed power, 
Elchibey noted that despite all these negative developments 
Aliyev is neglecting everything and is battling the People's 
Front and other democratic forces. 
<H5>  They Are Muffling Our Voice </H5>
  Pointing out that the leaders of the People's Front and many 
people working for the freedom of the country have been detained 
in recent days, Elchibey said: "It seems that they consider the 
democratic forces more dangerous than the Armenians; that is why 
they have dropped everything to battle us. They are detaining 
our members and preventing reporters from seeing us. They are 
trying to prevent our voice from reaching the outside world." 
  Touching on the war with Armenia, Elchibey indicated that 
Aliyev is lying both to the outside world and the Azerbaijani 
people, and said: "Aliyev frequently appears on television and 
announces the liberation of Fizuli and Agdam or advances of our 
Army with no casualties on our side. The fact is that our side 
had 14,000 martyrs within 45 days. More than 20,000 were 
injured. None of the six lost regions, not even a single 
village, has been recovered." 

