Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, minister of </F>
environmental protection and natural resources, under the 
heading ``Satisfaction'': ``Response to Persistent Critics: `No 
Normal Economy Can Be Built Without a Normal Environment'''] 
  [Text] My interview in NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA (No 251 (675), 
30 December 1993) drew an extremely emotional reaction from A. 
V. Yablokov, the chairman of the Security Council's Interagency 
Commission on Ecological Safety (NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA, 13 January 
1994). Neither I nor anyone else in the environmental protection 
system was surprised at that reaction -- we have long since 
become accustomed to Aleksey Vladimirovich's incompetence and 
emotional outbursts. But I do feel compelled to write to the 
newspaper again because that incompetence caused the distortion 
of certain facts that are quite obvious or else easily 
verifiable, as well as incorrect and subjective interpretation 
of other facts and such exaggeration that the likelihood of 
readers being misinformed is simply too great to ignore. 
  Provisionally -- but only provisionally -- one could divide 
Yablokov's ``response'' into three section: firstly, a 
description of Russia's ``terrible'' environmental problems, 
secondly, a tale of how the Ministry of Environmental Protection 
and Natural Resources, deprived of Mr. Yablokov's skillful 
leadership, either cannot or will not function and, finally a 
third section containing assertions of a political nature which 
clearly reek of denunciation. 
  Let us begin with the most simple fact, and the thing that 
evidently enrages my opponent most of all: my election as deputy 
to the State Duma. I was elected on a slate of candidates from 
the Russia's Choice association, and I was elected in Nizhegorod 
Electoral District, because the association's slate was divided 
up into geographical districts, in full compliance with the 
Election Statute. I did not lose anywhere. Nor did I attempt to 
register anywhere except in Nizhniy Novgorod. 
  So why did Yablokov not even bother to inquire of the 
Central 
Elections Committee exactly how I got elected? And along those 
same lines, what does the word ``self-appointment'' in the final 
paragraph of his article mean? Could it be that Yablokov thinks 
I appointed myself minister? One thing is clear: that kind of 
mistake is impermissible not only for a politician, but for any 
state official, even one who stands apart from politics (though 
at one time Yablokov was active in politics and served as a USSR 
people's deputy). 
  Now let us turn to ecology and begin with organizational and 
administrative matters. Unfortunately, at this time it is by no 
means just the Russian Federation Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Natural Resources that is responsible for the 
environment, the state of natural resources and natural resource 
use in Russia. In addition to it there are at least 11 other 
federal agencies dealing with those matters, and six of those 
organizations (the Russian Federation Committee on Fishing, the 
Ministry of Agriculture's Hunting Department, Russian Federal 
Oversight of Nuclear and Radiation Safety, Russian Federal 
Mining and Industrial Oversight and the Russian Federation State 
Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological Oversight) have always 
been wholly independent of the Ministry of Environmental 
Protection and Natural Resources. Yet Yablokov holds me 
accountable for all of them. 
  When I talk about the results of our efforts, about our 
problems, the means of solving them and our capabilities, in the 
first approximation I am referring to a framework established by 
current legislative acts. In addition one must also take into 
account the actual social and economic situation in the country, 
the things that society will agree to do and the things that it 
plainly will not accept at this time. Things are very 
comfortable when the GNP is rising and the centrally distributed 
portion thereof is increasing -- in that case everyone can be 
allocated a little bit more, and high-priority areas 
(environmental protection, for example) can be given more than 
anyone else. But if the amount of money being distributed is not 
growing, then one area can only receive something at the expense 
of another (for example, the pension fund, health care services, 
education, science, culture, etc.). It is even worse when the 
GNP and the centrally distributed portion thereof are 
decreasing. In that case the amount of funding received by each 
section of the state's budget also decreases, and in order to 
increase allocations in one area it is necessary to impoverish 
other areas even more. Add to that the fact that they are 
already losing money due to the worsening economic situation. 
One must have exceptionally high priority in the eyes of society 
to get additional funding under these conditions. But of course 
Yablokov is aware that the declining standard of living, higher 
crime rates, unemployment, political problems stemming from the 
collapse of the Soviet Union and many other things have 
relegated environmental protection to a place of very low 
priority in public opinion. Under these conditions one must look 
at things realistically and ask for whatever society is willing 
to give. Even if that means taking a purely market-oriented 
position and framing the issue like this: what is better in 
terms of improvement in the environment's priority ranking -- 
constant performance of requiems, or reasoning and information 
based on the actual functioning of the environmental protection 
system? I am convinced that the latter is better. Yablokov 
writes: ``...budgetary funding for the field is such that the 
entire Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection system is on 
the verge of collapse.'' As for collapse, that is an outright 
lie, and just show me anyone whose budgetary funding situation 
is any better! Without the slightest effort I could name 15 
ministries and agencies where things are worse. 
  If the environmental situation were catastrophically bad 
throughout the entire territory of Russia that would be a death 
sentence for all of humanity. It is strange that Yablokov has 
somehow overlooked the biosphere as a whole and the role played 
in it by our ``golden ecological reserve'' -- the more than 
one-third of Russia's territory that remains virtually untouched 
by commercial activity (7-8 million square kilometers). 
Fortunately, overall this is not yet a catastrophe, it is a 
problem, and one which can and should be solved. 
  One must not forget that 30 years ago an extremely severe 
environmental situation was observed in many regions of Europe, 
the United States and Japan. The situation there often coincided 
exactly with what we are currently seeing, primarily in 
metal-manufacturing cities, in Baykalsk and in industrial 
centers in the Urals and the Volga region. The post-industrial 
countries have solved this problem, though one must admit that 
they have done so largely at the expense of the Third World (and 
the world at large). I am convinced that we will also solve it, 
and we will attempt to do so not at anyone else's expense, using 
our own scientific and technical resources, instead of exporting 
environment-intensive types of production abroad. I have written 
on many occasions about the fact that that process could begin 
in Russia together with an economic upturn, that solutions to 
the problems of the economy and the environment must be 
implemented simultaneously, that introduction of the new 
technologies that will allow our economy to lower its overhead 
and improve its product quality and competitiveness on the world 
market will at the same time make it possible to achieve radical 
changes in the interaction between the economy and nature. No, 
there is no way to build a normal economy without a normal 
environment. But equally pointless is the position that says 
first the environment, then the economy. What is needed here is 
calm calculation, persistent day-to-day efforts to assess and 
monitor compliance with decisions, environmental inspection, 
further development of the economic mechanism for environmental 
protection and natural resource use (which even now is 
functioning just fine) improvement of the tax system, and 
development of environmental protection legislation. To many 
people that seems pretty boring, and most of these are things 
you would not talk about at a demonstration, for example, but 
the future of our environment and the ecological health of our 
country will depend primarily on these efforts. 
  I am surprised by the number of scientific errors constantly 
made by Yablokov. In what scientific source did he read that 
there is an ozone hole over the Northern Hemisphere, and over 
Russia in particular? Over the Antarctic -- yes, there is, or 
rather there is a hole that appears and disappears depending on 
seasonal variations. But the only thing that has been recorded 
over the Northern Hemisphere is a depletion of the ozone layer 
-- fortunately we still have a long way to go before we have a 
hole. The causes of this extremely unpleasant phenomenon did not 
come about in just the past three to five years. Large-scale 
production of ozone layer-destroying chlorofluorocarbons goes 
back several decades, and many of them continue to ``live'' in 
the atmosphere. The effects of those that are already there will 
only cease several decades from now. Yet reading that particular 
passage in Yablokov's article the uninformed reader could well 
think that the Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection has 
through its bungling created an ozone hole in the past two 
years. Things that can be forgiven an environmentalist speaker 
addressing a rally are unpardonable coming from a corresponding 
member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, just as they are 
unpardonable coming from a high-level government official. 
  Or consider this excerpt: ``Since the state of the 
environment is responsible for roughly 30 percent of our health, 
one year out of the three years of decrease in average life 
expectance in 1993 is due to the environment.'' But just what is 
``30 percent of our health?'' After declaring rates of illness a 
health factor, Yablokov draws this astounding conclusion: since 
roughly a third of the reported illness rate is attributable to 
the environmental factor -- according to him -- then 
consequently for every three years of decline in life expectancy 
one year is due to that factor. How can one respond to that? 
Doctors are well aware that disease rates are not so simply and 
directly connected with life expectancy, especially if one 
considers only reported illnesses based on hospital records (as 
is done in virtually every study). 
  Yablokov seems very prone to mistake his claims for the 
final 
authority on truth. In his opinion, the minister ``delayed for 
more than a year the development of a system of measures 
stemming from the decisions by the U.N. Conference on 
Sustainable Development signed by Russia in Rio de Janeiro.'' It 
is a well-known fact that those decisions were signed by more 
than 150 countries of the world, and I would like for Yablokov 
to name me even five that have approved any such systems of 
measures at the governmental level. The Russian Ministry of 
Environmental Protection in conjunction with other affected 
ministries and agencies has in fact submitted a draft plan to 
the government. Yablokov leveled the same charge at me at a 
meeting of the government's commission on environmental 
protection and natural resource use but, as is his custom, did 
not stay until the end and left the meeting before I was able to 
reply. For that reason he remains ignorant of the arbitrary 
nature of his assessment. 
  The Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection complies 
with all legal standards, laws and sublegal acts and cannot, as 
an organ of state executive authority, operate in any other way. 
At the start of this letter, addressing the ministry's tasks, 
functions and rights, I wrote: ``in the first approximation.'' 
The second approximation clearly is to consciously and 
purposefully change guidelines that do not satisfy the 
environmental protection system, based on consideration of 
principle and an overall scientific assessment of our tasks and 
functions. Not to violate the guidelines, but rather to change 
them, acting within the bounds of the law. We are very 
dissatisfied with the current ``Statute on the Russian Ministry 
of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources'' and have 
prepared a new version. We have gotten approval for it from all 
ministries and agencies and we are now waiting for government 
approval, but unfortunately due to the government's 
reorganization that approval has been delayed. We are in many 
ways dissatisfied with the current law ``On Environmental 
Protection,'' but the we have prepared a draft of a new federal 
law to be entitled ``On Environmental Protection and Sustainable 
Development'' and are ready to submit it to the State Duma in 
the near future. True, if it were not for the parliamentary 
crisis we would have done so months earlier. All of this adds up 
to not very favorable conditions surrounding the ministry, but I 
am not inclined to keep count of our defeats, otherwise one 
would have to regard the entire history of any ministry as an 
unbroken series of defeats. These are just difficulties, the 
kind that are quite normal for any aspect of government work and 
for any ministry or agency. We do not overly dramatize the 
situation. We are doing our jobs. Incidentally, a brief report 
on our work is included in the state reports I have already 
mentioned, and is submitted to the government on a monthly 
basis, in addition to our annual report. Yablokov should be 
familiar with all these materials, it just seems that he has no 
interest in them. 
  Now a word about the All-Russian Congress on Ecology and 
Environmental Protection. This is definitely a useful idea, and 
the Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection has been an 
active supporter of it from the start. But convening a congress 
without any preparatory work would be absolutely pointless. 
Major organizational preparations are required. Nor will a 
program for Russia's ecological revival come about by itself. It 
will have to be developed. All that takes money, people to do 
the work and an appropriate organization. At a board meeting of 
the Russian Ministry of Environmental Protection this matter was 
considered in the presence of Yablokov, who stated that he 
wanted to be head of the organizing committee that would 
organize the congress. The embarrassed board members said 
nothing, and no decision as to who should be assigned to head 
the organizational committee was made at that time. Firstly, it 
is a well-known fact that in other countries such events are 
usually headed by the president, the vice-president or the prime 
minister, not by an advisor. Secondly, Yablokov does not have 
any substantial apparatus supporting him, and that means the 
whole organizational burden would fall on the Russian Ministry 
of Environmental Protection. We are also very familiar with 
Yablokov's leadership style, and we were simply horrified at the 
prospect. The Russian delegation to the Rio conference was 
headed, not too successfully, by A. V. Rutskoy, whose status 
would be fully appropriate for the head of an organizing 
committee. As for the assertion that I need ``political 
closeness to Rutskoy,'' that statement could only elicit 
laughter from anyone who has the slightest familiarity with the 
issue. Incidentally, in terms of the ``mournful tone'' of his 
environmental speeches A. V. Rutskoy has always been very close 
to A. V. Yablokov. There is a great deal of evidence that I have 
never sought political closeness to Rutskoy, and Yablokov 
himself could call some to mind if he would try. Back in the 
fall of 1992 there was no mention of political battles in 
connection with the election or anything else of the kind. As 
for me, I have never betrayed my democratic beliefs and my 
liberal economic concepts, and there is no way that I can regard 
Rutskoy as an ally based either on psychological makeup or 
ideological considerations. As for the assertion that he has no 
use for me whatsoever, I have never had any doubt about that. 
  Where is the environmental program, Yablokov asks? I have 
already mentioned it. It is the document that has been submitted 
for government approval, prepared in accordance with the 
decisions of the U.N. conference in Rio de Janeiro and the 
followup conference on ``The Environment for Europe,'' held in 
Lucerne a year later. The document was completed exactly on 
schedule. As for why ``our government has avoided further 
developing and implementing it,'' that is a question that should 
be addressed to the head of government, not to me. In a 
postscript to his response to me Yablokov states that he intends 
to focus his efforts on the Russian Security Council's 
Interagency Commission on Ecological Safety. Of that commission 
he writes: ``The commission's decisions... are subject to review 
by organs of state authority...'' It is obvious that it is 
precisely authority that attracts A. V. Yablokov, the authority 
to be irresponsible, and that has always been his position: he 
has monitored and instructed the ministry and sent it almost 
1,000 letters in a year and a half, yet has never been 
accountable for anything. But he has a very dim concept of how 
to use authority. The same is true now: I look at his 
commission's plans and I can see that he will be lucky if 
one-twentieth of them will ever actually come before the 
Security Council. All the rest will be just static, another 
source of annoyance for those who have to implement them, those 
who will once again be issued tens and hundreds of guidelines to 
follow. Though head of the Security Council's Interagency 
Commission, Yablokov is not even clear on how the council 
functions, which issues it considers and what kind of decisions 
it makes. In MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI (9-16 January 1994, No 2/699) 
A. V. Yablokov, commenting on his resignation from the post of 
presidential advisor, wrote: ``I have not seen the president in 
the past six months.'' I think the president is right: the 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources 
prepares information and analyses on all environmental issues, 
so there is no need for any intermediaries. 
  P.S. As this article was being prepared NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA 
(No 13 (689), 21 January 1994) published another letter taking 
exception to my interview. It had the same hallmarks as the 
other, i.e. an extremely sloppy handling of facts, 
rumor-mongering and disregard for the law permeating virtually 
every line, and these things naturally lead one to conclude that 
all these opinions stem from a single source. 

