Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Regulations of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations </F>
and Trade and the State Administration for Industry and Commerce 
on the Use of Trademarks on Exported Canned Food--Promulgated by 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, 5 
October 1993"] 
  [Text] 1. Enterprises producing canned food for export 
and running this type of business must use trademarks according 
to the Trademark Law and the relevant regulations concerning 
trademarks on exports. Foreign trade enterprises that use 
others' registered trademarks on their exported canned food 
should sign contracts with registrants according to law to 
authorize the use of the trademarks. Their product quality, 
markets, clients, and prices are subject to the relevant 
departments' supervision, administration, and coordination. 
  2. The work of printing and making trademarks on exported 
canned food must be handled according to the Administrative 
Method of Printing and Making Trademarks promulgated by the 
State Administration for Industry and Commerce. If trademark 
registrants are foreign trade enterprises, the registrants or 
enterprises authorized by the registrants should be responsible 
for supervising the work of printing and making the trademarks. 
  3. Production enterprises are not permitted without 
authorization to sell others canned food with foreign trade 
enterprise trademarks which are produced for and used by foreign 
trade enterprises. If, for special reasons, production 
enterprises have to sell at home exported canned food which uses 
the trademarks of foreign trade enterprises, they are, in 
principle, not allowed to use the registered trademarks of 
foreign trade enterprises. If it is really difficult to change 
the trademarks, they should, with the consent of the trademark 
registrants, add another seal with the words "For Domestic 
Sale," which is not smaller than 2.25 square cm and which is not 
easily altered, at the conspicuous site of the trademarks. 
Canned food labelled for domestic sale is not permitted to be 
exported again. 
  4. The code names of the production plants, production 
dates, and product code must be printed on exported canned food. 
  5. Generically packed canned food without any trademarks is 
not allowed, in principle, to be exported to Hong Kong, Macao, 
and the Southeast Asian regions. 
  Units and individuals which violate the above-mentioned 
regulations will be dealt with according to the relevant 
regulations, and those violating the criminal law will be turned 
over to judicial organs for investigation and the determination 
of criminal responsibility. 
  Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade State 
Administration for Industry and Commerce 15 October 1991 

