BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Leonid Kravchuk by unidentifed </F>
correspondent on 23 April; place not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Announcer] Over the last 24 hours the Russian mass 
media have allowed many various distortions of our state's 
stance regarding the Black Sea Fleet situation. Therefore, we 
consider it necessary to explain again what Ukraine's stance 
really is. Leonid Kravchuk, Ukraine's president, was 
interviewed by Ukrainian television today. 
  [Correspondent] Leonid Makarovych. Ostankino, let us put it 
this way, has put into the mouth of its president, Russian Boris 
Yeltsin, an opinion regarding his consultations with the 
competent bodies on the Black Sea Fleet situation -- 
dissatisfaction with the Ukrainian side's stance, as if our 
stance is changing and being interpreted in various ways. 
However, the delegation at work in Sevastopol presented the 
stance that was a result of your talks with Boris Nikolayevich. 
  [Kravchuk] The Black Sea Fleet is an issue of many aspects. 
You see how long we have been approaching it, even at the 
presidential level. This meeting in Moscow was the fourth 
meeting between Ukraine's and Russia's presidents on the Black 
Sea Fleet. 
  I have already said that those documents, which we signed in 
Yalta, Zavidovo, and Massandra, and now in Moscow, as 
instructions, as a stance, already give grounds to finally 
resolve this problem. I could never believe that two ministers, 
with their people, could assemble in Sevastopol and immediately 
manage to resolve this issue. 
  They were searches to solve, instruct, and resolve those 
stances, which had been defined, and not to fully resolve this 
problem. I am convinced that this problem -- I talked to Viktor 
Chernomyrdin today -- can be resolved only at the presidential 
level. I am always rather afraid of premature evaluations and 
would not want the work of the two ministers, their meetings and 
some kind of comments, say, by journalists and so on, to then be 
presented as a stance. This is a search. 
  Our stance is a clear one. We want Russia to agree -- and I 
understand that Russia is agreeing to this -- to dividing the 
fleet 50-50 in accordance with the Yalta and Zavidovo 
agreements. This has been stated in documents. Nobody is 
proposing anything new. But Ukraine, proceeding then from the 
current realities of its possibilities and its position, should 
take 15-20 percent of the ships of the sea-going part of the 
fleet to resolve its problems. The remaining part, which is left 
over, is that which is sold to or compensated by Russia, in 
accordance with the situation, whether for debts or whatever. 
This is a problem of forms, but this is the position. It seems 
to me that the ministers did find a solution from this aspect in 
Sevastopol, as [Defense Minister Vitaliy] Radetskyy informed me. 
  The second problem is that of basing. I abide by the idea 
and, in this particular case, support the existing reality; I do 
not see any other one. The naval base of the Russian Black Sea 
Fleet is being set up in Sevastopol on universally recognized 
international principles -- the same as they solved Baykonur and 
others. In other words, there is nothing new about this. These 
are established, tested, let us say, by the world community. It 
is not for the first time that this is being done. 
  As far as the other currently existing bases in Crimea are 
concerned, for example, Feodosiya, Kerch, Balaklava, Donuzlav... 
[pauses] it cannot be so that the chief base is in Crimea and 
then the basing. [as heard] That is to say, [Russia's] stand 
today, as far as I understand, boils down to the fact that 
Ukraine must leave Crimea. We say that the base is in 
Sevastopol and those, let us say, points of current basing can 
be used by the Russian Navy according to relevant agreements and 
treaties. In other words, we are not raising the question today 
that everything must be changed overnight; however, the Russian 
side, too, must take into account our stand. For example, we 
receive a certain number of ships. Today officers have their 
homes in Sevastopol, but we cannot leave the officers, take the 
ships without the commanders, without the officers and moor them. 
  It is necessary to tackle this in a civilized manner. One 
should not take, let us say, any statements proceeding from the 
meeting of the ministers, and even a minister's reply, or 
minister's statement, even by such a minister as the defense 
minister, either Grachev or Radetskyy, as state policy. It 
seems to me that any statements today are premature. Premature. 
I have never, and in no place been making any other statements. 
I have not been making statements to the effect that a third 
country should help us. As far as I know, this has not been 
done by any member of the government, neither [Acting Prime 
Minister] Zvyahilskyy, nor Ivan Plyushch, as the Supreme Council 
chairman. Who are they talking about? Maybe, some political 
leader or political party did this? Well, then in Russia 
political leaders make a lot of statements, but this does not 
mean they must be refuted at the level of the president. This 
is a problem... [pauses] When a president or anybody else makes 
a statement, then this is really a statement on behalf of the 
state. This is how, I believe, one should approach this. 

