Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional drug seizures and arrests related to drug 
trafficking monitored through 6 March. Source is cited in 
parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  Atlantico Department policemen confiscated 10 kg of cocaine 
and arrested Wilson Mollano Suarez and Guillermo Montano Vela 
during an operation in Los Pinos neighborhood. The drug was 
found stashed inside a bus from Brasilia. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
EL TIEMPO in Spanish 24 Feb 94 p 9A) 
  The Lejanias II operation in Vichada Department led to the 
discovery of three cocaine laboratories camouflaged as Indian 
huts and 20 clandestine strips, 10 of which had sophisticated 
electronic equipment for night landings. Police confiscated 
equipment and chemicals, including several plastic drums marked, 
Lacoplast--Made in Guatemala. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision 
Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1800 GMT 27 Feb 94) 
  The Narcotics Police at Eldorado International Airport 
yesterday confiscated 11 kg of cocaine stashed in the third 
cargo compartment of an Avianca airplane bound for Miami. No 
one was arrested. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 
28 Feb 94 p 6b) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  Guatemalan Treasury Police members yesterday arrested five 
Mexicans--identified as Jose de Jesus Martinez, Jesus Acosta, 
Clara Macias, Alicia Cano, and Ericka Maria Murillo--in Pajapita 
jurisdiction, San Marcos Department, on the Mexican border. The 
Mexicans were driving two vehicles which held 213 kg of cocaine 
worth $3.6 million. Also, four Mexicans--identified as Jesus 
Primitivo Ley Jacobo, Bardomiano Ley Jacobo, Romualda Beltran 
Soto, and Flora Ortencia Salas Paiz--were arrested on 24 
February at a border post between Guatemala and Mexico. They 
had 108 kg of cocaine worth $2.8 million in their possession. 
(Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1537 GMT 4 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Honduras </H5>
  Police sources reported today that 20 kg of cocaine were 
confiscated on the Caribbean island of Roatan. The drug was 
intercepted by the Public Security Forces' recently created drug 
unit. This year Honduran police have seized 286 kg of cocaine, 
most of it coming from Nicaragua, Panama, and Colombia. In 
addition, a joint police and judicial branch operation on the 
Bay Islands resulted in the seizure of 39 kg of cocaine from 
Colombia. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 1711 GMT 3 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  Navy Secretariat members from the 6th Naval Zone in Lazaro 
Cardenas, Michoacan State destroyed five marijuana fields 
measuring 6,300 square meters. The fields held 30,950 plants 
with an approximate weight of 1,840 kg. In addition, police 
seized 6.3 kg of cocaine at the railroad depot in Puerto 
Penasco, Sonora State. (Mexico City LA JORNADA in Spanish 2 Mar 
94 p 40) 
<H5>  Panama </H5>
  National Police Agents on 27 February arrested (Lucio Ford), 
a 32-year-old drug distributor, in the Chorrillo area. Fiord 
was in possession of 40 doses of cocaine with a street value of 
$120.00. (Panama City Telemetro Television Network in Spanish 
1730 GMT 28 Feb 94) 
  Police stopped and searched a bus, resulting in the seizure 
of 5 kg of cocaine and the arrest of Colombian Alejandro Enrique 
Carcamo Alvarina and Panamanians Ernesto Manuel Revello and 
Pedro Corro Santos. The three arrested persons were turned over 
to the Drug Secretariat in Las Tablas. (Panama City LA ESTRELLA 
DE PANAMA in Spanish 5 Mar 94 p B5) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Narcotics Police today arrested nine drug traffickers, five 
of whom were Colombians, in Bella Vista, San Martin Department. 
The traffickers were members of a gang led by Colombian drug 
trafficker Waldo Arias, alias Ministro. Police reports indicate 
that Arias had ties with Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera, alias 
Vaticano, who is currently imprisoned at El Callao Naval Base. 
(Lima Global de Television Network in Spanish 0100 GMT 26 Feb 
94) 
  A joint Navy, Army, and National Police operation resulted 
in 
the seizure of 3,653 kg of cocaine paste on 26 February in Madre 
de Dios Department. The paste, once refined, is worth $86 
million. Thirteen drug traffickers were arrested, including one 
Boca Manu municipal councilman, three men who maintained the 
clandestine airstrip, and three women, one of whom was a radio 
operator. The drug traffickers transferred the drug to El 
Diamante community in Boca Manu, from where it was flown over 
Brazil to Colombia, reportedly to supply the Cali Cartel. 
National Narcotics Directorate Chief General Walter Taboada 
says Colombian drug traffickers constantly violate Brazilian 
airspace to avoid interception by Peruvian jet fighters. The 
authorities also seized weapons, ammunition, modern 
communications equipment, and a lighting system for the landing 
strip. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1552 GMT 3 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  The Venezuelan National Guard seized 230 kg of cocaine 
during 
a weekend operation. The drug was hidden in a secret 
compartment of a truck driven by Venezuelan citizen Jesus 
Orlando Dizarazo Jaime in Trujillo Department. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 2053 GMT 28 Feb 94) 
  Narcotics Agents at Maiquetia International Airport seized 
60 
kg of cocaine hidden in two bronze statues bound for Molini Sur 
in Miami. Francisco Javier Godoy Blanco, owner of a foundry in 
Cua, was later arrested. Godoy had been exporting sculptures 
since 1989. The National Guard has asked the DEA to arrest four 
other persons, including two Colombians and Godoy's cousin, 
Simon Blanco. Godoy admitted during his interrogation that he 
worked for a Medellin organization. (Caracas EL NACIONAL in 
Spanish 1 Mar 94 p D-10) 
  Members of the Judicial Technical Police Narcotics Division 
today arrested Venezuelan Luis Eduardo Gil Guerrero and 
Colombian Luis Eduardo Diaz-Granados Vinas at Simon Bolivar 
International Airport in Maiquetia. Each had swallowed 1 kg of 
cocaine before boarding a plane bound for Holland. The men were 
taken to the hospital to have their stomachs pumped to retrieve 
the drug, which had been sealed in condoms. Police claim the 
drug traffickers work for the Cali Cartel. (Caracas EL 
UNIVERSAL in Spanish 3 Mar 94 p 4-30) 
  Two Colombians were arrested at Simon Bolivar International 
Airport in Maiquetia carrying 2.5 kg of cocaine in their 
stomachs. Airport officials reported that the two men became ill 
and were taken to the hospital, where they said they had 
swallowed capsules filled with cocaine. One of the men expelled 
90 capsules, and the other expelled 80 capsules. The cocaine 
was from Colombia and bound for the United States. (Caracas 
Venezolana de Television Network in Spanish 2300 GMT 2 Mar 94) 

