BFN 

  [Text] Assemblies for economic efficiency will be held at 
every production and service center from 15 May to 30 June 
following the pilot process which has been described as 
favorable for the union movement. [passage indistinct] 
  [Begin recording] [Unidentified reporter] [Words indistinct] 
basically as result of the workers assemblies held nationwide? 
  [Unidentified speaker] Exactly. The assemblies were a 
special 
moment where the working class was able to express itself on 
economic efficiency in the workplace and the measures to be 
adopted to streamline finances. The experience of having 
discussed specific aspects of the economic efficiency in the 
workplace showed that we had to give continuity to that issue, 
the framework to do this will be the space formerly dedicated to 
the production or service assemblies. Now the assemblies for 
efficiency will be aimed at this precisely: To discuss 
efficiency in the workplace, to discuss specific aspects of work 
and measures to take so that the work in every work center, 
either service, production, education, or health is conducted 
more efficiently; to have budgeted units make a more adequate 
use of their budget; to have health units provide more efficient 
service to the population, thus better using the budget 
allocated to that task. 
  [Unidentified reporter] How can the working class contribute 
to make this -- we will not call it a package of measures -- but 
this new revolutionary offensive imposed by the times to make 
the country operate more efficiently? 
  [Unidentified speaker] Precisely, the process of the 
assemblies for efficiency will begin massively after 15 May. One 
of the issues which we have to discuss necessarily is the 
results of the National Assembly of the People's Government 
[ANPP] session on 1-2 May. Whatever results from this, the 
recommendations made, the measures the government will alter or 
implement, as well as others already in place, will have to 
necessarily have the support, consensus and committed actions of 
the workers. Otherwise, any measure adopted will not be 
effective. [end recording] 

