BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo has had another relatively quiet day. The 
chetniks fired with small arms at members of the UN Protection 
Forces [UNPROFOR] in Kozija Cuprija, but they returned fire. 
Apart from the use of a portable rocket launcher against 
Dobrinja Five, several explosions were also heard near the 
airport. Regrouping of enemy forces has been reported in 
several locations. 
  In the 1st Corps theater of operations, the fiercest attacks 
by the Serbian occupying forces was registered on the 
Olovo-Vares front. The enemy keeps retaliating for his losses 
in the clashes with the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army by shelling 
civilian targets from a safe distance. The chetniks have been 
shelling Olovo and Vares with 120-mm and 82-mm mortars. From 
[words indistinct] the aggressor has been firing anti-aircraft 
machine guns and M-84 machine guns at the defense lines in 
Gradina and Gornji Kopaci. 
  After several days of preparations and after concentrating 
new forces and bringing in heavy artillery to Nisici Plateau and 
Olovske Luke, the chetniks this morning launched a fierce 
combined artillery and infantry attack on our defense lines. 
Despite hundreds of shells fired in only a few hours [words 
indistinct], our lines remain stable and firm, and impenetrable 
for the chetniks. Despite several warnings by UNPROFOR, the 
chetniks have again used artillery against civilian targets 
[words indistinct] within the 20-km zone around Sarajevo. 
  According to the latest information, there are daily 
conflicts on the Nisici plateau between the local military and 
the population, and forces that have arrived from other parts of 
the so-called republic of Srpska. In order to calm the 
situation in this area at least a little, and to prevent the 
increasingly open clashes between the [word indistinct] police 
-- who even use weapons to express their dissatisfaction with 
the [words indistinct] of the local Chetniks, which culminated 
in the killing of some 10 policemen [words indistinct] -- a 
military delegation of Karadzic's parastate creation arrived 
last night. 
  On the Visoko front the chetniks keep firing with M-84 
machine guns at the road Visoko-[word indistinct]. The chetniks 
are also using portable rocket launchers and 60-mm mortars to 
fire on our positions in [words indistinct]. 
  This is stated by the 1st Corps Information Service. 

