Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sofia, March 7 (BTA) -- The Bulgarian Embassy 
in Belgrade contacted the Foreign Ministry of Yugoslavia 
(Serbia-Montenegro), asking the Serbian authorities to provide 
assistance in the arrest and identification of the hijackers of 
the Khan Kubrat, in ensuring the safety of the crew and the 
inviolability of the ship and its cargo, and in returning them 
to Bulgaria, BTA learned from the Press Centre of the Bulgarian 
Foreign Ministry. The Yugoslav Embassy in Sofia was approached 
with the same request. [passage omitted] 
  National radio reported that at a meeting of Mr. Konstantin 
Andreev, Head of the Foreign Ministry's Southern Europe 
Department, and Mr. Smilkovic, charge d'affaires of Yugoslavia 
in Sofia, the Bulgarian diplomat had been assured of the Serbian 
authorities' readiness to assist in the arrest and 
identification of the hijackers, in ensuring the crew's safety 
and the vessel's inviolability and in returning it to Bulgaria. 
  An official source who asked not to be identified told the 
BTA correspondent in the Danubian town of Vidin (northwestern 
Bulgaria) that the Khan Kubrat, hijacked on March 3 at about 
22:00 hrs. from the port of Somovit, had already reached the 
port of Prahovo in Serbia. Prahovo is the first Serbian 
liquid-fuel terminal upstream from the Bulgarian section of the 
Danube. The communication came from members of the sanctions 
assistance mission in Turnu Severin, Romania. According to it, 
the hijacked Bulgarian vessel came to a berth at about 200 m. 
from the fuel-discharging facilities at about 05:00 hrs. on 
March 6, but it is not known if the 6,000 tonnes of diesel fuel 
it carries have been unloaded. 
  Another official source says that the fuel has not been 
unloaded yet and that the governments of Bulgaria and Serbia 
have reached an agreement to keep the vessel loaded until the 
case is clarified. No information is available about the fate 
of the crew and the armed men on board the ship. 
  "It is a very bizarre case," said Rainer Boyssel of the EC 
Monitor Mission. "I believe that organized crime is involved. 
I do not blame the Bulgarian Government. Embargo busting can 
be extremely profitable. This business has a very good reason 
to exist. I am sure the Bulgarian Government has nothing to do 
with it, and I hope that the investigation will detect the 
truth," he said in an interview on national television. 
"Western European monitors chose not to halt the vessel to 
avoid pollution of the river in case it was blown up," he 
explained. 

