Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Zhang Kacong [1728 0595 5115]] </F>
  [Text] On 7 December, tens of thousands of mine 
construction workers and local people gathered in Honggu 
District of Lanzhou Municipality to attend the ceremony for the 
startup of construction of the Haishiwan mineshaft by the Yaojie 
Mining Bureau. At 2:30 p.m., Zhong Zhaolong, Standing Committee 
member of the Gansu Provincial Committee, Vice Governor Cui 
Zhenghua and others ignited tumultuous applause at the formal 
announcement of commencement of the project. 
  Authorities of the Ministry of Coal, State Energy Investment 
Corporation, and provincial and municipal departments attended 
the ceremony. 
  The Haishiwan mineshaft, now approved by the State Council, 
is Gansu's largest mineshaft construction project. Its 
geological coal reserves are 243 million tons; it is designed 
for an annual output capability of 1.5 million tons, and it can 
remain in service for 81 years. The operating investment will be 
324 million yuan and it will be built in 78 months. It will be 
equipped with advanced technology and facilities and built to 
high-output and high-efficiency standards. The formal startup of 
construction is targeted to solve the mineshaft replacement 
predicament in the Yaojie mining district as quickly as 
possible, and it will help to ease the serious coal shortage 
situation that exists in the two provinces of Gansu and Qinghai. 
  Since the Haishiwan mineshaft project was listed as a 
national preparatory project in 1990, the national ministries 
and commissions involved, and the provincial and municipal 
departments concerned gave it their full support, and the 
ahead-of-schedule preparations handled by the Yaojie Mining 
Bureau proceeded smoothly. So far, over 93 million yuan have 
been raised, and the civil engineering work has been done on the 
48,000 square meter work site, getting it ready for construction 
to begin on the main shaft, ventilator shaft and adits, and 
bringing it to the highest standard of readiness for any capital 
construction project in Gansu's coal mining history. 

