BFN 

<F P=106> [Tatyana Smolyakova report: "Ecology: "Patches for the </F>
Submarine"] 
  [Text] In accordance with a presidential directive and a 
Russian Federation Government decree a routine expedition to the 
area where the Komsomolets nuclear submarine sank five years ago 
in the Norwegian Sea will go ahead 15 June through 15 August. 
The voyage is to be carried out under the direction of Russia's 
Ministry for Emergency Situations with the participation of a 
number of Russian Academy of Sciences research institutes, the 
"Rubin" maritime technology central design bureau, and the 
Defense Ministry. 
  We would remind you that there are an atomic reactor and two 
torpedoes with nuclear warheads aboard the submarine. The 
torpedoes pose the greatest potential danger: Each of them 
contains 3,200 grams of plutonium-239. Since the nose section 
of the submarine has been damaged seabed currents could destroy 
the torpedoes' casings. And then radioactive contamination of 
the water is inevitable. According to the most pessimistic 
estimates, this could happen in late-1995 or early-1996. And 
although most scientists and specialists do not share such a 
pessimistic forecast, they all agree that it is better to play 
safe. That is the purpose of the expedition. 
  There are three specific tasks -- to hermetically seal the 
nose section of the Komsomolets nuclear submarine using special 
titanium "patches," monitor the radiation and environmental 
situation in the area, investigate the technical state of the 
submarine, and search for the rescue chamber. 
  A collegium session was held at the Ministry for Emergency 
Situations to examine the preparations for the expedition. It 
was acknowledged that the work is proceeding on schedule. The 
titanium "patches" have already been brought aboard the 
oceanographic ship Akademik Mstislav Keldysh. The intention is 
to fit them to the submarine using manned "Mir" underwater craft 
equipped with mechanical arms. In mid-June the ship will leave 
Kaliningrad, go to St. Petersburg and then to Denmark and 
Norway, and start the actual scientific program 1 July in the 
area of the wreck of the Komsomolets. The preparation of a 
warship to ship freight and members of the expedition from 
Murmansk to the work area is being completed. Another 
oceanographic vessel has been chartered in Murmansk as backup 
for the operation. 
  During the coming voyage particular attention will be paid 
to 
environmental monitoring. Unique self-contained equipment will 
be set up in the area where the submarine sank from which 
readings can be taken regarding the state of the environment 
without the equipment's being removed from the water. This is 
extremely important in order to gain a precise knowledge of the 
situation and precisely forecast how it will develop. 
  The fact that hitherto monitoring has been by no means 
perfect has given rise to a mass of speculation over the problem 
of the Komsomolets. For instance, there has been plenty of 
supposition that the fishing catch may be contaminated as a 
result of a plutonium leak. 
  In theory that possibility is not ruled out. It is known 
that the plankton on which the fish feed spend the winter at a 
depth of 1,000 meters. Sometimes they go down to a depth of 
1,500 meters and very small quantities as far as 2,000 meters. 
We would remind you that the Komsomolets is lying at a depth of 
1,700 meters. Thus, there is a likelihood of the plankton and 
then the fish being subjected to radioactive contamination. But 
how great is it? That also has to be ascertained using the 
state-of-the-art monitoring apparatus, some of which has been 
developed by Russian specialists, some by foreigners. 
  What is more, one of the tasks facing the 1994 expedition is 
to rehearse the technologies for emergency and monitoring work 
in extraordinary situations in the oceans of the world. 
  This program will cost Russian taxpayers 4.625 billion 
rubles 
and [as published] $4.1 million. But evidently this expenditure 
is worth it in order to prevent a possible nuclear catastrophe 
and stop speculation over the problem. 

