Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marek Chorabik: "I Will Choose My Vice Minister </F>
Myself, Minister Kolodziejczyk Says on His Return From Paris"] 
  [Text] "I am open to the coalition's proposals concerning 
the choice of [defense] vice minister. However, I will not 
accept a political commissar. I need a man who will be well 
briefed for the job in substantive terms," Defense Minister 
Piotr Kolodziejczyk said yesterday in Gdynia in reply to 
questions about the appointment of a candidate to the post of 
vice minister at the National Defense Ministry [MON]. 
  Kolodziejczyk did not confirm the report that Zbigniew 
Siemiatkowski, currently press spokesman for the Democratic Left 
Alliance, has been put forward as a possible candidate. 
  The MON chief stated that the matter will be the subject of 
his meeting with representatives of the government coalition, 
scheduled to take place during the coming week. Kolodziejczyk 
expected that the coalition would put forward several 
candidates, from among whom he would select the person most 
suitable for the post. 
  The immediate reason for calling the meeting between Piotr 
Kolodziejczyk and reporters was the conclusion of the trilateral 
talks between defense ministers of France, Germany, and Poland, 
which took place in Paris on Thursday night and Friday morning. 
"We achieved more than we had expected to achieve," Minister 
Kolodziejczyk said, clearly pleased with the outcome of the 
Paris meeting. "We gained powerful sponsors, who will promote 
our position in our efforts to join the Western European Union." 
Kolodziejczyk expressed his conviction that Poland will be an 
associate member of the Union as early as in May. 
  Kolodziejczyk also believed that the change in both 
Germany's 
and France's attitude to Poland and its position in Central 
Europe was a positive aspect of his meeting with Ministers 
Volker Ruehe and Francois Leotard. According to the head of the 
Polish defense sector, Poland at long last has a real chance to 
"emerge from the gray zone and find itself in a zone whose 
colors are identical with the rest of Europe." 
  One of the more immediately tangible results Minister 
Kolodziejczyk brought with him from Paris is the agreement on 
calling joint staff exercises and joint maneuvers of basic 
military units. To begin with, these will involve exercises for 
highland and Alpine riflemen on Polish territory (in the 
Carpathian Mountains) and in France. 

