Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Thailand yesterday agreed to set up border task 
forces with Burma and Laos to improve the efficiency of local 
officials from the three countries in their joint campaign 
against illegal drugs trade. 
  Narcotics Control Board Secretary General, Chawalit Yotmani, 
said the Thai-Burmese and Thai-Lao border task forces would 
enable anti-narcotics officials to take immediate action to 
prevent and suppress the production and trafficking of narcotics 
without having to wait for the decision of the governments of 
the respective countries. 
  The task forces would also make way for the improvement of 
intelligence operations and a better flow of information about 
drug traffickers among Thai Lao and Burmese officials, Pol Gen 
Chawalit said. [sentence as published] 
  Agreements on the border task forces were reached at 
yesterday's second ministerial-level meeting on drugs prevention 
and suppression in Rangoon which was attended by top government 
leaders and senior officials of Thailand, Laos and Burma. 
  The Thai task forces will be headed by Narcotics Suppression 
Bureau commissioner Somchai Milindarangkun. 
  Pol Lt Gen Somchai said the first meeting of Thai and 
Burmese 
officials will be held in Chiang Rai's Mae Sai District opposite 
Burma's border town of Tachilek in March, to work out joint 
drugs prevention and suppression plans. 
  The date of the meeting with Laos has not yet been scheduled 
but the venue will be in the northeastern province of Nong Khai, 
he said. 
  Pol Lt Gen Somchai conceded that coordinating efforts with 
Burma was likely to be more difficult than working with Laos as 
Thailand and Laos have already been close to one another and 
have always exchanged information. 
  He said Thailand should strengthen its cooperation with 
Burma 
so both sides can have a common understanding and trust one 
another. 
  "Trust in each other would help boost efficiency in our 
attempt to get updated information that would lead to the arrest 
of drug traffickers," he said. 
  Meanwhile, Pol Gen Chawalit said Thailand and Burma would 
also hold a discussion on problems about minority groups along 
their common border because some of these groups have been 
involved in narcotics production. 
  He said the three countries also agreed that meetings of 
their senior anti-drugs officials would be held twice a year and 
a ministerial-level meeting once every two years. 
  Cooperation would also be sought from China and Vietnam and 
these two countries will be invited to join in the next meeting, 
he said. 
  Thailand earlier pledged to provide training assistance 
under 
18 drug prevention and suppression projects to Burma and Lao 
officials between 1994 and 1996 at a cost of 8.2 million baht. 
  The meeting, which ends today, will be wrapped up with the 
signing of a joint declaration on narcotics suppression 
cooperation by Deputy Prime Minister Amnuay Virawan, Burma's 
Interior Minister Mya Than and Laotian PM's Office Minister Phao 
Bounaphon. 
  A joint declaration on the elimination of narcotics and drug 
trafficking in the region was signed at the first 
ministerial-level meeting in Bangkok in 1992. 

