BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Failure of U.S.-Indonesia Talks on </F>
Textiles"] 
  [Text] Problems always exist. Bilateral talks on textile 
production and export between the United States and the 
Goverment of Indonesia took place last week. This is a routine 
annual procedure as the period draws near marking the end of 
Indonesia's textile export quota to the United States. The 
talks mainly centered on the U.S. decision regarding Indonesia's 
annual textile export quota. 
  The failed talks were considered normal. Similar talks on 
textile quotas between the two nations have also failed 
previously and no agreements were then achieved. However, some 
of the talks have proven successful. 
  Indonesia's textile export was considered disappointing if 
it 
is observed within the context that its nongas exports achieved 
a level off [preceding two words in English]. 
  As a rule, Indonesia will make official its new request for 
an increase in its export quota on 1 July. But the U.S. 
insisted on holding a meeting in connection with the access of 
its commodities into Indonesia's market, including the issue of 
property right [preceding two words in English]. Indonesia 
clarified that its delegation was not empowered with the mandate 
of discussing such an issue because it was not related to the 
textile export quota. Thus, the talks collapsed. 
  But we view such a failure with a deeper perspective. First, 
the recently concluded talks were similar to previous talks, and 
the Indonesian delegation forwarded several requests in its bid 
to increase the textile export quota accorded by the U.S.. 
However, when the USTR [United States Trade Representative] 
requested certain concessions as a counter request, Indonesia 
could not grant such requests. 
  Indonesia probably practiced this strategy from the 
beginning. It is also likely that Indonesia made an earlier 
prediction that its request for access to the U.S. market would 
be turned down, acknowledging the fact that the United States as 
a superpower arrives at such decisions in most of its trade 
negotiations. Fortunately, the latest failed talks did not 
leave a negative impact on us because there will be more time 
for such talks in the future. 
  We perceive that the present and future economic 
globalization will depend on a change of attitude in trade 
negotiations. We also consider that our current strategic 
physical location is becoming less important to the United 
States global economic and political strategy. What we need is 
more economic and trade concessions, including an increase in 
the textile export quota. 
  Most of the previous trade relations brought about mutual 
benefit. But it is imperative for economic globalization to 
bring about mutual benefit. Economic globalization emphasizes a 
win-win situation [preceding three words in English]. 
  Therefore, Indonesia should be prepared to make certain 
concessions during future negotiations if its requests for more 
concessions are to be realized, particularly with regard to its 
request for an increased textile export quota. Our only 
strategy in the recent talks on textile export quotas was 
through giving an explanation that our delegation was not 
empowered with the mandate of making concessions during the 
limited trade negotiations. 
  It should also be taken into consideration that we are 
currently unable to forecast the U.S. aspirations in trying to 
increase its exports -- prior to the negotiations on the textile 
export quota. Furthermore, the Indonesian delegation which 
participated in the limited negotiations was not the best 
delegation empowered to make decisions. 
  In this connection, we wish to point out that the 1992 
U.S.-Indonesia textile negotiations were successful because 
Indonesia agreed to provide two concessions to the U.S., namely 
the entry of U.S. films and fruit into Indonesian markets. This 
was considered a precedent. Therefore, the USTR's demand for 
access to Indonesia's market and protection of the property 
right [preceding two words in English] do not come as a surprise 
or were considered extraordinary issues in connection with the 
trade negotiations between the two countries. 
  Second, the concluded bilateral negotiations on the textile 
quota issue were too formal. The Indonesian delegation met with 
the USTR team and, as far as we know, forwarded a request for an 
increased quota of exports to the United States -- including 
quotas on several other categories. On the other hand, the USTR 
pressed for a meeting on the issue of providing access for U.S. 
commodities into the Indonesian market and the property rights 
issue. The talks also collapsed due to disagreement. 
  Prior to the negotiations, no contact or lobbying was done 
to 
find out how Indonesia's request was met by the U.S. in 
connection with textile exports. Such measures were also not 
carried out when other discussions ended in a deadlock. Several 
Indonesian textile industrialists also participated in the last 
negotiations with the U.S. side. Unfortunately, textile 
industrialists who have access to lobbying and who had 
established earlier personal contact with the USTR, Foreign 
Relations Department, Agriculture Department, Inland Revenue 
Department, the Congress (House of Representatives and the 
Senate), and American businessmen were not included in the 
delegation. 
  Actually, Indonesia previously experienced similar 
negotiations in 1989 where personal contacts and lobbying played 
an important role in turning the negotiations into a success and 
diverting a deadlock. The USTR agreed to increase export quotas 
on textile and several other categories until the increase 
exceeded the limit. This was due to informal lobbying carried 
out outside the official negotiations. 
  In other words, Indonesia's delegation to the recently 
concluded negotiations did not lobby or embark on informal 
personal contacts during its mission to seek a desirable and 
favorable outcome. 
  Third, prior to the start of negotiations on the textile 
export quota, officials of the United States Embassy in Jakarta 
contacted a number of industrialists and economic experts in 
connection with the Indonesian delegation to the negotiations. 
Those who were contacted believed that the United States was 
not concerned with the quality of the Indonesian delegation. 
This resulted in queries about Indonesia's seriousness about 
the negotiations. In fact, almost all categories of the textile 
export quota to the United States have not been fulfilled [as 
published] during the current quota year (1 July 1993 to 30 June 
1994). Thus, why should Indonesia ask for an additional quota? 
  Regarding the quota issue, the United States has long 
monitored the allocation and management of the textile export 
quota. The United States along with the EC, Canada, and the 
Scandinavian countries allocate the quota for the sake of 
developing the textile industry in developing nations. 
Accordingly, the quota is allocated free of charge. However, 
the textile export quota has been commercialized and has become 
a source of income for those not engaged in the textile industry 
in Indonesia. In fact, this runs counter to the original 
objective of the United States, the EC, and the Scandinavian 
countries. 

