Europe      Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 16, 21 
April 1994 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Latin America Group featuring brief summaries of foreign 
media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most recent 
sources available to FBIS. 

   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Latin America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. 

   The EER is published in two editions, one for Western Europe 
(also including media coverage of Canada and Turkey), and the other 
for Eastern Europe.  Drawing primarily from domestic media sources 
of these countries but also using other foreign media where 
appropriate, the EER focuses on national and regional economic 
issues, such as economic competitiveness, regional economic 
integration, economic reforms and other changes in economic 
policies, and foreign trade and investment. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 

   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

   EU 

   Brittan Comments on U.S., Kantor 

   FINLAND 

   Report Proposes Reducing Unemployment Compensation 

   FRANCE 

   Editorial on Labor Minister Giraud Statements; Seguin Denies 
Large Creation of Jobs; Editorial Cautions on Air France Referendum; 
Balladur To Delay Work Hour Decree; Territorial Management Plan Seen 
as Return to 'Dirigisme'; Aid to Government-Owned Companies 
Reviewed; Poll Finds Acceptance for Economic Policy Change 

   GERMANY 

   Country Seen Lagging in Industrial Innovation; German-Turkish 
Economic Ties Expanding; 600,000 More Private Companies in East; 
Most Eastern Steel Plants Privatized, Downsizing; Governments 
Negotiate Post-1994 Job Market Support 

   GREECE 

   Conditions for OTE Sale Detailed 

   PORTUGAL 

   Poll on Government Subsidies 

   SWEDEN 

   Labor Market Measures Seen Replacing Job Creation 

   TURKEY 

   Businessmen View Economic Prospects 

   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EU, Germany, Greece, Portugal, Sweden 

   EU 

   BRITTAN COMMENTS ON U.S., KANTOR--An article in the economic 
supplement of the Paris daily LE FIGARO on 14 April reports an 
interview with Sir Leon Brittan, the EU foreign trade commissioner, 
in which Brittan stated that he believed the United States intends 
to "obey the rules" of the new international agreements even though 
doing so reduces U.S. ability to apply Section 301 trade sanctions. 
Brittan added that for the first time his U.S. counterpart, U.S. 
Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, acknowledged the "constraints" 
on U.S. trade sanctions that the agreements would have when they 
were officially signed in Marrakesh.  Moreover, Brittan states in 
the interview that he has the "deep feeling" that the United States 
is on the defensive, that U.S. conduct is dictated by domestic 
political concerns linked to the agreement's ratification in 
Congress. 

   The article additionally claims that it is "noteworthy" that 
Kantor mistrusts discussions with Brittan, "who always pulled new 
concessions from Kantor."  The article cites Brittan as "smilingly" 
saying, just before meeting with Kantor in a quadrilateral meeting, 
"I am pulling concessions from him gradually." (DiI)  (Paris LE 
FIGARO Le Fig-Eco supplement in French 14 Apr 94 p I, X) 

   FINLAND 

   REPORT PROPOSES REDUCING UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION--A working 
group commissioned by the government to study reducing the cost of 
Finland's generous social benefits system has proposed cutting the 
duration of unemployment compensation from 500 to 400 workdays. 
This would apply to persons receiving payments based on their 
payroll-deducted contributions to the Unemployment Insurance Fund as 
well as to those receiving only the "basic allowance," which is 
funded completely by the state.  In 1992, the most recent year for 
which figures are available, the average contributions-based benefit 
was 222 markkas/workday and the basic allowance was set at 116 
markkas/workday.  The number of persons receiving the latter type of 
aid is expanding rapidly and is comprised mostly of those who have 
never worked or worked only briefly, especially young people. 

   The working group also proposed introducing a means test for 
eligibility for "labor market aid," a type of state-financed 
assistance equal to the basic allowance and currently paid out 
indefinitely to any worker whose earned or basic benefits have 
expired.  This change would aim at making it more attractive for a 
worker to seek a job or enter a government-sponsored training 
program.  The panel would also like to see an unemployment insurance 
scheme into which all would pay, a sort of universal coverage 
arrangement like the country's national health insurance system. 
(RB)  (Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT in Finnish 30 Mar 94 p 5) 
FRANCE 

   EDITORIAL ON LABOR MINISTER GIRAUD STATEMENTS--According to 
deputy editor-in-chief of LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES Francois Roche, Labor 
Minister Michel Giraud's statement that employment in France will 
improve when the process of implementing the Five-Year Employment 
Law is complete--in the next month and a half--is an uninformed one. 
Roche points out that large companies have reserve capacity which, 
if demand picks up, will allow them to produce more without hiring, 
at least until the end of the year.  Roche adds that it is also 
"illusory" to expect that the law will have "spectacular" effects on 
employment since the law's intent is to manage unemployment rather 
than to treat the underlying causes of it.  The law has a plethora 
of provisions for training workers who do not have work or 
shortening work hours for those who do work, but there is nothing in 
the law to create wealth and encourage business growth.  The 
government has also done nothing about the essential problem of 
protecting our market share through an effective European trade 
policy, to help small- and medium-sized companies through 
appropriate financial strategies, or to implement a progressive 
reindustrialization of France by mentoring new projects, Roche 
concludes. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 6 Apr 94 p 
40) 

   SEGUIN DENIES LARGE CREATION OF JOBS--In an interview conducted 
by Frederic Gerschel for PARIS MATCH, Philippe Seguin, National 
Assembly president and an influential Rally for the Republic (RPR) 
leader, claimed that measures designed to promote the hiring of 
young people would only create from 10,000 to 15,000 jobs, refuting 
a senior government official's public statement that reducing labor 
costs alone would create 500,000 jobs.  When asked whether his 
estimate was too pessimistic, Seguin replied that "the French must 
be told the truth."  He argued that such labor cost reductions are 
often "marginal" in terms of creating new jobs, for they subsidize 
new hirings that would have taken place regardless of any measures 
adopted.  In Seguin's view, the government's recent effort to 
initiate a Job Training Contract (CIP) failed because young workers 
did not believe training was going to be provided in exchange for 
lower wages.  He added that the withdrawal of the CIP does not 
settle the crisis in the labor market, for contrary to the 
prevailing opinion, unemployment is not limited to the young. 

   Seguin contended that structural reform of the economy is needed, 
so that at least everyone can carry out a useful activity, even if 
full employment cannot be attained.  He advocated that funds now 
used unproductively for unemployment compensation and welfare be 
devoted to job creation.  However, he acknowledged that such a 
momentous" change could only be envisaged within the context of the 
presidential campaign.  Asked by Gerschel whether he feared a 
social explosion," Seguin replied that actually it would be a 
"social implosion," for the "very fabric of society is 
disintegrating" when a fourth of the active population is excluded 
from the labor market. (RM)  (Paris PARIS MATCH in French 14 Apr 94 
p 97-98) 

   EDITORIAL CAUTIONS ON AIR FRANCE REFERENDUM--Francois Roche, 
deputy editor-in-chief for LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES, writes that the 
results of the referendum organized by Air France President 
Christian Blanc to determine the level of support among Air France 
employees for his reorganization plans cannot be interpreted as a 
sign that other troubled companies could use the same tactic to 
circumvent labor union disputes.  The referendum at Air France 
garnered a high percentage of participation and the results showed 
that more than 80 percent of the employees would accept Air France's 
restructuring plans despite the fact that only a few of the labor 
unions out of the many which represent Air France workers agreed to 
the plan.  Roche contends that Air France's success in going over 
the heads of the unions to the employees was an "exceptional" case, 
since Air France was a government-owned company, represented the 
nation's flag carrier, had a new president who needed to build 
legitimacy for himself, and took place in such a degraded situation 
that there was little doubt the employees would agree. 

   This said, Roche argues, the strong positive response was 
nonetheless a strong disavowal of Air France unions, one which their 
leadership should think about.  The unions, in opposing so 
strenuously the reorganization plans of former Air France President 
Bernard Attali, unwittingly paved the way for the acceptance of 
Blanc's plan, which is no less hard on the employees.  However, 
Roche notes, many companies understand that the loss of union 
influence is not necessarily good for their labor relations.  He 
points to the German example as one which teaches that sharing 
management with labor is more efficient in periods of economic 
difficulties. 

   Air France's victory may be hard to manage, Roche continues.  In 
his view, the Air France management will need many hours of 
discussion with labor to implement its restructuring plan.  What the 
"will of the people" gave, it can take away, Roche cautions. 
Additionally, the legal foundation for such a course of action has 
not yet been established.  Paradoxically, the referendum sends an 
ambiguous message.  Social dialog in France is in a pitiful state 
when a company boss must win under the Gaullist standard, "Either me 
or chaos." (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 12 Apr 94 p 
40) 

   BALLADUR TO DELAY WORK HOUR DECREE--After backing off from the 
Job Training Contract decree when young job seekers took to the 
streets to protest, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur is again bowing 
to pressure and is delaying a decree intended to give companies more 
flexibility to manage work schedules and to ease unemployment, 
according to an article by Delphine Girard.  She contends that its 
successive flip flops in the conduct of social policy can only 
further weaken Balladur's government.  Although the Labor Ministry 
has been preparing to issue the work hour decree for several months, 
Balladur has decided to make the date of its implementation 
"indefinite" and to submit the issue to professional organizations 
who are charged with negotiating the controversy which has arisen 
over it.  For employers and labor unions which object to it for 
various and contradictory reasons, the government's "retraction" is 
a victory, Girard claims.  Labor Minister Michel Giraud, however, 
who intended to enact the decree by the end of April, is trying to 
justify this new turn of events.  Giraud's staff explains that 
Balladur has chosen to "convince" rather than to "force" social 
partners into accepting a law they do not like, even if doing so 
leads some to believe that he is renouncing labor reform. 

   Those who do not like the work hour decree are many and their 
criticism for its various provisions has been "incessant" and 
"hostile," Girard points out.  The National Confederation of French 
Employers (CNPF) for.example, claims the decree contradicts the 
Five-Year Employment Law since its provision mandating two days of 
rest per week keeps companies from computing work hours on a yearly 
basis.  The labor unions, on the other hand, are complaining that 
the law gives too much flexibility to companies to manage work 
hours, allowing them to stay open six days a week and at night and 
suppresses regulations that require the same work hours for 
everyone.  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 13 Apr 94 p 
4) 

   TERRITORIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN SEEN AS RETURN TO 'DIRIGISME'--Prime 
Minister Edouard Balladur and his Interior Minister Charles Pasqua 
have presented the outline for their new territorial management 
plan, which according to Christophe Palierese writing in LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES is a plan to return France to "dirigisme" or state 
intervention in the economy.  In presenting the outline, Balladur 
said it was necessary to "stop cutting France in two and to 
strengthen national unity.  Pasqua noted that while it is the 
government's task to create wealth for the nation, it is also its 
obligation to create "fairness."  He said, "We must organize a 
better distribution of men and wealth," adding that "employment is 
at the heart of the debate."  For Balladur as well as for Pasqua, 
territorial management is an economic policy, Palierese explains. 

   Pasqua points out that enormous funds are necessary to accomplish 
this territorial management plan and that the funding will be done 
largely through borrowing, adding that "there is a lot of money in 
this country which is not used in a productive fashion."  Palierese 
further cites Pasqua as saying the intent of the plan is not to 
create a rigid system in France but to "balance" the territory.  He 
added that this will not be done all at once.  Reforming local 
finances will be the first phase.  Below are the parts of the plan 
which are economic in nature: 

   * Reform Local Finances: The plan advocates "clarifying" local 
taxation, which has literally exploded in the last few years and 
which now represents a heavy burden on the taxpayer in an unequal 
manner.  This is especially true for the professional tax, the rate 
for which is lower in areas with many companies and which in turn 
attracts new companies but further disadvantages localities with few 
businesses.  The plan suggests that the professional tax should 
become a tax with a single rate fixed by the government. 

   * Reinforce the Economy: The plan would "support" companies, 
"especially in terms of their capital stock," and envisions 
establishing a "national guarantee fund" for this purpose. 

   * Accelerate Infrastructure Projects: The plan suggests 
transportation funding could be expanded and that "balancing 
mechanisms" could be established to assure that different modes of 
transportation complement each other. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE 
DESFOSSES in French 14 Apr 94 p 4) 

   AID TO GOVERNMENT-OWNED COMPANIES REVIEWED--An article by Sophie 
Seroussi in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES details the amount of capital the 
French Government has infused into struggling government-owned 
companies during 1993 (see below) and discusses projected government 
aid for 1994.  The greatest beneficiary of this "public manna" is 
the computer company Bull, which received 4.5 billion francs (Fr) in 
1993 and will receive Fr2.5 billion more in 1994.  However, in 1994 
Air France may top Bull if the EU Commission approves the projected 
Fr7 billion government aid planned for the airline's reorganization. 

   Other companies which would like additional funds in 1994 are 
engine manufacturer Snecma, which wants another Fr1 billion, and the 
General Maritime Company (CGM), which wants up to Fr4 billion.  The 
CGM is assured of getting at least Fr5OO million on top of Fr700 
million it received in 1992 (part of which was paid out in 1993). 
The National Railroad Company (SNCF), which will receive Fr36.68 
billion in 1994 from the Transportation Ministry, intends to ask for 
another Fr1.4 billion. 

   In 1994, the Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) and the Sept Arte 
will not be on the list.  However, they will be replaced by the 
National Company for Gun Powder and Explosives (SNPE) and arms 
manufacturer Giat Industries, which will receive subsidies "in one 
fashion or another."  In the audiovisual field, the Communications 
Ministry would like to provide Fr400 million for the television 
station France 2 and Fr300 million for the French Production and 
Audiovisual Company (SFP).  However, Seroussi claims Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur will have to mediate with the Budget Ministry to 
accomplish further subsidies since paying for them will be difficult 
with only Fr21 billion budgeted for recapitalization.  Seroussi adds 
that the government has "let it be known" on several occasions it 
will finance the recapitalizations with privatizations.  (DiI) 

   Capital Funding for Public Companies (in billions of francs for 
the 1993 Budget) 


   Company                              Amount 

   La Sept-Arte                          .735 
   France Television                     .450 
   SFP                                   .500 
   SNCF                                 1.800 
   CEA                                   .790 
   Bull                                 4.500 
   EMC                                   .500 
   CGPME                                 .500 
   Credit Lyonnais                      3.500 
   Snecma                                .750 
   Aerospatiale                        2.000 
   CGM                                   .500 
   Societe Marseillaise de Credit        .700 

       (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 8 Apr 94 p 10) 



   POLL FINDS ACCEPTANCE FOR ECONOMIC POLICY CHANGE--According to a 
BVA poll conducted by phone at the beginning of March, two thirds of 
the French public agree that to fight unemployment, an alternative 
economic policy to that of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's is 
possible.  Some 80 percent of the public at large and 97 percent of 
business leaders believed that reducing labor costs for companies 
would relieve unemployment.  The French were also in favor of 
exonerating companies which hire the unemployed from social benefit 
costs--83 percent of the public and 81 percent of business leaders 
approved--but barely a third agreed that lowering the minimum wage 
was acceptable.  Some 77 percent of the public were favorable to 
retiring older workers while 85 percent of business leaders wanted 
to finance public works through borrowing. (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION 
in French 18 Apr 94 p 14) 

   GERMANY 
   COUNTRY SEEN LAGGING IN INDUSTRIAL INN0VATION--According to an 
article in FOCUS magazine, Germany is lagging behind the United 
States and Japan in industrial innovation because of an ineffective 
approach to research and a lack of public support.  A study prepared 
exclusively for FOCUS by the Munich-based Institute for Economic 
Research (Ifo) found that in 1990--the last year for which figures 
are available--Germany accounted for 16 percent of all international 
patent applications, compared to 32 percent for the United States, 
and 24 percent for Japan.  As late as 1980, Germany was in second 
place (behind the United States) with 21 percent of all 
applications. 

   Ifo's study also found that a U.S. firm, IBM, was "the most 
innovative company in the world," having made 2,982 patent 
applications between 1989 and 1991.  Although the German firm 
Siemens finished second with 2,885 applications, and five German 
companies finished among the top 20, the article pointed out that 
the German innovations came in industries where the country was 
already strong, like chemicals and automobiles, rather than in new, 
more forward-looking industries.  The article noted, for example, 
that only two German companies placed among the top 40 innovators in 
electronics, the "key technology of the future":  Siemens, in fifth 
place, and Bosch, in 18th. 

   The article blamed Germany's relatively poor showing on both an 
ineffective approach to research and problematic public attitudes. 
Existing procedures, the article asserted, failed to convert the 
"abundantly available" knowledge of basic researchers into practical 
applications.  The country's applied scientists too often failed to 
follow up on breakthroughs made by basic researchers and publicly- 
funded researchers too often worked without regard to the need for 
their work to have some commercial application.  The article also 
noted an aversion to research among the German population, citing as 
examples the transfer of genetic research activities abroad in the 
face of public outcry and opposition by environmentalists to the 
Transrapid magnetic train project.  (RoH)  (Munich FOCUS in German 
28 Mar 94 pp 184-190) 

   GERMAN-TURKISH ECONOMIC TIES EXPANDING--After a record year in 
1993, German-Turkish trade is showing signs of further growth, 
according to an article in the business daily HANDELSBLATT.  Several 
councils have been founded to promote trade and soon there will be a 
German-Turkish Chamber of Commerce in Istanbul.  Thus far, Turkish 
exports to Germany have dominated the trade balance; Germany is 
Turkey's number one trading partner.  Direct Turkish investment in 
Germany has also expanded since the first Turkish banks followed the 
Turkish guest workers into the country.  Now Turkish construction 
companies, textile manufacturers, and retail stores have arrived, 
hoping to use Germany as a base for international trade.  The large 
number of Turkish immigrants to Germany have formed a useful network 
for these businesses.  A businessman from Istanbul explains that 
even a small Turkish businessman can travel in Germany without any 
language problem at all.  He is sure to find help from one of his 
countrymen residing in Germany." 

   Meanwhile, the modernization of Turkey's economy has created 
opportunities for German firms.  Germany has 447 companies operating 
in Turkey--more than any other country.  As a result of Turkey's 
increased need for high-tech equipment, most German investment there 
is in the electronics, machine, chemical, and pharmaceutical 
industries.  Siemens, which has a group of joint ventures, is the 
largest German manufacturer in Turkey.  When asked the most 
important reasons for investing in Turkey, businessmen still cite 
the large market, low wage costs, and proximity to the EU.  With the 
increased attractiveness of Eastern Europe as a low-wage region, 
however, Turkey's role as a bridge to Asia and the former Soviet 
republics is becoming more important.  Auto manufacturer Mercedes- 
Benz views the country as "an ideal production location for 
commercial vehicles for Central Asia."  According to the article, 
Turkish firms can be useful partners for German companies when doing 
business in the CIS countries.  There are already over 5,000 small 
Turkish businesses in the Turkic-speaking republics and Turkish 
construction firms have experience building housing for Russian 
soldiers returning from Germany. (WS)  (Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in 
German 13 Apr 94 pp 21, 23) 

   600,000 MORE PRIVATE COMPANIES IN EAST--The number of businesses 
registered in the new laender increased by about 600,000 during 
1990-93.  The new companies are primarily small and medium-sized 
firms, employing a total of about 3 million persons.  Only about 
11,000 of the new companies are in the industrial sector, which- 
-partly because it requires higher and more complex start-up 
financing--is more difficult to enter than the crafts and trades 
sector.  The Federal Government has adopted a variety of measures to 
stimulate the growth of independent small businesses, including low- 
interest start-up loans; six months of stop-gap funding for persons 
moving from unemployment to entrepreneurship; and special loans to 
stimulate research, development, and innovation in selected high- 
risk economic sectors.  To help some existing small businesses, the 
government is also setting up low-interest loans and credit 
guarantees for worker instruction and on-the-job training.  (CW) 
(Duesseldorf HANDELSBLATT in German 8-9 Apr 94 p 7) 

   MOST EASTERN STEEL PLANTS PRIVATIZED, DOWNSIZING--According to a 
report from the Federal Ministry of Economics, privatization of the 
former GDR steel industry is almost finished.  Of the 12 steel 
companies in eastern Germany, the Trust Agency had to shut down only 
two, designating two others for further reorganization prior to 
sale.  Of the eight privatized companies, six have been taken over 
by non-German firms.  The Italian Riva group has bought three 
companies representing 70 percent of eastern Germany's raw steel- 
making capacity, while Italy's Feralpi group, Luxembourg's Arped, 
and the East Slovak Iron Works in Kosice have taken control of one 
company each. 

   The privatized plants are also being thoroughly restructured and 
modernized, while shedding excess productive capacity. 
Collectively, the annual raw steel production capacity of the 
eastern German plants is expected to drop from 8.9 million tons in 
1990 to 5.1 million tons by 1996.  The plants' capacity to produce 
hot-rolled steel is to shrink from 5.35 to 4.25 million tons over 
the same period.  Employment in the plants, which once provided work 
for 66,000 people, is also expected to decline from its current 
level of 10,700 to around 8,000 after 1996. (CW)  (Frankfurt/Main 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 5 Apr 94 p 15) 

   GOVERNMENTS NEGOTIATE POST-1994 JOB MARKET SUPPORT--Post-1994 
funding for public works (ABS) companies in eastern Germany is in 
doubt.  The Trust Agency will provide 3.5 billion German marks (DM) 
in 1994 for such projects employing some 50,000 workers, but this 
funding will end when the Agency is dissolved at the end of the 
year.  The Federal and Laender Governments are negotiating how to 
compensate for this loss but it is expected that funding for 
nonpersonnel costs will be cut from 1994 levels, bringing many ABS 
projects to an end.  A decision on the funding issue is not expected 
before June, however.  (CW)  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE 
in German 9 Apr 94 p 9) 

   GREECE 

   CONDITIONS FOR OTE SALE DETAILED--According to an article in the 
Athens weekly TO VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS, the sale of Greek 
Telecommunications Organization (OTE) shares will implemented under 
the guidelines of a clear price policy to secure the trust of the 
investing public.  The article cites "reliable sources" as stating 
the law on OTE privatization will be approved by next June and will 
include, among other provisions, the organization's definitive price 
policy and an ordinance to allay fears about majority ownership. 
According to the article, this means that when OTE share prices are 
determined, government monitoring of OTE will be ensured.  While the 
government has not yet decided share prices, one scenario under 
discussion is a yearly adjustment of prices to match the expected 
rate of inflation. 

   The privatization law will allow the sale of 25 to 30 percent of 
OTE shares, the article continues.  It is not yet known whether this 
will take place all at once or in successive operations.  While the 
government would like to devote a large share of the privatization 
proceeds to covering the deficit and a smaller part to future OTE 
investment activities, trade unions insist that proceeds be applied 
to the modernization of OTE, characterizing other goals as self- 
defeating.  According to Greek General Confederation of Labor 
President Protopapas, privatization proceeds must be used to fulfill 
modernization needs, OTE must preserve its public and social 
character, and the sale of shares must be both "transparent" and 
subject to worker review.  The article adds that negotiations 
between the government and the trade unions will start as soon as 
possible. (RM)  (Athens TO VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS in Greek 3 Apr 94 p D7) 

   PORTUGAL 

   POLL ON GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES--More than 100 businessmen belonging 
to the monthly EXPRESSO/Euroexpansao panel were asked what role the 
state should play in the economy.  Some 59.2 percent said that the 
state must be a partner of the private sector within the context of 
a joint economic modernization policy.  Some 37 percent thought the 
state should play a subsidiary role, in which it monitors the proper 
functioning of the market.  Only 1.9 percent thought the state must 
be one of the principal movers of the economy, preserving an 
important position in strategic sectors such as banking, 
transportation, and telecommunications, as well as in some of the 
large industries.  Some 1.9 percent did not know or did not answer. 
Respondents were evenly divided on the question of whether 
businessmen have depended almost totally on government subsidies and 
EU grants without assuming risks, or not.  Some 11.2 percent did not 
know or did not answer.  (RM)  (Lisbon EXPRESSO ECONOMIA in 
Portuguese 26 Mar 94 p C1) 

   SWEDEN 

   LABOR MARKET MEASURES SEEN REPLACING JOB CREATION--According to a 
series of articles on unemployment in SVENSKA DAGBLADET, the Swedish 
Labor Market Board has become a haven for the unemployed and labor 
market measures designed to create jobs have only contributed to 
long-term unemployment.  Originally intended as a sort of "emergency 
room" for unemployed workers--to take them in, retrain them, and 
find them new jobs--the Swedish Labor Market Board is now becoming a 
long-term care facility.  In 1989, the number of workers who found 
jobs after six months of training was 75 percent but by the first 
half of 1993 the percentages were reversed:  75 percent are now 
returning to the Labor Market Board for more training.  According to 
the board's general director, Gote Bernhardsson, this trend has 
strained his organization's resources.  The board is now handling 
twice as many workers as Bernhardsson said three years ago could be 
accommodated "in a fair manner." 

   Critics note that labor market measures have become too important 
in the job market.  Instead of improving the functioning of the 
labor market and serving as stopgap measures, they are being relied 
upon to "provide alternatives to open unemployment."  Bernhardsson 
criticizes government measures like internships for young workers as 
crowding out real jobs."  Under this program, the government pays 
the wages for a young worker in the private sector for a limited 
time until he is permanently hired by the company.  Companies, 
however, are now looking at this as free labor, according to a 
professor at Umea University.  "Why hire a 25-year-old at full 
wages," the professor asks rhetorically, when you can get a 24 year 
old to do the same work for free?"  (WS)  (Stockholm SVENSKA 
DAGBLADET in Swedish 24 Mar 94 p 34; 25 Mar 94 p C1) 

   TURKEY 

   BUSINESSMEN VIEW ECONOMIC PROSPECTS--In an article in the Ankara 
daily DUNYA, several prominent business leaders discussed Turkey's 
current economic crisis.  Most of these leaders claimed they "were 
not surprised" by it and that, in fact, they "saw it coming."  They 
all stressed the need to lower the deficit.  Their comments are 
summarized below: 

   * Zekeriya Yildirim (former deputy governor of the Central Bank): 
Believes lowering the interest rates created the recent crisis. 
Noted that  the inability of government managers to communicate has 
disillusioned  business confidence.  Advocates government 
downsizing, starting with selling off government-owned companies. 

   * Tevfik Altinok (former undersecretary for Treasury and Foreign 
Trade): Claims the Central bank will never be independent as long as 
the budget deficit continues.  Supports "reasonable" mid-term 
policies to lower the deficit. 

   * Ertugrul Kumcuoglu (high-level government administrator): 
States government must stop foreign borrowing.  Wants the government 
to lower the public debt because without a lower debt, it is 
impossible to stabilize the Turkish currency.  Advocates-reforming 
government bureaucracy and the "structure of government." 

   * Ismet Alver (bank and corporate director): Argues Turkey needs 
a way to stabilize its politics and to implement decisions.   Claims 
frequent elections and changes of government erode the system's 
ability to carry out policies over the long term. 

   * Ishak Alaton (chairman of the Alarka Holding):  Advocates 
providing incentives to get investors back into the market.  States 
many have gotten addicted to earning high profits just by keeping 
their money in the banks, which he characterizes as "very 
dangerous." 

   * Gazi Ercel(bank board member and government administrator): 
Suggests the government must first establish trust in the financial 
markets and then reduce the public debt, which will increase 
production and investment.  Believes that as long as the deficit 
problem continues, the country will continue to go through these 
same crises. (EC)  (Ankara DUNYA in Turkish 21 Feb 94 p 14) 

   ECONOMIC BRIEFS 

   EU 

   --EU's future central bank, European Monetary Institute (EMI), to 
be permanently housed in office space in Eurotower building in 
Frankfurt, Germany. . .EMI to continue operating from Basle, 
Switzerland, until after renovation is complete, around beginning of 
November. (LIBERATION in French 6 Apr 94 p 12) 

   Germany 

   --Full conversion of East German marks for West German marks 
achieved on 7 April.  conversion took four years, exchanged 184 
billion East German Ostmarks for Dm120 billion. . .marks completion 
of monetary union between east and west Germany. (Paris LIBERATION 
in French 8 Apr 94 p 14) 

   Greece 

   --Participation in March housing construction  materials fair in 
Canton, China, by 11 Greek companies netted important contracts in 
fast developing Asian market...event to be immediately followed by 
opening of Sino-Greek Chamber of Commerce, Industry in Athens. (TO 
VIMA TIS KIRIAKIS 3 Apr 94 p D15) 

   Portugal 

   --Chamber of Commerce, Industry survey of prospects for first 
half of 1994 indicate 8 percent of businessmen optimistic about 
economy, 45 percent pessimistic, 47 percent expect no change. .91 
percent invested during last half of 1993, only 46 percent plan to 
do so at present. .45 percent reported production, sales decreases 
in 1993, 22 percent expect increase for first half of 1994. (DIARIO 
DE NOTICIAS 29 Mar 94 p 2) 

   --Unanimous EU decision granted grain growers 1 million contos, 
cattle farmers 5 million contos in compensation for 1993 drought 
losses. . .EU Commission has proposed allowing each country in 
future to set own reference year between 1989, 1991 to compute 
payment. (DIARIO DE NOTICIAS 30 Mar 94 p 2) 

   --Total 1993 direct foreign investment fell to 273 million contos 
compared to 1992's 590.6 million contos, according to Athayde 
Marques, president of Investments, Commerce, Tourism of Portugal 
(ICEP). . .second drop in as many years. (DIARIO DE NOTICIAS 28 Mar 
94 p 8) 

   Sweden 

   --Swedish news service study ranks Sweden sixth among OECD 
countries for attracting foreign investment during 1982-91, ahead of 
such EU powers as Germany, France.  undercuts argument that EU 
membership necessary to attract foreign investment. (DAGENS NYHETER 
2 Apr 94 p 30) 

   Roger B. (703-733-6508), Ender C. (703-733-6285), Robert H. (703- 
733-6504), Dian I. (703-733-6286), Rosa M. (703-733-6287), Wendy S. 
(703-733-6506), and Charles W. (703-733-6473) contributed to this 
Foreign Media Survey. 
ELAG/21 APR 94/ECONF/WED/JF 21/1808Z APR 94 

