Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Omer Vatric from Mostar] </F>
  [Excerpt] I am deeply moved by the degree of damage in the 
eastern part of Mostar and the indescribable misery in which 
people are forced to live, but I am also touched by the courage 
with which they bear it. This is what UN Secretary General's 
special envoy Yasushi Akashi said at today's news conference, 
attended by over 50 foreign correspondents and cameramen, that 
was held during his visit to the eastern, free part of Mostar. 
During his two-hour visit to the eastern part of Mostar, Akashi 
talked to the president and members of the Mostar War 
Presidency, Smail Klaric, Safet Orucevic, Rusmir Tific, Alija 
Alikadic, and Zijo Zuljevic, as well as with Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Army 4th Corps Commander Brigadier General Ramiz Drekovic. 
  Mostar is the first on the list of priorities, right after 
Sarajevo, since the situation in this city is in many respects a 
lot harder than in Sarajevo, stressed Akashi. The UN Protection 
Forces [UNPROFOR] are ready to extend maximal help, but they 
needs more troops. That is why Akashi is appealing to UN member 
states to authorize the deployment of fresh troops in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. In this respect, the agreement on the 
cessation of hostilities between the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army and 
the Croatian Defense Council [HVO], whose signing I witnessed in 
Zagreb, lends hope, said Akashi. Speaking about the conditions 
for the peaceful solution of the Mostar issue, Safet Orucevic 
acquainted Mr. Akashi and the attending correspondents with the 
five principles that the Mostar citizens would never give up on. 
They are: Mostar -- an open and undivided city; Mostar -- a 
part of the territory of the sovereign Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina; the return of all expelled citizens and the 
protection of private property; the punishment of all crimes and 
criminals on all sides; and direct participation in regulating 
the administration of the city. Mr. Akashi did not wish to 
comment on these principles for the public, at least not for the 
time being, he said. 
  The correspondents, however, showed the most interest in the 
new situation that had arisen after NATO downed four Serbian 
planes. Yasushi Akashi confirmed the news that the planes had 
been shot down, but it is interesting that he also said that he 
had been informed about this event after it happened. He 
explained that this was the usual procedure taken in 
implementing the no-fly zone over Bosnia-Herzegovina. General 
Mike Boorda [as heard] confirmed in a telephone conversation 
that this procedure had been absolutely respected, said Akashi. 
He then expressed hope that this would not change the positive 
atmosphere aimed at reaching a peaceful agreement, and that the 
fragile cease-fire would hold. Everything else would represent 
a crime against the citizens and peoples of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
In this respect, Yasushi Akashi has already spoken to Karadzic, 
and as he told correspondents, believed that Karadzic agreed 
with him that this incident should not be turned into a case 
that would significantly influence the peace atmosphere so 
laboriously created in Bosnia-Herzegovina. After a brief press 
conference, Yasushi Akashi left for the western part of Mostar, 
which is controlled by the HVO, where he will talk to the 
Croatian side. [passage omitted] 

