BFN 

  [Text] Forces of the rebel Shan warlord Khun Sa have 
pushed to within 6 km of the strategic eastern Burmese town of 
Tachilek, where 700 government troops face food and water 
shortages, a rebel source said yesterday. 
  "We hope to capture Tachilek," an official of Khun Sa's Mong 
Tai army said. "Our men are very near to the town and the 
defenders are nearly out of food." 
  Last week the rebels, mostly members of Burma's minority 
Shan 
population, reportedly stormed three Rangoon government bases 
near Tachilek and blew up a dam at the town's main reservoir. 
  Heavy fighting at the three government outposts on hills 
surrounding Tachilek between May 17 and 27 resulted in the 
deaths of 160 Burmese troops and 80 wounded, according to the 
Mong Tai army official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
  He said 17 Mong Tai army troop were killed in the fighting 
and another 39 were wounded. 
  Tachilek is the main border trade link to the northernmost 
Thai town of Mae Sai, 1,165 km north of Bangkok. 
  Burmese forces had been reinforced in the area in recent 
months in anticipation of a major offensive, but the Shan rebels 
launched a series of attacks two weeks ago that appeared to put 
Rangoon government troops on the defensive. 
  The Mong Tai army official said two Burmese military jets 
based at an air base at Tachilek flew two sorties May 17-18 
during fierce fighting around the village of Mong Kyawt, about 
24 km from the Thai border. 
  He said the Burmese jets dropped bombs from a high altitude 
because "they are afraid of our missiles." 
  Khun Sa's army, financed through taxes on opium caravans and 
heroin refineries in the Shan State, is equipped with 
surface-to-air missiles. 
  The half-Shan, half-Chinese warlord has been indicted on 
drug 
trafficking charges by a US federal court. 
  A Thai Third Army officer at the border identified the 
Burmese jets as F-7 fighter-bombers, which had been purchased by 
the Rangoon government from China. 
  The fighting in Burma has forced hundreds of Shan, Akha and 
Lahu tribesmen to seek shelter in Thailand because they fear 
being rounded up and forced to carry munitions for the Burmese. 
  Burma's military government, which has been trying to 
establish its control in the Shan State and other rebel-held 
areas for more than 40 years, routinely uses press-ganged 
civilian "porters" to carry supplies. 

