Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andrey Illarionov, director of the staff of </F>
advisors to the Russian Federation prime minister: "Economic 
Reforms in Russia: Between Shock Therapy and State Monopolism"] 
  [Text] When evaluating the possible change in the 
government's policy for conducting economic reforms, the 
majority of political figures, scientists and columnists proceed 
from the proposition that the fundamental changes will occur 
along three avenues: 
  a) A significant strengthening of the state's influence on 
economic processes; 
  b) Moving the stress in the transformation of management 
forms and methods from the macroeconomic level to the 
microeconomic one, that is, to the level of enterprises and 
entrepreneurial activity; 
  c) Moving away from a policy of monetarism to non-monetarist 
methods for managing the economy and production. 
  When doing this, it is assumed that the reforms' general 
orientation toward shifting to a market-type economy will remain 
immutable. 
  It is significant that one part of the analysts support the 
above-mentioned changes, considering their implementation to be 
almost the only way out of the "Gaydar blind alley;" the other 
part thinks that such a change in course will be disastrous and 
will lead to the downfall of the entire program of market 
reforms and, as a result, to the revival of a planned-directive 
economy of the Soviet model. 
  The extremely high level of politicalization in the 
appraisals of possible avenues for the future course of reforms 
and their detachment from economic logic call attention to 
themselves. The political right-wing (LDP [Liberal Democratic 
Party], communists, agrarians, and the political forces and 
leaders sympathetic to them) is completely and unconditionally 
insisting on a sharp change in the course of the reforms whereas 
the left-wing (Russia's Choice and the parties siding with it) 
are defending the correctness and necessity for continuing the 
selected policy. 
  Let us ask the question: Was the policy of economic reforms 
conducted during 1992-1993 really connected with a firm 
rejection of state control over the economy in favor of market 
self-regulation and the non-interference of the state in 
economic processes? There is every reason to answer this 
question negatively on the whole. 
  Let us begin with the fact that even the neoclassical 
doctrine of a market economy, which the administration of the 
U.S. economy is now following to a significant degree, does not 
repudiate the principle of state regulation of the economy and 
proceeds from the concept of a mixed economy of the market-state 
type. When implementing market reforms in Russia during the last 
two years, the government not only listened to the voices of 
Western advisers but also took into consideration the specific 
nature of the Russian economic situation and the presence of the 
Soviet economic system's legacy. 
  Even the liberalization of prices, which had the strongest 
influence on the economy, was practically not carried out using 
the shock method but was accompanied and is still being 
accompanied by numerous state regulation measures. State prices 
were maintained for a long time on products from the fuel and 
energy complex, purchase prices for agricultural products 
remained under the strong influence of the state, marginal 
levels of profitability were established on the prices for 
products from enterprise monopolists, extremely low state 
regulated prices (tariffs) for apartments and municipal services 
still exist, and numerous price subsidies from the federal and 
local budgets are being used. 
  One can argue about the success or failure of the 
privatization methods being implemented, including the voucher 
version; however, it is difficult to deny the fact that 
privatization is being directed by state programs. 
  Recognizing that the macroeconomic approach has predominated 
in the policy followed by the government during the last two 
years of reforms, one cannot deny the fact that as soon as 
affairs reached mutual nonpayments by enterprises and an acute 
shortage of their working capital or the threat of bankruptcy, 
the government and Central Bank did not turn enterprises over to 
market forces to be torn apart. State management levers were put 
into operation on the spot, state assistance was provided, loans 
were issued, and credits and even the forgiveness of debts were 
implemented although all these measures undermined the state 
policy for stabilizing currency circulation. If there had not 
been a strong state influence on the economy in Russia during 
the 1991-1992 period, not dozens but many thousands of 
enterprises would have gone bankrupt and the number of 
unemployed would have been not one million but tens of millions. 
  There is no reason to say that the state released social 
processes from its control although individual elements of the 
income and distribution regulation used by the state can in no 
way be recognized as successful. This primarily concerns the 
fact that the state "forgot" a great deal about the needs of 
science and higher education, released from its control the 
processes for an extremely sharp income differentiation, and 
moved to the cause not of those who most needed but of those who 
were "a little louder." At the same time, it is actually clear 
that, with the extremely limited state resources and budgetary 
capabilities, no method of state regulation permits critical 
social problems to be solved. State distribution adds absolutely 
nothing to consumer benefits and services which are produced in 
the country or purchased abroad. 
  Much of the criticism addressed to the tax policy being 
followed is known; however, hardly anyone dares to declare that 
the state is not using tax levers, including the export-import 
duty mechanism. The problem here is different: What is the 
maximum permissible taxation level, how should the collection of 
taxes be guaranteed and is it necessary to pursue a state 
protectionist policy through taxes? 
  Apparently, the rebukes addressed to the government, which 
consist of the fact that it has impacted poorly on structural 
policy through the regulation of investments, are not devoid of 
justification. However, those meager amounts of state 
investments, which the government had and has at its disposal, 
must be directed against its will to the priority branches and 
the critical zones in the economy. Another matter is foreign 
investments and the investment assets of enterprises and 
entrepreneurs: it is necessary to look for levers having a more 
powerful state influence on them. 
  Without disputing the need for maintaining and even 
deepening 
state regulation of the economy during periods when it is in a 
crisis situation, one must understand at the same time that this 
problem is not being solved by a return to directive state 
planning and command, bureaucratic and official management 
methods. One must look for flexible state regulation forms and 
methods that have been adapted to market relations and permit 
the organization, responsibility and interest of economic 
subjects to be maintained by state influence methods until an 
effective competitive mechanism for market self-regulation 
exists in the Russian economy. 

