Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Peter Mackler] </F>
  [Text] Davos, Switzerland, Jan 30 (AFP) -- Israel and the 
PLO will have a final agreement "very soon" to launch 
Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories, PLO chief 
Yasir 'Arafat said Sunday [30 January]. 
  He made his remarks at the World Economic Forum here amid 
two 
days of intense talks between delegations headed by 'Arafat and 
Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres in this Alpine resort 
town. 
  But there was no clear sign how much of a breakthrough the 
two sides had made in stalled negotiations on the withdrawal of 
Israeli troops from the West Bank town of Jericho and the Gaza 
Strip. 
  Only minutes before addressing the forum, 'Arafat said when 
asked if progress had been made: "Not yet." 
  Peres, who was also participating in a panel discussion on 
the Middle East here, pledged efforts to make peace but made no 
specific reference to the talks here. 
  'Arafat told the forum he and Peres had "very important and 
constructive talks" on ending the impasse over details of their 
September agreement to launch limited Palestinian self-rule in 
the two areas. 
  "We can say we are on our way to bypassing all the obstacles 
which had been raised in the last weeks to have very soon the 
final agreement to start direct implementation of the peace 
agreement," he said. 
  The PLO chief said he hoped to have an agreement signed soon 
in Cairo and Egyptian Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa announced 
President Husni Mubarak had invited the two parties for the 
signing. No date was mentioned. 
  Musa said the discussions made "definite progress that paved 
the way for the implementation of the agreement signed a few 
months ago." He said negotiations would continue after the 
Davos talks. 
  Earlier, a spokesman for the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation said the PLO had accepted a compromise hammered out 
overnight by a working committee of negotiators from both sides. 
  The compromise centred on the size of the autonomous Jericho 
area, Israeli radio reported. It also said Israel accepted for 
the first time to have corridors linking Jericho and three holy 
sites in the Jordan valley. 
  Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin was studying the 
proposal in Jerusalem but there was no word on any progress on 
the key issue of who would control international border 
crossings. 
  Israeli officials cautioned any progress here would not 
cover 
all disputes holding up the Israeli withdrawal from Jericho and 
Gaza, which was to have started December 13 and be completed 
four months later. 
  "We were not supposed to sign anything today," Peres said at 
the well-guarded luxury hotel where he and 'Arafat were staying 
and negotiating. 
  "We are trying to overcome the remaining problems and that's 
what we are doing," said Peres, who met with 'Arafat late 
Saturday and had two more sessions with him Sunday in the 
presence of Musa. 
  Israeli Environment Minister Yosi Sarid cautioned that even 
if some of the key details were ironed out here, several other 
points remained to be resolved. 
  Among them were the status of Palestinian authority and 
administrative arrangements in the two areas after the Israeli 
pullout. "There are many legal questions which we have not even 
discussed," Sarid said. 
  Before the talks opened here, both sides had played down 
chances for significant progress. But the atmosphere appeared 
warm from the start, and 'Arafat said early on that they hoped 
to get an accord in Davos or at least "a main platform for an 
agreement." 
  Peres was originally scheduled to fly to the United States 
later Sunday. Asked if he was sticking to the plan, he said 
only "maybe," leaving open the possibility of another day of 
talks. 
  'Arafat was to leave Monday for a trip to Bern at the 
invitation of the Swiss government and then continue to Geneva 
to speak to the UN Commission on Human Rights. 

