BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 6 Jun (JATHA) -- The coca growers who said 
the government spent $100 million on alternative development in 
the last 10 years came out short in their estimate when the 
government disclosed that it spent $207 million on that project 
in the last 10 years. 
  This information was provided by Social Defense Secretary 
Mario Soliz who invited the media to visit the Chapare "to see 
what had been done with that money, projects such as 
electrification, roads, health clinics, schools, etc." 
  In view of the doubt emerging about the multimillion dollar 
investment and the "great projects" carried out in the last 10 
years, Soliz said: "As in any operation some mistakes were made, 
wrong criteria were used but we cannot deny the existence of 
alternative development because of that." The questions were 
asked by the coca growers who recently said through their 
leaders that coca replacement or agricultural conversion should 
have been done on the 26,000 hectares that were voluntarily 
eradicated in the tropical region of Cochabamba. 
  But according to the technical reports of the institutions 
in 
charge of carrying out alternative development such as PDAR 
[Alternative Development Program], the IBTA [Bolivian Institute 
of Nuclear Science and Technology] of the Chapare, and the 
United Nations, coca replacement was only done on 2,000 hectares. 
  Leader Felipe Caceres said: "This means that 24,000 hectares 
are full of weeds while the peasants who eradicated coca from 
them are bankrupt, without work, and sometimes forced to get 
involved in illegal activities." 
  Were those $207 million really invested in the Chapare? 
asked 
Secretary Soliz again today. His response was: "Yes, the records 
and the evaluation made by the organizations involved in the 
program show they were." 
  But the coca growers said the majority of the organizations 
involved in alternative development spent more money on paying 
their employees' salaries and travelling expenses than on the 
projects themselves. 
  Soliz replied that paying salaries is part of the work on 
alternative development. 
  Soliz said that because there are different criteria, 
peasant 
leaders have been invited to participate in or become members of 
the executive board of the Fonadal [National Fund for 
Alternative Development]. 
  He added: "This is how they will be able to check the 
projects, and express their opinions which is something that was 
not done in the past. But from now on they will be the main 
participants in this process." 
  Government Minister German Quiroga said that in the last 10 
years more investments have been made in alternative development 
than in any other Latin American country and this is "a 
demonstration that alternative development was made and will 
continue to be made." 
  Quiroga added that this at least "shows that the government 
struggle is not against coca growers but against those who use 
coca to make other products." 

