Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Grigorij Meseznikov: "Slovakia: Factors of </F>
Political Stability Under Conditions of Social Transformation"] 
<H5>  [23 Nov p 6] </H5>
  [Text] The stability of social life in the countries 
that are experiencing the process of transformation is of 
special significance today. It is one of the fundamental 
conditions for advancing the transformation process and, in its 
ultimate consequences, for the success of the process itself. 
Moreover, the factor of political stability plays a substantial 
role in determining the relationship of the West toward the 
countries of Central and East Europe, influences the interest 
shown by West European countries and institutions in 
collaborating with the postcommunist countries, and acts to 
qualify the approach of the West with respect to the possible 
integration of these countries into West European 
structures. 
<H5>  Stability Under Conditions of "Real Socialism" </H5>
  The model of "real socialism" tended to solve the problem of 
social stability resulting from the essence of an order that was 
based on the principles of monodomination (state ownership in 
the economy, unlimited power exercised by the Communist Party in 
the political and ideological spheres, etc.). The foreign policy 
framework of the systems stability of that society was based on 
the status of the limited sovereignty of the individual Central 
European countries and the fact that the function of securing 
the military-strategic balance was left to the Warsaw Pact, 
headed by the USSR. Any kind of manifestations that tended to 
destabilize the social situation or that had the potential to 
result in similar destabilization in the economic sphere, the 
social sphere, the political sphere, or the nationalities 
sphere, as well as international relations, were "solved" with 
the aid of administrative methods of varying intensity, which 
were adequate for this system, including the use of force and 
military might. Such a model for securing social stability could 
temporarily eliminate the elements of permanently emerging 
tension but was unable to eliminate the deep internal 
destabilizing tendencies, which, in the end, brought about the 
downfall of the system. 
<H5>  The Social Value of Stability </H5>
  The assumption is that the goal of the transformation in 
postcommunist countries is the creation of a society that will 
be compatible with a "Western-type" society in terms of its 
parameters of economic, social, and political development. But, 
in a "Western" society, stability itself is one of the principal 
values. Social stability in a society based on liberal and 
democratic principles is primarily a matter of an established 
social and political order, reliable guarantees that protect 
citizens against violations of their economic, social, and 
political rights as outlined in the law, the inviolability and 
the unassailability of their ownership and residence, respect 
for the dignity of the human personality, and confidence in 
functioning state institutions. It can therefore be said that 
one of the principal goals of the transformation is the 
attainment of a status of authentic social stability. The 
process that leads to the creation of a socially and politically 
stable society in the countries of Central and East Europe is 
accompanied by numerous moments containing risks of potential 
destabilization. Actually, this is a road toward stability via a 
period of certain destabilization, having to do with the 
changing of the model for social development. 
<H5>  The Key Importance of the Pace of the Progress of the Reform </H5>
  We believe that a determining question in this regard is the 
question of the pace of the reforms being effected. In other 
words, the question sounds as follows: Must the pace of the 
transition be gradual (slow) or "drastic" (rapid)? 
Understandably, proreform forces are confronted with the danger 
that the cost of increasing the pace of economic reforms could 
be quite high, something that could manifest itself in the form 
of resistance on the part of significant masses of the 
population with respect to the course of the reform and to those 
forces striving to realize it and, in the end, could lead to 
threatening the course of the reform as such. However, the 
experiences already gathered today from postcommunist countries 
indicate that gradualism, efforts to gradually install market 
mechanisms, even at the margins of an administrative system, 
appear as ineffective or even as being harmful. They lead to the 
intensification of existing social problems and tensions, result 
in multiplying the negative influences of the residues of the 
former period, lead to the creation of stable antireform 
stereotypes, and result in the creation of prerequisites for 
long-term overall economic and political destabilization. It 
turns out that the entire sphere of the economy must be 
liberalized simultaneously and that this liberalization must be 
adequately significant in order to, in the end, "shake up" the 
entire system. The political prerequisite for such an approach 
is the unequivocally articulated will to actually undertake such 
a course, legitimized by support on the part of the dominant 
portion of the population. 
<H5>  The Given Facts for Slovakia </H5>
  What are the prospects for the developing situation in 
Slovakia from this viewpoint? In the context of the division of 
Czechoslovakia and its immediate and long-term consequences, the 
Slovak Republic attracts special attention abroad. Today, 
Slovakia is the smallest country in Central Europe that came 
into being as a consequence of the disintegration process in the 
postcommunist countries with multiple-nationalities 
compositions. It is a country that has weaker economic potential 
in comparison with the Czech Republic. It is a country that has 
a numerically strong nationalities minority (Hungarian), which 
represents 12 percent of the population; the question of the 
standing of this minority, as well as its relationship with the 
majority constitutional nation, is a permanent component of the 
topical social context, the object of political "in-fighting," 
and a factor influencing mutual relationships with the 
neighboring Hungarian Republic. Today, from the viewpoint of the 
topical needs involved in the development of an independent 
state, Slovakia is a country with an inadequately profiled 
industrial structure that is, moreover, beset by the 
disintegration of a common economic area at this time, by the 
reorientation of the production programs in individual 
enterprises within the framework of conversion, and by the 
disintegration or the loss of so-called Eastern markets. It is a 
country that borders immediately on Ukraine, a country whose 
economic situation is in a desperate state today and that, 
moreover, is experiencing problematic relationships with the 
largest successor state to the USSR--Russia. 
<H5>  Economic Prerequisites for Political Stability </H5>
  If we assume that the determining moment in terms of 
securing 
political stability in Slovakia is the successful and rapid 
implementation of the transformation course (that is to say, 
essentially, the course of privatization), it is clear that 
prolonging the crisis status of the economy as a consequence of 
any kind of retardation of the pace of economic reform can 
become a burdening test for political stability in Slovakia, 
with not particularly favorable consequences. The present 
governmental movement, which declares its devotion to the ideas 
of economic transformation, is at the same time pursuing a 
policy aimed at "modifying" it. Mostly, the privatization 
process is substantially retarded today. And the economic policy 
of the present government differs from the notions of the HZDS 
[Movement for a Democratic Slovakia] regarding the methods of 
economic transformation, as well as from the objective status of 
the economy--there is a general shortage of financial resources, 
an inadequate influx of investments from abroad, and economic 
difficulties resulting from the disintegration of the CSFR. As 
is well known, the HZDS government movement was victorious in 
the last elections under a slogan that was critical of the 
"Klaus" federal economic reform, and it promised strong social 
policies that resulted in intensive social expectations among 
its followers. These social expectations, fulfillment of which 
would today at the very least mean additional substantial 
slowing of the reform course, are undoubtedly a factor that 
exerts its influence on the economic policies of the government. 
An inadequately proreform-oriented policy that could, within a 
certain time frame, even appear as a factor assuring immediate 
social and political stability is a moment, from the long-term 
viewpoint, that acts to increase the danger of total 
destabilization. 
  Maintaining the original pace of economic changes or, 
rather, 
increasing that pace today means the adoption of a whole series 
of unpopular measures. Here, the question of confidence in the 
political force that resorts to similar measures arises. But it 
turns out that the present government and the HZDS have 
substantially exhausted the reserves of confidence on the part 
of the population and are approaching the limits of this 
confidence, which, if exceeded, makes the acceptance of 
unpopular measures appear problematic. From this viewpoint, the 
most optimum variation of development in Slovakia, from both the 
short-term standpoint and the long-term view over the next 10-15 
years, would be the formation of a credible "coalition of 
reforms," which would implement the introduction of liberal 
values and which, at the same time, would enjoy the support of 
the decisive portion of the population. 
<H5>  [30 Nov p 6] </H5>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Economic Prerequisites for Political Stability </H5>
  If we assume that the determining moment in terms of 
securing 
political stability in Slovakia is the successful and rapid 
implementation of the transformation course (that is to say, 
essentially, the course of privatization), it is clear that 
prolonging the crisis status of the economy as a consequence of 
any kind of retardation of the pace of economic reform can 
become a burdening test for political stability in Slovakia, 
with not particularly favorable consequences. The present 
governmental movement, which declares its devotion to the ideas 
of economic transformation, is at the same time pursuing a 
policy aimed at "modifying" it. Mostly, the privatization 
process is substantially retarded today. And the economic policy 
of the present government differs from the notions of the HZDS 
regarding the methods of economic transformation, as well as 
from the objective status of the economy--there is a general 
shortage of financial resources, an inadequate influx of 
investments from abroad, and economic difficulties resulting 
from the disintegration of the CSFR. As is well known, the HZDS 
government movement was victorious in the last elections under a 
slogan that was critical of the "Klaus" federal economic reform, 
and it promised strong social policies that resulted in 
intensive social expectations among its followers. These social 
expectations, fulfillment of which would today at the very least 
mean additional substantial slowing of the reform course, are 
undoubtedly a factor that exerts its influence on the economic 
policies of the government. An inadequately proreform-oriented 
policy that could, within a certain time frame, even appear as a 
factor assuring immediate social and political stability is a 
moment, from the long-term viewpoint, that acts to increase the 
danger of total destabilization. 
  Maintaining the original pace of economic changes or, 
rather, 
increasing that pace today means the adoption of a whole series 
of unpopular measures. Here, the question of confidence in the 
political force that resorts to similar measures arises. But it 
turns out that the present government and the HZDS have 
substantially exhausted the reserves of confidence on the part 
of the population and are approaching the limits of this 
confidence, which, if exceeded, makes the acceptance of 
unpopular measures appear problematic. From this viewpoint, the 
most optimum variation of development in Slovakia, from both the 
short-term standpoint and the long-term view over the next 10-15 
years, would be the formation of a credible "coalition of 
reforms," which would implement the introduction of liberal 
values and which, at the same time, would enjoy the support of 
the decisive portion of the population. 
<H5>  Political Prerequisites for Social Stability </H5>
  The unavoidable political prerequisites for stability 
include 
the following: 

  -  The process of acquiring a definitive image of the Slovak 
political scene; the overcoming of the fragmentation of 
political entities and their establishment at the level of 
"conservatism--liberalism--social democracy." 
  -  The maintenance of 
a state of law; the undisrupted and effective functioning of a 
system of parliamentary democracy; the intensification of 
experiences and customs of parliamentarism, which unavoidably 
raises the level of respect for valid legal standards and 
strengthens the will to solve conflicting or crisis situations 
with the aid of the laws. 
  -  Consistent adherence to the principle 
of separation of powers and utilizing the existing political 
mechanism to restrict authoritarian tendencies and efforts to 
prioritize the interests of the executive at the expense of the 
other components of power. 
  -  The achievement of such a status in 
which, in the event of nationwide conflicts, regional conflicts, 
industry and local conflicts, such conflicts would be 
formalized, institutionalized, and incorporated into the overall 
social context, and the transparency of their solutions would be 
promoted (experiences in postelection Slovakia indicate that the 
current power structure attempts to solve some problems by 
"lobbying," based on priorities of the executive). 
  -  Maintaining a 
balance between the actions of economically active individuals, 
the functioning of an independent judiciary, and the legislative 
power. The rights of private ownership must be unconditionally 
maintained. Failure to adhere to these rights is a destabilizing 
factor that casts doubt upon any intent to become a liberal 
society, acts to weaken economic activity, and creates a climate 
for the failure to observe other rights, primarily civil rights. 
  Positive influence and stabilization effects can undoubtedly 
be had from changes in the social structure of society, from the 
creation of an entrepreneurial class that supports the 
continuation of economic changes, as well as from the 
strengthening of the middle class, interested in maintaining 
social stability and representing the natural voter base for 
liberal parties (in the economic and political sense). 
<H5>  Potential Sources and Factors of Instability </H5>
  The creation of an independent Slovak state acted to remove 
the potential source of tension and destabilization resulting 
from the overall lack of a solution to the constitutional 
problem. But other factors have appeared, which can act in a 
destabilizing manner. This has to do mostly with problems 
connected with the division of a unified Czechoslovak economy. A 
division multiplies economic difficulties resulting from 
transformation processes or methods by which the transformation 
is being pursued. The economic recession, the decline in the 
standard of living for certain categories of the population, 
increased unemployment--all of these tend to lead to 
disillusioning those citizens of Slovakia who voted for the HZDS 
because of its promises to overcome existing problems. 
  The disappointment can be all the greater, particularly 
because many of the voters who voted for the HZDS did not desire 
the division of the CSFR. Consequently, it is possible to 
anticipate a specific amount of social frustration. The 
positions of political and social entities that could somehow 
"shortstop" this frustration must be kept in mind. The idea to 
utilize social dissatisfaction among the population to achieve 
immediate political goals (including the threats of civil 
disobedience) has thus far been introduced into the Slovak 
social context even by some representatives of the HZDS and at a 
time when the movement was in the opposition. It is unlikely 
that any of today's opposition parliamentary parties would 
resort to mobilizing the dissatisfaction of the masses to 
demonstrate civil disobedience. The same will obviously also be 
true of the trade unions, which, although they subject the 
economic and social policies of the present government to hard 
criticism, prefer a dialogue with the government and elect to 
use more moderate forms for their possible protests. 
<H5>  The Possibility of the Development of Civil Unrest </H5>
  The prerequisites for the development of civil unrest, of 
uncontrollable mass protests and resistance are the catastrophic 
decline in income for a large number of people, the total 
destruction of the social security system, an absolute 
deterioration of everyday living conditions, a deep decline in 
confidence in the government, a decline in authority of those in 
power, and an absolute lack of confidence in the institutional 
forms of resolving conflicts, but also the existence of a social 
force capable of channeling such forms of protest and 
coordinating them. It is highly unlikely that developments in 
Slovakia (despite all difficulties and problems) would culminate 
in a social explosion in the form of civil unrest and 
disobedience. In view of the distribution of political forces in 
parliament, it can almost be expected that, in the event social 
conflicts become exacerbated, the opposition parties would 
initiate changes in the government team or would conclude new 
coalition agreements, create a government of "specialists" with 
the broad support of parliamentary entities, or call for early 
parliamentary elections. 
  Selectivity in applying legal regulations, most of which 
originate in the environment of state organs and institutions, 
inconsistency on the part of courts in defending the legal order 
in cases where violation of a law has broader social 
implications, manifestations of cronyism and clientelism--these 
can be destabilizing factors. These manifestations undermine the 
confidence of the citizenry in the effectiveness of the legal 
system and create fertile ground for legal nihilism. 
<H5>  The Problem of the Hungarian Minority </H5>
  In judging the prospects for political stability, it is 
necessary to take into account the comprehensive problems having 
to do with the standing of the Hungarian minority, problems 
having to do with the relationship between citizens of Slovak 
and Hungarian nationality in regions in which the population is 
mixed. This is also the place for questions connected with the 
realization of cultural rights by Hungarian fellow citizens, 
questions dealing with the application of the language law, 
questions of territorial administrative arrangements of this 
area. The approach of the Hungarian political parties consists 
of stressing the connection between the 
nationalities-emancipation efforts of the Slovak people and 
efforts by the Hungarian ethnic minority to make its share in 
creating the newly constituted state visible, particularly 
because, according to representatives of the Hungarian parties, 
this share is not being adequately stressed. According to the 
representatives of the Hungarian parliamentary bloc, a 
comprehensive solution to the problem is only possible by 
adopting the law on minorities, for which they have submitted a 
proposal. In general, it can be said that the basis for stable 
development in this area will be the positive resolution of 
questions involving the citizenship status of a minority member, 
the political status of the minority as a whole, and the 
safeguarding and protection of minority rights. (N. Kusy: "The 
Hungarian Proposal Is Full of Discrepancies," NARODNA OBRODA, 7 
May 1993) Experiences thus far indicate that, for example, the 
language problem is perceived by Hungarians as well as Slovaks 
as a very sensitive one and that the social situation was 
already once destabilized significantly (in 1990), precisely 
during the time at which the language law was being adopted by 
the Slovak National Council. 
<H5>  The Security Situation </H5>
  Social stability is directly connected with the overall 
security situation in the country. Today, Slovakia is becoming a 
sought-after region for the functioning of organized crime 
originating in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union. Slovakia 
is particularly attractive to the mafias from CIS; it is a quite 
well "mapped area," presenting the opportunity for further 
penetration into Europe, a minimal language barrier, and having 
a certain sociocultural and psychological proximity, as well as 
a well-known postcommunist atmosphere. The penetration of Mafia 
capital, when seen against the background of economic problems, 
intensifies the risks of criminalizing the political life in the 
country. Today, this destabilizing moment is all the more 
disturbing now that large quantities of weapons originating in 
areas of armed conflict, drugs from the Caucasus countries, 
Central Asia, and the Near East, as well as nuclear materials 
are virtually moving around freely on the territory of CIS. 
<H5>  Geopolitical Aspects of Stability </H5>
  A separate chapter is the problem of geopolitical stability 
of the Central European region. For Slovakia, it is of 
extraordinary importance to cooperate with the other countries 
of the Visegrad Four. Today we are witnessing certain 
differences in the approach regarding the intensity and the 
method of institutionalizing these relationships. A stabilizing 
moment in terms of mutual relations among Central European 
countries is their unified declaration of interest in entering 
into the European Community organizations or NATO. Because West 
Europe will be accepting for membership in its economic, 
political, and military groupings only countries with balanced 
mutual relationships, this creates pressure upon individual 
countries to resolve problems in dispute (for example, the 
problem of the Gabcikovo water-management project involving the 
Slovak Republic and the Hungarian Republic) by way of a dialogue 
and with the help of existing international legal mechanisms. 
Undoubtedly, an important influence on developments in Central 
Europe will be exerted by the situation on the territory of the 
former Soviet Union. For Slovakia, as a small country 
immediately adjacent to the territory of CIS, for which economic 
ties to the East still continue to be vitally important, any 
kind of major political destabilization in Russia or Ukraine or 
any possible deterioration in their mutual relationships could 
be a destabilizing element in terms of internal development. A 
possible change of regime in Moscow, the advent of reactionary 
nationalistic forces to power in Russia, and efforts to renew 
the previous imperialist structure could result in great 
tensions developing in the relationship between Russia and 
Ukraine. For Slovakia, this could mean that it would find itself 
in the position of being an object of superpower politics. That 
is why it is vitally important for Slovakia to guarantee its own 
security through the most intensive relationships with the West 
European defense community. 

