Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladislav Volodymyrovich Datsyuk, procurator </F>
general of Ukraine, by Natalya Svichkolop: "Candid Discussion. 
Whom God Chooses, He Also Tests"] 
  [Text] It is not often that fate blesses us with 
encounters that provide sufficient occasion for useful 
reflection. But if it stares you in the face and offers 
communication with a person who listens to the voice of 
conscience--the voice of God--in his soul, it would be a sin not 
to share what you have heard. 
  It might seem absurd to some, who might wonder why 
speak with General Procurator of Ukraine Vladislav 
Volodymyrovich Datsyuk not simply about the fight against crime 
but about the real threat of self-destruction of world 
civilization or to recall the Delphic gods who commanded: Look 
inside yourself, get to know yourself, concentrate on yourself, 
for "you are being betrayed, your own selves are being stolen 
from you." Another person might rightfully wonder what crime and 
market egoism have in common. But this very market mechanism has 
doomed about 80 percent of the population of the planet to 
poverty and degradation! And what should be the relations among 
people and between society and nature? How do we find that which 
did not exist but which was felt and anticipated by humanist 
thinkers of mankind, from Socrates and Christ to Vernadskiy, 
Tolstoy, and Berdyayev? What are these incentives that preclude 
violence and preserve Life? Why do people sometimes send their 
conscience to the brothels but at the same time contrive to 
preserve an external appearance of decency? 
  This conversation turned out to be about ailments of 
the soul, although it began with a very trivial question, which 
is bothering everyone: What is the Procuracy up to today? 
  "The same things that our state and people are up to--being 
worried about problems, disturbances, and legal violations that 
have developed in Ukraine," Vladislav Volodymyrovich answered. 
"The main goal we face is to reorient the work of the Procuracy 
in such a way that our supervision focuses specifically on those 
violations that are leading us into chaos--the lack of 
discipline and disregard for the law." 
  [Svichkolop] What disturbs the procurator general most of 
all 
now? 
  [Datsyuk] The situation in which we have all ended up. I 
would call it a collapse. You will agree that today all 
bureaucrats have found themselves in the position of temporary 
workers in our state. Hence also the direction of their actions, 
and there is one main problem: How to survive when your bags are 
packed? The solution they have chosen is this: to create in some 
places structures that are illegal or, within the framework of 
the law itself, structures that not only help the collective to 
stay afloat, but also help the state bureaucrat himself or the 
economic worker to hold a more or less secure position. We have 
acted irrationally and destroyed the political, economic, and 
legal system all at once, completely forgetting about the 
concept of spirituality and the terrible problems of the 
ecology. We have thrown ourselves into the market. We have 
jacked up prices, motivated by the idea that we need to keep up 
with world prices. But nobody has explained to us why we need 
them. Neither you nor I nor any other rank-and-file worker needs 
them. And what has happened? This has led some people to this 
idea: "Why put on masks and break open cash registers when 
everything can be done much more simply; we can take money from 
the bank with interest (even if it is usurious, it is still 
advantageous), buy goods today, and in a month or even two weeks 
(thanks to inflation), there will be another two- to-threefold 
price increase, and the millions we have spent will turn into 
billions. What do the state and the people gain from such 
tricks? Nothing. And there are all kinds of wheeler-dealers like 
this around now. I, the procurator general, do not know how many 
commercial structures we have in the country. According to 
certain figures, there are 106,000; according to 
others--300,000. They are cropping up like mushrooms after a 
rain. Only 5-6 percent of them produce anything. What would seem 
to be a good idea enabling them to produce goods for the 
consumer upon inspection turns out to be simply speculation 
legalized by the state. The upstart businessmen understand that 
as long as the water has been muddied, it is possible to scrape 
together capital for a year or two, turn it into dollars because 
karbovantsy are worth nothing, and, as they say, cover all the 
angles. 
  Yes, but a question arises. Has anybody registered these 
commercial structures, familiarized themselves with the 
regulations of the joint venture, and found out who would be 
included in it? They include, as a rule, the manager and his 
wife or daughter, his son, the father of his son-in-law or 
"cohort," and the person who handles the registration imposes 
his own conditions: "I want to work here too." And what do we 
have? A situation that has no limit. That is all. The circle is 
closed. Nobody is to blame. They do their illegal business with 
the help of the power structures, which are participating in it 
directly. And it turns out that 5 percent, excuse me, are eating 
up the national income today, while 95 percent have been cast 
into poverty, they have no future. 
  But now answer me this: Was it really possible to introduce 
a 
national currency without having a food reserve, a gold reserve, 
a reserve of raw material? Was it really possible to get away 
from the solid monetary unit--the ruble? 
  But that is one aspect. Look what has happened in parallel. 
In 1991 the Supreme Council adopted the Law on the Procuracy. 
They thought they would construct a rule-of-law state out of 
good intentions and limit the functions of the Procuracy in it. 
There was no need to worry about commercial structures or 
banking or credit-financial affairs, and people's 
complaints--there was no need to worry about them, either; let 
them go to court. 
  [Svichkolop] That is, in practice the Procuracy was deprived 
of its supervisory functions. 
  [Datsyuk] Yes. I agree that the functions of the Procuracy 
could have been narrowed, but at a time when we have order in 
the state, when the citizen is protected not only by the law but 
also materially and socially. But where can a person go today? 
To whom can that pensioner from the village complain about the 
fact that the buses are not running, that he has not received 
his pension since November, and also that that pension is only 
enough for a couple of pieces of bread? They say, let him go to 
court. But where will you find a lawyer, and his services have 
to be paid for as well. It used to be that a person could go to 
the procurator, and he would pick up the phone, call the 
manager, and sometimes he could even resolve the whole matter on 
the telephone. 
  Now when the membership of the new board of the Procuracy 
was 
being formed, we immediately oriented our workers so that they 
would turn in the direction of the people. Whether the issue 
comes under your jurisdiction or not, receive the person, listen 
to him, and if you cannot help, at least give him advice. 
  And the second thing we have worked on is expansion of the 
framework of procuratorial supervision. And another major thing 
is that for two years nobody worked on coordinating the fight 
against crime. And the consequences of this deliberate unconcern 
have not failed to make themselves felt. Incidentally, the 
function of coordinating law enforcement organs was removed from 
the Procuracy by that same law of 1991. With a crisis of power, 
a growth of crime is natural, and here the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, the Procuracy, the Ukrainian Security Service, and the 
Supreme Court acted independently, each ignoring the others. 
They created a coordinating council for fighting crime under the 
president. But should the head of state really worry about 
thefts, muggings, or highway accidents? 
  [Svichkolop] Is the Procuracy today still deprived of all 
the 
functions you named as it was before? 
  [Datsyuk] No. They have been restored. We appealed to the 
Supreme Council, and they supported us. 
  But the time has passed. Now there is a possibility of 
joining together with militia workers, the courts, and Ukrainian 
Security Service workers, and deciding what to do. We just have 
to get everyone together. 
  [Svichkolop] Getting rid of the pain that is tormenting our 
society at the given moment certainly does not mean that its 
health will improve for good, even if its general condition does 
improve. Do you agree? 
  [Datsyuk] Perhaps. But what we have today is terrible. 
Moreover, I don't believe that we will be able to essentially 
rectify the situation in the next year or two. Even now we are 
investigating dozens of criminal cases against big-time crooks, 
managers, ministries, departments, and WARNING: Army structures. 
But we must not forget that we are working largely with 
organized crime, which is well armed. 
  Therefore comes the next thing I would like to discuss: We 
must adopt a law on arming decent, law-abiding citizens. This 
would not apply to drunkards, schizophrenics, or individuals 
with a record of convictions. Before breaking down the door to 
your apartment, the criminal should at least think about the 
fact that he might get a bullet in the forehead. But now we have 
complete vulnerability of some people and virtual impunity of 
others. Moreover, it has become fashionable to look across the 
ocean. But America has a completely different society, a 
different concept of obeying the law, and a different legal 
defense system. But we rush to defend the accused. Yes, his 
rights must be observed, but within the framework of the law. 
But why have we forgotten that there is another side--the 
victims and their close relatives. How do they feel about the 
fact that the criminal goes free? And there are hundreds of 
thousands of them who are free today! The state must first 
protect the victim, compensating him for both material and moral 
costs. 

