Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Eza Czaczkowska and Renata Wrobel: "Who Will </F>
Advise the Prime Minister?"] 
  [Text] Currently, two teams of advisers for the prime 
minister are being formed. The first team, a component of the 
Cabinet, will consist of permanent advisers who will advise the 
prime minister on ways of better organizing the work of state 
departments. The second team, the task of which is to draw 
conclusions and develop proposals for resolving various issues, 
will include experts representing different segments of society. 
The second team is headed by Franciszek Mleczke, under secretary 
of state at the Office of the Council of Ministers. In addition, 
the prime minister can seek advice from the Chief Executive 
Committee of the Polish Peasant Party [PSL]. Concurrently, the 
prime minister is considering the issue of creating a council 
for public-economic issues within the Council of Ministers. 
Those who are responsible for the creation of these advising 
bodies are not revealing the names of the advisers to be, 
claiming that it is too early to disclose their identities. 
  Unofficial sources say that Bogdan Lukasiewicz, Henryk 
Sobierajski, and Slawomir Wozniak could be named as advisers to 
the prime minister. 
<H5>  Bogdan Lukasiewicz </H5>
  In the past, he was one of Pawlak's closest advisers. He is 
"loved" more by the PSL leadership than by ordinary party 
members. "He is used to settling things in high places," says 
one PSL member. Lukasiewicz (born in 1950) owns a big farm and 
is joint owner of a transport company cooperating with the Wansa 
company that attempted to import 220,000 sheep from the 
Caucasus. Minister of Agriculture Andrzej Smietanko made 
assurances that this deal was cut short. Until late December 
1993, Bogdan Lukasiewicz, along with the People's Economic 
Association, held a controlling interest in the Glospress 
company, which publishes the Lodz newspaper GLOS PORANNY. 
Beginning this January, the majority of shares of the indebted 
newspaper are being bought by the Galtex company, Social 
Democracy of the Polish Republic, and the PSL. 
  Beginning in 1973, Bogdan Lukasiewicz was a United Peasant 
Party [ZSL] member. Under the previous ZSL leadership, he 
performed the functions of the Chief Executive Committee 
treasurer. Currently, despite Pawlak's support, new Chief 
Council members have not elected him to the Chief Executive 
Committee. Mr. Lukasiewicz was a deputy in the 10th and the 
First Sejm; he ran for the Sejm in the last elections but lost 
in his Lodz electoral district--he was number 53 on the 
all-country electoral list and could not become a government 
member. During "Pawlak's 33 days," he participated in 
negotiations on the coalition and was one of the candidates for 
deputy prime minister for economic issues; during the last 
period of the formation of Pawlak's Cabinet, Mr. Lukasiewicz 
headed the group of PSL experts involved in talks. He helped 
Pawlak write his inaugural speech to the Sejm. Before the PSL 
won in the elections, he told ZYCIE WARSZAWY: "The PSL and the 
Democratic Left Alliance have enough members who have gone 
through a deputy political school and can become members of the 
Office of the Council of Ministers. With us, this institution 
would have worked perfectly. Our people would not be strangers 
there." Currently, he is a member of the PSL Chief Executive 
Council and controls primary peasant organizations. 
<H5>  Henryk Sobierajski </H5>
  He is responsible for contacts with the mass media. He is a 
well-known citizen of Lodz, a grandson of Hubala and son of 
Krystyna Sobierajska, who worked for the newspaper Lodz GLOS 
ROBOTNIZY (currently, GLOS PORANNY) all her life. 
  Henryk Sobierajski graduated from the Academy of Physical 
Culture, wrote for GLOS PORANNY and DZENNIK LODZKI, and later 
(until June 1993) ran the company that edited GLOS PORANNY. He 
is not a party member. However, people think that he sympathizes 
with the PSL and is friendly with Bogdan Lukasiewicz. He has 
never run in elections. 
<H5>  The Office That Plans Government Activities </H5>
  Under Hanna Suchocka, this office was headed by Tadeusz 
Syryjczyk and was an advisory body. All of its members except 
Slawomir Wozniak have been dismissed. Currently, Mr. Wozniak may 
become one of Pawlak's advisers. 
<H5>  Slawomir Wozniak </H5>
  He graduated from the Higher School of Engineering in Radom 
and earned his doctoral degree in economics at the Academy of 
Political Sciences. Mr. Wozniak worked at the "Lucznik" factory 
and, in the late 1980's, was assistant to State Council Deputy 
Chairman Tadeusz Witold Mlynczak (president of the Democratic 
Party). 
<H5>  Franciszek Mleczko </H5>
  He was born in 1931. His current duty is to organize the 
second team of advisers. He is a professor of social sciences 
dealing with social issues of village life, agriculture, and 
culture. He studied in Warsaw, Moscow, and Paris. Since 1968, he 
has lectured at Warsaw Agricultural Academy, Warsaw University, 
the Academy of Social Sciences within the Central Committee, and 
the High School of Social Sciences. He was a member of the 
Polish United Workers Party [PZPR] until it ceased to exist. 
Currently, he is not a party member. In the opinion of PSL 
members, he is still a PZPR supporter. He began to attend PSL 
meetings on Grzybowska street (PZPR headquarters) as early as at 
the beginning of the 1970's; he used to write for the quarterly 
WIES WSPOLCZESNA. From 1974 to 1978, he was deputy director of 
the Institute of Culture at the Ministry of Culture and Art and 
shared an office with Michal Strak. 
  Professor Franciszek Mleczko says that Prime Minister Pawlak 
charged him with the first task before the 1991 elections. He 
analyzed the situation in the Polish political scene and the 
PSL's chances of winning the elections. During the last 
elections, he was proposed as a possible PSL candidate, but he 
rejected the suggestion, claiming that he did not want to engage 
in politics. Mr. Mleczko states that he is looking for people 
who are not connected with any parties. 
<H5>  Wladyslaw Szymanski </H5>
  He is an exception. He is a member of a group of advisers, 
both in the Office of the Council of Ministers and the PSL Chief 
Executive Committee. Professor of Economics Wladyslaw Szymanski 
is respected in PSL circles. He was born in 1941. He is an 
author of the PSL economic program. He is lecturing at the Main 
School of Commerce and heads the Analysis of Markets and 
Competitiveness Committee. Mr. Szymanski has been connected with 
the people's movement since 1960: First, he participated in the 
Rural Youth Union; in 1963, he joined the ZSL; in 1977-80, he 
was adviser to Roman Malinowski; in 1980, he became a member of 
the ZSL Chief Executive Committee; and in 1985-89, he was a 
member of the State Council and a deputy in the Ninth Sejm. Like 
all of the other advisers, he cooperated with WIES WSPOLCZESNA 
(1974-77). PSL circles respect him for efficient economic 
analysis (some deputies say that his predictions are too 
"catastrophic"). However, some of his prognoses have never been 
realized. He is said to be modest and not a "career man." When 
Pawlak's government was being created, Mr. Szymanski's name was 
proposed for a ministerial post among the others. However, he 
rejected all of the proposals. He did not run for the Sejm, 
either. Some well-informed circles state that, after his work in 
the State Council, he began to hate social activities. 
<H5>  Jan Bisztyga and Other Advisers </H5>
  Deputy prime ministers are organizing their own groups of 
advisers (Secretary of State Andrzej Zor is responsible for this 
work in Mark Borowski's office; in Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz's 
office, this is being done by Under Secretary of State Grzegorz 
Rydlewski; in Aleksandr Luczak's office by Under Secretary of 
State Stanislaw Dobrzanski). Some ministers have also started 
creating their own groups of advisers. The nomination of Jan 
Bisztyga to the post of adviser for Michal Strak, chairman of 
the Office of Council of Ministers, was the most controversial 
over the past few weeks. Mr. Bisztyga was the last spokesman for 
the mass media within the PZPR Central Committee. He performed 
his duties from the spring of 1989 until the last day of the 
PZPR's existence. Being a PZPR spokesman, he first met with 
journalists in mid-April 1989. He wished to implement a "new 
information policy" of the PZPR, describing it as "opening doors 
to primary PZPR committees." Before the elections were held, he 
organized forums with journalists entitled "Only for Those Who 
Think" and reassured that main candidates of the 
government-coalition faction have victory "in their pockets." 
After the elections were held, he was the first to state in the 
PZPR Central Committee: "We have lost. We should give back 
power." In 1972-74, Mr. Bisztyga performed the functions of 
under secretary of state in the Foreign Ministry and was Polish 
ambassador to Greece and Great Britain. Officials of the Office 
of the Council of Ministers state that he will use his 
experience in his new post and aid Mr. Strak on international 
issues. 

