Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on statements by French President Francois </F>
Mitterrand during interview with AFP on 9 January in Brussels: 
"Francois Mitterrand's New `Neither, Nor'"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  NATO's Role </H5>
  [Mitterrand] There are already several organizations 
responsible for security in Europe: the CSCE, NATO, the Western 
European Union [WEU]. In the political sphere, the Council of 
Europe brings together all the democracies and will probably be 
further expanded. Each organization must play its role, seeking 
complementarity. 
  With the Maastricht Treaty, the European Union [EU] is 
henceforth capable of exercising foreign and security policy 
responsibilities; the French initiative for a Pact for 
Stability, to which it gave approval in December and which will 
bring together all the countries involved in Paris in April, is 
proof of this. 
  The first adaptation which is vital is to take account of 
the 
European identity. 
  Since then, namely last November, the Maastricht Treaty has 
been ratified. For the first time, the European Community, 
which has become the EU, has authority in the sphere of common 
foreign and security policy, and has the aim of acquiring a real 
European defense identity and developing a common defense and 
security policy which, when the time comes, can lead to a real 
common defense. (...) 
  In the framework of the EU, the common foreign and security 
policy, the WEU, and the European corps all fit together. Let 
us not create a problem where no problem exists. Let us move 
forward: This is in the interests of the Alliance and of the 
Europeans. 
  We French will approach the summit with the desire to carry 
out a far-reaching discussion which will then enable the 
diplomats and experts to translate into practical terms the 
guidelines and principles on which we will have agreed. 
  This means that France, a full member of the Alliance, will 
have its full place in it. Our special military position within 
NATO, which there is no reason to change, presents no new 
problem either for us or for our allies who are fully aware of 
the reasons for it. 
<H5>  Relations Between NATO and the WEU </H5>
  Placing NATO's resources at the WEU's disposal could be an 
important development, provided there is a detailed examination 
of the methods and practical provisions. This cannot be the end 
result. 
  In our view, what is essential is that NATO and the WEU, 
which will act on the Twelve's behalf, are able to fulfill their 
missions without there being one organization dependent on 
another (which would be contrary to the principle of 
complementarity), or any competition between them which would 
result in wastage and pointless duplication. The discussions in 
progress should make it possible for the two organizations to 
resort, in full agreement, to the resources available, after the 
information and mutual consultation procedures have been decided. 
  As we have shown with the European corps, there is no 
conflict between the development of the WEU and NATO, provided 
it is accepted that missions other than those stemming from 
Article 5 of NATO are defined, planned, and implemented 
according to specific ad hoc procedures in keeping with their 
particular nature. Recent experience proves that peace keeping 
requires a constant adaptation of military structures to the 
objectives of each mission. From this viewpoint, the integrated 
military organization is not showing all the flexibility one 
would wish. 
<H5>  France and NATO </H5>
  There will be no return to the NATO integrated military 
command. With regard to the former Yugoslavia, particularly 
Bosnia, because the French have the largest number of troops 
there, in December 1992 I authorized French officers to 
participate in the work of the general staff being carried out 
at the time with a view to NATO being given a mandate, in the 
context of the UN resolutions, to guarantee the enforcement of a 
peaceful settlement and to make some areas "safe." Finally, 
NATO has so far not intervened and those plans have therefore 
not been implemented. 
  However, what I accepted in 1992 could be applied if 
necessary to other peace keeping missions and in the same 
conditions, in other words, when French troops are involved, 
provided a French decision to engage our troops has been made by 
the competent national authorities. This can only be decided 
case by case. The defense minister and the chief of staff will 
then be able to participate in meetings during which the said 
mission would be planned. All this has nothing to do with a 
return to the integrated commands, because these peace keeping 
missions would form part of procedures separate from those 
resulting from Article 5. 
  The peace keeping role adopted by NATO is merely one 
hypothesis. It does not have a monopoly of this role. This is 
merely an observation. 
<H6>  Political Identity </H6>
<H5>  European Nuclear Doctrine </H5>
  You are referring to the remarks which I made immediately 
after the conclusion of the Maastricht Treaty creating the EU. 
The urgency of the subject will increase as the EU establishes 
its political identity at the same time as its security and 
defense identity. This will probably take time, but we must not 
lose sight of it. However, there will only be a European 
nuclear doctrine, a European deterrence doctrine, when there are 
vital European interests, regarded as such by the Europeans but 
also understood as such by others. 
  You can see that there is a long way to go here. France will 
not dilute its national defense resources in this sphere on any 
pretext. Whatever happens, there cannot be some "replacement" -- 
to use your term -- of the United States. This question does 
not arise, the U.S. military involvement in Europe remains at 
the center of the trans-Atlantic link and hence of the Alliance. 
<H5>  French Nuclear Tests </H5>
  I decided on a test moratorium after calling on the 
Americans, Russians, and British to do likewise -- that was in 
April 1992 -- because we had achieved -- according to all our 
experts -- the adequacy which guaranteed the credibility of our 
deterrent. Mr. Bush, Mr. Yeltsin, and Mr. Major said yes to me. 
In 1993, President Clinton asked to extend that moratorium. 
There was no question of saying no to him because he was 
following the same course as us. Of course, the Chinese, who 
are lagging behind, continued their tests; I hope that they will 
adopt our attitude. I am still fully opposed to a resumption of 
nuclear tests by France, at least while our partners honor their 
pledge. I am discussing that with the prime minister and the 
other ministers involved. 
  Our nuclear deterrent is credible and adequate now and we 
think it will continue to be so for many years. Meanwhile we 
must replace the oldest components. Studies are under way, 
decisions will be made at the appropriate time. Moreover, in 
1992, I made decisions which will give the new-generation 
submarines, decided in 1983, a new missile with a substantially 
improved range. We will continue to work along these lines, 
knowing that this missile could also be installed on the Albion 
Plateau. In this context, we are speeding up, together with the 
prime minister, our simulation program, in other words, 
laboratory tests which must be treated as a great priority. 
  At a time when the whole world is anxious to eliminate the 
threat of nuclear proliferation which threatens everybody, 
France, through its initiative for a test moratorium, has 
greater political, diplomatic, and moral credibility than ever. 
Giving the signal for a new arms race would be contrary to what 
I expect of France. If that leads us to put more time into 
acquiring all the simulation technology, a consideration of the 
world's geopolitical state shows that we have that time. Until 
then our nuclear force will continue to deter anybody who might 
consider threatening us. 
  The parliamentary report is interesting but has not 
convinced 
me. However, on many points, discussion may be beneficial. At 
present, I am carrying out such discussion with the prime 
minister and the relevant ministers and with the members of the 
Defense Council whom I brought together in December and whom I 
will see again before the end of this month. Whatever happens, 
and our interlocutors know this, I have no intention of 
authorizing new nuclear tests. 
<H5>  Security of East European Countries </H5>
  The security need felt by the former members of the Warsaw 
Pact and the now independent states which have emerged from the 
collapse of the Soviet Union is legitimate. Each, whatever its 
size or geographical position, is entitled to security. I have 
constantly said that, especially when I visited the three Baltic 
states in 1992. This is what is enshrined in the Paris Charter, 
for which the CSCE bears responsibility. 
  What are now the most immediate threats to the security of 
the East European states? First, the problems of borders and 
minorities. Establishing the foundations for real security 
based on stability and confidence requires them to be solved. 
It is with this objective that the EU has decided to give a 
favorable reply to the plan put forward by Mr. Balladur to 
organize a conference in 1994 aimed at defusing in advance the 
conflicts which might arise in Europe from new minorities or 
border problems and reaching the conclusion of a Pact for 
Stability. We all know the other alternative, that of the 
collapse of the former Yugoslavia. Lack of foresight and 
impatience precipitated this tragedy. Membership of an Alliance 
would not dispense with the need to solve this problem. Let us 
beware of such illusions. 
  France and Germany have also proposed that the states which 
are already WEU associates, with the prospect of membership, 
acquire a status within the WEU which would meet their security 
expectations. All these initiatives should combine to give the 
continent's security a strong foundation and prevent, through 
negotiation, crises which we would otherwise have every reason 
to fear. In Rome back in 1991, I supported the idea of a 
discussion on this subject with the Central and East European 
countries. 
  I therefore approve of the idea of a "Partnership for Peace" 
to strengthen the security of all the Central and East European 
states. 

