CSO 

<F P=106> [Article based on report of the Volgograd Oblast Statistical </F>
Administration: "The Oblast National Economy in the First 
Quarter of 1994"] 
  [Text] The non-payments crisis continues to have a 
huge effect on the oblast economy. Not only has it had a 
negative effect on production and brought it into further 
decline, but it has also aggravated the problem of timely 
issuance of wages, pensions, stipends and other payments. 
<H8>  There is income, but no money </H8>
  According to the data of the oblast financial 
administration, 
the income of the consolidated oblast budget for the first 
quarter of 1994 comprised 147 billion rubles (R), and exceeded 
the expenditures by R4 billion. 
  According to the data of the Central Bank Main 
Administration, credit investments in the national economy as of 
1 April 1994 comprised R420 billion, and increased by almost 
four times as compared with the first quarter of 1993. The 
relative share of long-term credits within the overall volume of 
credit investments comprised only 7 percent. 
  The share of enterprises reporting losses increased from 27 
to 30 percent in February as compared with January. There was a 
particularly high relative share of unprofitable enterprises in 
transport, housing and municipal services and culture (from 47 
to 90 percent). 
  The unyielding payments crisis is aggravating the financial 
position of enterprises, disrupting the rhythm of economic 
activity and causing social tension in the production 
collectives. 
  Due to the absence of funds in the accounts of enterprises 
and organizations, payment of wages has been delayed. This 
question is particularly acute in agriculture. 
<H8>  What is in our pocketbooks </H8>
  For the first quarter of the current year, the monetary 
income of the oblast population comprised around R545 billion, 
while the expenditures were R410 billion. 
  Computed per oblast resident, the nominal monetary income in 
March was defined in the sum of R84,000 and increased by 28 
percent over the preceding month. Despite the significant growth 
in nominal monetary income of the population, the decline of its 
real value continued in the first quarter of the current year. 
  The surplus money on hand continues to increase. For the 
first quarter of the current year, it increased by R135 billion 
(for the first quarter of 1993--by R21 billion). A significant 
part of the cash money is being held by persons who have high 
income or who are engaged in commercial activity, and is being 
used by them as working capital. The increase in cash money on 
hand among the main mass of the population is associated largely 
with the need for current savings to make purchases at sharply 
increased prices. 
<H8>  Prices grow like grass in the springtime </H8>
  Consumer prices on goods and services provided to the 
population increased by 1.5 times during the quarter. Their 
growth each month during the quarter was stable (14-15 percent). 
  Prices on food products increased two times faster than on 
non-food items. 
  Of the food products, bread and bakery goods, milk, cheese, 
meat, vegetables and fruits increased in price by 1.8-2.1 times 
during the first quarter. 
  For non-food items, prices increased by 25 percent in 
January-March. 
  Prices on paid consumer services tripled in March as 
compared 
with December of last year. This increase was formulated 
primarily due to the increased payments on housing-municipal 
services (their growth comprised 9.5 times), urban transport--5 
times, communications--2.4 times, public health--2 times, and 
consumer services--1.5 times. 
<H8>  That is all--about us </H8>
  Population. The demographic situation in the oblast 
continues 
to remain extremely unfavorable. The natural decline in the 
population which began at the end of 1991, when the number of 
deaths began to exceed the number of births, has been retained 
over the last two years. The situation did not improve in the 
first quarter of this year: The natural loss comprised 4,200 
persons, and exceeded the corresponding indicator for the first 
quarter of last year by over half. 
  As was the case last year, there is a continued increase in 
the mortality rate and decline in the birth rate. The number of 
deaths exceeded the number of births by 1.7 times. During the 
first three months of this year there were 6,300 births in the 
oblast, and 10,500 deaths. As compared with the corresponding 
period last year, the number of births declined by 100, or by 2 
percent, while the number of deaths increased by 1,300, or 15 
percent. 
  As before, growth due to migration remains the only growth 
factor in the oblast's population numbers. In the first quarter 
of this year it comprised 7,400 percent. Of those, according to 
the data of the oblast migration service, forced migrants 
comprised 800 persons, and refugees--900 persons. 
  A further reduction in life expectancy was also noted. 
  Unemployment figures. In January-March of the current year, 
5,800 unemployed persons were registered, or almost two times 
more than in the first quarter of last year. By the beginning of 
April their number comprised 7,200 persons. Of those, 21 percent 
live in rural areas. Young people under 30 years of age comprise 
almost 30 percent of the unemployed. There are 2.6 times more 
unemployed women than men. 
  Consumer market in goods and services. Consumer goods 
account 
for one-fifth of the total output of industrial products, and 
comprised R228 billion worth of goods. As compared with the 
corresponding period for 1993, their production has declined by 
23 percent. 
  The production of food products declined by 22 percent. The 
output of meat and butter has declined by almost one-third; the 
output of whole milk products and vegetable oil--by 19-20 
percent, and the output of canned goods and macaroni 
products--by 42-43 percent. 
  Bakery enterprises have somewhat reduced the output of bread 
and baked goods. 
  The production of vodka and liquor-vodka products has 
declined by two-thirds. 
  The supply of goods in trade in the current year continued 
to 
increase, although the increase in prices significantly reduced 
the capacities of the buyers. Purchases of all basic food 
products declined as compared with the first quarter of 1993. 
  There were R114 billion worth of non-food items sold in the 
oblast trade organizations. As compared with the first quarter 
of last year, the sale of televisions increased by 14 percent 
and of household detergent--by 38 percent. The sale of 
refrigerators remained at the same level as last year. At the 
same time, the sales volumes of cotton, woolen and silk fabrics, 
tricot goods and leather footwear declined by 40-50 percent. 
  The sales volume of consumer services declined by 40 percent 
in comparable prices as compared with January-March of 1993. 
<H8>  Privatization and the voucher </H8>
  Beginning in 1992, there were 1,800 enterprises involved in 
the process of privatization. The overall value of the property 
of these enterprises exceeded R20 billion, which comprises 59 
percent of the overall value of state property. 
  One in every three enterprises privatized in January-March 
is 
in the sphere of trade, public catering and consumer services. 
Industrial enterprises comprise 28 percent of the total number 
of privatized enterprises, and building organizations--22 
percent. 
  The privatization of facilities in the current year 
generated 
monetary revenues in the sum of over R1.6 billion, and 
privatization checks--in the amount of over 160,000. 
  The exchange rate of the privatization check, according to 
the data of trading sessions on the Lower-Volga Commodity-Raw 
Materials Exchange, comprised R36,000 at the beginning of April 
(at the beginning of March it was R23,000). On the "black" 
market, privatization checks went for from R30,000 to R34,000. 
  Since the beginning of privatization (since 1989), there 
have 
been around 230,000 apartments privatized in the oblast (36 
percent of the apartments subject to privatization). 
<H8>  Dropped by one-fourth </H8>
  In the first quarter, industrial enterprises in the oblast 
produced R898 billion worth of products in effective prices. For 
January-March the volume of goods production declined by 
one-fourth as compared with the same period last year. 
  At the same time, 65 out of 332 enterprises increased 
production of their manufactured product in March as compared 
with the same month last year. Among these were: The Volgograd 
Plant imeni Petrov, the AO [joint-stock company] 
"Volgogradmebel" imeni Yerman, the AO "Keramicheskiy zavod," the 
AO "Plastkard," the Volga Pipe Plant, the Volga TETs-2 [central 
heat and power plant], the Karpovskiy Mixed Feed Plant, the AO 
"Volzhskiy orgsintez," and others. 
  Production of most vital types of products declined in the 
first quarter of the current year. 
<H8>  The rural areas are in a difficult state </H8>
  In January-March the financial position of agricultural 
enterprises, kolkhozes [collective farms], joint-stock 
companies, and peasant farms did not improve primarily due to 
the delays in payments for products sold, as well as the 
continuing disparity in prices on consumed industrial products 
and produced agricultural products. 
  Due to the shortage in monetary means, farms are 
experiencing 
difficulties in acquiring material-technical resources for the 
Spring planting. There is a chronic shortage of equipment, 
mineral fertilizers, toxic chemicals, and fuel-lubricant 
materials. 
  By the start of the planting season, agricultural 
enterprises 
had one-fourth less diesel fuel than last year, and 29 percent 
less gasoline. In a number of rayons the reserves of 
fuel-lubricant materials do not exceed even half of last year's 
level. 
  Equipment readiness for the last three years is the lowest 
in 
the current year. By the beginning of April, 19-23 percent of 
the tractors, trucks, plows, sowing machines and cultivators 
were in a state of disrepair. 
  The peasant (individual) farms are experiencing no less 
difficulty. 
  A difficult situation remains in livestock raising. As a 
result of the low recoverability of this product, the herd size 
of livestock and poultry continues to decline. 
<H8>  We are building, but not enough </H8>
  Enterprises and organizations held in all forms of ownership 
assimilated R112 billion in capital investments, which in 
comparable prices is 28 percent less than in the first quarter 
of last year. 
  R70 billion in capital investments were used for industrial 
construction, or 62 percent of all capital investments. 
  In the agro-industrial complex, R10 billion in capital 
investments were assimilated, or 9 percent of all capital 
investments in the oblast. 
  In the construction of facilities of housing-municipal 
function, R43 billion in capital investments were assimilated. 
Oblast residents received 859 new apartments with overall 
(living) space of 57,000 square meters. Of these, 19,000 square 
meters were placed into operation in the cities of Volgograd and 
Volzhsk. 
  The rate of construction of individual houses has increased. 
In the three month period, private individuals have introduced 
192 houses into operation, with overall area of 20,000 square 
meters. This is 49 percent greater than the corresponding period 
last year. 
  Among other facilities in the social sphere, a children's 
combined school for 280 students in the city of Volzhsk was 
placed into operation. 
<H8>  Plane, car, train... </H8>
  In January-March of the current year, the volume of cargo 
shipments in general use transport declined by 26 percent, 
including in air transport--by 67 percent, motor transport--26 
percent, and railroad--25 percent. 
  In railroad transport there was a reduction in the load 
level 
for almost all the vital types of national economic cargo. 
  At the same time, at the beginning of April there were 
283,000 tonnes of cargo on loading platforms, ready for shipment 
and not taken out by railroad transport. There was also an 
increase in the idle times of cargo cars at industrial stations 
and in cargo handling operations. 
  The increase in rates on passenger transport led to a 
decline 
in the passenger turnover. 
  The situation with services provided to the population on 
intra-city and suburban communications remains difficult. 
  In connection with the cancellation of runs, the shortage of 
fuel, divergence from routes and other reasons, 187,000 (20 
percent) of the scheduled bus routes were not fulfilled, as well 
as 29,000 (7 percent) trolley routes, and 10,000 (3 percent) 
street car routes. 695 electric trains were cancelled--6 percent 
of the number planned. 
<H8>  We are trading in raw materials </H8>
  The foreign trade turnover, according to preliminary data, 
comprised $129 million in U.S. dollars, and increased by 42 
percent as compared with the first quarter of 1993. The balance 
of foreign trade was positive in the amount of $76 million. 
  The oblast export comprised $102 million, and increased by 
38 
percent as compared with the corresponding period for last year. 
Raw materials, including oil, petroleum products and aluminum, 
continue to be exported. Their relative share in the overall 
volume of export comprised 88 percent. 
  $26 million worth of goods were imported during 
January-March 
of the current year. This is 62 percent more than in the 
corresponding period last year. Among these were machinery and 
equipment, raw materials for the aluminum industry, 
food-flavoring goods (sugar, coffee, tea, etc.), industrial 
consumer goods (clothing, shoes, carpets, etc.) and other 
products. 

