BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, 14 Jun (TANJUG) -- After his exceptionally 
long talks at the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Radovan 
Karadzic told Yugoslav reporters that "the Serb side presented 
its standpoints. I am very satisfied with the way we were 
received." 
  The talks were "useful and held in a good atmosphere," 
Karadzic pointed out. In his opinion, Russian diplomacy has 
assumed "an objective and impartial position," presenting the 
Serb interests in the Contact Group in the same way. 
  According to Karadzic, the territorial division of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, based on the 51 to 49 percent ratio, is problematic 
for the Serb side, but could be discussed if the quality and 
quantity of the territory were taken into account. In this 
case, Karadzic said, the Serb side would demand a certain degree 
of quality, compact territory, and a possible exchange of 
territory by giving "quantity for quality". 
  In Karadzic's view, the international community is dominated 
by forces that favor peace. In his opinion, some circles in the 
United States have so far opposed peace and are making proposals 
that the Serbs obviously cannot accept. "We are hoping that the 
Contact Group will act differently this time, that it will not 
come up with a proposal that is totally unacceptable to the 
Serbs. We would have to reject such a proposal," Karadzic said. 
He stressed a need for good relations with the Russian side so 
it can convey to the Contact Group what the Serbs can or cannot 
accept. 
  Asked whether Russia could support some Serbian stands 
regarding the maps, Karadzic said: "Today there was a 
considerable degree of understanding for some sensitive spots on 
the map," referring primarily to Brcko, Posavina [north Bosnia], 
and west and east Bosnia -- or the Drina region. 
  We believe it is very important that the fact be taken into 
account that both states -- the Muslim-Croat federation and the 
Serb Republic -- must be able to survive in a political and 
communications sense as well as in every other sense, the 
president of the Serb Republic said in conclusion. 
  Radovan Karadzic is expected to have more talks and meetings 
in Moscow. Tomorrow, he will receive the "Mikhail Sholokhov 
Award" from Russia's Writers Union at a special ceremony. 

