BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 31 March. 
  BOLIVIA 
  The Caballero Province Environmental Association, Acecab, is 
planning to plant 25,000 native trees to stop erosion in the 
Comarapa Valley. Acecab President Bendicto Vargas said the 35 
hectares of the Upper Comarapa River must be quickly reforested 
in the face of the excessive soil loss as a result of 
indiscriminate logging and natural erosion. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 
in Spanish 2 Mar 94 p 14) 
  BRAZIL 
  The Foreign Ministry will submit a request to the U.S. 
Government for a 30-day extension on the deadline established 
for Brazil to adopt an official position on the inclusion of 
mogno -- a Brazilian tree -- in Annex 2 of the Convention on the 
International Commerce of Endangered Wildlife and Flora Species. 
  A decision on mogno is on the agenda of the next meeting of 
the international tropical lumber organization council, of which 
Brazil is a member. (Brasilia Voz do Brasil in Portuguese 2200 
GMT 11 Mar 94) 
  Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Natural 
Resources, Ibama, workers found 30,000 cubic meters -- 15,000 
trees cut down illegally -- floating on the Purus River. The 
Ibama officials discovered that most of the trees had been taken 
from the Aripuana Indian reserve. A fine of 250 million real 
cruzeiros was imposed on the timber entrepreneurs, whose 
tugboats will be confiscated. Charges will be pressed against 
them with penalties as long as eight years in prison. (Rio de 
Janeiro REDE GLOBO Television in Portuguese 2300 GMT 21 Mar 94) 
  Ibama declared the Novo Destino rubber tree forest in 
Canutama County, Amazonas State, a private natural wealth 
reservation. The forest covers 104,000 hectares and is 20 times 
larger than the Caraguata forest reserve in Antonio Carlos 
County, Santa Catarina State. (Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in 
Portuguese 2200 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  PARAGUAY 
  Engineer Edgar Benitez and chemist Adelida Maldonado, two 
Agriculture and Livestock Ministry officials, carried out a 
surprise tour of the Chaco region, including Paratodo, Lolita, 
Loma Plata, and Filadelfia. In Loma Plata and Filadelfia, the 
officials seized 35 boxes of ``Guayaki,'' a poison against ants, 
worth 1.5 million guaranies. ``Guayaki'' contains 5 percent 
aldrin, a highly poisonous agrochemical. (Asuncion ABC COLOR in 
Spanish 28 Mar 94 p 36) 
  URUGUAY 
  According to a survey by the Economic Commission for Latin 
America, temperature increases in South America in December, 
January, and February might range from 2 degrees centigrade in 
the Amazon to 8 degrees centigrade in the Southern Cone. A 
4-degree increase might affect most regions with a high 
agricultural production rate, including Argentina, Brazil, 
Chile, Uruguay, and Paraguay. (Montevideo EL PAIS in Spanish 21 
Mar 94 p 10) 

