BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with V.N. Likhachev, vice president of the </F>
Republic of Tatarstan, by Shamil Khammatov, date and place not 
given: "Visit of Serious Intentions"] 
  [Text] TATAR-INFORM's special correspondent met with V. 
Likhachev, vice president of the Republic of Tatarstan, and 
asked him to comment on the results of the visit to Tatarstan by 
B.N. Yeltsin, president of the Russian Federation. 
  [Khammatov] Vasiliy Nikolayevich, I think that you can 
assess the Russian President's visit not only as a politician 
but also as a major specialist in the field of international law 
and a doctor of legal sciences. In this connection, what 
comment can you make on Boris Nikolayevich's visit to our 
republic in terms of its international significance? 
  [Likhachev] This visit is of interest to the international 
public in the sense that it confirms the very serious intentions 
of the two sides to reform Russia on the new democratic 
principles of a true federation. I believe that the Russian 
president came here not for a purely protocol visit so as to 
shake hands with the leadership of Tatarstan but in order to 
emphasize the consistency of his course and his readiness to 
abide by international standards, in particular the generally 
acknowledged right of the peoples to self-determination. 
  In 1990, B.N. Yeltsin said: "Take as much sovereignty as you 
can." In 1994 he signed a treaty with Tatarstan and I, as a 
direct participant in that signing, can confirm that there would 
not have been a treaty had it not been the will of the Russian 
president himself, who overcame resistance to it even within his 
own entourage. Yeltsin acted not just as a strong-willed figure 
but also as one characterized by political pragmatism. 
  Finally, the Russian President's visit to our country gave a 
powerful impetus to the implementation of the treaty between 
Russia and Tatarstan on the demarcation of terms of reference 
and the mutual delegation of powers. By this visit and the 
accord with Tatarstan, Boris Nikolayevich was displaying his 
democratic image to the public of Russia, the CIS, and 
undoubtedly the rest of the world. New models of mutual 
relations were refined and, in particular, support was given to 
the idea expressed by Tatarstan President M.Sh. Shaymiyev back 
at the beginning of this year on the decentralization of the 
administration of Russia -- decentralization in the sense of 
ensuring a balance of the interests of the center and the 
regions, not in the sense of anarchy, disorder, and destruction. 
  [Khammatov] Vasiliy Nikolayevich, I believe that I am right 
in saying that during the visit there was a fruitful discussion 
of questions connected with the life of the diaspora and with 
the spiritual and cultural development of the peoples of Russia 
and Tatarstan in general. 
  [Likhachev] Yes, I was very pleased that the Russian 
president firmly supported the implementation of questions of 
aid for the Tatar diaspora, important domestic and foreign 
policy questions as far as we are concerned. The discussion 
centered on the idea that Kazan should become a real coordinator 
of all Russian policy regarding the diaspora. A coordinator in 
the best and most positive sense. It is important to stress 
this so that the leaders do not think that Shaymiyev is going to 
phone up every day to ask how the Tatars are getting on over 
there, whether they have been provided with housing, work, and 
so on. It is important that it is by the joint efforts of all 
the regions of Russia, and I repeat the word "all," that an 
intellectual, methodological, scientific, and financial center 
is created to give the Tatar diaspora help because what we are 
talking about here is the second largest nation in Russia. 
Because in essence the work which is being carried out is 
currently reliant on our internal resources. And today, on the 
eve of the 21st century, when it is not only general human 
values which are being developed in a new way but when our own 
national culture and national languages are to be developed, the 
vectors of these will be the vehicles of world civilization. 
  The path to world civilization runs through national 
cultures 
and the national perception of life. There must be coordinated 
joint efforts to realize the idea of the smooth and civilized 
integration of Tatarstan and Russia into the spiritual and 
cultural world community. It is very important, the relevant 
documents have been prepared on the initiative of the 
presidents, and Boris Nikolayevich gave the corresponding 
instructions to a number of ministers, to O.N. Soskovets 
directly, to implement this plan. During this visit the Russian 
president spoke on behalf of all Russians as a man who has a 
fine appreciation of the psychological side of the country's 
life. Incidentally, in the near future I am due to have talks 
with Russian Federation ministers Kozyrev, Sidorov, and Yegorov 
on the implementation of these ideas and on their translation 
into the language of concrete edicts and directives of the 
Russian president and government. 
  [Khammatov] Does that also include the implementation of 
your idea on the creation of a children's folk art center in 
Kazan under the auspices of UNESCO and the Russian and Tatarstan 
presidents? 
  [Likhachev] Yes, this idea received the presidents' support. 
Children are the source of the spiritual rebirth of Russia and 
Tatarstan and of all the nations which inhabit their 
territories. And I think that we will be able to set an example 
of a state approach in the education of the rising generation, 
who are the future of both Tatarstan and Russia. 

