Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by National Speaker Yi Man-sop on his China trip] </F>
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] China clearly perceives South 
Korea as a trust-worthy economic partner. 
  This belief is based on the judgment that when China's human 
and material resources and the ROK's capital and experience in 
economic development are combined, it will produce greater 
effects than any other tie-up. 
  This does not mean that China is looking at us only from the 
point of view of its economic interests. The historical and 
traditional friendship forged over thousands of years cannot be 
explained only in terms of "national interest" adhered to by the 
distant West. Deeply embedded in the Sino-Korea relationship are 
the special affinity and bonds forged unconsciously. 
  During my short 3-day stay in Beijing, I was able to meet 
with all the three top leaders who are building a "new China," 
namely, Jiang Zemin, Qiao Shi, and Li Peng. Deng Pufang, 
chairman of the Association of the Handicapped, came up to 
Beijing from Shanghai, where he was looking after the paramount 
leader Deng Xiaoping who was wintering there, to pay me a 
courtesy call at Diayutai. Zu Liang, chairman of the NPC Foreign 
Affairs Committee, accompanied me during my entire 6-night, 
7-day China itinerary. All this hospitality exceeding the 
customary protocol should be understood in the context of the 
special friendship between the two countries based on the 
affinity mentioned above. [passage omitted] 
  I stressed to Jiang Zemin and other leaders that of the 
three 
elements of "arms, food, and trust" as referred to by Confucius, 
trust is most important, and that the two peoples should carry 
out exchanges open-mindedly trusting each other by "showing 
utter devotion to a friend" as the saying goes. [passage omitted] 
  China is more prepared than we are for economic cooperation 
between our two countries. 
  During the hour-long candidate dialogue, Chairman Jiang said 
he would take personal charge of economic cooperation, 
mentioning specific interests such as the automobile, 
electronic, and semiconductor sectors. Zao Qisheng, Shanghai 
deputy mayor, said that he personally explained the "Pudong New 
District" development plan to Korean businessmen when they 
visited Shanghai at his invitation. 
  We are now seeking internationalization and futuristic 
progress as our national goal. Through my recent visit I could 
confirm that China is our most important cooperative partner, 
given the present state of the North-South relationship. 
  During our visit to China, we, the National Assembly 
delegation, keenly realized that this is the time for our 
politicians and businessmen to pool their wisdom and 
resourcefulness for the sake of national development rather than 
wasting time and energy paying lip service to globalization and 
doing unproductive things. 
  In this sense it is of great significance that our National 
Assembly delegation, which included DP Secretary General Kim 
Tae-sik and other ruling and opposition party politicians, 
visited China at the outset of the new year which is dedicated 
to nationalization and opening. We firmly believe that our 
recent visit to China will add momentum to bringing about more 
brisk exchanges and a higher level of cooperation between our 
two countries. 
  The immense and friendly frontier called China is beckoning 
to us with open arms. 

