Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colombian President Cesar Gaviria by </F>
unidentified EL TIEMPO reporter; place and date not given] 
  [Text] [EL TIEMPO] The Council of State, through its new 
president, Magistrate Amado Gutierrez Velasquez, sent you a 
letter on Wednesday 19 January in which it requested information 
regarding the constitutional and legal reasons behind the 
presence of U.S. troops in different parts of our country. Is 
the president willing to give out that information? 
  [Gaviria] More than that. I have given instructions for the 
Defense Ministry to give out all the information it has on the 
temporary presence of U.S. troops in the country. The 
government is willing, as it has always been, to fully cooperate 
with the Council of State, not only by turning over documents 
but also by making the necessary explanations to clear up this 
matter. 
  [EL TIEMPO] As for the presence of U.S. troops in Juanchaco, 
why did the government not ask the Senate or the Council of 
State for authorization as the National Constitution requires? 
  [Gaviria] It is clear that the government believes the 
presence of U.S. troops or those of other countries that enter 
Colombian territory to provide technical and training assistance 
and that observe international agreements does not violate the 
Constitution. 
  The legal base for this type of exercise is the 
Inter-American Reciprocal Assistance Treaty (TIAR) which is 
currently in effect. It was signed by Colombia and approved by 
the Congress of the Republic in 1947. This treaty was followed 
by the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement signed on 17 April 
1952. These types of military missions are carried out in 
Colombia based on legal documents that have been in effect since 
the middle of the century. 
  As for the joint military engineering exercise taking place 
in Juanchaco--in which neither military personnel [as published] 
nor warships are participating--there is a memorandum of 
understanding and an agreement signed by Defense Minister Rafael 
Pardo and U.S. Ambassador Morris Busby on 29 October 1993. 
These instruments lie within the framework of, among others, 
the TIAR. They specify that the missions will be joint military 
engineering exercises for training purposes, which will lead to 
the construction of various projects for community use. Other 
similar agreements exist. One of them has to do with the 
exchange of military personnel, another has to do with the 
integration of the radar network located in the Caribbean, and 
another is aimed at expanding the naval river fleet. 
  Moreover, within the same framework of the TIAR, there have 
been various joint exercises with military units from various 
Latin American countries. We can mention the well-known naval 
operations called Unitas, 34 of which have already been held. 
They have been held every year since 1959 in Colombian 
territorial waters, as well as in other countries. Naval units 
from various countries are trained with regard to the joint 
procedures that would be followed in case of an attack from 
outside the continent. A landing exercise has taken place each 
year since 1962 at a place known as La Cangrejera on the 
Atlantic coast. In 1983 two exercises took place: one in Tumaco 
and another in San Andres. In 1991 and 1992 exercises took 
place in the vicinity of the Bahia Malaga Naval Base. They were 
joint exercises with the participation of U.S. and Colombian 
soldiers among others. 
  Therefore, by virtue of the fact that at the time TIAR was 
approved by the Congress, the Defense Ministry, and all 
exercises have been carried out on these same legal assumptions 
and never has anyone objected, I do not consider it necessary to 
request authorization from the Senate, or request the opinion of 
the Council of State, or inform any other authority, the same 
way it was not done in the past with Unitas and other similar 
exercises. 
  [EL TIEMPO] But do you believe Mr. President that the 
country 
is so naive as to believe that 150 men from the United States 
are needed to build a small school? 
  [Gaviria] Of course not; all these projects can be done by 
the Colombian State. But here lies the mistake. These 
gentlemen are military engineers and have come here to carry out 
joint exercises with Colombian military forces. The idea is to 
teach and practice, to share technical experiences, to solve 
logistical and communications problems, which eventually our men 
would meet in a situation of war. Instead of expending energy 
building or making useless things, they dedicate their energy to 
civic and solidarity objectives. The idea is to take advantage 
of the joint military engineering training and at the same time 
benefit the area and the community. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Does the presence of U.S. soldiers in Juanchaco 
violate Colombian sovereignty? 
  [Gaviria] The president does not see it that way. The U.S. 
military engineers are in an area totally under the control of 
the Colombian Navy and carry out their work under the 
supervision of the Armed Forces. I must also insist that the 
presence of military missions, doing civilian work, is covered 
by international agreements that are currently in force. 
  The problem is that many stories have been weaved around 
this. In fact, the EL TIEMPO Sunday edition highlighted the lies 
that have been used to attack the people's good faith. I have 
even heard that a U.S. base will be built in Juanchaco to 
replace the ones in Panama, or worse yet, that a new 
transoceanic canal is being designed. Good gracious! One needs 
to be very naive or very ill-intentioned to spread stories such 
as these that make no sense. 
  All this uproar leads me to wonder that once studies are 
completed, which both the Council of State and the Prosecutor 
General's Office are doing, the country must reflect and decide 
whether or not it wants this type of assistance in the future. 
My personal opinion is that if one believes that this type of 
assistance is an affront to our sovereignty, one is closing the 
door on something that is basic to making our Armed Forces more 
professional. Not only that, but we would end cooperation, 
equipment supply, maintenance, and intelligence that allow us to 
fight crime. 
  [EL TIEMPO] President, but Juanchaco is not the only case. 
What were the U.S. planes that overflew Barranquilla this 
weekend up to? 
  [Gaviria] According to what the Military Forces General 
Command and the FAC [Colombian Air Force] reported to me, the 
weekend Barranquilla overflights had been legally authorized 
earlier. The Civil Aeronautics Board, through the Directorate 
of Air Operations, had information on the Atlantic coast areas 
that this type of aircraft was going to overfly. 
  Colombia, in its fight against drug trafficking, receives 
support from the United States and other countries. We do not 
have all the equipment or the required technology to support 
with technical intelligence the struggle against drug 
trafficking. On the basis of current agreements that seek to 
repress illegal drug trafficking, the Defense Ministry requests, 
when conditions warrant, the support of U.S. planes that are 
specially equipped to detect airplanes that have not filed a 
flight plan. It is worth mentioning that overflights by U.S. 
airplanes are authorized by Decree No. 1692 of 1992. The 
overflights are to inform the Colombian authorities on the 
presence of unauthorized planes and that any other measure, such 
as chasing these airplanes, is exclusively the responsibility of 
the FAC and other national authorities. 
  You might be asking yourselves why the air traffic 
controllers did not know? Because there are ongoing 
investigations of air controllers involved in drug trafficking. 
There are also people who are interested in stirring up false 
sovereignty debates, encouraged by a dark sponsor. 
  If we are concerned about defending our air space 
sovereignty, the true threat does not lie in joint operations 
with the help of friendly countries. Danger to sovereignty, to 
Colombian society, and air security arise with the hundreds of 
illegal flights, without flight plans, and with perverse 
motivations, carried out by gun runners and drug traffickers 
over our territory. The authorized overflights are precisely an 
act of sovereignty to prevent our air space from being used with 
impunity by Colombia's true enemies. 
  [EL TIEMPO] How many air surveillance radars has the United 
States installed in Colombia? Who operates them and who uses the 
information they collect? 
  [Gaviria] Currently, the United States has installed four 
radars. The locations, facilities, and equipment are under the 
command, operation, and responsibility of Colombian military 
authorities. Some operate with the technical assistance of U.S. 
civilian organizations, and others with the technical assistance 
of U.S. military personnel. The radars' purpose is precisely 
what I talked to you about earlier--that is, to use technical 
means to enforce control, surveillance, and sovereignty. The 
information gathered is at the disposal of the Colombian Armed 
Forces, which uses it to plan operations. Colombia has always 
pressed the international community to obtain more equipment, 
which serves to enhance our intelligence work. I wish we had 
more radars and more technical assistance in these matters. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Some days ago, you said the U.S. military 
operation in Juanchaco was "humanitarian" in nature. Do you 
still feel that way? 
  [Gaviria] To be precise, I would be more accurate to talk of 
it as a solidarity or civic operation. I feel that building a 
hospital or a school, like the U.S. military engineers are 
doing, as a by-product of the joint exercise is a task that 
entails goodwill, and as the Juanchaco residents have said, it 
benefits the people of the zone where it occurs. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Is there any relation between the war against 
the 
Cali Cartel and the Juanchaco operation? Do the military 
operations in Juanchaco include building and operating radio 
beacons that seek to control drug trafficking? 
  [Gaviria] I believe I have stated with sufficient clarity 
that the Juanchaco activities, which stem from the memoranda of 
agreement and understanding signed between Defense Minister 
Rafael Pardo and U.S. Ambassador Busby, have no other purpose 
than the one announced: the joint implementation of military 
engineering projects based on reciprocal assistance treaties. 
Moreover, in view of the evident needs of the people of that 
area of the country, the Defense Ministry and the Valle 
Department Governor's Office signed a contract last December to 
build a landing strip in Juanchaco. The Codazzi Military 
Engineers Battalion is implementing that project. Although this 
project is being carried out simultaneously with the ones 
mentioned earlier, it has no connection with the project the 
U.S. soldiers are implementing. 
  All of this falls within the framework of the Colombian 
Constitution and laws. Some people, who are doubtful, have 
legitimate concerns. Others, who vehemently defend the notion of 
a U.S. invasion, are espousing a false nationalism that comes 
from bad information or shady interests. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Why have there been so many contradictions, so 
much secrecy, so much mystery in the handling of this case? 
  [Gaviria] No. There has not been any of that. From the 
start, 
I reported the activities going on in Juanchaco. If you compare 
the information the government issued in December to current 
information, it is exactly the same. The public is aware of the 
scope of the operation. Armed Forces officers have been ready to 
speak with reporters, and some reporters have even visited the 
site. As I said, I think it is legitimate that doubts and 
questions are expressed at political and public opinion levels, 
and the government has the obligation to answer them. I also 
think, however, the country is the victim of an exacerbated and 
ill-intended distortion of events. I am not ruling out the 
existence of a misinformation campaign aimed at creating 
sentiment against international cooperation in the struggle 
against drug trafficking. 
  In the past, drug traffickers have manipulated a false sense 
of nationalism to undermine the nation's purpose of ridding 
itself from the slavery that criminal organizations have tried 
to impose on it. We cannot be stooges for those who hide behind 
our flag to evade the law and protect their illicit businesses. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Last week's issue of SEMANA referred to a 
conversation with Prosecutor Gustavo de Greiff and U.S. Attorney 
General Janet Reno, in which the possibility of pardoning the 
members of the Cali Cartel was mentioned. How do you feel about 
it? 
  [Gaviria] Regarding your question, the country knows we are 
studying the topic either through consultations between 
presidents or contacts the foreign minister has made. We will 
make a decision at an opportune time. A decision will respond to 
the interests of Colombia and America. 
  Concerning the private conversation between the prosecutor 
general and Ms. Reno, I must inform you that the information I 
have is quite different from that published in the weekly in 
question. Never, for example, was there any mention of the word 
pardon. A pardon is a moral and legal impossibility of which 
neither the president nor the prosecutor could approve under any 
circumstance. 
  For obvious reasons the president of the Republic cannot 
expand on the issues discussed in that private meeting, but he 
is convinced that the terms of the conversation differ from the 
reports that were published. 
  What must be stressed is that after that conversation 
Prosecutor General De Greiff and the U.S. Justice Department 
managed to settle most of the differences that had emerged 
during the process of legal cooperation, whereby the proof 
gathered in the United States against drug traffickers was 
collected for the Colombian courts. 
  Nevertheless, because I am already discussing this topic, 
allow me to tell you that the president of the Republic has a 
high opinion of the prosecutor general, who has become one of 
the moral pillars of our society. With his legal wisdom and 
administrative skills he has built the Prosecutor General's 
Office, which was created by the 1991 Constitution to establish 
system of litigation in our country. 
  Moreover, he has done much more than this. He has bravely 
confronted the threats of criminals who see in the prosecutor 
general a respresentative of Colombians who refused to allow 
themselves to be defeated and were not frightened by the 
onslaught of violence. The prosecutor works shoulder to 
shoulder with the president of the Republic and his staff to 
develop and consolidate policies, such as the policy of 
submission to justice, which has allowed a tangible reduction of 
the terrorist phenomena associated with drug trafficking. More 
recently, the prosecutor has made progress in bringing to trial, 
sentencing, and jailing several criminals. 
  Of course, there have been times when we held different 
points of view--in short, different opinions concerning the way 
to handle particular cases. Because of the good relationship 
that exists between the president and the prosecutor, and 
because of the need, which is acknowledged by everyone, to work 
as a team, these differences have been eliminated for the good 
of the country. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Are the differences the public perceives between 
the Presidency and the Attorney General's Office concerning the 
surrender process for the Cali Cartel real or imagined? 
  [Gaviria] They are normal within the sphere of 
responsibility of each of the institutions. The Attorney 
General's Office, on one hand, strictly fulfills the dictates of 
the Penal Code as it pertains to the rights of defendants. The 
government, on the other hand, also insists on implementing 
strict penalties and on granting the necessary guarantees of 
security to those people who surrender to justice. 
  I believe I share the prosecutor's views concerning the drug 
lords' eventual surrender to justice. Moreover, if one member 
of the drug trafficking hierarchy wants to adhere to this 
policy, he must be sent to a top security jail. Also, if he 
wants to obtain from the government the implicit benefits of the 
submission policy, he must cooperate with the authorities and 
confess. 
  [EL TIEMPO] The way these drug traffickers are being held in 
custody seems to be one of the reasons for disagreement. To 
what extent is the government's severity due to what could be 
described as "La Catedral Syndrome" [reference to Envigado 
maximum security prison in Medellin, also known as La Catedral, 
considered to be one of the most secure prisons in Latin 
America]? 
  [Gaviria] The government has learned from past experiences, 
good and bad. In turn, the government must make sure that 
members of society who surrender to the authorities do not mock 
the administration of justice. The only way to control eventual 
abuses is to keep the inmates in high security prisons, 
protecting their rights and giving them all proper guarantees, 
but also having them do their duties as inmates. 
  [EL TIEMPO] The U.S. Government reportedly has made 
statements and applied pressure regarding the Cali Cartel. It 
has also been said that a certain indulgence of yours toward 
Washington is linked to your campaign for the post of OAS 
secretary general. What have you to say about this? 
  [Gaviria] The United States is not the only one that wants 
us 
to work with the same zeal with which we defeated the now 
virtually extinct Medellin Cartel. Colombian society is also 
committed to this effort, with or without the international 
community's requests. Colombia must continue to firmly combat 
drug trafficking. Colombia must wage a life-or-death struggle 
against drug trafficking with tools such as surrender. I am 
firmly determined to maintain this policy. I have stood firmly 
against drug trafficking throughout my public life, when I was a 
congressman, during my campaign for president, when I took up 
Luis Carlos Galan's banner, and as president of the Republic. 
The suggestion that the president of the Republic's view of 
this problem is influenced by Cesar Gaviria's eventually running 
as candidate for the post of OAS secretary general is evil and 
ill-intentioned. The country is familiar with my position 
regarding drug trafficking. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Behind the probable surrender of the topmost 
leaders of the Cali Cartel and other drug trafficking 
organizations lies the offer of those who control a large part 
of the drug supply to the United States to dismantle the 
business. Apart from putting a few drug traffickers behind bars, 
is it not important for the government to dismantle a business, 
whose profits can run in the millions, and the country's most 
complex criminal organization? 
  [Gaviria] It is the duty of this government, the Prosecutor 
General's Office, and the Attorney General's Office to find a 
good judicial solution to break impunity and to have the leaders 
of criminal organizations cooperate with justice, go to prison, 
and serve sentences that serve as deterrents. If, in addition, 
their illegal activities are dismantled, I am sure the Attorney 
General's Office can negotiate sentences in accordance with the 
Penal Procedure Code. 
  In due time, the Prosecutor General's Office itself will be 
able to assess the cooperation of those who submit themselves to 
justice. This policy must be accompanied by the combined actions 
of the intelligence services, the public forces, the Prosecutor 
General's Office, and the Attorney General's Office against 
criminal organizations--actions that will make it possible to 
dismantle their illegal activities and build up legally sound 
cases. 
  I want to go further, however. It must be crystal clear to 
the country that it is impossible to coexist with the mafias, 
either those that perpetrate terrorist actions or those that 
hide beneath a peaceful appearance. Every Colombian must be 
watchful to prevent a climate of relative complacency toward 
drug trafficking from leading us to painful situations like the 
ones we experienced in the past. I am sure this view is shared 
by the Prosecutor General and the Attorney General. Our shared 
objective is to rid Colombia of the criminal drug trafficking 
organizations. 
  [EL TIEMPO] In Thursday's "Counterescape" column, and in 
relation to the attempt on the finance minister's life and 
renewed guerrilla activity, journalist Enrique Santos Calderon 
questioned the military intelligence services' efficiency and 
the Armed Forces' capability to counter these attacks. What do 
you have to say about this? 
  [Gaviria] The Armed Forces have substantially improved their 
ability to deal with organized crime. In fact, we can say 
Colombian society and the Armed Forces are on the offensive and 
have been defeating subversion and violence. 
  A great effort has been made to improve the operational 
facilities of the Army and the police. Their numbers have been 
increased, and their members have become more professional and 
been given better equipment. In addition, the resources at the 
disposal of the state's security and intelligence services have 
increased in number and been reinforced. The results have been 
overwhelming. The guerrillas' military actions have decreased in 
number, their power to undermine the national wealth has 
decreased, and the number of kidnappings have decreased, among 
other significant variations in the guerrillas' behavior. 
  The dismantling of the Escobar cartel and the elimination of 
its leader, the world's most notorious criminal and drug 
trafficker, demonstrate the Colombian Armed Forces' ability to 
deal with organized crime. 
  As a result of the public force's permanent activities and 
the results obtained in the struggle against subversion, 
subversive organizations have been perpetrating terrorist 
actions to cast a false image of their armed power. In 
addition, in view of their complete political isolation, in this 
pre-electoral time they can do nothing other than perpetrate 
terrorist actions to make themselves known as an active 
organization. Nevertheless, and despite the serious events of 
this week, the guerrillas are clearly losing their emphasis on 
politics, and their actions are becoming more and more like 
those of a mafia or organized crime. 
  The attempt on the finance minister's life and the use of 
terrorism indicate the guerrillas' military weakness. We 
coincide with columnist Santos Calderon in that, to deal with 
these people in this new way, it is mandatory to keep 
reinforcing the intelligence services' work and, of course, to 
seek greater support for the authorities among the people. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Mr. President, when will the candidacy for the 
OAS secretary general be decided? 
  [Gaviria] Colombia's eventual candidacy for the OAS 
secretary 
general must be explained as a consequence of the reality of our 
international relations and our incorporation into the world 
community of nations, not as an expression of a president's 
personal aspiration. 
  As for your question, we are considering the subject, either 
through consultations among presidents or the foreign ministers' 
contacts, and the country knows this. We will make a decision 
when the times comes. Such a decision will respond to the 
interests of Colombia and all of America. 

