BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS corrrespondent Lyudmila Perkina] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 6 Apr -- Crimean President Yuryy Meshkov has 
described recent events on the Crimean peninsula as a flagrant 
political provocation by the Ukrainian authorities and an 
attempt to carry out a coup. 
  In an exclusive interview to an ITAR-TASS correspondent, he 
said this evening that "the Ukrainian authorities intend to 
carry out a partial removal of the president of the Crimea, to 
restrict his powers, and reduce them to the level of a local 
administrative officer, thus abolishing the results of the 
Crimean presidential elections." 
  According to the Crimean president, this was done 
deliberately in his absence during a business trip to Cyprus, 
where Yuryy Meshkov had been dealing with matters of an economic 
nature. 
  [Moscow ITAR-TASS in English at 1715 GMT on 6 April carries 
a 
similar report, which adds the following at this point: "On 
Tuesday a large group of Ukrainian top military officials 
arrived in the Crimea, bringing in more than 500 special task 
force troops. The simultaneous arrival of ukrainian supreme 
military, security and interior officials accompanied by 
deploying additional special task forces in the Crimea has 
aggravated the situation in the peninsula. Some 30 servicemen of 
special units of the Ukrainian National guard and the Ukrainian 
interior Ministry arrived in Sevastopol on board the plane of 
the deputy head of the Ukrainian Armed forces General Staff. 
Another 500 special unit servicemen had been settled at a navy 
school in Sevastopol. The Black Sea Fleet Command announced it 
was ready to put the fleet on alert should a conflict break 
out."] 
  Yuryy Meshkov expressed gratitude to Russia for the fact 
that 
it had ensured the flight of his aircraft from Cyprus to the 
Crimea. Yuryy Meshkov believes that the flight from Nicosia to 
Simferopol was allowed only with the authority of the Ukrainian 
president and the Foreign Ministry. Such decisions, he noted, 
are made solely at the very highest level. As is known, the 
authorities in Turkey, through whose territory the presidential 
airliner had to fly, closed their airspace without giving any 
reason. 
  The Crimean president is convinced that "all of the efforts 
of the Ukrainian administration are designed to provoke general 
indignation, to wreck the second round of elections to the 
Crimean Supreme Soviet, scheduled for 10 April, and to prevent 
the victory of the "Russia" bloc, which includes the president, 
and for whom 80 percent of the people of the peninsula cast 
their vote." In his opinion, Kiev can see that the process of 
creating statehood in the Crimea is being completed, but it does 
not wish to build relations on new economic principles. 
  In the situation which has been created, Yuryy Meshkov 
stressed, it is also calculated that the Crimean president would 
take the events "badly" and adopt tough measures. "However, I 
am not going to do that. We will be tough, but within the 
framework of the constitution," Yuryy Meshkov stated. 
  To a question what his reaction was to Leonid Kravchuk's 
decree appointing the Ukrainian president's representative in 
Crimea, Yuryy Meshkov said: "The people are indignant. It could 
ignite the situation in Crimea, and it is a dangerous situation 
with unpredictable consequences. This representative is a 
foreign body. We will not have contacts with him." 
  The Crimean president sees his main task as preventing a 
possible explosion, and he intends to do everything he can to 
ensure this. "The situation is under control, we have the trust 
of the people and I will rely on it," Yuryy Meshkov said. 

