BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 9 (CNS) -- China is now speeding up 
exploitation of applied satellite technology and applied 
technology for satellites in a bid to meet the needs of the 
economy, science and technology, culture and national defence. 
  The new generation of applied satellite technology under 
development at present includes communications satellites of 
great capacity and long life span, various kinds of 
meteorological satellites, satellites for navigation, satellites 
for reduction of disasters and multi-purpose satellites for 
earth resources. Of these satellites the "Dongfanghong No. 3" 
communications satellite and the "Fengyun No. 2" weather 
satellite will go into operation, marking the reaching of an 
internationally advanced level by China in the use of applied 
satellites. The "Dongfanghong No. 3" satellite is equipped with 
24 transmitters and has a life span of eight years able to suit 
the needs of satellite communications up to the year 2000 or 
even longer. The "Fengyun No. 2" is a remote-sensing weather 
satellite synchronized with the earth's orbit, the first of its 
kind ever developed in China. The meteorological satellite will 
play an important role in the development of meteorological 
science and technology both in China and elsewhere in the 
international community. 
  China, meanwhile, is improving and modifying the "Long 
March" 
carrier rocket and a number of advanced carrier rockets of 
greater loading capacity have been successfully developed, 
meeting needs at home and abroad. The "Long March No. 3B" 
synchronous carrier rocket has a loading capacity of 4.8 tonnes 
and 12 tonnes when in low altitude orbit. Other models of the 
"Long March" carrier rocket have also seen their carrying 
capability improved to various extents. A communications system 
with the application of satellites which can cover all areas 
across the country has been set up. China has also established 
a variety of ground systems with the use of satellites including 
a satellite system for quick location fixing and a satellite 
digital information system. All these kinds of satellite can be 
used in such sectors as communications, broadcasting, education, 
weather, resource prospecting, ocean exploitation, surveying, 
navigation, traffic dispatch, rescue at sea and environmental 
monitoring. 

