Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Knowledge Gathered in the United </F>
States Not Feasible for Mozambique"] 
  [Text] The military delegation of government and Renamo 
[Mozambique National Resistance] representatives recently 
returned from the United States, feels that most of the 
knowledge gathered in that country is not feasible for 
Mozambique given the different levels of development in the two 
countries. 
  The delegation included Lieutenant Colonel Alfredo Maria and 
Frigate Captain Sebastiao Sarmento for the government, and 
Lieutenant Colonel Buta Jose and Colonel Fernando Canivete for 
Renamo. Ministry of Finance inspector Henrique Gamito was also 
part of the delegation. 
  The delegation spent 27 days in the United States, having 
had 
a number of meetings with government departments, dealing mainly 
with U.S. public opinion and the country's strategies for the 
process of pacification of Mozambique, U.S. experience in 
demobilization and socioeconomic reintegration of demobilized 
personnel, experiences of that country in the solution of 
conflicts and disputes of a social and political nature during 
the process of development of democracy, and the National Guard. 
  Speaking briefly to NOTICIAS and AIM [MOZAMBIQUE INFORMATION 
AGENCY] journalists yesterday, the members of the delegation 
said their trip to the United States was designed to find out 
about the role of the military in democracy. 
  A member of the delegation said: "We got acquainted with 
that role during our visits to various U.S. states (Washington, 
Los Angeles, and others). [sentence as published] In our 
discussions we dealt with various issues relating to peace, 
demobilization, and democracy, notably during the tour of the 
Pentagon (U.S. Defense Department)." 
  Asked about the manner in which they thought of implementing 
the knowledge they acquired in the United States regarding the 
Mozambique pacification process, they said not all of it is 
feasible for our country given the major differences in levels 
of development. 
  According to them, the United States plans to demobilize 
about 700,000 men by 1995, while assuring all the resources for 
their reintegration into socioeconomic life. Mozambique also 
intends to demobilize a greater number, but it lacks the 
resources (jobs, money, and other means). [sentence as 
published] 
  A member of the delegation pointed out that for a country 
like ours, that knowledge is only feasible when it comes to 
organization and training of personnel. 
  The trip of the Mozambican military delegation to the United 
States was financed by the U.S. Embassy in Maputo. 

