Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Luo Maocheng (5012 5399 1004): "Sichuan </F>
Province Promotes All-Position Opening to the Outside World"] 
  [Text] Chengdu (RENMIN RIBAO) -- Sichuan, a province 
located in inland China, in recent years has stepped up the 
process of opening up to the outside world as an important 
measure to speed up economic development. The province has made 
many foreign friends, expanded international cooperation, and 
achieved a great success. 
  Cities in Sichuan Province have so far established friendly 
ties with 33 cities of 14 countries; meanwhile, the province has 
established economic and trade relations and cooperation with 
more than 120 countries and areas. In order to encourage 
foreign investors to expand their investments, Sichuan Province 
last year organized investment and trade talks in Hong Kong, 
Thailand, Macao, and the ROK, and sponsored Sichuan Festivals in 
Moscow and Sofia, all of which were successful. The province 
also participated and played an active part in the Shenzhen 
Investment Symposium. Despite the drastic changes in both the 
domestic and overseas markets, Sichuan Province persistently 
promoted export trade with a view to earning more foreign 
exchange income. Last year, Sichuan Province's gross 
import-export volume totaled $2,916 million, an increase of 32.6 
percent over the previous year. Of this volume, the export 
value totaled $1.65 billion, an increase of 11 percent. A total 
of 1,910 new foreign-funded enterprises were established, and a 
number of agreements on foreign-financed investment projects 
were signed, involving a total value of $2.4 billion. The 
province signed project construction contracts and labor service 
contracts with foreign parties, involving a total value of $600 
million, an increase of 17.6 percent. The province's border 
trade volume totaled $750 million. Foreign exchange earnings 
derived from tourism totaled $80.4 million, an increase of 16.2 
percent. Province-wide economic and technological cooperation 
has also been further expanded. 
  This year, the Sichuan provincial party committee and 
government are to take up the undertaking of opening up to the 
outside world as a task of top priority, further do away with 
ossified thinking, enhance the sense of opening up, improve the 
environment for investment both in terms of software and 
hardware, simplify operational procedures, and improve service 
quality. The province will reorganize state-owned foreign trade 
enterprises to meet the requirements of the modern enterprise 
system, thus increase export volume and earn more foreign 
exchange. In this connection, the province has drawn up a plan 
and selected 10 large export enterprise groups to undertake 
pilot projects with the aim of establishing international 
consortia with legal entity status. At the same time, 
enterprises with good potential will be encouraged to increase 
exports with a view to earning more foreign exchange, so that 
the province's total export volume will rise to $2 billion this 
year. 
  Sichuan Province will strive to attract more investors, 
explore more investment sources, and make use of various other 
channels, in an effort to introduce 2,000 new foreign-funded 
enterprises into the province. At the same time, the province 
has decided to select a number of strong, key industrial 
branches and some large- and medium-sized enterprises or 
workshops to run a number of technology-intensive 
technology-import projects with high added value, in the forms 
of joint ventures, cooperation operation, lease, and technology 
assignment, so as to establish a group of high-standard and 
large-scale foreign-funded enterprises. The target of this 
operation is to import $1 billion or even $1.5 billion worth of 
foreign capital. 

