BFN 

  [Text] Of all people, Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiroshi 
Kumagai, who is known to be the closest aide to Ichiro Ozawa, 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] secretary general, has recently 
and repeatedly been noted making "sour remarks" about Ozawa. 
Kumagai has said: "He has great strategies, but no tactics; he 
tends to fail to explain matters fully; and he often makes big 
mistakes." Such remarks are expected to arouse speculation 
regarding the chief cabinet secretary's true intentions. 
However, the Prime Minister's Office, which has been bothered 
by critics who attack the current administration for its "dual 
power structure" and its "hawkish nature," apparently hopes to 
ward off such attacks. 
  Regarding the "dual power structure," the fact that Kumagai 
fills the post of chief cabinet secretary as head of the Prime 
Minister's Office in itself has been a target of the 
administration's critics. They feel "this proves that Ozawa is 
in control" (as stated by a senior official of the Liberal 
Democratic Party [LDP]). 
  Therefore, Kumagai has frequently tried to emphasize that he 
is not in complete agreement with Ozawa. In an appearance on a 
commercial television program on 13 May, Kumagai even said, 
"There have been times when I did not speak with him for many 
months." In this way, he has tried hard to give the impression 
that he is not really that close to Ozawa. 
  The "hawkish nature" of the administration has been 
attributed to Ozawa's public image, because he believes that 
"sending Self-Defense Forces [SDF] personnel to participate in 
UN forces is constitutional." In this regard, Kumagai explains: 
"Mr. Ozawa is only saying that the SDF could participate in UN 
forces, which actually have not yet been organized. It is 
merely an idea. Mr. Ozawa has said that, under the current 
Constitution, Japan cannot exercise the right of collective 
security." Moreover, Kumagai has stressed that the current 
administration does not have to listen to Ozawa on the issue of 
an international contribution. In this way, he has tried to 
strengthen the administration's soft-line policy. 
  Regarding Kumagai's "declaration of independence from 
Ozawa," 
an LDP official who is well aware of the relations between Ozawa 
and Kumagai said: "The fact that Mr. Kumagai can make such sour 
remarks about Mr. Ozawa proves that he is very close to Ozawa. 
Continuing to make remarks which refer to Ozawa conversely 
proves that Ozawa is in control." Thus, it seems uncertain 
whether Kumagai's strategy will bring about favorable results. 

