Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, February 15 (XINHUA) -- The World Bank (WB) 
extended 2.955 billion U.S. dollars in promised loans to China 
in 1993 for the country's 15 national projects, the Chinese 
Ministry of Finance disclosed here today. 
  This increased the world's largest inter-governmental 
financial organization's loans to China to 16.956 billion U.S. 
dollars for 131 national projects since the country re-entered 
the bank in 1985. 
  The funds have been directed into the basic industries of 
agriculture, transportation, energy and environmental 
protection, according to the Finance Ministry. 
  The World Bank's 490 million dollar loan to build China's 
food circulation network in 1993 was one of the largest lending 
projects in its 48-year history. 
  "The year 1993 witnessed the continued steady progress of 
cooperation between China and the World Bank," a spokesman for 
the Finance Ministry said. 
  He said China will still need funds, especially low-interest 
loans, from the World Bank "for a relatively long period of 
time," promising that China will make full use of the funds to 
reap the best results. 
  A national inspection of China's projects jointly conducted 
by the two sides early last year showed that China remained one 
of the best of the bank's 176 member countries in carrying out 
project plans. 
  Such credit has laid the groundwork for further large-scale 
loans from the World Bank to China according to the bank's 
lending policy based on project fulfillment, said the ministry 
spokesman. 
  China, even as a low-income developing country which 
receives 
international aid, has been contributing to global development 
through sharing valuable experiences with other countries in 
using World Bank funds, said the ministry spokesman. 
  A "China migration report," finished by both sides in June 
1993, is "of great importance" for the World Bank to compile a 
comprehensive guidebook for migration, the World Bank was quoted 
as saying. 
  China has been one of the most successful countries in 
handling migration for project sites, the ministry said. 
  Another cooperative project between the world's largest 
financial organization and the largest developing economy 
includes a joint investigation of and research on China's 
economy. 
  Eight research projects completed in 1993 cover the 
reduction 
of industrial energy consumption, China's trade in the '90s, the 
fiscal ties between central and local governments and other 
topics. 
  Such research results may be consulted both regarding 
policies for China's reform and opening-up as well as for policy 
background in deciding the scale and orientation of future 
loans, said China's Finance Ministry. 
  The cooperation was also heightened by high level visits by 
the World Bank, said the ministry spokesman. WB President Lewis 
Preston's visit to China last May and his positive remarks about 
China should also be conducive to closer cooperation between the 
two sides, he said. 

