Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 14 (XINHUA) -- A top Chinese leader 
poured scorn on empty talk and called for efforts to seek real 
effects through measures that really work. 
  "In the past we sometimes didn't do things correctly, not 
because our direction was wrong, but because we didn't have 
measures that really worked," said Li Ruihuan, chairman of the 
National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC). 
  "Bragging, empty talk, erroneous talk having a semblance of 
correctness, and talk that is not mistaken but useless are all 
the 'evil habits of the cultural revolution' and must be done 
away with resolutely," he said at a group discussion by Tianjin 
deputies to the National People's Congress now in session in 
Beijing. Li once worked in Tianjin as mayor. 
  The central authorities have worked out major policies and 
principles, and the key issue now is to study measures that 
really work and pay attention to real effects in their 
implementation, said Li, who is also one of the top seven 
leaders of the Chinese Communist Party. 
  "Studying measures that really work means doing away with 
tricks -- measures that are hollow, flowery, sham or heretical; 
it means coming up with methods which really solve problems; 
paying attention to real effects means assessment of work on the 
basis of real results instead of lip-service," he said. 
  Li said, good measures come from a correct understanding of 
facts and a scientific summary of people's experience. 
Therefore, leaders at all levels must go to grassroots units, 
make thorough investigations, understand people's feelings, 
respect people's initiatives, pool people's wisdom, combine 
policies and principles with local conditions, and put forward 
concrete measures and effective methods. 
  "The desire to achieve real effects should become the point 
of departure, goal and criterion of our work," he said. 
  "Only by concentrating our time and energy on the study of 
problem-solving measures and the achievement of results can we 
overcome difficulties and make progress," he said. 

