BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Andrey Krasnoshchekov] </F>
  [Text] Strasbourg April 13 TASS -- "The first time I came 
to Strasbourg, I said that Russia does not need the Council of 
Europe [CE], and the latter does not need us. But now I have 
familiarised myself with the work of this organisation's 
commissions and committees and feel the vital need for us to 
join the Council of Europe," Deputy Speaker of the Russian 
Parliament Upper Chamber Ramazan Abdulatipov who participates in 
a regular session of the Council of Europe, said in an interview 
with ITAR-TASS here on Wednesday. 
  "On entering the council, we shall get a chance to borrow 
legislative experience of European countries and to check our 
legislation at the same time," he stressed. 
  "Europe has democracy," Abdulatipov continued, "but has no 
(absolute) freedom, while we have (absolute) freedom and no 
democracy. Our `democracy' often makes a flabbergasting 
impression on the West." 
  On entering the Council of Europe, Abdulatipov explained, 
Russian society will limit itself in freedom, the freedom to 
offend and destroy others, to commit lawlessness and suffer from 
bureaucratic omnipotence. Democracy should be strictly governed 
by appropriate laws mandatory for all, he stressed. 
  "The borders of freedom for every man in the West are 
clearly 
delimited, as are borders of private property", Abdulatipov 
noted. But people in the West clearly see not only limits of 
freedom and property but also limits of responsibility. 
  The understanding of this principle is especially important 
for the Russian society, deputy speaker underlined. 
  According to Abdulatipov, the main difference between Europe 
and Russia is that human rights legislation in Western countries 
is built on "the atomistic theory of personality" when the need 
for self-affirmation of an individual is stressed. 
  On the other hand, Russia has developed community traditions 
and it is difficult and not always necessary to wrest people 
from them. 
  Russian legislation should take into account national 
traditions and peculiar features, lacking in the West, said 
Abdulatipov. Therefore, when the Council of Europe envoys come 
to Russia to draw the final conclusions on the possibility of 
admitting it to this organisation, they will have to take into 
account that some inconsistencies with Western legislative 
standards may meet Russian realities of life to a great extent. 

