Viewed 

<F P=102>   94AS0245C New Delhi JANSATTA in Hindi 29 Mar 94 pp 1, 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0245C </F>
<F P=104>  New Delhi JANSATTA </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chitra Subrahmanyam: "Ultimately, What Is Behind </F>
American and European Sympathy for Laborers?"; all quotation 
marks as published]] 
  [Text] Geneva, 28 March. Full preparations have been made 
to declare India's cheap labor to be an unfair business 
practice. India has been in a position to make profits when 
competing with the Western nations because of the cheap labor 
here. Formal signing of the GATT will take place in Morocco on 
15 April. However, right before this, the United States and 
allies have expanded the sphere of the world trade agreement and 
have started a major campaign to include labor rates, the 
environment, human rights and other such issues in it. In the 
end, India's position will be greatly weakened when these issues 
are included in this agreement. 
  The Parliament is starting a special two day session on 
Tuesday to approve GATT. Meanwhile, the United States and the 
European group, especially France, have started to say that 
these new issues are related to trade. They maintain that strict 
rules are necessary to make sure that developing countries "do 
not take unnecessary advantage." Meanwhile, the developing 
nations say that the United States, by forcing issues that are 
not related to trade into this agreement, is endangering 
multi-national trade. 
  The diplomats say that this powerful campaign to expand 
GATT's sphere and establish strict trade policies is just an 
effort to hide the protectionalism practices of the richer 
nations. The United States and France are expressing rare 
agreement and saying that the time has come to give priority to 
the rights of laborers. Both countries are using cheap labor as 
an excuse to attack the developing countries and the 
export-based economies. The United States wants to add a 
paragraph to have the World Trade Organization (WTO) show its 
commitment to the "accepted level of labor." The WTO will 
replace GATT after the signing in Morocco. 
  This issue will be discussed in Brussels on Wednesday. Leon 
Briton, European Union's trade representative, will present a 
report that day requesting the WTO to pay attention to right to 
form unions, child and prison labor, and other social issues. 
The French authorities claim that this issue was discussed under 
employment during the G-7 nations meeting summit conference. 
This issue will top the agenda that Mickey Cantor, the U.S. 
trade negotiator, and Gerald Languet, the French negotiator, 
will discuss in Marrakech. Both these officials are going to 
demand that the WTO should have the right to investigate this 
problem soon. Peter Southerland, the executive director of GATT, 
told the participants in Geneva that he objects involving in 
trade the issues that the Western nations call "dumping the 
social garbage." However, a U.S. official said last week that 
President Clinton is committed to make the labor rights part of 
the WTO and it will be the duty of the U.S. trade representative 
to make sure that this goal is achieved. The official did admit 
that not all agree on this issue, however, he expressed the hope 
that consensus will be reached by the middle of April. 
  Developing nations say that the United States adds whatever 
it wants to GATT. These countries want that issues related to 
labor be discussed in the International Labor Organization. 
However, the Western nations say that the International Labor 
Organization is an ineffective shop where all they do is have 
some discussions. Therefore, these issues should be taken care 
of in the WTO. After the appeals to establish standards for 
labor, the United States has threatened China for not protecting 
human rights and Indonesia for not protecting labor rights. 
India can be its next target. 
  The present turmoil is reminding the diplomats of the 
"Montreal Syndrome." In 1988, the midterm analysis of the 
Uruguay Round was done in Montreal, and the whole agenda on 
trade was changed according to the demands of the United States 
and European countries. At that time, the U.S. strategy was to 
reduce the agenda of the issues that were not agreed upon 
earlier or in Montreal. 
  These issues were Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), Trade-related Import Methods (TRIMS), and services. 
Strong pressures was put on developing nations there. Even worse 
was that they were given threats of unilateral action against 
them under the Super-301 and Special-301. 
  India was pressured using the intellectual property rights. 
The United States ignored the talks to be held in Geneva and 
raised this issue with India in 1989. The discussion was limited 
to the fact that GATT officials have access to Indian 
politicians and bureaucrats. After Montreal, as the result of 
the discussions in Geneva, solid rules and regulations about 
intellectual property rights were added. All this had nothing to 
do with GATT, and there was no provision in its original 
announcement about it. Meanwhile, the developing nations were 
left reviewing the new areas that were included under the 
pretext of their being "related to trade." 
  After India had bowed down under U.S. pressure, the Indian 
delegate said on 8 April 1989, "We have provided an opportunity 
for multi-party approach, therefore, the decision on the 
conclusion of these talks must be made by the ministers from the 
Uruguay round. We will be satisfied if no decision is made 
before that." The results of the April 1989 meeting were 
disastrous for India. Instead of getting any benefits, India 
kept trying to reduce its losses. 
  The United States is pulling the same trick again. It is 
trying to force a decision using the pretext of the labor issue. 
India is insisting again that no decision should be forced 
without full discussions. Both are using the same language, and 
India's representatives are the same. One can assume what the 
result will be. 

