Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Neil Darbyshire, crime correspondent: "Station </F>
Where Police Are Suspects--45 Officers Accused in Corruption 
Inquiry"] 
  [Text] One of the biggest police corruption inquiries since 
the 1970s has looked at allegations of malpractice against 45 
officers from a station in north-east London, it emerged 
yesterday. 
  More than 130 individual complaints against junior 
detectives 
and uniformed officers at Stoke Newington have been investigated 
in a three year inquiry, codenamed Operation Jackpot. 
  Allegations included planting drugs on suspects, assault, 
theft, conspiracy to pervert the course of justice and criminal 
damage. More than 50 allegations related to just five of the 45 
officers. 
  The Police Complaints Authority, who supervised the 
investigation, said a report had been sent to the Crown 
Prosecution Service. 
  It would be up to them to determine if officers would be 
prosecuted, after which Scotland Yard would decide on 
disciplinary charges. 
  Operation Jackpot, which began in April, 1991, was prompted 
by the claims of Pearl Cameron, a convicted drug dealer, who 
said she had evidence that certain Stoke Newington officers were 
dealing in drugs. 
  In the following months, dozens of people arrested for 
dealing drugs, including crack cocaine, came forward to claim 
they had drugs planted on them by detectives from the station. 
  By early 1992, three officers had been suspended and eight 
transferred. 
  One officer central to many allegations was Det-Con Roy 
Lewandowski, who was eventually charged with stealing valuables 
from the home of a man who died after a burglary at his home. 
  He was also accused of planting evidence from the burglary 
scene on two men, who were later convicted. Lewandowski was 
jailed for 18 months in November, 1992, and the two men 
convicted on his evidence were freed last February. 
  Since then another nine people, almost all imprisoned for 
drug offences on evidence by Lewandowski and some of his 
colleagues, have had their convictions quashed. 
  After the most recent appeal in December, Lord Taylor, Lord 
Chief Justice, described police evidence as "tainted evidence 
from a source which ought to be reliable and in which the courts 
should have confidence." 
  In all, Jackpot investigated 22 separate cases. Two others 
were dropped, one because the complainant decided to take out a 
civil action and the other because allegations were withdrawn. 
One officer featured in eight cases, another in seven and three 
in six, while two officers had 11 specific allegations against 
them. 
  During the investigation, the inquiry team took 376 
statements and examined transcripts of police interviews, 
custody records and court proceedings. 
  The complaints authority said a difficulty facing the 
inquiry 
was the "limited co-operation" given by complainants. 
  The first complaint was in September, 1991, and the last in 
August last year, which is why the inquiry was so protracted. 
Three complaints were made two years after incidents to which 
they related. 
  "Whatever the reason for these delays, they did not assist 
the investigation," said an authority spokesman. 
  An organisation calling itself the Hackney Community Defence 
Association has given advice and support to many complainants 
and has built up its own dossier against officers at Stoke 
Newington and Hackney. 
  The association had dealt with 381 complaints against 
officers from the two stations since January, 1989, and was 
supporting 83 civil actions against Metropolitan Police 
Commissioner Paul Condon. 
  Sir John Smith, deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan 
Police, said the Jackpot allegations were serious and involved a 
"significant number of police officers"--but only a tiny 
minority in the force. 
  In Stoke Newington, there were "over 300 police officers 
doing a difficult and sometimes dangerous job in that difficult 
policing environment. The majority are untouched by the 
allegations." 
  Sir John said Stoke Newington police had recorded some 
remarkable successes in the battle against local drug dealing. 

