BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed editorial: "Lifting the Blockade on Jordan </F>
Before Resuming the Negotiations"] 
  [Text] The fast response shown by France and Japan to the 
Jordanian demand that the blockade imposed on Jordan be 
addressed reflects the international community's respect and 
appreciation for Jordan, especially since the concerned UN 
committee, which is discussing how to address this blockade, has 
acknowledged the great damage inflicted on the Jordanian economy 
and trade. This committee also acknowledged Jordan's commitment 
to the resolutions of international legitimacy. 
  His Majesty King Husayn raised this issue with courage and 
convincing objectivity, and demanded that it be addressed 
quickly. Reactions have clearly shown that the U.S. 
Administration has been most instrumental in maintaining the 
blockade on Jordan and even in a more painful and harmful manner. 
  King Husayn pointed out that Jordan's principled position on 
the peace process and its insistence on resolving the issues of 
the occupied territories, water, the refugees and the displaced, 
and other issues before signing any agreement with Israel had 
annoyed the U.S. Administration, so it practiced various 
pressures and harassments against Jordan in order to force it to 
yield to its will and sign with Israel the agreement which this 
administration wants. 
  King Husayn, however, was well aware of this maneuver and 
announced that Jordan's continued participation in the peace 
process hinges on lifting the unfair U.S. siege on al-'Aqabah. 
Now that Washington has promised to address the situation and 
that U.S. Secretary of State Christopher intends to make a new 
regional tour in the next two weeks and visit Jordan to discuss 
the resumption of negotiations with Israel, the U.S. 
Administration should seriously take the Jordanian position into 
consideration. Jordan is sustaining grave losses as a result 
of this unfair siege on al-'Aqabah. It is inconceivable for 
Jordan to negotiate the achievement of peace in the region at a 
time when it is besieged and encircled without any convincing 
reasons or justifications. 
  It is important for the U.S. Administration to learn that 
Jordan insists on ending this injustice resulting from the U.S. 
blockade before talking with Christopher on resuming the 
negotiations and before talking about peace. 

