BFN 

  [Text] Ankara--According to the latest monthly Human Rights 
report prepared by the human rights association IHD, Turkey 
again had nothing to boast about in terms of its human rights' 
record. A total of 643 people were reported to have lost their 
lives as a result of clashes between the outlawed Kurdistan 
Workers' Party (PKK) militants and the government security 
forces. In a press conference to announce the May report, the 
chairman of the IHD, Akin Birdal, said: "Turkey is condemned to 
live with the malfunction of its legal system. The ignorance in 
Turkey of extra-judicial executions, tortures, crimes of 
conscience and the ban on a free press and publications presents 
a very thought-provoking picture that gets a lot of attention in 
Western countries." He went on to say that political parties 
now look favorably on constitutional change but added that all 
changes must comply with international law. 
  Birdal said that the attempt to democratize the Constitution 
of 1982 was a test of the Turkish Parliament's commitment to 
human rights, in particular as regards the 152 articles that 
currently restrict freedom of expression in the country. 
Stressing that all views have to be represented freely, he went 
on to say: 
  "Therefore Article 8 of the anti-terror law has to be lifted 
immediately and urgently. If all parties are encouraged to 
participate in the democratization process, then this article 
has to be eliminated." He pointed to the 98 journalists, 
writers and publishers presently in jail for the violation of 
the "crimes of conscience" article and explained the heavy fines 
they were forced to pay as follows: "Obviously the government 
wants to pay its domestic and foreign debts from the fines 
exacted from journalists and writers." 
  According to the IHD report, Turkey's human rights abuses 
for 
the month of May included: 
  Disappeared while in custody: 28; died as a result of 
torture 
while in custody or summarily executed: 31; unsolved murders: 
19; journalists, writers, publishers, union members, scientists, 
and deputies currently in jail: 98 (with total possible 
sentences of 348 years); banned publications: 50. Seven 
publications and democratic organizations were raided by the 
police. Villages and settlements evacuated and burned: 74. 
Claims of torture: 13. 
<H5>  A delegation of the IHD to North Iraq. </H5>
  On the initiative of the IHD, trips by various organizations 
to examine the situation of the Kurds in Northern Iraq are being 
planned. The purpose of the trip planned for June 13-16 is to 
investigate the people who have emigrated there from Turkey. 
The IHD chairman said: "Whatever the causes of the migration 
might be, the effects of such a displacement of population are 
well-known from its precedents." He said that health, 
education, food, and shelter were all problems for people forced 
to migrate, and all of them needed to be examined on the spot so 
that the necessary reports could be made. 
  Apart from the IHD delegation, members of many Turkish human 
rights organizations, judicial associations and political 
parties will take part in the proposed visit. 

