BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed WVDV: "French Prime Minister Balladur </F>
Questioning Van den Brande About Anchoring: Mitterrand Mainly 
Concerned About Future of European Union"] 
  [Excerpts] In a sun-drenched Paris yesterday, Flemish 
Minister-President Luc Van den Brande was welcomed by France's 
two political leaders: Prime Minister Edouard Balladur and 
President Francois Mitterrand. With Balladur, Van den Brande 
mainly talked about the Flemish anchoring, an issue which was 
brought up by the French prime minister himself. Mitterrand was 
more concerned about the future of the European Union (EU). 
[passage omitted] 
  As announced, the new Belgian reality was an important item 
on the agenda. "Balladur and Mitterrand took due note of the 
new federal Belgium, but clearly stated that it is not up to 
them to express their opinion on the subject," Van den Brande 
said later on during a meeting with Flemish journalists. "The 
federal Belgium is recognized by them," he added. 
  Van den Brande also discussed the matter of the Flemish 
anchoring with both French leaders. Balladur raised the matter 
spontaneously, the Flemish minister-president said. "I made 
things clear to him by giving an example. Would it be 
acceptable if France Telecom were taken over by British 
Telecom?" So was there any sympathy for the Flemish anchoring? 
"Balladur was very well informed about the issue. I also 
reminded him that the idea of anchoring is a French idea. The 
examples that I gave spoke volumes," Van den Brande said. 
  Mitterrand spontaneously expressed his concern about the 
future of the EU. He did so because of the problems which 
arose with regard to the voting procedures in the enlarged EU. 
"He is extremely worried that the enlargement might jeopardize 
the EU achievements," Van den Brande added. [passage omitted] 
  In addition, Van den Brande approached his counterparts 
about 
the possibilities of practical cooperation in projects 
throughout Central and East Europe as well as in the border 
regions. [passage omitted] 

