Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Misawa, Aomori Pref., Feb. 20 KYODO -- The leader 
of the Social Democratic Party balked Sunday [20 February] at a 
proposal to merge the seven ruling coalition parties into a new 
large party to beat the opposition Liberal Democratic Party in 
an upcoming general election. 
  "It is impossible (for the seven) to become a single party 
due to the differences in their perceptions of the nation and 
the Constitution," said Tomiichi Murayama, chairman of the 
biggest force in the governing coalition. 
  Murayama made the remarks at a news conference while 
addressing a move to unify the seven parties into a single 
party, being pushed by Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] co-leader 
Ichiro Ozawa and Komeito Secretary General Yuichi Ichikawa. 
  He was apparently referring to an intracoalition rift on 
such 
sensitive issues as a proposal to expand Japan's involvement in 
U.N. peacekeeping operations and perceptions of the 
constitutional status of Japan's Self-Defense Forces. 
  The SDP leader said the seven parties could field joint 
candidates in each of the newly created, 300 single-seat 
constituencies for elections for the House of Representatives 
without forming a single party. 
  "We should seek to field joint candidates under the outline 
of taking a joint stand against the LDP," Murayama said. 
  His comments followed a recent warning by Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa that a possible failure by the seven parties 
to field joint candidates would give the LDP an advantage in 
general elections by possibly splitting ballots among those 
voters critical of the LDP. 
  Murayama ruled out the possibility that his party would 
immediately merge with the Democratic Socialist Party and 
Sakigake (Harbinger) to form a new party. 
  "It was by mere coincidence that (the three parties) shared 
the same stand of (opposing) the proposed national welfare tax 
and a cabinet reshuffle," he said. 
  The three parties were reportedly infuriated earlier this 
month when Hosokawa and Ozawa sought to impose a 7-percent 
indirect tax without holding prior consultations with them. 

