Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "H.V.": "Considerable Increase in </F>
Cross-Border Crime"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- The Federal Government wants to make sure 
that in the European Union (EU) "borders will not be abolished 
for criminals while they continue to exist for criminal 
prosecution authorities." 
  This declaration of intent is one of the most important 
points of an action program worked out by FRG Interior Minister 
Manfred Kanther (Christian Democratic Union) for the period of 
the German EU Presidency during the second half of 1994. 
  According to Kanther, the primary goal for this term of 
office is the improvement of the EU's internal security. 
Kanther told WELT AM SONNTAG that, during its presidency, the 
German Government wants to push ahead with the expansion of 
Europol in The Hague and wants to make sure "that this European 
police force is fully operational by October 1994." 
  The minister gave figures: In 1992 alone almost 6.3 million 
crimes were registered in Germany. In 130,000 cases vehicles 
were stolen. The damage: about 1.3 billion German marks. The 
Federal Government will work with particular emphasis toward an 
amendment to the valid EC law so that cars will be equipped with 
state-of-the-art security measures all over Europe. 
  According to Kanther, by 1995 at the latest, it is to be 
examined "whether asylum policy is to be transferred to the 
authority of the European Union." It is to be welcomed that in 
a report the EU Commission has already "come to a cautious vote 
in favor of making asylum policy a Community matter." Europe 
needs a common asylum policy. 
  The minister pointed out that still more than 70 percent of 
all asylum-seekers moving toward Europe come to Germany: "Since 
the pressure of migration on Europe is a common problem of the 
European states, it must be solved together in the future." 
This is true above all in a Europe of open borders, where 
asylum-seekers or foreigners, who have entered a country 
illegally, can move from one EU state to another practically 
without being checked. Freedom of travel must "not be confused 
with freedom of residence or freedom of immigration." 
  Regarding the acceptance of civil-war refugees, the Federal 
Government will press for a "fair burden-sharing" within the 
European Union. Kanther noted that more than 370,000 persons 
have been accepted in Germany. Thus, the FRG is "at the 
forefront internationally." Tomorrow, Kanther will meet Polish 
Interior Minister Andrzej Milczanowski in Warsaw for talks about 
closer cooperation in combating cross-border crime. Focal 
issues are drug trafficking and the rising number of vehicle 
thefts by the Polish car mafia. Furthermore, additional 
measures are to be agreed on to put an end to the activities of 
those gangs that smuggle asylum-seekers across the border to 
Germany for money. In Warsaw, Kanther will also be received by 
President Lech Walesa and Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak. 

