BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Leticia Rodriguez Lopez] </F>
  [Text] The Mexican Government rejects the proliferation of 
bilateral trade agreements because they would cause "excessive 
confusion" with merchandise-origin rules and risk trade 
triangularization, which in the end would threaten free trade in 
Latin America. 
  Jaime Serra Puche, head of the Commerce and Industrial 
Development Secretariat [Secofi], guaranteed before 
representatives of 27 Latin American and Caribbean countries, as 
well as representatives of international organizations, that the 
North American Free Trade Agreement [NAFTA] "has not weakened 
and has instead strengthened our ties with other countries and 
areas." 
  When inaugurating yesterday the 20th Latin American Council 
meeting of SELA [Latin American Economic System] at the 
ministerial level, Serra Puche confirmed Mexico's commitment to 
Latin America and its position that the trilateral trade treaty 
with North America is open for regional countries to join. 
  The Secofi secretary said in an interview that the new World 
Trade Organization (OMC), which will replace GATT [General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade], should draft clear and open 
rules, as well as demand that they be complied with to avoid 
unfair practices and trade wars. 
  He stressed that, with the proliferation of bilateral 
agreements in Latin America, there would be different 
merchandise-origin rules, which would induce the 
triangularization of products and, in turn, hinder area free 
trade. 
  In this connection, he reiterated that Mexico's position is 
that, with the expansion of NAFTA, clear rules must be defined 
so that new members or a group of countries may join, "instead 
of having a proliferation of bilateral relations or regional 
agreements." Even though Mexico has established bilateral 
agreements, all are compatible with NAFTA, because they serve 
the same areas and have rules of origin that are very alike, 
which avoid any triangularization problems, he said. 
  Serra Puche explained that, excepting Chile, the agreements 
that have been negotiated in the area include goods, services, 
and investments. The same criteria has been set to determine 
the rules of origin, fight unfair trade practices, and 
standardize, regulate, and respect intellectual property, among 
other topics. 
  During SELA's inauguration activities, which end today at 
the 
Mexican Foreign Relations Secretariat, the Secofi secretary 
stressed that the liberalization of trade between countries with 
economic links, with stable rules, allows safe access to markets 
and long- term project planning. 
  Likewise he said that the liberalization of trade allows 
countries to use more efficient operating scales, take advantage 
of market niches, and access a broad range of technological 
options -- all of which favor productive flexibility. 
  In general, it offers clearer market signals, which ease 
efficient economic decisionmaking, and increases in the general 
level of competitiveness among the countries that participate in 
the free trade agreements. 
  After stating that, following two years of treaty operations 
between Mexico and Chile, trade has increased 86 percent, he 
recalled that on 13 June President Salinas will sign in Colombia 
a free trade agreement with the Group of Three (Mexico, 
Colombia, and Venezuela). Serra Puche also spoke of the 
solidarity efforts that Latin American countries must make to 
attend to the needs of the more-impoverished population and 
achieve healthy and sustained growth. 

