BFN 

<F P=106> [EC Document No. DOC/IP/94/413: "Commission Adopts Its 23th </F>
Annual Competition Report -- A Comprehensive Analysis of The 
Commission Activities"] 
  [Text] Acting on a proposal from Mr. Karel van Miert the 
Commission has published its 23d annual competition report. As 
in previous years the report covers all aspects of competition 
policy: 
  - mergers 
  - state aids (art 92-94) 
  - liberalisation of regulated sectors (e.g. telecoms, air 
transport) 
  - international aspects of competition policy 
  - cartels, and other agreements between companies that 
restrict competition (art 85) 
  - abuses of dominant positions (art 86) 
  This widely circulated 380 page long report gives not only 
an 
in-depth review of the activities of the Commission during 1993 
in the field of competition policy (including all significant 
cases treated) but also sets out the general principles 
underpinning competition policy. In addition it sets out 
priorities and objectives for the future. This report will be 
the object of an active exchange of views between the Commission 
on the one hand and the Parliament, the Council, and the 
Economic and Social Committee on the other hand. 
  In view of the growing importance of the liberalisation of 
regulated sectors and of increasing competition in the service 
sectors (e.g. banking, insurance, audiovisual) where previously 
competition policy was not deeply developed, this years report 
explains in depth the link between these sectors and competition 
policy. It also explains in depth the link between competition 
policy, the internal market, industrial restructuring and the 
unemployment crisis, the Maastricht Treaty and the international 
context. 
<H5>  Statistical Overview </H5>
  A statistical analysis of the individual cases handled by 
the 
207 A-grade staff shows a positive balance. As regards art 85/6, 
  - 832 cases were finished which means that the backlog of 
old 
cases has been eliminated and only those under active 
investigation remain. Of the 1231 cases under investigation, 60 
percent (749) are notifications, 25 percent complaints (335) and 
15 percent (147) are cases where the Commission started 
investigations on its own initiative. An interesting fact is 
the growing number of complaints, a trend expected to accelerate 
as the internal market develops into a reality. 
  In line with the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission 
continued to refer cases to national courts, when they were best 
placed to treat them. 
  - for mergers 58 cases were treated. The majority (50) did 
not raise any problems and were rapidly approved. Four cases 
did not constitute mergers in the sense of the merger regulation 
but were treated under art 85/6. The remaining four cases were 
subject to an in-depth second phase investigation. Although 
there were no final negative decisions, in three cases the 
Commission was forced to impose conditions on the deals in 
question in order to prevent the creation or strengthening of 
dominant positions of the parties involved. The application of 
the merger regulation thus continues to permit the restructuring 
of EC industry required by the internal market and growing 
international competition whilst at the same time preserving the 
advantages of competition. 
  - state aid is another area where we see both an increasing 
number of complaints as well as more case involving newly 
liberalized industries and the service sector. In 1993 435 
cases were decided of which 399 were to raise no objections 
after an initial examination. The remainder (36) warranted in 
depth scrutiny because of the problems they raised. Some of 
these are still under examination although there have already 
been 19 positive decisions and 7 negative decisions. In 
addition the Commission proposed to the Council 11 decisions for 
steel in the framework of the ECSC Treaty. 
<H5>  Internal Market -- Vigilance To Make it a Reality </H5>
  1993 was a significant year for the Community and 
competition 
policy in particular: The entry into force of the internal 
market. If this is to be a success and the forecast economic 
benefits released not only do we need the legal framework (now 
largely achieved) but companies must increasingly compete. They 
must not be discouraged from competing by unfair state aids, 
state maintained monopolies or agreements between companies to 
divide up markets along traditional grounds. The effective 
enforcement of competition policy becomes critical. As markets 
are opened up anti-competitive practices (be they state inspired 
or stem from private agreements between companies) have an 
increasingly negative impact -- thus the enhanced vigilance of 
the Commission. 
  Restructuring and Crisis -- Competition's Role 
  The internal market, along with increasing international 
competition and rapid technological change, is forcing European 
Industry to restructure. This restructuring is taking place 
during unacceptably high levels of unemployment. The 
Commission's response is given in the White Paper on Growth, 
Competitiveness, and Unemployment. Restructuring and 
cooperation must be facilitated but competitive structures, 
which in themselves encourage positive adjustment must be 
maintained. This year's report explains how competition policy 
will react to the political priorities of the White Paper and 
how it can help achieve the objectives the Community has set 
itself. 
<H5>  Maastricht -- New Objectives Interact With Competition </H5>
  1993 marked the entry into force of the Maastricht Union 
Treaty. In particular the principle of subsidiarity and the 
formal inclusion of industrial, cultural and environmental 
policy goals in this Treaty will have implications for the 
application of competition policy. 
  In the case of the environment the interaction with 
competition is a two way process in that not only will be 
environmental goals influence competition policy but the 
achievement of environmentally sustainable growth, with the 
structural changes this implies, needs an active competition 
policy. 
<H5>  International Context -- A Growth Area For Competition Policy </H5>
  1993 also marked two very significant events in the 
international field: The conclusion of the GATT Uruguay Round 
and the ratification of the European Economic Space (EES) with 
the EFTA members which both have a large and direct impact on 
competition policy. They both illustrate the wider principle: 
as markets globalize and government imposed barriers are 
eliminated, it becomes imperative to eliminate anti-competitive 
agreements between companies that can split up markets or create 
barriers to entry to new markets. The EES gives a common set of 
competition rules for EU and EFTA member states. The new GATT 
round may include competition provisions. In fact this is an 
area where the Commission is already active, with agreements 
with the US and East European countries already in force or 
under negotiation. The link between globalisation of trade, 
trade policy, reduction of trade barriers and competition policy 
are examined in this years report. 
<H5>  Steel and Telecoms -- Two Major Events in 1993 </H5>
  The steel and telecoms were two major dossiers treated in 
1993. Whilst they both raise totally different issues, they 
illustrate very well the context within which competition policy 
must be applied. 
  - steel: It was clear that major restructuring and capacity 
reduction must take place with account taken of the social 
dimension, especially labour run down in high unemployment 
areas. We Must also ensure equal treatment of public and private 
steel companies. Therefore any state aid given must be 
accompanied by an appropriate capacity reduction. Italy, Spain, 
and the five new Lander were the main areas involved with state 
aids. As regards companies the Commission asked them to reduce 
capacity themselves without anti-competitive cartels which it 
will not tolerate. Whilst several decisions were made during 
1993 the problem is still an ongoing one. 
  - telecoms: This industry employs over 1m and is growing 
rapidly. An efficient telecommunication network is vital for 
the conduct of modern business as well as becoming an 
increasingly indispensable to all households. Although some 
progress had already been made to liberalise terminal equipment 
and value added services, telecoms was characterised by national 
monopolies. After an indepth study and consultation, the 
Commission put its proposals to the Council who accepted the 
need for full voice liberalization by 1998. Although many 
flanking measures still need to be undertaken before full 
liberalisation can become a reality, the acceptation of the 
principle is a major step forward. The Commission will be 
particularly vigilant to ensure a balance between on the one 
hand competition and the efficiency it will bring and on the 
other the necessity of maintaining a universal service 
affordable for all domestic customers. 

