BFN 

  [Text] Paris, June 30 (AFP) -- Japan's economic slowdown 
seems about to bottom out, helped by the latest fiscal stimulus 
package, but recovery prospects could be weakened in the even of 
further upward pressure on the yen, the OECD said Thursday [30 
June]. 
  The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) said Japanese output should grow by 0.75 percent in 
calendar 1994 after stagnating in 1993 at 0.1 percent. 
  But activity should pick up steam from the second half to 
reach 2.7 percent in 1995, enough to reverse the rise in 
unemployment, it said in its semi-annual Economic Outlook. 
  Japan would also likely benefit from low consumer price 
inflation both in 1994 and 1995, with rates running below 1.0 
percent. 
  With the yen's sharp rise against the dollar cutting sharply 
into Japan's export market shares, the expected upturn later 
this year would be mainly driven by expanding private 
consumption, the report said. Residential investment would also 
remain strong. 
  Weakening exports and increased imports should cut Japan's 
current account surplus to about 120 billion dollars or 2.5 
percent of GDP by 1995, roughly matching the 1992 level in 
dollar terms, from a peak of 131 bn last year, OECD projections 
showed. 
  This year's strong public investment, largely a result of 
last February's stimulatory package, was likely to fall off in 
1995, the OECD said. 
  But it should be relayed by a pickup in corporate investment 
fuelled by growing profits and expectations of a rise in 
capacity utilization. 
  The report said the business sector continues adjusting 
after 
the excesses of the "bubble economy period," with private 
investment now 15 percent below the 1991 peak level. But 
business sentiment still "improved considerably" early this year. 
  In the OECD's view, continued easy money market conditions 
should help support further progress in banks' balance sheet 
adjustment. 
  This, it said, would "contribute to generating the faster 
growth of money and credit needed for a long-lasting economic 
recovery." 
  Government policy has become more stimulative this year, 
"building on its success in turning around the growth of 
domestic demand last year," OECD economists said. 
  They said the impact of the February package on income flows 
would average 1.5 percent of GDP over the two-year period to 
end- 1995. 
  The fiscal package, combined with the 1994 budget, higher 
social security contributions and tax cuts assumed to remain at 
this year's level, could boost the overall government deficit to 
1.75 percent of GDP by 1995, from a small surplus in 1993. 
  With the official discount rate at a post-war low of 1.75 
percent since last September and the Bank of Japan pushing down 
the interest on overnight money to barely 2.0 percent by last 
May, monetary policy was also aiding the recovery, the OECD said. 
  Reflecting concerns about a larger government deficit and 
the 
rise in yields abroad, Tokyo bond yields have climbed nearly a 
percentage point since last January. But real interest rates, 
at just under 3.0 percent, remain low, it said. 
  Higher bond yields increased the cost of borrowing from 
long-term credit banks and some government-financed 
institutions, and this "may limit some private sector activity," 
the OECD said. 
  But it also said the steeper yield curve should mean that 
banks "will be better placed to increase operating profits and 
reduce the under-provisioning of bad loans, thereby allowing 
them eventually to increase lending." 
  And it stressed that, despite the bond market developments, 
the stock market rose 15 percent in the first five months of 
1994, while other East Asian markets tumbled in the wake of the 
increase in U.S. interest rates. 

