BFN 

<F P=106> [Manuel Abizanda report: "Air Force Needs Two More Fighter </F>
Squadrons To Guarantee National Security"] 
  [Text] The Air Force needs at least two more fighter 
squadrons -- 36 fighter bombers -- in order to guarantee 
national security and be able to perform the tasks entrusted to 
it, military sources have told ABC. Although transport aircraft 
are viewed by the Defense Ministry as its preferred aim, the Air 
Force believes that its main shortages lie in fighter aircraft, 
which have been beset by budget cuts, causing right now a 
shortfall of 60 fighter bombers from the maximum number of 
aircraft required, reckoned at 180. 
  When in the late seventies those in charge of the Air Force 
planned what the Spanish Air Force should be like at the end of 
the century, they could hardly have imagined the reality 
confronting their current successors. While at that time the 
plans proposed an Air Force with 312 fighter aircraft, of which 
240 would be F18's and the remainder Mirage F1's, the Air Force 
right now has just eight fighter squadrons with a total of 120 
aircraft; not enough, according to the aforementioned sources, 
to cope with all the operational tasks required of the Air 
Force. And although this figure of 312 aircraft seems 
excessive, taking current circumstances into account, the fact 
is that NATO itself, following the talks that led to the CFE 
[Conventional Armed Forces in Europe] treaty on the reduction of 
conventional forces in Europe, left the maximum number of 
fighter bombers for our country at 310. 
<H5>  "Statistics Are Not Lacking" </H5>
  The calculations that have been made show that the ideal 
number of fighter bombers for the Air Force would be 240 
aircraft; very far from the current figure, and one which, 
according to the Defense Ministry plans, will not be reached by 
a long shot. In order to reach this figure, the Air Force 
studies state that the ideal number of aircraft per squadron, of 
which Spain should have 10 -- something on which the Defense 
Ministry officials also agree -- would be 24. 
  "Since statistics are not lacking, and right now the rate of 
losses per squadron is six aircraft in the course of their 
useful life," the sources state, each unit would have 18 
aircraft, which is deemed the essential minimum for maintaining 
its capability. However, there is an average of 15 aircraft for 
each of the eight currently existing fighter squadrons. 
<H5>  Until 2013 </H5>
  Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that that figure of 24 
aircraft per squadron is utopian, and so the number of aircraft 
per unit has been reduced to 18. 
  The Air Force's accident rate is 0.5 aircraft for every 
10,000 flying hours, a level similar to that of the NATO 
countries, where the figure for the U.S. Air Force, for 
instance, stands at 0.42. 
  The Air Force's problem is that until the year 2013, when 
the 
last of the EF2000 aircraft will arrive, if the program does not 
suffer further delays -- something that cannot be foreseen right 
now -- the shortfall of fighter bombers will be more than 
evident. That is, that number of aircraft cannot be made up 
until 20 years hence. Moreover, according to the Defense 
Ministry, the 10 squadrons are to be made up with the 70 current 
F18's and the future 87 EF2000's, which could also be reduced at 
any time if the financial problems experienced by this program 
are not resolved. In all, there would be 157 aircraft -- again 
below that figure of 18 aircraft per squadron. 
  The solution would be the purchase of at least 36 aircraft 
in 
order to make up another two squadrons, which should be assigned 
to 21 Wing. Since the F5A's were decommissioned, this unit has 
had to perform its tasks with C-101's from the San Javier 
General Air Academy, which are unfit for combat missions in 
terms of both performance and equipment. 
  However, the Defense Ministry has rejected the offer made by 
the U.S. Air Force for Spain to purchase around 40 F16 fighter 
bombers from its surpluses. For the Air Force, those aircraft 
would be vital for making up the 10 squadrons required to 
perform its operational tasks. The Defense Ministry's grounds 
for rejecting this offer, as published by ABC, are that since it 
is a new system, it would entail higher maintenance costs, as a 
result of which in the long term and despite the good price of 
the offer -- 1 billion pesetas per aircraft -- it would be too 
expensive a transaction, in addition to the political 
difficulties that would be entailed by the purchase of a U.S. 
aircraft when the EF2000 is at a critical stage for its future. 
  The sources consulted denied that the F16 poses maintenance 
problems, "since this is an aircraft which, if it is 
characterized by anything apart from its qualities, it is its 
high level of reliability." They also pointed out that its 
maintenance is relatively simple and cited as an instance the 
fact that the aircraft of the U.S. 401 Tactical Wing stationed 
at Torrejon had an average operational readiness rate of 90 
percent while they were in Spain. 
<H5>  Interest in More F18's </H5>
  In any event, the Air Force has also held contacts with the 
U.S. Navy through the U.S. Embassy in our country, in order to 
sound out the possibility of purchasing some F18's. However, 
this possibility, which would not have the F16's' drawbacks with 
respect to maintenance and the training of pilots and 
technicians, seems very remote, since both the U.S. Navy and the 
Marines have no surpluses of this type of aircraft and have 
their whole fleet in service. 
  Even so, if the purchase of the F16's were to be made some 
day, we would still be far from the optimum figure of 180 
aircraft, since, with the F18's and Mirage F1's in service, only 
156 aircraft would be reached. 
  The future of expenditure on equipment also provokes 
disagreements. The Defense Ministry's enthusiasm for transport 
aircraft is not viewed with much optimism by the Air Force, 
although it is acknowledged that "this is what has given us most 
satisfaction over the past few months." In this connection, the 
sources consulted state that even the fleet of medium-sized 
transport aircraft, comprising Aviocar C-212's and the CN-235's, 
"is excessively large," while the fleet of C130 Hercules, with 
12 aircraft, has to redouble its efforts to perform its tasks, 
which over the past few months have ranged from mail runs to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina to missions in Ruanda. "An Air Force's 
ultimate aim," they state, "is combat aircraft -- not a regular 
airline." 
<H5>  Fewer Flying Hours </H5>
  The budgetary problems have also directly affected pilot 
training, which has been reduced. This newspaper has learned 
that the Air Force clocks up 90,000 flying hours per year, which 
means that each pilot clocks up around 150 -- below the Atlantic 
alliance's minimum. Specifically, NATO prescribes a minimum of 
180 flying hours per year for its crews, so Spanish pilots are 
30 hours below that specification. The lack of fuel forced the 
Air Force general staff chiefs gradually to reduce the 
aircrafts' number of flying hours to the aforementioned 150 
hours per year. 
  Right now, 480 pilots, including those of transport 
aircraft, 
are classed as combat ready. The current forecast is that by 
the year 2000 there will be a shortfall of 18 pilots, so the 
military chiefs' worries in this sphere are "not excessive." 
Moreover, there is always the recourse of assigning pilots from 
the San Javier General Air Academy to operational units. 
  Another of the most pressing needs confronting the Air Force 
is the modernization of the fleet of P-3 Orion antisubmarine 
aircraft, of which it has seven purchased from Norway. 
Although, when they were purchased just five years ago, an 
overhaul to fit new equipment was planned, budget cuts have 
prevented this modernization from being carried out. 
  Hence they have to operate with long-outdated systems in a 
task which, owing to Spain's characteristics, with over 3,000 km 
of coastline, is regarded as very important for national 
security. Moreover, these aircraft cooperate very closely with 
the Navy in the surveillance of the Strait of Gibraltar and the 
maritime communications routes. To this must be added the fact 
that an aircraft has remained stationed at the Italian base of 
Sigonella since the embargo decreed by the United Nations 
against Serbia and Montenegro began. 
<H5>  Ammunition Problems </H5>
  Former Air Force Chief of Staff Ramon Fernandez Sequeiros 
stated in the Congress of Deputies during his last appearance on 
the occasion of the discussion of the defense budgets that the 
Air Force has been gliding for several years and is now coming 
dangerously close to the ground, and cited the fuel and 
ammunition problems as one of its main shortcomings. 
  In this connection, the renewal of the F18's' weapons with 
new Harm, Maverick, or AMRAAM missiles is being carried out very 
slowly and far from the envisaged time scales. 

