BFN 

<F P=106> [Jochen Kummer report: "`Struggle for Freedom' of Kurds in </F>
Germany--With Heroin and Blackmail"] 
  [Text] Last week, scenes from Kurdish terrorism on German 
soil dominated television screens and front pages. The 
prohibited terrorist Workers Party of Kurdistan [PKK] turned 
Germany into a theater-of-war: It controlled nationwide highway 
blockades and attacked policemen, it laid fires, and had fanatic 
compatriots set themselves on fire. 
  At the same time, two short police reports were 
inconspicuously carried in the local sections of Hamburg 
newspapers. 
  The HAMBURGER ABENDBLATT reported on 24 March: "For months, 
a group of three young Kurds aged between 13 and 15 years sold 5 
grams of heroin to one addict alone every other day. Now, 
plain-clothesmen have arrested the dealers. They carried 20 
grams of heroin, 30 grams of hashish, and 900 German marks [DM]. 
An arrest warrant had already been issued for the 15-year-old 
boy, who is wanted as a drug dealer. The three Kurds live in an 
apartment for young people in the City of Hamburg." 
  DIE WELT reported on a new case on the next day, 25 March: 
"In St. Georg, plain-clothesmen have caught two Kurdish 
asylum-seekers (15 and 17 years old) in the act of dealing and 
found 55 grams of heroin. The 15-year-old boy was ordered to 
leave the country in 1991, his accomplice is facing deportation." 
  The drug sales to addicts in Germany are one of the most 
important sources of money for the Kurds to finance their 
terrorism in Germany and their struggle against Turkey. A 
second source is the extortion of protection money. 
  These two forms of Kurdish organized crime does not present 
their announcement--that is, that there will be peace again 
after the riots of the past few days, and their violence, which 
they call their "struggle for freedom"--in a favorable light: 
They are part of a strategy. Germany, as a prosperous and 
liberal country, is a financially profitable place of rest for 
the Kurds. 
  As the Duesseldorf Higher Regional Court realized, since 
1984 
Germany has been the European focus of the PKK, which has its 
headquarters in Cologne. About 500,000 Kurds have meanwhile 
settled in Europe--400,000 of them in Germany. About 40,000 
Kurds in Germany are classified as PKK sympathizers and about 
400 as members. They entered the country legally as respectable 
workers with Turkish citizenship, they came as asylum-seekers, 
or they were illegally taken to Germany. 
  It is no problem to accommodate the people smuggled by 
Kurdish gangs: Kurds who ask for asylum here are entitled to 
accommodation, food, and clothing. Those who entered the 
country illegally easily found refuge with clan members, 
friends, or relatives. 
  The commander and secretary general of the Marxist-Leninist 
"cadre party," PKK, is Abdullah Ocalan. According to findings 
of the German intelligence services, he is lodging, together 
with his wirepullers, in Damascus in Syria. 
  "The orders for attacks and demonstrations come from 
abroad," 
Ernst Uhrlau, president of the Hamburg Office for the Protection 
of the Constitution, says. A "Central Committee" of the PKK in 
Europe coordinates the activities; the so-called area committees 
are subordinate to it. 
  By Ocalan's order, the PKK organized six large-scale waves 
of 
attack in Western Europe and Germany in 1992 and 1993. About 
600 perpetrators participated in about 50 attacks in 
European-wide violent actions on 24 June 1993. On 4 November, 
about 60 violent attacks of Kurds on Turkish institutions and 
private houses were ascertained all over the FRG. 
  As a result, the PKK was banned in Germany. The 35 Kurdish 
groups that were prohibited at the same time as the PKK have 
disguised themselves with harmless names, but, according to 
findings of Germany security authorities, they are in reality 
arms of the PKK octopus that are registered as 
"suborganizations" in the local registers of associations, such 
as: "Kurdistan Art and Cultural Center in Nuremberg and 
surroundings--registered association," "Kurdish Women's Center 
in Leverkusen--registered association," "International 
Friendship in Munich--registered association," "Center of Media 
Culture in Hagen--registered association," "Mesopotamian 
Cultural Association in Bremen--registered association," 
"Kurdish Cultural Center in Hamburg and surroundings--registered 
association," etcetera. 
  A Kurd called Kani Yilomaz, who acts on the direction of 
Ocalan, acts as the spokesman of the PKK leadership in Europe. 
It was he who propagated the PKK's preparedness to discontinue 
its violent actions in Germany this week. 
  Apparently, the Kurds' drug deals in Germany yield enormous 
profits for the war against Turkey. This year in January, the 
Frankfurt special commission "Palu" reached the assessment that 
the Rhine-Main area is increasingly becoming the turntable for 
Kurdish heroin smugglers. According to findings of the Federal 
Office of Criminal Investigation, Kurds and Turks are the main 
suppliers of heroin. 
  Young Kurds deposited drug money in plastic bags at the 
Lindenstrasse post office in Hamburg. A "Joint Drug Squad" 
(GER) of the customs authorities and the police investigated. 
"Every day, 15-year-old boys came to the small post office and 
deposited cash in plastic bags," a GER officer said in February 
1993. The amounts ranged from DM10,000 to DM200,000 per deposit. 
  The investigators had the money--mainly small bills packed 
in 
newspaper--examined in a laboratory: There was always heroin 
sticking to the bills. The major part of the money was sent to 
a handful of Kurdish men in Bingol, Elazig, and Palu in eastern 
Turkey. According to findings of the police, most of the 
dealers who are arrested in Hamburg's streets come from these 
regions. 
  Within six months, Kurdish dealers deposited DM80 million in 
cash at Hamburg's smallest post office; 187 deposits were 
identified by the GER. The transfer of DM750,000 and DM900,000 
was proved against two Kurdish dealer organizations. 
  In a parallel street of Lindenstrasse, where the post office 
that drug dealers favor for deposits is situated, there is a 
mosque. Since the end of 1992, drug deals had flourished there 
so much that visitors of the mosque repeatedly complained to the 
police. Plain-clothesmen and the mobile police watched the open 
scene for six weeks. 
  An inn near the mosque turned out to be the dealers' meeting 
point. They used the continuous tangle of people around the 
mosque to cover their illegal deals. They acted skillfully 
under the protection of unsuspecting compatriots. In 
mid-February 1993, the police intervened. Seventy Kurdish drug 
dealers were arrested. Arrest warrants were issued for 41 of 
them. More than half of the arrested persons were younger than 
21 years: 26 suspects were between 14 and 16 years old and 17 
suspects were between 17 and 21 years. Apparently, three 
children aged between 12 and 13 years were used as drug couriers. 
  Kurdish children, some of whom arrive as "unaccompanied 
refugee children," prove to be well instructed: If they are 
seized by the police as not criminally responsible drug dealers, 
they will not be bothered by German punitive justice. The 
social welfare offices of the districts are responsible for such 
children, for example, in Hamburg. As is shown by the 
above-mentioned police report, the City of Hamburg provides such 
Kurds with apartments for young people. 
  The roads of Kurdish money transfers seem to be 
inexhaustible. Policewomen found DM45,000 in the brassieres and 
panties of Kurdish women when they were subjected to carefully 
directed checks at Fuhlsbuettel airport in Hamburg. The spicy 
aspect of the case was that the women belonged to a family who 
had flown in from Palu in Turkey at the expense of the German 
state, in order to identify a Kurdish drug dealer in court. 
  The second special field of the Kurds is the extortion of 
protection money. With this method, they cash donations for 
their political struggle. 
  In Berlin, where 50,000 Kurds live, Kurds and Turks are so 
active in this field that the police established a special 
investigation group in March 1993. Hans-Ulrich Voss, managing 
director of the Berlin Criminal Investigation Department, 
described how the collection of donations works: "First" PKK 
representatives approach businessmen "very politely" and ask for 
"donations" for the struggle for liberation. DM200 are 
requested from owners of kebab stalls, while owners of travel 
agencies and insurance agencies have to pay up to 
DM20,000--these amounts are often requested every month. 
  Turkish private persons are visited at home late at night. 
Their donations are calculated according to the size of the 
Turkish family's car. Hesitant victims are brought to heel by 
referring to one's knowledge of the children's route to school. 
  The shop windows of those Turks who still refuse to pay are 
broken or incendiary devices are thrown into the shops. With 
such attacks, the Kurds achieve a welcome additional effect: 
According to initial appearances, German right-wing extremists 
are initially blamed for such attacks. 
  However, the Berlin special investigation group discovered: 
"Collectors of donations" from Turkey, not--as originally 
assumed--xenophobic Germans, are responsible for many destroyed 
shop windows and arson attacks in Berlin-Kreuzberg. 
  According to Berlin experiences, only about 10 percent of 
the 
victims admit that they have been blackmailed; 10 percent claim 
that they pay "voluntary donations." The rest, 80 percent, are 
silent. 
  In Frankfurt on Main, the Municipal Office granted licenses 
for 2,500 "public houses and restaurants"--40 percent of which 
were to foreigners. Frankfurt senior detective officer Roland 
Ullmann estimates that "there is hardly anybody who does not 
pay." 

