CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Guard Lieutenant-Colonel Anatoliy Pihilov under </F>
the rubric "In the National Guard of Ukraine": "With Experience 
to the Pontoon Troops"] 
  [Text] The officers of the Main Directorate of the 
Commander of the National Guard of Ukraine, as well as the 
commanders of formations and certain units within the context of 
the training session being held, visited the military compound 
of a pontoon and bridging brigade of the Ministry of Defense of 
Ukraine. Unit commander Colonel N. Malkov, who received the 
National Guard personnel, personally familiarized them with the 
celebrated history of the military collective, and talked about 
the current daily life of the personnel. 
  The brigade, by the way, will be celebrating its fifty-year 
anniversary in August of next year. Its credits include the 
rebuilding and mine clearing of the city of Kiev, destroyed by 
the Germans, and the bridges across the Dnipro and other water 
arteries. In April of 1986, when Chornobyl caught fire, the unit 
was present at full strength at the scene of the disaster and 
worked to clean up the consequences of it. 
  The generals and officers of the Guard visited the sleeping 
quarters, enlisted-men's mess, subsidiary plots and combat 
vehicle motor pool, and saw with their own eyes the splendid 
organization of the daily detail service and the irreproachable 
regulation order in the facilities and on the grounds. And even 
though the "tourists" have many decades of service among them, 
many of the officers were not ashamed to note down in the course 
of their discussions the elements that interested them, so as to 
employ what they had seen in practice in the Guard collectives. 
  Commander of the National Guard of Ukraine Guard 
Lieutenant-General V. Kukharets warmly thanked the commanders of 
the unit for their hospitality, and wished the bridging troops 
new successes in their noble service to the Fatherland. 
  In the Guard collectives themselves, which are still 
undergoing an active process of emergence, many of the problems 
connected with the placement of personnel have to be resolved, 
so to speak, on the run, so as not to harm the most important 
thing--combat readiness. The Guard troops (this is the opinion 
of many officers), regardless of the difficulties, are able to 
create conditions for people that are in no way worse than those 
in the storied ranks of the pontoon troops. 

