Diseases 

<F P=102>   944F0457C Nalchik KABARDINO-BALKARSKAYA PRAVDA in Russian 17 
Feb 94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 944F0457C </F>
<F P=104>  Nalchik KABARDINO-BALKARSKAYA PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article, under rubric "In the KBR Government": "Need for </F>
Preventive Work"] 
  [Text] In late January of this year the KBR 
[Kabardino-Balkaria Republic] Cabinet of Ministers considered 
the questions of measures to prevent infectious diseases on the 
territory of the Kabardino-Balkaria Republic in 1994. 
  What did the Cabinet of Minister direct its attention to? 
Recently the work of preventing infectious and invasive diseases 
among human beings and animals has been conducted 
unsatisfactorily in the republic. In a number of populated 
places, as a result of the lack of a reliable accounting of the 
number of head of livestock that are being personally used by 
citizens, a large number of head of livestock remain 
unvaccinated against malignant anthrax and other infectious 
diseases, and animals are being slaughtered and their meat is 
being sold without veterinary inspection. Trade in meat and meat 
products is being carried out in unauthorized places. Frequently 
there is a lack of closed pavilions, and in the markets the 
sanitary condition is extremely unsatisfactory. This kind of 
situation creates a real threat to the arising of various 
infectious and invasive diseases of human beings and animals, 
which occurred in the village of Verkhniy Kurkuzhin, Baksanskiy 
Rayon. 
  What steps, then, have been taken? 
  For purposes of preserving the stable epidemiologic and 
epizootic situation, which precludes the arising of infectious 
and invasive diseases on the territory of the republic, the KBR 
Cabinet of Ministers, by its decree of 25 January 1994, No. 10, 
approved the Comprehensive Plan For Measures to Prevent 
Infectious and Invasive Diseases on the Territory of the KBR, 
and instructed the KBR Ministry of Finance to carry out the 
financing of the fulfillment of the program on the basis of the 
actual production expenditures being submitted by agencies of 
the Republic Center of the State Sanitation and Epidemiological 
Inspectorate and the republic's veterinary service. 
  The government directed the attention of the heads of the 
interested ministries and departments and the city and rayon 
administrations to the need to increase the efforts in the work 
of preventing infectious diseases on the territory of the 
republic. 
  To what specifically? 
  In particular, the heads of city and rayon administrations 
were instructed: 
  -- to establish in all populated places a strict accounting 
of the number of head of livestock in the individual use of 
citizens; 
  -- to organize the building of livestock burial grounds, 
corrals for the veterinary processing of animals, slaughter 
areas, and closed pavilions for the trading of meat and meat 
products in populated places; and to render assistance to the 
republic's veterinary service in organizing the carrying out of 
veterinary measures. 
  KBR Ministry of Agriculture and Food Products (A. T. 
Kushkhov) has been required: to tighten up the monitoring of the 
work of the veterinary service and to require the strict 
execution of antiepizootic measures by the established 
deadlines; and to have a reserve supply of the necessary amount 
of biological preparations, disinfectants, and diagnostic means 
to take steps in the event that emergency situations arise. 
  KBR Ministry of Public Health (M. L. Berov) and KB 
[Kabardino-Balkaria] Center of the State Sanitation and 
Epidemiological Inspectorate (A. A. Kyagov) are to assure the 
carrying out, on the entire territory of the republic, of a 
series of treatment-and-prevention and antiepidemic measures to 
prevent infectious diseases. 
  The government has demanded of the KBR Ministry of Internal 
Affairs (Kh. A. Shogenov), the KB Center of the State Sanitation 
and Epidemiological Inspectorate (A. A. Kyagov), the KBR 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Products (A. T. Kushkhov), and 
the administration heads in the republic's cities and rayons 
that they tighten up the inspection of the sanitary state of the 
populated places and the places where agricultural products are 
being sold, and that they hold strictly accountable the 
violators of the trade procedures and sanitation requirements. 
Moreover, KBR Ministry of Internal Affairs is required to 
tighten up the monitoring of the shipments of animals on the 
republic's motor roads. 
  Similar instructions have been issued to the 
Kabardino-Balkaria Television and Radio Broadcasting Company, 
which must guarantee the allocation of air time to the 
veterinary and sanitation-antiepidemic services so that 
specialists can speak on measures to prevent diseases among 
humans and animals. 
  An undisputed amount of interest is also being shown in the 
Comprehensive Program. It stipulates the execution of a number 
of important measures. They include organizational measures, 
veterinary-sanitation measures, treatment and prevention 
measures, sanitation and antiepidemic measures... Their 
implementation, to a large degree, will help to resolve this 
very complicated problem, which is taking hundreds and thousands 
of people away from creative labor. 

