BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, 31 May, BNS -- A report by the Estonian 
Finance Ministry, read by Minister Heiki Kranich at Tuesday's 
meeting of the Cabinet, shows that recovery in the country's 
economy continues also in the second quarter, Prime Minister 
Mart Laar said. 
  "While rising inflation was the main problem in the first 
quarter, the upward pace of inflation now has started to slow 
down and the government forecasts a continuing decrease in 
inflation rates for the second quarter," the premier said while 
briefing reporters after the cabinet meeting. 
  The Finance Ministry report, titled "On the General 
Condition 
of the Estonian Economy," points out indicators such as growing 
exports, increase in the collateral of the national currency, 
declining interest rates for short-term loans, as well as the 
improving investment climate as reflecting an ongoing economic 
recovery. 
  Also official unemployment figures have remained at low 
levels in Estonia. Both the value and physical volumes of the 
retail sector have been on the increase. 
  But the report also shows that the country's foreign trade 
deficit in the first quarter was bigger than for the whole last 
year. Despite a steady growth in exports both in February and 
in March, faster-growing imports have outrun export growth. A 
considerable deficit in the foreign trade balance is likely to 
lead to a negative outcome of the current account of the first 
quarter's balance of payments, the report warns. 
  For the first monthly period since the monetary reform of 
June 1992, a decline was recorded in March in the value of the 
collateral of the Estonian national currency, the kroon. 
  As much as 1.526 billion kroons, or 26.3 percent of the 
total 
set down for the whole year was received in budgetary earnings 
in Estonia in the first quarter. The value-added tax accounted 
for 822 million kroons of the total earnings in the first 
quarter. Also noted in the report was certain improvement as to 
the companies' debts to the state budget. 
  The World Bank in its evaluations has placed Estonia in the 
rank of upper-medium income level developing countries. 

