SUMMARY 
                           In a move having potentially serious implications for the future 
of Sino-U.S. relations, Chinese leaders made it clear during U.S. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher's 11-14 March visit that 
Beijing will not meet U.S. demands on human rights, even under 
the continuing threat of loss of its most-favored-nation (MFN) 
trading status.  Despite the apparent finality of this rejection 
of linkage between human rights and trade--a position provoked in 
part by internal political pressures--Beijing indicated that it 
is willing to move forward on a number of issues of concern to 
Washington, including the emigration and prison labor questions, 
and hopes to reach an accommodation that will prevent the loss of 
MFN and lead to the continued development of Sino-U.S. ties. 
                     END SUMMARY 

   Using unusually candid language during more than 12 hours of 
meetings with the Secretary, PRC Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, 
Premier Li Peng, and Chinese Communist Party General Secretary 
Jiang Zemin conveyed this apparent hardening of Beijing's 
position on human rights, rejecting U.S. demands that Beijing 
improve its record on human rights as a condition for renewal of 
China's MFN trading status.  According to Xinhua accounts, Qian 
went beyond China's usual criticisms of the U.S. human rights 
position in talks on 12 and 14 March and bluntly told Secretary 
Christopher that U.S. laws and the U.S. President's Executive 
Order, which was issued last year detailing Washington's 
conditions for the renewal of China's MFN status, are "not 
applicable" to China and that Beijing has "no obligation" to 
implement them.  China, he stressed, "can only do what Chinese 
law permits" (Xinhua, 12, 14 March).  Qian went on to declare 
that Washington and Beijing will continue to have ''differences 
over human rights for a "long time to come," warning that it is 
"futile and harmful" to pressure China on this issue.  Turning to 
the question of the renewal of China's MFN status, Qian suggested 
that Beijing is prepared to forego this benefit.  Pointing out 
that China "will not become another United States, the foreign 
minister rhetorically asked how China can be expected to "accept 
the American way of doing things for the sake of trade." 
   Judging by the Xinhua accounts of their meetings with Secretary 
Christopher, Li and Jiang were equally brusque in expressing 
Beijing's shift to a harder line on U.S. human rights demands. 
Like Qian, Li, in his meeting on 12 March, told Secretary 
Christopher that it is "not fair" for the United States to try to 
"impose" its concepts on Beijing and vowed that China will "never 
accept" them.  Pointing to the "historic opportunity" for 
expanding Sino-U.S. economic and trade ties, Li went on to 
reiterate China's willingness to accept the loss of its MFN 
status, saying that while Beijing will incur "losses" if 
Washington revokes its MFN trading status, China "relies mainly 
on its internal market and has a strong capability of self- 
reliance."   Underscoring the determination of China's leaders in 
this regard, Li said that the "existence of disputes" between the 
two countries is a "reality" and warned that these problems will 
only become "more complicated" if Washington attempts to "exert 
pressure unilaterally" (Xinhua, 12 March). 

   For his part, Jiang reiterated these warnings expressed by Qian 
and Li, telling Secretary Christopher, in their meeting on 13 
March, that Sino-U.S. relations can only "move forward" so long 
as both sides view them from the "world perspective" (Xinhua, 
March 13).  Alluding to the detention of Chinese dissidents on 
the eve of the Secretary's visit, widely reported in Western 
media but barely touched on in PRC media, he went on to defend 
China's actions against what he called "a small number of people 
attempting to subvert the Chinese Government," saying that it is 
not a question of "human rights" but a "political and legal" 
issue.  He stressed that the "government of every country" has 
the "responsibility and obligation of upholding law and order and 
maintaining political stability." 

Negative Media Treatment of Visit 

   Reflecting these continuing tensions in Sino-U.S. relations, 
Chinese media portrayed the Secretary's visit in largely negative 
terms, underscoring the differences between the two sides and 
noting the failure of the talks to achieve expected results. 
Xinhua accounts of Secretary Christopher's talks with Chinese 
leaders, for example, used formulations customarily used to 
denote disagreement.  Thus, Qian's talks with the Secretary on 12 
and 14 March were described as "frank (tanshuai) and businesslike 
(renzhen)," while the talks with Jiang on the 13th were portrayed 
as "frank and candid."  Qian also portrayed the visit in a 
negative light at his press conference on 16 March, reportedly 
stating that the visit had not produced as "many results as 
expected" (Xinhua, 16 March).  He went on to take issue with 
Secretary Christopher's claim that the visit had "narrowed 
differences" on human rights issues, pointing out that it "can 
hardly be said" that the two sides have "narrowed their 
differences in their fundamental viewpoints on human rights." 

   The PRC-owned Hong Kong media went even further in portraying the 
visit in a negative light.  A signed commentary carried by the 
PRC-owned Hong Kong based wire service Zhongguo Tongxun She on 14 
March, for example, castigated Washington for not "respecting" 
Chinese law and complained that the United States "automatically" 
views laws in other countries that contradict U.S. laws as "wrong 
or in some way not perfect."  Washington's continued 
"interference" in China's human rights, the commentary concluded, 
only shows that the United States "still has a hegemonic 
mentality."  A 14 March editorial in the PRC-owned Hong Kong 
daily Wen Wei Po took a slightly different tack in criticizing 
the Secretary's visit, portraying China as having soundly 
rebuffed U.S. efforts to "wield the human rights club."   It went 
on to suggest that Secretary Christopher had thrown away a 
golden opportunity to promote" trade and economic relations and 
had left China with "empty hands" because he failed to adhere to 
the strategy of taking the "long view" of Sino-U.S. ties. 

   Suggesting that the hardening of Beijing's line may have as much 
to do with internal events in China over the past several weeks 
as with U.S. policy, China's decision to cast the Secretary's 
visit in a negative light stands in stark contrast to Beijing's 
efforts in recent months to put a positive gloss on Sino-U.S. 
relations.  Beijing was, for example, upbeat in portraying the 
November meeting between U.S. President Bill Clinton and Jiang 
Zemin at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Conference, 
calling the meetings "positive and constructive."  Beijing also 
cast Qian's talks in late January with Secretary Christopher in a 
more positive light, even though they dealt with the same topics- 
-bilateral relations, disarmament, nonproliferation, and human 
rights--that were raised during the March visit (Xinhua, 24 
January).  PRC media described the January talks as "positive and 
constructive" and claimed that they had maintained the "momentum 
of improved Sino-U.S. relations." 

Reemergence of Hardline Themes 

   Perhaps reflecting a reassertion of hardline influence in the 
leadership and pressures on reformers to demonstrate their 
resolve to tighten social control as inflation, social 
discontent, and dissident activity have increased in recent 
weeks, less authoritative central media commentary has featured 
highly nationalistic rhetoric that undercuts this positive 
treatment of Sino-U.S. relations before Secretary Christopher's 
visit.  A 21 February article in Beijing's reformist current 
affairs weekly Liaowang, for example, pointed to alleged beatings 
of Chinese citizens in Beijing by foreigners to denigrate those 
who have "doted on foreigners" and do not "dare to stand upright" 
in the face of foreign pressure.  This xenophobic line was also 
evident in a signed article in Renmin Ribao on 2 March which was 
pegged to an incident at the recent Olympics involving an 
altercation between a Chinese speed skater and an American 
competitor.  Underscoring the need to stand up to foreign 
pressure, the article pointedly noted that the Chinese people, 
because of their past experiences, realize that "concessions do 
not win understanding and sympathy but result in endless 
bullying." 

   Signs of this harsh line were also prominent in both domestic 
Chinese media and in the PRC-owned Hong Kong press just prior to 
Secretary Christopher's visit.  A PRC Foreign Ministry spokesman 
on 10 March, for example, in commenting on the defeat of an anti- 
China resolution at the UN Human Rights Commission meeting in 
Geneva, warned that the "days when China was subjected to willful 
bullying and humiliation and outside interference are gone" 
(Xinhua, 10 March).  Similarly Minister of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Cooperation Wu Yi was quoted by the PRC-owned Hong Kong 
daily Hsin Wan Pao on the eve of the Secretary's arrival in China 
as saying that Beijing "simply cannot accept the human rights 
question being raised" (10 March).  A 7 March Ta Kung Pao 
editorial which blasted Washington for using "human rights 
diplomacy" to interfere in China's internal affairs was typical 
of the barrage of anti-U.S. rhetoric that appeared in the the 
PRC-owned Hong Kong press on the eve of Secretary Christopher's 
visit predicting that such an approach would be rebuffed. 

Prospects for Bilateral Ties 

   Despite its blunt rejection of U.S. demands on human rights, 
Beijing has not portrayed its position as necessarily leading to 
a further souring of Sino-U.S. ties at this time, but has 
stressed that the future of Sino-U.S. relations depends heavily 
on Washington's decision later this year on renewing China's MFN 
trading status.  Sounding an optimistic note about the future at 
his press conference on 16 March, Qian said that if differences 
between the two sides are approached in a "realistic" manner they 
can be solved.  In addition, he indicated that, although China is 
not "obliged" to fulfill the conditions of the President's 
Executive Order to gain renewal of its MFN status this year, one 
of the order's requirements--the question of Chinese exports of 
goods made with prison labor--"has been settled," and another- 
-the emigration issue--"is not a problem as far as the Chinese 
are concerned." 

   Premier Li Peng was also upbeat in assessing the prospects for 
Sino-U.S. ties in remarks at a reception on 22 March, saying that 
he did not feel "pessimistic" about the prospects for bilateral 
ties (Xinhua, 22 March).  Underscoring Beijing's commitment to 
the continued development of relations, Li went on to stress 
that, while China "will never make a deal by sacrificing 
principles," the PRC will continue to make "great efforts" to 
improve ties. 

   At the same time, although Chinese leaders clearly desire to 
preserve Sino-U.S. ties, they have stressed that the future of 
the relationship will be determined by Washington's decision on 
China's MFN status.  Speaking at the press conference on 16 
March, Qian for example, said that "trade can hardly be carried 
on  if MFN is not renewed (Xinhua, 16 March).  In addition, he 
suggested that the "deterioration" (ehua) in economic relations, 
which would follow the loss of MFN, would also cause a 
"deterioration" (ehua) in political ties.  Four days earlier 
Xinhua had reported that Qian, in his talks with the Secretary on 
the 12th, had predicted that the loss of MFN status would have an 
even stronger, albeit more limited, effect on Sino-U.S. ties, 
"ruining (duan song) the prospects of Sino-U.S. trade relations." 

   Jiang and Li also claimed to see the loss of MFN as having an 
effect on bilateral relations.  For his part, Jiang, according to 
Xinhua, told Secretary Christopher that bilateral ties would meet 
with "difficulties (kunnan) and setbacks (cuozhe)" if Washington 
failed to view Sino-U.S. ties from a "world-wide perspective and 
to "transcend their differences in ideology."  Li went even 
further in outlining the consequences of the loss of MFN status 
in his meeting with Secretary Christopher on the 12th.  Pointedly 
noting that the United States is a "strong power" in areas that 
China has identified as "priorities" for  development--transport, 
energy, and communications--Li said that the United States will 
"lose a vast market" if it fails to handle the MFN issue 
properly. 

Implications 

   Despite its tough position on human rights, Beijing has signaled 
its desire to prevent the human rights issue from scuttling 
relations with the United States.  While asserting that it is 
willing to accept the loss of its MFN status, if need be, Beijing 
appears to have confidence in the likelihood of MFN renewal, 
given the growing economic and trade ties between the two 
countries and Washington's desire to gain Chinese support on the 
North Korean nuclear issue and other international problems. 
Internal political pressures stemming from renewed dissident 
activity, economic dislocations resulting from economic reform, 
and the potential for social unrest against the backdrop of the 
leadership struggle to succeed senior leader Deng Xiaoping make 
it unlikely that Beijing will back away from its uncompromising 
position on human rights. 
   (AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/HEIPLE/DEW 23/1520Z MAR 

