Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Hermes Sucre Serrano] </F>
  [Text] Ernesto Perez Balladares of the PRD [Democratic 
Revolutionary Party] and Ruben Dario Carles of "Change '94" 
remain the leading candidates in terms of voter preference, 
while Mireya Moscoso de Gruber of the Arnulfist Party [PA] 
increased her credibility rating and rose in terms of voter 
preference, according to a 12-15 March poll conducted for 
Telemetro Channel 13. 
  The survey conducted just more than 50 days before the 8 May 
elections indicates the PRD candidate's credibility rating fell 
from 38.9 to 34.6 percent, while Mireya Moscoso de Gruber's 
credibility rating rose from 6.4 to 9.1 percent. Approximately 
20 percent of the voters remain undecided regarding who has the 
highest credibility in terms of his or her proposals. 
  According to the poll, which was conducted among 3,194 
people 
aged 18 or older nationwide, the PRD candidate continues to 
occupy the top place in voter preference with 33 percent. 
Compared with the previous poll, Perez Balladares only gained 
0.2 percentage points. 
  Ruben Dario Carles came in second place with support from 
16.1 percent of the respondents. This implies a 0.1 percent 
reduction in his support when compared with the results of the 
first survey conducted 9-11 February. 
  The increase in the approval rating of Mireya Moscoso de 
Gruber, who has said she does not believe in polls, should be 
pointed out. Moscoso de Gruber went from 9.9 percent to 12.2 
percent in voters' preference, which translates into a gain of 
2.3 points. The drop of Panamanian singer Ruben Blades should 
also be highlighted; he went from 14.8 percent to 11.2, 
reflecting a decline of 3.6 points. 
  The other candidates obtained the following approval 
ratings: 
Eduardo Vallarino of the Christian Democratic Party (PDC) got 
3.2 percent; Samuel Lewis Galindo of the National Consensus 
Alliance (Solidarity and the National Unity Movement) obtained 
2.6 percent; and Jose Salvador Munoz of the Doctrinaire 
Panamenist Party received 0.6 percent. It should be noted that 
Vallarino gained 1.2 percent from the previous poll, while Lewis 
Galindo fell 0.3 percent. 
  Regarding the candidates with the greatest credibility in 
terms of their proposals, the survey revealed the most 
significant changes occurred with candidates Perez Balladares 
and Mireya Moscoso de Gruber. Perez Balladares' credibility 
dropped from 38.9 percent to 34.6, while Moscoso de Gruber's 
rose from 6.4 percent fo 9.1 percent. 
  Regarding people's mayoral candidate preferences in the 
District of Panama, it was learned that approximately 47 of 
every 100 people will vote for Omaira "Mayin" Correa. Her 
closest contender is the PRD's Andres Vega "Domplin," whose 
approval rating remained at about 22 percent. 
  Of the rest of the candidates, former First Lady Ana Mae 
Diaz 
de Endara [title as published] came in in third place with a 7.1 
percent approval rating. 

