BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jose Dos Santos, PRENSA LATINA collaborator and </F>
vice president of the Union of Cuban Journalists: "Tourism in 
Cuba: New Era Industry"] 
  [Text] Havana [dateline as received] -- Tourism is a 
popular activity in Cuba and it has increasingly become a 
leading factor in the transformation that Cuban society strives 
to achieve. 
  Different perspectives characterize it in history within the 
social transformation launched 35 years ago. Today it strives 
to achieve a re-evaluation in volume and scope that will turn it 
into the country's foremost industry. 
  This cannot be achieved simply with sun, beaches, and 
verdant 
scenery, which is common in many places throughout the 
Caribbean. These elements only represent the natural 
surroundings of an ongoing explosion. 
  The people, their sympathy and hospitality, their social 
saga, and our current epic multiply the attractiveness that is 
now a potential for tourism given the authorities' decision to 
open it as a first class market... but that is not enough either. 
  An economic organization must outline a much more productive 
combination of the geographical layout and human atmosphere. 
New and not so paternalistic models will strengthen the 
required vigor. 
  Under more realistic considerations, starting at this stage, 
bankruptcy appears in Cuba as an economic category that will 
bolster spirits, encourage ideas, and guarantee efficiency. 
<H5>  Different View </H5>
  Until recently, the massive socialization of production 
means 
and basic services involved a "responsibility delegated to 
high-ranking officials" in many Cuban economic structures, 
meaning a form of blaming others -- particularly the state -- 
for the deficiencies and problems resulting from the actions 
carried out by the people, themselves. 
  The issue is too complex to explain here, but in tourism, as 
in many other sectors, it entailed shortages, deficiencies, 
limitations, even losses which directly affected the guarantee 
of a salary, job, and social benefits for all those who 
participate in the process. 
  Until now it was normal for the state to finance, subsidize, 
support, become indebted, and assume all the risks and 
non-reimbursed expenses, seeking an overall financial balance 
based on the income from more profitable areas and entities. 
The crisis provoked by external reasons further emphasized the 
lack of balance by making profitable activities more and more 
scarce. 
  It is as a result of this reality that staunch socializing 
views begin to change quite drastically. Agriculture production 
groups working as cooperatives are the most recent example, but 
not the only one. 
  Assuming business roles that have been carried out by the 
Armed Forces for several years -- a type of pilot plan for high 
production efficiency and feasibility -- tourism now faces new 
challenges with the economic good sense demanded by the current 
situation. 
  Osmany Cienfuegos, vice president of the Council of Minister 
in charge of the sector, explained in detail the concept 
currently under way during a closed-door meeting with a group of 
journalists, which included this correspondent. 
  The principle that will guide the country's tourism system, 
as it is being done by autonomous enterprises such as Cubanacan 
and Gaviota, will be the principle of competition and 
efficiency. That is why the "burdensome and obsolete" central 
structure called the National Institute of Tourism was 
dismantled and "multiplied" to become three independent hotel 
chains, plus another one destined for maritime facilities and a 
company that is comprised of territorial sections under the 
acronym RT (recreation and tourism). 
  This network will incorporate transportation, catering, and 
advertising enterprises, shops, equipment, and other services 
under the supervision and control of a single ministry. 
  He said the hotel chains Isla Azul, Horizontes, and Gran 
Caribe, will have between 6,000 and 7,000 rooms each. The first 
one will be a domestic chain, the second one will have up to 
three-star hotels, and the third chain will be one of greater 
hierarchy. 
  Jose Fernandez Cossio, former Cuban ambassador to Mexico, 
has 
been appointed general director of the Horizontes chain. 
  As part of the different outlook on tourism here, Cienfuegos 
said this will be a job in which the entire country will 
participate. For example, Cuban ambassadors abroad will be 
mainly responsible for carrying out this activity with optimum 
quality, something unthinkable for representatives of other 
countries. 
  Without mentioning operational details, the way the 
activities and mechanisms will be implemented in the new 
ministry will give us a glimpse of the future course of the 
economy. For example, to avoid bureaucracy, the services of 
specialized institutions will be hired when necessary, as in the 
case of audits. That is why there will only be 50 officials 
working there. 
  In addition, decentralization is aimed at getting the hotel 
manager or other type of entrepreneur to be held accountable for 
what is done at his installation or activity. It means each 
person will respond for what happens in his immediate 
surroundings, something Cuban society greatly needs. 
  Likewise, closed preserves, the land plot mentality, and 
other subjective limitations that have become a burden for 
tourism -- as for many other activities -- will be eliminated so 
that, for example, in the sale of facilities and options, the 
RT's will not only be working for the ones they run. They will 
be forced to give the same treatment to other facilities in 
their territory under the risk that they could be stripped of 
properties under their custody if they act differently. 
  Another new feature is that the management cadres of the new 
state tourism structure will be subject to contracts, renewable 
or not, depending on the specific results of their work, which 
in practice means that whoever is not earning a profit will go 
bankrupt along with his entity. 
<H5>  Results and Expectations </H5>
  Without going into many details, Cienfuegos said that in 
1993 
Cuba reported a 30-percent increase in tourism revenue, with 
560,000 visitors, and it is believed that tourism revenue could 
be 25 percent higher this year than last. 
  He said that if the trend continues, tourism revenues could 
surpass revenues from the export of sugar cane, the principal 
export product in the country. This could become a reality in a 
few years. 
  In addition to obtaining financial results, with the 
transformation of Cuba's tourism industry, the country is 
publicly starting a transformation of concepts and operational 
methods in the Cuban economy that can be used as a guideline for 
its progressive but massive introduction into the rest of the 
nation's activities and fields, a necessary mechanism to 
increase efficiency and productivity. It will help the country 
leave behind the present critical period. 
  According to a survey conducted by a specialized company, 
Mexico was the third place country from where the most tourists 
visited Cuba in the winter of 1993, with 29,964 tourists, only 
surpassed by Canada and Argentina. 

