Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by special correspondent Juan Zegarra Salas] </F>
  [Text] Huanuco, 26 Jan -- General Nicolas de Bari Hermoza 
Rios, chairman of the Armed Forces Joint Command, yesterday 
revealed that 30 military officers were charged in 1993 in 
military courts for their involvement in drug trafficking. He 
noted that stiff prison sentences have already been handed down 
on 13 of these officers. 
  Gen. Hermoza made these remarks at a time when press reports 
link trafficker Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera, aka Vaticano, with 
senior Army officers assigned to the Huallaga Front. 
  Gen. Hermoza, who is also the Army commander, has flatly 
denied these reports. He did not rule out, however, the 
possibility that ongoing military court investigations may yield 
some results. 
  He said: I can tell you that 13 officers who were convicted 
for their ties with drug traffickers are currently serving stiff 
prison sentences. 
  He added that charges have been filed against 17 other 
officers for their involvement in the illegal drug trade. These 
officers are standing trial and will soon be sentenced. 
  Regarding the responsibility of the Army and the other 
services in these cases, Hermoza made it clear that these 
isolated cases will in no way tarnish the image of the Armed 
Forces because they uphold unshakeable patriotic principles. 
  He again contended that there are only isolated crimes 
committed by military personnel and that these cases do not 
undermine morale within the security forces. 
  Gen. Hermoza said this after a quick tour of Tarapoto, Tingo 
Maria, and Huanuco, where the drug trade has expanded to every 
sector. 
  Foreign and Peruvian journalists alike have repeatedly 
reported that some Army officers are collecting bribes from 
traffickers to allow them to ship their illegal merchandise. 
  General Alfredo Rodriguez Riveros, the new 
political-military 
chief of the Huallaga Front, has announced that a special 
battalion led by Peruvian Army commander "Arturo" has been 
created to fight the traffickers, "who are close allies of the 
Shining Path." 
  Gen. Rodriguez added that the Army is currently using 
electronic devices that are used in times of war to investigate, 
identify, and rigorously and forcefully bring to trial--just as 
it does with terrorists--any officers engaged in crime. 
  Gen. Rodriguez said the Army Inspector's Office is using 
taped reports and all other evidence available in intelligence 
work to identify those officers who may be involved in this 
serious crime. 
  Gen. Hermoza noted that in the past there was only one 
inspector handling this type of problem in the Huallaga Front. 
  Hermoza added: Today I have assigned four colonel-inspectors 
with their respective aides to monitor the activities of 
military personnel assigned to that zone. 
  Hermoza emphatically stated that military criminals will be 
punished as severely as common criminals. 
  Hermoza also briefly commented on a document recently 
published by LA REPUBLICA containing a message from Abimael 
Guzman to his followers. 
  Gen. Hermoza ruled out the possibility that the Shining Path 
will hold its Second National Congress. 
  Hermoza stated that when communists analyze both objective 
and subjective conditions they will realize that they have no 
chance of winning. 
  He added: Besides, they have already lost international 
support and are lacking what they call "leadership" because 
their leaders, who are imprisoned at the Callao Naval Base, now 
have no control over their followers. 
  This is why, he said, through an adequate intelligence work, 
our security forces have managed to arrest more terrorists. 
  He said the "Peace Accord" between the government and 
Shining 
Path is a political subject. 
  Hermoza added that a political war is now being waged. He 
said every sector of national life is participating in this war, 
which should be named "Pacification." 
  Hermoza reiterated that the Shining Path extremist 
organization has absolutely no chance of carrying out an 
activity like its Second National Congress. 
  Commenting on the presentation to the media of 18 "confirmed 
terrorist criminals" at the Huanuco-based "Los Avelinos" 
barracks, Hermoza emphasized that these criminals were unharmed, 
that they do not have a single scratch. 
  Raising his voice, Hermoza rhetorically asked: Where are the 
human rights organizations? Why have they not commented on the 
number of skilled terrorist criminals who have been arrested in 
the past two years without having suffered a single scratch? 
  This, he said, is one of the many indicators of the way 
human 
rights is being respected in the country. 

