BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Richard von Weizsaecker by Einar </F>
Koch and Claus Larass; place and date not given: "`Longing for a 
Home is Good...'"] 
  [Text] [BILD] Mr. President, your 10 years in office will 
come to an end on 30 June. Would you like to stay on? 
  [Weizsaecker] No. These have been 10 years of fulfillment. 
Ten years are really enough for this gratifying, but also 
difficult and responsible office. 
  [BILD] An increasing number of citizens are skeptical about 
our state. Is there a crisis of meaning in people's lives? 
  [Weizsaecker] It is not a crisis of meaning, but a wrong 
understanding of the state. Who is the state? It is us, the 
community of citizens. There is no point in distancing oneself 
from the state on the one hand, and overstraining it as 
addressee of our claims and rights. It is in our, the 
citizens', interest, that the state meets its duties in 
connection with public welfare. That is why there must not be a 
crisis of public feeling. 
  [BILD] How can we expect the citizens to support the state, 
if the state itself sometimes does not take its own laws 
seriously? 
  [Weizsaecker] Of course there are shortcomings. Who would 
deny it. The acting in the state is done by humans. But the 
appearance of a state is formed by its citizens. The more they 
help each other and the more courageous they are, the better our 
state is. 
  [BILD] Can the term "home country" provide more orientation 
to people than it did over the past few years? 
  [Weizsaecker] The longing for a home is a natural and good 
human desire. Its becomes even more important at a time when we 
have grown far beyond national boundaries in terms of political 
decisionmaking and economic and scientific developments. 
  The stronger European integration gets, the more important a 
feeling of being rooted in one's own home country. 
  We want to promote the traditional, charming, and lively 
regions of Europe all the more, as we realize that there will no 
Scottish monetary policy, Brittanian trade policy, Lombardian 
energy policy, nor Bavarian defense policy, but that we will 
have to find a common ground in all of these fields. 
  [BILD] Are you proud of being German? 
  [Weizsaecker] I have been a convinced German without ifs and 
buts throughout all phases of this turbulent century, and I will 
stay that way. During my 10 years in office I have considered 
it my priority task to inspire and increase confidence in the 
Germans among our neighbors and all European nations. 
  If you are trying to promote such confidence you need to 
have 
confidence in your own country, which I have always had. 
  [BILD] If we want to integrate foreigners, will we not need 
double citizenship to achieve this? 
  [Weizsaecker] Let me give you an example: Take an 18 year 
old Turkish girl in Berlin who was born here and has grown up 
with her Berlin friends during school years and job training. 
Her future is here, and not in the country of her ancestors. 
  It is obvious that she not only wants to have the duties, 
but 
also the rights of a German citizen. It is understandable, is 
it not, that she does not want to draw a line with her parents 
and grandparents, does not want to hurt them by not giving a 
damn about her Turkish origin, but wants to go on respecting it 
and, therefore, does not want to cut the ties of citizenship? 
  Human fates and administrative traditions must be brought 
into harmony with each other. We will have to continue the 
debate and make progress. 
  [BILD] During your 10 years in office Helmut Kohl was 
chancellor. What is your opinion of him? 
  [Weizsaecker] The constitution provides for a division of 
labor, which we have followed in mutual respect. 
  The chancellor is elected in a legitimate power struggle 
between party politicians. The president is not unpolitical in 
his work, but independent and free of party ties. 
  These are two completely different mandates. This does not 
result in personal tensions, but in a division of power that 
makes us both work for the well-being of our country together. 
This is the way that Helmut Kohl and I have always seen it. 
  [BILD] We cannot believe that you want to retire 
politically.... 
  [Weizsaecker] My lively political interest dates back to the 
time before I held my first political office and it will go on 
after I retire from my last office. It is one of the tasks of 
old, retired people to share their experience, although not too 
loudly. 

