BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by Speaker Dr. Frene Ginwala to the National </F>
Assembly, Parliament building, Cape Town -- live] 
  [Text] I deem it a great honor to be elected speaker of 
this, the first democratically elected Parliament of South 
Africa. At the same time, I am conscious that it is a grave 
responsibility. I thank the honorable members for the 
confidence they have placed in me by appointing me to this high 
office. I shall do my utmost to vindicate their trust by 
carrying out my duties in a spirit of fairness, justice and 
impartiality towards each and every member of this house. 
  At the same time, I appeal to members for their cooperation 
at all times in upholding the dignity of this institution. 
Without that cooperation, my task will be difficult, indeed. 
The right of free speech, which is the essence of parliamentary 
debate, implies, inter alia, the right to make statements with 
which other members may strongly disagree, provided such 
statements comply with the Rules of Order. It will be my duty 
to protect that right, and to ensure that every voice is able to 
make itself heard here. The spirit of tolerance and good humor, 
despite differences of opinion, is conducive to good debate. 
  We are living in a time of great change in this country, 
which is reflected in this institution. This parliament differs 
from its predecessors in its composition, more representative in 
terms of the significantly larger number of women, and of 
persons of all races, creeds, economic status, and political 
persuasion. This parliament will now operate within the 
framework of a constitution that is the supreme law of this 
land. Nonetheless, the policy of this assembly must become the 
voice of the people of South Africa, articulated through their 
elected representatives. This house is both the fulfilment and 
the repository of the values and principles that at great cost 
have driven the changes through which our country and its people 
are passing. 
  All eyes will be on this parliament, as it meets to address 
the needs and expectations of all South Africans. May our 
proceedings here, whatever our political differences, be marked 
by a spirit of mutual respect for one another, and for the 
institution of a constitutional democracy. I now call upon 
Sheik (Shabir) to say a prayer. The honorable members please 
rise. 

