BFN 

<F P=106> ["Free Opinion" column by Salah al-Mukhtar: "Correspondents </F>
and the Time for National Action"] 
  [Text] Is it enough for the Arab media man, especially the 
correspondent, to demand the lifting of the embargo on Iraq in 
general through his media and then remain silent waiting for the 
consciences of the executioners crouching in the Western 
capitals, especially Washington, to wake up? The experience of 
the past three years and, indeed, all the good calls by 
journalists, politicians, lovers of freedom and humans in the 
Arab homeland and the world to lift the embargo were in vain 
because the consciences of decision makers in the colonialist 
West are dead and do not allow the calls of goodwill, right, and 
humanitarianism to reach their ears. 
  Hence, the correct national and humanitarian stand of the 
Arab correspondent is no longer to just call for lifting the 
embargo. This is especially so after some Arab governments, 
which made their contributions to the crime of the 30-state 
aggression on Iraq and to imposing an embargo on it, began to 
demand, in one way or another, the lifting of the embargo. 
Indeed, Arab correspondents are dutybound to define what is 
required to urge the appropriate side to lift the embargo. 
  What does this specifically mean? The embargo includes many 
forms. Ahead of these is a ban on imports and exports. 
According to the UN Security Council resolutions, this form of 
the embargo allows exporting many commodities, ahead of which is 
foodstuffs, to Iraq. It also allows the return of Iraqi assets, 
which some Arab governments volunteered to freeze in submission 
to U.S. desires, as well as the return of Iraqi equipment kept 
as a trust in Arab countries. The governments of these 
countries decided not to return or even carry out maintenance 
work on this equipment. 
  In order to realize the imbalance in the stands of some Arab 
governments, we must note that foreign governments, including 
European governments, have recently released frozen Iraqi 
assets, and used the proceeds to send shipments of food and 
medicine. They did so because they understand that UN Security 
Council resolutions do not prevent this. These non-Arab 
governments explained their stand by saying: Iraq is carrying 
out its obligations and the UN Security Council resolutions are 
clear and permit dealing with Iraq under certain limitations. 
  However, many Arab governments have not reached in terms of 
their awareness of their interests and humanitarian feelings the 
level reached by European and non-European countries. Indeed, 
these Arab governments buried their pan-Arab affiliation when 
they turned their countries into shackles that impose the 
embargo and perpetuate it. Although the United States did not 
punish the non-Arab countries that are carrying out direct and 
frank trade deals with Iraq under well-known limitations, some 
Arab governments are reiterating a disgusting pretext by saying: 
We cannot deal with Iraq because we fear the U.S. reaction. 
  Thus, it is a pan-Arab, national, and humanitarian duty for 
Arab correspondent to break the embargo imposed against Iraq. 
They should do this by not being content with generalities. 
Rather, they should specifically and publicly tell their 
governments: Your adherence to the embargo directly contributes 
to prolonging the suffering of the Iraqi people, without there 
being any justification or need. U.S. pressure does not justify 
taking a serious step that does much more harm than the case 
would be if U.S. pressures were rejected. This is because an 
Arab stifling another Arab and starving him to death will have 
grave consequences in the future on each Arab country. 
  Within this context, honorable correspondents should subject 
their governments to some acid tests. So, if the government of 
a certain journalist holds Iraqi funds or equipment, then he 
should raise a basic slogan calling for their release and 
mobilizing the masses to pressure his government. 
  If the government of another correspondent plays the role of 
instigator, in public or secret, calling for maintaining the 
Iraq embargo, then he should expose this and not make peace with 
his government until it yields and gives in to the will of the 
people. Finally, all Arab correspondents are required to 
exercise public, concrete pressure on their governments to 
resume trade with Iraq, after UN committees have confirmed 
Iraq's fulfillment of its obligations. In addition to this, the 
justifications for adhering to the embargo no longer exist, 
legally speaking. It is more important to pay special attention 
to this aspect, since the anti-Arab powers, led by the United 
States, are no longer citing legal justifications for the 
embargo, and are citing instead political reasons, such as human 
rights and others. 
  Any truly nationalist and serious Arab government can 
strongly argue the case for its desire to end the embargo. 
International law, pan-Arab interests, and its own interests 
will support its case and necessitate its ending the embargo. 
  Some might wonder: But, Arab governments could resort to 
violence against correspondents. Well, our answer is clear. 
Supporting Iraq, belonging to Arabism, adhering to the right to 
a decent, free life, and defending independence are goals and 
principles that are not safeguarded by words, but by big 
sacrifices. The history of Arabs and humanity tells us that good 
intentions have no value unless they are supported by precious 
sacrifices. 
  Finally, it is necessary to raise a vital question. The 
embargo will definitely come to an end sooner than many people 
expect, so is it appropriate for any Arab, ruler or subject, to 
see that he has not actively contributed to lifting the embargo 
when foreigners are pouring into Iraq asking for forgiveness and 
opening a new chapter? This question is worthy of consideration 
and deliberation in order to draw some lessons, the most 
important of which is that great stands are not adopted by easy 
talk but by effective actions that are accompanied by great 
sacrifices. 

