BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadja Pengov on the session of the parliamentary </F>
Foreign Affairs Commission in Ljubljana on 15 June] 
  [Text] In the closed part of the session, the 
parliamentary Foreign Affairs Commission discussed Italy's 
behavior toward our country regarding our integration in the 
European Union, the visit of the president of the state to 
Zagreb -- President Kucan briefed the members of the 
parliamentary commission himself -- and a report by the 
Commission's three-member working group for borders that visited 
some villages yesterday. The report concerns four villages on 
the other side of the Dragonja River and on the other side of 
the border crossings with Croatia where, in the past, the 
authorities of Piran and Buje communes used to intersect. The 
majority of the villagers there believe that they belong to 
Slovenia. The working group is of the same opinion. The 
Commission proposed that Slovenia does everything necessary to 
keep the villages in our country. 
  Regarding the visit of President Kucan to Croatia, during 
which he held talks with President Tudjman and Prime Minister 
Valentic -- as the Commission emphasized, a visit that again 
passed in the absence of our foreign minister -- the members 
were of the opinion that it is high time for the countries to 
finally start discussing numerous problems that are burdening 
relations. The agreement about this, as [the head of the 
Foreign Affairs' Commission] Zoran Thaler said, could be reached 
during preparations for the July visit of Prime Minister 
Valentic in Ljubljana. 
  Now about the third topic, which was discussed in the part 
of 
the session closed to the public -- Italy's attitude toward our 
country and the measures to slow us down in drawing closer to 
the European Union. 
  [Begin Thaler recording] The essential question that we 
asked ourselves is: What are the actual interests of Italy? Is 
what the Italian Foreign Minister -- who likes to say that these 
are minor problems that are already being resolved and that, 
after their resolution, Italy will gladly support Slovenia's 
membership in the European Union -- is saying also true, and is 
the agreement about these so-called minor issues truly 
sufficient for Italy to change its policy toward Slovenia? 
  Our logic is quite the opposite and, we believe, also more 
rational. We believe that the interests of Italy would be much 
better served if Italy was the one to encourage and, in a way, 
push Slovenia closer to the European Union. [end recording] 
  The Commission proposed that the government intensify its 
contacts with the 11 EU members and the arguments for the 
resolution of the position of the Slovene minority in Italy, 
which has recently deteriorated again. As Thaler assured, 
Slovenia will prepare a detailed dossier about the results of 
the Fascist repression upon the Slovenes between the years 1918 
to 1941 and will inform the European public of the findings. In 
this way, the second side of the medal to the questions and 
demands regarding property of the former refugees will also be 
known. 
  It will also become clear that the raising of the issues 
regulated with the Osimo Agreements could have further 
consequences for the European territory and that this is not 
merely a matter of Slovene-Italian relations. The Commission is 
of the opinion, Thaler emphasized, that the agreements between 
Italy and Slovenia are internationally and legally valid. Any 
possible new questions should be resolved to mutual satisfaction 
and not through blackmail. 

