BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent Yuriy Tyssovskiy] </F>
  [Text] Moscow April 8 TASS -- Viktor Posuvalyuk, the 
Russian president's special envoy, tackling problems linked with 
the settlement of the Middle East issue, told Russian and 
foreign journalists at the press centre of the Russian Foreign 
Ministry here today about the results of his recent trips to 
Syria, Jordan and Israel. 
  "The Near East is really near for us, Russians," he said. 
"This explains, in particular, the recent intensity of Russian 
diplomatic contacts in the region. During his visit to 
Damascus, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov handed to 
President Hafiz Al-Asad a message from Boris Yeltsin. We 
regard Syria's role in the Middle East peace process as a key 
factor, without which any contacts between the parties to the 
dragged out conflict would be one-sided, to say the least. 
Al-Asad's personal authority as a political leader is very 
high. Moscow's ties with Damascus are traditional and our 
attraction to each other remains very strong even though our 
relations had made little headway in the recent period." 
  Posuvalyuk stressed that the new Russo-Syrian relations were 
not beginning from scratch and that they had a rich background. 
He laid stress on the continuing dialogue and the development 
of economic relations that are based on new principles. 
"Al-Asad," the presidential envoy said, "agreed with us that the 
present level of relations did not meet the expectations of the 
two countries and that they should be further developed in all 
directions." 
  The diplomat said that the Syrian president welcomed 
Russia's 
active role in the effort to settle the Middle East problem. 
The views of the two countries on the approaches to this 
problem are similar. They believe that they should be based on 
the principle: Territories in exchange for peace". 
  Posuvalyuk met King Husayn of Jordan and Crown Prince Hassan 
in Amman. "It is gratifying," he said, "That the Jordanian 
leadership also assesses correctly the Russian policy in the 
Middle East. Jordan has made more progress in talks with Israel 
than the other Arab states. But the peace process calls for 
synchronous progress and King Husayn is well aware of it. He is 
fully dedicated to the achievement of an all-embracing 
settlement. 
  The presidential envoy met Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and 
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres during his visit to Israel. They 
assured the Russian representative that they were ready to exert 
every effort to resume the talks on Palestinian autonomy on the 
basis of the "Gaza-Jericho-today" plan. "During our talks," 
Posuvalyuk said, "we arrived at the conclusion that Russia's 
vigorous efforts in the Middle East are conducive for the peace 
process, and the Israeli side welcomed them. We also discussed 
preparations for Rabin's visit to Moscow." 
  Posuvalyuk especially stressed the importance of this visit 
and also of Yasir 'Arafat's trip to Moscow on April 19. "The 
Moscow meetings of the two leaders, who are displaying political 
wisdom and perspicacity, should be regarded as new links in the 
chain of events contributing to the peace process," he said. 

