Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A few minutes ago, in an interview with the Central 
News Unit, one of the commanders of the security forces provided 
new details on the conspiracy involving an assassination attempt 
on the life of the president and the blows struck at the Islamic 
system by foreign affiliated counterrevolutionaries. Please pay 
attention to this interview: 
  [Begin recording] [Unidentified correspondent] General, 
please tell our listeners about the latest investigations 
carried out and the information available on the attempt on the 
life of Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani, the president of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran. 
  [Unidentified security forces officer] In the name of God, 
the compassionate, the merciful. First let me express my most 
sincere congratulations to the martyr-nurturing ummah and the 
esteemed leader of the Islamic revolution on the 15th 
anniversary of the dawn of the Islamic revolution, thanks be to 
God. In less than three days after the incident, new dimensions 
of the assassination attempt against the esteemed president have 
been revealed. 
  The assailant, who was an individual of corrupt morals, and 
his corrupt collaborators, who had committed many immoral acts 
as well as drug addiction and who were intent on the 
assassination of the president, were all arrested. The 
assailant and his collaborators had taken part in Friday prayers 
in Tehran on a number of occasions for this very purpose -- to 
carry out their evil deed there. However, as the result of the 
vigilance of the Hezbollahi ummah and the implementation of 
security checks, they had not been able to carry out their evil 
plan there. Therefore, they made use of the great gathering of 
the people on 1 February, the anniversary of the first day of 
the Ten Days of Dawn, and of the presence of the esteemed 
president at those ceremonies, which had been announced in 
advance. 
  The assailant and one of his collaborators had entered the 
pure shrine of Imam Khomeyni, may God's blessings be upon him, 
in order to implement their plan. They then carried out the 
plot which everyone knows about. That man, who is a member of 
one of the anti- Islamic and antirevolutionary grouplets, and 
all the other members of the group who have been arrested, are 
completely against Islamic principles and the Islamic 
revolution. By firing a few shots in the direction of the 
podium, he was trying to carry out the plot, but thanks be to 
God, as the result of the vigilance, wrathful onslaught, and 
fast reaction of the Hezbollahi ummah the shots did not hit the 
target and the assailant was arrested by the people and handed 
over. 
  [Correspondent] General: We have heard in the news that the 
assassination attempt was premeditated and there is evidence of 
the involvement of foreign agents. Could you tell us some more 
about this, please? 
  [Security forces officer] Praise be to God and thanks to 
divine mercy, in the wake of precise intelligence work and the 
confessions of the assailant, all his accomplices and the 
planners of this disgraceful action have been arrested. All the 
evidence, files, and confessions indicate that the conspiracy 
was fully planned. There is other information on the next 
question you asked; however, for the time being, in order to 
safeguard the secrets of Hezbollahi ummah and for the sake of 
security expediency, we regret we cannot divulge them. God 
willing the martyr-rearing nation will be informed by us of the 
conclusive reports in the near future. [end recording] 

