BFN 

<F P=106> ["No Export Control Apparatus Will Have Effect on DPRK, </F>
Declares Foreign Ministry Spokesman of the DPRK" -- KCNA 
headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 2 (KCNA) -- The spokesman for the 
Foreign Ministry of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
declared that just as the "Coordinating Committee for Export to 
Communist Area" (Cocom) [Coordinating Committee for Multilateral 
Export Controls] had no effect on the DPRK in the past, the 
second "Cocom" and any other international export control 
apparatus will have no effect on it. 
  "We will not be frightened by the appearance of any export 
control apparatus," the spokesman said. 
  The spokesman made this stand clear, answering a question 
put 
by KCNA today concerning the moves of the United States and 
other Western countries to bring into shape the second "Cocom", 
another export control machine, in the wake of the dismantling 
of the "Cocom". 
  The spokesman said: 
  "In making haste with the formation of a new export control 
apparatus, the United States seeks to bar the developing 
countries from making an independent progress through economic 
and scientific- technological development and subjugate them 
and, at the same time, restrict and control the economic and 
trade relations of the Western countries with the developing 
countries through the medium of this apparatus. Judging from 
this, the `development' and `prosperity' of the international 
community harped on by the United States are all an empty talk 
intended to conceal its wild design to establish its domination 
and gain world supremacy. 
  "It must not go unnoticed that the DPRK and other developing 
countries have been designated as objects of control by the 
export control machine to be knocked into shape under the 
pretext of `preventing threat to world peace'. 
  "As far as the threat to world peace is concerned, it comes 
from the United States and its followers, not from the 
developing countries. This is an undeniable fact. 
  "The developing countries are on guard against the scheme of 
the United States and other Western countries to frame up the 
second `Cocom' for economic blockade on them. What is important 
at present is for the developing countries to substantially 
realise South-South cooperation on the principle of collective 
self-reliance. 
  "The Western countries must not make light of the attempt of 
the United States to have the field to itself in the economic 
domain." 

