Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Espionage" program] </F>
  [Text] [First announcer] The Central Intelligence Agency is 
trying to earn money wherever it can. For example, a CIA 
foreign language teaching computer program, for Russian and 
Spanish in particular, recently appeared in American shops. 
These programs, known by the name Exito, were compiled by CIA 
experts specially for the teaching of their agents. According 
to a representative of the U.S. intelligence service, with the 
help of Exito most students start speaking Spanish, for example, 
after two weeks of taking the course for seven hours per day. 
The teaching program that has come onto the market has hardly 
been changed. Only the special terms and expressions that the 
CIA agents were to use in their espionage work have been 
eliminated. 
  [Second announcer] Naturally the commercial activity of the 
CIA does not cover all the expenses of that intelligence 
department. Therefore, in spite of the cuts announced in the 
state budget, the U.S. Administration has asked Congress for $28 
billion for the needs of the intelligence service. They should 
definitely get down to concentrating on our economic interests, 
Bill Clinton, the new U.S. President, explained. He evidently 
had in mind the wave of financial and industrial espionage which 
has gripped the western world at the present time. 
  [First announcer] The CIA is asserting that the United 
States 
is literally teeming with foreign agents at the present time. 
India, Russia, Germany, and Egypt are conducting active 
industrial espionage against the United States. French agents 
have almost infiltrated 49 U.S. companies. Taiwan has 280 spies 
in the United States. The CIA staff calls industrial espionage 
the main threat to national interests. According to the CIA, 
the United States lost $100 billion last year because of this. 
  [Second announcer] There are friendly states, but there are 
no friendly intelligence services, Allen Dulles, one of the 
founders of the CIA, reminds us. The enemies in this new 
special services' war are the former allies in the struggle 
against communism -- the Japanese, the French, and finally 
Mossad. Israel undertook espionage in the United States 
earlier, moreover. We draw your attention to an account about 
the Israeli intelligence service. 
  [Begin video report showing Mossad units, news clips of 
international events that involved Mossad] [Correspondent] 
Mossad: In actual fact that malicious-sounding, hissing word, 
the utterance of which by nationalist patriots is almost 
indecent simply means administration, the administration of the 
intelligence service, of special operations. It appeared in 
1951 following the reorganization of the Israeli special 
services. Apart from Mossad, there is also the Aman military 
intelligence service in Israel, the Shin Bet security service, 
and the department of research and planning of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. 
  Mossad is involved in political intelligence work and is 
responsible for all the operations of Israel's special services 
abroad. Mossad is financed from the military budget. It 
consists of nine directorates in which approximately 2,000 
members of staff are employed. Of these there were 500 
officers. Naturally there are more Mossad agents. All members 
of staff in the organization enjoy benefits. They enjoy a 
supplement of 30 percent to their wages for risk. They also 
have the right to import goods from abroad without paying duty 
on them. And they go to the top of the housing list. 
  When a person joins Mossad, military training is taken into 
account. Parachutists and navy divers are given preference. 
New recruits undergo training at two intelligence schools, in 
Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. They spend the first six months 
studying the fundamentals of espionage, coding, mastering 
weapons, self-defense techniques, using electronic equipment, 
methods of shadowing and identification. Then they divide into 
specializations according to country. 
  Almost all Mossad's officers are obliged to speak Arabic 
fluently. For this purpose, Mossad and counterintelligence 
definitely sends members of its staff to the Gaza sector and to 
the West Bank for them to practice their Arabic for two years. 
Among the special training assignments are the following, for 
example. To penetrate Jordan and make one's way to the desert 
where only Bedouin live and to return alive, and not to cause 
any fuss while doing it. 
  So, throughout the world many Mossad staff members are 
working under the wing of state or private institutions. The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, travel agencies, as airline 
representatives of the El Al air company, and of trade unions. 
Officers of the Israeli intelligence service enjoy great 
freedom in carrying out specific operations. For example, when 
recruiting an agent, an officer is not obliged to consult the 
center every time. In recruiting agents Mossad makes 
considerable use of the Jewish diaspora which is known to be the 
most unified in the world. Incidentally this is precisely what 
explains the success of the Israeli intelligence service. 
  Moreover, in recruiting people, Mossad also uses false 
information. They may approach officers from various NATO 
countries, for example. 
  Naturally, Mossad is most active in the Arab world. It 
gathers information on literally everything, on arms, mutual 
relations between Arab leaders, the arms trade and in general on 
the political activity of the Arabs. Mossad actively pursues 
measures to influence the politics in those countries. It is 
widely known that it is not squeamish about political murders. 
The Italian magazine PANORAMA published a list of 24 
Palestinian leaders who were eliminated by Mossad from 1972 to 
1988. These were journalists, large-scale arms traders, 
intelligence officers, and PLO military leaders. The murders 
were carried out in Beirut, Rome, Paris, Athens, Tunis, and in 
Cyprus. 
  Mossad has a strong position on the African continent, in 
Kenya, Liberia, and Zaire. It has particularly close mutual 
relations with the Republic of South Africa intelligence 
service. In the 1960's Mossad received $80 million from the CIA 
to promote the activity of the Israeli intelligence service in 
Africa. Mossad instructors also trained sabotage experts in 
Honduras and Pakistan, and trained intelligence officers for a 
number of Latin American countries. 
  Mossad also carried out and is carrying out intelligence 
activity against the Soviet Union, Europe and even the United 
States, and the theft of nuclear materials, military technology, 
and secret documents. In 1968 the plans for the French Mirage 
fighter were stolen which formed the basis for a similar Israeli 
aircraft, the Kfir. In 1969, five of the latest missile patrol 
boats were stolen from the French port of Cherbourg. In 1979 
Israeli agents made a recording of a conversation between Andrew 
Young, the U.S. permanent representative at the United Nations, 
and the PLO observer. The CIA arrested the Israeli spy (J. 
Ford) for handing over classified documents. In 1986 Vanunu, a 
former member of staff of the Israeli nuclear center who told 
the public about Israel's nuclear potential was kidnapped in 
London, 
  Moreover the most considerable successes of any intelligence 
service always remain in the shadows. Therefore it is for the 
experts to judge whether all these notorious operations by 
Mossad should be considered successes. 
  In the view of the CIA expressed in a special report on 
Mossad, the specific task of the Israeli intelligence service 
consists of sowing discord among the Arabs and carrying out 
actions that will promote the sympathy of the West toward 
Israel. As far as the methods of the Israeli intelligence 
service are concerned, no one put it as eloquently as Yitzaq 
Shamir, Israel's former premier: After one shoots one's enemy, 
one fires a second shot to be sure that he is dead. 
  He should know. In his time this person had a dizzy career 
in Mossad, from an ordinary operative in 1955 to deputy director 
in 1965. 
  Yitzaq Shamir was not the first and not the last to start 
his 
career in the intelligence service. The intelligence service in 
various countries nurtured quite a few well known scientists, 
political scientists, and writers: Graham Green and Somerset 
Maugham, John Le Carre, and Daniel Defoe. In their time these 
people worked for the British intelligence service. We have 
examples like that, too. 

