BFN 

<F P=106> [Guangdong Provincial Government Work Report, delivered by </F>
Guangdong Governor Zhu Senlin (2612 2773 2651) at the Second 
Session of the Eighth Guangdong Provincial People's Congress on 
19 February: "Government Work Report"] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies, 
  On behalf of the Provincial People's Congress, I now submit 
the report on the work of the government for your examination 
and approval, and also for suggestions and comments from members 
of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 
[CPPCC] and other observers. 
<H5>  I. Review of Work Done in 1993 </H5>
  The year 1993 was an extraordinary one for the development 
of 
the socialist market economy and the realization of 
modernization in Guangdong Province. It was also a year when we 
seized the opportunity to speed up development. Under the 
leadership of the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee and the 
supervision of the provincial people's congress and its standing 
committee, we have implemented conscientiously the principles 
and policies of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council; 
maintained good momentum in the sustained, rapid and healthy 
development [chixu kuaisu, jiankang fazhan 2170 4958 1816 6643 
0256 1660 4099 1455] of the national economy; and achieved new 
successes in science and technology, education, cultural 
development, and other social undertakings in the course of the 
year. Almost all the principal targets for economic and social 
development adopted at the first session of the eighth 
provincial people's congress have been fulfilled. Calculated on 
a comparable basis, the province's gross domestic product (GDP) 
is expected to reach 314 billion yuan (the 1993 price, same 
below), an increase of 21 percent over the previous year if it 
is calculated in terms of comparable items, while the total 
value of industrial and agricultural production is expected to 
soar by 31 percent to 597.4 billion yuan. 
  Encouraged by the important remarks made by Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping during his tour of south China and by the spirit of the 
14th National People's Congress, the vast numbers of cadres and 
people throughout Guangdong stirred themselves up, emancipated 
their minds, and seized the opportunity to quicken the pace of 
economic construction. With the economy growing rapidly, the 
provincial government urged all localities to implement 
conscientiously the spirit of the first session of the eighth 
provincial people's congress by recognizing and seizing the 
opportunity to develop the reform in both depth and breadth, 
formulating policy measures that will promote economic 
development, and establishing a new supremacy for the 
development of the Guangdong economy. At the same time, the 
provincial government also followed closely the trends of 
economic development, kept track of and analyzed the issues of 
key concern, strengthened macrocontrol, and promptly resolved 
new problems under new conditions. In the early part of the 
year, we stressed the need to combine emancipation of the mind 
with seeking truth from facts, insisting that we should proceed 
from reality in everything and should do everything in our power 
and within our capabilities. We wanted speed on the basis of 
achieving an optimal structure and better economic results, and 
opposed the blind vying for speed and the application of 
pressure at every level for "faster growth" without taking 
conditions into consideration. At the same time, through the 
strengthening of guidance over real estate development and the 
sorting out of development areas, we not only achieved 
considerable growth in real estate development and enabled 
various types of development areas to make a good start, but 
also brought about a change for the better in the over-extended 
scale of development. In the second half of the year, we 
implemented conscientiously the important decisions of the CPC 
Central Committee and the State Council on strengthening 
macrocontrol; seriously handled the relationships among reform, 
readjustment and development; and devoted major efforts to the 
consolidation of fixed-asset investment and the financial order. 
On the use of construction funds, we ensured the needs of key 
projects; strictly controlled the launching of new projects; 
examined and graded all projects under construction; and cut a 
number of projects that were not in conformity with the state's 
industrial policies, did not have the necessary funds, and did 
not have clear market prospects. We also conducted a general 
cleaning up of unauthorized inter- borrowing, illegal fund 
raising, and illegal financial institutions; strengthened price 
monitoring; and carried out a general inspection of prices and 
charges. Through these regulatory and control measures, we 
prevented major fluctuations in the national economy and ensured 
its healthy development. On the whole, the government was able 
to fulfill its 1993 tasks in a satisfactory manner. 
  1. The national economy continued to develop in a 
sustained, rapid and coordinated way [kuaisu, xietiao fazhan 
1816 6643 0588 6148 4099 1455]. 
  Last year, while developing the national economy at a great 
pace, our province also further optimized the economic structure 
and achieved notable improvements in economic results. Where 
the development of the three major sectors of industry was 
concerned, we made improvements in the primary sector, increased 
the weighting of the secondary sector, and made new headway in 
the tertiary sector. New achievements were made in agriculture 
and rural work. Local governments at all levels greatly 
strengthened their leadership over agriculture, and increased 
their input. Input by fiscal departments at various levels 
showed a 7.6 percent increase over the previous year. Although 
the province was repeatedly hit by typhoons and other serious 
natural disasters last year, the total value of agricultural 
production still reached 88.6 billion yuan, an increase of 3.5 
percent compared with the previous year. 
  Grain, sugar 
cane, and fruit production dropped, but forestry, animal 
husbandry, and fishery all registered fairly large increases. 
Afforestation attained the planned targets two years ahead of 
schedule, and high-quality, high- yield, high-efficiency 
agriculture developed at a much faster pace. Township 
enterprises achieved an output value of 208 billion yuan, 45 
billion more than in the previous year. Industrial production 
developed at great speed, and economic results improved. Total 
industrial output value increased by 36.5 percent to 508.8 
billion yuan, and 96 percent of the goods produced were sold. 
Losses sustained by budget-covered state-owned industrial 
enterprises dropped by 37.6 percent, while total profits 
increased by 190.5 percent. Key construction projects showed 
smooth progress, while large-scale infrastructural construction 
was launched, and notable results were achieved in such areas as 
energy, transportation, telecommunications, and water 
conservancy. Investment plans for 45 key projects in the 
province were basically fulfilled. Sixty-three km of the 
Guangzhou-Shenzhen Expressway were completed and opened to 
traffic, the Guangzhou-Meixian-Shantou Railway extended 
passenger service to Heyuan, the construction of major tunnels 
and bridges on the Guangdong section of the Beijing-Kowloon 
Railway was in full swing, and the third phase expansion of the 
East River-Shenzhen River water supply project was completed 
ahead of schedule. Generating units with a total capacity of 
3.88 million kilowatts [kw] were installed, an additional 150 
kilometers of expressways were built, 1,349 kilometers of 
primary and secondary highways were built or improved, and 
telephone exchanges with a capacity of 2.2 million circuits were 
built in the urban and rural areas. New achievements were made 
in foreign economic relations and trade. According to 
statistical specifications that apply to the whole nation, total 
import-export volume for the year was $46.9 billion, with 
exports accounting for $27 billion and imports accounting for 
$19.9 billion. A total of 19,000 contracts worth $34.8 billion 
were signed with foreign investors, and foreign funds worth 
$9.65 billion were used -- an increase of 98.6 percent. Of this 
amount, $7.498 billion were direct investment, another all-time 
record. Foreign affairs, overseas Chinese affairs, tourism, and 
other work also made positive contributions to economic 
construction in the province. The export-oriented economies of 
special economic zones, coastal open cities, and coastal open 
economic zones all made further headway. The domestic market 
was enlivened, and buying and selling were brisk. Total retail 
sales volume was 140.26 billion yuan, an increase of 32.3 
percent over the previous year. Fiscal income showed a large 
increase. Annual receipts totaled 34.62 billion yuan, an 
increase of 56.4 percent, and expenditure totaled 33.42 billion 
yuan, an increase of 51.9 percent, indicating that we had a 
balanced budget with a small surplus. Bank deposits and loans 
continued to grow. By the end of 1993, the balance of various 
types of bank deposits totaled 271.98 billion yuan, up 14.4 
percent, while the balance of borrowings was registered at 
223.73 billion yuan, up 23.4 percent. Development of 
mountainous areas accelerated, and a successful job was done in 
supporting the poor. Total industrial and agricultural 
production value in the 50 mountainous counties (districts) in 
the province was 91.1 billion yuan, an increase of 26 percent 
over the previous year; revenue increased by 43 percent to 3 
billion yuan; and the per-capita annual net income of peasants 
showed real growth of 5.8 percent. We secured a life with 
sufficient food and clothing for 130,000 people, and helped 1 
million people shake off poverty, thereby basically fulfilling 
the objectives set early last year. People's living standards 
continued to improve. A sample survey last year showed that per 
capita living expenses for urban residents in the province 
amounted to 4,277 yuan, while peasants' per capita net income 
was 1,675 yuan -- increases of 10.1 percent and 6.1 percent over 
their respective 1992 figures after allowing for inflation. The 
volume of savings deposits for urban and rural residents was 
187.45 billion yuan, 41.5 billion yuan more than in the 
beginning of the year, or 2,881 yuan per capita. Housing for 
urban and rural residents also continued to improve. Last year, 
various types of new housing units were built, with total floor 
space amounting to 56.73 million square meters. A large number 
of urban residents with housing problems moved into new units. 
New headway also was made in urban and rural construction and 
in environmental protection. 
  2. The further deepening of reforms. 
  With internal reform and the change of operational 
mechanisms 
in full swing, various types of enterprises were able to make 
notable progress in exercising management autonomy, gearing 
themselves to market needs, strengthening management, and 
improving economic results. The provincial government organized 
and deployed 10 inspection teams to 20 cities to check up on the 
implementation of the "Regulations Concerning the Transformation 
of Operational Mechanisms in Industrial Enterprises Owned by the 
Whole People" and our province's own "Methods of 
Implementation." This work has been instrumental in ensuring 
the decisionmaking powers of enterprises. The 2,000-plus pilot 
enterprises for comprehensive reform achieved notable results 
and played an exemplary role in the transformation of 
operational mechanisms. Reform of the shareholding system was 
tried out on an extended scale and was moving in the direction 
of standardization. Last year, we approved the establishment of 
159 limited-liability stock companies and listed a number of 
companies on the stock exchange. Management of joint-stock 
companies and the stock market was strengthened. The 
joint-stock cooperative system made swift headway in rural 
areas, with the number of joint-stock cooperative enterprises 
exceeding 30,000. 
  The individual and private economies 
continued to develop. The market system further matured. The 
whole province went all-out in developing special commodity 
transaction markets and large shopping arcades, and in 
cultivating futures markets. The scale of various types of 
markets in the urban and rural areas further expanded, and the 
volume of market transactions grew steadily. The capital goods 
markets also further expanded. Today, about 98 percent of 
capital goods consumed in the province are obtainable through 
the market. The system of compensated land use was instituted 
in over 90 percent of cities and counties in the province. 
Substantial headway was made in the development of markets for 
production factors. Gradual improvement was made in the pricing 
mechanism, with market forces playing a dominant role; reform of 
the social security system also steadily advanced. The scope 
covered by the old-age insurance system was enlarged, and 
reforms were carried out in the operation and management of 
funds for unemployment, medical care, industrial- injury 
insurance, and social insurance. The unemployment rate in urban 
areas was kept within the 2 percent level. The reshuffling of 
government organs was grasped without letup. A program was 
drawn up for the reform of organs directly under the provincial 
government. A number of permanent organs were abolished, with 
steps taken to relocate their staff members. Smooth progress 
was made in the experimental reform of government organs in 15 
cities and counties. Reforms of the financial, scientific and 
technological, educational, cultural, public health, and urban 
housing systems also continued to deepen. 
  3. New advances were made in cultural and ideological 
progress and other social undertakings. 
  We persisted in stressing both material and 
cultural-ideological progress, seriously organized people 
throughout the province to study in depth Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, and continued to conduct in-depth education on 
patriotism, collectivism, and socialism. A variety of 
activities for the promotion of cultural and ideological 
progress -- such as those aimed at fostering a new workstyle; 
the spirit of dedication; and the establishment of civilized 
units, neighborhoods, villages, and households -- were launched 
extensively in light of reality. These activities brought about 
an improvement in people's political and ideological awareness 
and their moral qualities, and yielded satisfactory results. In 
order to accelerate the development of education in science and 
technology, the provincial government decided that starting last 
year, 723 million yuan would be raised and injected into the 
scientific and technological education fund each year. Notable 
results were achieved in science and technology, and new headway 
was made in the commercialization and industrialization of 
scientific and technological achievements, with focus on new and 
high technologies and their industrial development. The six 
state-level high and new technology development areas in our 
province all were able to maintain a good momentum of growth. 
Smooth progress was made in the implementation of the "Torch" 
and "Spark" Programs. New achievements were made in 
technological development and basic research. Education saw 
accelerated development. Last year, another 13 counties 
(cities and districts) passed the assessment and acceptance test 
for the implementation of compulsory junior secondary education. 
Universal nine-year compulsory education was practiced in 58 
counties (cities and districts), or half of the number of 
counties in the province. In some economically better-developed 
cities and counties, universal senior secondary education was 
introduced. Vocational, technical and adult education saw rapid 
development. The number of specialized higher and secondary 
institutions increased, enrollment expanded markedly, and 
distribution became more rational. Cultural and artistic 
creation, as well as mass literary and art activities thrived. 
A number of outstanding works emerged which reflected the 
spirit of the times and displayed local characteristics. 
Control of cultural markets produced fruitful results. The 
authorities carried out three large-scale raids on the 
province's audio-video and cultural markets and recreational 
outlets, stepped up the expansion of the ranks of cultural 
inspectors, and strengthened the management of cultural markets. 
Journalism, publication, and radio and TV broadcasting saw 
further development, and played an important role in promoting 
cultural and ideological progress and in enriching people's 
spiritual and cultural lives. Health conditions in the urban 
and rural areas improved. Achievements were made in terms of 
ensuring that township hospitals and county-level epidemic- 
prevention and health-protection organs were not housed in 
dangerous buildings and that they had appropriate accommodation, 
facilities, and personnel. Good results were achieved in 
sports. Our athletes broke 10 world records 17 times, and won 
19 world championships. At the Seventh National Games, they won 
31 gold and silver medals, and came second in terms of overall 
scores and medal counts. Mass sports activities continued to 
develop. A good job was done in family planning. The natural 
population growth rate was maintained at 12.5 per thousand per 
annum, suggesting that the target set by the state was 
fulfilled. National defense education for the whole citizenry 
continued to develop in depth. Closer ties were cemented 
between the Army and the government and between soldiers and 
people, and the work to support the Army and cherish the people, 
to support the Army and give preferential treatment to the 
families of soldiers and martyrs, and to arm grass-roots units; 
was strengthened. Armed forces units stationed in Guangdong, 
the People's Armed Police, the militia, and the reserve service 
all played an active role in rescue work and the maintenance of 
public order, and made new contributions to the promotion of 
material progress, as well as cultural and ideological progress. 
New achievements were made in minority nationality and 
religious affairs, archives, the protection of cultural relics, 
social welfare, and old-age care. 
  4. The comprehensive consolidation of public order and 
the establishment of a democratic legal system were strengthened. 
  With the spearhead directed against salient public order 
problems, we strengthened the work of comprehensive 
consolidation by by organizing a series of special campaigns 
were against thieves on public transport and bandits on roads, 
criminal gangs of a secret society nature, prostitution and 
whoring, gambling and drug dens, as well as smuggling and the 
selling of smuggled goods. Major raids also were organized 
against key spots and venues. Thus social stability was 
effectively maintained. The provincial government decided last 
year to increase contributions to administrative and legal 
development funds by 172 million yuan each year. It also 
decided to further enhance the strengthening of the ranks of 
administrative and legal personnel by increasing staff size and 
improving equipment. Economic auditing and administrative 
supervision were strengthened, and violations of law and 
discipline in the economic sphere were investigated and dealt 
with in accordance with law. Local governments at all levels 
continued to implement conscientiously the resolutions of the 
provincial people's government and its standing committee, and 
consciously accepted supervision by the provincial people's 
congress. The provincial government handled 327 proposals and 
recommendations submitted by deputies to the national and 
provincial people's congresses, as well as 252 motions submitted 
by members of the national and provincial committees of the 
CPPCC. Last year 18 pieces of local legislation submitted by 
the provincial government were examined and adopted by the 
standing committee of the provincial people's congress, and 31 
rules and regulations were promulgated by the provincial 
government. Lawyers and notarial organs worked hard to provide 
legal services for economic construction. Local governments at 
all levels devoted major efforts to the fight against 
corruption, and achieved intermediate results in promoting 
honesty and self-discipline, in rectifying unhealthy practices 
among leading cadres, and in tackling issues of key concern to 
the masses. Government organs at all levels improved their work 
style, further established and improved various administrative 
systems, perfected administrative procedures, increased the 
transparency of government, and improved working efficiency. 
  Over the past year, our province achieved economic 
prosperity, social stability, and tremendous successes on all 
fronts. These were the results of the concerted struggle waged 
by people throughout the province under the correct leadership 
of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council. We also 
owed these successes to the support and assistance given us by 
the PLA units stationed in Guangdong; democratic parties; 
people's organizations; Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan compatriots; 
and overseas Chinese compatriots; as well as friends all over 
the world. On behalf of the Guangdong Provincial People's 
Government, I extend to them our highest esteem and heartfelt 
thanks. 
  While affirming our achievements, we also must view soberly 
the new contradictions and problems that cropped up in our 
social and economic development last year. First, the scale of 
fixed-asset investment was over-extended. Last year, 
fixed-asset investment in the province totaled 146.1 billion 
yuan, an increase of 58.5 percent over the previous year. The 
use of funds was rather scattered, and there still was not much 
rationality in the readjustment and layout of the investment 
structure and in fund use. Second, there were too many weak 
links in agricultural production. Investment was sufficient, 
the loss of arable land was excessive, and the ability to 
prevent and fight natural disasters still left much to be 
desired. Our province suffered repeated spring chills and 
flooding, and was hit by six strong typhoons last year. These 
natural calamities caused our agricultural sector more than 12 
billion yuan in direct economic losses. Third, prices rose 
substantially. The general retail price index for the whole of 
last year was 18.2 percent higher than in 1992, and exceeded the 
control targets set by the provincial government early last 
year. Fourth, the public order situation was grim and there was 
an increase in the number of criminal offenses. Apart from 
these, there were enterprises that performed poorly and were 
heavily indebted. In some localities, contradictions reflecting 
clashes of interest relations among the people increased, and 
some localities lagged behind in economic development, while 
some had serious fires and accidents. These are problems that 
deserve our attention and that we must tackle in the course of 
advance. 
  Fellow deputies! In the new year ahead, we will be 
confronted by good opportunities, as well as grave challenges. 
The trend of peace and development cannot be held back, and the 
international environment has further improved. Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the decision of the 14th National CPC 
Congress and the 3d Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee on the establishment of a socialist market economy 
structure have further charted our course of reform and opening 
up. The whole country is deepening the reform, opening wider to 
the outside world, and pushing ahead in economic construction. 
We must cherish, grasp, face, and welcome this opportunity. 
Although we are likely to meet numerous other new challenges on 
our road toward the basic realization of modernization before 
the year 2000, with the foundation laid by more than 10 years of 
reform and opening up and with the great enthusiasm and wisdom 
shown by people throughout the province in construction, we 
definitely will be able to overcome difficulties and win new 
victories in reform and development. 
  II. Ensure the Sustained, Rapid, and Healthy 
Development of the National Economy 
  The year 1994 will be an important one for our province in 
accelerating the establishment of the socialist market economy 
structure and in economic development. The guidelines for the 
work of the government are: To conscientiously implement the 
spirit of the 3d Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee and the second session of the 7th provincial people's 
congress; actively promote reforms for the establishment of the 
socialist market economy structure; open wider to the outside 
world; make an earnest effort to shift the focus of economic 
work into the orbit of striving for better economic results; 
readjust and optimize the economic structure; properly handle 
the relationship among reform, development, and stability; 
ensure the sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
national economy; and promote the all-round progress of all 
social undertakings. 
  Based on a forecast of the overall trend of economic 
development, and bearing in mind that economic targets must be 
arranged in such a way that they can create an environment 
conducive to reform, the following planned targets have been 
adopted for our province: GDP growth -- 15 percent; total 
industrial output value growth -- 21 percent; total agricultural 
output value growth -- 5 percent; real growth in fixed-asset 
investment -- 13 percent; total retail sales growth -- 21 
percent; revenue growth -- 10 percent, calculated in comparable 
terms; growth in total import-export volume -- 16 percent; 
increases in the general retail price index -- around 12 percent. 
  In order to achieve these targets, it is necessary to pay 
special attention to the following ten tasks: 
  1. Steadily develop agriculture and the rural 
economy. 
  Governments at all levels must have a better understanding 
of 
the position of agriculture as the foundation of the economy; 
must strengthen their leadership over agriculture and rural 
work; and through guidance, support, protection, regulation and 
control, must increase input in agriculture in diverse ways so 
as to invigorate the agricultural economy. We must continue to 
readjust and optimize the pattern of agricultural production; 
invigorate agriculture through application of scientific and 
technological advances and the promotion of education; do a good 
job in running various types of farming-breeding and 
demonstration bases; promote advanced and applicable 
agricultural science and technology in an all-round way; and 
accelerate the development of high-quality, high-yield and high- 
efficiency agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and fishery. 
We must strengthen land management, strictly forbid the 
unauthorized seizure and use of arable land, and establish a 
basic farmland protection system. We must do a good job in the 
construction of commodity grain bases so as to ensure the steady 
development of grain production. We also must establish a 
system whereby the price of grain sold under purchase contracts 
is protected, and set up a grain risk fund in order to increase 
peasants' income. Effective measures must be taken to stabilize 
the acreage sown to grain and sugar cane, ensuring that we have 
at least 3.3 million hectares under grain and 260,000 hectares 
under sugar cane each year. We must strengthen farmland capital 
construction and concentrate on the construction, harnessing, 
repair, and reinforcement of key water conservancy projects -- 
such as the construction of embankments along major rivers and 
the Feilai Gorge Water Control Project -- so as to increase our 
capacity to fight and resist natural disasters and improve the 
conditions for agricultural production. We must make a success 
of the exploitation, utilization, and protection of water 
sources; develop the forestry economy; increase the acreage of 
fine forests and orchards; do a good job in forestry protection; 
and consolidate the achievements of afforestation. We must 
speed up the exploitation of slopes, extensively cultivate 
pastures, and actively develop grazing stock and rare animals so 
as to bring about a larger increase in the total number of 
livestock. We must stabilize and improve the two-tier 
management system, with contracting on a household basis forming 
the mainstay; actively develop the rural joint-stock cooperative 
system; and promote a moderate degree of economies of scale and 
intensive management in agriculture. We must develop various 
collectivized service systems in rural areas; gradually promote 
insurance for agricultural production; accelerate the 
integration of trade, industry, and agriculture; and enliven the 
flow of agricultural products. Care must be taken to integrate 
the development of township enterprises with the development of 
small towns in order bring about a higher level of urbanization 
in rural areas. We also must make full use of our superiority 
in having a long coastline and a vast sea area in order to 
further accelerate the exploitation and utilization of seas, 
coastal belts, and islands so as to develop a maritime economy 
in a big way. 
  2. Maintain rapid industrial growth on the basis of 
improved performance. 
  Achieving better economic performance is the key link in 
improving industrial production. Governments and departments at 
all levels must firmly grasp this key link; firmly uphold the 
policy of a high starting point, a high level,and a large scale 
in promoting technological development and technological 
transformation in an all-round way; speed up readjustment of the 
product mix; and improve the quality, grade, and 
production-marketing ratio of products. We must give energetic 
support to the development and production of new products, 
create a number of brand-name products, and establish a number 
of "star" enterprises in an effort to form some pillar 
industries and series of new products that have a competitive 
edge. We must attach special importance to follow-up 
technological transformation in 100 key enterprises and ensure 
the implementation of major technological transformation 
programs. International standards must be adopted in promoting 
standardization in enterprises. We must pay attention to the 
organization, deployment, and coordination of energy, transport, 
material resources, funds and other important factors of 
production. The internal management of enterprises must be 
strengthened. Emulation activities aimed at "changing the 
operational mechanism, grasping management, enhancing 
capability, and improving performance" must be launched in all 
enterprises in the province, and unremitting efforts must be 
made to grasp the management of work at the grass-roots level 
and in workshops in order to tap potential, reduce energy 
consumption, lower cost, and accelerate funds turnover. We must 
continue to grasp the work of turning deficits into surpluses 
and strive to bring about the unity of speed and performance. 
All enterprises must effectively ensure the legitimate rights 
of their staff members and workers, and improve their production 
and living conditions. Further efforts must be made to 
strengthen leadership over safety in production, establish and 
improve safety responsibility systems in production at all 
levels, stop all loopholes, remove hidden perils, and guard 
against the occurrence of serious accidents. 
  3. Attach importance to key projects and accelerate 
the development of infrastructural facilities and basic 
industries. 
  Doing a good job in developing transportation, energy, 
telecommunications, and key raw and semifinished materials 
industries is an important task confronting our province in its 
efforts to speed up modernization. While ensuring a rational 
level of fixed-asset investment, it is necessary to strengthen 
and improve macrocontrol, optimize the investment structure, and 
continue to give priority to infrastructural construction, basic 
industries, and technological transformation in investment. On 
the basis of the availability of funds, it is necessary to make 
rational arrangements for construction projects and keep new 
projects under strict control. Real estate development must be 
carried out in a positive and steady manner. Efforts also must 
be made to reduce the number of up-market buildings and villas 
and to step up the construction of residential units with a 
small profit margin for people with housing problems. 
  Our province has 33 major construction projects under way 
this year, with total investment amounting to 73 billion yuan, 
and 20 billion yuan in investment planned for the current year. 
Among these projects, five are new. They include the Guangzhou 
subway, the coastal expressway in the western part of the 
province, the Guangdong section of the Beijing-Wuhan-Guangzhou 
fiber-optic cable, the Feilai Gorge key water conservancy 
project, and the Dahe Reservoir project. The remaining 28 are 
projects already under construction. They include construction 
of the Beijing-Kowloon Railway, where work will be in full swing 
on all sections; the Guangzhou-Meixian-Shantou Railway, where 
track-laying will reach the Lianhuashan Pass and freight 
transport will be extended to Meixian; the Guangzhou-Shenzhen 
Quasi-Express Railway, where efforts will be made to put China's 
first quasi-express train into service; the completion of the 
Guangzhou-Shenzhen Expressway; the Humen Bridge, where work will 
be accelerated; the commissioning of a number of 10,000-ton 
berths at new ports; as well as efforts to step up the 
construction of key raw and materials projects, such as the two 
ethylene plants at Maoming and Guangzhou. The following targets 
have been adopted for key infrastructural projects in the 
province: Increase power generating capacity by 3 million kw, 
build 140 km of expressways and 400-500 km of first-class 
highways, and increase program-controlled telephones by 2.5 
million circuits. In accordance with the principle of "unified 
planning, coordination between central and regional authorities, 
responsibility at each level, and joint development," 
governments at all levels and various departments must mobilize 
the whole society, persist in raising funds in diverse ways, 
improve the fund-raising mechanism for key projects, strengthen 
organizational coordination and management, promptly tackle 
problems and difficulties arising in the course of construction, 
and ensure the completion of projects on time with attention to 
both quality and efficiency. 
  4. Open wider to the outside world and promote 
pluralism in foreign economic relations and trade 
  Opening wider to the outside world is an important guarantee 
for accelerating the Guangdong economy and for convergence with 
the international economy. We must grasp the opportunity and 
promote the opening of the province on multiple levels and in 
wide areas, as well as in breadth and depth. Special economic 
zones, coastal open cities, and the Pearl River Delta must 
continue to set the pace for opening to the outside world. The 
role of Guangzhou as a pilot city for comprehensive reform must 
be brought into play, and the pace of modernizing the 
export-oriented economy must be quickened. The eastern and 
western flanks of Guangdong and the mountainous areas in the 
heartland must strengthen the work in forming links with other 
parts of the country and importing from abroad, improve the 
investment environment, promote opening to the outside world in 
all directions, and accelerate the pace of development. The 
development zones must do a good job in planning, accelerate 
infrastructural construction, and grasp the completion and 
commissioning of a number of projects. Foreign affairs, 
overseas Chinese affairs, and tourism must continue to serve the 
opening of the province in a positive way and strive to absorb 
funds, talent, and technology from abroad. Efforts must be made 
to strengthen exchanges with other countries and to form 
friendly ties with overseas cities. It is necessary to further 
implement the policies with respect to overseas Chinese 
nationals, particularly housing policies for relatives of 
overseas Chinese nationals in cities and towns, and to make a 
success of overseas Chinese farms. We must strengthen ties and 
cooperation with overseas Chinese compatriots and compatriots 
from Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan, and fully bring into play the 
superiority of Guangdong as the hometown of many overseas 
Chinese. We must make an earnest effort to plan and build 
tourist spots in the province; develop Guangdong, Hong Kong, and 
Macao into a "big tourist triangle"; open up international 
tourist routes; improve the quality of tourist services; and tap 
the source of tourists. We must promote reform of ports, 
strengthen port management and port construction, and improve 
work at the customs and other checkpoints in order to provide 
the opening of our province to the outside world with excellent 
coordinated services. We must value the close ties of 
cooperation already formed with Hong Kong and Macao, as these 
ties are in keeping with the aspirations and interests of the 
people of the three places. The people of Guangdong must render 
positive efforts toward the smooth return of Hong Kong and 
Macao, as well as to their prosperity and stability. 
  We must fully grasp the favorable opportunity for the reform 
of foreign trade and strive to expand our foreign economic 
relations and trade. We must persist in putting quality first 
and accelerate the realization of the strategy to diversify 
export markets. While consolidating the Hong Kong and Macao 
markets, we must concentrate efforts to open up markets in North 
America, Western Europe, Southeast Asia, and Japan, and must 
increase our market shares in these areas. We also must 
continue with our efforts to open up markets in Eastern Europe, 
the Commonwealth of Independent States, South Africa, Africa and 
Australia. We must create conditions for the development of 
overseas enterprises, run multinational enterprises and 
international cooperative production enterprises, and establish 
overseas regional sales networks. We must attach importance to 
the development of trade with Taiwan. We must devote major 
efforts to developing international technology, labor exports, 
and overseas engineering contracts. We must strengthen import- 
export management and achieve better export returns. We must 
optimize the foreign investment structure, actively import high 
technology, attach importance to the work of attracting more 
international consortiums and multinational companies to invest 
in Guangdong, actively explore ways to make use of the 
international capital market, win foreign government loans and 
loans from the Asian Development Bank and World Bank, and 
improve the realization rate of foreign capital pledged. It is 
also necessary to strengthen the management of and provision of 
service to foreign-invested enterprises in accordance with the 
principle of equality and equal benefits, as well as the 
principles, policies, laws, and regulations stipulated by the 
state. 
  5. Develop tertiary industry and cultivate various 
types of markets. 
  Rationally developing primary, secondary, and tertiary 
industries, and achieving better coordination among the three 
sectors is a necessity for the basic realization of 
modernization in our province by the year 2000. This year, 
substantial headway must be achieved in accelerating the 
development of tertiary industry. We must implement 
conscientiously the Decision of the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council on "Accelerating the Development of Tertiary 
Industry," as well as the proposals for implementation drawn up 
by the provincial party committee and the provincial government, 
do a good job in general surveys, make concrete plans, and 
strive to increase the proportion of tertiary industry in the 
national economy. Growth of the tertiary sector in special 
economic zones and the Pearl River Delta must be higher than GDP 
growth. Mountainous areas, as well as under-developed areas, 
must quicken their pace of development. In developing tertiary 
industry, we must concentrate on speeding up the establishment 
of the market system and stimulate circulation. We must uphold 
the coordinated development of all economic sectors, with the 
public sector constituting the mainstay. We must continue to 
develop the commodity market and conscientiously grasp market 
development. Places that meet the necessary conditions should 
strive to set up more up-market large commercial and trading 
centers. Efforts also must be made to speed up the cultivation 
of various production factor markets, particularly the 
development of the financial, technological, information, labor, 
and transportation markets. We must accelerate the development 
of intermediary services, such as accounting, legal advice, 
auditing and counseling; accelerate the training of personnel 
providing intermediary services through a variety of effective 
ways and means; establish and improve various types of 
intermediary service organs; strengthen management; and actively 
provide high-quality service. We also must pay close attention 
to the establishment and improvement of market rules and 
regulations, protect fair competition, and strictly ban fake and 
inferior goods. 
  6. Effectively control commodity prices and improve 
the people's living standards 
  Keeping prices basically stable is an important condition 
for 
the smooth progress of reform. As the scale of national 
construction expands and the price reform progresses, price 
rises are unavoidable, but they must be contained within a 
reasonable range. We must actively and properly implement the 
state's price reform program; choose the opportune moment to 
further rationalize transport, energy, and telecommunications 
charges, as well as the prices of products like cured tobacco 
and cocoon; and step up the improvement of the price formation 
mechanism in which market forces play a dominant role. It is 
necessary to strengthen the government's macroeconomic control 
and management of prices, uphold and improve the system of 
responsibility for price control targets for governments at all 
levels, proceed from the work of increasing the supply of 
essential products, strengthen "Rice Basket" and "Shopping 
Basket" Projects, and effectively stabilize the prices of 
products that have a vital bearing on the everyday life of the 
masses. We must improve the reserve system for important 
commodities like grain, oils, sugar, and meat, as well as 
measures for price control. We must strengthen the management 
of administrative charges, strengthen price supervision and 
inspection, resolutely investigate and deal with the unlawful 
practices of random charges and price rises, and protect the 
legitimate interests of consumers. 
  Through efforts to develop the rural economy, improve the 
performance of enterprises, and promote the reform of the job 
allocation and wage systems in enterprises and administrative 
establishments, we should pay attention to resolving the actual 
difficulties of retirees, steadily raise people's income level, 
and improve their living conditions. 
  7. Maintain fiscal balance and credit balance 
  Actively carrying out reform of the taxation system and 
reform of the tax-sharing fiscal system in accordance with the 
unified arrangements of the state is a central task of our 
province's fiscal work. Governments at all levels must do a 
conscientious job in their fiscal and taxation work, and must 
strive to tap new sources of revenue and to economize on 
expenditure. It is necessary to manage taxation strictly in 
accordance with law; improve the means of tax collection; 
strengthen tax collection and management, particularly the 
collection and management of personal income tax and enterprise 
income tax; and ensure a steady growth of local revenue and 
revenue to be turned over to the central authorities, in order 
to make greater contributions to the state. In accordance with 
the principle of "planning our expenditures in light of our 
income and maintaining a balance between income and 
expenditure," we must manage our budgets strictly and must not 
allow any deficits. We must do a conscientious job in arranging 
and managing normal revenue and expenditure; give priority to 
the dispensing of normal operating expenses to local state 
organs at various levels and wages to administrative units; and 
guarantee input into agriculture, science, education, and other 
key areas, as well as public spending. We gradually must resolve 
the problem of scattered financial resources, reform the 
existing expenditure structure, practice strict economy, 
resolutely control unreasonable expenditure, and ensure fiscal 
balance. Efforts also must be made to complete the issuing of 
treasury bonds. 
  It is necessary to continue to strengthen bank credits and 
the control and management of money supply, and to improve the 
mechanism for a benign cycle of credit "borrowing, use, and 
repayment." In conjunction with fiscal reform, we must 
concentrate our efforts on readjusting the credit structure, 
truly support units that perform well and restrict those that 
perform poorly, ensure the fund needs of key projects, keep 
dynamic accounts of funds on deposit, speed up the turnover of 
funds, and make effective use of funds. We must continue to 
prohibit random fundraising. We must improve banking services 
and energetically organize deposits. In particular, it is 
necessary to stabilize enterprise deposits, strengthen bank 
provisions, do a good job in cash management, and strictly 
control the irrational release of cash. We must strengthen 
foreign debt management and prevent blind borrowing. It is also 
necessary to improve various management systems, standardize 
various types of financial operations, and consolidate the 
results of the financial overhaul. 
  8. Accelerate economic development in mountainous 
areas and quicken the pace of shaking off poverty and achieving 
prosperity 
  Speeding up economic development and the work to shake off 
poverty and achieve prosperity in "old, newly developed, 
mountainous, border, and poverty-stricken" areas is a task with 
an important bearing on the basic realization of modernization 
in our province by the year 2000. 
  Governments at all 
levels and various departments must attach further importance to 
and support economic development in 50 counties in mountain 
areas, make full use of the resource superiority of mountainous 
areas, suit measures to local conditions, and blaze new trails 
for economic development in mountainous areas. We must 
implement conscientiously the spirit of the eighth provincial 
conference on work in mountainous areas, energetically develop 
township enterprises in mountainous areas, concentrate energy on 
the vigorous grasping of infrastructural construction in 
mountainous areas and the improvement of their backward 
transport conditions, and speed up the exploitation of local 
resources and the work of absorbing foreign capital. According 
to the new standards prescribed by the state, our province still 
faces an arduous task in supporting the poor at present. We 
must continue to implement the existing support-the-poor 
policies and the related support systems of the provincial party 
committee, provincial government, and relevant units directly 
under the provincial government; resolutely adhere to the 
principle of "the province giving support to counties, cities 
giving support to townships, and townships giving support to 
management districts and villages"; and implement the system of 
contracted responsibility for different levels. We must do a 
better job in resettling people in extremely poverty-stricken 
limestone areas and on reservoir sites, continue to support 
extremely poverty-stricken townships in their efforts to expand 
their collective economy, concentrate energy on supporting 
poverty-stricken households, and strive to basically resolve the 
problem of providing these people with sufficient food and 
clothing in accordance with new standards before the end of this 
year. 
  9. Attach great importance to science, technology, and 
education; promote scientific and technological progress; and 
improve the quality of laborers. 
  Accelerating the development of science, technology, and 
education is the fundamental way to turn our national economy 
from an extensive economy into an intensive one. Governments at 
all levels must strengthen their leadership over scientific and 
technological work, increase input into science and technology 
through diverse channels, gradually establish an operating 
mechanism for science and technology which suits our economic 
development, and devote major efforts to increasing our 
comprehensive scientific and technological strength. In our 
scientific and technological development, it is necessary to 
face the main battlefields of economic construction; take 
commercialization, industrialization, and internationalization 
as our objectives; and concentrate our energy on the development 
of electronics information, bioengineering, new materials, fine 
chemicals, mechatronics, and other high and new technologies and 
industries. We must see to it that enterprises become the main 
entities for scientific and technological development, encourage 
enterprises to run their own research organs, and enhance the 
capability of enterprises to absorb technologies and carry out 
research and development on their own initiative. It is 
necessary to bring into full play the role of existing special 
research organs and institutions of higher learning, strengthen 
research on basic and applied science, and organize key 
scientific and technological projects and intermediate trial 
production in order to steadily raise the scientific research 
capability and technological level of our province. We must 
protect intellectual property, do a good job in patenting work, 
accelerate the conversion of existing scientific and 
technological achievements into productive forces, and raise the 
technological content of products. We also must continue to do 
a good job in running the six state-level high- and 
new-technology development areas and the Pearl River Delta High 
Technology Industrial Belt, and expand the scope of 
technological proliferation. 
  Continue to uphold the strategy of giving priority to the 
development of education. We must raise funds for education 
through diverse channels and improve the conditions for running 
schools. We must promote reform of the educational system, 
readjust the educational structure, and make a success of pilot 
projects for comprehensive educational reforms in both rural 
areas and cities. The Pearl River Delta and counties where 
conditions are right must make an effort to popularize senior 
secondary education. We must devote major efforts to developing 
secondary vocational and technical education and various types 
of adult education, and to providing on-the-job training for 
staff members and workers. We must strengthen preschool and 
special education, and develop various types of post-secondary 
education through various channels. In tertiary education, we 
must further optimize the distribution of institutions and the 
structure of specialties in an effort to train all kinds of 
specialized personnel for modernization. Moral education must 
be strengthened in all schools and the quality of education must 
be improved in an all-round way. We must earnestly organize the 
implementation of the "PRC Teachers Law," show greater concern 
for teachers, create the necessary environment for the 
continuous improvement of teachers' working and living 
conditions, stabilize and enlarge the ranks of teachers, and 
improve the quality of the ranks of teachers. 
  10. Strengthen urban and rural planning and 
management, and make an earnest effort to do a good job in 
environmental protection 
  We must have our eyes on the future; hold ourselves 
responsible to coming generations; persist in synchronous 
planning, implementation, and development for economic 
construction, urban and rural planning, and environmental 
construction; and must not carry out construction at the expense 
of the environment. 
  In accordance with the requirement of 
"unified planning, rational distribution, comprehensive 
development and coordinated construction," governments at all 
levels must strive for planning from a high starting point, 
construction of a high standard, and efficient management in 
order to be able to stand the test of time. It is necessary to 
quicken the pace of development in villages and small towns; 
concentrate energy on the planning and development of the seats 
of government of our 1,000-plus small towns; and turn them into 
rural economic, political, and cultural centers with fairly 
comprehensive functions. In environmental management at the 
small-town level, there must be the necessary leadership, a 
contingent of environmental protection and health personnel, 
guaranteed funds, and garbage and sewage treatment plants, as 
well as rules, regulations, and systems for environmental 
protection and public health work. By properly grasping work at 
the small-town level, we can bring along work at the village 
level. We also must uphold the principle of "unified planning, 
unified land acquisition, unified development, unified 
alienation, and unified management," and effectively strengthen 
land development, utilization, and management in both urban and 
rural areas. Strict standards must be adhered to in the 
examination, approval, and management of land use for 
construction purposes and of land use in the development areas. 
In the development of new villages by peasants, the use of land 
on slopes should be advocated. We must strengthen the 
comprehensive improvement of highways; do a good job in cleaning 
up, greening, and landscaping roadsides; take effective measures 
to tackle the problems of illegal construction and the dirty, 
messy, and poor environment in an all-round way; and strive to 
improve the view along roads. We must grasp urban environmental 
protection and the prevention and control of industrial 
pollution in accordance with law; attach importance to the 
comprehensive control of the "four harms" of sewage, waste gas, 
industrial residue, and noise pollution; and strive to achieve 
harmony between the overall environment and economic 
construction in order to continuously improve people's living 
environment. 
<H5>  III. Reforms for Promoting the Establishment of the </H5>
Socialist Market Economic Structure 
  The "Decision" of the 3d Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee is the program for accelerating the 
establishment of the socialist market economy structure. Our 
province must and can continue to set the pace in reform, and 
establish the basic framework for a socialist market economy 
structure in five years. With this in mind, and in accordance 
with the strategy of "general advance and breakthrough at 
selected areas," we must quicken the pace of reform while 
grasping reforms in the following seven areas. 
  (1) Speed up the establishment of a modern enterprise 
system. 
  We must be innovative in the establishment of a modern 
enterprise system. A total of 250 enterprises in the province 
will be chosen as pilots for the establishment of a modern 
enterprise system, and the experience thus gained will be 
promoted gradually. It is necessary to further implement the 
"Enterprise Law" and the "Regulations on Changing the 
Operational Mechanisms of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the 
Whole People," and effectively extend to enterprises the various 
rights and responsibilities pertaining to their management. It 
is also necessary to promote reform of the internal operational 
mechanisms, the labor and personnel system, and the distribution 
systems of enterprises in an all-round way, and to implement 
conscientiously the "Guidelines for Accounting in Enterprises" 
and the "General Financial Rules for Enterprises." These reforms 
should be completed before the end of this year. We must take 
reform of the property rights system as the point of 
breakthrough to accelerate reform of the system for management 
of state-owned assets. We must firmly grasp the establishment 
and improvement of state-owned asset management organs at all 
levels, and strengthen the management and supervision of 
state-owned assets by earnestly implementing the 
soon-to-be-published "Regulations for the Supervision and 
Management of the Assets of State-Owned Enterprises." We must 
unfold a general checkup of assets, define property rights, 
settle claims and debts, reappraise assets, and verify state 
capital. We must do a good job in property rights registration, 
clarify equity relations, and speed up the establishment of a 
standardized equity transaction market. Efforts must be made to 
study the organizational forms of equity of state- owned 
enterprises; promote the pluralization of equity through such 
means as alienation, mergers, leasing, and auctions; and bring 
about the compensated use of state-owned assets and their 
appreciation against inflation. We must earnestly publicize and 
implement the "PRC Company Law." In general, the corporate 
system must be practiced in all newly established companies. We 
must systematically promote the corporate system in existing 
enterprises. In light of specific conditions, wholly-owned 
companies, limited- liability companies, limited-liability stock 
companies, and other forms may be adopted. We must continue to 
enlarge the scope of experimentation in the standardized 
joint-stock enterprise system. Positive efforts must be made to 
adopt the shareholding system in new development and 
construction projects, and efforts must be made to increase the 
number of publicly listed, limited-liability stock companies. 
Joint-stock companies must play a good exemplary role in 
standardized management and in the transformation of management 
mechanisms. We must continue to do a good job in making use of 
foreign funds to rejuvenate old enterprises. 
  2. Ensure the smooth progress of reform in the 
fiscal and taxation systems. 
  We must do a good job in tax reform, reform of the 
tax-sharing system, and reform of the profit-distribution system 
in state-owned enterprises -- all in strict accordance with the 
unified requirements of the central authorities. Governments at 
all levels must resolutely subordinate themselves to the overall 
needs of reform and the overall interests of the state; properly 
handle relations between different quarters; protect the 
enthusiasm of governments at all levels in increasing revenue, 
reducing expenditure, and developing the economy; and ensure the 
smooth progress of reform. With the state now implementing the 
tax-sharing system, we must continue to practice the system of 
fiscal responsibility in cities and counties. The overall 
requirement is: 1) Rationally fix the pattern of interest 
distribution between the provincial government and the city and 
county governments. In accordance with the principle of 
protecting the vested interests and enthusiasm of the local 
authorities while ensuring that the provincial fiscal department 
can appropriately centralize financial resources and increase 
its regulatory and control capability, it is necessary to 
appropriately readjust the base figures of various cities and 
fix the annual rates of increase in light of the tax- sharing 
method practiced by the central government and the actual 
situation in various cities. 2) The provincial government must 
appropriately pool financial resources in given proportions from 
the additional revenue generated by different cities in 1993. 
These resources will be spent mainly on ensuring provincial 
public expenditure; helping out mountainous and poverty-stricken 
areas; supporting agriculture and scientific, educational, 
cultural, and public health undertakings; and supporting 
expansion of the ranks of public security, procuratorial, and 
judicial personnel. 3) Clearly and accurately settle accounts 
in strict accordance with policy regulations and promote this 
practice from city to city. Governments at all levels must do a 
good job in various kinds of groundwork for reform of the 
taxation system; establish a system of intermediate tax, with 
the value-added tax as the mainstay; and improve the local 
taxation systems and various supporting systems. In conjunction 
with the tax reform and the implementation of the "two 
regulations," it is necessary to readjust and standardize in a 
rational manner the relations of interest distribution between 
the state and enterprises. We must strengthen the collection 
and management of various types of taxes, and set up taxation 
organs at the central and local levels. Reform of the fiscal 
and taxation systems touches on various aspects of economic 
work. When promoting the reform, we must conscientiously handle 
various new problems and continually work for their improvement 
in order to increase the sources of revenue and arouse the 
enthusiasm of enterprises. Through promotion of fiscal and tax 
reforms, it is necessary to make positive efforts to explore new 
ideas for straightening out the relations between the localities 
and the fiscal departments in revenue distribution and for 
broadening the sources of revenue, and establish a good 
mechanism that can truly bring about the unity of fiscal and 
operational authority. 
  3. Steadily promote reform of the financial system 
  We must support and assist the provincial branch of the 
People's Bank of China in the transformation of its functions 
and in its exercise of stronger financial supervision. We must 
transform the operational mechanism of specialized banks as 
quickly as possible, so they gradually can change themselves 
into state-owned commercial banks that bear their own risks and 
are responsible for their own profits and losses. We must bring 
into full play the role of standardized local financial organs. 
We must speed up the transformation of operational mechanisms 
in the Guangdong Development Bank, the Guangdong Provincial 
International Trust and Investment Company, the Guangdong 
Provincial Overseas Chinese Trust and Investment Company, the 
Guangdong Provincial Yuecai [4727 6299] Trust and Investment 
Company, and other financial organs, and must increase their 
competitiveness. We must systematically run city cooperative 
banks in key cities on a trial basis. Positive efforts must be 
made to persuade the state to authorize the setting up of the 
Guangdong Overseas Chinese Bank. We must strive to create the 
necessary conditions to attract more foreign banks and Chinese 
banks in Hong Kong and Macao to set up branches in our province 
in accordance with the law, and encourage our more competitive 
financial institutions to set up branches outside China. We 
must develop and put on a sound basis a provincial financial 
market in which bank financing will be the main activity, a 
market that is managed strictly and opened to the outside world 
in a unified way and in which there is fair competition. We 
must speed up the formation of the Guangdong Financial Center 
and establish a standardized and centralized financing center as 
quickly as possible in order to standardize interbank borrowing. 
We must continue with our efforts to run well the Securities 
Transaction Center and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, and take 
prudent and proper steps to carry out foreign exchange futures 
transactions on a trial basis. We also must continue to explore 
other forms and means of financing in order to broaden the 
source of construction funds in our province. 
  At the same time, corresponding steps must be taken to 
reform 
the existing investment system and gradually establish a risk 
restraint mechanism for corporate investment and bank credits. 
We must reform the method of setting up projects, as well as 
the procedures for examination and approval, and establish a 
system of project registration. Competitive investment projects 
will have enterprises as basic investment entities and will be 
established and managed through fundraising on the market. 
While actively trying to secure state investment and financing 
in our infrastructural projects, it is also necessary to 
increase the responsibility of enterprises and local governments 
in investment and financing. Governments at all levels must 
concentrate on grasping the construction of major 
infrastructural facilities and basic industries that have a 
vital bearing on the local economy, make active efforts to win 
state support, and encourage and attract more local 
participation and investment in order to broaden the channels of 
investment and financing for these projects. Investment in 
public welfare projects should be made within the financial 
capability of the local governments concerned. 
  4. Deepen reform of the foreign trade system 
  We must uphold the orientation of "unified policy, open 
management, fair competition, and sole responsibility for 
profits and losses," and must make use of the opportunity 
afforded by reform of the foreign exchange system to promote 
reform of the foreign trade system. We must handle properly the 
various tasks of convergence following the merging of exchange 
rates, actively explore effective means of maintaining rapid 
growth in foreign trade and exports when mandatory plans for 
foreign trade enterprises are abolished, strengthen the 
coordination and service mechanism of foreign trade management, 
further improve the system of export tax refund, gradually 
introduce public bidding or standardized distribution for import 
and export quotas and licensing administration, and further 
enlarge the foreign trade power granted to production and 
commercial enterprises and scientific and technological units 
where conditions are right. We must speed up the transformation 
of operational mechanisms in state-owned foreign trade 
enterprises. Foreign trade enterprises that satisfy the 
conditions may be reorganized into standardized 
limited-liability or limited-liability stock companies after 
approval. We must practice the method of diversification on the 
basis of one main trade, actively promote the system of import 
and export agents, and develop international enterprise groups. 
We must back up enterprises where conditions are right in 
forming conglomerate companies that combine trade with industry, 
agriculture and technology, and promote the development of large 
enterprise groups and foreign-invested enterprises into 
multinational companies that combine trade with industry, 
agriculture and technology. 
  5. Increase the intensity of reform in the social 
security system 
  We must establish and improve centralized social insurance 
management organs to manage old-age pensions, industrial 
injuries, unemployment, and medical services in the province. 
Relevant departments at all levels must provide energetic 
support and cooperation in order for new breakthroughs to be 
made. All cities must establish within their jurisdiction as 
soon as possible special organs for the unified management of 
social insurance. It is necessary to enlarge the coverage of 
social insurance, pay special attention to the improvement of 
old-age and unemployment insurance in enterprises, strengthen 
the function of social services, and reduce the burdens of 
enterprises. We must create the necessary conditions for 
extending old-age insurance to rural areas, and practice there a 
system in which family insurance will be combined with community 
support, with the former playing the main role. We must reform 
the existing free medical system and labor insurance medical 
system, and speed up the establishment and improvement of an 
unemployment, industrial-injury, and medical insurance system 
for the whole province. We must establish social insurance fund 
supervision organs to supervise the collection, expenditure, and 
management of social insurance funds, and must separate social 
insurance administration from social insurance operations. We 
also must energetically expedite the work of providing the legal 
framework for the social insurance system. 
  6. Make a further success of reform in the urban 
housing system 
  In order to achieve a moderate level of prosperity in urban 
housing, it is necessary to speed up construction of civilian 
housing; put equal stress on sale, renting, and construction; 
coordinate policies; form a market; and accelerate the 
establishment of a new urban housing system. We must fix 
property prices rationally, quicken the pace of rent increases 
within the limits of rational housing expenses of worker 
families, and strive to raise rent levels to the equivalent of 
the sum of maintenance and management expenditure and 
depreciation by the year 1996. We must implement, in an overall 
way, a housing provident fund system and practice a variety of 
purchase payment methods. It is necessary to develop 
energetically housing that is both affordable and suitable, and 
to strive to improve a system to supply housing of a social 
insurance nature. Commercial real estate development companies 
should devote at least 20 percent of their construction projects 
to affordable and suitable housing. All local governments must 
speed up the construction of merchandise housing. In 
particular, they must step up the construction of cheap housing 
for those with housing difficulties and effectively improve 
people's living conditions. It is necessary to actively develop 
the real estate transaction market, while simultaneously paying 
attention to developing the property management, maintenance, 
and interior decoration markets. It is also necessary to 
quicken the pace of enterprise housing reform. 
  7. Actively implement the reform of government organs 
  Governments at all levels must effectively change their 
functions, and accelerate the reform of government functions in 
accordance with the principle of separate government and 
enterprise functions and the principle of simpler, unified, and 
effective administration. We must change the state of 
overlapping functions and the over-elaborate division of work in 
economic management departments, abolish or merge organs that 
perform overlapping or similar functions, and redefine the 
functions of different organs; drastically slash the number of 
non-permanent organs; energetically streamline internal organs 
and reduce staff numbers, and strictly adhere to the size or 
number of personnel stipulated; establish and improve a work 
system for organs and put administrative procedures on a sound 
footing. In institutional reform, it is necessary to make 
unified planning and careful organization, bring the higher and 
lower levels together, and implement measures gradually. On the 
basis of consolidating the achievements of previous 
institutional reforms, it is necessary to complete reform at the 
provincial level and reform in the 15 pilot cities and counties 
(districts) before launching the reform in all cities, counties 
(districts) and small towns, and strive to complete the reform 
of government organs at all levels as soon as possible. In 
conducting institutional reform and implementing the public 
service system, it is necessary to combine administrative 
streamlining and intensified training with the development of 
productive forces in order to improve the personnel structure 
and quality, while simultaneously turning superfluous personnel 
into a vital force for modernization. 
  Meanwhile, we must continue to deepen rural reform and 
reform 
of the planning, commodity circulation, pricing, scientific- 
technological, and education systems, and to accelerate growth 
of the market system and of structural readjustment. 
Governments at all levels must handle properly the relations 
between reform and development on the one hand and stability on 
the other, attach importance to key projects, pay attention to 
coordination, properly handle the interests of all quarters, and 
create a more relaxed macroeconomic environment for promoting 
reform. 
<H5>  IV. Strengthen Socialist Culture and Ideology; Promote the </H5>
Advance of All Social Undertakings 
  The establishment of a socialist market economy structure 
and 
the quickening of the economic development pace not only provide 
more favorable conditions for the promotion of cultural and 
ideological progress, but make it imperative for cultural and 
ideological progress to provide the necessary ideological 
guarantees, spiritual stimulation, and intellectual support. 
Our objective for cultural and ideological progress is to 
improve in an all-round way the quality of man as modern and 
civilized people, foster a new generation of better-educated and 
self-disciplined people with high ideals and moral integrity, 
and mold a good image for the people of Guangdong; to create a 
spiritual environment where everyone has a positive attitude and 
strives to make progress, a working environment where there is 
unity and harmony, an investment environment where there is 
friendly cooperation, and a living environment that is clean and 
beautiful; to foster a healthy, civilized, hardworking, and 
law-abiding social atmosphere, and promote economic prosperity 
and all-round social progress. In accordance with this 
objective, it is necessary to bring about cultural and 
ideological progress in practice. We must strengthen 
ideological education; arm the broad masses of cadres and the 
people with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics; deeply unfold education on 
patriotism, collectivism, and socialism, education on modern 
Chinese history, and education on the fine traditions of the 
party; oppose money worship, extreme individualism, and decadent 
ways of life; and foster a correct outlook on life, a correct 
sense of values, and correct moral concepts. We must unfold 
activities to build civilized units, villages, and households in 
a more extensive and penetrating way throughout the province. 
We must continue to develop and improve venues and facilities 
for the masses to better themselves culturally and 
ideologically. We must further unfold education on 
public-mindedness and professional ethics; create a fine social 
atmosphere in which everyone pays attention to civility, public 
health and decorum, abides by discipline and law, takes pleasure 
in helping others, and is ready to take up the cudgels for a 
just cause; and give substance to the vibrant spirit of the 
Guangdong people in seeking progress. 
  Further strengthen theoretical research on social science, 
and use Marxism and Mao Zedong Thought to guide theoretical 
research on philosophy and social science. We must implement 
the principle of "integrating theory with practice" and 
concentrate our energy on studying major theoretical and 
practical issues in the establishment of the socialist market 
economy structure, and carry forward various reforms. We also 
must continue studying the trends of economic development 
worldwide, draw useful lessons in economic construction from 
other parts of the country and from other countries, study how 
to further establish a new superiority for the development of 
Guangdong, and promote the modernization of our province. 
  Actively develop and promote various cultural undertakings. 
We must uphold the principles of serving the people and 
socialism, and pf "letting a hundred flowers blossom and a 
hundred schools of thought contend"; encourage the vast numbers 
of literary and art workers to actively plunge themselves into 
the great practice of reform, opening up and modernization, and 
to create outstanding works that are worthy of the times and 
satisfy the growing spiritual needs of the masses. We must 
continue to deepen the reform of the literary and art system and 
of art education, and to blaze new trails that are not only 
compatible with the socialist market economy structure, but can 
meet the requirements of socialist cultural and ideological 
progress, and are in keeping with the law of development of 
culture and art itself. We must effectively grasp the 
implementation of the "Beautiful Southern Guangdong Project" for 
the promotion of Guangdong culture. Factories and mines, rural 
areas, and government organs and establishments must actively 
unfold healthy, forward-looking, and diversified recreational 
activities to enrich the cultural life of the masses. While 
striving to bring about a prosperous culture, we must grasp 
management of the cultural market and make unremitting efforts 
to eliminate pornography in order to maintain a clean and pure 
social environment. We must raise funds by any and every means; 
further strengthen the construction of basic cultural and art 
facilities; grasp the construction of libraries, museums, 
cultural halls (stations), archives, and television and 
broadcasting centers and relay stations; and strive to broaden 
their coverage. From this year on, fiscal authorities at 
various levels must increase their allocations to support the 
development of cultural undertakings. Journalism, publication, 
and radio and TV broadcasting must create a better media 
environment for the reform, opening up, and economic development 
of Guangdong. Further efforts must be made to do a better job 
in keeping historical accounts, archives and local gazetteers, 
and to strengthen the protection of relics. 
  Strive to do a good job in medical and health work. We must 
continue to make a success of public health reform, and must 
strengthen and improve the internal management of medical and 
health units. Fiscal departments at all levels must suitably 
increase allocations to medical and health services. Efforts 
must be made to expedite the implementation of the primary 
health care program and do a good job in developing county-level 
epidemic prevention and health care organs, as well as township 
hospitals. We must grasp conscientiously the cultivation and 
training of public health technical personnel, and actively 
conduct research on medical science in order to raise the 
quality and level of medical service. We must devote major 
efforts to invigorating Chinese medicine. We must continue to 
do a good job in the prevention and treatment of local, chronic 
and epidemic diseases, and improve sewage and toilet facilities 
in rural areas. We must strengthen health legislation and the 
supervision of relevant law enforcement, and effectively 
consolidate the pharmaceutical market. We also must continue to 
conduct the patriotic health movement in depth, and make a 
success of health inspection in all cities in the province in 
order to greet the Third National Urban Health Assessment and 
Appraisal. 
  Energetically develop sports activities. We must launch more 
extensive mass sports activities in urban and rural areas, and 
strive to join the front ranks of the nation in mass sports 
work. We must improve selection and training networks, properly 
run sports schools and part-time physical education classes, and 
step up the cultivation of reserve athletes. We must strengthen 
research in sports science, strive to raise the level of 
competitive sports, and establish a new superiority for 
Guangdong in the sports field. We must make an earnest effort 
to make a success of the Ninth Guangdong Provincial Games. 
  Vigorously grasp family planning. Our province is still at a 
birth peak this year, and control of population growth remains 
an arduous task. Governments at all levels must effectively 
strengthen leadership over birth control, with the number one 
man personally assuming overall charge. It is necessary to 
organize the two provincial birth control campaigns in May and 
September, properly grasp regular birth control work, and bring 
birth control work into the orbit of management according to the 
law. It is necessary to strictly prohibit couples from having 
many children, strictly control persons having a second child 
outside the plan, and raise the birth control rate. It is 
necessary to strengthen family planning among the migrant 
population. Every effort should be made to keep the natural 
population growth rate under the level of 13.5 per thousand. 
  Conscientiously do a good job in work with nationalities and 
religious persons. We must uphold the principle of equality, 
solidarity, mutual assistance, and cooperation among different 
nationalities, and further implement the "PRC Law on Autonomy 
for Nationality Regions." We must assist nationality regions in 
making a success of infrastructural construction, energetically 
develop their economies, and strive to narrow the gap between 
minority nationality regions and other regions. We must 
implement conscientiously the party's policies concerning 
religion, respect the religious freedom of citizens, and protect 
normal religious activities and the legitimate rights of 
religious circles. 
  Further unfold national defense education and strengthen 
Army- people unity. With patriotic education as the core, we 
must make continuous efforts to enhance the defense awareness of 
the citizenry and strengthen the building of the militia and 
reserve forces. We must continue to do a good job of the "two 
supports," and create more model "two-support" cities 
(counties). Through the launching of activities to nominate 
"outstanding wives and mothers of servicemen," dynamic education 
on supporting the Army and giving preferential treatment to 
families of soldiers and martyrs should be unfolded in urban and 
rural areas this year. We must launch in a down-to-earth and 
sustained manner activities in which soldiers and civilians join 
hands to promote a civilized way of life, and must strengthen 
unity between the government and the Army, and between soldiers 
and the people. We must continue to take proper care of 
ex-servicemen and soldiers transferred to civilian work, as well 
as retired military cadres. 
  V. Strengthen the Socialist Legal System; 
Consolidate and Develop the Situation of Stability and Unity 
  Actively advance democratic politics. Governments at all 
levels must uphold the system of reporting their work to the 
people's congress and its standing committee, and must 
consciously accept the inspection and supervision of these 
bodies and earnestly implement their resolutions. It is 
necessary to further open up democratic channels, and bring into 
full play the role of the CPPCC and of democratic parties and 
nonparty personages in participating in and discussing 
government and political affairs. We must establish and improve 
the system of democratic participation in politics for trade 
unions, communist youth leagues, women's federations, and other 
organizations. We must earnestly handle motions and 
recommendations submitted by people's deputies, as well as 
proposals put forward by members of the CPPCC, humbly listen to 
the views and suggestions of all, strive to improve government 
work, cement closer ties with the masses, and advance socialist 
democratic politics. 
  Quicken the pace of legislation around the task of 
establishing a socialist market economy structure. We must take 
the initiative to support the people's congress and its standing 
committee in speeding up the formulation of laws and regulations 
for standardizing market entities, maintaining market order, 
strengthening macrocontrol, improving social security, and 
promoting the opening up of the country to the outside world, 
and must earnestly do a good job in drafting and coordinating 
bills and laws that are within our terms of reference. We must 
formulate administrative rules and regulations for standardizing 
the government's work of macroeconomic control, and try as 
quickly as possible to establish and improve the legal system, 
which is necessary for the development of the socialist market 
economy structure. We must devote major efforts to making a 
success of supervision over law enforcement, and make 
unremitting efforts to raise the level of doing things in 
accordance with law and of conducting administration and 
management in accordance with law. We must continue to promote 
the "two-five" (0059 0063] popular legal education and enhance 
the legal concept of the whole nation. We must further 
strengthen reform through labor and labor education, and make a 
success of legal services at the grass-roots level. 
  Strive to maintain social stability. We must raise the 
awareness of the citizenry concerning national security, and 
must guard against infiltration and sabotage by hostile forces 
both at home and abroad. We must continue to wage struggles 
against, deal vigorous blows to and eliminate the "seven evils." 
Bearing in mind the new trends of criminal offenses under a 
market economy, we must increase the intensity of the crackdown 
on serious criminal offenses, and promptly wage struggles or 
conduct investigations with specific targets in mind. We must 
concentrate our energy on battling infiltration by outside 
secret societies, as well as criminal gangs of a secret society 
nature, criminals guilty of serious violence, pickpockets on 
public transport, road bandits, and other arch- criminals. We 
must uphold the principle of "putting equal stress on raids and 
prevention, and dealing with the cause as well as the effect, 
with the emphasis on the cause"; rely on the great masses of the 
people; continue to strengthen the comprehensive consolidation 
of public order; earnestly implement various public order 
responsibility systems; establish and improve mass prevention 
and mass control networks; launch joint defense for the 
maintenance of public order; enlarge the coverage of public 
order patrols; and strive to maintain social stability and the 
safety of people's lives and property. We must strengthen 
public order administration over the migrant population. We 
must pay close attention to various factors of instability, and 
take positive steps to prevent and handle emergencies. We must 
be adept at handling contradictions among the people, properly 
handle the distribution of interests, and guard against the 
intensification of contradictions. We must energetically 
strengthen management of the traffic and fire services, attach 
importance to safety inspection, and promptly eliminate hidden 
perils. We must continue to conduct in-depth antismuggling 
struggles and joint operations in coastal cities and counties, 
and solve a number of major cases. We must earnestly grasp the 
building of public security and judiciary forces; rectify the 
workstyle of the police, increasing their strength and improving 
their political and vocational qualities; and make still greater 
contributions toward maintaining the stability of the 
motherland's "Southern Gate." 
  Fellow deputies, in order to fulfill these tasks, 
governments 
at all levels must energetically strengthen the building of 
honest government, and effectively improve their style of work. 
The building of honest government is a matter of prime 
importance in building closer ties between the government and 
the masses; ensuring social stability; and guaranteeing the 
smooth progress of reform, opening up, and economic 
construction. Government workers must bear in mind always that 
they are servants of the people, must wholeheartedly serve the 
people, and must wage resolute struggles against all corrupt 
phenomena. Leading cadres at all levels must take the lead in 
maintaining an honest and self-disciplined workstyle, resolutely 
investigate and deal with cases of major importance, and take 
effective measures to rectify unhealthy practices to which the 
masses strongly object. 
  It is necessary to further 
strengthen education on clean and honest administration, 
energetically publicize typical examples of honest officials, 
and deal severely with decadent and corrupt elements. It is 
necessary to establish a mechanism for fighting corruption and 
protecting honest officials, and TO combine the reform measures 
and economic policies of government departments with measures to 
establish a system for fighting corruption and protecting honest 
officials. It is necessary to continue with reform of the 
examination and approval system in administrative organs with a 
view to achieving open administration under mass supervision. 
It is necessary to combine internal supervision with social 
supervision in government work in order to achieve a perfect and 
sound supervisory mechanism. We must carry forward the fine 
tradition of plain living and hard struggle, and must oppose 
extravagance and waste. Government workers must strive to raise 
their theoretical and policy levels, better their knowledge, and 
improve their work style. They must study earnestly Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, and study the basic theories and knowledge of 
the socialist market economy. Responsible comrades of 
governments at all levels must gain a deeper understanding of 
the importance and necessity of investigation and studies during 
the new period, liberate themselves from dinner parties and red 
tapes, take the lead in conducting investigation and studies, go 
down to the grass-roots units and into the midst of the common 
people to study new conditions and solve new problems, overcome 
bureaucratism and formalism, and strengthen their service and 
work. It is necessary to increase the transparency of 
administration, gradually improve the system of democratic, 
scientific and efficient decisionmaking, and increase the 
efficiency of administration. It is necessary to do a good job 
in monitoring economic and social development; strengthen and 
improve macrocontrol; establish a system of supervision and 
inspection; strengthen the administrative functions of 
governments at all levels; ensure the unimpeded circulation of 
administrative orders; and truly turn governments at all levels 
into clean, honest, and efficient people's governments that work 
hard for the people. 
  Deputies! The 14th CPC National Congress, which attracted 
worldwide attention, adopted for Guangdong the grand objective 
of basically realizing modernization by the year 2000, and the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee further 
drew up for us the general blueprint for our socialist market 
economy structure. Our development objectives are grand, and 
our orientation of reform is clear-cut. In the year ahead, let 
us boldly blaze new trails, keep forging ahead, and advance 
bravely along the road of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. 

