BFN 

<F P=106> [Rustam Arifdzhanov article: "Zero Hour. Senators Will </F>
Finally Be Elected in Chelyabinsk. Chechnya Not in a Hurry at 
Present"] 
  [Text] Elections in Chelyabinsk have been scheduled for 15 
May. In Chechnya they are unlikely to be held in the next few 
months. But one way or another, four seats are empty in the 
upper chamber of the Russian parliament. The time has come for 
the last amendments to the composition of senators to be made -- 
zero hour. 
  The Chechen Republic was not even intending to send its 
representatives either to the Duma or to the senate. The 
declared independence of the mountain republic simply bound 
Dzhokhar Dudayev to ignore the December elections. But we will 
talk about Chechnya a bit later. 
  Things are more interesting in Chelyabinsk. Here deputies 
were elected to the Duma, but there were no elections to the 
Federation Council. "We did not manage to prepare ourselves" -- 
that was the argument of Oblast Administration Head Vadim 
Solovyev. A short trip to Chelyabinsk convinced us they have 
not actually managed to prepare themselves even now, in May. 
Well, the sharp Urals voters are not prepared to elect a 
governor to the senate. However, perceiving this, Solovyev, 
unlike many other Russian regional leaders, did not put forward 
his candidacy. Furthermore, he did not particularly want to 
elect senators in the spring anyway (maybe that was the 
reason?). But come fall.... 
  By and large, things are clear. The head of the Chelyabinsk 
administration is already involved in a protracted and fairly 
acute conflict with the State Duma five elected by the 
Chelyabinsk voters. Naturally he did not want to add to this 
the presumably complex relations with representatives of the 
oblast who will be elected to the Federation Council -- and this 
is the chamber of parliament that the regions will consider to 
be the most important. Solovyev is inwardly not prepared for 
this. And therefore, he believed, neither was the whole oblast. 
  Nevertheless, the Chelyabinsk inhabitants will elect the two 
most worthy candidates of 13. Of course, the ordinary 
inhabitant of Chelyabinsk, Magnitogorsk, or Miass, let alone a 
villager from the outlying Bashkir or Tatar districts, will not 
know all of them by name. The following names often come up: 
Magnitka Director Anatoliy Starikov; businessman Mikhail Isayev 
(in Chelyabinsk, as in the whole of Russia, a new "Russian 
roulette" has become fashionable -- putting money into 
investment funds); unemployed Andrey Belishko -- the Chelyabinsk 
"Yeltsin," a former first deputy head of administration whom 
four attempts were made to dismiss, and who was only removed 
from his post thanks to the reorganization of the apparatus. 
People also know Prosecutor Gennadiy Likhachev. In troubled 
times the people's hopes are pinned on the prosecutor -- he of 
all people will expose all the troublemakers. 
  The latest preliminary research by Chelyabinsk sociologists 
theoretically confirms my observations. The Magnitka director 
may be getting perceptibly ahead of all the others, while 
sociologists are adding another businessmen to the list of the 
aforementioned, with the comment "strange as it may seem" -- 
Andrey Sviridonov, whom rumor is ironically glorifying as an 
"obkom" [communist party oblast committee] man. 
  The list of candidates does however contain names which are 
known not just to Chelyabinsk inhabitants. At the very last 
moment, about 10 minutes before the expiry of the registration 
deadline, General Valentin Varennikov of the State Committee for 
the State of Emergency unexpectedly put forward his candidacy, 
evidently counting on the support of carefully voting veterans 
and the personnel of military units scattered around the oblast. 
In any case, he managed to gather the necessary signatures for 
registration even without an extensive publicity campaign. 
Another Muscovite, now almost forgotten in the capital -- 
Conservative Party Chairman Lev Ubozhko -- is preparing to have 
another go here in the southern Urals. 
  However, the success of "Women of Russia" at the Duma 
elections is making the candidacy of Galina Zheltikova, acting 
chairman of the oblast committee for the management of state 
property, and the only woman among the candidates, very serious. 
Many women of Chelyabinsk, incidentally, are indeed intending to 
vote for Galina. It seems that they may persuade their men, 
some of whom have been spending time with the family 
increasingly frequently recently. There is simply nothing to do 
at work. The local defense industry has launched a shorter 
working week -- people are working three or four days a week for 
three or four hours a day. The Chelyabinsk tractor plant is 
standing idle, chock full of unwanted output. An improbable 
thing has happened at Magnitka -- the blast furnaces have not 
been put out, they are being heated up, but no steel is being 
smelted. I think that there is no need to explain what that is 
about. Continuous losses. 
  Nevertheless Magnitka feels more sorry for its director than 
indignant. And anyway, if Magnitka does vote, it will vote 
specifically for him, if only to spite Chelyabinsk. The rivalry 
between the two major southern Urals cities is just as great as 
the traditional rivalry between Moscow and St. Petersburg. 
  However, regardless of where a candidate may come from, what 
position he may occupy, and whose interests he may reflect, they 
are all similar in one regard. No one has a clear-cut program 
in the event of victory. Everyone has simple slogans and they 
are all one sentence long. And, if you reflect on it, everyone 
has the same sentence: "Vote for me and things will be good." 
What do you mean good, why, by means of what? Deputies are 
usually accused that, once they have received the long-awaited 
mandate, they forget practically all their promises. It will 
not be possible to accuse the Chelyabinsk deputies of this. 
They are not promising anything. At least nothing specific. 
There is a hope that on the last day before the elections the 
candidates will let the voters know of their programs. If they 
exist, of course. 
  The Chelyabinsk elections will surprise many people with 
their originality. The election campaign has been conducted as 
if unwillingly. It has reached the point that, on the actual 
eve of the election, the chairman of the oblast electoral 
commission has been removed from his post with the remarkable 
formula "for self-removal from work." His deputy was assigned 
the task of the elections. And an astonishing "South African" 
version of conducting elections came into being. 
  Evidently, having deemed the competence of the Chelyabinsk 
voters equal to the education of the representatives of the 
famous Zulu and Bantu tribes, people here are planning to 
conduct the elections over several days. Until the people get 
into the swing of things. They will begin them straight after 
the May holidays, and perhaps the necessary number of votes will 
be gathered by the 15th. The slow elections, including a pause, 
seem to correspond to the national character more. 
  People in the know have attributed this strange system of 
conducting elections to the frank fear of making a fool of 
yourself once again. Because if Chelyabinsk does not elect any 
senators this time either, then the decisions Moscow makes about 
the validity of the local political leadership may be very 
varied. Excuses to the effect that our people are like this, 
they are distinctive, will scarcely be taken into consideration. 
  Chechnya is also talking about distinctiveness. The economic 
situation of this republic, which has declared itself 
independent, is more difficult than that of the Urals. Plants 
here have been standing idle for a long time. Money earned 
outside Chechnya is turning into stylish automobiles of Chechen 
businessmen coming here from the rest of Russia and Turkey and a 
growth in the weaponry of detachments loyal to Dzhokhayev or his 
rival Yaragi Mamadayev. Meanwhile, ordinary people are finding 
it difficult to make ends meet, and this means Russian workers 
just as it does Chechen peasants. The Dudayev administration, 
which is worried that the opposition has started to brainwash 
Moscow offices, has been forced to hint that it too is prepared 
to reach agreement with Russia. But even if it does prove 
possible to reach agreement on relations like Tatarstan did, 
then elections to the Russian parliament are scarcely possible 
in the near future. No matter what kind of ethnic hue may be 
applied here, and Mamadayev, for example, stressing the specific 
features of the republic, is thinking about the need to create a 
special organ which would include one representative from each 
Chechen clan; people here do not want elections and are afraid 
of them. 
  Both Dzhokhayev and Mamadayev have nevertheless not 
answered the question: What has happened to the money earned 
from the sale of oil products abroad by the government which 
they both headed? The first as president and the second as vice 
premier. And whether they like it or not, they would have to 
come up with an answer at an election. 
  Moscow is evidently not really insisting on the elections 
either. There is a probability that the Chechen voter, 
disillusioned with both Dudayev and the opposition, will vote 
for the famous fellow countryman who distanced himself from the 
all-Russian political arena to Groznyy. Even if Ruslan 
Khasbulatov has lost his influence in Moscow, he is nevertheless 
very undesirable as a deputy in the State Duma and all the more 
so on the list of senators. And so the "zero hour" of the 
elections that is frightening politicians in the center and in 
the localities is moving aside. 
  Chelyabinsk and Chechnya are not simply standing next to 
each 
other in the alphabetic list of Russian components of the 
Federation. Finding themselves by chance in the same bunch of 
territories not participating in the work of the Federation 
Council, they alone have united in the non-desire or not very 
great desire of the local leaders to participate in this work. 
Dudayev is worried that, if he decides to do so, he will lose 
his main trump card -- the image of fighter for independence. 
Chelyabinsk Governor Solovyev is worried that if as a result of 
the elections he gets the wrong people in the senate, it will be 
fairly difficult to run the oblast and govern it. So what is 
happening is that in one case there are no elections and there 
will not be any. In the other case they are kind of being 
conducted, but without much enthusiasm. Little Asian 
intricacies. 
  Incidentally, the border between Europe and Asia runs 
through 
the territory of Chelyabinsk Oblast and along the Caucasus 
mountain range. It does indeed. 

