BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Four Belgian Sappers Leave for </F>
Cambodia"] 
  [Text] Leuven -- During the Easter weekend four Belgian 
military sappers left for Cambodia. They will spend six months 
there to train some 1,000 local soldiers in mine detection and 
neutralization. The initiative is taking place with the 
Development Cooperation Ministry, which is contributing 7.8 
million Belgian francs and the United Nations Development 
Program, which manages the Cambodia Mine Action Center. The 
mine clearance unit of the army will supply three instructors 
and the navy will supply one. 
  The intervention by the Belgian soldiers is not without 
danger. Although the civil war has stabilized in Cambodia, 
individual actions by members of the Khmer Rouge are still 
reported. The instructors will work in the northwest of the 
country, the area which saw the most intense fighting during the 
war. In addition, during the first phase, the mine clearance 
activities will be accompanied on location. It is estimated 
that there are still 4 million mines in Cambodia. 
  It is the first time that the mine clearance department of 
the Belgian Army has carried out an overseas mission of this 
nature. However, army mine clearance specialists have been 
active in Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Somalia and Rwanda since 
1992. But these teams were responsible for neutralizing 
unexploded devices in order to protect Belgian troops and bases. 
At present, Belgian mine clearance experts are still in Croatia 
and Rwanda. The support provided by the Development Cooperation 
Ministry is based upon the assumption that mine clearance in 
Cambodia is an essential pre-condition for the country to 
redevelop itself. After all, farming is virtually impossible 
while the countryside is full of mines. It is reported that one 
Cambodian out of 236 has already lost one or several limbs. 
Every month, mines are still killing or wounding another 200 or 
300 people in the country. Of a surface area of 10,000 sq km in 
Cambodia containing mines, only 4.5 km have been cleared. 

