BFN 

<F P=106> [By Li Hong: "Low-cost Housing to Benefit Millions"] </F>
  [Text] A government project to provide low-cost housing to 
millions of middle-income citizens will be launched next year, 
according to the Ministry of Construction. 
  The programme, called "comfort housing project," will enable 
most urban residents to buy houses for 1,000 yuan ($115) per 
square metre, 3,000 yuan ($345) less than the current market 
rate. 
  Real estate developers participating in the 
government-subsidized project will get free access to State 
land, tax breaks and other premiums in order to reduce building 
costs, said Liang Xiaoqing of the ministry's real estate 
department. 
  She said the Ministry of Construction will encourage 
overseas 
investment by offering attractive returns, albeit without 
staggering profits. 
  The "comfort housing project" is expected to provide 150 
million square metres of living space by the time it is finished 
in 1997. The ministry expects it will benefit about 2 million 
urban families. 
  The recent decrease in the supply of affordable housing led 
the central government to launch the project, ministry officials 
said. 
  A report from the State Statistics Bureau (SSB) shows that 
moderately-priced housing development has been on a continous 
decline since 1985. The year-on-year decrease was 6.8 percent 
in 1986, plunged by 22.7 percent in 1987, dropped another 4.5 
percent in 1988, and nose-dived 27 percent in 1989. 
  Since 1990, the country has been caught in a real estate 
boom 
focusing on luxury office buildings, hotels, plush apartments 
and villas--all of which are beyond the means of ordinary 
Chinese residents. 
  On the other hand, demand for cheap urban dwellings has 
soared. Last year, the number of city households that had less 
than 4 square metres of living space per capita reached 5.5 
million. 
  And the number is expected to grow by 400,000 annually to 
reach 8 million by the year 2000, as more young people get 
married and start families, Liang said. 
  The central government started to cool down the over-heated 
property market last July. Bank credits were put under control 
and developers were required to make a fifth of their projects 
low-price residential housing. 
  To ensure the massive project gets off to a smooth start, 
the 
government will help fund it, Liang said. 
  The appropriations will be included in the annual State 
budget on fixed assets investment, which is to be approved by 
the nation's top legislature at its plenary session next, March. 
The planned investment for 1995 is 10 billion yuan ($1.15 
billion), Liang said. 
  Local governments and businesses will be required to raise 
the rest of the money for the project, she said. 
  To date, 64 cities have presented their plans for review by 
the Ministry of Construction. 
  Liang warned that many financially-strained State-owned 
firms 
may be unprepared to invest in the projects. In Beijing, for 
instance, about 30 percent of State companies are running in the 
red, she said. 
  Liang also said the planned selling price of 2,000 yuan 
($230) per square metre in Beijing was too high. 
  "They should reduce the price for the good of the Beijing 
people," Liang said. 
  She added that Shanghai, also a big metropolis, set a 1,000 
yuan ($115) per square metre ceiling on its "comfort housing 
project" apartments. 
  But Beijing officials said they had difficulty lowering the 
price since the building cost per square metre was 3,500 Yuan 
($402) in the capital. 

