Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The inauguration ceremony for the second Myanmar 
[Burma]-Thailand-Lao People's Democratic Republic [LPDR] 
tripartite ministerial conference on cooperation in controlling 
drug abuse was held at 0900 this morning at the conference hall 
of the International Business Center on Prome Road, Yangon 
[Rangoon]. 
  Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, secretary-1 of the State Law 
and Order Restoration Council, attended the ceremony and 
delivered the opening address. Later, Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt 
cordially greeted the Thai delegates, led by the deputy prime 
minister; the Laotian delegates, led by the Prime Minister's 
Office minister; ambassadors; and responsible personnel from the 
UN organizations. Near the entrance to the conference hall, 
Khin Nyunt and the visitors viewed an exhibition of photographs, 
charts, and graphs from various organizations working to control 
drug abuse. 
  The second Myanmar-Thailand-LPDR tripartite ministerial 
conference on cooperation in controlling drug abuse began at 
1130 in the conference hall. It was attended by the Myanmar 
delegation, led by Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn, chairman of the Central 
Committee for Drug Abuse Control [CCDAC] and minister of home 
affairs; the Thai delegation, led by Deputy Prime Minister 
Amnuai Wirawan; and the Lao delegation, led by Prime Minister's 
Office Minister Phao Bounnaphon. The first session of the 
meeting's first day recessed after speeches by Myanmar 
delegation leader Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn, LPDR delegation leader 
Phao Bounnaphon, and Thai delegation leader Amnuai Wirawan. 
  The second session began at 1400. Discussions were held on 
exchanging drug suppression information; the situation with 
narcotic drugs; drug suppression policies and practices; 
difficulties and achievements; international assistance; joint 
cooperation; crop substitution; border area development; and 
drug abuse control, prevention, education, treatment, and 
rehabilitation matters. The Myanmar delegation was led by 
Police Major General San Thein, secretary of the CCDAC and 
police director general. The LPDR delegation was led by Mr. 
Souban Salitthilat, chairman of the Lao National Committee for 
Narcotics Control and Suppression and deputy foreign minister. 
The Thai delegation was led by Police General Chawalit Yotmani, 
general secretary of the Narcotics Control Board. The first day 
of sessions came to a close in the evening. 
  The second day of sessions will begin tomorrow, 10 February, 
at 1000. 

