Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 29 (XINHUA) -- The China 
Administration of Tobacco Monopoly (CATM) burned 30,000 cartons 
of fake cigarettes in public here today, as part of its 
nationwide crusade against production and marketing of 
contraband cigarettes. 
  Jiang Ming, head of CATM, said that cigarettes were a 
special 
kind of product, harmful to people's health. China has always 
practised strict control over the production and marketing of 
cigarettes, he said. 
  China has imposed a state monopoly and a high-tax policy on 
the tobacco industry to restrict its production scale. 
  However, according to the senior official, the illegal 
production and marketing of counterfeit cigarettes had become 
rampant in some localities in recent years, which prompted CATM 
to organize a joint crackdown on fake and smuggled cigarettes, 
with relevant departments of public security, customs and 
taxation. 
  Marked results had been achieved in the crackdown, said the 
administrator. Official statistics show that since 1993, CATM 
has tracked down 514,000 boxes (a box contains 50 cartons of 
cigarettes) of smuggled cigarettes, seized 64,000 boxes of 
counterfeit cigarettes and burnt in public 51,000 boxes of them. 
  The CATM has also smashed 50 production centers of fake 
cigarettes and banned over 100 wholesale markets which sold fake 
and smuggled cigarettes. 
  The administrator said that China practised the system of 
state monopoly on the tobacco industry as early as in the 1980s. 
A large number of locally run tobacco enterprises have been 
closed down since then, particularly in 1993. The year saw a 
sharp reduction of the nation's tobacco enterprises from 300 to 
100. 
  The CATM renewed permits for nearly 1,000 enterprises which 
are considered qualified for the production and marketing of 
cigarettes. 
  The official stressed that the system of tobacco monopoly is 
of great significance in checking illegal tobacco activities and 
it will further safeguard the interests of the nation and of the 
vast number of smokers. 

