Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Raimundo Lopez] </F>
  [Text] Manicaragua, Cuba, 18 Feb (PL) -- A high-ranking 
officer of the Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR) in the central 
region of the island stated today that the Cuban military 
industry guarantees the country's essential defense needs. 
  Brigadier General Luis Perez Rospide, commandant of the FAR 
Military Industry, said that despite the economic difficulties 
facing the nation this sector is in a position to satisfy Cuba's 
basic defense needs. 
  Perez Rospide gave the members of the diplomatic corps 
credited in Havana a detailed explanation of the FAR's 
industrial activities. The members of the diplomatic corps are 
on a three-day tour of the country's central region. 
  These supplies, he said, include specifically projectiles, 
personnel and antitank mines, grenades, light rifles, and other 
material. 
  More than 40 ambassadors and other diplomatic officials 
visited the industry's "Commander Ernesto Che Guevara" 
facilities. The facility is located on a mountain range in the 
central province of Villa Clara, some 300 km east of the Cuban 
capital. 
  Answering questions by the foreign officials, the officer 
indicated that Cuban defense readiness was being maintained 
despite the economic crossroads the country is experiencing and 
since the abrupt loss of its main commercial partners within the 
former Socialist Bloc of Eastern Europe. 
  In response to the foreign diplomats and journalists, he 
said: "I assure you that we can produce sufficient amounts of 
ammunition to defeat any enemy no matter how powerful." 
  For the first time since its creation in 1962, the FAR 
opened 
these installations to foreign visitors. According to 
appearances, PRENSA LATINA observed that the visitors enjoyed 
total freedom to enquire about the available production capacity. 
  One detail that caught the diplomats' attention was the 
small 
amount of Soviet-made machinery, although the former USSR was 
practically Cuba's only weapons supplier. The majority of the 
equipment there is Italian, German, or Spanish. 
  When asked about this, Russian Ambassador Arnold Kalinin 
said 
that there is currently very little military collaboration 
between the two nations. 
  He told PRENSA LATINA: "there are still a few specialists on 
the island, but they are working mainly on weapons and machinery 
maintenance." 
  Gen. Perez Rospide explained that to date ties between the 
Cuban military industry and its former allies in the former USSR 
are nonexistent. He emphasized "we have no need for them right 
now." 
  The ingenuity and initiative of hundreds of workers and 
specialists, civilian and military alike, have kept our 
techniques in top condition, the Cuban soldier said. 
  Colonel Eladio Fernandez, director of the Manicaragua 
military industrial site, said that 1992 was the industry's 
toughest year. Last year, though, the sector began to recover. 
  Specifically, he said, many of the industry's facilities 
have 
been put to work to meet the needs of the people or other local 
industries such as tourism and even foreign investors. 
  We are also open to foreign capital, Gen. Perez Rospide 
said, 
mostly for civilian production projects. 
  He explained that the military factories, for example, use 
part of their facilities to produce scales, refrigeration 
equipment, and other local tourism industry needs. 
  Perez Rospide added that officials are studying the 
possibility of beginning a joint enterprise using foreign 
investment. He said he would prefer not to disclose any details 
due to the current stage of the negotiations process. 
  Diplomats credited in Havana, along with members of the 
foreign press, are on the second day of their three-day visit to 
the country's central region. 
  Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina told PRENSA LATINA 
that these tours are geared toward making foreign 
representatives aware of the true situation of the country and 
people, who he called the true designers of Cuba's foreign 
policy. 

