BFN 

  [Text] [Correspondent] Slovak President Michal Kovac will 
meet Hungarian President Arpad Goencz in New York on 21 June. 
Our Bratislava correspondent Ildiko Nagy reports: 
  [Nagy] Slovak Radio intends to set a precedent with the 
roundtable discussions that got under way today and where the 
participants are always invited journalists and a prominent 
personality. The guest on the first occasion was President of 
the Republic Michal Kovac, who replied to questions concerning 
Slovak domestic and foreign policies. 
  In answer to the Hungarian radio correspondent's question of 
what he would consider to be good relations with the new 
Hungarian state leadership, the Slovak president stated: On the 
basis of the statements heard so far, the future Hungarian 
Government will no doubt handle the nationality issue more 
realistically; many signs indicate that a solution can also be 
found to the matter of the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros water barrage, 
which burdens ties. He said he personally will strive to do 
everything in the interest of improving the two countries' 
relations because he knows how much other countries are watching 
this region and how much they want the Central European 
countries to become stabilizing factors. It is his conviction 
that the Hungarian side also sees it this way, said the Slovak 
president. 
  In answer to the question of the NEPSZABADSAG [Hungarian 
Socialist paper] correspondent of whether he would not like to 
open, jointly with Arpad Goencz, the border-crossing points that 
are in readiness, Michal Kovac replied that this had been 
planned earlier, with the intention of its being a gesture and 
of dissolving the tensions that existed at the time. Because at 
present it seems that, thanks to both sides, relations are 
becoming normal, the continuous settling of issues will be the 
task of the two governments and the individual ministries. 
  The presidential meeting could be the culmination of this, 
opined the head of Slovakia, who, on 21 June, when he accepts in 
New York the award for fostering good relations between 
neighbors, will meet Arpad Goencz, the other recipient of the 
award. Here the interstate agreement will also come up for 
discussion, opined Michal Kovac, who said he would be happy to 
come to Budapest to sign it. 

