BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kuo] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 19 (CNA) -- Both foreign investments 
in Taiwan and Taiwan investments abroad saw significant 
increases in the first quarter of this year, the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs reported Tuesday [19 April]. 
  Foreign investments in Taiwan, which included investments 
made by foreign nationals and overseas Chinese, soared 49 
percent to top US$273.22 million in the first three months of 
1994, officials from the ministry's Investment Commission said. 
  Of incoming foreign investments, capital from Hong Kong 
increased two times to top the list. It was followed by 
investments from the United States, Japan and Europe, commission 
officials said. 
  In terms of industries, investments in chemical processing 
jumped 1.4 times to lead the pack. Service industries and 
international trade followed with strong rises of 100 percent. 
  Meanwhile, investments made by Taiwan businesses overseas 
rose 66 percent in the first quarter of this year. 
  The commission's statistics showed that officially approved 
Taiwan investments abroad totaled US$530 million in the first 
quarter with investments in the United States taking the lion's 
share of the total outbound investments. 
  Taiwan investments in Singapore grew 327-fold during the 
three-month period while those to Thailand advanced 66 percent. 
  Taiwan investments in Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and 
Indonesia all dropped during the period by percentages ranging 
from 77 to 43 percent, the commission said. They noted that the 
drop in investment in Southeast Asia came before the 
government's "southern strategy," which encourages Taiwan 
investment in the region, went into full force. 
  Taiwan investments in the United States also plunged in the 
first quarter, dropping 92 percent or US$240 million to total a 
mere US$260 million, the commission reported. 
  During the first three months, the ROC Government approved 
$246 million of indirect investments in Mainland China by Taiwan 
investors. The commission reported that the approved amounts 
were for 314 investment project. It should be noted that much 
of Taiwan investment on the mainland is not registered or 
approved by the ROC Government. 
  Shanghai was favored by Taiwan investors, who put US$35.65 
million into the biggest city in Eastern China in the first 
three months this year. Other cities which absorbed Taiwan 
investments were Tungguan, Shenzhen and Xiamen in Southern China 
and Tianjin in Northern China. 
  By industries, basic metal processing and metalware 
manufacturing industries led the list and followed by food 
processing, beverage, electronics and electrical appliances, and 
precision instrument industries. 

