Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the Panamanian elections 
scheduled for 8 May 1994. 
  All Electoral Tribunal magistrates reiterated that no time 
extension would be allowed for election candidates to register 
and that the 8 February deadline at 1630 was announced long ago. 
The Authentic Liberal Party rallied outside the tribunal to 
protest the decision. It was also reported that the Civic 
Renewal Party presidential candidate, Ruben Dario Carles, 
visited the Victoriano Lorenzo Corregimiento in San Miguelito 
District where he walked through several streets and met with 
residents who expressed their community problems. Carles 
mentioned his recent trip to Honduras where he saw how certain 
industries operate. Carles suggested that similar industries in 
Panama could help reduce unemployment. Carles said: "We have 
visited San Miguelito several times, and greater attention to 
education, health, work, transportation, and security is needed 
in this area." (Panama City Circuito RPC Television in Spanish 
2300 GMT 16 Feb 94) 
  President Guillermo Endara challenged presidential 
candidates 
who use government corruption as their campaign topic to present 
the necessary evidence. Replying to a reporter's question about 
a possible punishment vote by dissatisfied groups, Endara 
replied: "I cannot see why my government should be punished for 
having gone by the book. Everyone is free to vote whichever way 
they please, but a punishment vote is a wasted vote." (Panama 
City Circuito RPC Television in Spanish 2300 GMT 17 Feb 94) 
  Ernesto Perez Balladares, presidential candidate for the 
United People Alliance, which is comprised of the PRD, 
Democratic Revolutionary Party, the Labor Party, and the Liberal 
Republican Party, presented formal registration documentation to 
the electoral tribunal and explained the party's name as "a 
desire to work for the best popular interests, for Panama's most 
needy and humble" and referred to the current administration as 
"belonging to the elite." On repeated charges of close contacts 
with former dictator Noriega, he replied: "Who, me? I have 
never had contacts with Noriega, much less now. I was a great 
friend of Omar Torrijos, who was a great nationalist and popular 
leader, who was also a member of the military. But I have no 
friends among the military, my friends are individuals." (Panama 
City Circuito RPC Television in Spanish 2300 GMT 18 Feb 94) 
  The Solidarity Party presidential candidate, Samuel Lewis 
Galindo, was interviewed by Carlos Singares, and one of the 
topics he discussed was U.S. military bases. He said that as 
long as the United States is interested in keeping military 
bases in Panama there is a possibility for this to be 
renegotiated. Nevertheless, he added that one needs to take 
into account that with the end of the Cold War, closure of U.S. 
bases everywhere is a topic of current interest. (Panama City EL 
SIGLO in Spanish 20 Feb 94 p 16) 
  After touring the Betania area with his wife and other PRD 
leaders, Ernesto Perez Balladares gave assurances that he will 
win the presidential election by a landslide and downplayed 
disparaging comments by certain political sectors. He would not 
comment on Carles' political campaign or on criticism by former 
Defense Force Chief Ruben Dario Paredes. (Panama City LA 
ESTRELLA DE PANAMA in Spanish 21 Feb 94 p 1) 
  Candidate Carles told a group of professionals, workers, and 
businessmen that his political project is to streamline the 
government in order to have enough savings for public works and 
investments that will generate employment and fight poverty. He 
said that his administration "must impose on itself the task of 
productive, immediate, intelligent, and optimum exploitation of 
all our advantages for the benefit of Panama and Panamanians; 
employment must stop being a specter in the thousands of homes 
of our fellow citizens." Carles also pledged to end 
discrimination towards women and stressed the need for women to 
participate in all public and private activities. (Panama City 
LA PRENSA in Spanish 21 Feb 94 p 20a) 
  Mireya Moscoso de Gruber, the Arnulfist Party presidential 
candidate, said that defense forces are not needed to guarantee 
security and that the country will not return to a military 
system. She did not rule out, however, a special canal 
protection force. (Panama City Circuito RPC Television in 
Spanish 2300 GMT 21 Feb 94) 
  A Molirena, Nationalist Liberal Republican Movement, source 
reported that Carles traveled to Colombia to meet with President 
Cesar Gaviria to discuss bilateral topics. (Panama City LA 
PRENSA in Spanish 22 Feb 94 p 1a) 
  CADE, Annual Conference of Business Executives, has invited 
all presidential candidates to explain their programs to improve 
western Panama -- Chiriqui and Bocas del Toro Provinces -- 
during the upcoming meeting in Bambito. Candidates Jose 
Salvador Munoz, of the Doctrinaire Panamenist Party, and Ruben 
Blades, of the Papa Egoro Movement, have excused themselves. 
(Panama City Telemetro Television Network in Spanish 1730 GMT 22 
Feb 94) 

