CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lt-Gen B. Dyukov, first deputy commander, </F>
Group of Russian Troops in Transcaucasus, by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA 
correspondent Vitaliy Denisov: "A Practical Military Diplomacy 
in Transcaucasus"; date and place not given; first paragraph is 
KRASNAYA ZVEZDA introduction] 
  [Text] The Group of Russian Troops in the Transcaucasus has 
been created relatively recently. What tasks does it face? What 
is the reason for a Russian troop presence abroad? These were 
the first questions put by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA's correspondent to 
Lieutenant-General B. Dyukov, first deputy commander, Group of 
Russian Troops in the Transcaucasus. 
  [Dyukov] The GRVZ [Group of Russian Troops in Transcaucasus] 
is not simply a strategic grouping on the soil of friendly 
Georgia and Armenia. The local populace, and--let us admit 
it--many people in nearby countries look upon the Russian Armed 
Forces as offering the sole opportunity for normalizing the 
situation in this explosive area, with the only, and, possibly, 
the last, real chance for ending internecine and fratricidal 
warfare. 
  Another aspect is the moral, the humanitarian. I have in 
mind 
the fact that Russian military personnel on duty in Tbilisi, 
Batumi, Gyumri, and Akhalkalaki are fully-qualified 
representatives of the great Russia. In this connection, any 
move they make, their behavior is watched very closely and 
subjected to unforgiving analysis and evaluation by our true 
friends on the one hand, and by our enemies and opponents (of 
which there are many) on the other. For this reason, for 
military personnel, such concepts as professionalism, 
conscience, and soldier's honor hold special significance. A 
significance which the famous Russian military leader General 
Yermolov described as early as the 19th century as "practical 
military diplomacy" for the Russian Army in the Transcaucasus. 
This in spite of the fact that today's military service Russians 
are performing in the Transcaucasus has nothing in common with 
the missions and functions assigned to the Caucasian Army at the 
beginning of the last century. 
  [Denisov] One may say that the Transcaucasus area is the 
"hottest" of all places in the territory of the former USSR. 
Reports emanating from here are more often than not alarming. 
How does that affect the Group of Russian Troops? 
  [Dyukov] The peculiarities of the situation in the area 
naturally do exert an effect on service in the Transcaucasus. 
The instability of the situation accords priority status to 
guarding and defending sites, bases, and the territory on which 
military units are stationed. Pursuing this mission under 
conditions of an extreme personnel shortage is anything but 
simple. And it must be realized that Russian military personnel 
must take on peacekeeping functions as well, such as in the fall 
of last year, when GRVZ men and officers assumed the burden of 
providing security for a segment of the railroad lying between 
Poti and Kutaisi. 
  In spite of the above, we cannot ignore combat readiness and 
military training of units and subunits. Combat training 
essentially boils down to commander training, but the arrival of 
contract servicemen affords us the opportunity of effecting a 
more effective, quality training process. There is much labor 
attached to this, it is true. For example, in the large unit 
stationed in Gyumri, the military authorities can organize 
weapons firing, driving exercises, special training, and even 
demonstration company tactical exercises including live firing. 
By agreement reached between the governments of Russia and 
Armenia and between the leadership of the ministries of defense 
of the two countries, it was at this time that permission was 
obtained to enlist republic citizens from among the 
Russian-speaking population, something which made it possible to 
effect a considerable improvement in filling the manpower needs 
of units and subunits. Commanders of other large units can only 
dream about that kind of scale of combat training. 
  I repeat: Interethnic conflicts in one way or another -- 
some 
waxing, others waning -- exert a direct influence on the life 
and activity of Russian troops in the area. Take Georgia as an 
example. The internal political situation in that Republic in 
1992-1993 was anything but stable. The absence of a well-founded 
program of resolving the total socio-economic crisis, 
Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, state of war existing between the 
country's east and west - all of that contributed to an increase 
in extremism, to a defamatory and unacceptable observance of all 
laws. It is not surprising that Georgia turned into a chaotic 
mess. On top of that, a large part of the population took up 
looting. 
  But from whom to steal? The primary target of violence was 
the Russian military. And we were forced to protect ourselves, 
without expectation of help from the authorities, who 
incidentally until recently were not particularly of a loyal 
frame of mind with respect to us. Unfortunately, there were 
victims. In two years in the Transcaucasus, more than 50 
enlisted men and officers lost their lives. Add to that the 
hundreds of pieces of motor vehicles and armored vehicles 
seized, incidents of forced eviction from apartments, constant 
threats hurled at servicemen's families, etc. 
  Yes, progress has been made in interrelationships with 
Georgia's leadership and the republic's minister of defense. The 
local populace's attitude toward the Russian military has shown 
some improvement. This definitely gives rise to hope: The 
realization has finally arrived whereby seizing our vehicles and 
plundering Russian troop facilities can cause only harm, not 
good, primarily to Georgia. 
  [Denisov] The situation is apparently somewhat more 
favorable 
in this respect in the large unit stationed in the city of 
Gyumri. 
  [Dyukov] There was a time when Russian troops in Armenia 
suffered difficulties. Desperate persons of the opposition would 
shout about the need for immediate withdrawal of the 7th Guards 
Army from Republic soil. The army departed. But now, some time 
later, many representatives of the power structures and even 
yesterday's "irreconciliables" openly admit their hastiness and 
generally the wrongfulness of their past statements and actions. 
The people simply realized that Russians are not enemies, that 
we--both Armenians and Russians--who have lived together for 
centuries, cannot exist separately. 
  Also of no small importance is something else. Even during 
the years when the situation attending our units stationed in 
Armenia caused unrest and apprehension, when some "gentlemen of 
opportunity" took it upon themselves to test the vigilance of 
Russian military personnel, we were always extended 
understanding on the part of the state's leadership and the 
power ministries. Criminals were delivered due punishment, while 
that which was seized or stolen was in most cases returned to 
the rightful owners. That firmness apparently also played a role 
in ending the lawlessness with respect to the Russian military. 
  [Denisov] In our conversation, we have not brought up the 
subject of another Transcaucasus republic: Azerbaijan. 
  [Dyukov] The fact of the matter is that there are no GRVZ 
units or large units stationed on the soil of the Azerbaijani 
Republic. Nonetheless, we are maintaining the necessary working 
contacts with this country's leadership and with representatives 
of the Ministry of Defense. The reason for this is that passing 
through Azerbaijan are military trains carrying freight shipped 
in support of the Group of Troops. These trains do at times 
raise passions. At times there are complaints of documents 
incorrectly filled out, while at other times allegations are 
made accusing the armed guards riding the trains of engaging in 
espionage. It is true that a complaint we lodged directly with 
the Azerbaijani minister of defense resulted in speeding up the 
trains. 
  [Denisov] During the recent visit to Georgia made by Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin and Minister of Defense Pavel Grachev, a 
statement was issued relative to a long-term presence of Russian 
troops in the area and the creation of several military bases on 
Transcaucasus territory. In your opinion, how will this be made 
a reality, and how will this affect the lives and service of our 
military personnel? 
  [Dyukov] Yes, Russia did make a statement dealing with the 
existence of strategic interests beyond the mountains of the 
Transcaucasus. However, in this regard, this is a long-term 
program not of a military presence, but of political, economic, 
and military cooperation which is directly dependant upon the 
internal political situation, say in this same Georgia. A 
particular leader may support the idea of a union with Russia, 
while his replacement may oppose it. Today's parliament may be 
in favor of ratifying treaties and agreements, while tomorrow's 
may reject them. Thus, the expression "long-term" as it applies 
to the Transcaucasus is highly relative. And discussion along 
this line unfortunately does not include a strategic 
perspective, only a specific time-- the end of 1995. Concerning 
military bases, in light of the agreement arrived at between the 
Russian Federation and the Republic of Georgia on Friendship, 
Neighborliness, and Cooperation, our Group is facing a change in 
the near future to a new, so-called "base-line" troop 
organization and equipment structure. This will require adopting 
a highly serious approach and exertion of greater efforts to 
acquire new skills, knowledge, and the necessary experience. 
  [Denisov] Many young men about to be inducted into the Army 
are apprehensive about leaving for service in the Transcaucasus. 
Officers are also less than enthusiastic to come here. However, 
service under these conditions, often extreme, is undoubtedly an 
excellent school for acquiring professional and life skills. 
  [Dyukov] All I can say is that service in the Transcaucasus 
very quickly brings out what a person is like. There is no room 
for weaklings and whiners here. Cowardice and faintheartedness 
are evaluated here not in terms of moral categories, but rather 
in lives. Service in the GRVZ is for those who understand that 
the purpose of the military person is either to protect and 
guard or to take up the offensive and liberate. It is for those 
who are willing to sacrifice warmth and comfort for something 
greater. But then, this is a matter of each person's conscience. 
  Does the service really promote professionalism? Most 
likely, 
if we think of this as doing one's duty, as irreproachable 
accomplishment of assigned responsibilities, personal 
discipline, and strength of the spirit. All these qualities are 
manifested more clearly and remarkably under the conditions of 
the Transcaucasus. And here it is not so important whether you 
have graduated from a military VUZ or have just been inducted 
into the ranks of the Armed Forces. That is why we have included 
among those awarded combat decorations and medals not only 
officers and warrant officers, but quite often enlisted men and 
non-commissioned officers. 
  [Denisov] Transcaucasus service personnel are granted 
certain 
privileges, knowledge of which is not widespread. In this 
connection, this could serve as an incentive for those who are 
wondering whether to enlist or not. 
  [Dyukov] There are many privileges. This includes 18 months' 
credit for 12 months of service, base pay plus half, and an 
additional two weeks of leave. I probably could not list all of 
them. Speaking of the material aspect, an enlisted man joining 
us on a draft basis, is paid, on the average, 80,000 to 100,000 
rubles. Contract service pays up to 200,000 rubles. However, I 
repeat that this is not the main thing. 
  Only by serving with us can a youth come to a rapid 
realization of his worth as a man and a person and appreciate 
the value of real service and Army brotherhood. 

