Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [by Chen Ming, Rong Song] </F>
  [Text] Tehran, March 4 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen arrived here this morning for a 
three-day official visit to Iran in a bid to promote bilateral 
relations. 
  Qian and his 14-member delegation were greeted by Iranian 
Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati at the Tehran International 
Airport. 
  Upon his arrival, Qian told reporters that the Chinese and 
iranian peoples have their long traditional friendly relations, 
saying that "we are glad to see many exchange visits by the two 
countries' high-ranking officials in recent years." 
  "Cooperation between the two countries have been well 
expanded and the two countries have the same or similar views 
toward many regional and international issues," Qian said. 
  He said that he was eager to meet Iranian leaders, saying 
that he will discuss ways of developing the friendly relations 
between the two countries and exchange views over international 
issues and regional situation with Iranian Foreign Minister 
Velayati. 
  Welcoming Qian, Velayati said that cooperation between Iran 
and China would help maintain peace and stability in the region, 
adding that Iran pays much importance toward developing 
relations with China and this is a decisive decision. 
  This is the last leg of Qian's five-nation tour which has 
taken him to Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Maldives. He 
started the tour on February 21. 
  During his visit, Chinese foreign minister is expected to 
meet with Iranian President Hashemi-Rafsanjani, Majlis Speaker 
'Ali Akbar Nateq-Nuri and other high-ranking officials, and have 
talks with the Iranian foreign minister. 
  The past few years witnessed a steady development of the 
bilateral relations after visits of state leaders of the two 
countries. The good political ties have facilitated economic 
and trade relations. The trade volume between China and Iran 
jumped to 712 million U.S. dollars in 1993, representing a 63.2 
increase over the previous year. 
  According to Chinese trade officials, China's export 
products 
have expanded from light industrial products and garment in the 
past to large production lines, equipment, machinery and high 
technology at present. 
  In economic and technological cooperation, the two countries 
have also made progress and the two sides have launched 41 
projects with a total investment of 1.6 billion U.S. dollars in 
the past decade, which range from dam construction, machinery 
industry to nonferrous industry. 

