BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the elections scheduled for 
29 May. 
  On 15 May, Conservative Party presidential candidate Andres 
Pastrana stated that Santa Fe de Bogota needs a friend in the 
presidency; "someone who is acquainted with the city's 
problems." During a visit to several Santa Fe de Bogota 
communities, Pastrana declared he is willing to guarantee the 
necessary assistance to solve the public transportation problem 
starting with the construction of five new highways. He also 
explained his plans to promote low interest housing loans 
through the National Urban Reform Institute, as well as to 
improve the quality of education throughout the nation. Another 
of his proposals consists of implementing unemployment insurance 
aimed exclusively at housing payments. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
TIEMPO in Spanish 16 May p 7A) 
  During a visit to Apartado this past weekend, Liberal Party 
candidate Ernesto Samper took advantage of the opportunity to 
disclose his "15 days strategy" leading to election day. The 
Samper strategy is based on three central points: to marshal 
and mobilize liberals throughout the nation in order for them to 
work for victory in the elections; the strengthening of the 
"Alliance for Colombia" which includes all sectors of Colombian 
society; and lastly, the impressive dissemination of what he 
termed as the "final position," which entails giving a detailed 
account of his proposals and their fundamental differences with 
those of Pastrana. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 16 
May 94 pp 1A, 6A) 
  Conservative Party presidential candidate Andres Pastrana 
Arango and Liberal Party hopeful Ernesto Samper have both 
stressed the need to call a referendum on the Constitutional 
Court's decision to legalize the possession of minor quantities 
of drugs for personal use. Pastrana indicated that "all 
Colombians must clearly voice their position on the 
Constitutional Court's decision." He also proposed the 
inclusion of a second ballot on the issue in the 29 May 
presidential elections. Ernesto Samper recently sent a note to 
President Cesar Gaviria stating that he supports the president's 
position on calling a referendum and that "it is an issue of 
much significance for the welfare of all Colombian families and 
the younger generation." (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 9 May p 6A) 
  Antonio Navarro Wolff, president of the 19 April Democratic 
Alliance, AD/M-19, and presidential candidate, indicated that 
his party "is gambling everything" on the 29 May presidential 
elections. He added that should there be a second election round 
in which he is not included, he is willing to abide by his 
party's decision. The determination, which was made during a 10 
May AD/M-19 national meeting, includes holding a general 
assembly once the election results are made public. According 
to Navarro, this is a way of giving assurances to all those who 
have decided to support him during the elections. (Santa Fe de 
Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 11 May 94 p 7A) 

