BFN 

<F P=106> ["Welt-Nachrichtendienst" report: "State Prosecutor </F>
Presents Material Against Lopez"] 
  [Text] Darmstadt -- The Darmstadt state prosecutor 
yesterday presented a detailed list of documents confiscated 
from Jose Ignacio Lopez, member of the board of directors of 
Volkswagen [VW], who was accused of industrial espionage by his 
former employer General Motors/Opel. In a two-page declaration, 
the state prosecutor substantiated the accusation that Lopez and 
close aides took along classified documents to Wolfsburg when 
they changed from General Motors to Volkswagen. 
  Plans for the construction of a new plant in the Spanish 
Basque Country were seized in Lopez's office in Wolfsburg. They 
provided "indication for close resemblance" with a similar 
project, on which Lopez used to work for his former employer, 
General Motors, in 1992. The Volkswagen "Plant B" project and 
General Motors' "Plant X" study are 75 percent identical, 
sources from the judicial authorities have said. Opel and 
General Motors had rated their study as "classified." 
  Moreover, Opel documents dealing with a development project, 
acquisition strategies, and economic strategies, which were also 
classified as secret company plans, were found in private 
apartments of Lopez and other former Opel managers. Yet, the 
state prosecutor emphasized that the investigations have not yet 
been concluded and no decision had been made yet regarding a 
charge against Lopez. 
  In a first statement, Volkswagen rejected the suspicion of 
industrial espionage. The mere close resemblance of confiscated 
plans with General Motors/Opel documents is not yet an 
indication of this accusation. Opel, however regards the state 
prosecutor's statement as a confirmation of its own conviction 
"that a great number of secret design papers and the company's 
highly sensitive cost structures were systematically 
misappropriated obviously to benefit a competitor." 
  However, an action for banning Lopez and seven former Opel 
employees from working for another company had been turned down 
by Opel at the Frankfurt/Main land court before. 

