BFN 

  [Text] Head of the United Nations commission disarming 
Iraq, Rolf Ekeus, briefed Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam 
al-Majali on developments and progress of his commission's 
responsibilities in Iraq. 
  The meeting also focused on some of the region's issues. The 
UN official said he was keen on hearing Jordanian assessment of 
the situation in the region. 
  He said there were no major differences with Baghdad on 
monitoring its weapons, and that he expected the Security 
Council to hold detailed discussions in July on easing trade 
sanctions imposed on Iraq. 
  Ekeus said there was good hope that the lifting of the 
sanctions can happen within the foreseeable future. 
  [Begin recording] [Ekeus] I was, and I am very interested to 
listen to the assessment of the Jordanian Government and the 
prime minister of the situation in the region, and especially 
with regard to the problems and developments coming out from the 
Iraqi situation, where we have special responsibilities. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Are your considering to lift 
the 
sanctions on Iraq, or easing it? 
  [Ekeus] This is as I said, there are provisions that if the 
Security Council finds that Iraq has fulfilled all its 
obligations with regard to the weapons, you know, the 
elimination of weapons of mass destruction, and the control of 
the missiles so they can no longer be a threat to the region and 
its neighbors, then the embargo will be lifted, and think its 
good hope that this can happen within the foreseeable future. 
It's up to the Special Commission however to give the Security 
Council the facts for such a decision. [end recording] 
  After meeting with Iraqi head of Military Industrialization 
'Amir Rashid in Amman, Ekeus said the sanctions issue is very 
high on the United Nations agenda. He said he would brief the 
Security Council of the latest developments in two days' time. 
  A UN weapons inspection team, meanwhile, is currently in 
Iraq 
to prepare guidelines for the long-term monitoring agreed with 
Baghdad before lifting the embargo. 
  The team arrived in Baghdad yesterday to join another team 
that flew to Iraq last week. 

