BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Chazan] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nairobi, April 29 (AFP) -- Hundreds of thousands 
of Rwandans poured into neighbouring Tanzania Friday [29 April] 
fleeing ethnic bloodletting, UN officials said, describing it as 
the biggest refugee exodus they had ever experienced. The mass 
flight came amid continued fighting between government and 
rebels forces, particularly in southern Rwanda, including a 
reported massacre when police opened fire with machine guns on 
refugees trying to flee a stadium. 
  A UN High Commissioner for Refugees statement said that 
250,000 people had sought refuge in Tanzania in a 24-hour 
period, many of them speaking of a worsening military situation 
in southern Rwanda. [passage omitted] 
  Meanwhile a UNHCR statement said Rwandan police and 
militiamen had opened fire Friday with machine guns and grenades 
on 5,000 refugees trying to flee from a stadium where they were 
being held, killing an unknown number. It said the attack 
happened at a stadium in Cyangugu, southwestern Rwandan, where 
the refugees initially sought shelter in the wake of widespread 
ethnic unrest which erupted at the start of April. The 
statement said an unknown number of people were killed and 
injured in Friday's attack, adding that local authorities had 
prevented aid agencies from visiting the area, and the refugees 
from leaving the stadium. 
  World Food Programme spokesman Francis Mwanza meanwhile said 
that about 320,000 Rwandans had reached Ngara, in north-western 
Tanzania, in the past few days, amid the general exodus. 
  An official of the UN humanitarian department, Lance Clarke, 
meanwhile said fighting had prevented aid experts from reaching 
southern Rwanda, controlled by government forces. Clarke told a 
news conference here that Rwanda faced a "humanitarian 
disaster." A UNHCR spokesman attributed the mass exodus to a 
"worsening of the situation" in southern Rwanda. 
  The rebels seemed to be tightening their grip on Kigali 
while 
the government forces lacked direction from their leaders, an 
international official in the capital said. The capital could 
fall to the rebels "very shortly," said the official, who 
requested anonymity. 
  Meanwhile in neighbouring Burundi, which has largely avoided 
the carnage sparked by the deaths of both countries' presidents 
on April 6, at least three people were killed as security forces 
tried to disarm militiamen. A soldier and two civilians were 
killed overnight, a military spokesman said in the capital 
Bujumbura. 
  In Brussels, the European Commission said it was sending a 
total of 1.13 million ECU's (1.3 million dollars) worth of 
humanitarian aid to help some 100,000 Rwandan refugees who have 
poured into Tanzania in recent days. 
  In a related development Belgium said it was barring members 
of Rwanda's interim government until it received a retraction of 
allegations that Belgian troops were involved the April 6 
downing of the president's plane. 

