BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 10 TASS -- Attempts to reconcile 
Chairman of the State Property Committee Anatoliy Chubays with 
Moscow Mayor Yuriy Luzhkov proved futile. Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin told a press conference here today that he had 
asked First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets to tell Chubays to 
"leave Moscow alone". 
  The approaching finish of the first stage of the Russian 
voucher privatisation has not reconciled the advocates of 
different forms and methods of this economically important 
process. Chairman of the Russian State Property Committee 
Chubays told a press conference the other day that "the great 
Russian squabble over privatisation has culminated in the 
latter's complete victory". True, he added that a fight was now 
going on over the results of privatisation. Of course, he 
himelf assesses them very highly. For instance, he believes it 
is a remarkable achievement that foreign investments were made 
in auctioned off enterprises. However, Chubays was able to 
mention only a few such instances, because the total amount of 
such investments is rather small. 
  Moscow Mayor Yuriy Luzhkov is the most outspoken opponent of 
the current method of denationalisation. He claims that it was 
a total flop. During a specially called press conference here, 
he even described the current privatisation methods as a 
"forcible break-down of the state", because everything was being 
sold at dirt cheap prices, the democratic principles were being 
violated, and the rights of Russia's territories were being 
ignored. 
  The Moscow government has offered its own concept of further 
privatisation. It moves to prolong the validity of 
privatisation vouchers and to collect in a depository the unused 
privatisation cheques in order to "return to every man the part 
of the property initially promised to him". The head of the 
State Property Committee rejects both proposals. "The 
government's stand is clear: We shall not prolong the voucher 
privatisation in Russia," he stated. 
  The Moscow government plans to use its own, higher 
yardsticks 
for assessing the cost of privatised enterprises, whereas 
Chubays is mobilising his lawyers to check the legality of its 
criteria. The head of the Moscow administration warns against 
selling land on the territory subordinated to him, while the 
head of the State Property Committee is seeking legal grounds to 
privatise land. Luzhkov demands broader rights to local 
government bodies, so that they could determine themselves 
"what, when, and within what time limits they find profitable to 
sell". Chubays is ready to make only minor concessions as 
regards the sale of packages of shares for money. "What will the 
packages be like, to what extent will they be fractioned, and in 
what sequence will the sales be arranged -- all this will be 
left for the local government bodies to decide," he says. 
  All this throws light only on the major problems that are 
being disputed not only by the foregoing statesmen, but also by 
various political forces. This does not promise a peaceful life 
to those who are linked with this historical process of altering 
the form of property in a huge country. 
  Be what it may, work on the programme for the post-voucher 
privatisation is nearing completion. It is to be submitted to 
the Russian Government on June 15. The latter will forward it 
for approval to the Russian president and the State Duma. Cash 
privatisation is to begin in July. About 70 percent of all the 
Russian industrial enterprises will be sold off by then for 
privatisation vouchers. Ten percent of the enterprises will not 
be privatised at all, while the remaining 20 will be auctioned 
off for money. The packages of shares left unused at 
enterprises during the voucher privatisation will also be 
auctioned off. 

