BFN 

  [Text] Russia has planned to construct storage tanks for 
radioactive waste leaking from its nuclear-powered submarines 
with financial assistance from Japan, but their construction has 
largely been delayed, and as of 2 April, no prospects are seen 
for their construction. This delay has fueled fears that Russia 
might resume the dumping of radioactive waste into the Sea of 
Japan. Faced with this situation, Japan has proposed: 1) in the 
first stage, it provide approximately 100-500 million yen in 
financial assistance to Russia for the construction of tanks 
with storage capacity of 2,000 tons of radioactive waste during 
April in Vladivostok, and 2) in the second stage, it provide 
approximately 500-1,000 million yen in financial assistance to 
Russia for the construction of radioactive- waste processing 
facilities within one-half year. Japan is now awaiting Russia's 
answer. 
  The Russian side says the answer to Japan has been delayed 
because of the time-consuming coordination of views between the 
central government and the Maritime Kray local government. 
  Japan has repeatedly asked Russia to speedily coordinate 
domestic views both in Tokyo and Moscow, and it is highly 
doubtful that the construction of storage tanks in the first 
stage will be completed within April. A Foreign Ministry source 
expresses deep concern over the delay in constructing the 
storage tanks, saying, "Russia is responsible for the delay." 
  Last October, Russia stopped dumping the radioactive waster 
into the Sea of Japan. It has since stored the radioactive waste 
in TNT-5 tanker (with the capacity of storing 500 tons) and 
TNT-27 tanker (with the capacity of storing 1,500 tons) in 
Vladivostok. 
  The two obsolete tankers are closer to reaching their 
limits, 
raising the fear of the tankers leaking radioactive waste into 
the sea. The Committee on Check of Radioactive Safety in the 
Maritime Kray local government recommended to the governor on 31 
March that the dumping of radioactive waster into the Sea of 
Japan be resumed beginning May when ice begins to thaw. 
  Japan, fearing that if Russia resumes the dumping of 
radioactive waste into the Sea of Japan, it would fan 
anti-Russia feelings among the Japanese, is continuing to urge 
Russia to speedily coordinate its domestic views. 

