BFN 

  [Text] RENMIN RIBAO reports in its 20 May issue that (Chen 
Bing-qian), spokesman for the (Hai Heng) Petroleum General 
Corportion of China, told the press that on 25 April, a 
Vietnamese newspaper carried an article under the headline: 
Protest Against the Creston Energy Company's Illegal Actions in 
the Tu Chinh Reef -- which is in fact the Wanan reef of China's 
Nansha archipelago -- Which is Under Vietnamese Sovereignty. 
The newspaper claims that the signing of a contract for oil and 
gas exploration in the Wananbei-21 area between the Creston 
Company of the United States and the (Hai Heng) Petroleum 
General Corporation of China constitutes a violation of 
Vietnamese sovereignty. It also demands the cancellation of the 
contract and an end to all contract-related activities. 
  In 1992, the (Hai Heng) Petroleum General Corporation of 
China and the Creston Company of the United States signed the 
Wananbei-21 contract. This contract has legal authority. The 
Wananbei-21 contract area lies within the Nansha archipelago 
under Chinese sovereignty. The contract area is 25,155 square 
km. The exploratory period under the terms of the contract is 
seven years. During the period of contract, the contractor 
concerned is resonsible for conducting seismic surveys and 
exploratory drilling. The (Hai Heng) Petroleum General 
Corporation of China and the Creston Company of the United 
States have the right to carry out their normal tasks in that 
sea area. 
  The (Hai Heng) Petroleum General Corporation entirely 
rejects 
Vietnam's aforementioned criticism and its absurd demand. 
  It should be pointed out here that in recent years, the 
Vietnamese Oil and Gas Corporation has zoned off a number of 
lots in China's Nansha Sea area and invited bidding from other 
countries. Some foreign companies have signed contracts with it 
for oil and gas exploitation. This constitutes a violation not 
only of Chinese sovereignty in the Nansha Sea area but also of 
the interests of the (Hai Heng) Petroleum General Corporation of 
China. 
  The Chinese Government has on several occasions pointed out 
that, pending the settlement of the dispute over the Nansha 
issue, [the parties concerned] may temporarily set aside the 
dispute and join in exploitation efforts. Therefore, the (Hai 
Heng) Petroleum General Corporation of China will welcome any 
efforts of the relevant corporations, including the Vietnamese 
Oil and Gas Corporation, to cooperate with it in seeking the 
possibilities of a joint oil exploitation. 
  The spokesman said: The (Hai Heng) Petroleum General 
Corporation of China requests the Vietnamese Oil and Gas 
Corporation to stop all acts that violate the legal interests of 
the two aforementioned companies. 

