Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Bombay--In protest against human rights violations 
"Panun Kashmir," an organization to protect the interests of 
Kashmir Pandits, organized a street play, "Sab Theek Thak Hai" 
(everything is alright). 
  The play, which coincided with the human rights week 
observed 
all over the country and abroad by "Panun Kashmir" (our own 
Kashmir), is a satire depicting the ongoing terrorism in the 
Valley and the government's lackadaisical attitude toward the 
issue. 
  Various representatives of the organization have told the 
United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva that New Delhi 
has "violated their rights, choosing instead to appease Islamic 
fundamentalist forces" in their state, resulting in the "growth 
of secular and democratic forces." 
  "For the first time we have exposed the designs of our state 
and the government's apathy. We have attacked both Farooq 
Abdullah and Congress Party. Our artistes will project the 
facts," said the organization convenor Agnishekhar. 
  "Our nation is on the verge of disintegration and Kashmir is 
the litmus test. If we lose Kashmir then it will be difficult 
for us to stay united," he added. 
  Disillusioned with the Bharatiya Janata Party's role, 
Agnishekhar said that even they reduced the Kashmir issue to a 
"mere simple argument." 
  Agnishekhar said more than 5,000 members of the community 
have died in camps and elsewhere due to sunstrokes, gastro 
entritis, typhoid epidemics, snake bites, etc., following their 
forced exodus from the Valley. 
  According to the organization, about 300,000 Kashmir 
Pandits, 
constituting 99 percent of the total population of Hindus living 
in Muslim majority areas of the Valley were forcibly pushed out 
by the terrorists, who were trained in Pakistan since 1989. 
"There is a threat of extinction. Death rate is increasing, 
while the birth rate has fallen drastically in Kashmir," said 
Agnishekhar. 
  Elaborating upon the destruction in Jammu and Kashmir, the 
organization members said about 1,100 Kashmir Pandits were 
tortured and killed by the terrorists; 105 educational 
institutions were damaged or forcibly occupied; 103 religious 
and cultural institutions were destroyed; 14,430 business houses 
were destabilized and 95 percent of the houses were looted. 
* 

