Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kadi Heinsalu: "Foreign Aid To Agriculture"] </F>
  [Text] 
  Besides the World Bank loan, Estonia's agriculture is 
also supported by several foreign funds created with proceeds 
from the sale of aid shipments from the countries involved, said 
Ruve Shank, director of foreign relations at the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
  The World Bank has extended two so-called shopping loans to 
help Estonia's agriculture, the first of which arrived to 
support agriculture with $5 million in 1992. Last year, the 
World Bank supported Estonia with the so-called Japanese loan, 
the distribution of which is taking place now. 
  In addition to these, Shank said, foreign aid funds have 
been 
created in Estonia by three other countries and the European 
Community. Some of the funds distribute proceeds from the sale 
of shipments as grants, others offer loans on favorable terms. 
  "The money of the first of these, the U.S. fund, has been 
distributed and has begun to bring in interest on the loans," 
Shank remarked. The fund created on the basis of 100,000 tonnes 
of feed grain shipped to Estonia in 1992, has been used to 
credit private enterprise in agriculture. The 25 million kroons 
received from the sale of grain were lent mostly to farmers at 7 
percent annual interest. 
  Two years ago, grain assistance was used to create the 
European Community fund, with 75 percent of its sales proceeds 
going to support agriculture. "In contrast to regulations for 
the U.S. fund, this money--30 million kroons--is being 
distributed to some of the better projects in rural enterprise 
as a non-returnable loan," Shank explained, adding that the 
competition is still on, and this is why the EC fund continues 
to have great significance this year. 
  "In the third place, by volume, is the Italian fund, also 
with 30 million kroons," Shank continued. By now, it has 
accumulated 14 million kroons, one half of which will be lent at 
a 12.5 percent annual interest to develop rural enterprise, and 
the other half given as grants to state structures, including 
support to state collectives, agricultural schools and the 
Ministry of Agriculture. 
  Making up the smallest part of the volume, 4 million kroons, 
is the German fund based on spare parts for agricultural 
machinery shipped here a few years ago. "So far, less than one 
third of them have been sold, and thus the significance of this 
fund in supporting agriculture not particularly significant," 
Shank remarked. 
  Shank said that assistance through funds will, in the near 
future, be replaced by a system of loans at favorable interest 
rates. "We have been negotiating with the German government, the 
World Bank and Japan are also willing to lend money, instead of 
granting it." 

