Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gillian Tett in Brussels, Michael Lindemann in </F>
Bonn, and Andrew Baxter in London: "EU Steel Deal a Camouflage, 
Say Officials"] 
  [Text] They are too polite to use the fudge word. But as 
officials in Brussels yesterday digested this week's surprise 
agreement forged between steelmakers and Mr Martin Bangemann, EU 
[European Union] industry commissioner, the mood in some 
quarters was bitter. 
  Although Mr Bangemann's entourage insists it is delighted 
that the industry has apparently met the European Commission's 
demands for further steel reductions, in private officials admit 
the deal may have been little more than a face-saving camouflage. 
  "All that has happened is that the problem has been put off 
for another year or two nothing has really been agreed at all," 
commented one Commission official. 
  From the perspective of some member states, at least, such 
an 
analysis may seem too harsh. 
  Mr Bangemann's aides point out that his meeting on Wednesday 
[23 March] with chiefs of the big steel producers marked a 
significant shift in the negotiating climate. In place of the 
political posturing which has dogged recent negotiations, both 
sides are proclaiming a new climate of "understanding." This 
involves agreement to aim for cuts totalling some l9 million 
tonnes in capacity, in exchange for extending the deadline for a 
restructuring plan until November. 
  Furthermore, the steel industry's offer of a moratorium on 
state aid until November has been welcomed by the Commission and 
member states, particularly in the UK which has recently stepped 
up its demands that the Commission take a tougher line on state 
aid. But with the details of the plan remaining to be decided 
some Commission officials fear that the extension of the 
deadline will give the industry more scope to evade the cuts. 
  The steel market is expected to pick up in the summer, 
partly 
on the back of a recovery in the motor industry, so further cuts 
are likely to be even less palatable to the steel sector. These 
fears have been fuelled by continuing ambiguities in the new 
"understanding," including the source of the extra reductions. 
  Although the Commission says the final figure has been 
boosted by 6 million tonnes-worth of cuts in the Italian private 
sector and 2 million tonnes-worth through private sector 
mergers, most probably in Germany, in practice these figures 
appear to involve little more than a juggling of earlier offers. 
  There is also a question over the degree of industry support 
for the deal. 
  British Steel, one of the most hawkish of the private sector 
producers, reacted cautiously to the deal as it did not attend 
Wednesday's meeting. But it said anything which led to 
subsidies being ended permanently would be welcomed. 
  The German steel federation was pleased that talks about 
capacity cuts had been extended and that an ECU240 million 
(181.4 million pounds) aid package to help pay for redundancies 
had not been cancelled. "The industry needs this. It is not 
over the worst yet," it said. But German producers were not 
likely to make any extra capacity cuts. 

