Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Mohseen Jeenah, APLA member and Durban student leader, </F>
sent to WEEKLY MAIL hours before his death; first paragraph is 
newspaper introduction] 
  [Text] One of the last things Durban student leader Mohseen 
Jeenah did before he died was send a story to the MAIL &amp; 
GUARDIAN putting the case of those APLA [Azanian People's 
Liberation Army] guerrillas who refused to accept the PAC 
[Pan-Africanist Congress] order to lay down their arms. The 
editors were mystified by this story from a writer they had 
never dealt with before, quoting an unnamed APLA commander, 
coming just as the PAC announced the end of their armed 
struggle. Within hours, however, Jeenah was shot down in the 
streets by police, after allegedly taking part in an attack on a 
police station. He had put his words into action. His story 
had now become the dramatic and tragic words of the APLA 
`bitterienders.' [bitter enders]. 
  An Azanian People's Liberation Army commander has vowed that 
the armed struggle will continue until the end of the five-year 
government of national unity in 1999 and that the organisation 
will step up attacks in the run-up to the April 27 elections. 
  The commander's comments come despite the fact that the Pan 
Africanist Congress is contesting the poll and has agreed to 
negotiate a mutual cessation of hostilities with the government. 
  This correspondent met the APLA man -- who identified 
himself 
only by the name Sizwe and as the army's Natal commander -- in a 
Durban township recently. Usually reliable sources had placed 
this reporter in contact with the APLA cadre, who said he had 
joined APLA in the 1970s and had received military training in 
Tanzania and Libya. 
  In the interview, Sizwe said APLA commander Sabelo Phama had 
ordered cadres to continue waging armed struggle even after 
elections. "Our commander said we would continue fighting for 
the next five years." 
  He said the ANC [African National Congress] -- which had 
agreed to a government to national unity until the next election 
scheduled for 1999 -- had "sold out the African masses" and were 
"puppets of the regime." 
  Sizwe urged Umkhonto we Sizwe [Spear of the Nation, MK; ANC 
military wing] guerrillas not to allow themselves to be 
"integrated" into the South African Police and South African 
Defence Force. He warned: "If they are stupid enough to join 
the boers, we will kill them." 
  He added that APLA would strike in Natal, which has been 
under "surveillance" and where "many units" were in place, in 
the countdown to elections. 
  "We are not fighting to vote in elections. We are fighting 
to regain the land that was stolen from our forefathers," said 
Sizwe. 
  He expressed surprise that "people want to know why we are 
fighting while the PAC is negotiating. Negotiations are not 
going to deliver genuine freedom. Only APLA can." 
  Asked whether this reflected divisions between APLA and the 
PAC, Sizwe said: "Negotiations is part of the PAC's programme. 
APLA's programme is underground and we have our own command 
structures." 
  Sizwe added that while he personally was opposed to it, news 
reports of APLA cadres being trained in Zimbabwe for inclusion 
in the National Peace-Keeping Force might reflect a strategic 
decision on the part of the guerrilla army's leadership. 
Participation would lead to cadres receiving military training 
and returning to the country ensure to MK's component in the 
force did not "oppress" Africans, he said. 
  Sizwe strongly denied that APLA was responsible for last 
July's St James massacre which left 11 people dead. "APLA has a 
very high respect for God and people who are worshiping. The 
regime is trying to bluff the world that we are a bunch of 
monsters. We are a disciplined and principled army," said Sizwe. 
  Commenting on the bus blast in central Durban late last 
year, 
Sizwe said he did not order the attack. If it was found that 
the alleged Pan Africanist Student Organisation (PASO) member, 
Xolani Cuba, charged in connection with the explosion was 
responsible, he had acted independently of APLA structures. 
  Sizwe said he would have no problem with this as PASO had 
taken a "a decision to actively engage the enemy. "They (PASO 
members) are young and fearless and are prepared to die like all 
our soldiers. They have said themselves that every PASO member 
is an APLA cadre, "added Sizwe. [quotation marks as published] 
  Sizwe said he would not kill unarmed civilians and did not 
hate whites because of the colour of their skin. "There are 
some whites who sympathise with the struggle. But as our 
founding father (Robert) Sobukwe said, it is dishonest to say 
that you hate the whip but not the person who wields it," he 
said. 
  Sizwe was adamant that he would not kill unarmed civilians 
but added that he did not "understand the fuss" created when 
"some white civilians are caught in the crossfire" as "our 
people are killed in the thousands." 
  He said APLA did not attack farmers randomly. "We receive 
reports from workers in an area about which farmers are 
oppressing them. These are the farmers APLA targets." 
  Claiming "great success" in driving farmers off the land, he 
said: "in Elliot, only three farmers out of 45 are still 
occupying the land." 
  Spelling out how APLA structures operate, he said cadres 
received their instructions from the high command based outside 
the country. 
  "Each unit is made up of three to five cadres, each with a 
commander. The unit commanders report to the area commander who 
is in charge of that specific area. 
  "The area commanders then report to the regional commander 
who then reports to the high command," Sizwe said. He said the 
area commander instructed one of his units to keep a target 
under surveillance for more than a week. He then planned how 
the attack should be executed with the regional commander. 

