BFN 

<F P=106> [Article in two installments by D. Vukovic and S.P. </F>
Stamatovic: "Who Are the New Ambassadors?"] 
<H5>  [14 Jun p 12] </H5>
  [Text] Yugoslav diplomacy is preparing an offensive. This 
can be deduced from the fact that, several days ago, a new 
diplomatic corps, composed of new heads of the FRY [Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia] missions in a number of foreign 
capitals, was inaugurated. 
  When the Federal Government announced this 20 days ago, in a 
statement issued in the wake of the meeting, it also pointed out 
that the new Yugoslav diplomatic corps would also include many 
businessmen, because economic affairs are unquestionably of 
primary importance. The weekend before last, while introducing 
the list of new ambassadors to the public, Federal Prime 
Minister Kontic made a few critical remarks on the behavior of 
the press, which, he sais, had speculated a lot about the list 
and spread the conviction that mainly businessmen would be 
chosen for diplomatic posts. Whether the prime minister had 
actually overlooked the statement previously made by the Federal 
Government, or whether he wanted to say something else when the 
names had already been specified is not quite clear. 
  Anyway, the list was presented to the public, together with 
the request of the representatives of the government to 
journalists that they should not call it the list of 
ambassadors. The reason is that ambassadors cannot be appointed 
as long as the sanctions last, so the press should rather refer 
to the designated people for the posts of heads of missions, or 
charge d'affairs, and suchlike. That is to say, the list 
includes people who are professional diplomats, for whom 
diplomacy is both a vocation and a profession, as well as those 
who are coming from the public, political, and, in a broader 
sense, social life. 
<H5>  Ministers and Writers </H5>
  In this second group, the man with the best social rating in 
the current circumstances is certainly Danilo Z. Markovic, 61. 
He should not need any particular introduction to the public, 
because he earned his good reputation as the minister of 
education in all governments under Milosevic so far. He is 
believed to have been the mentor of Mirjana Markovic 
[Milosevic's wife] when she was working on her graduation exam, 
after which he became her protegee. He belonged to [Mirjana] 
Markovic's ideological group at Belgrade University that, 
actually, prepared the Eighth Session [of the Serbian 
communists, which launched Milosevic to power], only to make 
headway in his political career after that. The scientific 
career of Markovic rests upon a breakthrough to the East. His 
book, Sociological Aspects of Work--which is his 
expert field of knowledge--was translated only in Moscow and 
Sofia, under the communist regimes. Is this what makes him 
qualified to take up the Moscow office? It is quite unlikely 
that he still has admirers in the Moscow offices from which the 
state is run. Or, could it be, perhaps, that they are just 
temporarily absent? 
  Djoko Stojicic, 58, also has a ministerial pedigree. He is 
leaving for Prague to replace Stanja Stojanovic, who was 
Milosevic's right hand man when he was squaring accounts with 
rivals from the Yugoslav Communist Parties in the former Central 
Committee of the Association of Communists of Yugoslavia 
[CKSKY]. Stojanovic spent four lovely and well-deserved years 
in Prague, where he was so successful that the president of the 
state in which he served raised a hue and cry against the Serbs. 
Whether he, as an ambassador, could do anything about it is 
questionable, but what we have stated here is definitely 
unquestionable. 
  In any case, Stojicic is going to face the same from 
President Vaclav Havel who is ill-disposed toward the Serbs. 
Just like Havel, Stojicic is also an author, but his literary 
status is quite unclear, even in Yugoslavia, let alone abroad. 
His poetry is not so esteemed, yet he is writing and publishing 
it persistently. Recently, however, in a review of one of his 
volumes of contemporary folk poems, which Stojicic collected and 
brought to light, academician P. Ivic assessed his opus as being 
equal to the work of Vuk Karadzic [famous 18th century Serbian 
philologist and linguist]. 
  In terms of politics, Stojicic is also Milosevic's 
confidant. 
Before the Eighth Session, he was in a brief dilemma over 
whether to stay neutral in the conflict, but shortly thereafter 
he made a decision and joined the right side. Thereafter he 
edited NIN, managed the Institute for International Scientific 
and Cultural Cooperation, and, until recently, he was a minister 
in [Serbian prime minister] Nikola Sainovic's cabinet. As a 
young man, he was a leader of the Youth Association for a long 
time and was also an internationalist for quite long thereafter. 
Eventually, he gradually began to lean toward the national 
line. He is quite good at picking lucrative jobs -- for many 
years he was the chairman of Krsmanac [choir and ensemble 
performing folk songs and dances], which it made possible for 
him to travel all over the world. Yet, we have to give him 
credit for initiating a rather respectable festival -- the 
Mokranjac [famous Serbian composer] Festival traditionally held 
in Negotin. 
  Many people believe that Veizovic remained in the office of 
Krajina's foreign minister for such a (relatively) short time, 
because the assessment of the then Krajina leadership was that 
he is too soft a Serb. On the eve of one of many negotiating 
conferences on the Krajina issue (the London conference), 
Zecevic decided to replace Veizovic with Slobodan Jarcevic, 
because the prime minister believed that a Krajina native ought 
to be the leading man of Krajina's diplomatic corps. 
  It seems that Veizovic was also rated as a soft Serb because 
of his platform for negotiations in settling the Krajina issue. 
According to some opinions, his platform, which found support in 
Vukovar at the time, promoted the confederal option for Croatia 
and the RSK, although Veizovic himself says: "My platform meant 
that one can find a solution only through negotiations, while, 
actually, all the options were being reconsidered at the time as 
well as any solution based on the Vance plan and equal rights 
for all the peoples in the former Yugoslavia." 
  Veizovic, whose current title is "authorized minister of the 
Federal Foreign Ministry," is now working in the SMIP, or in 
other words, he is a diplomat in transfer at the moment. 

<H5>    [15 Jun p 12] </H5>

<H5>    Diplomats and Double-Ministers </H5>
  Among the 11 heads of Yugoslav diplomatic missions who have 
been recently appointed, five of them are from Montenegro. Two 
of them, Miodrag Lekic and Zoran Popovic, have already been 
Yugoslav ambassadors abroad. Dr. David Dasic has also been to a 
diplomatic mission, but as consul general to New York City. 
Gojko Dapcevic has been with the Federal Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs [SMIP] for several years, but was never sent abroad 
before. We do not know whether the same applies to Ljubo 
Djukic, longtime SMIP official. The post of the Yugoslav charge 
d'affairs (to the Austrian capital) has been given to Dobrosav 
Veizovic, longtime deputy of the Serbian foreign minister and 
short-time foreign minister in the government of the Republic of 
Serbian Krajina. 
  Gojko Dapcevic, 56, newly appointed ambassador of the FRY to 
Kiev, is a famous poet of the mid-generation. He entered the 
SSIP [former Federal Secretariat of Foreign Affairs, now SMIP] 
several years ago, changing from the post of the director of the 
Marxist Center to the Central Committee of the Association of 
Communists of Montenegro. Those who know him well say that 
Dapcevic had an eye out for a diplomatic post for the past 20 
years, and only now has he got one. He graduated from the 
Faculty of Philosophy in Belgrade. 
  Dr. David Dasic, 54, is the future chief of the Yugoslav 
diplomatic mission to Brazil. He is an economist by profession. 
After studying in Belgrade, Dasic remained in the capital for 
some time to do some scientific work. The leadership of the 
Association of Communists of Montenegro [SKCG] offered him a job 
at the time when the chairman of the Central Committee of SKCG 
was Vojo Srzentic, so Dasic took up the position of executive 
secretary of the Central Committee. After that, he worked in 
the [former] Federal Executive Council as an adviser, then he 
changed over to the SSIP, only to be thereafter appointed 
Yugoslav consul general to New York City. 
  The future Yugoslav ambassador to Syria, Zoran Popovic, 45, 
started his career as journalist in TANJUG. From Cyprus, where 
he was TANJUG correspondent, he came to Montenegro as 
reinforcement for the then Radio Titograd. He was editor in 
chief of Radio Titograd for four years, after which he atayed an 
additional four years in the capital of Montenegro as the editor 
of the only Montenegrin daily, POBJEDA. Even then, people were 
saying that Popovic was not particularly interested in 
journalism, but rather considered it as a temporary occupation 
on his way to a diplomatic post. So it was -- Popovic went as 
Yugoslav ambassador to Jordan. His affinity for Arabic 
countries is logical, since he has a degree in Oriental studies. 
  Ljubo Djukic, longtime SMIP official, who is now leaving to 
take up the ambassador post in North Korea, is not so well-known 
in Podgorica, since he did not perform any political function in 
Montenegro. This is understandable, because while he was aide 
and senior at the ministry [not further specified] in Belgrade 
he was mainly in charge of relations with the Assembly and the 
government. 
  According to BORBA's sources, all the future ambassadors on 
the Montenegrin list meet one of very important preconditions 
for working in the diplomatic service -- they speak at least one 
foreign language fluently. Except for Lekic, whom we reliably 
know that he does not belong to any political party, we could 
not find out if the other four do. 
  According to well-informed sources, the future Yugoslav 
charge d'affairs to Austria, Dobrosav Veizovic, 58, is a 
professional diplomat with appropriate experience, or as he 
himself says, he is a career diplomat. Veizovic is a Serb from 
Serbia (he was born in Bajina Basta), rather than one from 
Krajina, as he was believed to be earlier because he was the 
foreign minister in the government of the Republic of Serbian 
Krajina [RSK] for several months. He graduated from the Faculty 
of Philosophy (German literature and the Italian language), he 
speaks German and Italian, and has some knowledge of 
Scandinavian languages. 
  Veizovic acquired his diplomatic experience in the Yugoslav 
Embassies in Stockholm, Copenhagen, and Cyprus, where he was the 
chief adviser, and he was also the secretary of the Yugoslav 
Embassy in Bern. Since 1964, he has been with the SMIP. What 
made people remember Veizovic, however, is the two ministerial 
offices that he held at the same time for several months. From 
1991 to 1993, he was the deputy Serbian foreign minister in 
Vladislav Jovanovic's cabinet (who was also a double minister 
for a while, republican and federal), while in the course of 
1992 he also happened to be the foreign minister of the RSK in 
Zdravko Zecevic's cabinet. 

<H5>    A Man of Weight </H5>
  Darko Tanaskovic, 48, the future head of the mission to 
Turkey, is not only not a professional diplomat, but he also has 
no political background, as his predecessor does. However, his 
weight in the eyes of the public is perhaps the greatest among 
all the newly appointed ambassadors. He taught Islamic studies 
at Belgrade University for a long time and earned undisputable 
respect among his colleagues. The son of a general (his father 
was the commander of the Territorial Defense of Serbia), even as 
a student Tanaskovic became quite famous for his high marks and 
knowledge. However, recently, he became involved in social 
debates in which his attitude, generally well-balanced, assumed 
a somewhat stronger national color. Possibly, this might be a 
good enough recommendation for the authorities in Serbia to put 
him on the list, although it is not the best reference for the 
country he has been assigned to. In some of his more recent 
performances, he has not been considerate toward the Muslim 
cause at all. Some say that this attitude of his was aimed at 
gaining entry to the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. 
Instead of the Academy, Tanaskovic has entered diplomacy. 
  Among the freshmen in the diplomatic service, there is also 
Dragoslav Jovanovic, 57, until recently deputy prime minister in 
Sainovic's cabinet, who has been appointed head of the mission 
to Brussels. Jovanovic built his career in the SDK [State 
Taxation Service], where he was director general. At a certain 
stage, rumors circulated that he would be appointed governor of 
the National Bank of Yugoslavia, until the real messiah 
appeared; namely Dragoslav Avramovic. 
  Jovanovic was born in "Serbian Kumrovec" [town in Croatia 
where Tito was born], that is Pozarevac, where he most probably 
had an opportunity to see and meet the man who makes the 
decisions on diplomatic careers. In his youth, Jovanovic was 
active in athletics, he was a sprinter, while later he became an 
official of the Athletic Association of Serbia. 
  Zivorad Igic, 52, the future head of the mission to Tirana, 
was born in Babin Most, near Pristina. He graduated from the 
Faculty of Philosophy. He was a journalist, and editor in chief 
of the informative-political program of Radio Pristina, 
responsible editor of KOMUNIST, the Kosovo edition, and also the 
editor in chief of Pristina's daily JEDINSTVO. 
  Since 1981, he has been writing for many Yugoslav 
newspapers. 
He wrote several studies, as well as two books. In 1988, Igic 
was appointed deputy chairman of the Association of Journalists 
of Yugoslavia, while his first political function was that of a 
member of the Council of the Regional Committee of Association 
of Communists [OKSK] of Pristina in 1989. A month later he was 
designated a member of the Presidency of the Provincial 
Committee of the Association of Communists [PKSK] of Kosovo, 
while in December of the same year he was elected chairman of 
the Socialist Association of Kosovo. 
  At the inaugural congress of the Socialist Party of Serbia 
[SPS] in July 1990, he was elected a member of the Executive 
Committee of the Main Board of the SPS, while three months later 
he was elected deputy chairman of the Regional SPS Board for 
Kosovo. In December 1990, he was appointed a delegate to the 
Serbian Assembly, while in fall 1992 he rose to the function of 
chairman of the Regional SPS Board for Kosovo. In the same 
year, he was appointed a delegate to the Council of Citizens at 
the Yugoslav Assembly, where he clashed with the radicals. 
  Until 1988, Igic had little social recognition, while, since 
then, he has been decorated and awarded several times. Among 
other recognitions, he was awarded the Medal of Work with Silver 
Wreath, the Svetozar Markovic award, the Award of the Yugoslav 
Institute for Journalism, and so forth. 
<H5>  Trained in Montenegro </H5>
  As for the "Montenegrin list," the greatest attention is 
being paid to Miroslav Lekic, 47, the current foreign minister 
of Montenegro and future Yugoslav ambassador to Rome. After he 
finished studying political science in Belgrade, Lekic started 
his career in his home town of Bar, where he performed many 
different functions -- he was the secretary of the OKSK of Bar, 
the director of the local cultural center, and the director of 
Radio Bar. He made a name for himself as a member of the 
Executive Council of Montenegro, where he was the secretary of 
the Committee for Education and Culture at the time when the now 
deceased Vuko Vukadinovic was chairman of the Executive Council. 
It was the Executive Council that, after the well-known events 
in October 1988, collectively resigned. That was the first 
success of the antibureaucratic revolution in Montenegro. Lekic 
is one of few people from Vukadinovic's team who, after the 
"Montenegrin January," remained in the newly elected Executive 
Council, with Radoje Kontic as its chairman. After that Lekic 
went to the diplomatic service. He was the Yugoslav ambassador 
to Mozambique, at the same time being in charge of diplomatic 
relations with Lesotho. Lekic is a well- mannered diplomat who 
speaks several foreign languages fluently. Few people know that 
he is not a member of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists, 
although in the second cabinet of [Prime Minister] Mile 
Djukanovic he was given a very important ministerial department. 

