BFN 

<F P=106> [ITIM report] </F>
  [Text] Moshe Shahal, minister of police, energy, and 
infrastructure, said on 22 April that peace arrangements with 
Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan would take form between the summer of 
1994 and the beginning of 1995. The minister was speaking to 
the forum of managers for advancing managerial culture in Israel 
at Tel Aviv's Open University. He said that Israel was 
demanding a period of several years between the signing of a 
peace agreement with Syria and its actual implementation in 
order to enable the parties to examine whether the agreement 
holds under different rulers and whether it indeed includes all 
the components of a normal peace. 
  Shahal asserted that Israel wished to impose a 10-year 
waiting period between the signing and the initial 
implementation of the agreement. The Syrians were prepared to 
accept a period of three years, while the United States had 
suggested a seven-year moratorium. At any rate, he added, the 
question of time did not trouble Syrian President al-Asad since 
he was also interested in putting things off. 
  In Shahal's assessment, the negotiations will hit a logjam 
if 
we do not reach agreement by the end of 1994 or the beginning of 
1995 because both the United States and Israel will enter an 
election period which will preclude any real progress in the 
peace process. "Ten minutes after the signing of a peace 
agreement with Syria, Lebanon will also sign an agreement with 
us. Jordan will sign even before the Syrians, as soon as there 
is a signal that Damascus and Jerusalem are about to reach 
agreement," Shahal said. He believes that soon after the peace 
agreements are made, five Muslim countries will establish 
diplomatic relations with Israel. 
  Shahal also said that the Gulf emirates, mainly Oman and 
Qatar, believe Israel could protect the area against an Iraqi or 
Iranian invasion and have an interest in the peace arrangements 
because they estimate the agreements would provide the emirates 
with protection. He estimated that Qatar will announce the joint 
gas project with Israel in May, adding: "I will not be 
surprised if they invite Israelis for business there." At the 
same time, Oman has accepted the possibility of starting 
business contacts with Israel even without granting it 
diplomatic recognition. 

