Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC President Nelson Mandela by SABC </F>
presenter John Bishop, in the Johannesburg studio, on the Agenda 
Program -- live] 
  [Text] [Bishop] Welcome back. Our promised interview with 
Mr. Nelson Mandela, the ANC [African National Congress] 
president, whose organization, I'm sure you know, has just 
celebrated its 82d birthday, and issued a major policy 
statement. As you probably also know all parties in the country 
are gearing up for their promised elections, and the papers are 
full of the contenders criticizing and attacking one another in 
print. But there has been a serious attack earlier today at 
Katlehong. When I welcome you Mr. Mandela I want to put that 
question to you? 
  [Mandela] Thank you. 
  [Bishop] Your comments on that -- that Katlehong incident. 
  [Mandela] What happened today, to the secretary general of 
the ANC, and the chairman of the South African Communist Party 
[SACP], must be condemned in the strongest terms. It shows in a 
very clear manner how the people in that area live. I spoke to 
Mr. de Klerk today the moment Comrade Ramaphosa reported the 
incident to me, and he had promised to go into the matter and 
come back to me. I am meeting him on Tuesday morning, and I 
have got a specific proposal to make to him. If he does not act 
on that proposal, then South Africa is facing a crisis. 
  [Bishop] Can you give us any details of that? 
  [Mandela] It is better for me not to do so, and it will give 
him the opportunity of examining the proposal, and deciding what 
he should do about it, that he'll understand that we cannot 
allow a situation where a hostel has now become the center of 
the most blatant criminal action, and without the police doing 
anything. What is going to be of interest, is what action the 
police are going to take. Are they going to raid the hostel? 
When are they going to do so? Will they in the course of that 
raid seize the illegal weapons in that hostel? Arrest the 
culprits? That is going to be very interesting. 
  [Bishop] Just to remind our viewers, if you've just tuned 
in, 
there's been a really awful attack at Katlehong earlier today. 
One journalist was killed, several were wounded, and it was the 
occasion when Mr. Slovo and Cyril Ramaphosa, and Carl Niehaus 
and others, were walking towards the area, to inspect the area. 
Is that it? 
  [Mandela] Yes, they went there to see for themselves how 
people in this area are living in the light of the accusations 
and counter- accusations that have been made. And I think that 
the public now has got an idea of what is happing there, because 
the shooting started from the hostel without any provocation. 
  [Bishop] What about the argument, I think that there is an 
argument, that the ANC had constantly said they don't want the 
police around them when they go and visit the people. Is there 
anything in that argument? 
  [Mandela] There is no excuse for the police not doing their 
duty of maintaining law and order. 
  [Bishop] They were told about the... 
  [Mandela, interrupting]...Whether we want the police to be 
with us or not is irrelevant. The police should not allow any 
people to fire at innocent residents going about with their 
normal duties. 
  [Bishop] I think they were in fact informed. Were they? 
Some of your people told me earlier... 
  [Text] [Mandela] On Friday the Regional Executive Committee 
of the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, Vereeniging] area informed 
the police. Even quite apart from that it was well publicized 
that the secretary general and the chairman of the South African 
Communist Party were visiting the area. If the police did not 
know that they were visiting then they are not worth to be 
policemen. 
  [Bishop] Well, of course, we have no police here, so we 
better not keep it one-sided I think. Could I just leave it for 
you at the moment? You are going to see everybody of course, 
soon, about this, and leave this incident and move on to the 
general question of violence in the country? 
  [Mandela] You're welcome. 
  [Bishop] Thank you. What are we going to do, Mr. Mandela? 
First of all, can I suggest that all parties perhaps should stop 
accusing each other? Is it possible to come to that kind of 
agreement? 
  [Mandela] Before I answer your question, I want to state 
very 
clearly that whatever I'm going to say, my approach to problems, 
my conduct and my statements are influenced by the objective of 
building a new South Africa, of urging all leaders of various 
political formations to join in trying to build a new South 
Africa. I'm interested in stability both politically an 
economically so that we can attract investment in our country, 
because without those investments we are unable to make the 
breakthrough which all of us desire. I am, therefore, going to 
say that you can't avoid discussing the policies of other 
political parties which are involved in the election. It 
happens all over the world and South Africa is no exception. 
But the point is that whatever we say must be influenced by the 
idea of building a new South Africa and uniting our people. 
  [Bishop] Have you got anything to give us tonight about 
stopping the violence? I mean, if you had the opportunity to 
put it in a nutshell and fix it, what would you do? 
  [Mandela] Well, we are not the government, you must 
understand. The task of maintaining law and order is that of the 
government, not of the ANC. We have no state power, we have no 
arms, we have no caspirs, and violence can only be effectively 
addressed by people who have these means. But within our 
capacity we have tried, to the best of our ability, as an 
organization to support the efforts which are made by a wide 
variety of organizations for peace. We will continue to do so, 
and that is why we are talking to all political parties -- those 
inside the negotiation process and those who stand outside 
because we want to avoid any danger of a civil war in this 
country. 
  [Bishop] Well, that's taken as is, but it's also said by 
some 
of your critics that some of the SDUs [self-defense units], some 
of those young men have run out of control. You see in the 
headlines: Mafia groups, maverick young men, SDUs out of the 
control of the ANC. Comment? 
  [Mandela] The problem about the SDUs only occurred within 
the 
last six months. People have been dying long before that. You 
must remember that we are dealing with a government which has a 
culture of intolerance. Freedom fighters have been dying since 
the early 60s. There are no less than about 200 people who have 
died in police custody from the 60s and a statement which was 
made by the late Dr. Gluckman, who had the opportunity to deal 
with these cases, a number of other freedom fighters like Neil 
Argot and Richard Turner, the Goniwes, all these were killed 
long before we had any complaint about the SDU. The complaint 
against the SDU is made primarily by the government and the 
National Party in order to divert attention from their own 
criminal negligence. 
  [Bishop] But not entirely. Haven't you come and said, at 
least the ANC came out and said and admitted that some of those 
SDUs are out of control? 
  [Mandela] No, you must put the matter in proper context. We 
have had the courage and honesty to say to the public that we 
have problems with SDUs, but you must understand that the SDUs 
are a community-based organization to protect the masses of the 
people after the government has failed to do its duty, and after 
the people have lost their belongings. They have come out in 
order to provide some measure of protection to the community. 
  [Bishop] I think that's generally known, but it's been 
suggested that now you should instruct -- if that's the word -- 
some of your very senior men, perhaps in Umkhonto we Sizwe 
[Spear of the Nation -- ANC military wing] who have high 
profiles to go in there and sort it out. 
  [Mandela] We have been there sorting things out. Last 
Tuesday we had that 10-hour meeting with the SDUs in that area, 
involving not only the ANC but the South African Communist 
Party, COSATU [Congress of South African Trade Unions], the mass 
democratic movement, and I ask you, what has the government done 
to address the question of violence? 
  [Bishop] Before we move away from this violence, the 
Heidelberg massacres, the continuing attacks on civilians, the 
ever rising crime rate. Again I ask: What can we do? 
  [Text] [Mandela] We are against any form of terrorism, and 
what has happened recently in connection with the tavern attacks 
is a matter that is going to be discussed by the Transitional 
Executive Council [TEC]. We are against any form of thuggery, 
and we have condemned it publicly in the strongest terms. 
  [Bishop] The TEC now has some muscle, if I can use that 
[pauses] I mean it is an established organization, and you've 
been addressing the question of violence, I think. We are 
talking about a national peacekeeping force, we are talking 
about an integrated SAP-SADF [South African Police-South African 
Defense Force], Umkhonto we Sizwe, and other groups. How far 
off are we from that, because it strikes me... 
  [Mandela, interrupting] Before I deal with that, let me just 
tell you about the report which was made by the commissioner of 
police from Natal, a report which has been tabled before the 
TEC. In that report he mentions that before the festive season 
he drew the attention of the government to the instability in 
Natal and felt that because the migrants were going back to 
Natal, this might create problems and aggravate the whole 
question of violence. He also got a legal opinion from senior 
council which showed that the South African Police can go into 
Natal and into the homelands without any restrictions. They are 
free to do so. 
  [Bishop] Legally? 
  [Mandela] Legally. And he also went further and identified 
areas where the IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] and the kwaZulu 
police were responsible for this violence, and he mentioned that 
there was a self-defense unit in one area which was alleged also 
to be involved in violence, but he was honest and he said that 
there was no concrete evidence to support this allegation. Now 
that is a statement from a commissioner of police in Natal. And 
you must, therefore, look at the whole question of the SDUs from 
the point of view that we are facing an extraordinary situation 
where the government is working with criminals in order to 
destabilize the people in that region. 
  [Bishop] Let's leave that now but stay in that region and 
ask 
you, when are you and Chief Minister Mangosuthu Buthelezi going 
to fix things up? 
  [Mandela] Well, I have met Chief Buthelezi on three 
different 
occasions. I have done everything in my power to persuade him 
to come back and negotiate with us. But it is a false premise 
to think that this violence can be addressed by two people 
meeting. In no government in a country anywhere in the world 
will a government refrain from taking steps to maintain law and 
order and rely on two individuals. You don't find that 
anywhere. It is the task of the government to ensure that 
violence is stopped and that the slaughter of innocent people is 
immediately addressed by the government and settled. 
  [Bishop] Do you still say that you will go ahead with the 
elections regardless of whether the Freedom Alliance is on board? 
  [Mandela] We will persuade the Freedom Alliance to join in 
negotiations and to take part in the election. 
  [Bishop] Can you do that? 
  [Mandela] I am discussing with the ultra right. I have met 
General Viljoen, Dr. Ferdi Hartzenberg, Mr. Dries Bruwer, and I 
am discussing the whole question of the violence, their demand 
for a separate volkstaat [national state] and their 
participation in the election. I do so because it is absolutely 
necessary for all sections of our population, for all national 
groups to speak with one voice on the major national issues 
facing the country. 
  [Bishop] Just seven minutes left, I have so much to ask you 
Mr. Mandela. Let's talk about the possibility that your party 
will probably, might -- whatever the expression is -- win the 
election. Let's make the presumption that you do. What kind of 
a South Africa, as far as the economy, will we have? You have 
done away with the idea of nationalization, but we hear a lot of 
talk about redistribution of wealth, a wealth tax and so forth. 
So what can be expected in that area? 
  [Mandela] We are not concerned with labels. Our primary 
object is to address the social, economic problems facing our 
people, the question of unemployment which is 50 percent of the 
economically active population of the country, lack of housing, 
lack of education and medical facilities, and that is our 
object. That must be done by ensuring that the resources of the 
country are equally available to all South Africans irrespective 
of color or creed, and that is what we intend doing. 
  [Bishop] But that requires money, doesn't it? And some 
economists are saying it requires free market style generated 
money, no more talk of a Marxist-Lenin command economy. Comment? 
  [Mandela] We have never talked about a Marxist economy as 
the 
African National Congress. The people who say that we were once 
committed to a Marxist economy are either saying so because of 
ignorance or out of malice. Our concern is not to adopt any 
pattern from any other country. It is to address the real 
problems facing our country, and these are the problems I have 
referred to. We are already as a political organization far 
advanced in seeing organizations like the International Monetary 
Fund with whose president I met in September this year [as 
heard]. We have met the World Bank on several occasions to 
discuss the question of resources to be able to address this 
problem. I have met presidents like Mr. Bill Clinton, Prime 
Minister Major, President Mitterand and all of them I'm 
discussing questions, among others, of resources so that we can 
address the problems I have referred to. 
  [Bishop] What are the assurances you are giving these top 
people about the economy? Are you saying don't worry, 
investment in, profit out, no problem? 
  [Mandela] We are briefing them on the steps that we have 
taken to attract investments. I have pointed out to them that 
in May 1992 we issued an investment guide in which we guaranteed 
all investors against the confiscation of their properties. 
Secondly, that they will be entitled to repatriate their profit 
and dividends and that if an investor sold his business 
activities in the country, he will be entitled to repatriate 
them. 
  [Bishop] Sorry, I've got to rush everything up, so much to 
ask. Quickly, the question of freedom of expression and in 
particular the control of the SABC [South African Broadcasting 
Corporation]. It's been said in certain quarters that the ANC 
now controls the SABC, that the National Party controlled it 
before, now it's the ANC. Does it control the SABC? 
  [Mandela] I don't think so. This is a board that was set up 
by an independent selection panel composed of South Africans of 
the highest integrity. They are not members of the ANC, and 
they could not set up a board which is composed of members of 
the ANC. 
  [Bishop] But they are pointing to three prominent and highly 
professional people who are closely connected to the ANC and 
who've just joined the SABC. Comment? 
  [Mandela] Well, I think that as far as I'm aware, if you are 
talking about the three persons that I know, they have been 
selected because of their merit; not because of association with 
any political organization. 
  [Bishop] To cut it short, you wouldn't [changes thought] 
Let's say you were the leader of the country in three or four 
months, you wouldn't lift the phone and tell news editors and 
other people what to do? 
  [Mandela] The democratic culture is very much entrenched in 
the African National Congress. We believe in an independent 
media because we would like to look at the media as a mirror to 
see how we are functioning, and to control the media would be 
contrary to the fundamental principles of democracy, and it is 
for that that we have attacked the National Party's control of 
the SABC. 
  [Bishop] Moving to another matter very quickly in the time 
left. The Afrikaners, what is wrong if a group of Afrikaners 
sincerely want to move away and live on their own? 
  [Mandela] We are against ethnic solutions. 
  [Bishop] Why? 
  [Mandela] We have fought the bantustans system, and we have 
now overthrown that system. Even the Nationalist government 
which was the only government which recognized the bantustans 
has now agreed, and a clause has been entrenched in our 
constitution that all the bantustans, all the homelands -- 
self-governing and independent -- must now be reincorporated 
into South Africa. If we made an exception and gave in to the 
demand of the Afrikaners for a volkstaat [national state], we 
would be reopening the same thing. All the bantustans would put 
forward similar claims and you will break up South Africa into a 
number of different political entities which would destroy our 
economy. 
  [Bishop] Just a few seconds left. What kind of message would 
you send now at this point in our history? 
  [Mandela] We would like the spirit of reconciliation to be 
accepted by all South Africans. 
  [Bishop] Not revenge? 
  [Mandela] No. We have made the point very clearly that we 
are not here for retribution. We are here to try and contribute 
to the building of a new South Africa. 
  [Bishop] Mr. Mandela, thank you very much indeed for coming 
along. Need I say that was Nelson Mandela of the Africa 
National Congress? Thanks for joining us and staying with us. 
Good night. 
  [Mandela] Good night. 

