BFN 

  [Excerpt] Interior Minister Carlos Ruckauf has announced 
the establishment of an agency in charge of investigating and 
bringing charges against "discriminatory, racist, and xenophobic 
activities." The federal government will thus promote tracking 
down members of the Nazi regime who were involved in the murder 
and persecution of people during World War II and who currently 
reside in Argentina. 
  The establishment of this agency was stipulated in a 
resolution that Ruckauf will sign in Bariloche today. The 
minister spent the weekend at the residence of the Neuquen 
governor, El Mesidor, which is located in Villa La Angostura. 
  Ruckauf announced on 17 June that the government will 
extradite former Nazi officer Erich Priebke, who is currently in 
custody on charges of having been implicated in the murder of 
335 people in Rome, in March 1944, during World War II. 
  According to the resolution Interior Ministry Secretary 
Alberto Iribarne and Daniel Barberis, population and community 
relations under secretary, will be charged with drafting a bill 
providing for the establishment of the agency within 90 days. A 
copy of the text will be sent this afternoon to the chairman of 
the Delegation of Argentine-Jewish Associations (DAIA), Ruben 
Beraja, who is currently in Israel. He will thus be able to 
officially convey the Argentine Government's decision to the 
Israeli president. 
  Ruckauf will sign the resolution at the Open Puerto tea room 
at 1300, during a ceremony to launch the "National Program for 
Nondiscrimination." Among the reasons underpinning this 
decision, the government cited "evidence that individuals who 
have been implicated in atrocious crimes against human rights" 
during World War II "have tried to escape from justice by 
seeking refuge in Argentina, thus taking advantage of its vast 
territory." 
  It further stated that "the atrocities committed" under the 
Nazi regime, which ruled Germany from 1933 to 1945, "violate the 
humanist principles enshrined in our national Constitution." 
  "Argentina has again and again been taken unawares by the 
discovery of people charged with crimes against human rights," 
it added. 
  The first article of the resolution makes it clear that the 
agency will seek to "prove the existence on Argentine territory 
of persons who during World War II were implicated in the 
extermination of people, or in the murder and persecution of 
individuals or groups of individuals because of race, religion, 
nationality, or political opinion." 
  Following this decision, the government will convene 
"nongovernmental organizations struggling against 
discrimination, racism, and xenophobia" to draw up a bill 
providing the legal framework for this agency. [passage omitted] 

