Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Moscow Russian Television Network in 
Russian at 2030 GMT on 6 January broadcasts an eight minute 
commentary on the report of the death of former Georgian 
President Zviad Gamsakhurdia. 
  The program interspersed its own commentary with the 
reactions and views of interviewees. It did not reveal 
additional information about the circumstances surrounding 
Gamsakhurdia's reported death, nor did it offer further 
confirmations of existing reports. 
  Valerian Advadze, Georgian ambassador to Russia, who was 
interviewed in the Georgian embassy in Moscow, said that he, 
like his colleagues in Tbilisi, had learned about Gamsakhurdia's 
death from the Russian media. Advadze expressed doubt that 
Gamsakhurdia had committed suicide: "With his character he would 
have been unable to kill himself; he would not have had the 
courage." He said he thought it more likely that Gamsakhurdia 
was killed by one of his own entourage. 
  Asked by the announcer whether Gamsakhurdia's death, if it 
had taken place, would be advantageous to the Georgian 
leadership, Advadze replied: "I can firmly state that it would 
have no influence and no significance for either the leadership 
or the people, because he had already shown himself up once and 
for all, and had been dead politically for a long time already. 
There was no chance that he could make another expedition to 
Tbilisi, like the one he launched recently." 
  Continuing his commentary, the announcer expressed the view 
that Gamsakhurdia's death would affect Russian interests, 
referring to Gamsakhurdia's links with Abkhazia and Chechnya. 
However, V. E. Yegoshkin, acting director of the Transcaucasus 
department of the Russian Foreign Ministry, told the program 
that Russia's relations with Georgia did not depend on who was 
in power: "Our relations with Georgia and its people do not 
depend on who holds political power in that country. That is 
the internal affairs of the Georgians themselves, and Russia 
sees no point in interfering in Georgia's internal affairs." 
  Finally, the commentator recapped the latest controversy 
over 
Gamsakhurdia's place of burial, adding: "So one way or another, 
almost everyone is ready to bury him. If he is still alive, it 
will be difficult for him to find his place again in this 
rapidly changing world." 

