BFN 

<F P=106> [Article from the "Perspective" column by Gao Haorong (7559 </F>
3185 2837): "A New Development in the Dispute Over the Korean 
Nuclear Issue"] 
  [Text] Recently, the United States and the ROK took a 
series of striking measures on the DPRK nuclear issue: The 
United States called off the third high-level talks with the 
DPRK and announced that the "Team Spirit 94" joint military 
exercise would be resumed. Clinton ordered the deployment of 
"Patriot" missiles in the ROK and wrote a letter to ROK 
President Kim Yong-sam, reasserting that the United States would 
abide by its security defense pact with the ROK. The ROK called 
an emergency security defense meeting to discuss measures to 
enhance its security and readjust its policy toward the North. 
Kim Yong-sam also issued a "Grade A alert" order, urging the 
Army to be at the higher alert level from 23 to 31 March so as 
to ward off any military threat posed by the DPRK. The 
International Atomic Energy Agency adopted a resolution on 21 
March, saying that the inspection of nuclear facilities in the 
DPRK could not confirm whether nuclear material had been 
transformed for military purposes and asked the DPRK to let the 
UN Security Council handle the case. 
  In face of these moves, the DPRK made its own response: 
  1. It reported, in a massive and rapid way, U.S. moves 
to strengthen its armed forces in the ROK. The DPRK news 
media rapidly reported that President Clinton ordered the 
deployment of "Patriot" missiles in the ROK as well as U.S. 
attempts to resume the joint military exercise. DPRK news media 
quoted foreign news agency reports that a U.S. "Patriot" missile 
battalion -- equipped with over 40 missile launchers and 
composed of 850 soldiers -- had left the United States for the 
ROK. The United States is studying military measures at the 
next stage, including dispatching aircraft carriers to the 
waters of the Korean Peninsula. A U.S. fleet composed of 30 
naval vessels has already arrived at a site from which it can 
reach the coast of the DPRK within 24 hours. The 
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier USS Karl Vinson and six 
frigates have left the Japanese port of Yokosuka for a location 
which can be used for maneuvers toward the Korean Peninsula. 
The United States is also considering the possibility of 
launching its own military exercise on the East Korean Sea (the 
Sea of Japan). 
  2. The situation on the Korean Peninsula is considered 
to be "going to extremes," so the DPRK must "be on due 
alert." A number of commentaries published by the DPRK's 
NODONG SINMUN said that the adventurous moves of the United 
States and the ROK "are pushing the situation on the Korean 
Peninsula toward extremes." The situation "is getting more and 
more serious." The military steps taken by the ROK under U.S. 
manipulation "have gone beyond the stage of simply posing a 
threat to us, but represent extremely serious provocations." As 
demonstrated by the development trend, the "situation is so 
grave and risky that it is more and more likely for war to break 
out on the Korean Peninsula." 
  3. The ROK authorities were accused of completely 
sabotaging reciprocal visits of special envoys and South-North 
dialogue and of pushing the situation toward confrontation and 
war." A spokesman from the DPRK's Fatherland Unification 
Committee issued a statement on 22 March, saying that the 
measures discussed at the ROK emergency security meeting were "a 
kind of full-scale confrontation and war." The statement said: 
Kim Yong-sam "is following foreign forces, unilaterally 
suspending dialogue with his nation, and pushing the national 
situation toward the dangerous brink of war," and his crime "is 
leading to a serious situation." It shows that, with the 
presence of traitors and renegades of our nation, such as Kim 
Yong- sam, "it is impossible for the North and the South to 
achieve reconciliation and unity, but it is rather possible to 
fall victim to foreign forces." The statement urged the Korean 
people to undertake a decisive struggle to eliminate this 
traitor. A commentary published by NODONG SINMUN on 25 March 
said that the major purpose of Kim Yong-sam's visit to Japan was 
to discuss the issue of objecting to "international cooperation" 
with the DPRK. The DPRK "will always take heed of" military 
activities launched by the Kim Yong-sam clique under foreign 
manipulation. 
  4. The DPRK made clear that it would never yield to 
power politics or pressure and that it was prepared for every 
situation that could arise. The commentary published by 
NODONG SINMUN said: The DPRK will never fall victim to power 
politics or pressure and it will never, under whatever 
circumstances, tolerate any infringement of its national dignity 
and sovereignty. The DPRK is not afraid of sanctions and will 
never yield to pressure. The DPRK is prepared for every 
situation that could arise, and it will respond to dialogue with 
dialogue and to war with war. Even if weapons fiercer than 
"Patriot" missiles are deployed in the south by the United 
States and the ROK, the DPRK will not be intimidated. The DPRK 
people and the People's Army will severely punish renegades of 
our nation and will defend our fatherland and our nation. The 
United States and the ROK should remember that, when they tried 
to settle problems by power politics and pressure, they also got 
into trouble. 

