BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by military correspondent Eytan Rabin] </F>
  [Excerpts] Special roadblocks will be set up on the day 
the territories of the Palestinian self-government are evacuated 
to prevent the entry of right-wing activists who are expected to 
carry out spectacular acts to foil the evacuation. In view of 
the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] withdrawal from Gaza and 
Jericho, the IDF and the security forces will employ special 
units to handle disturbances along the routes and at certain 
sites in the territories and inside Israel. The above details 
appear in a document obtained by HA'ARETZ. 
  According to estimates by the security forces and the 
police, 
the right is expected to stage demonstrations against the 
evacuation. At the same time, Palestinian organizations opposing 
the Declaration of Principles and the accompanying agreements 
might carry out attacks. 
  According to the plans, the Khan Yunus police station is due 
to be evacuated in five days. All the other Gaza Strip 
installments will be evacuated between 17 and 21 April. 
[passage omitted] 
  The defense establishment is anticipating riots by Israelis 
on the day of the evacuation. Therefore, it has been decided to 
concentrate large forces to handle riots by Jews along the 
routes, at certain sites, and inside Israel. On the day of the 
evacuation, the IDF, the police, and the security forces will 
takeover all the routes leading to the Gaza Strip and Jericho to 
prevent the riots. 
  Until the evacuation, the IDF will avoid initiating 
operations which might create friction with the local 
population. Activity against fugitives, mainly Hamas [Islamic 
Resistance Movement] members, will continue. The soldiers were 
instructed to avoid shooting as much as possible. New open-fire 
regulations will soon be issued. They will state that soldiers 
may not open fire at a vehicle which breaks through a roadblock, 
unless it has been established that this is a terror attack and 
the soldiers threatened with death. The soldiers were 
instructed to work for the security of the Palestinian police 
arriving in Gaza, and treat them with restraint and respect. 

