Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Shenai Raif, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Excerpts] IRA terrorists brought Heathrow and Gatwick 
airports to a halt this evening with coded warnings of more 
mortar attacks similar to the three on London's main airport in 
the past five days. 
  But the security alert was later lifted and the airports 
reopened after Scotland Yard accused the IRA of a cynical 
attempt to frighten passengers and cause confusion. 
  Hundreds of passengers were stranded in terminals for three 
hours as police and troops searched outside, and incoming 
passengers were diverted all around the country. 
  As in previous attacks, coded warnings were given during the 
evening and followed the third mortar attack on Heathrow this 
morning. 
  But this time Gatwick, London's second airport, was also 
threatened. 
  A new strategic plan agreed between police and airport 
officials, was put into place. All runways were closed, 
together with perimeter roads and public transport was halted. 
Flights, 20 of them heading for Heathrow, were diverted to 
airports as far afield as Stansted, Southampton, Luton, 
Manchester, Bournemouth, Bristol, Cardiff and Birmingham. 
Terminal Four at Heathrow was closed and passengers were told 
they could not leave other terminals at both airports. 
  The first coded warning closed the aiports at 7 P.M. 
Warnings were then phoned to Sky News at 7.10 and 7.35 P.M. 
They said "there will be bombs in one hour's time." 
  They came on the same day that more mortars were fired at 
Heathrow. They failed to explode and no one was injured. 
[passage omitted] 
  Heathrow was reopened at 2130 after tonight's new warnings 
and passengers were gradually being allowed to continue their 
journeys although departing travellers were advised to check 
with their airlines. 
  The security alert at Gatwick ended after a thorough search 
by security services and the airport was reopened at around 10 
P.M. A spokesman said the airport is now fully operational. 
[passage omitted] 

