BFN 

<F P=106> [Roundtable talks among Yoshiro Mori, general secretary of </F>
the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP); Wataru Kubo, general 
secretary of the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ); Kozo 
Watanabe, acting general secretary of Shinseito (Japan Renewal 
Party); Takenori Kanzaki, floor leader of Komeito; Masuo 
Matsuoka, general secretary of the Japan New Party; Takashi 
Yonezawa, general secretary of the Democratic Socialist Party 
(DSP); and Hiroyuki Sonoda, general secretary of Sakigake 
(Harbinger); moderated by Kazuyuki Takahashi, YOMIURI SHIMBUN 
assistant political editor; place and date not given] 
  Cabinet Resignation En Masse or Diet Dissolution? [subhead] 
  [Takahashi] Some people are predicting that either the Diet 
will be dissolved for a general election or that the cabinet 
will resign en masse once the budget bills are passed. 
  [Watanabe] We would sincerely like to call on the SDPJ and 
Sakigake to return to the original spirit which aspired to 
create a new political order in this nation. 
  [Kanzaki] We must not let a political vacuum occur. We must 
do all the things that need to be done. As far as political 
reform is concerned, we must finish it, and pass the bill on 
electoral district zoning. After all this is done, if there is 
a demand that the public pass judgment on the government, then 
let there be judgment. 
  [Takahashi] What is the view of the SDPJ? 
  [Kubo] For the coalition government to solidify its base, we 
must think about forming a third coalition government after 
enabling the second coalition government to fulfill its mission 
at the earliest date. I am not talking about the logic of 
numbers, but I am saying that if there are confrontations over 
constitutional, or important policy matters, we can submit a 
motion of no-confidence in the cabinet. If we decide to present 
a motion of no-confidence, we should do so only after 
considering what kind of government should replace the Hata 
administration. It would be too irresponsible to do otherwise. 
We would like to arrive at a decision on the question in the 
course of deliberations in the Diet. 
  If a motion of no-confidence is passed, as a matter of 
principle in constitutional government, power should first be 
passed to the largest opposition party. The question is whether 
we want that now. I think the Hata government should think about 
moving out voluntarily and about what it should do to build the 
next coalition government. Once a motion of no-confidence is 
passed, it cannot do that. 
  [Watanabe] Prime Minister Hata is considering General 
Secretary Kubo's idea as a possible option. The possibility of 
the cabinet resigning en masse is not completely zero. The SDPJ 
and the Sakigake voted for Tsutomu Hata as prime minister; they 
should recognize the importance of that action. 
  [Sonoda] The cabinet has already begun work, we should not 
pass a motion of no-confidence in it. It is true, though, that 
the coalition is a minority government and there is no doubt the 
issue will be raised sooner or later. 
  [Yonezawa] The 1994 budget bill and budget-related bills are 
still in the process of being deliberated. As a result, actions 
on other important government matters are being delayed. It is 
no time to create a political vacuum. A motion of no-confidence 
will not pass unless the LDP and the SDPJ collaborate. But I 
wonder if either party would accept such an arrangement. No one 
should talk about holding the next general election under the 
multiseat electoral district system. If a politically difficult 
situation arises and a general election must be held, it should 
be held under a single-seat district system (which combines a 
proportional representation system). Conducting an election 
under the multiseat district system will mean destroying 
political reform altogether. Suppose a no-confidence motion is 
passed. Political chaos will worsen unless we have arrived at 
agreement on what kind of government we should have next. 
  [Matsuoka] We do not hear anyone in our constituencies 
calling for dissolution of the Diet. Instead, many say 
political reform should be completed and the coalition should 
once again persist. The way to meet the expectations of the 
people on political reform is to hold an election and form a new 
coalition government under the new single-seat district system. 
I have to say that any other course of action will kill 
political reform. 
  [Takahashi] What are the chances of Mr. Hata resigning 
voluntarily and returning to the post of prime minister in a new 
cabinet? 
  [Kubo] If he resigns in order to stabilize the base of the 
coalition government, all heads of the parties participating in 
the new coalition will be qualified to be appointed prime 
minister -- Mr. Hata included. 
  [Kanzaki] I welcome Mr. Kubo's view. 
  [Takahashi] Can you share government power with Mr. Ichiro 
Ozawa (general secretary of Shinseito). 
  [Kubo] I worked with him for half a year. There were things 
I learned from him, but there were also points where I could not 
agree with him. But we can cooperate with each other on the 
major issues which Japanese politicians must tackle. I do not 
think the problem with Mr. Ozawa is such a great obstacle. 
  [Takahashi] Does SDPJ Chairman Murayama think the same way? 
  [Kubo] There are no differences of view between myself and 
the chairman. The chairman said: "If the government comes to a 
dead end and there is no choice but to dissolve the Diet and 
hold a general election, then we should ask for the public's 
judgment by holding the election." I, too, think that if there 
is no other choice, that is what we should do. 
  On the other hand, if a no-confidence motion is passed but 
the coalition does not want a general election under the 
multiseat district system, then the only choice left is 
resignation of the cabinet en masse, which would be tantamount 
to giving up on the coalition. What I am saying is, the 
coalition should not wait for a no-confidence motion to be 
filed, but should choose its own way of stabilizing its 
government base. 
  [Takahashi] Will the SDPJ come back to the existing 
coalition government if a new agreement was reached on basic 
policies? 
  [Kubo] It would be extremely difficult for the party to 
return to the present government. The SDPJ will, by all means, 
seek ways to form a new coalition government -- a third 
coalition government. 
  [Takahashi] Will the LDP pursue its plan to get the Diet 
dissolved in preparation for a general election? 
  [Mori] The SDPJ bolted the coalition government late in the 
evening of 25 April, the day Hata was appointed prime minister. 
The prime minister, in principle, should have resigned then. 
Besides which, it is former Prime Minister Hosokawa and 
then-Deputy Prime Minister Hata who should be held responsible 
for having delayed action on the budget bill in order to get the 
reform bills passed first. Once the budget bill is passed, his 
duties expire. We have never said anything about a motion of 
no-confidence in the cabinet nor on the dissolution of the Diet. 
At issue is what Prime Minister Hata decides to do once the 
budget bill is passed. The people are angry about the reins of 
government being passed over from one group to another by 
prearrangement. The people want another general election. If 
there is an election, there would be no choice but to hold it 
under the current (multiseat district) system. If that is 
considered an "act of crushing political reform," then all the 
parties should get together and agree on some kind of action to 
prevent it. 
  [Watanabe] No doubt it is desirable that the budget for a 
year should be formulated before the end of the preceding year. 
But in December last year, it was the prevailing view of the 
Diet and the public that the political reform-related bills 
should be passed before anything else. As a result, the 
formulation of the budget got delayed. It is not the case that 
certain people delayed the formulation of the bill. It means 
the coalition parties gave priority to political reform. 
Consequently, the third supplementary budget was formulated, 
and is being used in the April-May period. As long as the 1994 
budget bill is passed by the lower house by 1 June, there should 
be no adverse impact on the economy. 
  [Mori] We are doing everything we can to have the bill 
passed without delay. We are irritated because there is no word 
from the ruling parties on "when it should be finished." I am 
happy that you have formally given us a date of "1 June." Why 
did you not say that earlier? 
  [Watanabe] Because I might have got scolded if I did. 
[laughter] 
  [Takahashi] Will the next general election be conducted 
under the current multiseat district system or under the new 
system? 
  [Watanabe] The common view of the parties is that the next 
election should be held under the single-seat district system. 
But if an unjustifiable no-confidence motion is introduced and 
passed, it is possible the election will be conducted under the 
current multiseat district system. 
  [Kanzaki] As long as the zoning of the electoral districts 
remains uncompleted, there is no way to toughen up provisions on 
penalties [for infractions of election law violations] or 
reforming the political funds system. Some say the election can 
held under the current system if the parties can agree that 
elections thereafter will be held under the new election system. 
But I must note that about one third of incumbent Diet members 
normally would lose their seats in each election and that the 
agreement cannot bind newly elected Diet members. 
  [Kubo] The SDPJ is not saying the election must be carried 
out under the current multiseat district system. We are saying 
there is no choice but to hold the election under the multiseat 
system if attempts to find a political breakthrough fall through 
and dissolution of the Diet is the only answer. If that 
happens, I must warn that the political reform bills should be 
not used as a green card [preceding two words in English] to get 
around the problem. 
  [Yonezawa] We can foresee a situation in which an election 
must be held because the political situation has come to a dead 
end. But this depends on what the opposition parties decide to 
do. I hope they will wait until the election can be held under 
the single-seat district system. 
  [Mori] You must not try to constrain the Dietmen's right to 
dissolve the Diet. People talk about the possibility of the LDP 
and the SDPJ cooperating. Prime Minister Hata should think 
about it so this kind of situation does not arise. 
  [Matsuoka] I think the causes of political corruption in the 
past have been in the election system itself. We should make 
sure the government is able to put the finishing touches to 
reform. I hope we can agree to maintain the administration 
until an election under the single-seat system is possible. 
  [Sonoda] If you think about the future, you will come to see 
the need to complete work on the single-seat district system. 
No doubt, the single-seat system will make elections more 
party-oriented than the multiseat system. Voters, though, want 
an election system that enables them to picture a certain 
framework of government and make a choice based on that. For 
that reason alone the single-seat district system is preferable 
and the election should be conducted under it. 
<H5>  Will LDP-SDPJ Collaboration Be Possible? </H5>
  [Takahashi] Do you see the LDP and the SDPJ collaborating 
with each other? 
  [Mori] The times we live in are such that this is a 
possibility. The political world will remain paralyzed if the 
present coalition continues. As long as the political form 
widely known as dual structural power continues, the Japanese 
political world will remain an anomaly. Both our party and the 
SDPJ are endeavoring to change this. That does not mean, 
though, we are collaborating particularly closely. 
  Both parties have their own routes for climbing toward the 
goal. When they come to the final point of the climb, they might 
have to talk to each other. But the SDPJ could reject our offer 
at such a time. 
  [Kubo] With progress being made on political reform and 
political realignment, I think the walls between political 
parties and between ruling and opposition parties will become 
lower. In that context, active cooperation with the LDP for the 
purpose of defending parliamentary democracy is possible. If 
there are common policy issues, they will find it necessary to 
cooperate. On such important political issues as a 
no-confidence motion, conclusions will be reached after the two 
parties have fully briefed each other on their respective 
positions. But just because we left the coalition parties, it 
does not automatically mean we have formed a coalition 
opposition force. 
  [Watanabe] I would like to ask both Mr. Kubo and Mr. Sonoda 
if your two parties will stay in the position of being neither 
ruling nor opposition parties. I will ask Mr. Hata, for his 
part, to do some soul-searching, but I hope your parties will 
return to the ruling parties without further delay. 
  [Sonoda] Our party did not leave because we felt mistreated. 
  [Takahashi] Which way do you think reorganization of the 
olitical world will move? 
  [Yonezawa] Once the elections begin to be conducted under 
the single-seat district system, the political forces will 
probably gather around two axes. Forces with policies of a 
certain similarity will get together around these axes and come 
to share government power together. 
  [Sonoda] The idea of the "LDP against the non-LDP forces" is 
not our ultimate goal. I think we should consolidate forces 
within certain frameworks. 
  [Kubo] Whether it be under a bi-polar or tri-polar system, 
the era of the coalition -- the condition of the government 
changing hands from one coalition to another -- will continue. 
Perhaps the age of the "tri-polar" system will last 
considerably longer. Only after we have experienced coalition 
governments of various compositions, will we probably head 
toward a two-party system. 
  [Mori] As far as local organizations are concerned, too 
hasty a political realignment is undesirable. We should not be 
too rash. A problem with the existing coalition is that it wants 
to get to a bi-polar system too fast. When the new election 
system comes into being, the shuffling of Diet members will take 
place at a considerably faster tempo. A stable two-party system 
is desirable, though as long as proportional representation 
remains part of the election system, I think stability is 
impossible. I think we should head for a simple single-seat 
district system eventually. 
  [Watanabe] Under the single-seat system, as far as local 
areas are concerned, the LDP definitely has advantages. Unless 
smaller parties find a way of joining their forces together, the 
elections will be meaningless. We selected the single-seat 
system as the appropriate way of proceeding toward a two-party 
system. I think eventually we will get there. 
  [Yonezawa] There was a time (immediately after the Hosokawa 
government started) when being the "non-LDP" force was 
justification enough when it came to getting things done. But I 
think we no longer live in that time. Unless we can pursue our 
goals by sharing policies and ideals, we will be called simple 
collections to get ourselves elected to Diet. 
<H5>  Evaluation of the Hata Government </H5>
  [Takahashi] What is your view on the minority Hata 
government? 
  [Watanabe] The government set sail under very difficult 
conditions. But Mr. Hata is in the process of accomplishing 
things, one after another, that meet the expectations of the 
public. His biggest responsibility is to pass the budget and 
related bills as soon as possible. The SDPJ and the Sakigake 
have promised to "cooperate on the passage of budget and 
budget-related bills." The LDP, too, said it appreciates the 
importance of passing the budget bill. 
  On top of that, we would like to be able to at least make a 
forecast of the future of political and tax reform. 
  [Kanzaki] For the Japan of today, regardless of which party 
takes over government, things will be difficult. The Hata 
government may be a minority government, but it is doing all it 
can to tackle the issue of reform, and the public's appreciation 
for it's efforts is shown in an approval rate of more than 50 
percent in all kinds of public opinion polls. 
  [Matsuoka] At the start of the second coalition government, 
we all agreed that we should hold more in-depth talks with each 
other in order to make better use of the experiences of the 
first coalition government, but this action led to the departure 
of the SDPJ from the coalition. We must rethink the framework 
(of the coalition) with the understanding of the SDPJ. 
  [Yonezawa] Economic reform, administrative reform, and 
political reform are common tasks for all ruling and opposition 
parties. As long as the Hata government seeks earnestly to get 
the agreement of ruling and opposition parties on reform in 
these three areas, opposition parties to show it some 
understanding. And we will make every effort to help the SDPJ 
and Sakigake return to the coalition. 
  [Kubo] We would like to do our best in getting the budget 
and related bills passed. But we regret irregular statements 
made by cabinet members in reference to emergency laws and 
collective security, which seem to suggest a change in the 
thinking of the government. We strictly warn against such 
remarks. 
  [Sonoda] We are in the peculiar position of supporting the 
cabinet from outside the cabinet. But there is no question that 
we are outside the coalition camp. We will do our best to 
cooperate in running the Diet and getting the [budget-related] 
bills passed. But what happens after that will be something 
very different. Various problems will arise and the Hata 
government will have to face up to them. 
  [Mori] In two aspects, the Hata government does not conform 
to the basics of parliamentary democracy. First, it does not 
reflect the public will. Second, when the Hosokawa coalition 
government collapsed, power should have been handed over to the 
LDP, which is the major opposition party. But the reins of 
government were handed over to another coalition by 
prearrangement. I think we must create a political structure 
which accurately reflects the public will. 

