Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["To Safeguard Human Rights or To Practise Hegemonism? -- A </F>
Comment on U.S. Human Rights Report"] 
  [Text] Beijing, February 27 (XINHUA) -- Despite the 
requirements of international law, the U.S. State Department 
annually issues a worldwide report on human rights, to interfere 
in the internal affairs of other countries and practise power 
politics under the excuse of safeguarding human rights. 
  The 1993 worldwide report on human rights issued by the U.S. 
State Department on February 1 again wantonly distorted and 
unreasonably criticized the human rights situation in China and 
some other countries. 
  However, it said nothing about the human rights problems in 
the United States itself. The report was aimed at forcing other 
countries to accept the ideology and value concepts of the 
United States and change their political systems according to 
the U.S. human rights model. As a result, it met with 
opposition from many countries and the mass media. 
  To enjoy extensive and full human rights is the common wish 
of people all over the world, including the Chinese people. For 
this purpose, the Communist Party of China has led the Chinese 
people to strive in a long-term and arduous struggle. 
  The founding of New China put an end to the long and 
miserable history of the Chinese people's being invaded, 
oppressed and humiliated. The Constitution of China stipulates 
that all the rights of the People's Republic of China belong to 
the people. 
  China has taken various measures to guarantee all the rights 
of the people. Nowadays, the human rights situation in China 
has been fundamentally improved. At present, China's political 
situation is stable. Great progress has been made in building 
democracy and the legal system. The economy and all trades are 
prosperous. The people live and work in peace and contentment. 
This is a fact obvious to all. 
  Of course, the human rights situation in China is not 
completely satisfactory. However, the human rights situation in 
China is better than that in the United States in many aspects. 
  The incidence of crimes such as murder, robbery, rape, drug 
abuse, violence and racial discrimination in the United States 
come first on the list every year, costing many lives of the 
American people, thus infringing upon the human rights of the 
American people. 
  According to the statistics made by U.S. officials, about 
one 
million people in the United States are being imprisoned. 
However, merely 1.2 million people are being imprisoned in 
jails and reform- through-labour farms in China. Since China's 
population is 4.5 times that of the United States, the U.S. 
proportion of imprisoned people to the whole population is four 
times that of China. 
  The U.S. Government has admitted that about seven million 
people in the country are homeless and there are two million to 
three million people in the United States sleeping in the open 
all the year round. In China, however, only 150,000 people are 
found sleeping in the open every year. Moreover, the 
departments of civil affairs would make timely arrangements to 
re-settle them. 
  Why is the United States, which has so many serious problems 
of human rights, so enthusiastic to criticize the human rights 
situation in other countries? 
  To put it bluntly, the United States was not really trying 
to 
"safeguard human rights," but to interfere in the internal 
affairs of other countries and trample on international norms 
under the excuse of the human rights problem so as to serve its 
hegemonist policies of foreign affairs. 
  The United States has long posed as a "worldwide judge", 
judging the human rights situation in other countries with its 
own political norms and legal philosophy. It often imposes 
sanctions on countries which do not tally with its norm of human 
rights by integrating human rights with its external aid, 
economic and technological cooperation and most favored nation 
trading status and using these as the means of political 
pressure. 
  It even demands other countries to change their domestic 
policies and political systems, thus severely infringing on the 
sovereignty and dignity of many developing countries. 
  As known to all, the issue of human rights is in essence an 
internal affair of a country. According to international law, 
to respect the state sovereignty and not to interfere in other's 
internal affairs is a conventional principle of international 
law. To negate the principle of sovereignty means to negate the 
foundation stone of the modern international law. 
  As early as December 6, 1946, the General Assembly of the 
United Nations passed the "Draft Declaration on Rights and 
Duties of States," which points out: "Every state has the right 
to independence and hence to exercise freely, without dictation 
by any other state, all its legal powers, including the choice 
of its own form of government," and "every state has the duty to 
refrain from intervention in the internal or external affairs of 
any other state." 
  On December 9, 1981, the U.N. General Assembly adopted 
Resolution No. 36/103, passing again a declaration which points 
out that every state has the duty to avoid utilizing and 
distorting the issue of human rights and using the issue to 
impose pressure on any other state. 
  The human rights report of the U.S. State Department 
violated 
these U.N. declarations. It shows no concern with human rights, 
but practises power politics. 
  While posing as a guardian of human rights and making great 
efforts to carry out the diplomacy of human rights, the United 
States has not joined some important international conventions 
on human rights passed by the U.N. General Assembly. 
  For example, the U.S. Congress has so far not approved the 
United States to sign "The International Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" passed in 
1965, "The International Convention on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights" passed in 1966, "The International Convention 
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid" 
passed in 1973, and "The Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women" passed in 1980. 
  Therefore, it is not strange that Professor John Lawrence 
Hargrove, executive vice-president and executive director of the 
American Society of International Law, stated that the U.S. has 
not participated in major international human rights 
conventions, so on what grounds does it concern itself with 
other countries' human rights situations? 
  On the contrary, China has been in advance of the United 
States in ratifying the international conventions on human 
rights. Since the People's Republic of China resumed its seat 
in the United Nations, it has participated in seven of the 
international conventions, including "The Convention on the 
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide," "The 
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of 
the Crime of Apartheid," "The Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women," "The Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination," "The 
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees," "The Protocol 
Relating to the Status of Refugees," and "The Convention Against 
Torture and Other Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment." 
  Besides, the Chinese Government has always submitted reports 
about the situation in carrying out the conventions it has 
already participated and always sternly and seriously 
implemented its duties stipulated in the conventions. 
  After the U.S. State Department's human rights report was 
issued, it has met with denunciation by China and many other 
countries. The United States will certainly not succeed in its 
plot of practising power politics and hegemonism under the 
excuse of human rights. 

