BFN 

<F P=106> ["eli" report: "Army Inspector Criticizes Bundeswehr Reform </F>
Plans"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- Statements by Army Inspector Hartmut Bagger 
concerning the reform plans for the Bundeswehr have caused great 
disquiet in the Defense Ministry. At a parliamentary meeting of 
the Bundeswehr Association, Bagger had mentioned problems with 
implementing Defense Minister Volker Ruehe's conceptual 
guidelines and had complained that he was not fully informed 
about the preparations. NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner 
has harshly criticized the Bundeswehr debate. 
  On Friday [29 April] Bagger had a personal statement 
disseminated, in which he stressed that he fully agrees with 
Ruehe's goals for developing the armed forces. At the meeting 
he had pointed to "potential consequences" and "difficult 
questions" in connection with implementing the concept. It is 
not correct that he thinks shortening compulsory military 
service is not feasible. Bagger said that relevant reports 
describing his dissension were abbreviated and incorrect. 
  Bernhard Gertz, head of the Bundeswehr association, told 
SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG that Bagger's statements were indeed 
reported in an exaggerated manner. At the meeting he had 
referred to the practical problems associated with implementing 
reform, in particular in connection with shortening compulsory 
military service to 10 months. The Army inspector described the 
"gigantic heap of problems in practice" and expressed concern, 
but did not cast doubt on his loyalty to Ruehe. On Friday, 
Bagger was summoned by Ruehe and explained his position to the 
defense minister. He felt grossly misunderstood, it was said. 
  According to Gertz, however, Bagger indeed complained that 
he 
had been informed so late in the game and not been involved in 
the preparations. Inspector General Naumann, on the other hand, 
had always insisted that individual unit inspectors had been 
involved in the preparations. It is possible that Naumann spoke 
with Bagger's predecessor Helge Hansen. Bagger took over the 
post of Army inspector in March and was obviously not informed. 
  Gertz told SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG that he himself does not 
think that a reduction in compulsory military service time is 
realistic. The Bundeswehr Association objects to giving up 
social achievements for the conscripts. Ruehe' concept will 
cause even more young men to refuse to do their military service. 
  NATO Secretary General Woerner said in Bonn that the 
Bundeswehr has become a "disposable mass." "This cannot and 
will not work." The strength of the armed forces cannot be 
arbitrarily manipulated, Woerner stressed. 

