CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of pastoral letter "In this time of Grace, on the </F>
Occasion of the Greeting of His Holiness John Paul II to the 
Indians of the Continent," by Msgr. Samuel Ruiz Garcia, bishop 
of San Cristobal de las Casas, 6 August 1993. In a Christmas 
message (the text of which was published in Mexico City 
DOCUMENTACION E INFORMACION CATOLICA of 13 Dec 93), Bishop Ruiz 
said of his August letter that it was apparently "the last 
straw, the act that unleashed the pent-up rage of those in power 
who live from exploitation of the lowly."] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  1. Greeting </H5>
  In this hour of grace for the Church of Latin America, as 
the 
Good News calls us together once more in the sign of unity, and 
as the Holy Father returns to Mexican soil, the land of a 
markedly prophetic mission, what better occasion to express in 
unison with the universal Church the hopes, yearnings, and 
sufferings of our Indian peoples. The Roman Pontiff John Paul II 
wishes to keep his promise and make his voice of comfort and 
enlightenment heard to Indian representatives from all over the 
continent as part of the international year of indigenous 
peoples. Our diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas, which is 
markedly Indian, wants to make its voice heard as well. 
  This new experience of Church unity and universality once 
again presents Jesus to us as the Good News that greets all 
those whose poverty places them at the fringes of society. 
Heralding this News at the start of his ministry, Jesus 
proclaims that he has been sent to proclaim the Good News to the 
poor and to all the victims of rejection and scorn (Luke 4:18). 
Aware of their needs, Jesus tells them: "Blessed are the 
poor...." (Luke 6:20). "So then, the needy and the sinners can 
feel loved by God and the object of his immense tenderness" 
(Document of Santo Domingo No. 4). 
  With this outlook of understanding and faithful to the 
Gospel 
and to the cause of the Kingdom, we wish to express the joys and 
sorrows of our local Church's journey, as well as the bountiful 
harvest of the seeds of actions and commitments that we have 
pursued out of loyalty to Jesus and the Church. We would feel 
selfish if at this moment we failed to share what God has 
brought to fruition in our midst, to console and edify the 
Church community to which we are so beholden. 
<H5>  2. The Need and Demands of a Word From the Faith </H5>
  If we know that God speaks to us through the outcries and 
even through the painful silence of those who do not yet have a 
voice and who at times live in despair, we must be able to 
discern the seven "signs of the times" and diligently respond to 
the clamor of the poor, the oppressed, the underprivileged, the 
tortured, and all those who suffer persecution owing to their 
race, religion, or denunciation of injustice. 
  "The joys and hopes, the sadness and anguish of men in our 
times, especially the poor and the suffering, are the joys and 
hopes, the sadness and anguish of the disciples of Christ. There 
is nothing truly human that does not awaken an echo in his 
Heart" (Gaudium et Spes 1). 
  The Diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas, in keeping with 
the statements of Vatican II, feels a solidarity with the 
history of our Indian brethren. Heir to the prophetic vocation 
of Fray Bartolome de las Casas, it walks among and with the 
poor, gaining an awareness of the suffering of the majority of 
the population: high rates of poverty, disease, illiteracy, lack 
of communications, deep-seated racial ostracism and 
discrimination...Let us hear their burning word.... 
<H5>  3. The Word of Our People </H5>
  "We are in a very difficult situation and time, in a 
political, economic, social, and ideological sense alike. We 
must talk about the current economic system because our way of 
life and production are oppressing us. We can see that in these 
new times those who accumulate wealth need two main things to 
keep going and make profits: the privatizations and the Free 
Trade Agreement. Capitalism needs these two things to continue 
benefiting the strong, the powerful, both here and abroad. The 
advances of technology push them in this direction for their own 
benefit. This new approach to work abandons thousands of 
peasants and workers to their fate. 
  "Given unemployment and the shortage of land, the government 
is pursuing political control because the poverty that the 
depredations of this social system creates is a threat to its 
policies. Thus, laws have to be amended and new crimes invented. 
This approach violates human rights. We can thus see that the 
system under which we live inherently violates human rights. 
  "So then, we are facing very serious and distressing 
problems...But when we tell each other of our suffering and our 
shame, then we hear the Word of God and feel that the suffering 
and afflictions of Christ are alive in us and that his Way of 
the Cross is being lived today in our municipalities. It would 
seem as though we are never going to see the end of this Calvary 
or that our problems are never going to end.... 
  "It seems that we are not going to have a resurrection...But 
whereas Jesus spent three days in the ground, we do not know how 
long our problems are going to be with us...But we are certain 
that we are going to be resurrected." 
<H5>  3.1 Economics </H5>
  People are increasingly feeling the weight of high prices, 
unemployment, injustice, and mounting poverty. The People are 
dissatisfied. There is malnutrition and poverty-caused disease. 
  We have no land on which to work and grow our food. We have 
to rent land, which takes away our profits. Our requests for 
land go unanswered, and the land is too expensive to buy. 
Meanwhile, some have a great deal of land and do not work it or 
use it to raise livestock, which requires large areas. When we 
seek to register a little plot, they charge us heavily, and if 
we get behind in our payments, they threaten to take our land. 
Oil wells are also being drilled; they belong to the government 
but adversely affect us because they take land from us. 
  The prices for what we sell are low, and we peasants need to 
transport our products ourselves, because the greedy profiteers 
and middlemen are using marketing schemes to rob us in selling 
them. 
  Wages are very low; families cannot live on them. Many 
workers and peasants who request higher wages through the 
regular established channels see that the decision almost always 
goes in the companies' favor. We thus have no one to assert our 
rights. The government boards help those who have money at the 
expense of the workers. 
  The government forces us to produce what suits it and would 
have us believe that "the efforts of all will resolve the 
crisis." The taxes on electricity and land are very high and 
rise every year. Bank loans are unaffordable, and we sink into 
debt, while private loans carry very high interest rates. The 
system is stripping the region of its natural resources, without 
development for all. 
  The forestry law is causing problems; people are being 
jailed 
under it. We are suffering greatly in the communities. We must 
file a request to cut down a tree. We have to pay to cut it 
down. If we do not pay, we have to perform 10 days' service in 
the tree nurseries. 
  The powerful, the well-off, and the tavern keepers are 
bleeding us dry. 
<H5>  3.2 Politics </H5>
  The authorities almost do not allow us to voice our 
opinions. 
We are being humiliated and deceived. 
  In elections we are forced to vote for the ruling party: PRI 
[Institutional Revolutionary Party]. When we elect our own 
authorities, the people on top do not like them and put in their 
own. They should put one of our own in the municipal government 
to help us. It would be a good idea to train our own people to 
hold posts in the municipal government and help us resolve our 
complaints. 
  The authorities do not like to see us organizing and want to 
get rid of the people who head up a group. 
  There is repression in the countryside and the city. They 
repress us by taking our lands. They sic the police and the army 
on us and investigate us. 
  There is widespread corruption among the authorities. The 
courts are there to serve money and the dominant political 
ideology. 
<H5>  3.3 Society </H5>
  Besides widespread illiteracy, the school system is very 
deficient because teachers are irresponsible, impose new demands 
on us (holidays, godparents, uniforms), destroy our culture, 
conduct registrations at the wrong time and with many 
requirements, thus costing us time and money. Oversight by the 
educational authorities is lacking. But it seems that this is 
part of the system, because keeping people ignorant suits the 
government. 
  We do not have electricity, drinking water, or sewers in the 
countryside. Such health-care services as there are impose 
programs to introduce artificial birth control or to promote the 
abortion law. 
  Alcoholism is deeply rooted in our communities. It is a sign 
of our frustration and causes divisions, family breakups, 
confrontations, and death. 
  Many brothers and sisters who have not signed up at the 
registry office are forced to do so. They come from very far 
away to register but are asked to meet many requirements and 
thus waste much time and money. 
  The government demands that a community defray 70 percent of 
the cost of building a highway to it, besides furnishing good 
meals for the workers. 
  Women are very underprivileged and suffer greatly because 
they are the main victims of alcoholism, our worst enemy, which 
we have not been able to uproot. 
<H5>  3.4 Ideology </H5>
  There is complacency owing to the influence of others whose 
ideas dominate us. Those who leave to look for work because the 
land does not suffice return with new ideas and are no longer in 
tune with the community. 
  The government sets up cooperatives that do not educate. The 
radio lies instead of informing properly. They advertise items 
that we cannot afford and do not need, while making us believe 
that we can afford them and that their use or consumption will 
make us happy (Assembly of the Believer People, May 1993). 
  This is what a great many of our people think. 
<H5>  4. The Explanation in the Context of Our Own History </H5>
  Our people's current impoverished situation and deplorable 
living conditions, which are even worse in the Indian zones of 
our diocese, can be explained by the action of institutions that 
have developed over 500 years of our history. 
<H5>  4.1 The Conquest </H5>
  For the Indian pueblos the conquest meant subjugation and 
exploitation by the colonizers; such subjugation and 
exploitation took several different forms, depending on external 
interests and local protests against the brutality that was 
inflicted on the indigenous peoples and the trampling of their 
dignity. 
  Slavery gave way to the "encomienda" [land and inhabitants 
granted to a conquistador], which in turn gave way to the 
parceling out of Indian pueblos, at the same time that the tax 
system was stabilizing. Amid this onslaught only a few peoples 
were able to keep possession of their lands under normal 
conditions, even in the areas of sanctuary. 
<H5>  4.2 Independent Mexico </H5>
  The ups and downs of National Independence and, later, the 
first modernization with the reform and industrialization 
promoted by Porfirio Diaz led to the growth and development of 
the Mexican hacienda, with its patterns of forced labor 
differing from region to region. 
  With the haciendas came the predominance of the system of 
"permanently resident rural estate peons," uncultivated lands, 
and servants. These trends led to a greater concentration of 
land in private hands and to a decline in the lands owned and 
controlled by the Indian pueblos. These were the days of the 
sinister stories about the operations to extract chicle and 
fancy woods from the tropical jungle or the factories that 
produced sugar and spirits in more humid regions. 
<H5>  4.3 The Mexican Revolution and the Agrarian Reform </H5>
  The faction that triumphed in the Mexican Revolution sought 
to change the institutions of land tenure with its agrarian 
reform proposal aimed at quieting the demands and rebellions of 
the peasants. This was the reason for the various regulations 
governing small-scale property, whereby communal assets were 
restored and deeded and large haciendas were redistributed in 
the form of the ejidos and the new ejido population centers. The 
uneven pace and scope of these measures are well documented, 
aside from their complex, stormy history. 
  The agrarian reform had a shining moment in Chiapas under 
Lazaro Cardenas, when the first ejidos were established and 
deeds were issued for the first communal assets. During 
subsequent periods this process slowed and failed to keep pace 
with the rest of the country. We saw peonage systems in Indian 
regions of Chiapas as late as the 1980's. In contrast, products 
such as coffee, cacao, tobacco, and bananas were being exported 
from modern plantations, and areas of forest and jungle were 
being opened up and cleared for extensive ranching and grazing. 
<H5>  4.4 The Neoliberal Agenda of Modernization </H5>
  We call it this because starting with the years of so-called 
"stabilizing development" in our country (the 1950's) and more 
emphatically since the 1970's, Chiapas began to be viewed as a 
strategic region in economic and national security terms. 
Chiapas is a border state near Central America possessed of 
significant resources that could bring in foreign exchange: 
hydroelectric power, oil deposits, and the tourism appeal of 
natural beauty, shot through with Mayan history. 
  The crisis of the industrialized countries and the fall in 
oil prices in the first half of the 1980's made the burden of 
the foreign debt intolerable for the economic system. The State 
then took its first neoliberal macroeconomic austerity measures, 
which carried a high price for the most vulnerable strata and 
classes. The government of President Salinas intensified and 
honed these measures to modernize and reform the structure of 
the economy and the State, retaining control of the more 
strictly political concessions and seeking a new way to 
incorporate the Mexican economy into the international system, 
relying on the Free Trade Agreement with the United States and 
Canada as the touchstone of this effort. It managed the social 
problems arising from the expanding areas of poverty and extreme 
poverty by making discretionary use of its contingency funds 
(the result of a leaner public sector) through PRONASOL 
[National Solidarity Program], the operative arm of so-called 
"Social Liberalism." 
  From this perspective, we are now living in what we could 
call "the second modernization of the countryside in Chiapas." 
It is taking place amid a protracted drop in world coffee 
prices, precisely when agrarian conflicts are intensifying and 
spreading, in accordance with the criteria of previous agrarian 
legislation (Chiapas accounts for 27 percent of the nation's 
backward agrarian sector). The spearhead of this agrarian 
modernization movement is the reforms of Article 27 of the 
constitution and the new agrarian law. The goal is typically 
"modern": to remove obstacles so that land can be turned into 
merchandise and, thus, private investors can buy it up or form 
joint investment ventures. 
  The consequences that are actually in the offing are the 
destruction of the land's meaning to the community, the 
concentration of ownership, and migration from the countryside 
to the cities, particularly as a result of the program to 
certify ejido rights (ProCeDe), a legal requirement for the 
purchase and sale of ejido lands. 
<H5>  5. The Burden of Recent Decades: Salient Problems </H5>
<H5>  5.1 High Degree of Unrest </H5>
  Given this wide-ranging panorama of asymmetry and 
inequality, 
it is no surprise that recent decades in our diocese have been 
marked by an extremely high level of unrest. In the indigenous 
zones the most vulnerable groups in this structural framework 
have been establishing their own organizations and methods of 
struggle to demand their rights to land and better living 
conditions. It has not been an easy road; rather, it has been 
marked by violent responses from those who benefit from the 
status quo. Nonetheless, the difficulties themselves have forced 
the Indian pueblos to mobilize against hunger, exploitation, and 
repression in various ways: marches, sit-ins, demonstrations, 
hunger strikes, etc. 
<H5>  5.2 Guatemalan Refugees </H5>
  Moreover, the sociopolitical conflicts in Guatemala and the 
response of the Guatemalan State and military have also forced 
the peoples and communities ravaged by the military's "scorched 
earth" policy to flee into our country and seek refuge in 
Mexican communities along the border, which have responded with 
solidarity and like good Christians, along with other national 
and international organizations. Today, more than a decade has 
passed, and there are hopeful signs that they will be able to 
return. For example, in early January we and the Believer People 
of the Diocese watched as some 2,500 of our Guatemalan refugee 
brothers made an organized return to their country. 
<H5>  5.3 The Expulsions </H5>
  Since the 1970's we have also had to confront the painful 
problem of Indians who have been expelled as individuals and in 
groups from their municipalities and communities. Both our 
Evangelical and Catholic brothers have been victims. This 
development has forced us to spotlight freedom of religion and 
to expose the political and economic interests of the cacique 
government structures, which are given to intolerance and deals 
with the State. This situation has also required an ecumenical 
dialogue at various levels and has prompted our offer of 
humanitarian aid and counsel in defense of the human rights of 
the affected groups, families, and individuals. 
  What we find truly extraordinary is the testimony of many 
families that have been expelled, Catholic and Evangelical 
alike, who have preferred to be stripped of their homes, lands, 
and domestic animals rather than renounce their faith. Those who 
have signed some document asserting that they have changed 
religions to avoid being expelled can be counted on the fingers 
of one hand. 
  Regardless of their religious differences, the people who 
have been expelled have organized movements to defend their 
rights and have achieved significant results. 
<H5>  5.4 Discrimination and Inequality </H5>
  Although the State that emerged from the Mexican Revolution 
has tended to present itself as the guarantor of a "nationalist" 
identity into which an indigenous component has been 
incorporated, racism and discrimination are still rampant in 
these regions. Although there have been official and 
semiofficial attempts to reduce all forms of poverty, when we 
examine their results, we see that the structures of inequality 
of the socioeconomic system itself have outweighed them. 
Discrimination can be seen in all forms of poverty and in the 
predominance of political control to counter organized 
expressions of protest or dissent that pose just demands. 
  But this blight is most obvious in the administration of 
justice and respect for human rights. Our diocese's records in 
recent years contain a frightening number of reports of trumped 
up charges, unlawful arrests, torture, impunity, unjust 
imprisonments, mistreatment in prison, evictions, etc. 
  Therefore, it is not subjective to argue that all human and 
social relationships in Chiapas are shot through with inequality 
and tinged with oppression and domination, which become part of 
the collective consciousness. More than elsewhere in the 
country, the identity of men and women from Chiapas reflects 
this situation in many ways. The clearest differences can be 
seen in the case of the Indians, not only because of their race 
but also their economic and social status. Stripped of their 
lands, the Indians are strangers in their own land. This state 
of affairs is repeated among the natives who live on the fringes 
of national society and whose lands are being settled, with all 
of the consequences thereof: expropriation of their lands, the 
pillaging of their natural habitats, and the loss of their 
culture. In the cities the differences are just as great, albeit 
less apparent. The way people deal with each other makes these 
inequalities clear, and they become heightened in times of 
social conflict. These differences have become internalized and 
are reflected in the role that each is called upon to play in 
society. The poor in Chiapas are the Indians, the peasants, the 
workers, the sick, the mestizos, the children, the women, those 
who do not have influential friends, the expelled, the jobless, 
and the low-income earners. 
<H5>  5.5 The 1994 Political Transition </H5>
  In recent weeks our country has been engulfed in a series of 
very worrisome violent events. These developments have revealed 
that drug trafficking is linked to police, judicial, and 
political institutions. Regrettably, the official version of the 
death of our brother, Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas Ocampo, has 
succeeded only in underscoring the people's widespread mistrust 
of government institutions. In the midst of the 1994 political 
transition, this has been compounded by the scant credibility of 
electoral processes and mechanisms, which are tainted by the 
control that the State and its party have over them. In this 
specific regard, many have pointed out that as long as this 
situation persists, the democratization of our political system 
will remain an unfulfilled wish. There are serious fears that if 
this barrier remains, it will lead to confrontations and strains 
among political players outside the institutional rules and 
accords. The present moment is marked both by signs of a 
relative opening and by the resurgence of political demands that 
have long gone unmet. 
<H5>  5.6 Injustices and the Response of the Diocese </H5>
  As part of our Christian commitment to the Indians and 
peasants of the southern Pacific region, we have been pointing 
out the grave situation and the subhuman conditions in which our 
brothers are living. This situation has been worsening because 
our system has created new forms of political exploitation and 
legal injustice that legitimize oppression and repression. 
Cultures are under ideological assault and being stripped of 
their fundamental values. The list of injustices done to the 
indigenous people in our diocese over the past 500 years is a 
very long one. 
  In light of the challenges posed by modern life and the 
harshness of neoliberalism, both they and we alongside them have 
seen that poverty is in and of itself an evil that is totally 
contrary to God's will. 
  The Church has been able to fulfill its prophetic mission at 
various times through prominent figures and works. It cannot be 
denied, however, that at other times it has grown worldly, 
whether by ideologically legitimizing the organs of colonial 
government or the independent State or by enjoying privileges 
when it used the tools of the prevailing systems to gain 
property and power. 
  This local Church, which is marked mainly by Fray Bartolome 
de las Casas's evangelical loyalty, has chosen in recent decades 
to take its place on the fringes of society alongside the very 
poor. 
  In other words, the former Diocese of Chiapas, whose first 
bishop was Fray Bartolome de las Casas, a steadfast defender of 
the Indians and implacable critic of the colonial system, has 
been characterized by its pastoral line because the dreadful 
conditions that he fought against are still present. 
Particularly after the Second Vatican Council, the presence of 
pastoral agents from the diocese (priests, brothers, and 
committed laymen) in a situation of unrest set us on a long path 
that has also meant a long process of conversion. The indigenous 
community, which makes up the majority of the population and is 
the most disadvantaged segment of society, required that we make 
our presence felt urgently (if we wanted to remain faithful to 
the Gospel). This is why our diocese bears the characteristics 
inherent to pastoral action among the Indians. By such pastoral 
action we do not mean just concern for the natives; rather, it 
is an embodiment of our presence in their world, which is full 
of both shortcomings and grand values. We see it as an 
experience that guides our reflections about our faith, our 
pastoral activities, and our aspiration as a Church to move 
towards the emergence of an Autochthonous Church that will be 
able to tell of its salvific history, express itself in their 
culture, enrich itself with their values, embrace their 
sufferings, struggles, and aspirations, and through the strength 
of the Gospel transform and liberate their culture. As one 
Indian man said years ago to the apostolic delegate at the time: 
"Unless the Church becomes Tzeltal with the Tzeltal Indians, 
Chol with the Chol Indians, and Tojolabal with the Tojolabal 
Indians...I do not see how it can call itself the Catholic 
Church." It would actually be an upstart Church belonging to a 
ruling social class, alien to the Indians. The religious 
schizophrenia that Indians have experienced since the war of 
conquest will not disappear until they are acculturated in the 
Gospel in a way that bears fruit in their own ministers, in a 
faith that is reflected in their own cultural ways, and in the 
celebration of the Sacraments with their own ethnic expressions 
(Ad Gentes 6). 
  With this pastoral option our "...Church through its 
children 
joins with men of any status, but especially the poor and the 
afflicted, and devotes itself joyfully to them. It shares in 
their joys and sorrows, comes to know the aspirations and 
enigmas of life, and suffers with them in their death throes" 
(Ad Gentes 12. Cf: Ad Gentes 11 2). 
  This option has brought harassment and attacks, both by the 
State and by various privileged groups or sectors, in the 
economic and sociocultural spheres. We have thus had to endure 
slanderous propaganda and lies over the official and 
semiofficial mass media, intimidation, the jailing of pastoral 
agents, the murder of catechizers, and even inter-Church 
denunciations, with guileless people manipulated and deceived. 
  In short, the so-called discovery of America conditioned the 
life and integration of the New Continent and changed the 
history of our peoples; it also changed the life of the peoples 
who looked at us with eyes of destructive, dominating greed and 
the life of those who looked upon us with apostolic zeal to 
convey to us their experience of faith and set us on a new path. 
  The full benefits of the call to Christ's faith to form a 
Church, which summons peoples like a light raised on high, are 
better understood after 500 years and ought to be duly 
appreciated. Therefore, our Roman Pontiff, Pope John Paul II, 
put forth the idea of nine years of renewed evangelization to 
commemorate the 500th anniversary of the meeting of the two 
worlds, inasmuch as the birth of what we today call Latin 
America was closely linked to the proclamation of the Gospel's 
message in our lands. And although it is true that the 
evangelization was at times also used as a tool for subjecting 
peoples to an unjust colonization and its resulting 
depredations, "it must also be recognized that...it has been 
much more powerful than the shadows that regrettably accompanied 
it down through history." 
<H5>  6. The Diocesan Pastoral Process (1960-1993) </H5>
<H5>  6.1.1 Interpreters and Confidants of the People </H5>
  As interpreters and confidants of the people, we realize how 
difficult it is to open the door to hope when the conditions 
under which most people live are so distressing and the 
structures of domination are so persistent that those who devote 
their lives to change see that all of creation is misused by the 
evil of the wicked. Those who seek the paths of justice become 
so upset and frustrated at times that they do not know what to 
do and not even what to ask for. But we know that the Spirit 
wails within us with indescribable sobs that the Father can, 
however, understand, as the Spirit intercedes with Him on our 
behalf (Romans 8:18-27). 
  It is precisely now that words of encouragement are most 
needed, words that are both specific and that explain why 
Christians have hope. Today we wish to support all that we have 
done and said on its sole, true foundation: the Resurrection. 
The process of the diocesan Church that began 33 years ago has 
the Lord's Resurrection as its source, because if Christ did not 
rise again, our pastoral work and your faith are in vain. The 
message of the Resurrection is, in fact, the core that has given 
us hope through the various stages, because the Resurrection is 
the central mystery of the faith, and the faith has given us the 
inspiration for everything that we have done. 
<H5>  6.1.2 Evangelizing </H5>
  "To evangelize is to do what Jesus Christ did when in the 
synagogue he showed that he had come to `evangelize' the poor 
(Luke 4:18-19). Being rich, he became poor to enrich us with his 
poverty (2 Corinthians 8,9). He challenges us to bear genuine 
witness to evangelical poverty in our lifestyle and Church 
structures, as He did. This is the foundation of our commitment 
to an evangelical and preferential option for the poor, an 
option that is steadfast and irrevocable but neither exclusive 
nor exclusionary, as solemnly affirmed at the Medellin and 
Puebla conferences" (Santo Domingo No. 178, 1-3). 
<H5>  6.1.3 The Suffering of Our People Is the Starting Point </H5>
  The suffering of our people is the starting point of a 
lengthy journey, of a transforming process of conversion, of a 
pressing appeal for us to serve as salvific mediators for the 
indigenous world (the poor among the poor), an appeal that 
awaits an evangelical reply without delay. 
<H5>  6.2 Several Stages in What We Call the Diocesan Process Can </H5>
Be Distinguished 
<H5>  6.2.1 The Stage of Pastoral Renewal </H5>
  The stage of pastoral renewal began after the Second Vatican 
Council and was supported by the joint pastoral of the UMAE 
(Union of Mutual Episcopal Aid), in which 25 dioceses took part. 
This stage sought to develop a Joint Pastoral through planning 
with the aid of Religious Sociology and with the encouragement 
of the Movement for a Better World. Several ecclesiastical 
organizations in Mexico became enthusiastic about the idea and 
the earnestness with which the movement was set in motion, in 
light of the backing that Padre Lombardo, S.J. and the father of 
Religious Sociology himself, Canon Boulard, gave to this 
movement. Many community leaders who were called upon at the 
time remain active to this day. 
  Work in teams, divided up by homogeneous zones, was 
organized 
in the diocese of San Cristobal de las Casas. This teamwork 
continues today, with some modifications. Taking part with us in 
this undertaking in the southern Pacific coast region were 
Guatemalan bishops from neighboring dioceses, who were united in 
their desire to move forward together in the indigenous 
pastoral. The disastrous Guatemalan earthquake interrupted the 
meetings that we had been holding with them. 
  The process that UMAE had set in motion was taken up by the 
Bishops Conference itself when it asked the services team which 
had been set up to advise the Mexican Episcopate. 
<H5>  6.2.2 The Stage of Pastoral Reaffirmation </H5>
  The stage of reaffirming the value of indigenous cultures, 
in 
order to develop a pastoral geared to the various situations of 
these ethnic groups, began after the Gatherings of Indigenous 
Missions in Mexico and the Pastoral Gathering of Missions in 
Melgar, Colombia, which was organized by the Missions Department 
of CELAM [Latin American Bishops Conference] in preparation for 
the Medellin meeting. The shared approaches and experiences that 
furthered an understanding of missionary work date from my term 
as president of the CELAM Missions Department and of the 
Episcopal Commission for Indians in Mexico. We thus moved 
gradually from the "pro-Indian pastoral" (run by agents alien to 
the Indian communities) to an indigenous pastoral (run by people 
in charge of the communities themselves). 
<H5>  6.2.3 The Stage of Grasping the Sociopolitical Dimension </H5>
  This stage was marked by the political liberalization of the 
country, when political movements could be acknowledged as 
partisan movements that were able to run in elections. We 
bishops of the southern Pacific coast region (Province of 
Antequera or Oaxaca) issued a joint Pastoral Document to guide 
the faithful in the region. Although it was not our intention, 
the document had a major domestic and even international impact. 
  Political parties that had theretofore not been registered 
or 
officially recognized went into every corner of the republic to 
sign up the affiliates they needed to register. Our region saw a 
heavy influx of political movements and parties, which made 
their presence effectively felt despite linguistic, ethnic, and 
geographic barriers. The aforementioned Pastoral Letter had been 
both timely and prophetic, and besides being very useful, it 
still offers guidance in most respects. 
  This stage included our diocese's inescapable commitment to 
join in the Indians' struggles to recover their lands and in the 
criticism of the euphoria surrounding the "oil miracle" that 
brutalized Indians, created tension and conflict, prompted a 
campaign to discredit us, and brought repression of Indian 
leaders and the pastoral agents who stood by them in their 
efforts and struggles to defend their cultural identity, their 
patrimony, and their survival. 
<H5>  6.2.4 The Stage of the Economic and Social Processes of </H5>
Neoliberal Modernity 
  Neoliberal Modernity, with its economic and social 
processes, 
does not take the diversity of peoples into account. It seems 
that modernity would like to eliminate them, as if they were a 
hindrance rather than a human resource. One of the urgent 
responsibilities of the new evangelization is to establish the 
autochthonous Church, which has emerged from the historic trends 
in society, culture, religion, and the faith. 
  Our great motivation in this process is the appeal for love 
and service that Christ makes to us from the suffering people 
with whom he identifies. We acknowledge that our path is in our 
faith, in the heart of our Church, the Church that 
notwithstanding its tensions and limitations and even the human 
failings of many of its members, is able to respond to the 
Spirit that guides it through historic crossroads such as the 
Vatican Council, Medellin, Puebla, and Santo Domingo. At no 
point have we lapsed into a spiritualist reductionism (which 
shuns history) or a sociological reductionism that fails to 
affirm our transcendence. 
<H5>  6.3 Three Elements That Have Accompanied Us on Our Journey </H5>
  In the beginning we saw these three aspects as parallel. 
Over 
time, however, our pastoral activities brought them together, 
until we viewed them as a basic unit that has accompanied us on 
our diocesan journey. 
<H5>  6.3.1 Incarnation </H5>
  Our Church can be truly Catholic only to the extent that it 
becomes "whole for all" and is able to proclaim salvation from 
the very essence of mankind in its specific forms, our cultures. 
It must invigorate, purify, and enlighten them, placing the 
gifts that God has given humanity in the context of the faith 
with an eye towards the building of the Kingdom that will become 
part of history and seek eagerly to undertake the divine 
project, which has been planted in the hearts of men and which 
will reach its fullness in the Second Coming. 
<H5>  6.3.2 Liberation </H5>
  We have discovered that redemption through Christ is a 
comprehensive redemption accomplished inchoately in history or 
with the involvement of mankind. This discovery was not the 
result of abstract reflection; it was the result of living 
together with our people and seeing their poverty, their 
suffering, and the injustice of which they are victims. We hear 
the urgent appeal for us to become a credible Church that 
proclaims the Good News to the poor. 
<H5>  6.3.3 Service to the World </H5>
  We know that the Church is not an end in itself, nor is it 
built for itself. We know that it has been sent into the world 
as its servant and as a humble but necessary leavening for the 
construction of the Kingdom of God, which is justice, love, and 
peace. We also know that the Kingdom begins here, although its 
consummation is not of this world. This spurs us on, in the here 
and now, to perform our evangelical task of learning how to talk 
with all those of good will, to shed evangelical light on the 
times, and to walk with all our brothers. 
<H5>  6.4 The Most Important Moments of the Diocesan Process </H5>
<H5>  6.4.1 The Indian Congress </H5>
  In 1974 the diocese was invited to take part in an Indian 
Congress from 14 to 16 October in the city of San Cristobal de 
las Casas to honor the feast of Fray Bartolome de las Casas, the 
"defender of the Indians." In accepting, the diocese was trying 
merely to enable the Indians to make their voice heard in public 
after so many years of silence. The Indians astutely seized the 
opportunity and accepted the challenge of taking responsibility 
for the Congress and putting the seal of their own personality 
on it. A thousand communities representing 400,000 persons took 
part for one year, during which time they gathered together the 
complaints and problems of the four linguistic zones (Chol, 
Tzeltal, Tzotzil, and Tojolabal) in the areas of land, trade, 
education, and health care. 
  Representatives who were "men of their word" were elected at 
these assemblies, that is to say, individuals who are consistent 
in "what they do and say" and who would put their proposals 
before their Indian brothers in attendance. 
  During the three-day Congress they described in detail the 
desperate conditions in which they lived, giving specific 
examples of their plight: abuse in stores, exploitation on the 
job, eviction from their lands, destruction of their culture, 
oppression, murders that go unpunished, etc. Their denunciations 
were analytical, with painful, undeniable information as to 
dates, places, persons, and events. They offered suggestions as 
to how justice could be served and put forth an organized plan 
of action. They asked the Church (which they know is not a 
political party or a political alternative but does have social 
power) to lend them its support and its prophetic voice, as the 
Lord, incarnate in Yahweh's poor, asks of it. 
  When we as pastoral agents of the diocese heard and saw what 
the Indians were saying about their own situation, we realized 
very clearly that we had drafted our Pastoral Plan without 
taking into account the aspirations, needs, and hopes of their 
communities. In answer to their appeal, we drew up a plan that 
sought to respond in some way, based on the faith, to the needs 
they described. 
<H5>  6.4.2 Preferential Option for the Poor </H5>
  The panorama of impoverished, disadvantaged conditions that 
we see in Latin America is strongly prevalent in our diocese. 
With a great sense of responsibility and fidelity to the Gospel 
we recall the pastoral letter of 17 October 1985, which on 
behalf of the Christians in the diocese denounced the injustices 
that the people are constantly suffering. 
  It is with deep sorrow and concern that we have seen in 
Chiapas the increasing number of attempted murders, the abuse of 
the most basic human rights, and the crackdown on grass-roots 
movements. As a diocesan Church, we strive to be faithful to our 
vocation to build the Kingdom of God by advancing evangelical 
values to humanize the earth and by serving primarily the poor. 
We cannot remain uninvolved in what is happening in our midst. 
Events cause us to exclaim: "Yahweh has seen the miserable state 
of my people in Egypt and has heard the appeal to be free of 
their slave drivers. I am well aware of their sufferings" 
(Exodus 3:7). 
  Aware of the painful conditions facing our brothers, the 
poorest of the poor, we chose to accompany them, like the good 
Samaritan, in their quest for a new society based on justice and 
brotherhood. 
  The evangelizing task of Jesus himself is marked by a 
commitment to the poor. He undertook his messianic mission as 
"the servant of Yahweh" (Isaiah 41:9; 42; 49:3-50:3). He is the 
one who is to come; there is no need to wait for another. For 
the blind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf 
hear, the dead are raised to life, and the Good News is 
proclaimed to the poor (Matthew 11:2-7; Luke 4:16-22). 
  We will be able to understand the Beatitudes of Christ only 
if we avoid placing our heart in riches and only if we are 
prepared to fraternally share economic, social, and cultural 
goods with those who lack them (Luke 6:20-26). Men are blessed 
when, moved by the Spirit of God, they make common cause with 
the poor (Matthew 5:11-19). 
  In the beginning, our pastoral plans focused mainly on the 
neediest. But as we lived together with "Yahweh's poor" and 
discovered their great suffering, we were forced by 
circumstances to speak out against the way in which they were 
being plundered. Therefore, in light of evangelical reflection, 
we had to make a more clear-cut option for the poor. This was no 
decree, no mere theological rambling; it was a simple reading of 
our intentions and the trend of our pastoral activities in the 
face of painful realities. It was an urgent evangelical 
decision. We also knew that we were beginning to experience the 
conflict of charity: proclaiming from amid the poor a message of 
conversion to the oppressor and proclaiming to the oppressed, 
with whom Christ identifies, a hope-giving Gospel (Santo Domingo 
279, 178-179). In light of this diocesan option, we revised the 
training of future priests, our actions, and our attitudes, in a 
word, our entire approach. 
  The structure of our diocese has undergone changes during 
these years, not only to meet the demands of the Council but 
also as a result of contact with the communities and a 
consideration of their permanently conflict-ridden situations, 
as well as to respond to unexpected developments that demanded 
rapid analysis. 
  The theological-pastoral reflection that accompanied this 
evolution was also marked by historical junctures that were 
favorable to our diocese. Having attended all sessions of the 
Council, I was also at the Melgar missionary meeting in 
preparation for the episcopal gathering in Medellin, at which I 
also presented a paper: "Evangelization in Latin America." When 
I was asked to serve as chairman of the CELAM Missions 
Department and, later, as chairman of the Bishops Commission for 
Indians of the Mexican Bishops Conference, I gained 
opportunities to enrich the diocese's journey with the 
post-Council Latin American theological reflection on missionary 
work that was developing at the time. 
<H5>  6.4.3 The Way of Evangelization and Catechesis </H5>
<H5>  6.4.3.1 The First Stage, 1952 </H5>
  During the first stage, which began under my predecessor, 
His 
Excellency Bishop Dr. Lucio Torreblanca, Indian men and women 
stepped forward, motivated by the Spirit of the Lord, and 
gathered their brothers together. They taught hymns and 
explained certain catechistic texts with questions and answers. 
Most important was the testimony of their lives, as manifested 
in their zeal and the glow of their words. They did not have 
academic training; they did not have a legal mandate. They had 
an evangelical mandate to share the joy of having discovered a 
new life (Matthew 13:44-46). 
  In 1961, the apostolic delegate, Msgr. Luigi Raimondi, 
suggested that the Chiapas diocese establish two schools of 
catechistic training for Indians in an effort to implement the 
resolutions of the Indian Missionary Congress. During this 
period 700 catechizers from various Indian regions were trained. 
The methods were very dynamic, but Western in nature and 
organized from the top down. There was, however, this key 
element: a devotion to service in proclaiming the Good News to 
all, whatever the sacrifice. 
<H5>  6.4.3.2 The Second Stage, Starting in 1968 </H5>
  The second stage began in 1968. In assessing the catechizing 
efforts, the catechizers clearly stated: "The Church and the 
Word of God have told us about things to save our souls, but we 
do not know how to save our bodies. While we work for the 
salvation of our souls and the souls of others, we suffer 
hunger, disease, poverty, and death." These words spoke to us 
and helped us to discover that the Gospel is not just a series 
of dogmas but also a liberating proclamation and a new life. The 
Council and later Medellin spoke to us of a liberating 
proclamation that entails learning humbly how the Spirit of God 
lives and acts in the historic-salvific values and events of a 
given culture. 
  We thus intensified our reflection on and practice of a 
catechesis that we called the catechesis of incarnation, which 
sought to have the Word of God assume the flesh of a culture and 
invigorate the individual and community life of our brothers 
amid historical events. The entire life of the community, its 
social, economic, political, and cultural reality, was revealed 
to us as a theological place that, as the bishops emphasized at 
the October 1974 synod, bespoke the substance of the 
proclamation that must be made through its various components 
(the needs of the listeners, their desires, and their way of 
speaking, thinking, judging, and interacting with their fellow 
man). 
  The catechizers became spokesmen of the community's 
thinking, 
not just teachers who conveyed prefabricated thinking. The Word 
of God became reflected within the communities on the basis of 
experiences and situations, and the catechizers became "the 
gatherers of the harvest of community thought." As they 
reflected on very painful situations they had experienced, men, 
women, and children began speaking out, in keeping with the 
Indians' style, until they developed the Resolution, which 
contained their vision of the faith, their theological vision of 
reality. These resolutions were called "catechistic readings," 
and although they were not going to be taught to the community, 
they represented the outgrowth of their Christian reflection on 
their lives and problems. When they reflected on brotherly 
charity, they said: "Charity is not talked about, or defined, or 
written about; charity is lived." Their reflection consisted of 
a commitment to organize the community and live that commitment 
in man's three dimensions: How will we live our charity in 
politics? What does loving our fellow man mean in the economic 
sphere? What does it mean to love one's brother from the 
standpoint of culture? 
  Without the self-sacrificing devotion of our servants and 
catechizers, evangelization would have made scant progress in a 
diocese as large, as isolated (owing to the lack of roads), and 
as complex (given its diverse ethnic, political, and economic 
makeup) as ours. They bring the communities together, at least 
once a week, and nourish the communities' faith with their 
words, their example, and their actions. 
<H5>  6.4.4 The Oneness and Service of Authority </H5>
  The episcopal mission in the Church of God involves the 
tasks 
of teaching, sanctifying, and governing the People of God and 
seeks to consolidate the Church of the Lord so that it, as the 
light of nations, can proclaim, promote, and contribute with all 
men of "good will" to the construction of the Kingdom of God, 
which is shaped in time and consummated in eternity. 
  The efforts to fulfill this threefold episcopal mission 
throughout our diocese amid the complexity of its ethnic groups 
and historical situations do not end with the direct activities 
of the bishop himself. Pastoral agents, committed lay persons, 
catechizers, and countless servants acting jointly with him are 
active throughout the diocese. The diocese has 7,822 catechizers 
and 422 deacon candidates (called pre-deacons) in 2,608 
communities. Along with the catechizers, the Christian 
communities have developed other ministries that help build the 
People of God. Several thousand people conduct these ministries 
on a permanent basis in our diocese, their only remuneration 
being the strength that the Lord gives their hearts. 
  By the same token, one of the most important efforts that 
the 
bishop of this diocese has undertaken has been to make way for 
joint responsibility and shared decision-making in the great 
task of proclaiming the Gospel to the poor. The Diocesan 
Assemblies are an example of this. Each of them is a salvific 
moment in which our diocesan life is invigorated, guided, and 
begun anew in light of the events that reflect a love of God, as 
embodied in history and discovered through the written Word. 
  Through an ongoing conversion that means accepting the 
presence of the Spirit in the community in light of the faith, 
we become convinced that we must respect individuals and 
communities (while still addressing them critically) so that 
they can compare their behavior with the Word of God and realize 
that they themselves must forge their own history. This is all 
the more necessary because the people (especially the indigenous 
people) have had their voice in society, and even in the Church 
itself, taken away from them. We have taken the steps that we 
have because the people must become aware of their dignity as 
children of God who have been redeemed through the blood of 
Christ. We have also taken them because we need organizations to 
demand what in justice is due them. In the final accounting, we 
have taken them because the dispossessed, spurred by their 
Christian faith, must proceed towards the construction of the 
Kingdom in justice, as the privileged audience of the Gospel. 
  The Spirit of the Lord has brought forth in these 
communities 
values the seeds of which were planted throughout their history. 
The Church Fathers called them "Seeds of the Word." This lends 
acculturation in the Gospel a distinguishing feature. The 
community structure and the lifestyle of solidarity and service 
in Mayan Indian cultures are strikingly conducive to an 
acceptance of the Good News in the freshness and novelty that 
characterize the ministries. 
  The indigenous culture, along with an evangelization 
strongly 
marked by Christian commitment, are the new wine that offers 
many opportunities for work and shared responsibility in service 
to the community. Various ministries are thus emerging in the 
community, as former ministries of their own culture are renewed 
and invigorated. The most common terms referring to them are: 
"workers" and "servants," which indicate that work is truly 
being done for the community. After many years of work amid 
suffering and hope we have in our diocese: catechizers, 
secretaries, leaders, stewards, chairmen, choirs, regional 
heads, health promoters, women's coordinators, tuhuneles [not 
further identified], pre-deacons, deacons, and servants for the 
defense of human rights. 
  The communities' responsible acceptance of the Gospel fuels 
the hope that we can move towards an indigenous priesthood. 
  Since we are accompanying the people in their search for 
mature, aware, and responsible answers, we must ask the Lord 
Jesus to render our minds permanently clear so that we can 
discern before him the commitment that leads to the construction 
of the Kingdom of God in justice and truth. 
<H5>  6.5 Accomplishments and Work Methods </H5>
<H5>  6.5.1 Accomplishments </H5>
  It is difficult to recount accomplishments because several 
are the work of other institutions, bodies, or individuals that 
also have an impact on the life of the communities. 
  What we can describe as a diocesan accomplishment is the 
move 
that the Indian and peasant communities have been making away 
from having others decide for them and towards forging their own 
history. In other words, the Indians and peasants are gaining a 
growing awareness of their dignity, enhanced by the values of 
the Gospel. They have been taking the place that they deserve in 
the Church and, consequently, in history as well. Gradually they 
are feeling and living their own responsibility in the Church to 
which they belong and which belongs to them. 
  The communities have been gaining a critical awareness, 
which 
is a sign of a mature faith. They are discovering that united 
they can solve the problems besetting them. Appreciation for 
their own language, their legitimate customs, and their cultural 
identity has grown. Translators selected by the communities have 
translated the Sacred Scriptures into several Indian languages, 
with guidance from the diocese, which bears the ultimate 
responsibility. 
  They have taken joint responsibility for the cooperative and 
health-care movement. Enlightened by reflection on the Word of 
God, many communities have organized unions to improve various 
aspects of their lives: transportation, loans, health care, etc. 
<H5>  6.5.2 Work Methods </H5>
  All work methods have evolved, but one of them evolved more 
strikingly or constantly in one of the zones and from there 
spread naturally to the rest. It was a catechesis that moved 
from indoctrination ("Nopteswanej") to community involvement 
("Tijwanej"). This method involves courses either for a specific 
group, which then conveys them to its community, or for entire 
communities, which add their comments, thus enriching the 
courses for other communities. Depending on needs and timing, 
these courses address: introduction or further studies for 
catechizers; Sacred Scripture; support group members; deacon 
training; human rights; analysis of actual conditions, faith and 
politics, and health care. They are taught in the community, in 
a zone, or in a broader region. 
  Whether with the enlightenment of the faith or with support 
infrastructure, mechanisms are put in place to complement the 
processes, decisions, or actions, depending on our role: 
pilgrimages, support for a ban on alcohol, support for women's 
groups, and guidance and support in cases of human rights 
violations. On pastoral tours, during visits, and at meetings we 
accompany them in their expressions of joy: in celebrating the 
faith, at the feasts of patron saints, and at meetings with 
community representatives, whether for special issues or to 
assess, organize, or schedule gatherings. Their modest goal is 
economic or environmental alternatives so that they can discover 
their own abilities and see the results of their own actions. 
<H5>  6.5.3 Criteria </H5>
  At the root of all our pastoral guidance lies an evangelical 
principle: proclaiming and living a faith that leads to abundant 
life (John 10:10), and illuminating the link between faith and 
life. Therefore, at each step of the way we must judge whether 
an action furthers the creation of the Kingdom of God in 
Justice, in Truth, in Love, in Peace. 
  Hence, every pastoral action is legitimate if it is 
liberating, if it respects the legitimate decisions of God's 
People, if it accompanies their journey and helps the weak, if 
it takes into account their culture, religiosity, and needs. 
  Pastoral agents decide carefully when to be present so that 
they do not displace people from their proper place but instead 
help them to mature so that they themselves can decide, 
question, and evaluate, thus shaping their own history. The 
people themselves often wisely tell us where our place is. In 
the final accounting, manipulation, paternalism, and supplanting 
run counter to the Gospel. 
  It is important to acknowledge and respect people's proper 
place in their civic and political decisions. Enlightened by the 
faith, Christians do well to make their own political decisions, 
and we as pastoral agents should neither head their 
organizations nor promote our own leadership. Guidance that 
informs, enlightens, or supports whatever just actions are 
undertaken is consistent with our role. 
<H5>  6.5.4 Mistakes </H5>
  We have made many mistakes in our pastoral pilgrimage. 
  Our first actions, years before the Second Vatican Council, 
were destructive of culture. We had only our own criteria for 
judging customs, and our judgment was based on ethnocentrism and 
moralizing, which unfortunately were widespread at the time. Our 
shortcomings, our compassion and love for the Indians, and our 
presence in their midst had to suffice. 
  We were unable to see the mestizo domination of politics and 
the economy and even their manipulation of religion to 
facilitate their plundering of the Indians, who were kind and 
enthusiastically religious. Without realizing, much less 
analyzing it, we were on the side of those who oppressed the 
Indians; we felt that through them and their illusory good will 
we could bring about some changes. 
  We have not found a pedagogical method (if there is one) to 
touch the hearts of those who, while geographically close to the 
Indians and peasants, are distant from them in spirit. The many 
methods and activities we experimented with in various parts of 
the diocese have had short-lived effects. The conversion of the 
so-called "caxlan" or mestizo hinges in some cases on 
restitution, which means the departure of all of them from the 
community, inasmuch as they have improperly taken possession of 
homes and lands. We see that the hearts of more than a few 
mestizos are opening up, while others are hardening. 
  The presence of the poor and their deep grasp of the 
mysteries that God reveals to them more than to the learned 
(Luke 10:21) have caused jealousy and the feeling that they are 
being left out of a Church that they once knew and that they saw 
as a place of worship without any commitment to follow Jesus and 
without any concern for their brothers (Luke 16:19-31). 
  We have not made sufficient use of grass-roots religiosity 
to 
harness its deep, hidden sense of liberation. 
  The frequent personnel changes by religious congregations 
adversely affect the monitoring of evangelization efforts and 
teamwork. 
  The pace of events is dizzying at times, and we are often 
incapable of reacting to the consequences that they have for the 
people. The agrarian laws that were recently reformed in 
connection with the so-called Free Trade Agreement are having a 
very adverse impact on the peasant communities, but we have been 
unable to propose alternatives to them. 
<H5>  7. Our Word as a Church, Today </H5>
<H5>  7.1 The Evangelizing Mission of the Church, Sacrament of the </H5>
Father's Love 
  God wishes to restore life where death imposes its laws: "I 
have seen the oppression of my people and heard their cries" 
(Exodus 3:7). He is manifesting himself in our troubled history 
to reestablish his plan: to distribute the riches of creation 
justly (Luke 1:47-55). God reveals himself when he accompanies 
the people's liberation and forges an alliance with them: "I 
will be your God and you shall be my people" (Leviticus 26:12). 
Thus, to be against the people and their rightful aspirations is 
to be against God. Jesus became poor among the poor and from 
their midst proclaimed and fulfilled the Father's Plan amid a 
troubled history of death, and he calls on us to take the path 
of Life, strengthened by the Truth and the Hope of the 
Resurrection. 
  Therefore, in light of this situation, the Church's 
evangelizing mission (the Sacrament of the Father's Love, of 
Jesus's Solidarity, and of the summoning of the Holy Spirit) 
demands that we proclaim here and now the Good News of the 
entire world's liberation so that all men and women will pledge 
to take part in God's action in the world by acknowledging 
Christ as the Lord of Life who acts in history. 
  The plan of Salvation unfolds in a world full of options, 
which invigorate life and history. These very options define the 
Christian option, the truth of which is shown in Christ, who 
died and rose again. We can choose between eternal life and 
death, between God and the idols of power and money, between 
freedom and oppression, between living and building the 
community and plunging into individualism; between discovering 
Christ in the poor, defending them and loving them, and 
oppressing and plundering them; between building justice and 
destroying ourselves amid injustice. In a word, we can proclaim 
and build the Kingdom of the living God or build a Kingdom of 
death. Each of the options for life, by which we follow Jesus, 
increase the life within us and clarify our pilgrimage, which is 
a commitment without return. 
<H5>  7.2 Our Objective </H5>
  Our objective is that our diocesan Church, in union with the 
Universal and Latin American Church, will proclaim the life of 
Jesus and life in a participatory, fraternal community, while 
committing ourselves to and serving the people, joining like 
Jesus in the process of liberating the oppressed, who will shape 
their own history, so that together we can build the new society 
as a foretaste of the Kingdom. 
<H5>  7.3 Principles Guiding Us </H5>
<H5>  7.3.1 Theological </H5>
<H5>  7.3.1.1 God Our Father </H5>
  He is the creator of the universe. He has made his creation 
a 
gift for all men and women. But in their desire to possess more, 
human beings kill to become the sole owners of the gifts that 
God, out of love, gave to us. Thus did social sin develop. 
  God is a God of life who accompanies his people, who reveals 
himself in the suffering, resurrected Christ the poor, who opts 
for the poor, who wants life for all his children, especially 
for the most deprived and despised in our society, who wants 
well-being for the people. 
  God reveals himself to us in history; his salvific action 
takes place in history through the participation of men. 
  God makes a Covenant with his people and calls on us to be 
faithful, to free ourselves from injustice and death, to form a 
community, and to work together to build the Kingdom. 
<H5>  7.3.1.2 Jesus Christ </H5>
  The God of life appeared among us as a poor man called Jesus 
of Nazareth, who was slain by the powerful of this world because 
he did good. Jesus Christ, God become incarnate in history, took 
his place among the poor, gave them preference, and made their 
cause his. This is why Jesus Christ obliges us to seek the 
fulfillment of the human person and brings us into his project 
of life and life in abundance (=liberation). 
  What illuminates our search to build the Kingdom of God is 
the work of Jesus, his mission, marked by a commitment to the 
poor. He came to liberate all men from all the servitudes to 
which sin has subjected them (John 8:32-35): ignorance, hunger, 
poverty, oppression, and injustice, the origin of which is 
selfishness and hatred, and he proclaims the Good News to the 
poor, liberation to the captive, and freedom to the oppressed. 
<H5>  7.3.1.3 The Holy Spirit </H5>
  The Spirit of God is present in Jesus and manifests his 
strength in summoning the people for total liberation. 
  The Spirit of Jesus, as present in the ecclesiastic 
community, creates a variety of ministries in it for the 
fulfillment of its mission, embracing the cultural and 
socioeconomic conditions of peoples. 
<H5>  7.3.1.4 The Church </H5>
  It was born among the excluded of the Empire; among them it 
proclaimed and announced Jesus and the Kingdom. 
  The Church, the community of those who believe in Jesus, 
proclaims and promotes liberation from among the poor. 
  The Church, as a visible reality, is made up of the 
Hierarchy 
and of all baptized persons, who are the People of God. The 
movements that emerge from among the people through the power of 
the Spirit are the ones that have invigorated the Church. 
  In our diocese today the People of Believers want to bring 
about the Kingdom of God and are expressing this in different 
ways. 
<H5>  7.3.1.5 Mary </H5>
  The maternal face of God's action, in Mexico she manifests 
herself as a protector, defender, and evangelizer who, despite 
having many ambassadors, conducted the evangelization through a 
poor Indian, Juan Diego. 
<H5>  7.3.2 On Individuals </H5>
  Western thought focuses on possessing, having. In Latin 
American thought, the individual develops and is perceived on 
the basis of being. An individual is not something more because 
he or she owns more. 
  The task of philosophy is to open up the panorama of human 
potentialities to the presence of the other. The fulfillment of 
the human person entails a growth of the people in their 
decision-making, a respect for them without manipulation. 
  The value of human beings is pre-eminent. They all possess 
an 
inviolable dignity that must be respected in and of itself; 
others must respect it and see that it is respected without 
qualifications. 
<H5>  7.3.3 On Society </H5>
  Human coexistence in society must be based on the common 
good, which means the fraternal fulfillment of the common 
dignity; this means that some are not to be used as tools for 
the benefit of others. 
  A proper social order requires a just distribution of 
resources to thus achieve the common good. This is the priority 
concern of society and the authorities, whose function is to 
further the good of the majority and guide the humanization and 
transformation of natural resources. 
  Society is pluralistic, and therefore ethnic and cultural 
variations must be taken into account so that peoples, which 
shape their own history, can fulfill themselves. This cannot be 
done unless opportunities for participation in the economy, 
politics, and social relations are created. Peoples shape their 
own history, and society is the setting in which human existence 
achieves fullness by giving the community precedence over 
individualism. 
  There are disagreements, interests, and confrontations in 
society, as well as a confusion of ideas owing to the clash of 
cultures. 
  There are countries that are exploited by others. Among them 
are the countries of Latin America, in which large percentages 
of people are living in poverty, disadvantaged conditions, and 
misery. The economy, politics, and ideology of a country are 
determined by its place in the world: center-periphery. 
  We are a dependent country at the level of states, 
municipalities, ejidos, and communities. The break with 
dependence begins from the periphery when the disadvantaged and 
oppressed become an aware, organized people. The State does not 
allow this break because it would shatter its agenda of 
hegemony. This is why it seeks to control the people and keep 
them unaware and unorganized through political, economic, 
ideological, and police-military controls. 
<H5>  7.3.4 Ethical Demands </H5>
  In this sort of world Christians know that their priority is 
other people, those who are not secure: the weak, on whose 
behalf we must struggle for justice and become the hands of God 
in defense of their human rights (sic). 
  The comprehensive growth of individuals and a community can 
be achieved only on the basis of their own culture, so that each 
and every one shapes its own history. Neither they nor we can do 
this alone; we must do it together, because we both have values 
to contribute in the pursuit of happiness. We encourage 
involvement and the sharing of responsibilities. 
  We promote human beings in their development as complete 
persons, thus furthering their progress towards independence. 
  We must not lose our identity as Christians and pastoral 
agents, since only as such can we be forces for unity. 
<H5>  7.4 Moving Forward on the Path of Faith, Hope, and Charity </H5>
  The different response that rich and poor give to the 
proclamation of the Gospel creates divisions and contradictions 
in mankind's house (Luke 12:51) and prompts serious opposition 
to those who proclaim love and justice. We can only deplore the 
fact that the Lord Jesus's reproaches of the Scribes and 
Pharisees (Luke 11:37, 12:1) are still fully valid in our 
diocese. The poor who demand their rights through legal channels 
are repressed; merchants profiteer with agricultural products; 
jails are full of innocent people; and hunger and malnutrition 
are the permanent companions of many Indians. 
  In the face of this situation, which is very common in Latin 
America, our diocese is compelled to intensify its prophetic 
mission by interpreting the "signs of the times" in light of the 
Spirit and by calling for the sort of conversion that will lead 
all to build a just society. This interpretation of history is 
part of the service that the Church performs in the world and 
falls within its prophetic ministry, which proclaims God's 
justice. 
  Moving forward today on the path of faith, hope, and charity 
in the Universal and Latin American Church means continuing to 
preach the Word of God amid conditions in which poverty has 
spread and grown worse, in which tensions have sharpened, and in 
which men and women have become aware of their actual situation. 
Their actual situation is more troubled because the powerful 
have strengthened their hand through the use of force and have 
turned a deaf ear to the Gospel, while materialism has taken 
hold of the modern, industrialized, secularized ruling classes. 
But on a continent on which the Catholic Church consists largely 
of the poor, oppressed masses that have been deprived of power, 
these masses are full of faith, solidarity, and hope for a 
better future that will enable them to march towards a new 
world, a forerunner of the Kingdom of Life that will be achieved 
with Christ in final salvation. 
  "The resurrection of Christ, which reaffirms his entire 
mission, reaffirms the hope of man's resurrection in history, a 
Resurrection that predates and leads to the final resurrection. 
Mankind throughout the ages is invited as part of this 
resurrection to reconcile social groups and classes and to 
restore the order of nature that has been violated, subjugated, 
and distorted. From Christ's resurrection stems the effective, 
persevering effort to begin and consolidate processes that are 
designed to build the sort of life that is not limited to an 
adequate daily diet but instead entails a recognition of 
so-called human rights and the reestablishment of a human 
community whose institutions function for man, not for 
accumulation" (Easter 1993 Message). 
<H5>  8. An Appeal for Understanding, Dialogue, and Conversion </H5>
  At a time when contradictions are sharpening in our country 
and troubled waters are developing in which many are fishing for 
and finding juicy profits, the responsibility of Christians in 
the quest for truth must emerge more clearly. By striving to 
internalize in our own hearts the suffering or anguish of 
others, we will be better prepared to understand ourselves, to 
listen, and to change our hearts. Selfishness and one's own 
advantage are not an appropriate groundwork for dialogue at a 
time when we need each other. The Lord would have us realize 
that this approach dehumanizes and destroys. Creation itself 
protests the plunder and concentration of wealth that our social 
system brings about, warning mankind that it must change its 
course urgently lest our survival as a planet be short-lived. 
  Why not begin a new path without waiting for social 
institutions to change in response to the despair of those who 
have been subjugated for ages? Instead of forming production 
organizations that bring a further concentration of land, what 
is stopping us, for example, from beginning a dialogue with the 
Ejido Unions to take a fresh step forward? 
  Dialogue, a condition for fraternal relations, requires a 
willingness to listen. A willingness to listen, in turn, is 
based on an acceptance of others, without assuming that they are 
acting in bad faith. Representatives who are kind of word, good 
of heart, and have moral influence will largely assure a 
successful dialogue. 
  Individuals, groups, or communities that have clashed must 
seek to build bridges of communication so that they can be 
transformed through Christian forgiveness. 
  The poor, the downtrodden in society should bear witness to 
the love that Jesus made the sign of his Church. They should 
know that if the Lord favors them with his love (which no one 
deserves), if he calls on them to contribute their values to 
transform society, then this is a society in which the struggle 
is for all. This is not a transformation from which I exclude my 
enemy. Rather, I include him, because his enmity is based on the 
fratricidal society that we wish to change so that the Kingdom 
of God can be established. 
<H5>  9. Farewell </H5>
  The Holy Trinity is the reason for our existence. Conceived 
from eternity as images of the Word, we became part of history 
as followers of Jesus Christ to be faithful images of him. Our 
vocation is to build in this world a model of society that is a 
reflection of the Trinity's Life. 
  Helping the Church of Jesus Christ to become a sacrament of 
this New Creation will bespeak our hope. 
  Unjust inequality runs counter to the plan of God, who makes 
us his tools so that we can live the "year of grace of the 
Lord," the permanent Christian jubilee in which wrongs are 
forgiven and equality established; the hills laid low and the 
valleys filled in to prepare a way for the Lord (Matthew 3:3; 
Luke 3:4-6). 
  No person of the Trinity is inferior to another, nor are 
there any rivalries; no divine person possesses something that 
another lacks. To strive for a social system whose workings and 
institutions abolish plunder and have the sharing of goods as an 
end, so that there are no longer any have-nots, will lead to 
irreversible accomplishments in history. 
  We entrust our path to the Virgin of Guadalupe, who chose to 
embrace our mestizo identity in her cape and, through the 
message that she bequeathed to us through Blessed Juan Diego, to 
give us the assurance that our sufferings would be allayed. May 
she guide us with her benevolent hand. 
  San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas 6 August 1993 Feast of 
the Transfiguration of the Lord 
  Msgr. Samuel Ruiz Garcia Bishop of San Cristobal de las 
Casas 

