BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Sa'ib 'Urayqat, head of the </F>
Palestinian elections committee, by Qol Yisra'el correspondent 
Sa'id Mu'addi, place and date not given; from the "With the 
Events" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Mu'addi] Dr. Sa'ib 'Urayqat, head of the 
Palestinian delegation to the Washington talks and head of the 
Elections and Local Government Committee, good evening. 
  ['Urayqat] Good evening. 
  [Mu'addi] Dr. Sa'ib, preparations and arrangements are under 
way for the coming elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, 
including the appointment of an elections committee. 
  ['Urayqat] In fact, the decision to hold elections was made 
on 20 November. This decision was the first presidential decree 
signed by President Yasir 'Arafat in the wake of the Oslo 
agreement. 'Arafat signed a second presidential decree 
appointing members in the committee. This committee comprises 
figures in the legal, administrative, city organizations, and 
statistical fields. It includes brothers such as lawyer Fu'ad 
Shihadah, 'Ali Safarini, Khalid al-Qidrah, Tawfiq Abu-Ghazal, 
Faraj al-Sarraf, Dr. Hasan Abu-Libdah, Dr. Muhammad Ishtayyah, 
Dr. Rami 'Abd-al-Hadi, Dr. Husayn al-A'raj, Zahirah Kamal, and 
Engineer Nadir al-Saqqa. 
  This committee was entrusted with preparing for domestic and 
general elections, with general elections meaning [self-rule] 
council according to the agreement. The committee is now 
working to lay the pillars of the basic elections law for the 
council, and also the basic Palestinian law for elections on the 
level of municipalities and village councils, which we call 
local government. God willing, in the next three days, and after 
we have completed both the studies and a total of 17 projects 
with the EEC, the basic contract will be signed between this 
committee and the EEC. 
  The committee's work also includes much training. We will 
send 30 persons to train in Germany. These people will return 
and train cadres here. According to our information, donations 
for training purposes will be given by other states such as 
Britain, Sweden, and Norway. I can say that because of the work 
of the past four months, both elections and democracy in the 
Palestinian community are now irreversible, and matters are 
proceeding persistently. God willing, we will manage to hold 
the elections as soon as possible. 
  [Mu'addi] Dr. Sa'ib, what are the bases and nature of the 
elections that will be held? When do you expect the coming 
elections will be held? 
  ['Urayqat] As I said, elections will be held on the national 
level, that is, general political elections designed to elect 
the Palestinian Council. This is in addition to the elections 
on the domestic level for municipalities and village councils. 
As you know, there are 481 residential gatherings in the 
occupied territories, including only 29 municipalities, 82 
village councils, and 23 camps. This leaves 347 residential 
gatherings without any bases for administration; in other words, 
they are run by what we call village heads. The committee is 
now in the process of returning the structural organization of 
the occupied territories in terms of the number of districts and 
governorates as well as upgrading a large number of villages to 
the level of municipalities and laying a basic Palestinian law 
for the local government elections. Meanwhile, we have 
finalized the options for the elections system, whether 
elections would be proportional or according to the majority or 
a mixed model in addition to dividing the constituencies. We 
will present this to the leadership in the next few days, so it 
can choose the elections system. Afterward, the legal team in 
this group will begin to put the complete touches on the 
elections system on the general national level. As we suggested 
in our negotiations in Washington, there will be an 
international supervising committee under UN auspices composed 
of the two cosponsors, the United States and Russia, the EC 
countries, the Scandinavian countries, Japan, Canada, Jordan, 
and Egypt. We seek to hold honest, free, and general elections. 
I believe that in view of the stalled negotiations, the date of 
13 July, as stipulated in the agreement, cannot, from the 
technical and readiness viewpoints, be honored. Thus, we have 
worked out a new timetable for elections on 15 October. 
  [Mu'addi] Dr. Sa'ib 'Urayqat, thank you very much. 
  ['Urayqat] You are welcome. 

