BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup": "Jiangsu State Enterprises Streamline Operation </F>
Mechanism"] 
  [Text] Nanjing, April 21 (XINHUA) -- The output of major 
state enterprises in east China's Jiangsu Province in the 
January-March period surpassed the province's average for the 
first time. 
  "This indicates that the endeavors of the key state 
enterprises in shifting their operational mechanism has paid 
off," a local economist said. 
  According to the latest statistics, these enterprises 
generated a gross output value topping 50 billion yuan in the 
first quarter of this year, an increase of 25.4 percent over and 
one percent higher than the province's average. 
  Jiangsu is one of China's most economically-developed 
provinces, and its industrial increase value accounted for 9.66 
percent of the country's total last year, ranking first among 
all the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities on the 
mainland. 
  Jiangsu has 1,652 key industrial enterprises. A total of 
1,021 are state-owned and the rest are collective ones. 
  Yang Xiaotang, deputy governor of the province, said, "the 
provincial government has adopted a package of policies to help 
enterprises to shift their operational mechanism over the past 
few years in a bid to help them to develop healthily and in line 
with the market economy. 
  "To reform public ownership so as to form an economy with 
public ownership in the main coexisting with other economic 
factors is a key way to help a state enterprise to shift its 
operational mechanism," he added. 
  He said he was convinced that the reform will surely 
"enliven 
enterprises." 
  One example is the Wuxi Weifu Company, which, after 
succeeding in trying out a share-holding system, is undertaking 
whole-staff contracts for production while streamlining its 
administrative organizations and personnel. 
  An official of the company said, "after the employees become 
share-holders of the company they care more for enterprise 
management and pay more attention to improving the products to 
suit the market needs." 
  As a result, the company's sales income in the first two 
months rose by 68.4 percent over the same period of last year. 
  A survey of 589 key enterprises by the end of last year 
showed that most of these enterprises were profitable. 
  According to the deputy governor, to encourage state 
enterprises to co-operate with foreign companies in importing 
advanced technology and management expertise is another shortcut 
to help enterprises to shift their operational mechanism. 
  At present, about 70 percent of the key state enterprises in 
Suzhou, Wuxi and Changzhou Prefectures, where the economy is 
developing more rapidly than in other places, have co-operated 
with foreign business people to modernize themselves. 
  Through foreign co-operation the Wuxi Steel Plant has 
replaced its out-of-date equipment with modern facilities. It 
has formed an annual production capacity of 300,000 tons of 
alloy steel, special steel tubes and seamless steel tubes. 
  One of China's old industrial bases, Jiangsu has mainly 
medium- sized and small industrial enterprises. 
  To better compete in the international market, the 
provincial 
government encourages the formation of enterprise groups. 
  Through the contract system, the Xuzhou Engineering Group 
has 
admitted the Anhui Bengbu Crane Plant and the Shanghai Universal 
Motor Vehicle Fittings Plant as its members. It also has 
annexed the Bengbu Diesel Engine Plant. 
  An official of the group predicted that the group's sales 
will reach three billion yuan and exports will be at least 50 
million U.S. dollars-worth in the first two years, making it 
the country's largest engineering machinery producer. 
  Although Jiangsu has made progress in helping enterprises to 
shift their operational mechanism, the deputy governor said, it 
still has a long way to go. The provincial government has vowed 
to further tap the potential of enterprises in line with the 
needs of the market economy. 

