Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Network Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] In Malawi, the multiparty elections, of course, are 
taking place in May, in about three months' time, but opposition 
parties are still unhappy. Their latest concerns are about the 
activities of the Young Pioneers, the 4,000 strong paramilitary 
youth wing of the Malawi Congress Party. These Young Pioneers 
used to terrorize people who did not support President Banda. 
Two months ago, the Army started an operation to dissolve the 
Young Pioneers, one way of ensuring, of course, that the 
elections will be fair. Now they have captured many of their 
weapons, but cannot account for a good number of the Young 
Pioneers. Well, the opposition isn't impressed. It believes 
many Young Pioneers fled to Mozambique and will return soon in 
secret to disrupt the election. On the line to Malawi, Fergus 
Nicoll with opposition leader Mr. Bakili Muluzi of the United 
Democratic Front. How many Young Pioneers are still in 
Mozambique? 
  [Begin recording] [Muluzi] Well, according to the 
information 
we have, people have talked about over 1,000 MYP [Malawi Young 
Pioneers] who actually crossed over to Mozambique, but then the 
Malawi Government came up and said no, they are not 1,000, they 
are 350, 250. Even if there were 50 or there were 20 MYP's 
armed in Mozambique, still, that to us it is of great concern. 
Why should they run away with weapons to Mozambique, I mean 
what for? The question of actually disarming them was to try 
and bring stability in Malawi because we think that these 
people, that is the MYP, have been a source of intimidation, a 
source of causing problems to our security in this country. 
  [Nicoll] While on the run up, of course, to elections 
scheduled for May, are you concerned at this time that any more 
activity, let's say by the Young Pioneers, might jeopardize 
those elections? 
  [Muluzi] We in the opposition are definitely saying that we 
would like to have a peaceful election. I think Malawi needs 
that. We all definitely want to do that, but we are saying that 
if the MYP's are left armed as they are, armed as they are in 
Mozambique or wherever they may be, even in the country, that is 
definitely going to cause a lot of concern to us, because we 
think that they will be definitely prone for a lot of 
intimidation to our people. They will do anything to actually 
cause confusion during the election, which we don't want to 
happen, and we would want therefore that the elections to be as 
peaceful as possible. 
  [Nicoll] So, do you think that it is time for the Army to 
step in again, or is there an alternative tactic that you would 
like to see the government use? 
  [Muluzi] What we are saying is that, naturally, the rule of 
the disarming of the MYP is in the hands of the police and the 
Malawi Army. What we are saying is that we want the Army to 
continue to be looking around for those people who are holding 
any weapons. There are now negotiations between Malawi 
Government and Mozambican Government to the effect that those 
people who are in Mozambique should return to Malawi before the 
elections, and we want that happen as soon as possible so that 
the run up to the elections should be peaceful. 
  [Nicoll] People who have visited Malawi in the last few 
years 
have been commenting that the atmosphere of the general sense of 
freedom of expression and freedom of opinion has really been 
very widespread now and people are really enjoying that. Do you 
see any threats to that in the current situation over the months 
ahead? 
  [Muluzi] Oh yes, generally things have changed in Malawi in 
terms of people expressing themselves freely, but we in the 
opposition feel that this kind of change can be temporarily 
until the general election actually takes place on 17 May. We 
feel that if government does nothing in trying to disarm the 
Malawi Young Pioneers, they can use that as intimidation to our 
people, and therefore the question of people expressing 
themselves freely and things of that type would seem a temporary 
kind of thing, which we don't want to happen, because we think 
that the transition and also what has happened during the 
referendum, and also after the referendum should continue, 
should be irreversible. The change must be irreversible, you 
know, in order for the people to enjoy the freedom that is there 
now. [end recording] 

