BFN 

  [Text] Today's main event in the world is the International 
Day of Freedom of the Press. The event is important given the 
number of measures, some with tragic consequences, facing 
journalists throughout the world. 
  The French watchdog group Reporters Sans Frontieres has 
announced that more than 60 journalists have been killed 
throughout the world since the New Year. The American Freedom 
House Society has asserted that, despite the gains made by 
journalists throughout the world, hurdles facing freedom of the 
press continue to exist in more than 100 countries. 
  In Algeria, in addition to the aforementioned pressures, 
journalists have been facing the risk of assassination; 14 of 
our colleagues have been victims of the violence in our country. 
  On this occasion Mr. Mohamed Benamar Zerhouni, minister of 
communications, today made the following statement to the 
national radio: 
  [Begin Zerhouni recording] I cannot, on this symbolic 
occasion, but offer my prayers to all those who have been slain 
as they were carrying out their noble mission. Indeed, they 
were some of the best people who gave their life trying to do 
their job the best possible. 
  I would like also to salute and pay respect to their 
colleagues, be it journalists or other workers in the 
communication sector, and in particular those who have been 
tirelessly defending the profession of journalism and its 
freedom despite their personal suffering and other obstacles. 
Given all this, I cannot but stand by their side to condemn 
everything that might harm the freedom of expression and 
personal sacrosanct rights. [end recording] 
  The minister took this opportunity to invite all journalists 
to organize themselves through their own trade unions: 
  [Begin Zerhouni recording] I would like to take this 
opportunity to call upon all publishers of newspapers and other 
publications, as well as all members of the two wings of the 
national press, to join in trade unions where they will be 
bonded by their common interest. Once such unions are set up, 
people who will truly represent them in their open, continuous, 
and frank dialogue with public authorities will emerge. [end 
recording] 

