Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Carol Pui-yee Lai] </F>
  [Text] Beijing will hear its first case of a computer 
software copyright infringement filed by a Hong Kong company. 
  The Hong Kong Broad Mind Computer Company (BMC) has filed a 
suit against Beijing Hai Wei Electronic Engineering Company and 
Beijing Hai Wei Computer Technology Company for pirating 
firmware of their CT110 Chinese and English terminal. 
  The hearing, scheduled to be held in Beijing's intellectual 
property court on Friday, will be the first case of this kind 
involving Hong Kong businessmen since China joined the Berne 
Convention. Beijing acceded to the Berne Convention for the 
Protection of Literary and Artistic Work and the Universal 
Copyright Convention in September 1992. 
  Sunny WS Cheung, BMC's managing director, said they 
discovered pirated versions of CT-110 when their mainland sales 
of CT-110 dropped from 5,000 in 1988 to only several hundred in 
recent years. 
  They could not take action in 1989 because there was no 
relevant legislation to protect against computer software 
piracy. But in October 1991, Beijing started to implement a 
regulation to protect computer software copyright. BMC then 
registered in Beijing their CT 110B software, which was an 
upgraded version of the original CT-110. Yang Shaokun, managing 
director of the Hai Wei company, said he was confident the 
judiciary would be impartial. 
  He said BMC knew Hai Wei produced CT-110 as early as 1989 
and 
they did not take action at that time. The usual statute of 
limitations for filing a civil law suit in China is two years. 
  While BMC said they could provide evidence to prove they 
were 
the original owner of CT110, Cheung said he was worried Beijing 
would intervene administratively in the case. The U.S.-based 
Business Software Alliance last week named China as one of the 
world's main offenders against intellectual property rights. 
  And the vice-chairman of the US Chamber of Commerce, Steven 
Senderling, last week said China's growing counterfeiting 
problem could jeopardise its attempt to enter the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and he blamed a lack of 
enforcement. 

