BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by reporter Lin Ying (2651 7751): "China </F>
Uses Foreign Funds To Quicken Development of Power Industry"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong, 29 Apr (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE)--With the 
high-speed development of the economy, the supply of energy in 
mainland China has become more and more strained. In 
particular, the supply of electric power is 20 percent short of 
demand. If the national economy continues to grow at an annual 
rate of 8 to 9 percent, the country will need 300 million kw of 
power generating facilities by the end of this century. To 
basically meet the need, beginning this year, new generating 
capacity of 15 million kw will have to be added each year. 
Therefore, China is orienting a policy of inviting foreign 
investment in the energy industry and hopes that $30 billion to 
$40 billion of foreign funds will be invested in the energy 
industry in order to make up for the power shortage. 
  In fact, the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant, which was built a 
number of years ago, served as a trial for introducing foreign 
funds and technology. Hong Kong's China Light and Power and 
Electricite de France were invited to participate in the 
construction of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant in Guangdong. 
The pressurized water reactor was supplied by a French company. 
After that, Shandong also cooperated with the French power 
company by jointly investing billions of U.S. dollars to build a 
number of thermal power plants with a generating capacity of 22 
million kw. At the same time, Electricite de France will help 
Shandong modernize its existing power plants and increase 
generating capacity by 36 million kw. 
  Encouraged by China's favorable policies, some American 
companies have also invested in China's power industry in recent 
years. For example, Saide [sai de 6357 1795] Electric Company 
built the largest power plant in Hainan Province in Sanya City. 
Investment in the first phase of the project amounted to $1 
billion, and the generating capacity will reach 1.2 million kw. 
Gross investment in the three phases of the project will reach 
$4 billion, and the total generating capacity will reach 4.8 
million kw. Another American company, Kangdena [kang de na 1660 
1795], cooperated with Guangdong Environmental Engineering 
Company to invest $50 million in Nanao County to build a 
wind-driven power plant, where generating capacity will reach 
200,000 kw. 
  Before and after this, Siemens of Germany cooperated with 
the 
mainland's Dongfang Electrical Machinery to invest $100 million 
in building a 600,000-kw turbine generator assembly plant to 
meet the need for generating equipment in various large power 
plants. In addition, Babcock of Germany provided two 300,000-kw 
generator sets to Tianjin's Yangliuqing Power Plant, and the 
total value of the equipment was $140 million. 
  Hong Kong's Hopewell Company recently invested in two 
thermal 
power plants in Guangdong. Another large Hong Kong corporation, 
Cheung Kong Enterprises, has also invested $257 million to build 
a 570,000-kw power plant in Guangdong's Nanhai City. Together 
with Hutchison Whampoa, Cheung Kong Enterprises also invested 
$500 million to build the Zhuhai Power Plant in Guangdong. The 
first phase of the project will install four 660,000-kw 
generator sets. At the same time, Cheung Kong Enterprises 
invested $70 million to build a 100,000-kw thermal power plant 
in Tianjin, Hopewell invested $1 billion to build two 600,000 
generator sets in Tianjin's Beitang. In addition, a number of 
Hong Kong companies formed an investment consortium to build a 
large power plant in Fujian's Meizhou Bay. Investment in the 
first and second phase of the project will reach $400 million 
for the installment of 1.6 million-kw generating equipment. 
Hong Kong's Pokai Group invested $50 million to build a 
100,000-kw thermal power plant in Longyan in Western Fujian. 
Hong Kong's Onyin Enterprising invested $53 million to build a 
100,000-kw power plant in Zunhua City in Hebei Province. 
  It is learned that some Hong Kong companies, such as Asian 
Power, China Light and Power, New World Development, and Wingsan 
have recently also contacted relevant departments on the 
mainland to launch investments projects in the power industry. 
At the same time, ABB of Europe, General Electric of the United 
States, Nishiya, Hitachi and Toshiba of Japan, (Aoyi amd Fuyite) 
[3421 0181 0126 0181 3676] of Germany, and General Electric of 
Canada have also successively sought cooperation opportunities 
with China in developing the power industry. 
  In addition, Fujian, Jiangsu, Liaoning, and Hainan 
Provinces, 
which are planning to construct nuclear power plants, are trying 
to invite foreign investment and introduce foreign technological 
cooperation in developing the nuclear power industry. 

