CSO 

<F P=106> ["From the report of N. Akbarov, chief of the Kazan Internal </F>
Affairs Directorate": "Level of Crime Decreasing"] 
  [Text] Over the period that has transpired since adoption 
of the "Package of Urgent Measures To Fight Crime," the 
material-technical base of internal affairs organs has been 
significantly enhanced and the authorized strength of 
territorial militia organs has been increased, that of the key 
services first and foremost--criminal investigations, inquests, 
patrol and sentry operations. 
  In this regard, a great volume of work has been accomplished 
in bringing personnel levels up to strength. Some 2,789 
individuals entered service in the militia. The structure of 
rayon subdivisions was reorganized. Rayon internal affairs 
departments acquired the status of directorates. Twelve 
territorial divisions were converted into militia departments 
with full assortment of services enabling the militia to 
operationally respond to crimes committed in their zone of 
activity and react to reports of incidents. 
  Efforts continue with regard to introduction of the "Patrol" 
security alarm system, the first unit of which is scheduled for 
interdepartmental testing in July of this year. Work has begun 
on the establishment of an automated data base for address and 
other information pertaining to city residents. This information 
is being entered for use at the passport and visa services of 
the Kirovskiy, Leninskiy, and Moskovskiy Rayon Internal Affairs 
Directorates. 
  The strength of detachments patrolling the streets and 
public 
facilities has been increased severalfold during daylight and 
nighttime hours. 
  Integrated drills exercising preventive measures and special 
exercises are conducted constantly, involving the participation 
of all personnel. 
  The number of crimes related to motor vehicle transport has 
decreased to less than half its prior level. This is mainly the 
result of the operation of inspection stations, which have the 
right to inspect motor vehicles as well as the individuals 
inside them. 
  Some 840 crimes in the economic sphere have been exposed by 
criminal-militia units over the first four months. Greater 
incidence--by 21 percent--of thefts involving large and 
especially large amounts were uncovered. 
  Serious violations have been uncovered in the sphere of 
credit and monetary relations. Criminals use gaps in 
legislation, defects in the organization of banking procedure, 
and problems existing with respect to reciprocal accounting, to 
effect maximum advantage for themselves. As a result, 
large-scale fraud has taken place through the use of counterfeit 
bank remittances, the illegal receipt and use of preferential 
credits, noncompensated transfer of state monetary assets to 
commercial structures in accordance with a variety of fictitious 
contracts, and other mercenary abuses. 
  Five criminal cases are presently under investigation with 
respect to incidents involving the use of counterfeit 
remittances through which criminal groups attempted to steal 
over R2.5 billion. 
  Preliminary investigation is complete with respect to a 
number of former directors of the Tatoptprodtorg association, 
who abused their position by funneling monetary assets amounting 
to multi-millions to commercial structures managed by their 
close friends or relatives. 
  Of special concern is the matter of preventing and 
curtailing 
incidents of money counterfeiting. Counterfeit bills totalling 
R4,240,000 were removed from circulation. Some 129 incidents of 
sale of counterfeit bank notes were registered. A group of 
counterfeiters actively engaged in sales of counterfeit R10,000 
bills was arrested in April. The group included people from the 
Caucasus and previously convicted members of criminal groups. 
  Some 3,078 criminal cases were brought before the city 
courts--almost 43 percent more than last year. This is due 
primarily to the significantly greater workload being placed on 
militia employees in criminal investigations, inquests, 
inquiries, and other key areas. 
  Efforts to solve crimes committed during past years have not 
been terminated. A case involving the murder of a guard at the 
Spetsmontazh enterprise, on Gorkiy Highway, was solved in March, 
one year later. An individual by the name of Zinin was convicted 
of the murder. Zinin had been previously convicted on a number 
of occasions. In addition to murder, he was among a criminal 
group of five individuals (all arrested) who carried out two 
assaults against citizens in November of last year resulting in 
the death of the victims. 
  In the summer of 1993, the buried and dismembered body of a 
Mr. Gubaydullin was discovered in the garden of a house on 
Ashkhabadskaya Street. The case had been under investigation 
since August of 1992. A Mr. Yermakov was convicted of this 
crime. He had been previously convicted and resided not far from 
the place where the body was discovered. 
  A total of 153 crimes committed during previous years were 
solved over the past four months. 
  Our current operational data indicate that 21 criminal 
groups 
are now operating in the city, involving the participation of 
over 2,000 people. We assess the results of operations against 
these groups as inadequate, although just this year criminal 
charges were filed against 108 active group members. 
  Proper criticism has been directed against us with respect 
to 
a lack of professionalism and low standards exhibited by certain 
militia personnel in their work. The problem here lies primarily 
in the fact that just in the period since January 1993 through 
the present day, about 3,000 individuals have been admitted to 
the force. As a rule, these are people without legal education, 
who do not know the ins and outs of militia work. It is our 
mission to teach them how to function. 
  Disciplinary action--up to and including discharge--is being 
taken against those employees who do not desire to honestly 
carry out their responsibilities. Over the first four months of 
this year, 293 personnel received punishment by order of their 
superiors, court-of-honor deliberations were conducted for 48 
individuals, and 29 persons were discharged from the internal 
affairs organs for deeds unworthy of the calling of militiaman. 
  The criticism directed towards us by deputies in session 
during October of last year--that the militia was sometimes 
incompetent in the operational application of its rights 
afforded by the Law on Emergency Measures in the Fight Against 
Crime--is entirely justified. Incidents took place in which 
articles of this law were incorrectly interpreted, violations 
were committed with respect to drawing up and registering the 
documents stipulated by law, and close relatives of detained 
individuals were not notified in timely fashion. All this was 
noted in the materials of inspections conducted by the city 
procuracy and Tatarstan Republic Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
Over the period during which this law has been in force, a total 
of 34 such inspections took place: 22 by the procuracy, four by 
the Tatarstan Ministry of Internal Affairs, and eight by the 
city Internal Affairs Directorate. 
  Over the four months of this year, for all the individuals 
detained in accordance with Article 2 of the law--850 people in 
all--real suspicion is in evidence as to their participation in 
the commission of grave crimes. 
  Criminal charges have been filed against 40 percent of this 
number, including 199 placed under preventive arrest and 125 
released after signing a document of intent not to leave. 
  Naturally the question arises: Why were the rest detained? I 
will explain. During the initial stage of investigation of a 
crime for which the identity of the perpetrators is not clear, 
we only determine the circle of individuals privy to the crime. 
Therefore, the detention of citizens under suspicion and 
application of the detention period with respect to them 
according to Article 2 of the law does not constitute 
"bloodthirstiness" or a striving on the part of the militia "to 
revel in its power," but simply reflects hard work involved in 
solving the crime, a need dictated by the situation. 
  Nonetheless, even in view of the overall reduction in level 
of crime in the city, the situation continues to be extremely 
adverse. Crimes are acquiring sophisticated, camouflaged forms. 
A significant portion of crimes are being committed violently, 
with special cynicism and brutality. More and more frequently we 
have occasion to hear about murders that have been contracted. 
Illegal and fraudulent transactions involving apartments are 
becoming more frequent. Criminals have at their disposal large 
quantities of firearms. 
  Therefore, despite the fact that our militia personnel have 
been required for a year now to function at augmented levels and 
intensified modes of operation, I appeal to you on behalf of the 
entire militia collective to present an appropriate proposal to 
the Tatarstan Republic Supreme Soviet for extending the term of 
effectiveness of the Law on Emergency Measures in the Fight 
Against Crime, and I hope you will support us in this regard. 
  We can fight crime--and not simply resist it--only if we 
have 
the appropriate weapons at our disposal: all-encompassing 
legislation, provision with technical equipment, financial 
independence, and the support of society. Today, in the absence 
of this, we must at least have the right, afforded by law of the 
Republic of Tatarstan, to apply emergency measures. I think you 
will agree with me. 

