Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski: </F>
"Poland and the North Atlantic Alliance"] 
  [Text] A sensible foreign policy should always take two 
viewpoints into consideration: one's own and that of the 
partner. For Poland, participation in NATO is the synonym for 
national security. For the signatories of the North Atlantic 
Alliance there arises the question of whether the gradual 
expansion of NATO by the Central European states is in their 
interest and, if so, whether Poland -- alone or in the Visegrad 
group -- should initiate this process. There is no doubt that 
these two viewpoints are not identical. However, they can prove 
to be convergent, if we weigh the motives and needs, the 
benefits, and the potential risks for all parties involved, 
soberly and without prejudice. 
  Unfortunately any important foreign policy problem is 
shrouded in myth, which makes it more difficult to solve. In 
our case, too, there is often a strange MYTHOLOGY OF FEAR 
[capitals as published] that replaces realistic assessments and 
courageous visions. 
  Myth number one: In NATO it is feared that by expanding to 
the uncertain zone of Central and Eastern Europe, the alliance 
might be dragged into local conflicts, for the settlement of 
which it is prepared neither politically, nor militarily, nor 
psychologically. After all, the alliance was formed to defend 
the West against aggression from the outside and not to get 
involved in situations that do not directly threaten its 
members' security. 
  Such fears seem to be nourished by events in the former 
Yugoslavia. However, even if we bow in pain to the suffering of 
these people and entire ethnic groups, we must soberly note that 
the situation in the former Yugoslavia has nothing in common 
with the situation in Central and Eastern Europe. One can 
assume with certainty that potential misunderstandings between 
individual nationalities in this area do not harbor the danger 
of bloody conflicts. 
  This applies all the more to Poland, which is ethnically 
almost homogeneous and has managed in the course of the past few 
years to establish friendly, goodneighborly relations with all 
neighbors and to settle all border and nationality issues by 
treaties. 
  Myth number two: Russia is afraid of NATO. Certainly, one 
should not underestimate the remnants of old enemy images -- in 
particular in the Army. Neither the solemn statement by the 
North Atlantic Cooperation Council in 1990-91 nor the tell-tale 
changes in the doctrine and the organization of the NATO forces 
have been able to completely abolish this enemy image. However, 
this myth takes into consideration neither the changes that have 
already occurred nor the dynamism of the further development of 
Russia's relations both with NATO and its individual member 
states. The Russian statements that relations between NATO and 
Russia should be better than NATO's relations with the states in 
Central and Eastern Europe demonstrate how unfounded this myth 
is. 
  Instead of NATO, Russia points other states to the CSCE. We 
understand the efforts to strengthen the CSCE and, on principle, 
we share them. However, we are of the opinion that the CSCE 
cannot replace NATO as a collective self-defense system in the 
foreseeable future. On the other hand, it can and should play a 
more important and more effective role. Therefore, together 
with Germany, Russia, and other states, we are in favor of 
considerably expanding the powers of the CSCE, in particular in 
the field of conflict prevention as well as arms limitation and 
control. 
  Myth number three: Poland is afraid of Russia and, 
therefore, wants to isolate it from Europe with a "cordon 
sanitaire." This myth is particularly absurd. It is simply not 
possible to isolate Russia and, if it were possible, it would be 
a mistake. In Poland such action would be prevented by 
political and economic aspects as well as by strong cultural and 
ethnic ties. Poland is against Russia's isolation. To put it 
even more clearly: In our view, no European security system 
will work without the participation of a democratic and strong 
Russia -- neither in the short term nor in the long run. A 
democratic and strong Russia will be the strongest guarantee for 
peace and stability in Europe. 
  Thus, we are not afraid of Russia but only of objective 
situations that might provoke it to actions dangerous to Poland. 
Such a case is the current security vacuum in Central Europe. 
"Nature abhors a vacuum," the Romans noted. In Poland's case it 
is particularly artificial and provoking, because it is located 
between two giants -- Germany and Russia. The consolidation of 
this vacuum would provoke these two states into considering 
Poland either as a buffer state in the classical sense of the 
19th century or as an area, where the respective spheres of 
influence clash. One does not need any proof that both cases 
would be detrimental not only to Poland's interests but also to 
Europe's stability. The common denominator of these three myths 
is easy to see. The concern and the fears do not develop from 
the friend-foe pattern but from the structural incompleteness of 
the European security system. Therefore, the construction of 
its new architecture is very important. 
  This term is, perhaps, not quite adequate as regards the 
current and future situation, because it lacks dynamism. At the 
moment, it is not so much the creation of new elements that is 
important but active cooperation of the already existing ones 
and their adjustment to the new situation. The European 
security architecture of the near future will not be of the 
classical style but rather of the baroque, with its flowing and 
interlaced elements. 
  At all levels of this construction Polish diplomacy has 
made an essential contribution and intends to continue doing so. 
We have settled the bilateral security issue with all the old 
and new neighbors. At the supraregional level Poland is trying 
to support initiatives such as the Visegrad group, the Central 
European Initiative, or the institutions of the Baltic Sea 
littoral states, which do not deal directly with political 
security aspects but strengthen the climate of cooperation and 
contribute to stability in Europe. At the pan-European level 
Poland has played an active role in arms limitation negotiations 
as well as confidence and security-building measures. 
  We watch the activation of the Western European Union [WEU] 
with great attention. We do not see the WEU as an alternative 
but as a supplement to NATO and consider it to be NATO's 
increasingly strong European pillar. The WEU's close relation 
to the process of European integration makes it the natural 
forum of cooperation between those states, which have -- like 
Poland -- already linked their future with this integration. 
  At the global level we recognize the need to strengthen the 
powers and functions of the UN Security Council in safeguarding 
and reestablishing peace. 
  Thus, we are convinced that European security must be 
established at different levels in different forms. I can 
describe our altitude by paraphrasing the proverb that 
"everything is politics, but politics is not everything." The 
same goes for the question of the North Atlantic Alliance: 
"Everything is linked with NATO, but NATO alone is not 
everything for Europe's security." 
  At the same time, we are firmly convinced that NATO remains 
irreplaceable for the foreseeable future. First, as an anchor 
safeguarding the United States of Europe, one that we consider 
absolutely indispensable as a guarantor of peace on the 
continent and Poland's security. Second, as a mechanism that 
ensures the harmless self-realization of German power in harmony 
with the interests of other European peoples. Third, as the 
only fully organized, experienced, and powerful military 
organization that would be able to stand up to a potential 
aggressor. Fourth, as an alliance of peoples who represent 
common values rooted in Greek culture, Roman law, and Christian 
religion. 
  I have already mentioned that Poland does not mean any 
threat 
to NATO in the sense of a "Balkanization." Even more: As a 
member of NATO, Poland would not only not be a burden but would 
even be a trump card. The increasingly consolidated political 
stability, the continuity of the economic reforms, the visible 
signs of an economic upswing, the strengthening of civilian 
control over the military -- all this makes Poland an 
increasingly essential element of European order and democracy 
in this part of the continent -- and this in its most sensitive 
geostrategic area, in the narrowing between the Baltic Sea and 
the Carpathians. 
  Above all, however, accepting Poland into NATO would be a 
first step toward ending the division of Europe into different 
security areas and levels. This would be the beginning of an 
evolution of the European security system toward indivisibility, 
universality, and mutuality. 
  A process aimed at a specific goal: Apart from a handful of 
Polish politicians who demanded the immediate acceptance of 
Poland into NATO in spring 1992, all serious political parties 
and the overwhelming majority of our people agree that Poland's 
membership in NATO will be preceded by a complicated process. 
Both in Poland and abroad, a number of ideas for step-by-step 
solutions and partial approaches have emerged. We brush none of 
them aside right from the beginning. We will insist on only one 
criterion: The purpose and goal of these projects must be 
Poland's approach to full membership in NATO -- and not putting 
it off, feeding it with hopes, or pushing it on the sidetrack of 
half-way solutions. 
  This also applies to the particularly topical initiative of 
the "partnership for peace" that U.S. President Clinton has 
proposed. We see it as an important initiative for a Europe 
that is not divided into blocs or security spheres and that 
would be characterized by democratic values, rule-of-law 
principles, free market economy, and the openness of European 
society toward the extra-European world. This shows that the 
initiative of the "partnership for peace" should extend to all 
countries that fulfill these conditions. It should, however, 
also clearly communicate (to the interested states) the final 
goal -- namely membership in the Atlantic Alliance for those who 
fulfill the specific criteria. The lack of such a prospect 
would reduce the support of the parliaments and the public for 
the idea of a "partnership for peace" in the affected countries 
and also the dynamism of the initiative. There would be the 
impression that the West wanted to keep these countries in a 
"gray zone of insecurity" forever. This would give rise to a 
trend toward nationalist tendencies in these countries, provoke 
a negative attitude toward international cooperation, and make 
them withdraw like a snail into their own shell. At the same 
time, imperialist desires might again emerge in neighboring 
states. 
  The framework agreement on the partnership should not be 
general. On the contrary, it should set down as precisely as 
possible the criteria and conditions for participating in the 
"partnership for peace," including: Transparency of the 
military budgets, civilian supervision of the armed forces, 
non-deployment of armed forces on foreign territory without 
approval by the affected states, observing all obligations in 
the field of disarmament, arms control, as well as security and 
confidence-building measures. 
  The "partnership for peace" should also further develop the 
contents of Article 4 of the Washington Agreement, by noting, 
for instance, that the consultations envisaged there in the case 
of a threat to the inviolability of the territory, the political 
independence, or the security of one or several partners, can 
also lead to common action with the goal of safeguarding or 
reestablishing peace. 
  In addition, bilateral agreements on specific fields and 
forms of cooperation with NATO should make it possible to take 
into consideration the specific geographical location, the 
interests, needs, and security problems of the individual 
countries as well as their progress in the process of 
democratization. This would result in a positive 
diversification of forms and scope of cooperation. 
  I hope that the NATO summit will take our proposals into 
consideration and publicly state its conviction that the 
security of Poland and the other Central European countries is 
part of NATO's basic interests -- because their security is 
closely linked with NATO's own security. 

