BFN 

  [Text] At the group discussion meeting of the National 
People's Congress Session held on 12 March, Gu Jinchi, secretary 
of the Liaoning Provincial CPC Committee, stressed that at the 
time of speeding up the setup of the market economic system, we 
should pay attention to the setup of the socialist legal system 
and use laws to safeguard and guide the setup of the socialist 
market economic system. 
  Gu Jinchi said: Many new reform policies will be worked out 
this year. So, the year 1994 is a key year to accelerate the 
development of the market economy. Due to the influence of the 
centralized planned economic system, Liaoning's ideology, 
managerial system, regulations, and rules have some factors 
unsuitable to the requirements of the socialist market economic 
system. Therefore, we should exert great efforts to renew our 
ideas; speed up the setup of the market economic system; and pay 
particular attention to speeding up the setup of the markets for 
means of production, the markets for production factors, and 
monetary markets. 
  Gu Jinchi said: The market economy is the legalized economy. 
In the course of replacing the high-degree planned economy by 
the market economy, the province should combine the policy 
decisions on reform with the policy decisions on legislation. 
This point is of extreme importance. Without a stronger sense 
of laws, it will be easy to create problems. Some people 
maintain that the market economy means to seek a chance to make 
money. This is wrong. In fact, it is more necessary for us to 
keep our words under the market economic conditions. We should 
use laws to guide and promote the setup of the market economic 
system. We should strengthen the setup of the legal system, set 
up and perfect a complete set of laws and regulations, handle 
well the relationship between the setup of markets and the setup 
of legal system, and make the setup of markets and that of legal 
system supplement each other. Only by so doing will we be able 
to straighten out the confused order cropping up in the course 
of developing the market economy and to set up a healthy and 
orderly market economic system. 
  Gu Jinchi stressed: Now, our province enters a key period of 
doing the second pioneering work. The setup of markets and that 
of legal system are of the same importance. So, we should 
organize the broad masses of cadres to conscientiously study 
various kinds of laws and regulations and strengthen the 
legislation of local laws. 
  He set forth three specific opinions: First, in line with 
the actual conditions of the province, we should vigorously 
conduct the propaganda and education on using laws to protect 
the setup of the market economic system, upgrade the cadres' 
awareness of laws, make the market economy operate itself within 
the framework of laws, and particularly educate the cadres to 
take the lead in enforcing laws and handle affairs according to 
law. Second, in line with the objective reality of the 
province, we should strengthen the legislation of local rules, 
formulate laws and regulations with Liaoning's special features, 
and embark on the orbit of legalizing the economic development. 
Third, we should use legal means to solve the hotly debated 
problems in society cropping up in the course of setting up the 
market economy, strictly deal blows to economic criminal 
activities, restrain the activities of abusing power for private 
gains and trading in power for money, and exert great efforts to 
consolidate social order. It is necessary to strengthen the 
construction of administrative and law enforcement contingents 
and to upgrade the level of administering the province and 
handling administrative affairs according to law. 

