Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Yelena Tregubova report under the "Party Activists" rubric: </F>
"Rutskoy `Presidential Party' Being Created? 
`Travkinites-Motorists' May Bury the Democratic Party of 
Russia"] 
  [Text] Valeriy Khomyakov, chairman of the board of the 
Democratic Party of Russia [DPR] (Travkin's party), who handed 
in his resignation the other day, has stated that one reason for 
such a step had been some sort of "economic" differences with 
Travkinites who have seats in the Duma. Asked for by regional 
party activists, Valeriy Khomyakov gave the names of Democratic 
Party of Russia men in the Duma who had voted for perks for 
deputies: Six members of the party, including Stanislav 
Govorukhin, voted for the provision of chauffeured cars for all 
deputies, something "even the Supreme Soviet did not venture to 
do." 
  According to his lights, during the party congress on 19 
February, Nikolay Travkin intends to alter the organization's 
structure and to distribute all key party positions among the 
"motorists" [avtolyubiteli] -- members of the parliament 
faction. Such shakeups at the party "top," Valeriy Khomyakov 
thinks, may result in that the relatively numerous regional 
structure of the Democratic Party of Russia would "crumble," and 
in such an event there is no knowing if the party would last 
until the next elections. 
  A certain part of the Democratic Party of Russia, in Mr. 
Khomyakov's words, is already turning to "Shakhray's party," 
another to "Gaydar's union." 
  As for Valeriy Khomyakov, he still ranks himself among 
Democratic Party of Russia members. He admitted, however, to 
already "having been offered to work together" with the "New 
Alliance" movement, now being created, which gambles on support 
from Aleksandr Rutskoy as future president. Nikolay Travkin's 
loyal comrade in arms, however, is deterred by the fact that, 
with the exception of Valeriy Zorkin, Aleksandr Tsipko, and Oleg 
Rumyantsev, "there are no outstanding leaders." Besides, 
Khomyakov, "an experienced party builder," is positive that "it 
would take several tens of billions of rubles just to get 
Rutskoy going," and the organizers have no other choice but to 
hope that "Aleksandr Tsipko of the Gorbachev Fund may not have 
joined the alliance for nothing, and that he has some commission 
from Mikhail Sergeyevich." 

