Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Timo Rautava: "Europe Has To Suffer More Damage </F>
From Drugs"] 
  [Excerpts] The problems are so deep-seated that a more 
permissive approach for drug-control policies is not 
anticipated. [passage omitted] 
  "Antidrug goals are so profoundly a part of UN principles 
that we will have to work at it for many years before the 
present drug control structures can be substantially changed," 
said Chief Inspector Tapani Sarvanti of the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Health, the head of the drug policy team. He has 
participated in the planning of drug control as Finland's 
representative on the Council of Europe, in the United Nations, 
and on the Nordic Council of Ministers. 
  They began to control drugs manufactured in the developing 
countries at the start of this century, and the general 
international agreement on them goes back to 1961. In 1971 
control was extended to drugs manufactured in the industrial 
countries and in 1988 to the international trade in drugs and 
money laundering. 
  A debate on their legalization is currently in progress in 
the area covered by the former Soviet Union and the East 
European countries, Estonia and Hungary, for example. 
  "Once a debate is engaged in, control settles on some point 
or other. Under the Soviet system, the whole issue was banned. 
The socialist countries' drug problems could not be publicly 
discussed since drugs went hand in hand with capitalism and a 
bygone age. Drugs were combated with official actions kept 
concealed from the public. Nevertheless, they got better results 
with this dishonest strategy than we in the Western countries 
did. Now that capitalism is being introduced into the former 
socialist countries, drug use in them is clearly on the 
increase," Sarvanti said. 
  In Sarvanti's opinion, many symbolic values are associated 
with drugs in the Western countries. "And the more we make a 
mystique of drugs, the more they are also used as a channel for 
rebellion. The drug problem in the slums of the United States 
has gotten out of hand. There are many subcultures there that 
have gotten involved in crime." 
  "They have gotten so deeply entangled in drugs that they can 
no longer legalize them. They don't dare do anything radical 
about them since they cannot predict what that would result in," 
he said. 
<H5>  Absolute Ban or Unrestricted Use? </H5>
  In Western Europe legalization has been discussed rather 
extensively, in addition to Spain, in Switzerland, Great 
Britain, and Germany, among other countries. The problem in 
these countries is a serious one. An absolute ban and stiff 
sentences or complete permissiveness are the extreme 
alternatives. 
  In many countries the attitude toward the problem is in 
practice somewhere between these two extremes: They try to 
minimize the damage. 
  "Every country has to take this path of minimizing the 
damage. They have to turn a blind eye to minor violations for 
practical reasons. They are forced to accept the fact that 
mainliners have to be given needles and drugs. It doesn't make 
any sense to force these people to take to the streets and 
commit property crimes to get junk," Sarvanti said. 
  "Probably one of the most radical experiments is being 
conducted in Zurich. Hard drugs may be used in a certain part of 
the city under the supervision of officials. However, the area 
in which the experiment is being conducted is an intolerable 
place for ordinary people since such a filthy business goes on 
in it. The most miserable bunch of riffraff who have abandoned 
all of the society's values gathers there in the restricted 
area." 
  In the Netherlands they make a distinction between soft and 
hard drugs. In Amsterdam the use of soft drugs is permitted in 
supervised cafes. 
  "The Dutch themselves claim that in this way they have 
reduced the number of HIV cases and drug use in general. They 
emphasize that problems are created for them by those countries 
with strict drug policies. They offer proof of their claims with 
studies they have made and officials and researchers are of the 
same opinion. 
  ``The Dutch also vigorously attack hard drugs,'' Sarvanti 
noted. However, factors other than control policy guide drug 
use. In Germany, for example, according to Sarvanti, they are 
worse off in proportion to the population than in, for example, 
the Netherlands. In many German cities they have in practice had 
to adopt minimization of the damage. 
<H5>  Nordic Countries Support Tight Control </H5>
  Right after the war, the drug problem was worse in Finland 
than it is now. At that time there were many people in this 
country who had become dependent on painkillers. Drugs emerged 
again as a problem through the hippie movement in the 1960's. 
Finland did not awaken to the fact until drugs became a youth 
problem. 
  "Now the problem is very well under control," Sarvanti said. 
In Finland private use is interfered with and the European 
practice seems to be negligent as seen from here. 
  Finland recently opposed legalization of drugs in the United 
Nations and at the same time indirectly took a stand against the 
Netherlands. "The Nordic countries are drug policy hawks; they 
support tight control but, on the other hand, follow-up 
treatment as well." [passage omitted] 

