BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Terje Rod Larsen, UN assistant </F>
secretary general responsible for the Middle East, by Bjorn 
Lindahl in Oslo on 1 June] 
  [Text] Oslo -- "As of yesterday Israel stopped paying for 
the civilian administration in the Gaza Strip and Jericho. What 
is important now is that the money from the rest of the world 
arrives in the bank so that the Palestinian police force can be 
paid its wages and can find somewhere to live. The situation in 
Gaza is very serious." 
  So said Terje Rod Larsen, the new UN assistant secretary 
general with responsibility for the Middle East. Wednesday [1 
June] should have been his first working day, but a funeral in 
Oslo meant that he asked for a postponement for a couple of days 
and together with his wife and close aide, Mona Juul, he found 
time for an interview with SVENSKA DAGBLADET. For the past nine 
months the two have been involved in what has been called family 
therapy between Israel and the PLO. 
  We met at Terje Rod Larsen's office at Fafo, the Trade Union 
Center for Research, Investigation, and Documentation where he 
was the director before he was appointed a Norwegian Foreign 
Ministry ambassador and subsequently one of the five UN 
assistant secretaries general. 
  Mona Juul works as head of division at the Norwegian foreign 
minister's office. 
  Together they formed the core of the secret Oslo channel 
which led to the agreement in principle on Palestinian 
self-rule. Since the results of this work became known, the 
role of the channel has decreased. 
  "But the need for a non-public channel remains. As recently 
as last night I was contacted by one of the sides," Terje Rod 
Larsen said. It is uncertain what will happen to the channel in 
the future. 
  "Norwegian Foreign Minister Bjorn Tore Godal has already had 
several meetings with both sides and is available if the sides 
wish it," Mona Juul said. 
  It is not only in the Middle East conflict that Norway plays 
a key role. In June peace talks between the guerrillas and the 
government in Guatemala will begin in Oslo. There is also an 
ambition that Norway should mediate in conflicts in Sudan and 
Sri Lanka, as well as in the former Yugoslavia, where former 
Foreign Minister Thorvald Stoltenberg is UN mediator. 
  Just as the Norwegian media showed little restraint when it 
came to giving Norway the credit for the fact that Israel and 
the PLO finally reached a peace agreement, there has been tide 
of small-minded criticism inside the Norwegian Foreign Ministry 
recently that too many resources are being used on peace work in 
distant countries which does not benefit Norway economically. 
  "There is not enough shopkeeping and too much ideology and 
missionary work at the Foreign Ministry. We have clearly taken 
over Sweden's role as everyone's benefactor. The Swedes have 
scaled down the moral steering of their international 
relations," a Norwegian Foreign Ministry official pointed out. 
  For Terje Rod Larsen a view like this borders on the absurd: 
  "The Oslo channel was a `low-budget film' where the costs 
were limited to the wages of three to four people and airline 
tickets. 
  "The United States has spent more than $50 million on the 
multilateral peace negotiations without any results." According 
to Larsen, these were doomed to failure. 
  "The Americans skipped the first stage of international 
negotiations which consists in sounding out in what areas there 
is a desire to reach an agreement. The PLO has a delegation of 
160 in Washington, and Israel has a similar number. The whole 
thing turned into a permanent press conference at which both 
sides were simply speaking to their home publics. 
  "There is something called press freedom, but freedom from 
the press can be just as important for the democratic process. 
If the sides are not given time to build confidence in each 
other, it is impossible to achieve results," Larsen said. 
  "But it is important that nothing is concealed afterward, 
once the sides have reached agreement. That is why we have 
tried to be as open as possible afterward," Mona Juul added. 
  The appointment of Terje Rod Larsen as assistant secretary 
general has also been criticized as an attempt by the United 
Nations to buy some of the glory surrounding the Oslo agreement. 
  "The United Nations would never have been able to play a 
role 
like the one Norway played. The Israelis have always been very 
skeptical toward the United Nations and have often felt unjustly 
treated, because they have had the majority of members against 
them in the General Assembly so many times," Mona Juul pointed 
out. 
  Norway's involvement in the autonomous Palestinian areas is 
greater than that of any other country. As well as the informal 
channel Norway is also responsible for coordinating foreign aid 
to the autonomous areas and to the police force. 
  Norway also has the largest group of observers in Hebron and 
is represented in the multinational peace negotiations which are 
held in Washington. 
  In money terms Norway will donate 250 million kronor 
[currency not specified] over 5 years. 
  "I will continue to work in all four areas, but as a 
representative of the United Nations," Terje Rod Larsen said. 
Within a month he expects that with the help of the heads of the 
UN body for aid for Palestinian refugees, UNRWA [United Nations 
Relief and Works Agency], development body UNDP [United Nations 
Development Program], and Unicef he will put forward a plan for 
the coordination of the work of the United Nations. 
  "UNRWA is the biggest UN organization and has 8,000 
employees 
on the West Bank and in Gaza. Alongside the Palestinian 
administration it will play a major role in the work of building 
up the economies of the Palestinian areas. 
  "In the short term the new Palestinian administration is 
facing the acute problem that while the international aid group 
has promised $2.2 billion -- or 14 billion kronor -- in aid over 
five years, almost none of this is in the bank. There is only 
the $2 million which Norway has given, $5 million from the 
United States, and a promise of 10 million Ecu (91.14 million 
kronor) from the EU [European Union] that has not yet been paid 
out to run the Palestinian police force, which when complete 
will consist of 9,000 policemen. 
  Each policeman is expected to cost $1,600 per month -- and 
this means that the total cost per year will be around $170 
million. 
  "The police force is crucial if chaos is to be prevented in 
Gaza. If the police do not receive money for themselves and 
their families, their loyalty will rapidly evaporate. It has 
even been necessary to distribute Israeli military rations to 
provide food for the day. In addition the Palestinian 
administration takes over responsibility for the 7,000 
Palestinians who were employed by the Israeli military 
administration. 
  "Norway has called a very important meeting of the 
aid-giving 
nations in Paris for 9-10 June. At this meeting they will have 
to demonstrate a willingness to redirect some of the money they 
have promised so that a larger share can be used to meet 
day-to-day costs. The problem is that most countries have taken 
the money from their aid budgets and have tied it to specific 
projects," Terje Rod Larsen said. 
  Next on Terje Rod Larsen's agenda are talks in New York with 
UN Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali and the U.S. 
Administration. A reconnaissance tour of the autonomous areas 
will follow. 

