Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Peter Kooijmans by David </F>
Binar; place and date not given: "`If Netherlands Investors 
Were To Wait Until the Completion of the Privatization Process, 
There Would Be Nothing Left for Them, Says the Dutch Foreign 
Minister'"] 
  [Text] Netherlands Queen Beatrix begins a three-day visit 
to the Czech Republic today. To mark this occasion, the 
Netherlands Foreign Ministry granted a team of Czech journalists 
the opportunity to interview Foreign Minister Peter Kooijmans. 
  [Binar] How do you view, from the Netherlands perspective, 
the expansion of the North Atlantic alliance? Do you think that 
the path chosen at the January summit in Brussels -- the 
Partnership for Peace [PfP] -- will lead to the security 
integration of Europe? 
  [Kooijmans] It is not easy to explain why the Partnership 
for Peace formula was chosen. It was, however, important to 
avoid both Scylla and Charybdis. Scylla would be the entry of 
some countries into NATO, while others would remain outside. 
This would be a clear indication that there are new borders in 
the world, borders that could provoke a reaction from the 
countries languishing beyond them. This could threaten stability 
in Europe. Charybdis would be if it were said to all states 
that no form of cooperation is possible. 
  From the outset negotiations were to have been held equally 
with each country from Central and East Europe. However, during 
discussions among the allies, a concept was developed that took 
into consideration both the Scylla and the Charybdis; it was 
left up to the Eastern partners to decide how they will 
implement the Partnership for Peace. This allows for the 
possibility of gradual rapprochement and takes into 
consideration current developments on the European continent. 
Of course, it is clear that countries like the Czech Republic, 
Poland, and Hungary will enjoy closer relations with NATO than, 
for example, Kazakhstan or Georgia. 
  [Binar] The Partnership for Peace was adopted after Moscow 
began to express opinions opposed to the expansion of NATO. 
Both President Boris Yeltsin and the extreme right-wing leader 
Zhirinovskiy see a certain "threat" in the rapprochement between 
the alliance and the countries of Central Europe. What is your 
view? 
  [Kooijmans] First: It goes without saying that the alliance 
cannot allow its policy to be dictated by Russia. Second: 
There is a certain complementarity between the European Union 
[EU] and NATO. It has always been clear that when a country 
becomes a member of the European Union, it has to establish a 
certain relationship with the Western European Union (WEU) -- 
either as an observer or a member. There will come a time when, 
within the framework of Europe's integration, there will be a 
common foreign and security policy. Then, those states that 
currently have observer status will have to become members of 
the WEU. There is also a security guarantee here that 
complements NATO's security guarantees. In the case of the 
European partners, the United States is always involved within 
the framework of these guarantees. Therefore, it is logical 
that when a state becomes a member of the WEU, it also becomes a 
member of NATO. There is a certain logic here that must not be 
viewed as a threat by Moscow, because it is part of the European 
Union's overall concept. 
  [Binar] What is your opinion of mutual relations between the 
Netherlands and the Czech Republic? Are there any problem areas? 
  [Kooijmans] Our businessmen often have major problems in 
reaching specific agreements in the Czech Republic because of 
state bureaucracy and problems involving privatization. They 
also, unfortunately, receive no support from official quarters. 
  [Binar] Why, then, do your businessmen not wait until these 
problems have been resolved or why do they not link up straight 
away with the private owners? 
  [Kooijmans] If our investors were to wait until the 
completion of the privatization process, there would be nothing 
left for them. They want to invest their money in privatization. 
And, because privatization is being administered by the state, 
they have to turn to official quarters. It is important for the 
Czech Republic that this kind of report is not spread: "You 
want to invest in the Czech Republic? Wait, let me tell you 
about my experiences in that country." 
  [Binar] The Czech Republic's entry into the European Union 
is not, of course, on the agenda at the moment. Are there any 
opportunities for us to somehow come closer to it with the 
implementation of the Maastricht Treaty, which could potentially 
speed up our entry? 
  [Kooijmans] I think that cooperation among the Visegrad Four 
states is very important. It could become an example of how 
regional cooperation may contribute to entry into the European 
Union. It is very important to attain the EU standard in policy 
regarding the environment, ecological norms in production, and 
so on. Close cooperation in these sectors among the Visegrad 
Four will enable these states to achieve this standard more 
quickly. 
  The same applies for the social sphere. This involves, for 
example, labor safety norms. 
  [Binar] There is a certain cooperative structure among the 
Benelux states. Are there any parallels between this 
cooperation and the cooperation among the Visegrad Four 
countries? 
  [Kooijmans] Yes. In the past, the Benelux states offered 
the Visegrad Four countries help and advice concerning their 
closer cooperation. A meeting involving Visegrad Four and 
Benelux ministers was envisaged. However, to our surprise, the 
interest shown by the Visegrad Four in our experiences with 
Benelux was not too great. During my visits to the Visegrad 
Four countries, I have always said that it is very important not 
only that they orient themselves toward entry into the European 
Union, but also, at the same time, that they strengthen their 
economic and political ties. These countries will probably be 
the first ones from Central and East Europe to join the European 
Union. If there were a certain economic cooperative structure 
here, then this cooperation would make them more ready for 
membership in the European Union. Nevertheless, the Visegrad 
Four countries must not seek their future only in the European 
Union, but mainly in their own region. 
  [Binar] The Czech Republic is a relatively small state. Do 
you not think that our interest in EU membership entails the 
desire to have a share of the wealth enjoyed by the other member 
states? 
  [Kooijmans] It is wrong to view this as bargaining between a 
dwarf and a giant. It must not be forgotten that the country 
applying for admission is not the only one that would profit by 
the agreement. The benefit is mutual. I have been in the 
European Union for long enough to know that it is not an 
altruistic society. If the European Union had seen no advantages 
in its expansion, then it would not have begun any negotiations 
at all. 

