Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ravil Mustafin commentary: "Spy Passions. Ameses' Guilt </F>
Still Has To Be Proved in Court, While British Spy in Moscow Has 
Already Confessed Everything"] 
  [Excerpts] On Tuesday [1 March] hearings took place 
concerning the case of the Ames couple, who are accused of 
spying for Moscow. An ITAR-TASS correspondent reports that only 
a small group of journalists was admitted to the hearings on the 
pretext that there were "not enough seats." It can thus be said 
that the judicial part of the "biggest spy scandal," as the 
sensation-seeking U.S. press has dubbed this case, is 
essentially taking place behind closed doors. [passage omitted] 
  That is how events are developing in Washington. But what is 
happening in Moscow? 
  In Moscow the Federal Counterintelligence Service (FCS) has 
reported that the espionage activity of a leading official in a 
military-industrial complex organization has been terminated. 
Criminal proceedings have already been instituted in this case. 
The spy was arrested 15 January and on 25 January he was charged 
with treason against the motherland in the form of espionage. 
  During the preliminary investigation our counterintelligence 
officers obtained evidence showing that the defendant was at 
some time recruited by the British intelligence services and 
that he received from them special espionage equipment, secret 
writing materials, and instructions about methods of secretly 
communicating in Moscow with the British Embassy station. The 
spy worked exclusively for money, gathering and passing on 
information of a secret military and economic nature. We were 
informed by the FCS that the information handed over contained 
data on the latest Russian efforts in the sphere of developing 
various weapons systems and their specifications and performance 
characteristics, on the financing of defense research and 
development work, and on the state, prospects, and organization 
of military-technical cooperation between Russia and foreign 
countries. 
  But while in Washington the Ameses' guilt still has to be 
proved, in Moscow the British spy has already admitted his 
guilt. Moreover, Russian counterintelligence officers 
neutralized this agent without kicking up a big fuss in front of 
the whole world. Especially as nobody in Moscow intends to 
transfer this event, which is routine for the special services, 
to the dimension of Russian-British relations and base a 
particular policy on it. 
  Simple chronology shows that the British spy's arrest in 
Moscow can in no way be regarded as revenge for the Ameses' 
detention. Therefore the statement by British Labor Party 
Spokesman Allan Rogers that actions based on the "eye for an 
eye, a tooth for a tooth" principle can be discerned in all 
these cases looks plain silly. 

