BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Sow the Wind and Reap the Whirlwind"] </F>
  [Text] Yesterday marked the 14th anniversary of severing of 
diplomatic relations between the Islamic Republic and the United 
States of America. 
  Several occasions arose in the last decade and a half for 
improving Irano-American relations, but so far there has been no 
change in the status quo. 
  An analytical review of the history of the two countries' 
relations reveals that two key factors were instrumental in 
shaping U.S. policy towards Iran prior to the Islamic 
Revolution. First was the U.S. fear of Communist domination of 
the oil-rich Persian Gulf region, and second was America's 
political immaturity combined with its military and economic 
supremacy which deprived the United States of the chance to 
understand the realities of world politics. 
  The United States never understood the Islamic Revolution in 
Iran because it never appreciated this country's culture and 
history. If the universal definition of politics is war fought 
without arms, then Washington's policies towards 
pre-revolutionary Iran must be defined as war fought by coercion. 
  Despite the friendly disposition of Iran towards the United 
States in the late 1940's and early 1950's, American policies, 
stemming from U.S. power, gradually soured the initial and 
cordial relations between the two countries and changed it into 
an antagonistic relationship. The role of the United States in 
toppling the nationalist government of Dr. Mosaddeq in 1953, and 
the subsequent U.S.-sponsored policies of Iran which neglected 
this country's religious, historical, and cultural backgrounds, 
was the final straw that broke the back of Iran-U.S. friendly 
relations. 
  The Islamic Republic's anti-American stance in the past 14 
years is a natural reaction to U.S. actions in Iran since the 
50's and is based on the principle of "he who sows the wind will 
reap the whirlwind." Iranians' collective opinion of the U.S. 
has changed, they no longer think of the United States as 
synonymous with names such as Morgan Shuster [served as Persia's 
treasurer-general in 1911] and [Arthur] Millspaugh [U.S. adviser 
to the Persian Ministry of Finance 1922-1927]. The new American 
image in the Iranian mind is one of an imperialist government 
with less than friendly designs for the Islamic Republic. 
  Washington has preferred to look at the world from the point 
of view of a superpower, while the Islamic Republic, which was 
founded on the principle of mutual respect in its dealings with 
other countries, refuses to bow to superpower pressure. The 
U.S. is faced with the same dilemma in Europe where it took on 
the role of the dominant Western power during the Cold War. 
Today's European efforts to undermine U.S. authority is the 
logical outcome of 45 years of slave-master relationship between 
Europe and the United States. 
  The as yet undefined "new world order" has provided an 
opportunity for the U.S. to rethink its basic policies vis-a-vis 
the rest of the world. 

