BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ma Wenrui (7456 2429 3843): "Guard Against </F>
Corrosive Influences and Never Be Tainted With Bad Practices -- 
in Commemoration of the 45th Anniversary of the Publication of 
Comrade Mao Zedong's Speech at the Second Plenary Session of the 
Seventh CPC Central Committee"] 
  [Text] Before China won an overall victory in revolution, 
the CPC held the timely Second Plenary Session of the Seventh 
CPC Central Committee, preparing for the shifting of the center 
of gravity of the party's work from the village to city and from 
armed struggle to the development of production. With the 
insight of a Marxist, Comrade Mao Zedong delivered a report of 
great foresight and far-reaching influence to the session. Over 
decades of trials and hardships, we can still feel the shaking 
power of his profound thinking while rereading this report. In 
his report, Comrade Mao Zedong submitted a series of important 
principles and policies, including the central task of 
developing production after taking over the city and relying on 
the working class wholeheartedly. In addition, he also proposed 
an important idea which can be summarized as: Maintain the 
party's fine work style forever to resist corrosive influences 
and guard against peaceful evolution. He clearly brought up the 
issue of guarding against the attack of sugar-coated bullets for 
the first time and noted: "The road after the revolution will 
be longer, the work greater and more arduous" and emphasized 
"comrades must be taught to remain modest, prudent, and free 
from arrogance and rashness in their style of work; comrades 
must be taught to preserve the style of plain living and hard 
struggle." His foresight has been verified by historical facts 
and the two "musts" he stressed still ring like an alarm bell 
that has immediate and practical significance for our current 
efforts to improve the ideological levels and work style of the 
party members and resist the attack of sugar-coated bullets and 
the corrosive influences of various wrong ideas. 
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, the CPC has resumed the ideological line of seeking 
truth from facts, upheld the central task of economic 
construction, carried out reform and opening up, stepped up the 
pace of economic construction, and has made world-known 
achievements in the course of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. While leading the country to develop the 
economy in the new period, the CPC has also undergone hard 
struggles and tests; we are clearly aware of the severe 
challenge faced by the CPC in construction under the complicated 
circumstances at home and abroad -- a severe challenge because 
the launching of reform and opening up and the transition to a 
socialist market economy involve tremendous social changes, 
requiring people to make corresponding readjustments and 
transformations in their ideology and concepts. It is not easy 
for a CPC member to orientate himself amid such changes -- to 
adjust one's ideology to the reality of reform, opening up, and 
the establishment of a socialist market economic structure, 
which is much more complicated than before, on the one hand; and 
to uphold the Marxist outlooks on the world, life, and values 
and carry forward the communists' fine work style on the other. 
Many people are still not well-prepared for such changes. 
Moreover, after the country opened up to the outside world and 
begun absorbing capital, advanced science and technology, and 
management experience from capitalist countries, the decadent 
ideas of capitalism have taken advantage of the occasion to 
surface. Hostile forces in the West have not given up their 
attempt to subjugate China, and are inclined to conduct peaceful 
evolution in China. They proceed with their infiltration 
through all means, including publicizing capitalist democracy, 
freedom, human rights, and bourgeois outlooks on the world, 
life, values, and lifestyles via culture, art, and various 
media, and thus intensify the complexity and arduousness in our 
efforts to resist corrosive influences. Under such conditions, 
many people have been shot by sugar-coated bullets -- some are 
enslaved by bourgeois ideology and advocate bourgeois 
liberalization and complete westernization, whereas some abuse 
power for personal gain, commit graft, take bribes, and become 
corrupt and degenerate. The party's work style and social 
values are seriously hit and decadent phenomena are growing and 
spreading among some members of the party. Corruption will 
surely undermine the CPC's image and the relations between the 
CPC and the people, as well as be used by hostile forces. 
Corrupt elements are morally decadent elements. It is a very 
dangerous situation if corrupt phenomena are not firmly checked. 
We are facing a very complicated and severe struggle, between 
those who are corrupt and those who oppose corruption, as well 
as between peaceful evolution and counter-peaceful evolution -- 
the "war without the smoke of gunpowder" the imperialists wanted 
to wage. The struggle is important to the future and destiny of 
the CPC, the state, and socialism as a whole. Drastic changes 
in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and the 1989 
disturbance in China all remind us that it would be a serious 
historical mistake if we overlooked this struggle. 
  Studying again Comrade Mao Zedong's report at the Second 
Plenary Session of the Seventh CPC Central Committee and 
reviewing the revolutionary practice before and after his report 
have given us considerable enlightenment on how we should wage 
this struggle. 
  I. To Conscientiously Strengthen Ideological 
Education, Make Good Preparations for the "Prevention" Work So 
As To Enhance the Self-Awareness of Anti-Corruption 
  Comrade Mao Zedong attached great importance to ideological 
education on anticorruption. The key to anticorruption lies in 
"prevention." As early as 1944, he made arrangements for the 
whole party to study "A Sorrowful Review of Chinese History 
Since 1644" [jia shen san bai nian ji 3946 3947 0005 4102 1628 
4385], written by Guo Moruo. At the Second Plenary Session of 
the Seventh CPC Central Committee, he once again put forward the 
warning that "it is necessary to prevent" attacks with 
sugar-coated bullets. Meanwhile, he urged that "all party 
members should have a clear understanding of the necessity of 
maintaining a fine work style. As a result, the inoculation of 
party members was boosted because the members had been 
inoculated before entering urban areas during the civil war. 
Since the new period, our principles and policies have been 
absolutely correct. As far as prevention work is concerned, 
however, there is much room for improvement in our ideological 
education because there is a tendency to pay more attention to 
the construction of material civilization than to spiritual 
civilization. Comrade Deng Xiaoping pointed out sharply that 
the greatest mistakes made during the 10 years of the Cultural 
Revolution involved education. Improving this work commands our 
immediate attention! 
  In strengthening ideological education, party cadres at all 
levels are required to take the lead. But it is not enough to 
concentrate on this point only. Ideological work in the fields 
of culture, art, and morality should also be strengthened. It 
is necessary to uphold the leadership role of Marxism in the 
entire spectrum of ideology. In carrying out the new task of 
establishing and developing a socialist market economy in a new 
environment, it becomes even more important to persist in the 
Marxist world outlook, outlook on life, and value system. In 
the ideological sphere, such forms of art as literature, film, 
and television exert great influence on the people. But many 
problems exist in these fields. Some works with serious 
drawbacks are not given due criticism. A few works which give 
publicity to pornography, violence, money worship, 
individualism, and hedonism are cropping up time and again, with 
applause coming from some people. A few people at home failed 
to make the necessary analysis in terms of the Marxist position, 
viewpoints, and methods regarding some movies which particularly 
expose our country's backwardness but won movie awards abroad. 
As a result, they followed others to applaud the movies. Some 
movie directors, hoping to win movie awards, try every possible 
way to cater to foreigners' tastes and feel proud while 
following in other people's footsteps. Such a trend should be 
turned around. Can it be effective to use such things to 
"educate" and influence the people? 
  In ideological education, education in necessary alertness 
to the presence of the enemy and in the concept of class 
struggle should also be necessary for all party members. Of 
course, "cultural revolution" mistakes should never be repeated. 
However, if we were not alert to the presence of the enemy and 
the concept of class struggle, we would be disarming ourselves 
ideologically. Comrade Mao Zedong noted: "After the enemies with 
guns have been wiped out, there will still be enemies without 
guns; they are bound to struggle desperately against us; we must 
never regard these enemies lightly. If we do not now raise and 
understand the problem in this way, we shall commit very grave 
mistakes." Historical events after the Second Plenary Session 
of the Seventh CPC Central Committee, particularly the drastic 
changes in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and the 
1989 disturbance in China, have all incontrovertibly proven that 
enemies without guns do exist. They spy out the land, wait for 
the opportune moment to go into action, and think of subverting 
the people's political power all the time. If we believe that 
all is well because an attack by armed enemies is not in sight 
and thus develop a false sense of peace and security, and if we 
fail to understand the gravity of the attack of enemies without 
guns, feel no danger in the face of peaceful evolution, and 
relax our alertness in resisting the corrosive influence of and 
guarding against peaceful evolution, we are bound to meet with 
disaster. 
  Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping 
was published recently. Comrade Deng Xiaoping has inherited and 
developed Mao Zedong Thought, and his book has not only pointed 
out the way for us to persist in reform, opening up, and 
stepping up economic development, but also offered very good 
teaching materials for enhancing our ideological education, 
unifying our thinking and action, resisting corrosive 
influences, and guarding against peaceful evolution. We must 
study it in depth and grasp the book's spirit and essence 
comprehensively and accurately. In the meantime, we should 
select and study some works by Marx, Lenin, and Mao Zedong to 
enhance our understanding of the fundamental tenets of Marxism- 
Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought and the theory of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. 
  II. Persistently Launch Anticorruption Struggle and 
Earnestly Wage the War Against Corrosive Influence and Peaceful 
Evolution 
  After the Second Plenary Session of the Seventh CPC Central 
Committee, Comrade Mao Zedong had not only repeatedly conducted 
education in resisting corrosive influences and guarding against 
peaceful evolution within the party, but had also paid great 
attention to this issue all the time and had taken timely 
measures to deal with developments as they came up. Right after 
the revolution, he initiated the movement against the three 
evils [corruption, waste, and bureaucracy] and the movement 
against the five evils [bribery, tax evasion, theft of state 
property, cheating on government contracts, and stealing 
economic information] as well as personally approved the death 
sentences of major grafters Liu Qingshan and Zhang Zishan. 
These were all aimed at forestalling and fighting decadent 
phenomena within the party. Therefore, China's political 
practice was fairly clean and honest, social values were 
healthy, and the people were content in the 1950's. People 
still have warm recollections of those days. 
  In view of the fact that decadent phenomena are growing and 
spreading among some party members, the CPC Central Committee 
decided to fight corruption. The decision has enjoyed popular 
support. The key to eliminating decadent phenomena lies in the 
party's determination to fight. If its determination is strong 
enough, it will take powerful and effective measures to carry 
out this struggle. The people have held out fervent hope for 
this struggle. Comrade Deng Xiaoping noted: Why are there not 
many achievements made in punishing and dealing with corruption 
despite our repeated demands? The cause could be within the 
party. Some of our comrades immerse themselves in specific 
affairs and pay no concern and attention to political 
developments and ideological work; their alertness to decadent 
phenomena is scarce and their corrective measures are 
ineffective. If there is any problem in China, it is within the 
Communist Party. Therefore, we must approach and handle this 
problem from the high plane of a strategy to correct the 
phenomena of "scarce alertness" and "ineffective measures;" the 
entire party should pay attention to this issue and take action 
to handle it properly. 
  The most important task in the anticorruption drive is to 
rely on the socialist legal system and fully harness the power 
of the law as a weapon. We should resolutely overcome flagrant 
interference with the way we handle cases by a handful of people 
so judicial organs can handle cases fairly and punish corrupt 
elements in accordance with the law. We should further improve 
the law and establish a stringent legal system during the 
anticorruption drive. We now encounter resistance in handling 
cases. The web of connections and the practice of interceding 
on somebody else's behalf are seriously interfering with the 
fair handling of cases. The majority of people engaged in such 
practices are cadres who have great influence. Depending on the 
specific circumstances of interference, leading organs should 
make severe criticism, conduct education, take disciplinary 
action, or even dismiss the concerned people and refer their 
cases to judicial departments for investigation and prosecution 
in accordance with the law. We should also give full rein to 
the media's supervisory role and boldly expose various serious 
acts of interference through the press, radio, and television. 
  Our party also has a powerful magic weapon in the 
anticorruption drive--the mass line. In a certain sense, 
whether we achieve substantial results in the anticorruption 
drive or achieve a full- scale victory depends on whether we can 
mobilize the masses and rely on the mass line. While we do not 
launch mass movements, we must follow the mass line and fully 
arouse public enthusiasm for battling corruption. We should 
also create some momentum so people who engage in corrupt 
practices will feel the pressure and be aware of the fact that 
they are under effective supervision by the masses, like a rat 
crossing the street with everybody yelling "Kill it!" This will 
prevent them from engaging in corrupt practices. 
III. To Conduct Correct Criticism and Self-Criticism, and 
To Inherit and Carry Forward the Party's Fine Tradition 
  Comrade Mao Zedong said in his report: "We have the Marxist- 
Leninist weapon of criticism and self-criticism. We can get rid 
of bad style and maintain the good." Criticism and 
self-criticism constitute one of the three essential aspects of 
our party's fine workstyle and serve as a powerful weapon for 
guaranteeing that our party's fine workstyle will be inherited 
and carried forward. Regrettably, quite a few people have 
abandoned this weapon in favor of "praise and self-praise." 
Under such circumstances, healthy Marxist practices are 
inhibited while unhealthy trends run rampant. This has led to a 
strange phenomenon in society: An individual is duly criticized 
for his serious mistakes. Instead of being condemned and 
supervised by public opinion, he becomes a celebrity while his 
critics are isolated. In the words of Comrade Deng Xiaoping, 
"criticism, however little, is often branded as `attack' or 
`bludgeoning.' In fact, it is the critic who comes under 
attack, while the one who is criticized often receives sympathy 
and support." (Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, p 46) Evidently, healthy Marxist practices have 
not yet prevailed. For this reason, Comrade Deng Xiaoping said 
emphatically: "We must thoroughly change this abnormal 
situation so that Marxist, socialist, and communist 
propaganda--especially correct views on all major theoretical 
and principle-related matters--will truly to play their dominant 
roles in the ideological field." (ibid) To achieve this end, 
we must wage a regular and active ideological struggle and carry 
forward the party's fine tradition of criticism and self- 
criticism. 
  The key to carrying forward the party's fine workstyle lies 
in party organizations and cadres at all levels who must take 
the lead in this regard. We must conduct self-criticism with a 
strong sense of responsibility toward the party and the people 
whenever problems occur or mistakes are made in our work. When 
someone criticizes us, we must truly follow the rule "Correct 
mistakes if you have made any, and guard against them if you 
have not." Based on the party's position, we must have the 
courage to sternly criticize erroneous ideas, unhealthy trends, 
evil practices, and liberalism in the party and society. For 
many party cadres, the main obstacle to conducting criticism is 
goody-goodyism--they do not have the courage to uphold 
principles lest they hurt people's feelings and offend them, and 
as a result become themselves the target of retaliation. For 
the criticized, the main problem is retaliation--they regard 
other people's criticism as an attack on themselves, regardless 
whether it is justified or not, and seek to take revenge. Both 
attitudes are contrary to the spirit of building the party for 
the interests of the people. Essentially, both are guilty of 
individualism. True Communist Party members should build the 
party for the interests of the people. However, in some 
people's minds, public interests have weakened while self 
interests have rapidly expanded. No wonder correct criticism 
and self-criticism are difficult to conduct. Obviously, we 
cannot draw impetus from it to make progress. Therefore, today 
it is of special significance to stress the viewpoint of 
"building the party for the interests of the people," "remaining 
selfless," and "serving the people wholeheartedly." We must 
overcome all sorts of selfish ideas and unhealthy trends through 
correct criticism and self-criticism in order to truly carry 
forward the party's fine traditions and style of integrating 
theory with practice, of forging close ties with the masses, and 
of displaying the spirit of plain living and hard struggle. In 
this way our party organizations and vast numbers of party 
cadres will always retain the true characters of proletarian 
vanguards in building socialism with Chinese characteristics, 
becoming a steel wall of fighters with a strong party spirit, 
capable of resisting corrosive influences as well as 
sugar-coated bullets! 
  Today, when we restudy Comrade Mao Zedong's report, the 
world 
situation has undergone tremendous changes, which made the 
report even more extraordinary. In the report, Comrade Mao 
Zedong pointed out with vision: "After several decades and when 
viewed in retrospect, the victory of the Chinese people's 
democratic revolution will seem like only a brief prologue to a 
long drama. A drama begins with a prologue, but the prologue is 
not the climax." After several decades of efforts, particularly 
under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, China's economy is 
developing rapidly. We are marching to the world. We are 
moving toward the climax of a long drama. At this moment, we 
must seize the central task of economic construction and never 
let loose. We must bear in mind Comrade Mao Zedong's teaching 
that comrades must be taught to remain modest, prudent, and free 
from arrogance and rashness in their style of work; they must be 
taught to preserve the style of plain living and hard struggle. 
We must act cautiously as if we were on thin ice, and must make 
great efforts to successfully carry out the task of resisting 
corrosive influences, avoiding degeneration, and building our 
party well. We must promote both material and spiritual 
civilization at the same time. With both wings, we will be able 
to soar to the sky and open a bright future. We can definitely 
stage a socialist drama on the world stage, with climaxes coming 
one after another. 

