BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Jordanian Handshake"] </F>
  [Text] For the first time in the history of 
Israeli-Jordanian relations Jordan has agreed to host the 
bilateral talks in its territory. For the first time it is 
willing to host an official Israeli delegation for at 
international economic forum. These two developments are enough 
to indicate the change in Israeli-Jordanian relations over the 
last week. There are in addition, however, reports on a series 
of economic projects of great importance to both Jordan and 
Israel which are in an advanced stage of negotiations. Among 
these projects are the Red Sea-Dead Sea Canal Project; a joint 
park in the 'Arava; establishing a civilian tourism 
subcommittee; building a road from al-'Aqabah to Taba via Elat, 
and establishing a tripartite Israeli-Jordanian-Palestinian 
framework for dealing with banking and financial issues. 
  This assortment of issues indicates that Jordan views the 
peace process not merely in declarative terms, but as a means to 
advance and implement its vital interests. Jordan no longer 
regards itself as the guardian and representative of the 
Palestinian problem. From now on it will try to compete with 
the Palestinians over the benefits accruing from the peace 
process. 
  The Gaza-Jericho agreement undoubtedly facilitated the 
Washington talks this week. Jordan's concern lest it will lose 
economic strongholds such as the banks and the supremacy of the 
Jordanian dinar to the Palestinians also contributed to the 
success. These strongholds harbor a lot of political power 
which can influence the functioning of the Palestinian autonomy 
as well as Jordan's economy, which is at a dangerous low. 
  Israel, for its part, has always wanted to maintain normal 
neighborly relations with Jordan, and such relations have 
existed de facto. The open bridges policy inaugurated by Dayan, 
the generally calm border maintained by Jordan, and the secret 
meetings between Israeli leaders and King Husayn only 
strengthened the relations between the two countries. Israel 
and Jordan have both regarded each other as strategic partners 
for foiling the establishment of a Palestinian state. 
  Israel is interested both in the autonomy's success and in 
strengthening Jordan's status in the region. In fact, the two 
are mutually dependent. Without cooperation with Jordan the 
Palestinian economy will crumble and will become a dead weight 
on Israel's economy; without cooperation with the autonomy, on 
the other hand, the Jordanian economy might suffer deeper 
unemployment, a loss of income, and the rise of radical elements. 
  Now that the Palestinian problem has been detached from the 
negotiations with Jordan and has become an independent problem, 
negotiations with Jordan can become an easier affair. It is 
relatively easy to solve the border demarcation problem between 
Israel and Jordan, because this border does not constitute a 
strategic buffer as does the Golan Heights. Other controversial 
issues can be solved via reasonable negotiations. With a 
modicum of goodwill these negotiations will resemble 
negotiations between friendly countries. 
  It is still hard to assess whether Jordan has proceeded with 
Syria's blessing or despite its opposition. Syria has still not 
given up its efforts to delay the process until negotiations 
with it score significant progress. Until the agreements are 
signed, we should be cautious in our assessment of the process. 
There is no doubt, however, that the quick progress made in 
negotiations with Jordan could facilitate the negotiations with 
Syria and Israel's acceptance by the entire Arab world. 

