Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Nairobi, 21 Mar (KNA) -- The Intergovernmental 
Authority on Drought and Development [IGADD] committee of heads 
of state on the Sudan conflict consisting of its chairman, His 
Excellency Daniel arap Moi, president of the Republic of Kenya, 
His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, president of the Republic 
of Uganda, His Excellency Meles Zenawi, president of the 
transitional government of Ethiopia and His Excellency Isayas 
Afewerki, president of the state of Eritrea, held its third 
session on 17 March, 1994. 
  The IGADD committee met with Lieutenant General 'Umar Hasan 
al-Bashir, president of the Republic of the Sudan and 
subsequently met the leaders of the two Sudanese People's 
Liberation Movement/Sudanese People's Liberation Army factions, 
Dr. John Garang and Dr. Riak Machar, and conducted intensive 
consultations within itself and with the parties concerned and 
agreed to launch the IGADD peace talks on the Sudan. 
  The committee and the parties to the conflict agreed that 
pursuant to the mandate given by the meeting off the IGADD 
summit held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on 6 and 7 September 1993, 
the negotiations shall take into consideration the previous 
efforts in search of a solution to the conflict, namely talks 
held in August 1989, Addis Ababa, December 1989 in Nairobi, May 
to June 1992 and April to May 1993 in Abuja and May 1993 in 
Nairobi. 
  The committee expressed serious concern at the continued 
human suffering, misery, famine and disease in the war-affected 
areas. It was agreed that the parties to the conflict shall 
allow access to relief agencies to ensure that the relief 
assistance is delivered to the suffering people in those areas. 
  The committee also expressed deep concern that the long 
drawn-out conflict was a threat to peace and security in the 
sub-region. In reference to their stated commitment to the 
IGADD peace initiative including their readiness to immediately 
embark on negotiations, the parties to the conflict agreed to 
send to the peace talks high-level delegations with a full 
mandate to negotiate. The committee called upon the parties 
concerned to the conflict to exercise restraint and desist from 
escalating hostilities, including actions that might jeopardise 
the IGADD initiative, in order to create a conducive atmosphere 
for the conduct of negotiations. 
  The IGADD committee decided that the standing committee of 
ministers of foreign affairs shall conduct the peace 
negotiations under the supervision of the chairman of the IGADD 
committee and directed the standing committee to start the 
negotiating process immediately. 
  The IGADD committee further appealed to the international 
community to continue supporting the initiative. [passage 
omitted] 

