BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Victoria Palant] </F>
  [Text] Rome, 5 May (EFE) -- Peruvian Prime Minister Efrain 
Goldenberg today signed an "agreement to promote and protect 
foreign investments" with outgoing Italian Prime Minister Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi. 
  Goldenberg arrived here on the night of 4 May on a private 
visit. He told EFE that the agreement "is highly significant" 
for his country, which is seeking to attract investors "not just 
in Europe, but worldwide." Earlier, Goldenberg visited Milan 
and Stockholm. 
  Peru has signed similar agreements with Switzerland, France, 
Sweden, Paraguay, Colombia, and Thailand; and it will soon sign 
another one with Spain. 
  Goldenberg said: "Peruvian laws do not discriminate between 
foreign and domestic capital; each receive equal guarantees. 
The Peruvian state does not reserve for itself areas of vital 
interest." 
  Goldenberg, who is both prime minister and foreign minister 
of Peru, cites as an example that "a Spanish company paid $2 
billion for 35 percent of a now-privatized telephone company," 
adding: "Telecommunications are usually considered of vital 
interest." 
  Goldenberg added that an agreement signed with the Swedish 
Government will help to expedite mining exploitation in Peru. 
  Goldenberg said: "More mining deposits have been discovered 
in the past 18 months than in the entire history of the Republic 
and Swedish industries are very interested in supplying 
equipment and technology." 
  Goldenberg declined to comment on the ongoing investigations 
by Rome's prosecutor Vittorio Paraggio into alleged cases of 
corruption within the framework of Italian-Peruvian cooperation. 
He said that his tour primarily seeks to attract Swedish and 
Italian investors. 
  Goldenberg stated: "Foreign investment is productive; it 
produces quick results and it does not fuel inflation." He 
added: "Contrary to what many people believe, drug trafficking 
money -- moral considerations aside -- is harmful because it 
provides masses of money the country does not need." 
  Goldenberg said: "I did not come here to say that we do not 
have problems, because we do. It is important to report that 
last year the country grew by 7 percent and that during the 
first quarter of this year we have grown by an unprecedented 8.6 
percent." 
  Noting that, during the five-year tenure of Alan Garcia, 
Peru 
"reached the worst level of hyperinflation ever registered in 
world history: 2.2 million percent," Goldenberg said. He added 
that the current figures clearly show progress has been made 
because "in 1990, inflation stood at 7,650 percent; in 1991, at 
150 percent; in 1992 at 70 percent; and in 1993, at 39 percent." 
  Goldenberg conceded that "unemployment is still high," but 
noted that government policy considers "jobs will be created 
through growth," that the state cannot bear the useless burden 
of public employees, and that "any job is a good job." 
  This afternoon Goldenberg addressed members of 
Confindustria, 
the association of Italian businessmen, within the framework of 
a seminar on the analysis of economic prospects offered by Peru 
to Italian investors. He told EFE: "Peruvian foreign currency 
reserves already exceed $3 billion." 
  Goldenberg noted: "In 1960 Peru exported 10 times as much as 
South Korea and carried much more weight in the world. It will 
take time, however, to regain the levels of production we 
achieved then." 
  In his opinion, all this is the result of "mistaken 
macroeconomic policies and ideas that have not worked anywhere 
in the world." 
  Goldenberg met this morning with Italian President Oscar 
Luigi Scalfaro. He will return to Peru tomorrow after a 
scheduled stopover in Costa Rica. 

