Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] National Security Council secretary-general Gen 
Charan Kunlawanit says he is very satisfied with a compromise 
reached between Burma's rulers and some minority groups on a 
ceasefire ahead of peace talks. 
  The Burmese junta recently held peace talks with Kachin 
rebels in the north and with the Mon. 
  More talks were expected with other dissident minority 
groups 
such as the Karen and those in Shan state, Gen Charan said. 
  Earlier, the Karen National Union [KNU], the strongest 
anti-Rangoon minority group, called on the ruling State Law and 
Order Restoration Council to hold peace talks on equal terms 
with all minority groups to ensure rights and freedom in all 
economic social and political fields. 
  The KNU threatened not to talk if its conditions were not 
accepted by the SLORC. 
  Western sources criticised Rangoon's move as a deceitful 
tactic to get minorities to bow down to the junta. 
  They cited the government's refusal to release Nobel Peace 
Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi who has been under house arrest 
for five years. 
  Gen Charan said he did not know if Aung San Suu Kyi might be 
released, but he disagreed with the criticism, saying there was 
no reason for the junta to play a trick on the minorities as it 
might stir hatred and resistance. 
  "The Burmese junta is trying to be more open to the world 
community as the West is condemning its undemocratic system," 
said Gen Charan. 
  "However, we have to accept that change needs time. 
  "Thailand always supports peace talks and clings to the 
belief that any slaughter of minorities should be condemned by 
the world community." 
  Gen Charan spoke of Thailand's neutral stance on Burmese 
affairs, saying the Government would not interfere with the 
conflicts even though some minority groups which did not trust 
the Burmese government were asking for help from Thailand. 
  The talks might proceed well, he said. 
  One thorn still obstructs the peace in Burma, according to 
Gen Charan, as the junta has to attack the strongholds of opium 
warlord Khun Sa, who is notoriously influential in Shan State. 
  Khun Sa's group is believed to survive on money gained from 
trading in narcotics. 
  Shan State used to be the homeland of Thai Yai, but is now 
occupied by Chinese Haw and hill-tribe people. 
  Thailand and Burma are expected to hold talks on the opening 
of Tah Kee Lek checkpoint opposite Mae Sai district as the 
Burmese government is relaxing its regulations by allowing 
foreigners to cross the Thai border. 
  The move is to promote trade and tourism. 
  Tah Kee Lek used to be a permanent checkpoint but was closed 
after political upheavals in Burma. 
  Since then it has been opened on a temporary basis. 

