Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial] </F>
  [Text] When SABC-TV [South African Broadcasting 
Corporation-Television] decided to broadcast, in a series of 
five programs, the history of the ANC [African National 
Congress] before the general election, it should have realized 
that this would provoke strong reaction from opposition 
political parties. 
  It is, of course, not easy for any institution in the world 
to operate as a so-called state broadcaster on taxpayers' money. 
There has to be constant, careful planning in order not to 
provoke too much adverse criticism. Even in a Western democracy 
like Britain, the BBC is constantly criticized, especially over 
political matters, and during a run-up to an election. In such 
instances the so-called state broadcaster has to provide 
explanations to the taxpayer and the licensees on whose finances 
it depends. 
  When the SABC-TV indicated that it was to begin broadcasting 
a series on the ANC's "struggle," it was being unbelievably 
naive, totally inconsiderate, or blatantly biased. People who 
are not ANC supporters come to one conclusion, and not without 
any reason: This series is part of ANC's election campaign. 
  The tendency was to reject any kind of interference in the 
so- called state broadcaster during the so-called "apartheid 
era." One can rightly ask if the authorities then would have 
allowed this type of program to be broadcast. The same applies 
to the program exalting ANC's Umkhonto we Sizwe [Spear of the 
Nation -- ANC military wing] last Thursday. How such a program 
can contribute to the so-called leveling of the political 
playing field is beyond any comprehension. 
  The present SABC authorities should use wisdom in handling 
political material. Surely the persistent reports of control by 
an ANC coterie under the leadership of Dr. Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri 
cannot be denied. These reports are supported by the 
disclosures of Dr. Matsepe-Casaburri's close links with the ANC 
in the past. She has a right to her personal political 
preferences, but in her position she should set them aside. 
  The news about the appointment of an outspoken ANC-member to 
an important executive post at the SABC, as well as this week's 
announcement of the ANC candidate lists in which the names of 
three SABC Board members appear (one declined immediately), 
arouses more suspicion. What became of the excellent rule of 
political impartiality when appointing members to the board? 
This very board, put together after much publicized hearings by 
a panel of so-called "uninvolved" jurists? 
  The SABC's latest step places a heavy responsibility on 
well- 
known non-supporters of the ANC within the SABC Board, such as 
academic Christo Viljoen, churchman Professor Pieter Potgieter, 
and communications expert Professor Arrie de Beer. 
  The actions of SABC-TV leaves us with some serious questions 
on how the Independent Broadcast Authority will from now on 
divide the radio waves and matters regarding television among 
the different interested parties. What will happen if the ANC 
on 27 April becomes the senior partner in a government of 
national unity? 
  For the SABC Board there is only one solution: To establish 
a truly impartial and neutral tradition regarding political 
issues before a new constitutional dispensation. The time has 
come for all who are exposed to the SABC services, as well as 
those in the administration who steadfastly support justice and 
fairness to stand up and be counted. 
  Surely, now is not the time to be silent. 

