Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Li Tzu-ching (7812 5261 0079): "Deng and Chen </F>
Factions Differ on Propaganda Work"] 
  [Text] While Deng and Wan focus propaganda and 
ideological work on reform, opening up, and construction, Chen 
and Song insist on outdated preaching as the first priority for 
propaganda and ideological work. Can such a contradiction be 
reconciled? 
<H3>  "One Country, Three Statesmen" Pulls Propaganda Work in All 
Directions </H3>
  One belated item of news: The CPC called a national 
conference on propaganda and ideology from 24 to 29 January. 
  One item of news which was not late: This conference 
highlighted the predicament of CPC propaganda work. 
  The greatest predicament is: Senior statesmen above the 
Political Bureau leaders have their own ideas, versions, and 
lines of thinking for policies, which is confusing to propaganda 
workers under them who do not know who to obey with "one 
country, three statesmen." 
  What is the situation with "one country, three statesmen?" 
  From internal sources this reporter obtained documents 
circulated at the conference, such as conference speeches by 
Deng and Chen and other senior statements and cables and letters 
of congratulation, which are excerpted as follows: 
<H3>  Differences and Agreements Between Deng and Wan, and Chen 
and Song Over the Focus of Propaganda </H3>
  Deng Xiaoping: The conference was called just at the right 
time. In work on propaganda and ideology, we must coordinate 
closely with the party's general policies and central tasks so 
that work on propaganda and ideology adapts to and promotes the 
demands of socialist modernization. 
  Chen Yun: The party's propaganda and ideological work must 
be clear-cut and must propagate, educate, and guide the whole 
party and people of the whole country to love their country and 
socialist society. Propaganda work should serve socialist 
society and the party's basic line and inherit the will of 
revolutionaries of the former generation, with selective 
emphasis on the construction of socialist thought, morality, and 
spiritual civilization. 
  Wan Li believes: Propaganda and ideological work must uphold 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics; must continue to do away with frameworks and 
shackles unfit for work in the new era; must avoid doctrinaire 
and bookish preaching; must reflect the people's demands, views, 
and voice promptly, correctly, and comprehensively and solve 
practical problems; and must share the same goal and task in 
concerted efforts to achieve the four modernizations. 
  Song Renqiong said: The first task for the party's 
propaganda work is to uphold Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought 
and insist on propagating the party's basic line and the 
philosophic viewpoint of proletarian dialectical materialism. 
The present urgent task is to rectify and strengthen the 
party's propaganda work. Another important task for the party's 
propaganda work is to expose and oppose bourgeois liberalization 
and criticize various anti-Marxist tendencies and ideological 
currents and activities. 
  A look at the views of Deng Xiaoping and Wan Li and those of 
Chen Yun and Song Renqiong will readily show differences between 
Deng and Wan, and Chen and Song. In short, Deng and Wan are 
focusing propaganda and ideological work on reform, opening up, 
and construction, while Chen and Song are taking outdated 
preaching as the first priority for propaganda and ideological 
work. 
  Can this contradiction be reconciled? 
  Of course not. 
  This is not a problem of general outlook, or different 
points 
of view on a problem, but a problem of direction and fundamental 
difference. Deng Liqun assembled a number of "leftist" marshals 
to sign jointly a statement about "righting the direction of 
propaganda work," betraying their belief that past propaganda 
work was wrong in its direction. 
<H3>  Sixteen "Leftist" Marshals Demand Righting of the Direction 
of Propaganda Work </H3>
  On 26 January, the CPC Central Committee General Office 
newsletter ran a letter addressed to the national conference on 
propaganda and ideology by 16 people such as Deng Liqun, Wang 
Dongxing, He Jingzhi, Gao Di, Yang Rudai, Wang Renzhi, Chen 
Yeping, Li Ximing, and Xu Weicheng, demanding the righting of 
the direction of propaganda work, propagating unashamedly 
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought, and upholding the party 
constitution. 
  A cadre with the Central Propaganda Department thought that 
the problem of direction alleged by Deng Liqun was about 
doctrinairism and bookism. But they made a big mistake in 
labeling opposition to doctrinairism and bookism as a 
directional mistake. 
<H3>  Those Who Give Commands in the CPC Have Lost All Authority 
[subhead] </H3>
  But this reporter believes that in fact CPC propaganda work 
has done little to shatter the shackles and yoke of doctrine. 
The truth is that even that leaves the conservatives 
dissatisfied. 
  Of course, compared with the past, the CPC has made progress 
in propaganda work. For instance, the 24 January RENMIN RIBAO 
ran a reader's article in its "People's Forum" the day following 
the opening of the national conference on propaganda and 
ideology entitled "Recover the Power to 'Ban,'" a move hardly 
permissible in the days of the Cultural Revolution. The article 
was highly critical of the corrupt phenomenon in which "bans are 
flagrantly defied." "If you have doubts, consider this: The 
state issued an instruction forbidding people to eat and drink 
lavishly. But obviously it could not stop some people from 
continuing the practice." The article was critical because it 
named the cause as "lacking the power to ban," which is another 
way of saying that those who give commands in the CPC have lost 
all authority. Is this not a sign of the CPC's impending 
decline? Did Deng Liqun and company not make a big mistake in 
seeing this well-intentioned warning to the party as a piece of 
"bourgeois liberalization" propaganda? 
<H5>  A Ship Which Sank 36 Years Ago Suddenly Becomes Big News </H5>
  The front page of the same edition of RENMIN RIBAO gave 
coverage to "Chinese shipbuilding," running articles and 
pictures on reports of 36 years ago on the "launching ceremony 
for the first 10,000-tonne ship." The propaganda material 
reportedly caused controversy and questions both before and 
after it was published. 
  "The 10,000-tonne cargo ship "Great Leap Forward" vanished a 
long time ago. How can it be as used propaganda material?" 
  "Is it not better to hide our faults than to make a show of 
them. In any case why should we expose our seamy side?" 
  "If this is not totally lying to the people, it is certainly 
a grand deception!" 
  Back then, with his own eyes, this writer saw the "Great 
Leap 
Forward" at Dalian. It was really huge and made a spectacular 
sight. There was a large audience at the launching ceremony. 
But it quickly dropped out of sight and news stories about it 
stopped. People were not puzzled and the party mouthpiece was 
silent about it. Later this writer learned that the "Great Leap 
Forward" had "leaped" to the bottom of the Huang Hai. For 36 
years there has been no official explanation about it, leaving 
only a big question mark among the people about the 10,000-tonne 
vessel. Now, suddenly, "non-news" became "news" again, and the 
"Great Leap Forward," which had vanished for 36 years, suddenly 
"leaped" out of the water and onto the front page. Such a 
practice may suit quite well the taste of Deng Liqun and 
company. If the word "liberalization" has to be used, then this 
is typical "proletarian liberalization," reporting only good 
news and not bad news. 
<H3>  The Conference on Propaganda and Ideology States 10 Big 
Problems </H3>
  Due to differences and gaps, the national conference showed 
that workers were confused in their thinking. A pile of 
problems and opinions were raised during group discussions, 
which can be summed up into 10 points: 
  --Is there a contradiction between Marxism and Mao Zedong 
Thought and the current party line, principles, and policies? 
  --What should propaganda and ideological work focus on: 
Party theory or the demands of socialist construction? 
  --With which are propaganda workers getting out of touch: 
The party's theoretical foundation or the central tasks in the 
new era? 
  --How do propaganda principles and policies match with 
socialist construction, reform and opening up, and the pursuit 
of a socialist market economic system? 
  --Do propaganda departments give orders and inculcate 
thoughts and theories, or educate people's thinking with 
respect, understanding, and care? 
  --Which should be the criterion for propaganda: The party's 
line, principles, and policies, or state laws? 
  --Should propaganda enforce the democratic principle and 
allow differing voices on the basis of law? 
  --Are propaganda departments state administrative organs, or 
are they part of the party organization? 
  --Should propaganda departments allow nonparty and 
democratic 
party personnel a certain proportion of posts to reflect 
solidarity among circles and strata? 
  --Should propaganda work observe a distinction between the 
party and things outside the party? Or between party ideology 
and the state Constitution and laws? 
  As the ideology is not unified, conference participants said 
propaganda work is difficult. They have "four worries": A 
wrong understanding of the "central spirit" and making mistakes; 
being accused of violating the "four cardinal principles" and 
pursuing bourgeois liberalization; worry that propaganda will be 
rejected by society; and being caught up in controversy. 
<H3>  Close to a Hundred Propaganda Cadres of Provincial Rank Ask 
for Transfers </H3>
  The conference revealed that in 1993 close to a hundred 
propaganda cadres of provincial rank asked for post transfers or 
transfers out of their departments. The posts of propaganda 
department head and deputies in some provinces have been left 
vacant and are temporarily filled by party secretaries or deputy 
party secretaries. 
  After the new round of elections of members of party 
committees of departments, committees, and offices of the CPC 
Central Committee and ministries, commissions, and offices of 
the State Council, there are still some 20 propaganda member 
posts left vacant in ministries, commissions, and offices. 
  In a way, the national conference on propaganda and ideology 
reflected differences within the party over ideological and 
organizational matters. "Leftist" marshals and generals' 
insistence on combining doctrinairism and bookism reflected 
their sectarian spirit. 

