CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhao Jian (6392 0256)] </F>
  [Text] In two days, responsible government departments will 
announce to society arrangements for 1994 treasury body 
issuance. According to reli able news, on this occasion treasury 
bonds worth 100 billion yuan will be issued, newly increasing 
three-year term treasury bond collection receipts and two-year 
term material treasury bonds. Markets look good for both in 
terms of interest rates and circulation rates, in particular 
for making it easier for the ordinary masses to make purchases. 
This is the first boom of China's bond market in 1994. It has 
the attention not only of high level leadership but individual 
investors also are givi ng it the utmost consideration. 
  Treasury bonds have a good reputation, stable earnings and 
no 
income tax is paid on interes t. In most countries, they are are 
favored by investors who crown them "golden bonds." Since China 
first issued treasury bon ds in 1981, there were 10 years of 
apportioned issuance as an "arranged marriage." In 1991, after 
contracted buying and sel ling and competitive bidding were 
adopted, there were two years in the market of "free love." In 
1991 and 1992, treasury bo nd issuance was at 10 billion and 
eight billion, respectively, a honeymoon stage of "love at first 
sight." In 1993, due mai nly to interest rates unsuited to 
concurrent changes in financial markets, there was a hitch in 
treasury bond issuance; matchm akers cried out in alarm: they 
are "bitterly losing their golden luster." Nevertheless, after 
the appearance of state macroeconomic policy measures, since the 
end of January 1994, there has been a boom in Shanghai's 
treasury bond spot market. Bet ween 29 Jan and 11 Mar, all major 
types of 1991 to 1993 treasury bonds rose betwen 1.74 percent 
and 3.48 percent. Most investors and experts agree, 1994 will be 
the year of the treasury bond in China's bond market. 
  People's good view of the 1994 treasury bond market is not 
without reason. There is no exception whatever from advanced 
western econom ies by state fiscal treasury bond market measures 
providing long-term stable fund accumulation. The Chinese 
Government has clearly announced that as of 1994 central 
government financing will no longer directly provide overdrafts 
or loans from the Central Bank of China, but treasury bonds will 
make up fiscal deficits, accumulate construction funds, readjust 
and control the economy, and hold down inflation. This 
necessarily will expand the volume of treasury bonds issued, 
providing policy assu rances to establish a richly vital and 
effective bond market. The fiscal government and banks are now 
joining hands to improve on places in the past where 
second-grade markets were imperfect. For example, increasing the 
kinds of treasury bonds to one-half year, one year, two year and 
three year terms; raising interest rates and stressing sales to 
individuals; allowing certain kinds of bonds to be transferred 
on the market for short time periods and allowing transfer 
prices to fluctuate alo ng with the market. To make purchases by 
the masses and supervision easier, banks will open a network of 
74,000 bond purchase sites where customers can convert or obtain 
cash at any time. Banks also will concentrate a network of 
43,000 sites to handle reselling. The Central Bank of China will 
join market operations at an appropriate time. 
  Experts predict that expanding treasury bond issuance and 
exchange under conditions of stock market underselling for a 
certain time period may spur on currency circulation and affect 
stock prices while at the same time providing to most investors 
a kind of high-earnings safe financial commodity which could 
provide currency to three families [huo bi sanjia 6303 3024 0005 
1367], thereby inciting investors to stress investment, reducing 
speculation and making companies on the market more efficient 
and stress outstanding achievements. 

