BFN 

  [Text] Kan Kato, chairman of the Government Tax Commission 
(prime minister's advisory panel;, Gaishi Hiraiwa, chairman of 
the Economic Council (prime minister's advisory panel); and Eiji 
Suzuki, chairman of the Financial Systems Council (finance 
minister's advisory panel) held a meeting at a hotel in Tokyo on 
the morning of 6 June, and agreed that administrative reform and 
tax reform should come together to gain the public's 
understanding on the need for drastic tax reform accompanying a 
raise in the consumption tax rate. 
  Specifically, they agreed it would be necessary to formulate 
an "administrative reform five-year plan" which will call for 
the merger or abolition of special status corporations and for 
reductions of commodity prices by remedying existing gaps in 
prices between Japan and other countries. They will work on 
Prime Minister Hata and Finance Minister Fujii with this 
recommendation. It is very rare that heads of these major 
councils charged with giving advice on economic operations agree 
on a concernted action. It is likely that Prime Minister Hata's 
leadership will be severely tested. 
  The meeting took place at the suggestion of Tax Commission 
Chairman Kato to Hiraiwa and Suzuki, and it was held in an 
informal manner. At the meeting, the three chairmen first of 
all agreed that to improve welfare service while upgrading the 
social overhead capital of Japan in the approaching era of aged 
population, increased financial burdens by the public would be 
unavoidable, and a rise in the consumption tax rate would be 
necessary. They further agreed that if the public burdens are 
to be eased somewhat under the given conditions, it would be 
essential that the governmenet make efforts to carry out 
administrative reform in parallel with tax reform, and that the 
Tax Commission and the two councils should, in the course of 
conducting deliberations in their respective organizations, 
should call strongly on the government to move administrtative 
reform into actions. As actions that need to be taken by the 
government, they cited the formulation of a "[central 
government] administrative reform five-year plan" and a "local 
government administratve reform five-year plan" which will show 
what government projects and special status corporations should 
be merged or abolished in what year, the correction of commodity 
price gaps between Japan and other countries by making headway 
in deregulation, and the revision of the way the public utility 
charges' rates are decided. 
  Following the three chairmen's meeting, Chairman Kato of the 
Tax Commission told reporters: "The common view of the three 
chairman is that thinking about the Japan of the 21st century, 
tax reform and administratiive reform should be carried out 
concurrently. Some in the Financial Systems Council insist 
administrative reform should be specific (so that it might 
contribute to reduction of expenditures). In the future, I think 
the Tax Commission and the Financial System Council will come to 
work in particularly close cooperation." 

