Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lisette Andreae and Juergen Schwenkenbecher: </F>
"Turnaround Led to Militancy--`Spillover From East' Thesis Is 
Scarcely Accepted"] 
  [Text] Kay Nehm, the federal chief prosecutor, said last 
week that right-wing radicalism spilled over from east to west 
after unification. Well-known political scientists and 
sociologists do not agree. 
  The scientists, responding to queries from BERLINER ZEITUNG 
do agree that militancy, proneness to violence and aggression 
are more pronounced in the new laender than in the old but that 
right-wing extremism is not. 
  Manfred Funke, a Bonn political scientist, points out that 
right-wing extremism has always been more flagrant in the west 
than in the east. There has been a strong right-wing element in 
the old laender from the very start, he says, citing the ban on 
the right-wing radical SRP [Socialist Reich Party] in 1952 and 
the emergence of the NPD [National Democratic Party] in the 
sixties. Funke also points out that a clear-cut right-wing 
ideology complete with leadership personalities never did exist 
in the east. The right-wing radical riots in the east following 
unification were more of a way of saying no to reality; a 
protest outlet for explosive mass desperation about the social 
situation. 
  Funke believes that the real problem is not right-wing or 
left-wing extremism but the "loss of the democratic center" as a 
counterforce. 
  Eckhard Jesse, a Chemnitz political scientist, also thinks 
Nehm's statement is something of an exaggeration. Although it is 
true that aggression is more pronounced in the east than in the 
west and that right-wing extremism has gotten a new lease on 
life as a result of events in eastern Germany, the question is 
whether it really makes sense to speak of right-wing extremism 
in eastern Germany in the aftermath of unification. Antifascism, 
after all, had such a strong impact [in eastern Germany] that 
right-wing extremism never really existed. Right-wing radicalism 
as it manifested itself in the east after unification was a kind 
of "costume fascism," says Jesse. Underneath, all the social 
problems lie hidden. 
  Marburg political scientist Armin Pfahl-Traughbert says that 
the spillover thesis is only partially correct, i.e. insofar as 
it applies to militancy which is more manifest in eastern 
Germany than in the western part of the country. It is not 
right-wing extremism but the extremist potential generally which 
is greater in eastern Germany, he believes. 
  In the opinion of two Bielefeld sociologists there is no 
scientific proof for Nehm's statement. Youth researcher Klaus 
Hurrelmann says that the east-to-west spillover thesis is simply 
"bizarre and historically incorrect. If anything did spill 
over," Hurrelmann says, "then it was west to east." He thinks 
the reason for the sharp rise in the proneness to violence in 
eastern Germany is the "sudden radical change into a capitalist 
society." Many people were unable to cope with insecurity and 
the lack of familiarity with foreign cultures. 
  Hurrelmann believes the threshold has now been reached at 
which the spontaneous protest movement has turned more and more 
distinctly into a political movement with leaders which 
organizes and solidifies itself. "That is the real danger," he 
says. 
  Wilhelm Heitmeyer, a colleague of Hurrelmann's, 
characterizes 
the Nehm thesis as an "institutional way of looking at things 
which is inaccurate in this form." Heitmeyer, the head of the 
youth research center at Bielefeld University, believes that the 
logistic base of right-wing extremism is situated in western 
Germany while the greater potential for violence is situated in 
the eastern part of the country. His studies have shown that 
neo-Nazis with a proneness to violence are more numerous in the 
new laender whereas the corresponding political parties such as 
the Republikaner are less popular. 
<H5>  2,000 Activists at the Time of Unification </H5>
  For a long time the GDR denied that there was such a thing 
as 
right-wing extremism among young people. Even an attack by 30 
skinheads on the Zion Church in East Berlin in October 1987 was 
downplayed as an example of "rowdyism." 
  And yet, the fact of the matter is that internal Stasi 
documents set the date of the start of the right-wing extremist 
movement as 1982. In the late eighties, the Stasi estimated that 
there were some 800 neo-Nazis in 38 different groups, including 
"Zyklon B" in Berlin and "SS Division Walter Krueger" in Rostock. 
  According to a study by the then-Joint Land Criminal Police 
Office (GLKA), just under 2,000 persons belonged to the hard 
core of right-wing extremist groups in eastern Germany at the 
time of unification, with another 15,000 persons characterized 
as sympathizers. "The road to right-wing extremism frequently 
leads to social and political contradictions via a decidedly 
emotional way of looking at things," said Bernd Wagner, the head 
the extremism/terrorism department of GLKA in 1991. 

