Recommended   for Exporting Companies 

<F P=102> 942A0146A Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanse 8 Apr 94 p 
31--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 942A0146A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN </F>
<F P=105>  Japanse </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Koichi Sugimoto, researcher, Long Term Credit </F>
Bank of Japan: "Extend Export Exchange Contracts to Four or Five 
Years--Strive To Avoid Losses From Quotation Differences; Part 
of Financial Activities for Which Comprehensive Management Is 
Needed"] 
  [Text] 1) The manner in which currency risk 
management is conducted in Japan's export industries is one of 
the reasons that corporate performances falter when the yen 
appreciates. If export industries improve risk management 
through longer term exchange contracts, business deterioration 
can be avoided to some extent even if the yen appreciates. 
  Industrial structure changes necessitated by yen 
appreciation 
can also be carried out more smoothly. 
  2) If exchange risks are hedged beforehand, the action 
will become a pressure against yen appreciation and currency 
adjustments will proceed rapidly; therefore, it will become a 
factor in curbing excessive investments in the export business 
and in restraining trade imbalances. 
  3) To develop stablility and soundness in the Japanese 
economy, the reassessment of ALM (Assets and Liabilities 
Management) process of individual corporations and agumentation 
of their management structures are necessary. 
<H5>  6-Month Period Is Too Short for Hedging </H5>
  The exchange fluctuation rate was 10 percent, on an annual 
basis, during the 20 years from 1973 to 1992. That means that 
Japanese export industries continued to export while shouldering 
the risk that yen-denominated sales proceeds which fluctuate 
about 10 percent annually. During the same 20-year period from 
1973 to 1992, the number of automobiles sold in the U.S. market 
fluctuated at an annual rate of 10 percent. This can be called 
the "business risk" of fluctuating sales affected by changes in 
the economy. In other words, as for exports, the "exchange risk" 
that proceeds would decrease because of the yen's appreciation 
was as big a risk as the "business risk" of declining sales and 
receipts due to deteriorating business conditions. 
  Many people think that "the currency risk should naturally 
be 
big for export industries," and that is actually true. The 
problem is, although the exchange risk can be hedged by simply 
using forward exchange contracts, that action has been neglected. 
  It is commonly believed that "export industries are using 
forward exchange contracts as a hedge." At present, however, 
forward contracts of export industries cover, at the most, only 
about half of the annual exports, i.e., only sales up to about 
six months ahead. Japan's export industries cannot stop 
exporting suddenly even if the yen appreciates. If exports are 
to be continued with existing production capabilities, it is 
clear that, if the yen appreciates (after six months), 
yen-denominated sales proceeds would decrease and difficulties 
would arise (even if product prices are raised on 
dollar-denominated basis, sales volume would decline; therefore, 
yen-denominated proceeds would decrease). Therefore, business 
would slump in Japan if the yen appreciates. 
  Since forward exchange contracts of present export 
industries 
cover too short a duration, there is practically no hedge 
against exchange risks. It might be said that they are 
conducting business operations while carrying an enormous 
exchange risk. To avoid this, they must conclude forward 
contracts covering exports over a longer period of time. 
Considering the depreciation period of the current export 
production lines and the employment situation, flexibility of 
product prices, etc., forward exchange contracts needed as 
actual risk hedges must cover four to five years and over 10 
times the current monetary amount. Then, the predicament of 
carrying the obvious and enormous exchange risk of business 
deterioration from yen appreciation can be evaded. 
  If exports spreading over four or five years are hedged, the 
exports made with current facilities will be settled on a 
yen-denominated basis even if the yen appreciates; therefore, 
there will be ample time for corporate structural changes in 
case the management strategy is taken to reduce exports in 
stages and promote local production. Also, management can avoid 
sudden setbacks caused by yen appreciation. 
  The same line of thinking should apply when making new 
capital investments. When setting up production lines for 
exports, basically, the exchange rate that can be contracted 
into the future must be made the standard. Proceeds of exported 
products that are manufacturd at these export production lines 
should be received in dollars in the future. The export proceeds 
to be received in the future should basically be hedged and the 
possible contract rate should become the basis of investment 
planning. Concretely, annual capital investments will be hedged 
with the output intended for exports to be used as the basis to 
calculate the dollar-denominated cash flow. 
  If such exchange risk hedges had been in place in the past, 
what would've been the effects on currency markets and 
macroecnomics? If Japan's export industries had exercised 
exchange risk management and concluded long- and medium-term 
forward exchange contracts for anticipated exports, the yen 
would have appreciated sooner under the dollar-selling pressure 
of forward contracts and industrial structure changes would have 
proceeded rapidly while the present trade frictions could have 
been averted to some extent. 
<H5>  Concept To Increase Corporate "Current Value" </H5>
  Long- and medium-term forward exchange contracts are 
basically similar to the short-term forward contracts frequently 
used in export contracts and have been used by Japanese 
corporations since early 1980's to hedge currency risks of 
foreign currency-denominated debentures issued by corporations. 
  Meanwhile, long- and medium-term forward exchange contracts 
from an ALM standpoint, including hedging of future exports, 
have become possible institutionally through the abolishment of 
the actual demand rule in 1984. Subsequently, the ALM concept 
has not permeated the corporate circle and even today, hedging 
operations are limited to hedges against financial risks, such 
as hedging foreign currency-denominated corporate bonds and 
hedging a company's product inventories through short-term 
export contracts. Movements to hedge against exchange risks, 
from an overall corporate ALM standpoint, are not apparent. 
  To control risks, such as those created by currency 
fluctuations, Japanese corporations must basically reassess the 
past process of business management and change to a 
comprehensive ALM setup. First, in the past emphasis tended to 
be focused on profits and losses of a settlement period revealed 
through financial accounting. Hereafter, it is important to 
introduce the concept of increasing the current value of the 
entire corporation. 
  Second, in the past attention tended to be directed to 
financial risk management, but hereafter, attention must be paid 
to overall corporate risk management, based on cash flow in 
business operations, such as future payments for exports and raw 
materials. Third, the use of hedging measures, such as 
derivatives, are important to control risks. 
  Periodic profits and losses based on financial accounting 
can 
be exaggerated, e.g., by including latent profits of stock 
holdings or through various other settlement manipulations. In 
such cases, since the values that should be realized in the 
future are being preempted for the current year, it is the same 
as passing the bill for that amount to subsequent years. 
Actually, there are cases that latent losses are being carried 
on the basis of book rate valuations because of forward contract 
extensions or that latent losses are being carried because of 
price declines of stock holdings; therefore, there are many 
cases that the periodic profits and losses appear favorable, but 
the real conditions of the company are worsening. 
  In enforcing ALM, therefore, the operations must include 
control of latent profits and losses. To do this, the concept of 
"current value," which expresses the real economic value, must 
be employed. "Current value equals book value plus or minus 
latent profits and losses" and the "current value profits and 
losses equal periodic profits and losses plus or minus latent 
profits and losses." Therefore, the aim of ALM is to increase 
the "current value" of a company by including all of the 
potential profits and losses in a consolidated form. A company's 
current value is assessed in the stock market as the total 
market value of its shares; therefore, increasing the current 
value has the same effect as increasing its stock prices. 
  Since a company's current value is computed on the basis of 
"current value of its assets and liabilities," ALM is concerned 
with market values of assets and liabilities. Risk calculations 
are made by figuring out how current values of assets and 
liabilities are altered by risk factors, such as interest and 
exchange rate fluctuations, commodity price variations, etc. 
Risk management, employing hedging measures, should be carried 
out to minimize these risks and maximize the company's current 
value. This series of actions constitutes "ALM." 
  In the process of calculating current values, it is 
necessary 
to consider the entire cash flow, including future receipts and 
payments expected by the company. This action is the first step 
in sound "ALM" that considers latent profits and losses. At 
present, financial cash flows, such as interest payments and 
foreign bond issuances, are managed relatively well, but there 
are many cases that cash flows involving exports and raw 
materiel payments are taken for granted and not considered as 
factors for risk management. In other words, interest and 
exchange rate risks affecting financial status are managed, but 
risks involving exports, imports, and raw materials tend to be 
neglected although the concerned sums are relatively large. The 
exchange risk affecting the sales of export industries is a 
typical example. 
  Furthermore, since these risks are often managed separately, 
the interrelationships between risks tend to be ignored. Since 
there are cases that risks hedge against each other, it is 
essential to consider comprehensive risk management which takes 
into account all of the company's risks. 
  For example, let us consider the case of a company, which is 
engaged in exports to the United States, issuing 
dollar-denominated corporate bonds. If the yen appreciates, the 
yen-denominated value of cash inflow from future exports to the 
United States will decrease, but since the yen-denominated value 
of cash outflow in future payments on dollar bonds will also 
decrease, both are hedging each other against exchange risks. If 
attention is paid only to the exchange risk in the financial 
sector and dollar bonds are hedged on yen-denominated basis, the 
exchange risk is being enlarged from the overall company 
standpoint. 
<H5>  Swaps, Etc., Are Inexpensive </H5>
  Risk management must be flexible when undertaking ALM. The 
use of long- and medium-term forward exchange contracts as well 
as the derivatives market, such as swaps, futures and options, 
will become important. Derivatives are useful in providing the 
required amount of control, when needed, of necessary risks and 
they are inexpensive. 
  Take exchange risks for example, there are cases that 
European automobile manufacturers have concluded long-term 
forward exchange contracts on exports to Japan, and leading 
U.S.-European corporations have fully established ALM setups. 
They are also aggressively using derivatives for hedging 
purposes. 
  In Japan, although there are many corporations dealing with 
exports and imports, there has been little progress in the 
establishment of ALM systems and utilization of risk hedging 
measures. If individual corporations establish the ALM 
structure, corporate values and performances will stabilize, and 
that will in turn lead to stability of the macroeconomics of 
this collective corporate body. 


