BFN 

  [Excerpts] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin confirmed at 
today's cabinet session that an IDF [Israel Defense Forces] and 
Foreign Ministry team have been doing staff work on the Syrian 
issue. The cabinet today approved the entry of 20,000 
inhabitants of the territories into Israel in spite of the 
closure, which was extended until further notice. 
  As for reports about cooperation between Hamas and Fatah, 
cabinet ministers asserted that this would lead to the annulment 
of the Declaration of Principles with Israel. Our political 
correspondent Udi Segal reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Segal] An IDF and a Foreign Ministry team 
have been working on a peace package with Syria, Yitzhaq Rabin 
confirmed in today's cabinet session. The teams were instructed 
to examine several possibilities, particularly with regard to 
the security issue, but none of these mentions a full withdrawal 
from the Golan Heights. Rabin was angry about the leaks to the 
press of the document formulated by Major General Ilan Biran, 
and said he was opposed to holding a cabinet debate on the peace 
package. A debate here would be tantamount to a public debate, 
he said. The ministers, at least some of them, accepted Rabin's 
position with understanding. [passage omitted] 
  Another issue tackled by the cabinet was the report about an 
agreement -- a kind of distribution of labor -- between the PLO 
and Hamas, whereby the former would allow the latter to go on 
staging terror attacks against Israelis. This report was not 
corroborated by the briefings given by IDF officers and the head 
of the Shin Bet. Nevertheless, Rabin and other cabinet ministers 
asserted that the issue would be looked into and that if the 
existence of such an agreement is confirmed, this would 
invalidate the Oslo agreement. 
  [Education Ministry Official Rubinstein] We did not get any 
confirmation of these reports. However, in order to remove any 
doubt, we are hereby announcing in advance that such a 
development would thwart and sabotage any arrangement with the 
PLO and would actually invalidate the understanding reached with 
it. 
  [Segal] In contrast, Tourism Minister 'Uzi Bar'am believes 
the whole thing is a lie. 
  [Bar'am] The matter will be checked, of course, but it is 
most probably Hamas propaganda. [passage omitted] [end 
recording] 
  Knesset Member Binyamin Netanyahu urged the prime minister 
to 
present to the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee the 
peace package with Syria drafted by the IDF. 

