BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 1 Jun (XINHUA) -- The State Council's 
General Office recently issued a circular on improving the 
protection and management of forest resources. The circular 
said: In recent years, various localities have made new headway 
in accelerating the pace of afforestation and greening, and in 
improving the protection of forest resources. Some new problems 
have arisen in our forestry sector, however. Chief among them 
are an increase in the excessive consumption of forest 
resources, the rather serious problem of logging in excess of 
authorized quotas, and the renewed practices of indiscriminately 
felling and logging trees and of recklessly capturing and 
hunting wildlife. People's governments at all levels and all 
relevant departments should take these problems seriously, and 
they should earnestly study ways to solve them. 
  In the circular, the State Council's General Office said 
emphatically: Although our country has achieved growth in both 
forested areas and forest reserves, it is still deficient in 
forests, with dwindling full-grown or overgrown forest 
resources. People's governments at all levels should take 
forestry-related work seriously. We should make use of all 
economic and legal means, adopt administrative measures which 
are conducive to the protection and development of forest 
resources, and devote earnest efforts to protecting and managing 
forest resources. 
  First, we should strictly implement the system of logging 
quotas and timber transportation based on relevant documents. 
Annual logging quotas, which are approved by the State Council 
for prescribed periods, represent the maximum consumption 
amounts for various localities when they exploit forest 
resources; they are legally binding. No localities may surpass 
the quotas without the approval of the State Council or other 
authorized units. In the second half of 1994, all localities 
should extensively review the progress of recent years in 
enforcing logging quotas, and strictly deal with units that 
exceed logging quotas. We should continue the policy of 
allowing forestry departments to exercise unified management and 
organize trips into the mountains to buy timber from key 
timber-producing counties, and may not willfully abolish timber 
inspection stations established in accordance with the law. 
Railways and transportation departments should maintain the 
system of transporting timber based on relevant documents. 
Administrative organs and law enforcement departments are 
strictly forbidden to run logging operations under various 
pretexts and in various forms. 
  Second, we should tighten supervision and management over 
woodland utilization and implement the system of compensated 
woodland utilization. Units and individuals which have not 
attended to relevant procedures in accordance with the law may 
not, under any pretext, occupy or allot for free utilization 
woodland which is used by state-owned forestry enterprises and 
institutions. Forestry rights certificates are legal documents 
attesting to ownership rights to forests, timber, and woodland. 
People's governments at all levels should review illegal 
woodland appropriation and occupation since the second half of 
1992; set deadlines for attending to procedures for examination, 
approval, and compensation; and retake illegally appropriated 
and occupied woodland upon failure to complete such procedures. 
  Third, we should conscientiously improve the protection and 
management of wildlife and rare plants. People's governments at 
all levels should take wildlife and rare plant protection as 
their important duty, institute an on-the-job responsibility 
system, and implement various protection measures. 
  Fourth, we should improve forestry administration and basic 
services regarding forest resources, and stabilize the 
forestry-related law-enforcement ranks. People's governments at 
all levels, particularly county-level forestry departments, 
should place a premium on basic services such as forest resource 
protection and management. They should stabilize the ranks of 
managerial and law-enforcement personnel for forestry 
administration, forestry-related public security, timber 
inspection stations, and forestry work stations. They should 
actively solve practical staffing and funding problems, and 
foster good working conditions for such personnel. 
  Fifth, we should sternly combat all kinds of illegal and 
criminal activities which destroy forest resources. People's 
governments at all levels should take resolute measures against, 
and devote special efforts to cracking down expeditiously on, 
illegal and criminal acts committed by various people's 
governments to pilfer and clandestinely log trees owned by the 
state and collectives; to occupy woodland illegally; to hunt, 
smuggle, and trade illegally in wildlife and allied products 
which are on the state's priority protection list; to damage 
rare plants; and to beat up and injure forestry-related 
law-enforcement personnel. 
  Sixth, we should uphold the responsibility system based on 
tenure-specific objectives under which leading cadres protect 
and develop forest resources. Forest resource protection and 
management are an important duty of people's governments at all 
levels. We should take the growth and depletion of forest 
resources as one of the criteria against which to evaluate the 
performance of leaders at all levels, especially those at the 
county and township levels. We must investigate the 
responsibility of key administrative leaders if they have caused 
heavy losses through their failure to effectively halt the 
practices of indiscriminately felling and logging trees, 
illegally occupying woodland, and recklessly capturing and 
hunting wildlife while they are in office. We should commend 
and reward those who have achieved remarkable results in 
protecting, nurturing, and developing forest resources. 

