Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Tokyo NHK General Television Network in 
Japanese at 0030 GMT on 20 February, in its weekly 75-minute 
"Discussion" program which begins at 0000 GMT, carries a 
15-minute live interview with Sakigake Secretary-General 
Hiroyuki Sonoda on the prime minister's planned cabinet 
reshuffle, regrouping of parties, and other political issues. 
The interview is conducted by NHK commentator Takashi Yamamoto 
and Tokyo University professor Takeshi Sasaki. 
  Asked how he views Prime Minister Hosokawa's planned cabinet 
reshuffle, Sonoda says he believes the prime minister is hoping 
to change the chief cabinet secretary. When Yamamoto asks what 
are reasons for the reported discord between Prime Minister 
Hosokawa and Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura, Sonoda says 
"their relationship remains unchanged" although their positions 
in the government are different. Asked to comment on a reported 
crack in cooperative ties between the Japan New Party [JNP] and 
Sakigake, Sonoda says it is necessary to coordinate views within 
the two parties on any future merger. Asked when is the 
appropriate timing for cabinet reshuffle, Sonoda says: "It is 
desirable to reshuffle the cabinet after the ordinary Diet 
session because he will have enough time." Asked if Sakigake is 
opposed to an immediate cabinet reshuffle, Sonoda replies: "I am 
sure that if he really wants to reshuffle the cabinet, the prime 
minister will consult not only with Sakigake but also with other 
parties. Our party will present our view when consulted by the 
prime minister." Sonoda also notes: "We have never thought of 
leaving the ruling parties." He then discusses what Sakigake 
head Takemura has done in the cabinet as Chief Cabinet 
Secretary, noting: "I think it is most desirable that Mr. 
Takemura remain in the cabinet if Prime Minister Hosokawa really 
needs Sakigake as a prop for his cabinet." 
  Yamamoto asks about the possible formation of a new 
political 
force involving Sakigake, Democratic Socialist Party [DSP] and 
the SDPJ, [Social Democratic Party of Japan]. Sonoda says there 
are many things to be carried out before the formation of a new 
political force, saying: "I do not think we should decide at 
present on the formation of a new political force." 
  Asked if he supports the idea of establishing a "tripolar" 
structure among the SDPJ-DSP-Sakigake, Shinseito-Komeito, and 
the LDP, Sonoda says: "I am of the opinion that under the 
single-seat constituency system, the political world will be 
dominated by two big political forces in the future." He adds: 
"What is most important is that the ruling parties should 
cooperate with each other in the next election so that the 
coalition government will be further stabilized." 

