Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Pavel Felgengauer report: "A Partnership That Is Always at </F>
Hand"] 
  [Text] Russia and America are friends and partners once 
again: The meeting in Vladivostok between Russian Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev and Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher was officially described as "fully satisfactory." 
Scandals over Aldrich Ames and Richard Nixon appear to have 
been left behind. Even the latest effort of the aging former 
U.S. president -- his presence at the "Working Russia" rally on 
Sunday, where Nixon reportedly signed his name on a leaflet 
calling on citizens to take part in a rally on 17 March "to 
campaign for the restoration of the USSR" -- has not changed 
anything. 
  A certain stabilization in Russian-American relations nearly 
to the former -- pre-crisis -- level, however, could have been 
confidently forecast two weeks ago when an anti-Russian campaign 
was in full swing in the American press and in Congress. At the 
time, a "high-ranking official" in charge of foreign policy 
matters in the Clinton administration was in Moscow on an 
official visit; naturally, she asked not to be identified should 
she be quoted. I asked her: "Why did Bill Clinton personally 
announce the arrest of the Ames couple? Do so extraordinary 
actions by the top official signify the beginning of drastic 
changes in relations with Moscow?" 
  The answer was: "No, they do not, on the contrary. It is 
because the administration is doing its utmost to keep the 
relations of partnership with Moscow that the President has 
spearheaded that campaign, so that it can be quickly and 
painlessly 'hushed up' afterward. Had he not done so, economic 
sanctions against Moscow would have already been imposed." (Any 
Russian bureaucrat or politician would confirm that the best way 
to "kill" a damaging initiative is to head it.) The Ames case, 
indeed, has come to nothing surprisingly fast; even the 
deportation of James Morris, CIA station chief, from Moscow has 
not drawn any coherent response. 
  The issue is not only that Bill Clinton has invested too 
much 
personal effort in establishing a friendly relationship with 
Yeltsin and does not want to be seen a bungler. The 
Russian-American partnership has a more than real foundation. 
Both parties in the Congress and the administration agree that 
no return to a global nuclear standoff should be allowed. This 
is what U.S. Defense Secretary Bill Perry said this week on the 
eve of his visit to Moscow. 
  The Americans appear to be ready to go to any length to 
prevent this prospect from materializing. Hence, there is an 
entirely realistic alternative to the current soft, pro-Moscow 
stance by the Washington administration. This is a policy of 
sanctions, ultimatums, and growing pressure. 
  In Vladivostok, Andrey Kozyrev said that Russia would not 
accept the role of "a junior partner" and that it demands 
equality in relations with the United States. But equality is 
something we cannot even dream about given current realities. A 
Russia stricken by permanent political and economic crises does 
not have realistic possibilities at this stage to pursue a 
stable, active foreign policy in the Balkans or the Middle East. 
The Russian Foreign Ministry, however, has been displaying the 
most intense activity possible, thus successfully creating the 
legend about a series of "stunning foreign policy successes." 
  As a result, the image of a strong and increasingly 
powerful, 
imperialistic Russia is gaining ground overseas, a Russia that 
is just ripe to start being "contained." The incompetence of 
American politicians and political scientists about the actual 
situation in Russia, apparently, can only be matched by the 
incompetence of their Russian counterparts. The stabilization 
in bilateral relations may prove short-lived, and the 
circumstances and results of Nixon's Moscow visit may turn out 
to be nothing but harbingers of further events. 

