BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 20 Jun (AFP) -- Liberal Ernesto 
Samper, Colombian president-elect, announced today that he will 
propose the creation of a binational cooperation commission with 
the United States to adopt joint strategies against drug 
trafficking. Samper added that he will accept "any technical 
support from this country" in that effort. 
  In a news conference with the foreign media in Colombia, 
Samper, who was elected president on Sunday after narrowly 
defeating his opponent, Conservative Andres Pastrana, insisted 
on the need to fight drug trafficking in a "global" and 
"comprehensive" manner. "We are not the perpetrators but the 
victims of drug trafficking," he said, lamenting the fact that 
the international community continues to think the drug 
trafficking problem is exclusive to Colombia. He said "it is 
imperative that we ensure greater effectiveness in the 
cooperation between Colombia and the United States" in this area. 
  Samper said the creation of a Colombian-U.S. commission, 
which would be made up of government and civilian 
representatives, would focus on permanently reviewing the 
cooperation policy, strengthening mutual trust, and ensuring the 
effectiveness of the various police, prevention, and 
rehabilitation programs. 
  He said the commission would work toward overcoming 
difficulties encountered by the two countries in their struggle 
against drug trafficking mafias, one example being the situation 
created by a recent Washington decision to withhold information 
obtained through U.S. radars in Colombia. Samper said he hopes 
to maintain "clear, frank, honest, and firm cooperation" with 
the Clinton administration in the struggle against drug 
trafficking. 
  As for U.S. military aid to fight mafiosos in Colombia, 
Samper said he welcomes "any U.S. technical support for our 
counternarcotics efforts." He also reaffirmed his disapproval 
of a recent ruling by the Constitutional Court legalizing the 
possession and consumption of minimum drug dosages in Colombia 
and announced that he is studying two legal alternatives to 
close the door on that ruling of the highest court, which is 
tasked with protecting the political Constitution. 
  Samper said he is studying the possibility of calling a 
referendum, as proposed by outgoing President Cesar Gaviria, or 
issuing a law to ban the use of drugs. 
  Samper, who will assume office on 7 August, announced he 
will 
maintain the voluntary surrender policy for drug traffickers 
implemented by Gaviria but will introduce certain changes, 
especially in terms of the sentences imposed on capos who decide 
to surrender. 
  Samper said he will make the sentences tougher and will not 
allow mafiosos to take advantage of the accumulation of sentence 
reductions specified in the prison code for common criminals. 
Finally, the Colombian president-elect demanded "strong 
international cooperation" in the struggle against drug 
trafficking. 

