Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Shi Meisi (0670 5019 3128): "Xie Fei Says </F>
Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macao Should Strengthen Cooperation To 
Strive for Common Prosperity"] 
  [Text] Guangzhou, 20 Feb (XINHUA Hong Kong)--Xie Fei, 
member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and 
secretary of the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, tonight 
told Hong Kong and Macao delegates to the Guangdong Provincial 
People's Congress and provincial Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC] members from Hong Kong and Macao 
that Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macao should give full play to 
their own strong points to supplement each other and intensify 
their cooperation to achieve common prosperity. 
  Leaders of the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, the 
Guangdong Provincial People's Congress, the Guangdong Provincial 
Government, the Guangdong CPPCC, and the Guangdong Provincial 
Discipline Inspection Commissions had a cordial meeting with 
Hong Kong and Macao delegates to the Second Session of the 
Eighth Guangdong Provincial People's Congress and Guangdong 
Provincial CPPCC members from Hong Kong and Macao attending the 
Second Session of the Seventh Provincial CPPCC. They enjoyed 
themselves together at the evening party at the Guangdong Guest 
House tonight. 
  At the beginning of the evening party, Xie Fei first 
extended 
cordial greetings to Hong Kong and Macao delegates to the 
provincial people's congress and to provincial CPPCC members 
from Hong Kong and Macao, expressing heartfelt gratitude to the 
large numbers of compatriots residing in Hong Kong and Macao for 
their care and support for Guangdong for a long time past. He 
said that after achieving a 19 percent GNP increase in 1992, 
Guangdong succeeded in boosting its GNP to 310 billion yuan in 
1993, up 21 percent. "Guangdong is now working in a 
down-to-earth manner to basically attain the strategic goal of 
modernization in 20 years from 1990. Guangdong will set up a 
market economy, perfect its legal system, and build a clean and 
honest government. It will also pay extra attention to the 
development of agriculture, basic infrastructure, education, and 
science and technology. In addition, it will optimize the 
industrial structure and improve the ecological environment and 
the people's quality. Guangdong will not accomplish these 
glorious and arduous tasks without support from compatriots in 
Hong Kong and Macao," he said. 
  Xie Fei maintained that since Guangdong's investment 
environment is continually improving and Hong Kong and Macao 
enjoy superiority in funds, market, management, and information, 
they should intensify their cooperation to supplement each other 
and that there is a lot to be achieved in this respect. He 
stressed the role Guangdong's modernization drive will play in 
maintaining Hong Kong and Macao's prosperity and stability and 
the role the latter will play in promoting Guangdong's economic 
development. He said: "Common interests have made links 
between Guangdong, on the one hand, and Hong Kong and Macao on 
the other, closer and further developing their cooperative 
relations is of greater and greater significance." Xie Fei hoped 
that Hong Kong and Macao delegates to the provincial people's 
congress and provincial CPPCC members from Hong Kong and Macao 
will further display patriotism and contribute to Guangdong's, 
and the country's, economic development. 
  Over 300 people attended the evening party. Also present was 
Zhu Senlin, deputy secretary of the provincial party committee 
and Guangdong mayor. 

