Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ma Zhiping: "Companies Required To Renew Their </F>
Trademarks"] 
  [Text] Officials yesterday warned companies that they must 
renew their trademarks before they expire. 
  Companies that do not meet the deadline will have their 
trademarks invalidated, said an official in charge of the 
country's trademark registration. 
  A large number of Chinese companies have failed to renew 
their property rights according to the Trademark Law. 
  "More than 85,000 trademarks passed their 10-year legal 
validity term last March, and about 50,000 owners failed to 
apply for re- registration by last September," said the 
official, who refused to be named. 
  Expired trademarks become nullified after 10 years and are 
no 
longer protected by law. 
  The official urged companies to reregister their trademarks 
as soon as possible before use of them becomes illegal. 
  According to the Chinese Trademark Law, issued in 1983, a 
registered trademark is valid for 10 years, and re-registration 
is required six months prior to the expiration date. A grace 
period of six months after the expiration date is permitted, 
though firms that delay must pay a fine. 
  "Trademarks that are not re-registered become illegal and 
products bearing the marks will no longer be allowed to be 
sold," the official said. 
  The official added that many companies, especially those in 
rural areas, have stopped using their trademarks without 
informing the government. 
  Experts have also attributed the failure to re-register on 
poor trademark management and uninformed owners. 
  They urged enterprises to check the expiration date of their 
trademarks and re-register immediately if they are overdue. 
  In the first nine months of last year, the State 
administration and its local branches handled 27,000 cases of 
trademark infringement, statistics show. 
  And as of last September, the bureau said there were 395,000 
authorized trademarks in the country. Domestic firms accounted 
for 340,000, and foreign firms--from Kodak of the US to Sony of 
Japan- accounted for 55,000. 
  The administration has set up 63 branch offices nationwide 
to 
handle trademark registration. 

