CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz] </F>
  [Excerpts] Cocaine base, packed marijuana, opium gum, 
"crystal," ephedrine, and both poppy and cannabis indica seed, 
worth approximately 150 million new pesos and intended to be 
shipped to the United States for sale and consumption, were 
incinerated yesterday by the Attorney General's Office [PGR] in 
Jalisco State. There, legal action is being taken against at 
least 20 presumed public poisoners associated with the 
confiscations. [passage omitted] 
  The PGR's representative in Jalisco, Raul Garza Serna, 
reported to the assistant attorney for local offices and 
inspection, Alfonso Cabrera Morales, that the drugs were burned 
on the premises of the Jalisco Hunting Club located in the 
settlement of La Venta del Astillero, near the city of 
Guadalajara. They consisted of approximately six tons of pressed 
marijuana, nearly 37 kg of cocaine base, and 274 kg of 
ephedrine, a chemical precursor used by drug traffickers to 
prepare amphetamines and to process cocaine base. Also destroyed 
in the presence of military authorities and representatives from 
the health sector and the Public Education Secretariat, on both 
the state and municipal level, were 20 kg of the drug known as 
"crystal," 92 kg of methylamphetamine, eight kg and 263 grams of 
opium gum, some 17,000 psychotropic pills, and nearly two kg of 
marijuana and poppy seed. Various plants used as samples from 
crops that had been discovered and eradicated in the state were 
destroyed as well. 
  The public servant explained that the incinerated drugs, 
which would have netted the public poisoners sizable profits, 
were connected with seizures made during February by Federal 
Judicial Police agents, still under the command of the force's 
deputy commissioner, Javier Gomez Lopez. 
  At this event, Garza Serna stressed that the cooperation of 
all social sectors of the population is essential in the battle 
against the drug traffic. He indicated that family intervention 
plays a preponderant role in preventing future generations from 
succumbing to drug use and abuse. The authorities present at the 
incineration ceremony, for their part, confirmed their 
commitment to support each and every action against the 
aforementioned social cancer taken by the PGR, now under the 
command of Humberto Benitez Trevino. [passage omitted] 

