Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ja'afar Ra'id: "Iran's Inner Leadership"] </F>
  [Text] Inside Iran is not as depicted. Many outside 
observers of the Iranian scene fall into this error on many 
occasions. Iran today is not like any other country in the 
world. It is a country that is not governed by political 
parties, but by political tendencies that influence the 
direction of its domestic and foreign policies. These political 
trends enjoy considerable influence, whose effects are 
manifested in all public economic, social, cultural, and 
political areas. 
  Moreover, Iran is not under military rule, with senior 
officers sitting at the top, using junior officers as assistants 
to manage affairs, whose wills are enforced by military units 
deployed throughout the country. However, the armed forces, 
especially the Revolution Guard and the forces subordinate to 
the Guard, are respected everywhere, including the highest 
official circles. 
  In Iran, political blocs compete, but they are not political 
in the complete sense of the word. They are political-religious 
blocs, led by strong religious leaders who have specific 
political orientations. The size of these blocs increase or 
diminish in accordance with circumstances, and their influence 
waxes and wanes accordingly. 
  Iran is under a parliamentary system of government, but the 
Islamic Consultative Majles--i.e., the Iranian Parliament--does 
not have all the powers enjoyed by parliaments in countries with 
parliamentary systems. There is a higher body called the Council 
to Preserve the Constitution, which scrutinizes all 
parliamentary decisions and enactments for ratification. If it 
finds they conflict with the provisions of the Islamic shari'ah 
or with the articles of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran, it refuses ratification and sends them back to the 
Majles to be amended in accordance with the Council to Preserve 
the Constitution's recommendations. 
  The matter does not end there. There is another body that is 
higher still than those two (the Islamic Consultative Majles and 
the Council to Preserve the Constitution) in breadth of powers. 
It is the Committee for Discerning Expediency for the System. 
This committee or council is composed of the heads of the three 
legislative, judicial, and executive branches, the chairman of 
the Council to Preserve the Constitution, and the representative 
of the velayat-e faqih [rule by religious jurist]. At the 
present time, this representative is Hojjat-ol-Eslam Ahmed 
Khomeyni, son of the Imam. In addition, there are other 
individuals from high organizations. This committee is set apart 
from the Islamic Consultative Majles and the Council to Preserve 
the Constitution, i.e., its decision is valid and determines 
whatever issues are submitted directly to it. 
  Moreover, there are other councils and bodies: the Assembly 
of Experts, with nearly 100 members who are elected directly by 
the Iranian people. This assembly is tantamount to a constituent 
assembly, and its members meet as necessary to amend certain 
articles of the Constitution, which was written by the assembly 
itself, or for the purpose of choosing the country's leader 
(velayat-e faqih), as occurred when it chose Ayatollah Seyyed 
'Ali Khamene'i for this position--the highest position in the 
nation. The position of prime minister, which used to exist, was 
abolished. It had been occupied by Engineer Mir Hoseyn Musavi. 
Now all executive branch responsibilities rest on the shoulders 
of the president of the republic, who--at the present time--is 
Hojjat-ol-Eslam 'Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani. 
  Khamene'i stands at the pinnacle, with vast powers that are 
higher than the powers of the councils, bodies, and agencies, 
without exception. The leader of the country, whom, these days, 
the Iranian media customarily call the "leader of the 
revolution" or "leader of the Islamic Revolution," is content 
with this title over several other sobriquets that were used 
before. 
  The leader of the revolution, Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali 
Khamene'i 
is, at the same time, the supreme commander of the armed forces. 
His position is permanent for life, as opposed to the term of 
president of the republic, which lasts only four years and can 
be renewed only once. 
  Hashemi-Rafsanjani is serving the second and final term of 
his presidency. From this point of departure, he is working hard 
to succeed in his plan to rebuild the country. He tours cities 
and rural areas, urging the people to participate actively in 
carrying out the rebuilding projects. He has also given priority 
to economic affairs in his domestic and foreign policies. He 
recently stated that he was determined to make maximum efforts 
at cooperation with the rest of the member OPEC states to fight 
against any lowering of prices. In pursuit of this objective, he 
telephoned the custodian of the two holy mosques, King Fahd 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz, and certain other heads of member states in 
that organization. The contacts resulted in the fact that the 
recent conference of those countries in Geneva achieved certain 
positive results. Evidence indicates that efforts were 
successful to prepare the groundwork to hold a summit conference 
between the Iranian president and the custodian of the two holy 
mosques, to study bilateral relations and oil affairs in 
general. It is certain that economic issues, especially in the 
petroleum field, will be given high priority. 
  However, behind all of President 'Ali Akbar 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani's domestic and foreign activities, which have 
attracted attention, a critical eye watches very calmly, without 
causing any clamor or uproar. This is the movement of the inner 
leadership of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is moving slowly 
forward, taking hold of the destiny of all affairs in Iran. It 
is the leadership of Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i 
which--these days--is exerted, at times, determinedly and 
resolutely from behind the scenes, and publicly and overtly at 
other times. This leadership is gathering all the reins into its 
hand and has dropped some of the titles and slogans that are no 
longer appropriate in the present circumstances. Its sole 
concern is to rescue the ship of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
from domestic and foreign perils. 
  We shall leave the details of this event to another 
occasion. 
  It is worth noting that officials responsible for the 
sensitive ministries in Hashemi-Rafsanjani's government are 
persons well known for their loyalty to Ayatollah 'Ali 
Khamene'i. Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati, the foreign minister, was 
Khamene'i's choice to be prime minister, when Khamene'i first 
took over the presidency during Khomeyni's regime. However, the 
Iranian Majles decided that day to reject his nomination for 
that important post. President Khamene'i was forced to give the 
prime minister's job to Eng. Mir Hoseyn Musavi, with Velayati 
taking on the Foreign Ministry. He has remained in the foreign 
minister's post to the present day, that is, for 12 years, 
maintaining that serious portfolio throughout Khamene'i's first 
and second terms, and during Rafsanjani's first term. The 
Foreign Ministry has been returned to Velayati for Rafsanjani's 
second term. Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati is a pediatrician, who has 
become skillful in dialogue and is considered the most loyal of 
Khamene'i's men. 
  The role of Hojjat-ol-Eslam 'Ali Fallahian, the minister of 
information, is a strong one at the present time. He is one of 
the leader of the revolution, Hojjat-ol-Eslam [as published] 
Khamene'i's, elite. Following those two officials in status is 
Minister of Interior 'Ali Mohammad Besharati-[Jahromi], who 
enjoys the confidence of Khamene'i, and is one of his closest 
proteges. There are a number of other ministers who rely on the 
leader of the revolution, not to mention the Armed Forces, 
including the Army, Revolution Guard, gendarmerie, and police, 
who are directly subordinate to his leadership. 
  These matters must be taken into account by anyone who 
wishes 
truly to understand the course of present events in Iran. In my 
opinion, he who would follow the course of radical developments 
in Iran must follow--from now on--the steps of Hojjat-ol-Eslam 
'Ali Khamene'i, who is most skillful. Recently, he has been 
content in his addresses as leader of the revolution to back 
away from other titles, some of which have raised certain 
sensitivities. Follow his steps in various Iranian fields of 
endeavor. In order to make a more precise evaluation, we need to 
look at Khamene'i's past. He is from the city of Mashhad, the 
capital city of Khorasan, where he was born in 1929 into a 
well-known religious family. He received his introduction to 
religious sciences in Islamic jurisprudence in the same city, 
and in Qom, studying under senior marja'iat [religious 
authorities], such as Ayatollah Borujerdi and Ayatollah Milani, 
as well as Ayatollah Khomeyni. His roots go back to the city of 
Khamene'ieh in Iranian Azarbaijan. 
  After finishing his traditional religious studies, he turned 
to teaching Islamic jurisprudence and interpretation in the two 
religious cities of Qom and Mashhad. From the beginning, he 
immersed himself in the struggle of religious ulema in 1952, as 
a supporter of Ayatollah Khomeyni. He took part in the political 
struggle for religious groups. From mid-1976, he was one of 
those who were drawing up the principal guidelines to create a 
party organization, which later were crystallized in the form of 
the Islamic Republican Party. This party emerged onto the 
Iranian political scene after the success of the revolution. 
  Khamene'i was one of those depended upon by Ayatollah 
Khomeyni and was an object of his esteem. He was a permanent 
member of the Revolution Command Council [RCC] and was also in 
charge of matters to do with the Revolution Guard. Later, during 
the last part of Eng. Mehdi Bazargan's government, he was 
appointed deputy defense minister for coordination between 
Revolution Guard affairs and the regular army. However, 
Khamene'i resigned from this post to enter the Iranian elections. 
  A short while after the revolution, that is, 1 April 1980, 
Imam Khomeyni appointed Khamene'i imam for the city of Tehran to 
lead thousands of Friday worshipers. He is still the principal 
imam for Friday prayers, and the rest--such as Rafsanjani, 
Musavi-Ardebili, Jannati, and Yazdi--lead those who perform 
Friday prayers in Tehran in their capacity as acting Friday imam 
or temporary imam, according to Iranian terminology. 
  During the Iranian Revolution, Khamene'i and his colleagues, 
Ayatollah Seyyed Mohammad Beheshti (a clever religious and 
political leader, who lost his life in the mass assassination to 
which more than 70 senior revolutionary leaders were subjected, 
in the explosion of a building where they were meeting) and 
Hojjat-ol-Eslam Akbar Hashemi, established the Islamic 
Republican Party. Khamene'i was elected deputy to Beheshti, the 
party's first secretary general, responsible for the party's 
newspaper, JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI. 
  Ayatollah Khamene'i's political life encompasses the 
following stages since the Iranian Islamic Revolution, and he 
was successful at each stage: 
  1. Member of the RCC. 
  2. Imam of Friday prayers in Tehran. 
  3. Deputy defense minister. 
  4. Imam Khomeyni's representative to the Revolution Guard. 
  5. Representative of the leader of the revolution, Imam 
Khomeyni, to the Supreme Defense Council; later, chairman of 
this council after he became president of the republic. 
  6. Secretary general of Islamic Republican Party. 
  7. President of the republic, and member of the Council to 
Amend the Constitution. 
  8. Successor to Imam Khomeyni after his death. He enjoys the 
highest authority and broadest powers in the Iranian Islamic 
Republic regime. 
  One of the most important facts of Khamene'i's life concerns 
27 June 1981, when he was the target of an assassination plot 
organized by the Mojahedin-e Khalq. An explosive charge was 
concealed in a cassette player, which exploded while Khamene'i 
was speaking in a mosque in one of the southern areas of Tehran. 
However, the explosion did not take his life, but did result in 
paralysis in his right arm. 
  On 2 October 1981, he was elected president of the Iranian 
Islamic Republic, following the death of President Mohammad 'Ali 
Raja'i in the incident of the blowing up of the cabinet referred 
to earlier. Khamene'i was reelected to that post in 1985 and, in 
the second week of June 1989, that is, a week after the demise 
of Imam Khomeyni, Khamene'i was elected by the Assembly of 
Experts to be Imam, Khomeyni's successor and leader of the 
country. 
  Ayatollah Seyyed 'Ali Khamene'i, the Azerbaijani, is fluent 
in Farsi and Arabic, and is a devotee of literature, philosophy, 
Sufism, and music. These qualities endear him to the hearts of 
Iranians, who are lovers of poetry and art. He is well known for 
his integrity. 
  We do not want, at this point, to discuss this man's life; 
we 
just offer a brief summary to help understand his identity and 
political orientations. In conclusion, one can stress that the 
dual nature of leadership in Iran, to which I referred and to 
which others have many times referred in the pages of AL-SHARQ 
AL-AWSAT, has begun to disappear from the Iranian scene. Freedom 
of action is emerging for Khamene'i's one-man leadership. 
Certain experts in Iranian affairs have called attention to 
this. Amir Taheri dealt with this matter some weeks ago in the 
opinion page. Therefore, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT is a leader in 
shedding light on events before they occur. 


