Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] We have just received a report on the activities in 
our country this afternoon of Croatian President Franjo Tudjman. 
  This afternoon, Croatian President Franjo Tudjman visited 
the 
art gallery. Qirjako Meniko, the director of this institution, 
acquainted the high-level guest with the best work of Kole 
Hidromeno, Nexhmedin Zajmi, Odhise Paskali, and other authors. 
During this visit the Croatian president was accompanied by 
Dhimiter Anagnosti, minister of culture, youth, and sports. 
  Several bilateral agreements were signed at the Palace of 
Congresses and the Foreign Ministry today. An agreement on 
cooperation in the field of tourism between the Government of 
the Republic of Albania and the Government of Croatia was signed 
by Ministers Spaho and Bulic. An agreement on petroleum 
research inland between the National Agency of Hydrocarbons and 
Croatian National Company Ina Naft Plin was signed by Fatbardh 
Ademi and Franjo Gregoric. Presidents Berisha and Tudjman were 
present at the signing ceremony. 
  Arian Starova and Ivo Sanader, Albanian and Croatian deputy 
foreign ministers, signed an agreement on cultural, educational, 
and scientific cooperation and an agreement to abolish visas for 
diplomatic and business passports between our two countries. 
  At the end of the two-day visit in Albania, Presidents 
Berisha and Tudjman gave a news conference for reporters. 
  President Berisha pointed out that the visit of President 
Tudjman is a real contribution to the friendly relations between 
Albania and Croatia and that we should expand these relations in 
the political, economic, technical, and scientific fields as 
well as in tourism, education, etc. Croatia is a state under 
attack, and this aggressor is Serbia, President Berisha said. 
  We greet Europe's support for the NATO attack and think that 
this support is indispensable. The Croatian Government can make 
its own contribution to resolving the question of Kosova, 
because we think that there cannot be a solution to the crisis 
in the region without solving the problem of Kosova, President 
Berisha said. He also pointed out that Kosova should be placed 
under an international protectorate. 
  For his part, Croatian President Tudjman stressed that 
Croatia is a friendly country for Albanians. We have been 
historically tied since Illyrian times and even the Croatian 
chronicles write about our common enemies. Croatian literature 
speaks about Queen Teuta and glorifies Scanderberg. As 
countries that lie next to the the Adriatic Sea, Albania and 
Croatia aspire to move toward the European Community. 
  President Tudjman also pointed out that the international 
community has taken powerful steps to solve the crisis in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina politically. The Granic-Siladzic talks will 
end in Washington today and a preliminary agreement is expected 
to be drafted, which constitutes a contribution to stopping the 
war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Berisha and Tudjman later answered reporters' questions. 
Regarding Croatia's attitude toward the Kosova question, 
President Tudjman said that Croatia has been engaged in 
recognizing the rights of the 2 million Albanians who are in 
their lands. 
  Answering a question on Albania's implementation of the 
embargo against Montenegro, President Berisha answered by saying 
that Albania is serious and interested in implementing the 
embargo. However, Albania has requested that Montenegro and 
Kosova be excluded from the embargo because Kosova is under 
Serbian occupation. Meanwhile, Montenegro has maintained a 
different attitude. The application of the embargo by Albania 
has been confirmed by international inspections. 
  The signing of the Partnership for Peace is a very important 
act in the cooperation between Albania and NATO. I think that 
this signing assumes special dimensions. During the days of the 
ultimatum, Albania was among the first countries to be ranked by 
NATO; it clearly and finally demonstrates its definition by the 
Western world and determinedly supports the principles and 
assets that this civilization defends. In this context, I have 
the conviction that this is an important event for all Albanians 
wherever they are. 
  Croatian President Franjo Tudjman ended his official visit 
to 
Albania this evening. Albanian President Sali Berisha was at 
Rinas airport to see him off. Bashkim Kopliku, Council of 
Ministers deputy chairman, Foreign Minister Alfred Serreqi, and 
others were also present. The diplomatic corps accredited in 
Tirana was also at Rinas airport. On this occasion the band 
played the national anthems of both our countries, Croatia and 
Albania. The honor guard was also paraded. 

