Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ruta Skatikaite on news conference by V. </F>
Shevaldin, director of the Ignalina nuclear power plant, with 
unidentified reporters on 25 February; place not given: 
"Foreign Experts and P. Globa Will Assess the Ignalina AE"] 
  [Text] On Friday [25 February], V. Shevaldin, director of 
the Ignalina nuclear power plant [AE], held a press conference 
in which he told about his recent meetings in Moscow, London, 
and Paris concerning the plant's security. The meetings were 
also attended by representatives of the Lithuanian Energy 
Ministry, the Energy Institute, and the Ignalina AE. The most 
important meeting took place in London where an agreement was 
signed with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
on a 32-million ECU [European currency unit] gift aid for the AE. 
  "The Donors' Council drafted a new agreement on this gift 
aid," said V. Shevaldin, "because Lithuania had not signed the 
draft agreement discussed in December due to its categorical 
demand to shut down one block. The conditions for aid contained 
in the new draft agreement satisfied both Lithuania and the 
Donors' Council. There are two of them: Both blocks at the 
Ignalina AE will be used until the year 2004 according to the 
technical possibilities of the tubes; foreign experts must 
prepare a report on the security of both blocks by 30 July 1995. 
After receiving this report, the State Atomic Energy Inspection 
will consider the matter of issuing a license for the station. 
It is very important that Lithuania retain the right to judge 
whether to issue a license or not." 
  [Reporter] What will the acquired currency be used for? 
  [Shevaldin] We coordinated and approved the scope of work 
with the bank. This work will be performed by companies 
selected through competition. The European Bank has begun to 
organize an international bid on the establishment of a special 
group that will regulate relations with future contractors. 
Seventeen companies from all over the world have expressed the 
desire to participate in the competition. It will be decided 
over the coming days which company will supervise the 
implementation of the project in cooperation with AE specialists. 
  [Reporter] Would you define the key lines financed by the 
European Bank? 
  [Shevaldin] Eighteen lines have been established. Most of 
them are linked with the acquisition of equipment controlling 
the key technological points. There are plans to create radio 
monitoring that would allow receiving constant operative 
information about the radiological state of the plant and its 
environment. Some very important lines are associated with the 
closure of the reactor due to the reduced utilization of water 
in technological tubes, as well as with the design of new 
emergency stoppage systems. It is very pitiable that the 
Donors' Council did not agree to include in the agreement such 
issues concerning the AE security as the acquisition of several 
containers for fuel waste, cementing and processing of 
radioactive resins, and the purchase of a press for solid waste 
with low radioactivity. 
  [Reporter] After your return from the trip, you must have 
read the prophesies of clairvoyant P. Globa about the possible 
accident in the second block. Did this week's unscheduled 
stoppage of this block occur because of this prophesy? 
  [Shevaldin] No, we did not close the second block because of 
Globa's prophesies. We noticed a slight increase in 
radioactivity in an area near the reactor, where one cannot get 
while the block is operating. Since routine two-month repair 
work at the first block begins in a month, we decided to remove 
the fault now in order to avoid the closure of the entire plant. 
I have never said that such prophesies as P. Globa's are 
nonsensical. I myself do not have extrasensory perception 
skills, therefore, I cannot feel things like he does. We have 
requested the nuclear plant in Rovno to send us all relevant 
information, because P. Globa prophesied an accident there as 
well. Moreover, we have written a letter to the clairvoyant 
inviting him to the station and promising to cover all travel 
expenses. There will be nothing bad if we conduct an additional 
inspection of the plant with this man. If he does not arrive, 
we will have to think that he himself does not believe in his 
prophesies, or that he simply does not care about any accident. 

