Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir this evening 
received Asif Zardari, Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's 
personal envoy to leader President Saddam Husayn, and his 
delegation. During the meeting, the prime minister received a 
written message from Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutti for 
leader President Saddam Husayn on relations between the two 
friendly countries. 
  The prime minister said that relations between Iraq and 
Pakistan were close and developed, especially with Pakistani 
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, as well as between the two 
friendly peoples. He stressed the determination to promote 
these relations in light of the longstanding history of good 
relations in the interest of the two Muslim peoples. He added 
that leader President Saddam Husayn is interested in promoting 
bilateral relations in all fields in the interest of the two 
peoples. 
  The prime minister stressed that the circumstances 
experienced by Iraq are transient, that the unjust blockade will 
be removed, and that Iraq will recover. 
  The prime minister reviewed the reconstruction campaign of 
the installations that were destroyed by the 30-state 
aggression, the gigantic new projects implemented over the past 
three years, and the great expertise the Iraqis have acquired as 
a result of their self-reliance in the implementation of these 
projects. 
  Asif Zardari, Benazir Bhutto's personal envoy to leader 
President Saddam Husayn, may God preserve him, said: I am 
carrying good wishes to leader President Saddam Husayn and the 
Iraqi government and people from the Pakistani prime minister 
and people. My visit expresses the good intentions of the 
Pakistani people toward the Iraqi people and leadership in light 
of the close bilateral relations. 
  He expressed admiration for Iraq's reconstruction experiment 
and ability to implement new projects under the current 
circumstances. He stressed the Pakistani Government's desire to 
promote bilateral relations in all fields and to benefit from 
both sides' technical expertise. 
  The meeting was attended by Hamid Salih al-Rawi, head of the 
Council of Ministers' secretariat and Foreign Ministry under 
secretary, and the Pakistani ambassador in Baghdad. 

