Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres </F>
by Debora Berlinck in Geneva "before addressing the UN Human 
Rights Commission"] 
  [Text] [Berlinck] Is what you achieved with this agreement 
what was missing? 
  [Peres] We had serious difficulties reaching this agreement. 
We reached a 68-point agreement, arguing over each phrase, each 
expression, but without going to war, without being pressured. 
It is an unprecedented agreement, a goodwill trial. There are 
still some obstacles, some details about daily activities in the 
occupied territories to be settled. This will take time. I am 
aware there is still a lot to be negotiated. But if we were 
able to reach an agreement with Egypt, a country with which we 
had been at war for the past 15 years, we also will do so now. 
  [Berlinck] Do you think this agreement will mark the 
beginning of a Palestinian state? 
  [Peres] That is not important. People must understand that 
the first negotiation took place among ourselves, the Israelis, 
not with the Palestinians. Israel had to choose what it wanted 
to be. I believe the best solution would be to create a 
confederation with the Jordanians, Palestinians...[pauses] 
'Arafat told me he thought the same. And I do not think it 
will be hard to find a solution that will satisfy all parties. 
The situation merits a confederation because most Jordanians 
are of Palestinian origin and most Palestinians are Jordanian 
citizens. Therefore, it would be completely unreal to establish 
two countries. 
  [Berlinck] 'Arafat was never criticized as much as now by 
the Palestinians, who now accuse him of having made too many 
concessions to Israel. Don't you think this agreement is at 
stake? 
  [Peres] I am certain that most Palestinians, like us, want 
peace. We are all sick of war, violence, and terror. A century 
ago the Palestinians tried to solve their problems with weapons. 
But they made no progress; quite the contrary, they only 
hindered economic and social development. The Palestinians' 
support for the PLO and for the peace-seeking negotiations is of 
a political and not a personal nature. I am certain this 
support represents most Palestinians. 
  [Berlinck] Why does Israel insist on controlling the 
borders. Is it for safety reasons or does it fear it will lose 
sovereignty over the occupied territory? 
  [Peres] The negotiations were carried out when terrorism 
still existed. I told 'Arafat: "I am aware you cannot wipe out 
terrorism. The territories are under our responsibility. 
Moreover, it must be clearly established that there is a single 
border. It is an autonomy; therefore, there is no border 
between Israel and the neighboring countries, and another 
between Israel and the autonomous territories. Every person who 
crosses the border has a right to circulate throughout the 
country -- to go to Jerusalem, Tel-Aviv. And what if that person 
is a terrorist?" 'Arafat answered: "But I am a terrorist." I 
then refuted: "No, you are a former terrorist. You were fired 
from that job. We are the only ones who have weapons and 
policemen to fight terrorism. Moreover, you know we are not at 
peace with Jordan." Israel is going to insist that it remain in 
charge of safety in the territories. A clear difference between 
dignity and safety must be established. The Palestinians may 
have the dignity but the Israelis must be in charge of the 
safety. 
  [Berlinck] The Hamas Islamic Resistance Movement continues 
at war with Israel, but its leaders now are trying to find a way 
to assume a leading role as soon as elections are held in the 
territories. 
  [Peres] That is a problem, but Israel is not willing to act 
as the Palestinians' police. The Palestinians must elect their 
own leader and take care of their safety. It is not up to us to 
choose. We will negotiate with the leader who represents the 
majority. 
  [Berlinck] When does Israel intend to extend autonomy to 
the entire occupied territories and when does it intend to 
withdraw from these territories? 
  [Peres] I do not like to give deadlines or dates. All I can 
say is that we are really trying to speed up negotiations. As 
for our withdrawal from the occupied territories, we are trying 
to do so as soon as possible but that is not only up to us. 
Some problems we did not expect have surfaced, and this will 
delay things more than we expected. One of the problems is the 
border: A person crossing it has to be checked. 
  [Berlinck] Do you believe in 'Arafat now? 
  [Peres] It is not up to me to decide. 'Arafat represents a 
country that believes in him. To tell you the truth, I am 
certain the world is changing and that is not up to me or 
'Arafat. The Palestinians have changed; 'Arafat has changed; we 
have changed. The world today is a new world without an arms 
race, without Saudi Arabia to replace others with its money. 
The important thing today is not the size of a country but 
rather how fertile its land is. 
  [Berlinck] What does Israel intend to do with the demand for 
the release of hundreds of prisoners? 
  [Peres] If they promise they will stop their terrorist 
activities, great; then they will have a right to request their 
release. If not, what right do they have to ask us to stop 
defending ourselves? 
  [Berlinck] After the Palestinians, another difficult 
negotiation within the framework of the peace-seeking process 
will be Syria. After the Clinton-al-Asad meeting have you 
received any indication from the Syrians regarding al-Asad's 
desire to normalize relations? 
  [Peres] Nothing. What there is is not enough. They do not 
clearly understand what peace means; they do not understand it 
entails embassies, open borders, free trade. The Syrian media 
states: "We support peace but without embassies." They comment 
that Syria does not have an embassy with Kazakhstan. But, of 
course, the Syrians do not have to ask Kazakhstan permission to 
withdraw from the Golan Heights. The third issue is safety: We 
are not in the Golan Heights for biblical reasons. We are there 
for safety reasons, because we were attacked three times. The 
fourth point is Lebanon. There is a link between Lebanon's 
future and Syria's policy that must be settled. 
  [Berlinck] The latest poll shows 70 percent of the Israelis 
are not in favor of giving the Golan Heights back to Syria in 
exchange for peace. Is your government willing to become 
unpopular? 
  [Peres] The poll results are changing. The differences 
between poll results are like perfume: nice to smell but bitter 
to swallow. A government is not a hospital where physicians 
must take the patients' temperature every day. If we are 
successful in achieving peace, the people will be on our side. 
If not, they must not elect us, and for very good reasons. We 
are not going to use makeup to look better. 

