BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 20 (XINHUA) -- China reports a 
steady growth in steel output in the first quarter of this year, 
with steel products made to meet the needs of the market, the 
mix of production improving and profits uplifting. 
  Still, the steel industry has found itself in a tight 
corner, 
due to insufficient funds, debt chains that have long been 
harassing its enterprises, and relatively low output of iron ore. 
  Data released on Tuesday [19 April] by the Ministry of the 
Metallurgical Industry show that in the first quarter of this 
year China turned out about 22.954 million tons of steel, 22.149 
million tons of iron and 20.293 million tons of rolled steel, a 
hefty rise of 7.66 percent, 11.30 percent and 9.47 percent over 
the same period of last year, respectively. 
  Steel production in the first quarter featured a high growth 
rate in the output of continuous-cast steel ingots. 
  More than 8.86 million tons of continuous-cast steel ingots 
was produced from January through March this year, an increase 
of 1.867 million tons over the same period of last year. Its 
proportion in the total output rose from 32.82 percent to 38.62 
percent, meeting the requirements set for the year-end. 
  The mix of the first quarter's production was also 
characterized by the iron and steel producers' satisfaction of 
market needs. They concentrated on raising the output of the 
steel products that are badly needed by national economic 
construction. 
  The output of heavy rails needed by the Beijing-Kowloon 
railway project, for example, jumped by 112,200 tons, a sturdy 
54.19 percent rise over the previous year's figure. 
  The production of light rails, silicon steel, and various 
types of steel plates and wires also increased by a big margin, 
and the growth rate of alloy steel jumped by 36.64 percent. 
  However, by the end of February the amount of credit due 
topped 60.7 billion yuan for the whole sector and the amount of 
debt hit 42.1 billion yuan, increases of 146 percent and 134 
percent, respectively, over the same period of last year. 
  The iron and steel enterprises are still in financial 
straits, lacking working capital. 
  In addition, the planned iron ore output in the first 
quarter 
this year was 7.91 million tons short. 

