Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anti-Mafia Commission President Luciano </F>
Violante by Liana Milella; place and date not given: "The Mafia 
May Strike Near Election Time."] 
  [Text] Organized Crime: The president of the 
Anti-Mafia Commission speaks out. During 1993, there have been 
some great successes in the war against Cosa Nostra, but the 
next few months could hold some explosive surprises in store for 
us. 
  One hundred sixty-one Mafia gangs under investigation, with 
a 
total of 2,813 members of Cosa Nostra, the Camorra, and the 
'ndrangheta. The Sacred United Crown under observation; 580 
informers; 236 major fugitives arrested, including Toto Riina, 
the head of Cosa Nostra, and his deputy, Nitto Santapaola; 
Rosetta Cutolo and Umberto Ammaturo from the Camorra; and 
Pasquale Condello and Antonino Imerti, 'ndrangheta bosses. The 
people who carried out the Capaci [Judge Falcone] massacre were 
arrested, and there is a good chance that arrests will also be 
made in connection with the Via D'Amelio [Judge Borsellino] 
attack. In 1993, the war against crime reached levels never 
before seen in Italy.The center of analysis and impetus was the 
Anti-Mafia Parliamentary Commission. Together with the 
commission's president, Luciano Violante, PANORAMA has 
established what has been done and what remains to be done. 
  [Milella] Have we reached a Nuremburg for Cosa Nostra? 
  [Violante] Nuremburg came after the military defeat and 
followed the political sanctioning of that defeat. Today, we are 
only at the landing of the Allies in Normandy. We are at the 
point where the state is beginning to invade the territories 
dominated by the Mafia. The military victory may be near, but 
that by itself is not enough. The financial and social fronts 
must still be addressed. In 1993, Cosa Nostra killed the parish 
priest of Brancaccio, Don Pino Puglisi. It was not a 
neighborhood murder, rather the first attack against a man who 
had chosen to work with the people against the Mafia. 
  [Milella] At the political crimes trial, Riina chose not to 
speak in front of Tommaso Buscetta. Is it the beginning of the 
end for the Mafia? 
  [Violante] All the organizations have suffered severe blows. 
But Cosa Nostra's trafficking continues, and the Camorra and the 
'ndrangheta are still underestimated. The 'ndrangheta is a very, 
very dangerous organization because of its connections with 
subversive elements on the right and the corrupt Masonic lodges. 
The Camorra is dangerous because of its control over the 
territory. In Sicily, there are some free zones, but not in 
Campania. You have not won if you defeat only Cosa Nostra. We 
risk winning in Sicily and losing in the rest of Italy. 
  [Milella] What effect have the arrests of the big bosses and 
all the informers had? 
  [Violante] We have won many battles, but not the war. In the 
end we will win that, too, but we will have to pay a different 
price. Many more on our side will be killed. We have to isolate 
the Mafia. The public has often lived with this phenomenon: the 
doctors who fake certificates as favors; shop owners who launder 
dirty money; the lawyers who act as counselors. All this must 
stop. And, to a certain degree, it already is stopping. 
  [Milella] There are allegedly more shocking strikes being 
prepared. What does the Mafia hope to obtain? Can it be stopped? 
  [Violante] Until now, we have had two types of attacks. One 
kind is extermination, the elimination of a single enemy, like 
the judges Gaetano Costa and Rocco Chinnici. The other kind is 
one of dialogue: the bombs in the spring and summer protesting 
the harsh prison conditions resulting from the modifications 
made in July 1992 to Article 41bis of the prison regulations. We 
have not yet had strikes aimed at obstructing, which have the 
same function as the gunfire of a patrol in protecting behind 
the front lines in earning time. In the future, this is the kind 
we will have to deal with. 
  [Milella] Then why are they targeting individuals like you, 
like prosecutor Giancarlo Caselli and the head of DIA, Gianni De 
Gennaro? 
  [Violante] The fact that there are so many objectives proves 
my theory. The murders of Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, 
just two months apart, already signaled the beginning of this 
strategy. It is project of extermination targeting all the 
strong points. 
  [Milella] Will the state have the strength to stand up to 
it? 
  [Violante] Many massacres have already been avoided. Many 
people are alive thanks to measures of prevention. Making an 
attack more difficult is already a step ahead, as is arresting 
the suspected perpetrators. 
  [Milella] After the bombings of Rome, Florence, and Milan, 
there was talk of Mafia terrorism, of an alliance between the 
Mafia, Masons, extremists on the right, and government secret 
agents who have turned traitors. Is this still a valid theory? 
  [Violante] The Mafia does not act alone. The criminal 
elements from Sicily, Campania, and Calabria have always had 
ties with the extremists on the right. It happened in the past 
with the massacre of train 904. Today, we have a former member 
of the New Order movement and of the Mafia, Pietro Rampulla, 
arrested for the Capaci ambush. Rosario Cattafi from Messina is 
involved in the traffic of arms. There is Domenico Papalia, a 
'ndrangheta boss who, thanks to a unique appeal, was able to 
have his murder trial overturned. Papalia was the first name 
mentioned by Antonino Gioe, the Mafioso who killed himself in 
prison. 
  [Milella] That alliance was not just a theoretical 
assumption? 
  [Violante] There exists a system of subversive forces, each 
with its own history and its own goals, which sometimes happen 
to act together. Just think of the corrupt Masonic lodges that 
were key elements in the relationships. Members of the 
Calabrian, Sicilian, Mafias, etc., belong to the same lodge. 
What we are seeing is the Mafia making use of the Masonic system. 
  [Milella] In 1993, political men who were thought to be 
untouchable, like Giulio Andreotti and Antonio Gava, found 
themselves under investigation. What is changing in the 
relationship between the Mafia and politics? Who are the Mafia's 
new contacts? 
  [Violante] I do not know if Senator Andreotti and Senator 
Gava are criminally responsible. Very likely, the top levels of 
the Mafia leadership are now waiting to see what will happen. If 
a separatist political proposition--under whatever name or 
guise--were to go ahead, it would be an incredible opportunity 
for them. The Mafia, which makes investments in its 
relationships with politics, is now waiting to see. It could be 
that it is waiting to ally itself with the future winner. 
Everyone must keep their eyes open. 
  [Milella] Is the Mafias also trying to sabatoge the 
investigations by influencing the informers? 
  [Violante] There could be a strategy of infiltration aimed 
for the most part, not at getting false testimony or stopping 
the trials, but at finding out where the former Mafiosi are 
being held, how they are being guarded, and what kind of control 
there is of their family members, so they can kill them. It is a 
question of predominance: They have to show that they are 
stronger than we are. As for the informers, it is about time a 
code of professional ethics were passed for the magistrates, 
which would establish the regulations of the relationships with 
the state's witnesses and would determine the scheduling and 
format of the confessions. 
  [Milella] Elections are approaching. Should we be expecting 
demonstrations like the bombings in May and July? 
  [Violante] Nothing can be excluded by anyone. The 5 April 
1992 elections were preceded by the assassination of Salvo Lima 
and followed by the massacres of Capaci and Via D'Amelio. It is 
likely that the strikes of obstruction will take place before 
Parliament is dissolved and after the elections, like in 1992. 
We have the means to prevent the attacks, but some cannot be 
avoided. 
<H5>  [Box, p 29] </H5>
<H5>  Embargo </H5>
  "We are still lagging behind in the hunt for Mafia money. A 
meaningful comparison would be to say that today on the 
financial front in the fight against crime we find ourselves in 
the same situation in which we were at the end of the 1970's 
with regard to the criminal front." In 1994, Luciano Violante's 
principle objective and the one on which he will be 
concentrating all his energies, is the battle to stop the dirty 
money of the Cosa Nostra and the other criminal organizations. 
  The president of the Anti-Mafia Commission explains: "Back 
then, we followed the individual crimes committed by the Mafia, 
and we did not attack the organization as such. The big 
difference with judges like Rocco Chinnici, Gaetano Costa, 
Giovanni Falcone, and Paolo Borsellino was precisely that they 
went from concentrating on the individual responsibilities for 
the murders to attacking the Mafia organization in and of itself 
as a crime in order to then discover the ones who were really 
guilty of the assassinations. On the financial front, this 
change has not yet taken place. Today, we are following the 
individual cases of money laundering--with positive results 
statistically--but we are not yet in a position to attack the 
complex organization of money laundering. The result is that 
single channels of money laundering are discovered while all the 
rest continues." 
  What is Violante's proposal? "There should be at least one 
magistrate in each district attorney general's office to handle 
Mafia finances. We also need to review the laws controlling 
criminal assets, because the present ones are totally 
inadequate. Only 7 percent of the assets seized are confiscated 
and 11 percent are given back. All the rest remains blocked. 
Then we need to periodically hold joint meetings of the special 
police forces (DIA [Anti-Mafia Investigative Directorate], ROS 
[Special Operations Section], SCO [Central Operations Service], 
and GICO [Organized Crime Investigative Group]) and the ordinary 
police, who handle financial matters--but without getting into 
our heads the idea that we need another specialized 
organization. Finally, international collaboration is 
indispensable, because a problem like money laundering cannot be 
confronted on the level of a single country. In the future, some 
forms of embargo will have to be considered for countries and 
banks that welcome Mafia funds." 

