Europe     Economic Review:  WESTERN EUROPE Vol. III, No. 07, 24 
February 1994 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a series published by 
FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group featuring brief summaries of 
foreign media reports on topical issues, compiled from the most 
recent sources available to FBIS. 

   Europe Economic Review (EER) is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA 
SURVEY published by the West and East European Divisions of 
Europe/Lat in America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas 
bureaus.  The EER is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Report for West and East Europe, 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear in other FBIS publications. The EER is published in two 
editions, one for Western Europe (also including media coverage of 
Canada and Turkey), and the other for Eastern Europe.  Drawing 
primarily from domestic media sources of these countries but also 
using other foreign media where appropriate, the EER focuses on 
national and regional economic issues, such as economic 
competitiveness, regional economic integration, economic reforms and 
other changes in economic policies, and foreign trade and 
investment. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government.  All comment or analysis contained herein is 
attributable to the cited media source, unless otherwise indicated. 

   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

   INTRODUCTION 

   EU 

   EU 'Employment Subsidies' Compared 

   DENMARK 

   Proposed Law To Ease Impact of Mass Layoffs; Labor Leader Urges 
Making Sabbatical Leave Law Permanent 

   FINLAND 

   Ministry Warns of High Unemployment to Year 2000; Government 
Presents Job Stimulus Program; Labor Ministry Runs Small Business 
Start-Up Fund 

   FRANCE 

   Debate on Lowering Minimum Wage; Government To Lift State Company 
Layoff Freeze; Government Initiates 'Time Savings Accounts'; 
Balladur Takes 'Sharp Turn' on Policy; Balladur 'Softens' VAT, 
Hiring Linkage; Balladur Criticized as 'Interventionist'; CNPF 
'Hostile' to Balladur Proposal on VAT; CNPF Strategy for 
Unemployment Detailed; Balladur May Stimulate Service Industry 
Hiring; Response to Balladur's Push To Increase Service Jobs; PS 
Announces Program for Unemployment; Unions, CNPF Agree on Long-Term 
Short Working Hours; Courts Take Hard Line Against Employers; 
Commentary Declares Breakdown in Labor Laws; Companies Offer More 
Benefits Than Necessary; Unemployment Projected at 14 Percent by 
2000 

   GERMANY 

   Report Says Consolidation Key to Growth, Jobs;Government Issues 
Program for Reducing Unemployment; Opposition Social Democrats 
Criticize Program;Labor Leaders, Employment Boards Also Critical; 
Lack of Funds To Stimulate Economy Seen as 'Good'; Employment Office 
Urges More Flexibility; Blum Also Urges New Work Methods; Commentary 
Hits Apprentices Who Take 'Buy Outs' 

   ITALY 

   Poor State of Public Finances Limits Jobs Programs; Government 
'Withdrawal' Increases Unemployment in South; Leftist Proposes 
Measures To Curb Unemployment 

   SPAIN 

   Labor Unions React Differently to Strike Turnout; Youth 
Unemployment Pegged at Almost 50 Percent; Government Completes Labor 
Reform Legislation; Labor Reform Underscores Trade Union Defeat; 
'Experts' Say Labor Bill Benefits Business Most 

   SWEDEN 

   Liberals: Deficit, Small Business, Research Key to Jobs; 
Government To Encourage Household Service Jobs; Social Democrats 
Call For More Investment; Study Warns of Permanently High 
Unemployment 

   INTRODUCTION 

   West Europe:  Status of Unemployment, Labor Reform 

   This special issue of the Europe Economic Review concentrates 
entirely on West European press articles and commentaries which deal 
with the related subjects of unemployment and labor reform.  In a 
region currently enduring a severe recession, the problem of growing 
unemployment and official responses to it have received prominent 
coverage in the press.  Some of this reporting has focused on the 
debate about how much of the region's joblessness is due to cyclical 
causes--that is, related to the current recession--and how much to 
structural causes, such as the high cost of West European labor.  In 
addition, press reporting makes it clear that traditional West 
European ideas of social welfare obligations have been brought into 
question by the,need to lower unemployment rates. 

   Monitored West European media has reported a variety of 
government efforts to reduce unemployment.  Germany, while 
consciously rejecting expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, is 
trying to improve the supply side of the economy through tightened 
government budgets, lower taxes, fewer regulations, and subsidizing 
lower labor costs.  The German press has reported the government's 
30-point program to implement such policies and to encourage 
privatization.  The press has also reported strong criticism of 
these initiatives from the opposition Social Democratic Party, whose 
economic spokesman, Uwe Jens, called the government's plan a "purely 
diversionary tactic."  Some press commentary has emphasized the need 
to fundamentally change public and government attitudes toward work 
and productivity. 

   In France, government efforts revolve around extending 
unemployment benefits, arranging for early retirements, shorter work 
hours, shifting workers from full-time to part-time work, and 
increasing low-level service jobs.  Some French commentary has 
pointed out that more fundamental labor reform, such as sharply 
reducing employer labor costs or strongly stimulating economic 
growth, is needed. 

   The Italian press reported that the government, distracted by its 
political and constitutional crisis, is hampered in pursuing labor 
reform by its poor financial condition.  It has therefore 
concentrated on extending unemployment benefits and establishing 
work share programs.  In Spain, the press focused on reactions to 
the 27 January labor union strike, which was viewed as a bellwether 
for gauging the extent of popular opposition to labor reform. 
Denmark and Finland's media have reported a plethora of initiatives 
to regulate layoffs and to increase service jobs, public works 
funding, and subsidies for investment and research, while Sweden's 
center-right government is following policies similar to those in 
Germany. 

   EU 

   EU 'EMPLOYMENT SUBSIDIES' COMPARED--According to an article in 
the Paris financial daily LES ECHOS, since the 1970's France has 
been the largest exploiter of direct subsidies to employment in the 
European  Community.  Labor Minister Michel Giraud has recently 
published a study which claims the recourse to different forms of 
direct financial aid to maintain and to create jobs constitutes one 
of France's main instruments of employment policy and notes that 
most countries follow such a policy.  Below is the study's summary 
of subsidy policies in: 

   * France--Subsidies have traditionally concentrated on the young. 
Subsidies for the long-term unemployed, however, became an equal 
priority after the second half of the 1980's.  During recessions, 
the French Government has used subsidies for hiring, such as 
reducing employer social security costs.  Such subsidies helped 
create more than 550,000 jobs in the retail sector in 1990. 

   * Germany--The number and types of subsidy policies used by the 
German Government are relatively limited.  More situational and less 
targeted, they have reduced wage costs significantly, up to 80 
percent in some cases, according to the article.  Special programs 
have been established for economically depressed regions or for the 
long-term unemployed.  Under Chancellor Helmut Kohl's 
administration, subsidies have increased but jobs created have not 
surpassed 150,000. 

   * United Kingdom--Subsidies have been targeted to solve 
structural problems in the labor market.  After 1980, such subsidies 
were directed toward disconnecting youth from adult wage structures 
to stimulate youth employment.  Other subsidies provide direct aid 
to the unemployed to encourage acceptance of lower salaries. 
Apprenticeship is encouraged under these programs, with some 400,000 
workers taking advantage of them each year.  (DiI) (Paris LES ECHOS 
in French 3 Feb 94 p 2) 

   DENMARK 

   PROPOSED LAW TO EASE IMPACT OF MASS LAYOFFS--Resolving an issue 
which has divided the Social Democratic-centrist coalition since it 
came to power a year ago, the Danish Government has introduced a 
bill to ease the economic and social impact of mass layoffs. 
According to the proposal, employers planning to dismiss more than 
12 percent of their work force will first have to hold talks with 
their employees for 21 days.  Only then will the company be 
permitted to issue layoff notices, which cannot take effect for an 
additional eight weeks.  Current legislation does not stipulate 
negotiations and provides for only 30-days' notice.  If the employer 
is found guilty of violating provisions of the new legislation, 
workers will be entitled to compensation equalling eight weeks of 
pay, twice the amount under present law. 

   Labor Minister Jytte Andersen said the purpose of the proposed 
law will be to help localities better adjust to sudden jumps in 
unemployment: "The goal of the bill is to allow the surrounding 
community, for example the training institutions, to have more time 
to adapt to the situation.  One should have a chance to get training 
ready.  And the workers will have a better possibility of 
adjusting." 

   The bill also brings Danish law into line with a recent EU 
directive by, for example, prohibiting employers from attempting to 
divide worker opposition to firings by bargaining in advance with 
only part of the work force.  Also, following an EU directive, 
workers laid off because of company bankruptcy will be entitled to 
compensation from the Workmen's Guarantee Fund for a longer period 
than heretofore.  (RB)  (Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 26 
Jan 94 p 1, II 1) 

   LABOR LEADER URGES MAKING SABBATICAL LEAVE LAW PERMANENT--Hans 
Jensen, the deputy chairman of Denmark's umbrella labor union 
confederation, has joined the ranks of those proposing that the 
recently passed leave law, scheduled to expire in 1996, be made 
permanent, according to an article in BERLINGSKE TIDENDE.  This 
legislation, part of the Social Democratic-led coalition's program 
to combat stubbornly high unemployment, provides for leave of up to 
one year for such things as participating in full-time training or 
taking care of an infant.  Even those who have never been employed 
and are thus not "insured" under the unemployment compensation 
scheme, are entitled to such leave.  Jensen also suggested that the 
extension of the program could be funded from worker and employer 
contributions.  The program as it is now, is paid for by the 
government, which has already begun to pay participant stipends. 
Workers are enthusiastic about the the proposal, according to the 
article, and are willing to have the additional cost deducted from 
their paychecks up to l or 2 percent, but would be unwilling to cut 
their wages further. 

   National Economy Minister Marianne Jelved did not respond 
directly to Jensen's funding idea but welcomed discussion on future 
financing, while warning that no one should look to government 
funding for this purpose.  Reaction from the Danish Employers' 
Association was cool.  Jensen's pledge to find a payment scheme 
which would "preserve the competitiveness" of Danish business was 
greeted skeptically by association Deputy Director Henning Gade: "If 
one is in an evil frame of mind, it might be said that (some) people 
would get rich by taking a leave every fifth year, for example."  He 
refused to comment further on the prospect of labor and employers' 
organizations reaching an agreement on contribution levels.  (RB) 
(Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 20 Jan 94 p l, II; 20, 23 
Jan 94 p 1, II 12) 

   FINLAND 

   MINISTRY WARNS OF HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT TO YEAR 2000--According to a 
Finnish News Service report appearing in the Helsinki daily 
HELSINGIN SANOMAT on 1 February, the Labor Ministry has warned that 
there is no end in sight for Finland's high unemployment.  At last 
report, unemployment in Finland stood at just under 22 percent, or 
over half a million persons.  The ministry report predicted that 
economic growth, accompanied by an upturn in consumer spending and 
additional public sector budget cuts, would cut this number by 
150,000 in 1997, leaving a still record high jobless rate of 16-17 
percent.  Especially intractable in the ministry's view are the 
problems of youth unemployment and long-term (over one year) 
joblessness.  The report urges the government to implement new job- 
stimulation measures and to appropriate additional funds for job 
training and other programs. 

   One reason for the expected stubbornly slow drop in unemployment 
is suggested in a separate Statistics Office report describing a 
spurt in overtime work.  As summarized by HELSINGIN SANOMAT business 
section reporter Esko Nurmi on 26 January, the study showed that 
overtime hours had increased by over 30 percent from October- 
November 1992 to the same period in 1993.  As in many countries at 
the incipient stage of recovery, Finnish employers were finding it 
less costly to increase working hours than hire new (or rehire 
former) workers.  This was discovered to be especially true in the 
booming export sectors--mining/metals and forestry.  (RB)  (Helsinki 
HELSINGIN SANOMAT in Finnish 26 Jan 94 p B1; 1 Feb 94 p B1) 

   GOVERNMENT PRESENTS JOB STIMULUS PROGRAM--Stung by charges of 
insensitivity regarding what the press increasingly terms "mass 
unemployment," Prime Minister Esko Aho's government announced new 
measures to reduce the jobless rate, while claiming recent job 
growth figures in the "normal labor market" vindicated its cautious 
policy on intervention.  As reported by Patricia Winckelmann- 
Zillacus in the Helsinki HUFVUDSTADBLADET on 28 January, Labor 
Minister Ilkka Kanerva outlined two new programs which, combined 
with those already in place, aim to put 300,000 persons back to 
work.  The first proposal involves 4-5 billion markkas in new 
spending on public projects in 1994.  A second program, to be 
launched in the fall, would target youth unemployment. 

   According to a Finnish News Service report in the same paper on 5 
February, Kanerva and Aho made public additional details of the 
first program.  The government is asking Parliament for 1.7 billion 
markkas in a supplemental budget for job creation, which will be 
added to the 1.2 billion markkas approved earlier but not yet spent. 
Most of the total is planned for infrastructure investments. 
Highway and railroad construction would receive the bulk of these 
funds, with some funds for improving sea channels.  Other projects 
include energy subsidies, building renovation, scientific research 
and help for cities, many of which have been hard hit by industry 
layoffs and shut-downs.  To help alleviate the combined effects of 
higher social security costs and reduced taxes, the government wants 
to provide 20 million markkas for welfare and health services.  Aho 
expressed hope that the new round of government spending would also 
stimulate private investment, pointing out that the recent 
legislation provides a 7 percent rebate for "productive investments" 
and that investment in construction will be exempted from value- 
added taxes this year.  (RB)  (Helsinki HUFVUDSTADBLADET in Swedish 
28 Jan 94 p 7; 5 Feb 94 p 5) 

   LABOR MINISTRY RUNS SMALL BUSINESS START-UP FUND--One job- 
creation program begun long before the current recession is the 
small business start-up fund administered by the Labor Ministry.  In 
a report by Aila Kayhty and Jussi Otalahti in HELSINGIN SANOMAT, 
this program is credited with having helped establish some 11,500 
small businesses in 1993.  This represents a 100-percent increase 
over the previous year, and a 500-percent increase over the figure 
for 1990, the year before the start of Finland's recession.  The 
authors describe how the centers of many villages and small towns- 
-where rents are substantially cheaper than in cities--have been 
transformed over the past few years by appearance of of these new 
businesses. 

   A ministry official indicated that the number of business start- 
ups assisted by this program has probably peaked and may decline in 
1994. This is because the government plans a more rigorous study of 
applications before granting funds in an effort to ensure that 
proposals are viable.  A still-unpublished ministry report has 
found, for instance, that the "life expectancy" of firms financed by 
the program has dropped from an average of five years in the 1980's 
to around half that time since the beginning of this decade.  (RB) 
(Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT in Finnish 3 Feb 94 p 16) 

   FRANCE 

   DEBATE ON LOWERING MINIMUM WAGE--Editor-in-chief of the Paris 
financial biweekly publication L'EXPANSION, Gerard Moatti, states 
that public debate on labor costs in France is only beginning, 
marking the end of a period of "hypocrisy" during which both past 
Socialist administrations and their conservative opposition ignored 
the impact of such costs on employment.  Moatti argues the 
government has not gone far enough in lowering labor costs for 
employers.  He also concludes that lower labor costs are not enough 
and that economic growth is a key requirement to produce more jobs. 
However, since Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has stated that he 
will not further change economic policy to stimulate such growth for 
now, Moatti contends that the creation of jobs in the short term 
revolves around lowering labor costs.  He believes there are two 
theoretically viable measures which can lower them: lower the 
minimum wage for youth or reduce the employer's social benefit 
costs.  Below is Moatti's view of the debate for and against each of 
these solutions: 

   1. Lower the Minimum Wage for Youth 

   * The current minimum wage in France, the SMIG, is too high. 
When employer charges for social security benefits are added, the 
SMIC reaches Fr8,000 a month. 

   * The exceptions to the SMIC have multiplied.  One can now 
legally pay below the minimum wage those who are 16 to 18 years old 
or those who hold training or apprenticeship contracts.  The new 
"professional hiring contract" created by the five-year employment 
law allows hiring a youth at 80 percent of the SMIC without having 
to offer training or between 30 to 65 percent with company training. 
Even with these exceptions, unemployment among the 16-25 year olds 
was greater (693,000) in 1992 than for those who held subsidized 
jobs (6ll,000). 

   * An indexed "youth SMIC" would reduce youth labor costs 20 
percent.  Both the Matteoli Commission study on "Structural 
Obstacles to Employment" and studies ordered by the Senate from 
INSEE and the Bureau of Information and Economic Forecasting (BIPE) 
recommended an indexed lowering of youth labor costs, by which the 
youngest workers would receive the lowest wage and those closer to 
25 years old a wage closer to the regular SMIC.  INSEE and BIPE 
concluded that an indexed youth SMIC would cost the government Fr5 
billion per year in lost income revenue compared to Fr50 billion in 
revenues which would be lost by reducing employer social security 
contributions.  However, youth would bear the burden of such a 
solution by losing income. 

   * A "substantial" and general lowering of the SMIC is impossible. 
According to Moatti, SMIC levels must be compared to other benefits, 
such as unemployment, minimum hiring revenue (RMI), and other 
housing and social benefits.  If SMIC levels are below the level of 
other benefits, then the incentive to work weakens.  For the Youth 
SMIC, however, this is not the case since it applies to those 16 to 
25, while such benefits as the RMI apply to those over the age of 
26. 

   2. Reduce Labor Costs on Low-Wage Workers 

   * Reducing employer social security costs does not affect the 
workers' income.  However, this solution costs the government Fr50 
billion in lost revenues. 

   *  Reducing employer social security charges for lower income 
workers would be particularly expensive for France.  Moatti, who 
claims such a reduction would not be significant below a level of 1 
percent of GDP, cites former INSEE Director General Edmond Malinvaud 
as advocating in a recently published paper that European countries 
should establish a sliding scale for exempting employer social 
security charges for those earning between one and two times the 
SMIC.  However, such an exemption would be particularly expensive 
for France where the majority of salaries are clustered at the lower 
end of the scale.  The French Observatory of Economic Conditions 
(OFCE) has calculated that the Malinvaud solution would cost 2.7 
percent of GDP or around Fr190 billion.  The increase in jobs would 
in theory reach around 400,000 after some years.  In fact, probably 
much less. 

   * The question of who pays for the shortfall in social security 
revenues is key to the debate.  Suggestions for how they can be 
shared include: 

   --Increase VAT taxes.  Moatti points out, however,  that is 
regulated by single market regulations. 
   --Increase company taxes.  This would "would be taking with one 
hand while giving with the other." 
   --Increase social security deductions from medium- and high- 
income earners. The OFCE study concludes this would be the most 
efficient way to promote employment of the unskilled because of the 
"substitution effect" which would replace skilled worker with 
unskilled.  However, this would penalize those most skilled in the 
work force who are already the targets of direct taxation. 
   --Increase income taxes.  Again burdening the already burdened 
and dampening economic recovery. 
   --Establish a pollution tax.  Proposed by the EU Commission, but 
energy taxes are already very high in France. 
   --Increase the General Social Tax (CSG).  This has the same 
effect as increasing income taxes. 
   --Lower corresponding social spending, such as on health.  Moatti 
suggests that France may one day be presented with the choice of 
health care or employment. 

   Included in the commentary is a chart detailing the results of a 
study by four economists at INSEE and the Bureau of Information and 
Economic Forecasting (BIPE) comparing the results of the two 
solutions to unemployment in France envisioned by Moatti.  The model 
worked out by INSEE and BIPE calculates that the responsiveness 
(elasticity) of hiring to labor cost reductions is probably less 
than 0.5 percent (employment increases less than 0.5 percent when 
labor costs decline by l percent).  The effect is not immediate but 
will have a three- to five-year delay, at which time the gain is 
greater for lower-skilled jobs and decreases markedly for higher- 
skilled jobs. 


   Supplemental Jobs Gained through ... 
(in thousands of people assuming current trends) 

--               ... Youth SMIC        ... Lower Employer Costs 
--                    1997       2000          1997        2000 

Total Employment        33        105            88        212 

Youth Employment       136        145           274        289 

(DiI)  (Paris L'EXPANSION in French 3/16 Feb 94 p 47) 



   GOVERNMENT TO END STATE COMPANY LAYOFF FREEZE--David Ausseil, 
writing in LIBERATION, reports that the government has devised a 
plan to soften the consequences of the 13,300 layoffs announced on 
15 September 1993 by state-owned companies, which were then 
prohibited from proceeding for six months by Prime Minister Edouard 
Balladur.  The plan, to be implemented in lieu of the layoffs, calls 
for more than 3,200 progressive early retirements, 4,900 retirements 
funded by the Special Allocation of National Funds for Employment 
(ASFNE), 1,000 employees put on Indemnified Long Term Reduced Work 
Hours (TRILD), and 4,000 workers put on part-time hours. 

   The plan's cost has not yet been determined.  According to 
Ausseil, the government may be prepared to spend between Fr2.5-3.0 
billion, or nearly a third of the annual funding allocated for state 
companies from the National Fund for Employment.  Furthermore, the 
plan's application could presage a change in the rules of the game 
for failing companies, Ausseil claims.  If so, company managers will 
have in the future a very complete set of measures at their disposal 
to optimize the management of their labor force and their labor 
costs.  However, the employees of these companies remain fearful of 
these formulas which tend to reduce their pay, their working hours, 
and consequently weaken their position, according to information 
from labor union sources cited by Ausseil.  He concludes that such 
doubts do not augur well for the reception this plan will have by 
employees.  (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION 17 Feb 94 p 9) 

   GOVERNMENT INITIATES 'TIME SAVINGS ACCOUNTS'--The Council of 
Ministers is examining a bill by Labor Minister Michel Giraud on 
employee stock purchases and profit sharing. Included in the bill is 
a new initiative, which, according to Marielle Court writing in LE 
FIGARO, is "incontestably the great innovation of the bill."  Giraud 
explains the provision: "Instead of distributing the gains of 
productivity under forms of bonuses--whether they result from profit 
sharing or salary contracts--those gains could be offered to the 
worker in a form of paid time off."  This "time savings account" 
could then also be augmented by deferred regular vacation time.  The 
law declares that it should be a minimum duration of six months "in 
order to have an effect on employment." (DiI) 

   BALLADUR TAKES 'SHARP TURN' ON POLICY--Prime Minister Edouard 
Balladur's decision to link accelerated VAT reimbursements to 
medium- and large-sized businesses to the creation of jobs is a 
"sharp turn" in the economic policy of the current French 
Government, which has long advocated limiting government regulatory 
control over labor, according to the chief economic editor of 
LIBERATION, Laurent Mauduit.  This reversal may be a reaction to 
President Francois Mitterrand's 5 January criticism that companies 
have done little with the Fr80 billion in government support they 
received in 1993 to create jobs.  The government, however, claims 
the idea to link VAT reimbursements to how many jobs a company 
creates is not new but an extension of last year's decision to do 
away with the one-month waiting period required of the companies 
before they could receive their VAT refunds.  The decision carried a 
considerable price for the government of nearly Fr95 billion. 
Consequently, the government intends to implement the plan in a 
progressive manner, first reimbursing small companies, then medium 
and large companies.  In total, the government will pay by the end 
of the year nearly Fr45 billion in all.  Additionally, the 
government had intended to pay the remaining amount to be reimbursed 
over 20 years, according to Mauduit.  Now, however, the government 
wants to step up the pace. 

   Balladur proposes to disburse these sums faster than expected but 
under the condition that they have a concrete effect on employment. 
The government expects one of two conditions to be met: either the 
commitment of the companies to increase its work force or the 
promise to make use of some of the job programs established in the 
five-year law on employment.  Mauduit, who questions how this form 
of reimbursement will be policed, notes that companies will have to 
comply if they want the state to write them a check.  Furthermore, 
Balladur has killed two birds with one stone since he has countered 
Mitterrand's criticisms and has partially disarmed labor union 
complaints. (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 13 Jan 94 p 13) 

   BALLADUR 'SOFTENS' VAT, HIRING LINKAGE--Prime Minister Balladur 
appears to have backed off his proposal to link company VAT refunds 
to their success at creating jobs, a proposal which placed Balladur 
at odds with the National Federation of French Employers (CNPF). 
Contrary to what he had previously announced, Balladur confirmed in 
an interview for the newspaper L'ALSACE on 21 January that it did 
not seem possible to him to establish "a mechanical link" between 
"state aid" to companies and the hiring realized by them.  He said, 
"This would be an immense source of administrative complexity." 
However, this was exactly what his proposal had envisaged and the 
final implementation may only have been softened.  Instead of 
demanding that companies create jobs to obtain their VAT 
reimbursements, the government could more "modestly" ask them to 
take advantage of certain subsidized hiring programs, which would be 
less constraining for the companies. (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in 
French 21 Jan 94 p 13) 

   BALLADUR CRITICIZED AS 'INTERVENTIONIST'--While it was known that 
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's government was less a free market 
advocate than it claimed, the announcement that the repayment of VAT 
taxes would be linked to the number of jobs companies would create 
reveals that Balladur's government is one of the most 
"interventionist" in the last decade, writes economic journalist 
Philippe Maniere in LE POINT.  It is "absurd" to count the number of 
jobs created during any single period, he contends, for expanding 
companies need to hire and failing firms must lay off workers to 
survive, regardless of VAT refunds.  While a company is obviously 
better off with a VAT reimbursement, the difficulty of correctly 
accounting for jobs is Balladur's first error, Maniere contends.  In 
addition, he continues, Balladur's demand that companies use the 
funds as he would like betrays his professed free market ideals. 

   Maniere additionally contends that French firms currently receive 
"too much" from the state.  While the "expensive and useless" 
subsidies assigned to, for example, "innovation" and investing in 
mountainous and underdeveloped regions would be immediately 
abolished by a true free market advocate, the Balladur government 
instead is increasing them, Maniere concludes.  (RM)  (Paris LE 
POINT in French 22 Jan 94 p 57) 

   CNPF 'HOSTILE' TO BALLADUR PROPOSAL ON VAT--The president of the 
National Federation of French Employers (CNPF) indicated yesterday 
that he "did not appreciate" the announcement made Il January by 
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur linking reimbursement for Value- 
Added Tax (VAT) for large companies to job creation, where each hire 
would give the company a VAT credit.  Balladur's message, which 
announced the "beginning of a study" of strategies to link VAT 
reimbursement to "creation of employment," is clear, according to an 
article in LES ECHOS.  The government wants to transform the 
automatic reimbursements of some Fr50 billion that they owe to 
companies into a "bonus" for hiring.  According to an article in LES 
ECHOS, this decision shows the government's disarray in dealing with 
mounting unemployment. 

   While labor unions have expressed their satisfaction with 
Balladur's strategy, the CNPF has been "squarely hostile."  "The 
reimbursements of the VAT to companies is not a gift but an 
obligation," protested CNPF head Francois Perigot.  He added that 
there is "no relationship between the companies' treasuries and 
their hiring.  Everyone knows that hiring comes from growth.  The 
plan is contrary to the goal of hiring since it will favor those 
companies who are hiring and are in good shape and penalizes those 
which have problems."  PSA Peugeot-Citroen pointed out that "in an 
industry such as the automotive industry, where one perfectly well 
knows that survival unfortunately depends on reducing the work 
force, linking VAT reimbursement to creating employment would be 
criminally against the spirit (of survival)." (DiI)  (Paris LES 
ECHOS in French 13 Jan 94 p 4) 

   CNPF STRATEGY FOR UNEMPLOYMENT DETAILED--In an article in 
LIBERATION, CNPF Vice President Jean Domange outlines his 
organization's priorities to save France's system of social 
protection.  Remarking that it is "amazing" that France is the only 
country in the world where politicians think companies can create 
jobs during a recession, Domange refutes the prevailing notion that 
companies should be required to hire to receive their VAT refunds. 
He points out that during a recession, these refunds are used to 
shore up a company's finances rather than to expand production and 
create jobs.  Domange argues that the problem is the cost of labor, 
which has become a brake on hiring.  He adds that the CNPF is 
"correct" in wanting to lower this cost and notes that the CNPF has 
long wanted the social protection system in France changed in three 
fundamental ways: 

   * Lower costs for social benefits. 
   * Shift responsibility for some of these costs from the employer 
to the government. 
   * Alleviate social security costs in the "commercial productive 
sector" which bears a disproportionate burden that affects hiring. 

   Despite the organization's desire to reduce labor costs, Domange 
acknowledged that the CNPF recently accepted higher employer 
contributions for social benefits.  He explained that the CNPF did 
so not only "out of a sense of duty" but because it was caught in a 
political system based on negotiation and burden sharing which 
repeatedly required compromise. (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 
24 Jan 94 p 14 

   BALLADUR MAY STIMULATE SERVICE INDUSTRY HIRING--Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur announced in an interview in an 11 January 
broadcast of TF1 that the government may take new "stimulative 
measures" to create employment in service industries, such as 
banking, gasoline distribution, and food market companies.  Balladur 
is focusing all his attention on the services not exposed to 
international competition, which employ some 300,000 to 400,000 
persons.  According to unnamed members of Balladur's staff, these 
stimulative measures will include, for example, mandating a set 
number of supermarket parking lot attendants, bank security 
officers, or pump attendants at gas stations.  To avoid distorting 
competition, the regulations would cover all the businesses in an 
industry.  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 13 Jan 94 p 
2) 

   RESPONSE TO BALLADUR'S PUSH TO INCREASE SERVICE JOBS--To say that 
there exists a "well" of service jobs to be tapped through 
government regulation and incentives is "risky," according to 
Perrine Chercheve writing in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES.  Chercheve points 
out that when former Labor Minister Martine Aubry tried tax 
incentives in January 1992 to stimulate employment of household 
workers (reducing taxes up to 50 percent for wages up to Fr25,0O0 
per year), only 30,000 net new jobs were created in one year. 
Chercheve questions whether the government's program to increase 
service industry employment is enough to persuade the private 
sector.  Some companies appear ready to try.  The oil company Total, 
for example, just recruited 200 young people under the aegis of one 
of the government's "qualification contracts" to train as mechanics 
and heating technicians.  Commenting on the ability to create jobs 
in services, Independent Parisian Transportation Board (RATP) head 
Francis Lorentz states that a demand exists for additional travel 
services.  "But not at current costs," he explained.  He proposes 
that labor costs for minimum wage earners--SMIC employees--be 
reduced to lessen the cost of unskilled labor. (DiI)  (Paris LA 
TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 7 Jan 94 p 4) 

   PS ANNOUNCES PROGRAM FOR UNEMPLOYMENT--To create 2.5 million jobs 
from now until 2000, the opposition Socialist Party (PS) will 
propose establishing a 36 or 37 hour work week, according to an 
article by Jean-Michel Themand in LIBERATION.  The PS program, 
introduced in a report to the National Convention on Employment 
which will be held the end of February, is largely the work of 
former Industry Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn, now president of 
the PS's expert group, and Dominique Taddei, vice president of the 
PS's economic commission.  Their report, which did not specify 
whether the proposed 36-37 hour work week included a salary 
reduction, is intended to end the internal PS debate over a 32-hour 
work week.  However, the proposal will still be criticized within PS 
ranks.  Henri Emmanuelli has already warned that he would not find 
the proposal "political" enough, and the left wing of the PS remains 
in favor of a 35-hour work week without reduction of salary. 
Strauss-Kahn and Taddei believe their plan will attain more than a 
third of the PS's job creation goals if the PS can avoid being 
"hemmed in by a statistical debate" over workers' salaries. 

   The report also suggests that to attain the economic growth 
needed to increase employment sufficiently, the international 
monetary system must be "stabilized."  The report proposes that 
currency speculation be penalized in order to regulate capital 
movements.  Furthermore, the EU must be provided with a "real 
foreign trade policy using legal means and instruments" such as the 
United States has.  The report also favors a "public program of 
investment at a European level" more ambitious than the program 
agreed to at the last EU summit.  It suggests organizing "a 
coordinated reduction in short-term interest rates," presumably to 
stimulate growth throughout the EU but also to more quickly advance 
toward monetary union. 

   Domestically, the program proposes establishing "a stable 
partnership" with industry entailing "minority--but significant- 
-public ownership rather than Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's 
privatization plan which finances current expenses while selling 
national assets at a discount." (DiI)  (Paris LIBERATION in French 
18 Jan 94 p 9) 

   UNIONS, CNPF AGREE ON LONG-TERM SHORT WORKING HOURS--Beatrice 
Taupin reports in LE FIGARO that three labor unions will sign an 
agreement with the French Employers Confederation (CNPF) to finance 
increases in the Indemnified Long-Term Reduced Work Hours (TRILD) 
program through UNEDIC, the unemployment insurance system.  The 
three labor unions are the CFDT, CFTC, and the CGC.  The Workers 
Force (FO) has not yet decided and the General Workers Confederation 
(CGT) has refused to sign, claiming it is an "agreement of 
complacency" and "totally inadequate to fight unemployment." 

   The agreement will extend the financial support to workers put on 
"short working hours" by paying for an additional 500 hours, or a 
total of 1,200 hours of labor during an 18-month period.  The 
current program, which UNEDIC does not participate in financing, 
pays workers 50 percent of their salary up to 700 hours with a 
minimum of Fr29 francs an hour, Fr22 of which  are paid for by the 
government.  The agreement, worked out to show good faith in meeting 
target figures "imposed" by the government's five-year employment 
law, is intended to avoid layoffs.  For the supplemental hours, 
UNEDIC will pay Fr10 per hour and guarantee workers 50 percent of 
their former salary.  Taupin questions where the remaining funding 
for this program will come from, pointing out that either it must 
come from the government or the company. (DiI)  (Paris LE FIGARO Le 
Fig-Eco supplement in French 16 Feb 94 p 4) 

   COURTS TAKE HARD LINE AGAINST EMPLOYERS--Having believed that 
they won the battle in 1986 to free themselves of government 
bureaucratic approval for layoffs, companies are now realizing that 
the courts have progressively taken over this function, according to 
a commentary by Delphine Girard in LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES.  An unnamed 
top official in the Labor Ministry recalls that under bureaucratic 
control of company layoffs, 90 percent of such cases received 
approval.  Now, the official points out that judicial approval is 
required and is harder to come by.  Furthermore, the courts examine 
company accounts to find financial justification for layoffs whereas 
the government hesitated to interfere in the management of 
companies. 

   With the increase in unemployment, the idea has developed in 
public opinion and in judicial and political circles that companies 
have a social responsibility.  From the beginning of his 
administration, Prime Minister Balladur has asked employers to use 
layoffs as a last resort, after all other alternatives have been 
exhausted.  Balladur's request has not been heeded, according to 
Girard.  The number of layoffs for "economic reasons" reached a 
record level in 1993 of 600,000. 

   Under the pressure of unemployment, parliament and the courts 
have reinforced controls over company employment plans.  The law of 
29 January 1993, the last of the Socialist government sponsored by 
then Labor Minister Martine Aubry, profoundly changed the rules of 
the game, imposing on the employer the obligation to try to find 
other jobs or "placements" for workers or face having their layoff 
plans prohibited.  The opposition at the time was violently opposed 
to this measure.  In power, Balladur has decided to maintain the 
law. 

   The new regulation states that all companies laying off more than 
10 employees for economic reasons must produce a "social plan" 
detailing company efforts to place workers in other jobs.  Early 
retirement formulas or financial aid to encourage voluntary 
departures cannot be considered as part of these plans.  According 
to Aubry's law, for the social plan to be considered worthy, a 
company must: 

   * Try to place workers elsewhere in or outside the company and 
facilitate hiring by another employer by offering such benefits as 
job search support and stipends for moving. 

   * Take "actions to create new business," either in the company or 
the group, or "support for the creation of a business." 

   * Provide training or retraining for workers. 

   * Reduce or "manage" work hours through part time, early 
retirement, or other forms of management. 

   If these obligations are not met, the departmental Directorate of 
Labor will deny permission for the layoff. 

   The interpretation of the new regulation by judicial authorities 
has revolutionized the management of companies and has nourished the 
fears of employers, according to Girard.  Several court cases have 
added to these fears.  The 24 November 1993 decision by the court of 
appeals in Rheims to deny permission for layoffs at Moet et Chandon 
had "the effect of a bomb."  The court denied permission to the 
champagne producer because it had not taken "concrete" steps to 
place workers within the company or the parent group LVMH, as the 
law demanded.  The court considered the company's external placement 
efforts to be "of little use."  The court also examined the 
financial situation of the group and decided, "The social plan in 
its entirety appears unbalanced. .. considering it is a group whose 
financial health does not seem compromised..."  Additionally, the 
court in Lyons denied permission to the Sabla company to fire 122 
employees because Sabla had an "inadequate social plan."  The 
tribunal concluded that because Sabla belonged to a group 
representing 199,000 employees, it must have job opportunities 
within the company or group. 

   Companies particularly fear that court control of employment 
plans further encourages the examination of company accounts to 
verify the financial reasons for layoffs.  Girard maintains that 
this process has increased in severity.  For example, on 11 May 1993 
the Court of Appeals in Lyon refused to consider as a "real or 
serious" economic reason for layoffs the decision by Thomson-Video- 
Color to close a business in France to move production abroad to 
reduce prices.  Additionally, on 29 December the departmental 
director of labor for Loire-Atlantique forbade the Chantelle company 
to lay off 200 workers after closing a site at Saint-Herblain.  The 
court ruled that the layoffs were not justified by any "urgency" to 
move production elsewhere. (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in 
French 13 Jan 94 p 17) 

   COMMENTARY DECLARES BREAKDOWN IN LABOR LAWS--During the last two 
years, "one can no longer count" how many times companies have 
ignored the nation's labor laws, according to economic 
correspondents Delphine Girard and Perrine Chercheve writing in LA 
TRIBUNE DESFOSSES.  Not only has the Labor Ministry "judged it 
useful" to publicize the legal framework within which companies can 
lower salaries but for the last few months it has tolerated the 
outright breaking, or the circumvention, of labor laws, often with 
the tacit approval of workers who fear losing their jobs.  "Periods 
of economic expansion over the years have allowed workers to improve 
their legal and financial status," explained Jacques Gounon, labor 
law adviser to Labor Minister Michel Giraud.  Gounon states that the 
real question today is whether the recession and growing 
unemployment will allow workers to keep their acquired benefits.  He 
concludes, "For me, the answer is no."  Worker's Force (FO) union 
official Jean-Marie Bousquet claims state authorities do not 
intervene or do little to stop illegal practices because "they know 
that doing so would just force new layoffs."  Examples of subverting 
labor laws are rife and include paying workers "off the books" and 
working employees fulltime while collecting government subsidies for 
part time employees.  Additionally, slow court reviews of labor law 
cases further subverts compliance. 

   State complicity in these illegal practices acknowledges the fact 
that workers who are faced with such labor practices usually accept 
them as "done deals" and remain complacent as long as their jobs are 
secure.  However, if faced with unemployment and nothing to lose, 
they would cause social, according to Dominique Denobili-Barlier, 
labor law specialist in Paris. 

   The excess of labor regulations which have been denounced for 
years by the current government as the main cause of unemployment in 
France has finally been understood and accepted in the ranks of the 
opposition, the authors contend.  Under the pressure of 
unemployment, labor laws are being broken and the process seems 
inescapable.  "Deregulation, I believe is inevitable," confided a 
labor law professor and former government adviser.  "For years, we 
tried to nail down work contracts.  to protect workers.  Result? 
The explosion of underground (black market) labor and the constant 
diversion of the law.  When a country has 20-percent unemployment, 
and not 12 percent as the official statistics say, you can not avoid 
questioning past regulations.  There is not enough work for everyone 
and 3 to 5 million unemployed people are ready to step in and 
replace workers under more precarious conditions with less pay. ... 
Today unemployment has changed the rules of the game." 

   Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's five-year law to fight 
unemployment subscribes to the logic of labor flexibility and 
deregulation.  Giraud expects the law will create 400,000 jobs in 
five years.  However, in the ranks of the governing coalition, the 
law is judged too timid and especially too complex to implement.  On 
a 28 November television interview, former Prime Minster Raymond 
Barre said, "I want a single solution.  A 10-year law on employment, 
with a single article authorizing, with the agreement of the 
companies, total exemptions to legal and conventional regulations 
which govern the functioning of the labor market and the social 
relations within the company."  (DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES 
in French 12 Jan 94 p 19) 

   COMPANIES OFFER MORE BENEFITS THAN NECESSARY--According to an 
investigation into unemployment benefits by the consulting firm 
Right Associates done for the National Agency of Personnel Directors 
and Staff (ANCDP), 80 percent of French companies are offering their 
employees unemployment benefits greater than mandated by regulation 
or law in all categories of personnel and types of unemployment. 
Additionally, 68 percent of the employees questioned think that 
their company's benefit plans will do the same, particularly for 
professional personnel.  Some 46 percent of the respondents believe 
there are no predetermined formulas to calculate these benefits. 
(DiI)  (Paris LA TRIBUNE DESFOSSES in French 4 Feb 94 p 5) 

   UNEMPLOYMENT PROJECTED AT 14 PERCENT BY 2000--According to 
reports from the Center for Forecasting and International 
Information (CEPII), France has little chance of attaining a 5- 
percent unemployment rate by the year 2000 and may well suffer 14 
percent unemployment instead.  Researchers at CEPII and at the 
French Observatory for Economic Conditions (OFCE) have concluded 
that a 5-percent unemployment rate by that time could only be 
obtained if the economy grew by 5.9 percent per year from now until 
2000.  With an average annual growth rate of 1.8 percent expected 
for the 1990's, unemployment would grow to 14 percent by the end of 
the century. (DiI) 

   The hard copy version of this Foreign Press Survey contained two 
graphs; one showing the Layoffs Expected for 1994; the other was 
Forecast:  Growth Necessary for 5-Percent Unemployment by 2000 

   GERMANY 

   REPORT SAYS CONSOLIDATION KEY TO GROWTH, JOBS--The government's 
annual economic report rejects proposals for activist monetary and 
financial policies as self-defeating, arguing that budgetary 
consolidation and structural reforms will allow the country to 
escape rising unemployment.  According to an article in the Munich 
SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG, a draft version of the report argues that 
"past experience" indicates expansionary fiscal and monetary 
policies produce only a "short-term upswing" and ultimately 
exacerbate existing structural problems."  The recent pattern of a 
residual unemployment level which rises with each succeeding 
economic cycle was not a "natural law," however, and could be broken 
by returning to "the basics of social market economy."  This means 
adopting fiscal and monetary policies which would improve the supply 
side of the economy and a wage policy characterized by restraint. 
Such an approach implies consolidating the government's finances, 
limiting taxes and fees, lowering labor costs, and encouraging both 
investments and the creation of lasting, competitive jobs through a 
process of deregulation and privatization.  The government also 
needs to educate the public to be more open to technology, to 
increase the willingness of companies to take risks, and to forge 
closer cooperation among the state, business, and science sectors. 
(RoH)  (Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 22/23 Jan 94 p 31) 

   GOVERNMENT ISSUES PROGRAM FOR REDUCING UNEMPLOYMENT--On 18 
January the Kohl government presented a 30-point program, to be 
implemented during the remainder of the year, for reducing the 
country's record high unemployment.  "The Action Program for More 
Growth and Employment" includes budget cuts, investment incentives, 
and several new labor market policies.  The government also intends 
to argue against any pay increases in the 1994 wage negotiations for 
public sector workers.  The program foresees a reduction of the tax 
burden and provides for a series of measures to simplify the tax 
system.  Bonn also wants to encourage the establishment of new 
businesses by extending financial aid already available in the 
eastern states to the west.  Under this plan, interest-free and low- 
interest loans will be available to establish innovative firms and 
for training.  The unemployment program further calls for increasing 
the ability of the laender and communities to privatize some 
functions.  The government has promised to complete its 
privatization plan and to complete financing for public works such 
as the planned high-speed train between Berlin and Hamburg by the 
end of March.  By the fall it wants to have a plan for the expansion 
of the highway network, which is to be carried out by private 
corporations. 

   The government also proposed a variety of labor market measures, 
including making particularly depressed areas of western Germany 
eligible for a program that shifts subsidies from employees to 
employers by exchanging government compensation to workers for lower 
wages for reduced employer social security payments.  This measure, 
which will end in 1996, will also be used to promote environmental 
protection, social services, and youth service projects.  There will 
be stronger incentives for workers receiving unemployment 
compensation to do seasonal work and underemployed workers will 
receive supplementary pay.  In addition, unemployed workers starting 
their own business will be given "transition money" for a six-month 
period.  Workers switching from full- to part-time work will 
continue to be entitled to the same unemployment compensation as 
full-time workers.  Instead of instituting a planned trial period 
for private employment agencies, these agencies will be allowed to 
begin operations immediately.  The government also plans stricter 
measures against illegal and black-market jobs.  (WS)   (Munich 
SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 18 Jan 94 p 21) 

   OPPOSITION SOCIAL DEMOCRATS CRITICIZE PROGRAM--The opposition 
Social Democratic Party (SPD) was critical of some of the budget 
cutbacks as well as the labor market measures included in the 
government's program.  According to an article in the 18 January 
FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU, SPD economic spokesman Uwe Jens called the 
program a "purely diversionary tactic" that would not create any new 
jobs.  Many other SPD members said the planned reduction in the 
budget for research would endanger 2,500 jobs in the research and 
development sector.  An article in the 4 February edition of the 
same paper reported that the Social Democrats, like the unions, 
particularly opposed allowing private employment agencies and 
encouraging the unemployed to take seasonal work.  (WS) 
(Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU in German 18 Jan 94 p 21; 
4 Feb 94 p 1) 

   LABOR LEADERS, EMPLOYMENT BOARDS ALSO CRITICAL--Union leaders and 
employment officials have strongly criticized the government's 
proposals for private employment agencies and stronger incentives 
for the unemployed to take seasonal jobs.  According to an article 
in the 20 January FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU, the state employment boards 
are worried that private agencies will not only recruit their best 
employees but will inhibit their ability to analyze the labor 
market.  The president of the German Handicrafts and Trades 
Association, Heribert Spaeth, called for a limited trial period, 
confined to three regions, for the private agencies.  The German 
Employees' Union said that "nothing shows the helpless action of the 
German Government better than the decision to help about 5 million 
unemployed find about 200,000 available jobs through private 
employment agencies."  Commenting on the proposals to encourage the 
establishment of new businesses, Spaeth pointed out that many of the 
unemployed do not have the qualifications to start their own 
businesses and would soon fail.  An article in the 3 February 
edition of DIE WELT notes that the public services, transportation, 
and traffic union called the incentives for the unemployed to take 
seasonal jobs, such as harvesting, a "climatic disaster."  Farmers' 
unions have also opposed such plans.  (WS)  (Frankfurt/Main 
FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU in German 20 Jan 94 pp 1, 11)  (Berlin DIE 
WELT in German 3 Feb 94 p 11) 

   LACK OF FUNDS TO STIMULATE ECONOMY SEEN AS 'GOOD'--A commentary 
in the 21 January edition of the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE perceives a 
"good" side to the German Government's shortage of funds for use in 
stimulating the weak economy.  The commentary, which bears the 
abbreviated byline "bar," maintains that public works projects and 
other spending programs are "useless anyway" in the effort to return 
the "tired, overburdened" German economy to a path of strong 
economic growth.  Such an effort, the commentator continues, is 
properly the province of regulatory policy.  Deregulation is one of 
the best things the government can do to help the economy and, in 
this regard, Bonn's plan to legalize private employment agencies is 
a 'remarkable contribution."  The commentator does note one 
disadvantage to the shortage of funds, pointing out that there is 
no maneuvering room" for "a tax reform which would promote 
investment and efficiency."  (RoH)  (Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER 
ALLGEMEINE in German 21 Jan 94 p 1) 

   EMPLOYMENT OFFICE URGES MORE FLEXIBILITY--The head of the Federal 
Employment Office, Christian Democrat Bernhard Jagoda, favors more 
creative solutions to the unemployment problem.  He notes that the 
trend toward restructuring the economy may be a good thing despite 
current layoffs since a more efficient economy will in the long term 
create job opportunities in new technologies.  Employees must be 
more flexible and willing to "learn by doing."  Jagoda rejects the 
argument that workers can be motivated by a greater differential 
between wages and unemployment compensation.  He also stresses the 
importance of more part-time work.  If the percentage of part-time 
workers in Germany was as high as in the Netherlands--30 percent- 
-there would be 2 million fewer unemployed.  He cites the health 
care industry, where there is a high turnover rate and workers' 
skills are quickly outdated, as an area with great potential for 
more part-time workers.  He also notes that the increasing number of 
women in the work force creates a need for more child-care providers 
and housekeepers. 

   Jagoda also calls for more creativity in industry.  Because wages 
are high in Germany, firms must use other cost-lowering measures 
such as increased quality and innovation.  He is concerned about 
patent statistics and the Employment Office's conclusion that 40 
percent of German firms have not improved their products in the last 
three years.  (WS)  (Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 11 Jan 94 
p 19) 

   BLUM ALSO URGES NEW WORK METHODS--Labor Minister Norbert Blum, 
who has opposed some of the government's job creation proposals, 
also calls for a change in thinking, particularly regarding part- 
time employment.  In an article in the 14 January DIE ZEIT, Blum 
writes that Germany has developed into a nation of inventors who do 
not produce their products.  "To only develop products but not 
produce them is job denial."  German workers on the average work 38 
hours per week and machine operating time in Germany is 12 hours 
less per week than the rest of Western Europe.  Productivity is 
wasted, according to Blum, by allowing the machines to stand idle 
the rest of the time.  What is needed is a break from old patterns, 
according to Blum.  Work hours need not be as they have been for 100 
years.  To illustrate the distortion in the labor market, Blum cites 
the statistics that 250,000 unemployed persons are seeking only 
part-time work, while over 2 million full-time workers would like to 
become part-time.  Part-time work, Blum points out, does not have to 
be measured in hours, it can be calculated in terms of weeks, 
months, or years.  Like Jagoda, Blum mentions housekeeping and 
child-care, which he says have been stigmatized in German society, 
as potential growth industries where a new way of thinking is 
necessary.  (WS)  (Hamburg DIE ZEIT in German 14 Jan 94 pp 24-25) 

   COMMENTARY HITS APPRENTICES WHO TAKE 'BUY-OUTS'--A commentary in 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE criticizes some apprentices for accepting job 
offers and then immediately quitting for "buy-out" benefits. 
According to the commentary, which appears under the abbreviated 
byline "ank," a few companies, despite large-scale downsizing, have 
offered permanent jobs to their apprentices "out of a sense of 
social responsibility."  Some of these apprentices have accepted the 
jobs and immediately quit, hoping to reap generous severance 
benefits intended to encourage long-time employees to leave 
voluntarily.  Whether or not these benefits are ultimately granted, 
the commentator maintains, no employer who has experienced this 
behavior is likely to go to bat for its apprentices again.  "When 
the severance benefits have been used up," the commentary concludes, 
"there will be a great deal of wailing."  (RoH)  (Frankfurt/Main 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 22 Jan 94 p 11) 

   ITALY 

   POOR STATE OF PUBLIC FINANCES LIMITS JOBS PROGRAMS--In an article 
comparing unemployment in the more industrialized countries, 
L'ESPRESSO correspondent Maurizio Valentini wrote that because of 
the "desperate situation" of its public finances, Italy cannot 
expend large sums to stimulate the economy.  Instead, it is slowly 
complementing current unemployment insurance benefits with extended 
benefits, early retirements, and subsidizing work share programs so 
that workers receive at least 50 percent of their original wages. 
Although these programs are expensive, Valentini notes, they will 
limit the number of layoffs, and "it is better to spend more than to 
perish." (AB)  (Rome L'ESPRESSO in Italian 18 Feb 94 p 138) 

   GOVERNMENT 'WITHDRAWAL' INCREASES UNEMPLOYMENT IN SOUTH--A 
January report by the Association for the Development of Southern 
Italy (SVIMEZ) shows that unemployment in this region grew by 4.8 
percent and has now reached 18.9 percent compared to 7.7 percent in 
the center-north of the country.  These figures place the eight 
southern regions as the worst in West Europe and agree with the 
latest government report on poverty which shows almost 4.4 million 
poor in the south compared to 2.4 million in the rest of Italy. 

   Commenting on the report, Mariano D'Antonio, an economist who 
specializes in the south's economy, said that while high 
unemployment in the south is nothing new, it is rapidly getting 
worse.  D'Antonio claims the main reasons for the rise in 
unemployment is the collapse of government spending and the 
"withdrawal" of the government from the south.  The government's 
"southern policy," which subsidized southern Italian industries, has 
stopped, D'Antonio said, resulting in massive cutbacks in incentives 
to companies and investments in public works.  To get out of the 
current situation, D'Antonio suggests restarting the government 
development programs and increasing investment, without giving in to 
excessive spending.  For emergency relief, D'Antonio suggests that 
agencies for education and employment be established.  According to 
D'Antonio, it is preferable to spend public funds to promote the 
growth of new companies rather than to keep the young and the 
unemployed at home. (AB)  (Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 28 
Jan 94 p 19) 

   LEFTIST PROPOSES MEASURES TO CURB UNEMPLOYMENT--Pierre Carniti, 
former leader of the Italian Confederation of Trade Unions (CISL) 
and currently Social Christian leader within the leftist Progressive 
Alliance, proposed several measures to curb unemployment which my be 
implemented by the next government should the Progressive Alliance 
win in the upcoming national elections.  His suggestions include: 

   --Extend the compulsory school age to 18 by the year 2000 and 
reform the high school curriculum to increase professional skills 
for the labor market. 

   --Reduce work hours.  A 32-hour work week can be achieved in 
Italy through a trilateral agreement among the unions, industry, and 
government.  This would create 1.4 million new jobs, Carniti 
maintains.  Companies that would function on four days instead of 
five could save 20 percent on general expenses.  The government 
would save on unemployment benefits and would receive greater 
revenues because the employed pay taxes. 

   --Establish a "labor draft" to draw on 500,000 youths to dedicate 
one year to community service.  The cost would be 700,000 to 800,000 
lire per month for each youth. 

   --Reconsider employment classifications, dropping the 
philosophical distinction between manual and intellectual labor, 
because manual labor in Italy is undervalued both in remuneration as 
well as social prestige. (AB)  (Milan L'EUROPEO in Italian 9 Feb 94 
p 39) 

   SPAIN 
   LABOR UNIONS REACT DIFFERENTLY TO STRIKE TURNOUT--An article in 
EL PAIS by correspondent Carmen Parra claims labor views the 27 
January strike against labor reform legislation as a "resounding 
success."  Some of the trade unions who shared this view included 
Workers Commissions (CCOO), General Workers Union (UGT), and Workers 
Trade Union (USO).  According to the trade unions, the strike was 
endorsed by nearly 90 percent of Spain's 9 million salaried workers, 
a vast majority of the students, retirees, a large number of small 
business workers, and other citizens.  UGT leader Nicolas Redondo 
asserted that the trade unions would not allow the strike to become 
a "useless event," urging that if a solution were not found for 
unemployment, the prime minister would lose labor support in the 
next election.  Redondo and CCOO leader Antonio Gutierrez sent a 
letter to Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez to schedule a meeting to 
discuss a compromise on the labor bill. 

   Correspondent Concha Martin reports a far more critical reaction 
and highlights the "radically contradictory" figures provided by the 
Confederation of Spanish Employers (CEOE) concerning strike 
participation.  The CEOE, for example, perceived the strike to be a 
"failure" in light of the low 26-percent turnout rate (approximately 
2 million people).  CEOE leader Jose Maria Cuevas suggested that 
people may  have been pressured to participate in the strike.  He 
further noted a low turnout rate from the service sector and a 
comparably higher participation rate for the industry and 
transportation sectors.  He also alluded to a high turnout rate in 
select regions such as Asturias and the Basque country but 
attributed this to "picket violence, aggressiveness, and 
intimidation."  Cuevas believes the trade unions inflated the number 
of strikers.  He further claims the unions were unable to produce 
arguments that would convince citizens to strike, which forced them 
to "shield themselves with their own militants and 'agents'." 
Cuevas's remarks were seconded by president of the Spanish 
Confederation of Small and Medium-Sized Business Manuel Otero Luna 
who added: "The current model for trade unionism has failed." (CH) 
(Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 28 Jan 94 p 18) 

   YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT PEGGED AT ALMOST 50 PERCENT--An article in EL 
PAIS by correspondent R. Ruiz, cites Social Affairs Minister 
Cristina Alberdi as acknowledging 1 million young Spaniards are 
still unemployed despite government spending on youth educational 
and training programs.  Ruiz notes that the Socialist government 
allocated 1.6 trillion pesetas for such programs during 1989-93. 
The gender breakdown for unemployment rates, which have risen for 
the age group since 1989, is 40 percent for men and 48 percent for 
women under the age of 25.  Alberdi outlined what the Socialist 
government has done for people between the ages of 18 and 29.  She 
highlighted the creation of 116 new university degrees and 1 million 
training contracts of which 750,000 are slated for internships.  She 
also noted that 700,000 students were awarded academic scholarships 
every year and pointed to financial grants which were awarded to 
over 10,000 young Spanish farmers on a yearly basis to assist them 
in their first farming operation. 

   Despite government aid to students, Ruiz recalls that during the 
fall of 1993, students took to the streets to protest the increase 
in tuition, the lack of scholarships, and the poor quality of 
teaching.  Another bone of contention are the apprenticeship and 
training contracts, which Ruiz believes served as a catalyst for the 
27 January strike.  These entry level contracts are viewed by the 
trade unions as "contracts to exploit workers."(CH)  (Madrid EL PAIS 
in Spanish 20 Jan 94 p 25) 

   GOVERNMENT COMPLETES LABOR REFORM LEGISLATION--In late December, 
the cabinet approved the remaining labor reform legislation 
according to an article in EL PAIS by correspondent Carmen Parra. 
Parliamentary groups had until mid-February to submit partial 
amendments to the legislation.  The bill then goes to the Senate for 
approval, which is expected sometime in June.  The main trade unions 
whose dissatisfaction with the legislation led to the 27 January 
strike, did support the provision outlining new trade union election 
regulations.  However, they objected to other provisions concerning 
collective bargaining, dismissal reforms, and regulations governing 
apprenticeship contracts.  They also opposed an increase in the 
minimum wage (SMI), which the government proposes to raise 3.5 
percent, in contrast to the 6.5 percent suggested by the trade 
unions.  Labor believes that the reform proposals go too far, but 
Labor Minister Antonio Grinan asserts that the aim of the labor 
reform package is for "every possible job to become a reality." (CH) 
(Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 30 Dec 93 p 14; Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 
2 Feb; 8 Feb 94 p 13) 

   LABOR REFORM UNDERSCORES TRADE UNION DEFEAT--Mariano Guindal 
reports in LA VANGUARDIA that all the parliamentary groups, except 
for the United Left, the Canary Islands Coalition, and the 
representative from the Republican Left of Catalonia voted to 
support the initial part of the labor reform legislation.  Guindal 
quotes Labor Minister Antonio Grinan as saying: "The trade unions 
are entitled to call a general strike" but "it must not be forgotten 
that over 90 percent of the deputies representing the people have 
voted in favor of it, and this means that the vast majority of the 
population, whom they lawfully represent are in favor." (CH) 
(Barcelona LA VANGUARDIA in Spanish 29 Dec 93 p 9) 

   'EXPERTS' SAY LABOR BILL BENEFITS BUSINESS MOST--A group of labor 
relations experts--professors, labor lawyers, and labor inspectors- 
-believe that the labor reform bill will discourage collective 
bargaining because it moves approval for layoffs away from Labor 
Ministry control to "judicial" control.  Additionally, they claim 
that the reform legislation "goes against the Constitution, which is 
intended to protect workers from free market laws."  Citing labor 
mobility as an example, they noted that once the bill goes into 
effect employers can force workers to move to another city to fill a 
job.  At that point, the employee will have to make the decision 
either to accept the job transfer or to quit.  If the employee opts 
to keep his job and then goes to court to fight the decision, he 
will be fired despite legal appeal.  The experts also criticized the 
20,000 apprenticeship contracts which have been underwritten by the 
government, stating that this figure is nothing more than a 
"conversion" of some of the 30,000 contracts for regular employment, 
which were not renewed in January.  The apprenticeship contracts, 
effective as of 1 January 1994, allow the hiring of young, untrained 
workers to be paid at below the minimum wage.  (CH)  (Madrid EL PAIS 
in Spanish 26 January 94 p 21) 

   SWEDEN 

   LIBERALS: DEFICIT, SMALL BUSINESS, RESEARCH KEY TO JOBS--In a 
commentary in the 16 January Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER, Liberal Party 
leader and Minister of Social Affairs Bengt Westerberg and Finance 
Minister Anne Wibble defend the government's austerity package and 
plans for promoting investment as ways of fighting unemployment. 
Westerberg and Wibble assert that Sweden's high unemployment and 
high budget deficit are the same problem.  Unemployment, they argue, 
is the leading cause of the budget deficit, and both are related to 
structural faults in the Swedish economy.  The deficit can therefore 
only be eliminated by reducing unemployment and by following the 
government's austerity program, which includes reduced compensation 
for sick days and periods of unemployment. 

   Westerberg and Wibble's goal is to achieve full employment in 
Sweden by creating about 400,000 new jobs in the 1990's.  They point 
out that 200,000 new jobs were created in the latter half of the 
1980's and that net job creation would have been even greater had 
there been more labor available.  Westerberg and Wibble call for 
more than seven out of 10 of these new jobs to be in small 
businesses and new enterprises.  The government has introduced a 
number of measures to favor small business, for example, tax breaks 
for people owning their own business, the abolition of the capital 
gains tax on working capital in a small business, and the 
elimination of dual taxation on stocks. 

   The government has also emphasized measures to increase 
investment and promote research and development.  In this respect, 
Westerberg and Wibble reiterate, EU membership is vitally important 
to avoid "capital flight."  In addition, a better climate for 
investment can be created if interest rates are reduced after the 
austerity program is implemented.  Westerberg and Wibble point out 
that Sweden has lagged behind other industrialized countries in 
research and development oriented production.  They believe it is 
especially important to increase R &amp; D's share of total production, 

because it is precisely this production which is least sensitive to 
business cycles and price fluctuations.  The government is now 
preparing a proposal on increased support for technological 
innovation.  (WS)  (Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 16 Jan 94 p 
4) 

   GOVERNMENT TO ENCOURAGE HOUSEHOLD SERVICE JOBS--The Swedish 
Government is considering introducing legislation in the fall which 
would change tax rules to encourage private households to hire help. 
A study commissioned by the Minister of Taxation suggested giving 
tax deductions of 70,000 kronor to families with children who hire 
housekeepers or baby-sitters; it also recommended reducing employer 
fees--paid by an employer to the government for each employee--for 
these families and for companies providing household services. 
Taxation Minister Bo Lundgren said that the legislation could apply 
to housepainters and auto mechanics as well:  "The whole service 
sector suffers from our high tax burden in Sweden."  According to 
the professor who conducted the study, these proposals would create 
20,000 new jobs. 

   The proposals are expected to meet with opposition from the 
Social Democrats, who see the government as giving up high-wage jobs 
for low-wage jobs and higher wage differentials.  A Social 
Democratic tax expert said:  "The risk is that Sweden will get more 
and more of what are called 'junk jobs' in the United States--low- 
paying jobs with no development potential that do not require any 
education."  (WS)  (Stockholm DAGENS NYHETER in Swedish 28 Jan 94 p 
6) 

   SOCIAL DEMOCRATS CALL FOR MORE INVESTMENT--In response to what it 
considers the government's "passivity" regarding unemployment, the 
opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) has put forward its 
economic program, calling for massive investment in Sweden's 
infrastructure.  The Social Democrats are hoping for an investment- 
led growth rate of 3.4 percent this year and 4.5 percent next year. 
They propose investments of $20 billion in infrastructure 
improvements, education, and labor market measures, $15 billion of 
which would be financed by taxes and reduced transfer payments.  The 
proposed infrastructure improvements include maintenance of roads 
and railroads, new railroad stations and airport hangars.  The SDP 
also advocates a temporary subsidy of 10 percent on housing starts 
before the end of December 1994 and 20 percent for housing 
renovations begun before March 1995.  They would also subsidize the 
renovation of schools, rest homes, community centers, and religious 
organizations.  Investments in environmental projects such as 
cleaning up old factories and reducing traffic noise would also be 
increased.  The SDP is also proposing the introduction of a 12-month 
apprenticeship for young people before they are hired at full wages. 
In addition, firms would be allowed to deduct 70 percent of 
machinery investments from their taxes but nonsocialist programs 
such as a capital gains tax reduction and the cessation of dual 
taxation on stocks would be eliminated.  (WS)  (Stockholm SVENSKA 
DAGBLADET in Swedish 26 Jan 94 p 11) 

   STUDY WARNS OF PERMANENTLY HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT--A report issued by 
the Association for the Study of the Economy and Society (SNS) 
warned that Sweden's current welfare system takes away the incentive 
to work and creates a class of permanently unemployed people.  The 
report, entitled "The Welfare State in Times of Misfortune," points 
out that employment levels have not risen despite economic growth. 
It warns that high levels of welfare payments make it more 
profitable to live on unemployment compensation than to accept a 
low-paying job.  The resulting pressure on public finances, 
according to SNS, will restrain economic growth and endanger the 
welfare state.  To break the cycle, the economic think tank 
recommends reducing welfare payments, in part by privatizing some 
types of insurance.  SNS economists believe the public sector's 
share of GNP should be reduced from 70 to 50 percent.  They also 
propose abolishing taxes on incomes under 60,000 kronor per year to 
make it easier for low salaried employees to live on their earnings. 
This tax reduction could be financed by increasing taxes on higher 
incomes.  (WS) 

   The hard copy version of this Foreign Press Survey contained two 
graphs dealing with--Growith Without More Jobs, and Unemployment by 
Region. 

Anilla B. (703-733-6285), Roger B. (703-733-6508), Robert H. (703- 
733-6504), Carolina H. (703-733-6288), Dian I. (703-733-6286), Rosa 
M. (703-733-6287), and Wendy S. (703-733-6506) contributed to this 
Foreign Media Survey. 
ELAG/24 FEB/ECONF/WED JEG 25/0232Z FEB 

