BFN 

<F P=106> [Li Tung Commentary: "Is Samdech Hun Sen a War-Monger?"] </F>
  [Text] Some pessimists have put all the blame on Samdech 
Hun Sen for the deteriorating military situation in the past two 
weeks by pretending to forget about the danger of the Khmer 
Rouge and by ignoring the Royal Government's policy. 
  Two months ago, through a newspaper in Phnom Penh, a Royal 
Government official charged that there were war-mongers in the 
cabinet. He did not specify who they were, however. It is only 
now that these pessimists have reflected on this accusation and 
pointed at Samdech Hun Sen directly. 
  Why have these people stirred up this matter? It is either 
to break up the internal unity of the Royal Government and thus 
enable the Khmer Rouge to seize control, or to keep the 
government in chaos and instability, while enabling the Khmer 
Rouge to continue their attacks in the outlying areas, and thus 
prolong the current situation. 
  First of all, even if these elements do not know everything, 
they should at least know that the leadership of the Royal 
Government by the first and second prime ministers must be in 
harmony. The prince's first trip as prime minister to hold 
discussions with Khieu Samphan at the beginning of 1991 and the 
recent final decision to eliminate the Khmer Rouge's 
isolationist movement through military means have all been 
agreed upon. These matters have been affirmed by the two prime 
ministers. We must resolutely oppose anyone who is a war-monger 
and attempts to use warfare as a means to stabilize his power. 
  Each battle has its own meaning, aim, and form. If the Royal 
Government did not resist the war waged by the Khmer Rouge which 
had caused great destruction to national property and the lives 
of people, the government would certainly be blamed. The 
government has been blamed, however, by these pessimists for 
carrying out its duty in line with the articles defined in the 
Constitution. This matter is difficult to understand. It will 
be even more difficult to understand if these pessimistic 
elements are in the ranks of the cabinet. 
  Peaceful means is the only way to end the conflict in 
Cambodia. But the Khmer Rouge have rejected the round-table 
meeting. This should serve as clear proof for all, including 
those pessimists, as to who the real war-mongers are; Hun Sen, 
the Royal Government of Cambodia, or the Khmer Rouge? 

