Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Gao Jinan: "China Lifts the Secrecy Shrouding </F>
Aerospace"] 
  [Text] China has raised the veil of secrecy around its 
space industry by inviting international investment in a diverse 
package of projects. 
  This is the first major step taken by the China Aerospace 
Corp (CASC) to lure foreign investment since it was founded last 
June. 
  At that time the Ministry of Aerospace Industry was split 
into two independent enterprises -- China Aerospace Corp and the 
Aviation Industry of China -- to sharpen the competitive edge of 
the space and aviation industries. 
  While announcing the investment opportunities last week, 
Wang 
Liheng, Vice-President of CASC, also disclosed that 
breakthroughs in the manned space programme are expected by the 
end of this century or early next century, but gave no details. 
  CASC is seeking co-operation in 93 projects covering 
satellites, electronics, machinery, and automobile and real 
estate development. Implementing all of them will require 1.28 
billion yuan ($147 million). 
  Wang said CASC is willing to cooperate with any foreign 
partner and would explore all forms of assistance in developing 
the space industry, including joint ventures and technological 
exchanges. 
  Economic co-operation would be shared equally by the 
partners 
and would yield mutual benefits, Wang said. 
  CASC has set aside 60 million yuan ($6.9 million) and $10 
million as start-up capital for the projects. 
  The corporation will stage four international exhibitions 
this year to publicize the projects: In Chicago, the US, in 
March; in Melbourne, Australia, in May; in Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, in July; and in Beijing in September. 
  Five of the projects are related to satellite applications 
and require 77.5 million yuan ($8.9 million) Wang said. 
  The Hunan Aerospace Corp, for instance, is seeking a foreign 
partner to jointly manufacture satellite TV receiving systems. 
The required investment is estimated at 15 million yuan ($1.7 
million). 
  The corporation now produces 2,000 sets for home use, but 
needs capital to expand production to meet expanding demand. 
  Market surveys show that current demand for satellite TV 
receivers is about 100,000 each year, and will grow to 300,000 
to 500,000 by the turn of the century. 
  The four other satellite projects involve communications 
ground stations, a digital communications network, a weather 
information platform, and a communications monitoring system. 
  CASC had devoted itslelf to developing and manufacturing 
launch vehicles, spacecraft, and strategic and tactical missiles 
before shifting to civilian purposes in the late 1970s. 
  Civilian production now makes up about 70 per cent of the 
industry's output. 
  Wang said his corporation will concentrate on three markets: 
satellites, automobiles and computers. Most of the 93 projects 
are in these three fields. 
  He said Chinese satellites have improved to the point where 
they will be good enough to export by the year 2000. 
  China has signed space-related agreements and protocols with 
a number of countries, including Germany, Italy, United Kingdom, 
the US, Pakistan India, Russia and Brazil. 

