Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sergey Filatov, Russian President Yeltsin's </F>
chief of staff, by unidentified correspondent; place and date 
not given: "Living According to the Law and Conscience -- 
Sergey Filatov, Specially for ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI"] 
  [Text] [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] It took tremendous 
intellectual and moral efforts by society to take the step to 
the country's new Constitution. Its adoption is a historical 
fact and was a moment of truth. We all must be aware of the 
great strength of the state embodied by the new Constitution. 
It is important that we all sense the vitality of the 
fundamental law, which from the outset must give not the 
slightest grounds for being seen as impotent or purely 
rhetorical. Is there any confidence that the launching of the 
new Constitution into the orbit of the Russian state will rally 
the people and give them faith and hope for change and for the 
instrument of this change? 
  [Filatov] It is precisely confidence in the Constitution's 
timeliness that is today maintaining and imparting confidence to 
many Russian Federation citizens both inside and outside the 
country. 
  The Constitution has cut the knot of the soviets' monopoly 
on 
power in the country, has created substantial legal barriers to 
the possibility of gaining power by violent adventurist means, 
and has created the preconditions for ending the legal chaos. 
On 24 December 1993 the Russian Federation president issued the 
edict "On Measures To Bring Russian Federation Legislation Into 
Line With the Russian Federation Constitution," whereby he laid 
down all the additional powers he was forced to exercise after 
the termination of the Supreme Soviet's activity. Thus 
responsibility for the country's development is de jure now 
placed equally on the executive and legislative branches, in 
conformity with the Constitution. 
  The elaboration of the draft constitution and the holding of 
the nationwide vote was a huge job involving hundreds and 
thousands of people: scientists, specialists, and 
representatives of parties and social movements. All mechanisms 
of democratic principles were used in preparing the 
Constitution. The support for the Constitution by the people is 
visible confirmation that it was prepared not by the powers that 
be but indeed by representatives of all strata of the 
population. While the United States was left with two volumes 
of stenographic reports after the preparation of its 
Constitution, we have been left with an entire multivolume 
series in our archives. The text of the fundamental law was 
studied at the Constitutional Conference, in its chambers, in 
working commissions, and under constitutional arbitration 
procedures. I hope that all the papers will be published and be 
available to any historian. I want to sincerely thank all 
participants in this great and important work! 
  There were many firsts. For the first time a draft 
constitution was submitted to a nationwide vote. For the first 
time the existence of a professional parliament has been 
enshrined in the Constitution. 
  There are many other firsts. This is probably why it is 
proving such a slow and difficult process to build the edifice 
of the new statehood. But it is a poor master who is guided 
solely by the well known principle "Let us raze everything to 
the ground, and then...." Naturally, the new Constitution was 
based on consideration of the relations really existing in 
society and on consideration of the existing real guarantees of 
human rights and freedoms. Therefore it both encapsulated 
society's existing achievements and, most importantly, opened up 
future prospects. 
  With the adoption of the new Constitution one of the 
fundamentally important pledges that the president of Russia 
gave the people has been fulfilled. This was also fresh 
confirmation of people's trust in the presidential course of 
political and economic reform. 
  The nationwide approval of such an important legal document 
represents a credit of trust in the authorities. A sizable 
credit at a considerable rate of interest. So we should not 
rest on our laurels but constantly think about progress every 
day and every hour. It is no accident that the opposition is 
vigorously pushing the thesis that the policies of the 
supporters of democracy and economic reform are ramshackle. 
However, work on the new Constitution demonstrated, first, the 
seriousness and promising nature of our plans and the fact that 
they are thoroughly thought-out and, most importantly, the 
consistency of the transformations in all spheres of Russia's 
social life. In my view, the time of "ultrarevolutionary" 
upheavals must finally recede into the past. We have had enough 
of measuring our lives by the intervals between revolutions. 
People are tired of upheavals, of a feverish economy, and of 
uncertainty about the future. 
  The new Constitution is precisely an instrument we can rely 
on in transforming our society's economy and politics and the 
life of the country as a whole. It clearly delimits the 
competence of legislative and executive organs of power and does 
not permit them to "pressure" each other. It contains a number 
of mechanisms for this. 
  I hope that the start of work by the Federal Assembly will 
show that the new parliament's main task is to create the 
framework of legislation and adopt the laws according to which 
we will live, while the task of the executive organs is to 
ensure that those laws are implemented. But if all of a sudden 
the mechanism for the separation of powers "misfires," the 
mechanism of guarantees -- the president's power -- will come 
into effect. It is the president who is the guarantor of 
observance of the Russian Federation Constitution. Moreover, 
the Constitution in itself, as a law, lays down the basis for 
stability in the country's existence, enabling the world 
community to regard the country as a strong state and reliable 
partner from the political and economic viewpoints. 
  [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] Nowadays the word "Constitution" is used 
together with the word "new." How are its forms new? It is 
important to grasp this, since some of them were enshrined in 
the old Constitution. 
  [Filatov] The most fundamental element in the Constitution 
is the enshrining of human and civil rights and freedoms. For 
the first time it is on record that the Russian Federation 
recognizes and guarantees rights and freedoms in accordance with 
generally recognized principles and norms of international law. 
The aforementioned rights and freedoms are direct-acting and 
are safeguarded by the judicial system. 
  Both economic rights and citizens' freedoms have been 
clarified. Each citizen is granted the right to engage freely 
in entrepreneurial activity. The question of private ownership 
has been fundamentally resolved. Article 35 says that the right 
of private ownership is protected by law. 
  The entire Constitution is permeated by the idea of 
strengthening our federative state. It clearly defines the 
legal status of components of the Russian Federation and their 
equality among themselves and in relations with the center. I 
need only cite the provision of Article 76 whereby normative 
legal enactments of components of the Russian Federation operate 
in the adoption of federal law on questions not forming part of 
the competence of central organs of state power. 
  It is important to note that the autonomy of components is 
determined not only by the Constitution but also by the 
Federation Treaty and also by their right to conclude other 
treaties on the demarcation of areas of responsibility of their 
powers. [sentence as published] 
  The constitutional regulation of relations between the 
president, the government, and the Federal Assembly is 
important. This nexus is structured on the basis that the 
president of the Russian Federation is the head of state and 
guarantor of the Constitution, human and civil rights and 
freedoms, and the sovereignty, independence, and state integrity 
of the Russian Federation. With the consent of the State Duma 
the president appoints the chairman of the government (if 
parliament rejects three nominations the president has the right 
to appoint the chairman independently, dissolve the Duma, and 
schedule fresh elections), adopts decisions on the dismissal of 
the government, at the proposal of the chairman of the 
government appoints and dismisses his deputies and federal 
ministers, and submits to the Federation Council for appointment 
candidate justices of the Constitutional Court, Supreme Court, 
and Superior Court of Arbitration. According to the procedure 
indicated in the Constitution, he can be removed from office by 
the Federation Council on the basis of a charge of high treason 
or another grave crime submitted by the State Duma. 
  The Constitution creates a new legislative organ -- a 
Federal Assembly consisting of two chambers: the Federation 
Council and the State Duma. The State Duma, which works 
permanently, elaborates and adopts laws, and the Federation 
Council approves these laws. It will not work on laws article 
by article but will assemble periodically and examine what the 
State Duma has done from the viewpoint largely of federal 
interests. 
  [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] Has the criticism of the Constitution by 
its opponents been taken into account? 
  [Filatov] I must immediately dot the "i's" here. The 
preparation of the draft constitution by the Constitutional 
Conference and its chambers consisted of two important periods. 
During the first all the proposals and comments without 
exception -- and after publication of the draft in May 1993 
there were over 5,000 of them -- were examined and carefully 
studied. During the second stage the country's president 
referred the draft constitution for nationwide approval. 
Russians familiarized themselves with the text of the draft and 
determined their attitude toward the proposed version. During 
this period no changes were made to the draft constitution. A 
telephone information service was created in the Kremlin to 
explain the published text and each day over the course of a 
month it explained the provisions of the draft constitution to 
all callers and provided interpretations of particular articles. 
There were over 3,000 calls during this month. Normal 
productive work was carried out. 
  Meanwhile certain public movements were inflaming the 
situation in the country, fanning hysteria, and deliberately 
misinterpreting the draft's provisions. The "scathing 
criticism" by certain historians, sociologists, and political 
scientists was often based simply on a lack of information about 
the Constitution's contents. But sometimes, unfortunately, some 
of them were carrying out social orders. Incidentally, this was 
all too easy to see when, for instance, politically committed 
jurists began to intimidate Russians with the fatal consequences 
of a thoughtless action. To be honest, it is hard to believe 
that in Russia the people's actions are always thoughtless. The 
themes of the "stupid people" and the "wise leader" are all too 
familiar to many of us. We have experienced this for ourselves, 
so to speak. 
  I have more faith in the Russian people's wisdom, natural 
intelligence, and perspicacity. 
  [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] The operation of the Constitution 
extends to all regions, even those which voted against adopting 
it. How will the federal authorities act if those who rejected 
it refuse to live according to it? 
  [Filatov] The Constitution, as an integral entity, can be 
regarded only as a united and interconnected package of rights 
and responsibility for the implementation of these guaranteed 
rights. The fundamental law cannot be implemented selectively -- 
I choose to implement this bit but I refuse to implement this 
bit. The strength of the Constitution lies in the unity and 
interconnection of rights and duties. Only then does the 
mechanism of guarantees on the part of the state begin to 
operate. 
  The text of the Constitution begins with the words "We, the 
multinational people of the Russian Federation." This does not 
merely sound solemn, there is far more substance here than 
solemnity. It is the people, the entire people, not some 
section of them, that have adopted new rules for the country's 
life. We the people take on all the problems, we the people 
take on all the difficulty of making tricky decisions, we the 
people really become responsible for our future and the future 
of new generations. 
  There is only one solution for contentious issues -- calm, 
considered, reasoned, and professionally competent examination 
of contentious issues in the Constitutional Court. In fact, 
this is the reason why the judicial branch exists. It is called 
upon to harmonize interests and to see that law triumphs over 
the unruly wishes of each individual. 
  [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] Now for some questions about what the 
new Constitution brings for ordinary people. For instance, 
Article 2 asserts that the state undertakes the obligation of 
recognizing and observing human and civil rights and freedoms. 
Moreover, Article 18 says that rights and freedoms are 
direct-acting. How does this work in practice? 
  [Filatov] An unquestioned achievement of the new 
Constitution is the fact that it is direct-acting, that is, the 
norms enshrined in it cannot be "adjusted" for the worse by 
subsequent laws. Take Article 18, for instance. It states that 
human and civil rights and freedoms are direct-acting. This is 
not merely instructions to the Federal Assembly, the president, 
and the government to adopt their enactments within the 
framework of the Constitution's provisions. This statement is 
the legal basis for the defense of human rights via the courts. 
And it would be a question of a direct violation of the 
Constitution, not merely of some legal provision. As you can 
see, the state's legal guarantees are of a very different, 
higher level. 
  We are steadily moving forward and developing society's 
legal culture. As you can see, the process is not only complex 
but, most importantly, affects all society and requires a 
totally different type of relationship between the citizen and 
the state. We are still not used to this kind of 
interdependence. But we will have to get used to it. 
  [ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI] The Constitution apparently creates 
colossal scope for implementing human rights. But how will the 
fulfillment of these rights be guaranteed? For instance, one of 
the Constitution's norms proclaims the individual's right to 
travel freely and choose his place of stay and residence. 
  How is this norm going to enter into effect? After all, it 
is well known that the institution of residence permits still 
exists and, moreover, special procedures for the registration of 
visiting citizens have been introduced for Moscow and St. 
Petersburg. Won't this norm come into conflict with other human 
rights? 
  Or to take another example, Article 21 says that the dignity 
of the individual is protected by the state and nothing may be 
grounds for disparaging it. But today our dignity is disparaged 
at virtually every step: in dirty stores, on poorly maintained 
streets, in the subway and streetcars, in social security and 
housing offices.... It is hard to imagine that this norm will 
begin to operate.... 
  Is there any need, in our [as published] view, for the 
president and government to take special measures to ensure that 
the Constitution begins to operate right from the outset? 
  [Filatov] Unfortunately, your questions are typical of our 
legal awareness. Or, to be more accurate, of the legal 
awareness of yesterday's Soviet person. 
  I know it is not so easy to become a Russian citizen, 
someone 
for whom democratic norms must be customary and natural. The 
main difficulty in the way of our "legal maturity" is to 
overcome the echoes of yesterday's ideas molded by Soviet 
reality. Paternalism -- the belief in the all-powerfulness of 
the state and the expectation of often totally unjustified and 
unrealistic favors from it -- has thoroughly corrupted us. It 
is like in a family where the parents alone bear the entire 
burden of problems, the children usually lack willpower and are 
weak. 
  Judge for yourselves. Even since the nationwide referendum 
approving the new Constitution we have been living in a world of 
illusory expectation that someone -- the president or the 
government -- will come along and the dirt in stores and the 
subway will vanish while social security offices will begin to 
dote on pensioners and veterans. I think that there is all too 
much simple passive and lazy waiting for the same old favors in 
this attitude. Nothing comes along or happens automatically. 
That truth is as banal as it is real and vital. 
  I reiterate the thought that the Constitution is a contract 
for us all and a code of basic rules of life that will make our 
society richer and more free. But not automatically, without 
our doing anything, but precisely thanks to us, thanks to our 
labor! 
  As I conclude, I would like to draw your attention to the 
fact that, despite all the problems, it is New Year. So let us 
forget all our problems for a moment and feel light and relief 
in our hearts. Let the mood be good in the new year, may 
children and grandchildren bring joy to our homes, and let us 
learn to live in peace and harmony! Happy New Year to everyone, 
I wish you new happiness! 

