BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zou Qingli (6760 3237 7787)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 27 Mar (XINHUA) -- It was learned recently 
from the office of the Three Gorges Project Construction 
Committee that large generating sets to be used in the Three 
Gorges Project shall be jointly designed and manufactured by 
Chinese enterprises and a foreign company that wins the 
international bid. 
  According to Li Shouren, chief engineer of the Ministry of 
Machine-Building Industry, the Three Gorges Project will need a 
total of 26 large generating sets, each with a 700,000 kw 
capacity. The design and manufacturing process for the hydraulic 
turbine -- one of the largest hydropower units in the world, 
each with a wheel about 9.85 meters in length -- require fairly 
high technical standards. In recent years, China's 
machine-building industry has made many attempts to solve major 
technical problems and other preparations for the manufacturing 
of such power units. As a result, it has been equipped 
basically with the ability to manufacture such large hydropower 
units. 
  In consideration of the possibility that foreign funds may 
be 
used in the Three Gorges Project, as well as for the purpose of 
guaranteeing that the technology and quality of such power units 
are of advanced-world levels and promoting China's standards in 
developing and manufacturing power-generating equipment, the 
state has made the following decision: The bid for the 26 large 
hydropower units will be open for foreign companies around 1996. 
The 12 generating sets, which are for the first-phase 
construction project, shall be jointly designed and manufactured 
by a foreign bid winner and the Harbin Electric Machine Plant 
and the Dongfang Electric Machine Plant. The foreign company 
shall be fully responsible to the China Three Gorges Project 
Development Cooperation for technology, quality, and time of 
delivery. The Chinese plants, in turn, shall be responsible to 
the foreign company. During the joint production process, the 
Chinese plants shall gradually increase the percentage of 
locally made products in an effort to master design and 
manufacturing ability. The other 14 units shall mainly be 
manufactured at home, with the Chinese plants becoming major 
suppliers of the goods. 
  It was learned that the 550,000 kw flow-type hydraulic 
generating set for the Ertan power station shall be jointly 
manufactured by the Dongfang Electric Machine Plant and the GE 
Canada Company soon in accordance with the above-mentioned 
method. Such a method shall be helpful in accumulating many 
experiences for Chinese plants in terms of jointly developing 
and manufacturing power generating units with foreign companies. 
The Harbin Electric Machine Plant and the Dongfang Electric 
Machine Plant, which are to be responsible for developing and 
manufacturing power generating units for the Three Gorges 
Project, are now making technical preparations. 

