BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 3 (XINHUA) -- The average annual 
increase rate of overseas tourists visiting China reached a 
record 13 percent between 1985 and 1993, the highest in the 
world. 
  This figure is included in the latest statistics compiled by 
the World Tourism Organization. 
  With the quickening of China's drive of reform and opening 
to 
the outside world in recent years, China's tourism industry has 
become an important component of world tourism, said Yang 
Liuyin, a leading official with the State Administration of 
Tourism. 
  A total of 41.53 million overseas tourists visited China in 
1993 alone, up 8.9 percent over the previous year; the foreign 
exchange earnings gained from tourism reached 4.67 billion U.S. 
dollars, a hike of 18.3 percent over the 1992 figure. 
  Yang said that China has absorbed a stable source of 
tourists 
from the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Singapore, Hong 
Kong and Macao since last year. 
  Besides, big breakthroughs have been made in luring tourists 
from the Republic of Korea and other parts of the world. 
  According to official statistics, a total of 200,000 ROK 
tourists visited the Chinese mainland in 1993, most of them were 
on commercial tours. 
  The ROK tourism authorities expected the number to reach 
500,000 this year, as the ROK Government had annulled in April 
all relevant restrictions hindering ROK citizens from touring 
China. 
  Other statistics show that the Chinese mainland is now the 
best choice for Taiwan visitors. A record total of 1.4 million 
Taiwan residents visited the mainland last year, up 8 percent 
over the previous year. More and more Taiwan residents have 
diverted from the single purpose of visiting relatives to many 
other fields of activities such as commercial, cultural and 
academic exchanges. 
  The booming industry of tourism has greatly invigorated the 
national economy as a whole and provided job opportunities for 
over a million people every year, according to the official. 
  Moreover, the industry boosted vigorous development in the 
fields of construction, telecommunications, commerce, finance, 
transport and cultural exchanges. 

