BFN 

  [Text] While the ruling and opposition parties are 
simultaneously urging the need for an "early passage" of the 
fiscal 1994 budget bill, various ministries and agencies in 
Kasumigaseki [where judicial and administrative organizations 
are concentrated] are worried that their appeal may end in mere 
gesture. Since the resumption of budget deliberations at the 
House of Representatives' Budget Committee will be delayed until 
23 May, it is uncertain whether Diet will pass the budget bill 
by the end of the current Diet session on 29 June, when a 
supplement to the current stop-gap budget -- which will be 
approved soon -- expires. Moreover, with an eye on the 
political situation, the ruling parties are ready to take a 
stance of not speeding up the passage of the fiscal 1994 budget 
until they submit a bill for redistricting single-seat 
constituencies to the Diet. There is a growing view that "the 
outlook for the redistricting bill will decide all the matters, 
including the timing of approving the budget" (as stated by the 
Ministry of Finance [MOF]). 
  In an effort to overcome the awkward situation of the 
minority ruling parties, Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata has at last 
begun calling on both the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] and the 
Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] after the Golden Week 
holidays to hold a summit meeting on future management of 
policies. However, the prospects for the budget passage are 
still uncertain. Showing its displeasure, the MOF said: "We 
had no choice but to work out a supplement to the provisional 
budget to cover the long period before the end of the current 
Diet session." 
  While the ruling parties have maintained that top priority 
should be placed on the budget passage, both the LDP and SDPJ 
have taken an attitude of cooperating with them for the time 
being. However, after the budget passage, the two parties 
intend to soon move to overthrow the Hata administration through 
such measures as submitting a no-confidence motion in the 
cabinet. 
  On the other hand, the idea of approving the redistricting 
bill at the Diet immediately and securing a free hand in 
dissolving the House of Representatives has cropped up among the 
ruling parties. However, since the panel has just begun studying 
details of redistricting single-seat constituencies, it is 
impossible to submit the bill to the Diet immediately. If the 
fiscal 1994 budget passes the Diet too quickly, the opposition 
parties will be given a chance to submit a no-confidence motion 
at any time. 
  For this reason, it is widely speculated in Kasumigaseki 
that 
"because it is wiser for the ruling parties to continue budget 
deliberations until the redistricting bill is submitted to the 
Diet, they may take such a move" (according to an MOF official). 
The ruling parties themselves will, so to speak, hold the 
budget bill as a "hostage." 
  Kasumigaseki officials are critical of both the LDP and SDPJ 
as well, saying: "Their true intention is that they do not want 
to speed up budget deliberations." They say coolly: "If they 
intend to overthrow the cabinet, they should immediately submit 
a no-confidence motion in the cabinet after approving the budget 
bill. Their unwillingness to do so is evidence of their lack of 
administrative strategies after they overthrow the cabinet." 
  There is a possibility that the ruling and opposition 
parties' justification that "the political situation should not 
be confused during deliberations on the budget" may result in a 
delay in approving the budget. Irritation is increasing at 
ministries and agencies in Kasumigaseki. 

