Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Milan Martic, president of the republic of </F>
Serbian Krajina, by Luka Miceta; place and date not given: 
"Dzakula Is Not the Only One"] 
  [Text] "Personally, I have nothing against the fact 
that relations between the Republic of Croatia and Yugoslavia 
are being normalized. It is inevitable that more than three 
years of war be followed by a time of peace and that all 
conflicts be resolved by political means." 
  Until only several years ago, Milan Martic was the 
chief of a small police station in Knin. Now he is the president 
of the republic of Serbian Krajina [RSK], the capital of which 
is Knin. People of ill-will say that there is no difference 
between his former and current functions. 
  Such are the times in which we live. Gloomy. 
  [Miceta] Based on the constellation of political forces (RSK 
president--RSK Assembly), it can be concluded that your position 
will unavoidably be marked by compromise. However, you were a 
policeman for a long time. Now you are the president of a state 
that is coming into being. To what extent will you be impeded in 
your current function by the habit and practice--acquired in the 
police--of subordination? It appears that you will have to be 
twice as tolerant, especially with regard to adopting a uniform 
position on the question of relations with Croatia, but also 
with Yugoslavia? 
  [Martic] In the last elections, the people in Krajina came 
out in favor of the political option--the unification of all 
Serb lands, that is incontrovertible. Accordingly, all those 
entrusted with a mandate must respect the will of the voters. As 
you yourself have noted, we have a situation in which on the one 
hand there is the president of the republic elected by the will 
of a large number of voters as the candidate of a citizens 
group, while on the other hand, in parliament, we have a 
coalition of the radicals and the SDS [Serbian Democratic Party] 
of Krajina. This sort of balance of power should not and cannot 
be a handicap, assuming that all the elected representatives of 
the people are sincerely committed to the programs that they 
advocated in the election race. And it is only in this sense 
that compromises are possible. 
  Concerning the issue of relations between the republic of 
Serbian Krajina and Croatia or Yugoslavia, there can be no 
compromises that would be to the detriment of the will of the 
people of Krajina. Specifically, it is a known fact that the 
people in Krajina have held three referendums in which an 
unreserved commitment to living outside Croatia and to a unified 
state of all Serbs was expressed. Anyone who would be willing to 
compromise outside that framework in order to further their own 
political ambitions would be a traitor to the political option 
supported by the people of Krajina. 
  It is exclusively for that reason that I am insisting on the 
formation of an expert government, which at the same time should 
be an expression of national unity. I am certain that this 
stance will prevail in our parliament as well, because any 
insistence on partisan exclusiveness would land us in a blockade 
situation which would be very hard to surmount, given the 
current constitutional provisions. 
  [Miceta] What was the decisive consideration in your 
decision 
to run for the Krajina presidency? It was said in Belgrade, the 
story arrived from Krajina, that Mr. Milosevic persuaded you to 
run on several occasions? 
  [Martic] It is true that I was in a dilemma for a long time 
about whether to agree to run for president of the republic. The 
people who were most insistent about it were my fellow soldiers 
and people who share my political views. In that regard, I 
encountered support from a large number of politicians from 
Serbia, not only President Slobodan Milosevic. And there is 
nothing wrong with that. That was mostly support for the 
political option that I uphold. On the other hand, nearly all 
opposition leaders supported my opponent in the second round, 
Milan Babic. And that too is support for his political option. I 
see nothing wrong with that. Everyone supports the person who is 
closest to them politically. And that is the main reason that I 
agreed to run for president. Specifically, we have made too many 
sacrifices over the past three years of war to now turn Krajina 
over to the tender mercies of political intriguers, whose 
personal political affirmation is the top priority. We managed 
to make that clear to the people in the second round, and I 
think that that tipped the scales in the results of the voting. 
  [Miceta] Do you feel that the support that you received from 
Mr. Crncevic, Mr. Markovic, Mr. Kosutic, and Mr. Bingulac, who 
are not residents of Krajina, is natural? 
  [Martic] I have already emphasized that the basis of my 
political outlook is perseverance in the policy of unifying all 
Serb lands. I feel that I was supported in this by everyone who 
has the same outlook. You mentioned only some of the people who 
helped me in my election campaign. However, these people also 
included prominent politicians, businessmen, and cultural 
figures from Yugoslavia and the republic of Srpska who did not 
hide their support for my political option. And for their own 
option, of course. 
  [Miceta] Cooperation on a high political level has begun 
between the FRY and Croatia. The first meetings of teams of 
journalists from Belgrade with their colleagues from Zagreb, but 
also with Croatian political officials, are also taking place. 
To what extent can these and similar initiatives help you, and 
what is their influence, in your opinion, on the thaw in 
relations between Belgrade and Zagreb? 
  [Martic] Personally, I have nothing against the fact that 
relations between the Republic of Croatia and Yugoslavia are 
being normalized. It is inevitable that more than three years of 
war be followed by a time of peace and that all conflicts be 
resolved by political means. Likewise, I have nothing against a 
normalization of relations between the republic of Serbian 
Krajina and the Republic of Croatia in the foreseeable future. 
Naturally, several preconditions are necessary for that, most of 
all the establishment of a lasting peace. To achieve that, 
Croatia must stop its continuous attacks on the RSK, meaning 
that it must abandon its aim of overcoming its frustrations 
through force. Anyway, I am a pessimist with regard to the 
current political team in Croatia and its real intentions. 
  [Miceta] Veljko Knezevic has been appointed chief of the FRY 
office in Zagreb, a man who is believed to be a member of the 
SK-PJ [League of Communists-Party of Yugoslavia]. It is also 
known that you are at the very least a sympathizer of that 
party. Is it possible to say that for those reasons this is a 
good move by the Yugoslav diplomatic leadership, since 
ideologically close people work together better? 
  [Martic] That question is provocative. You are in fact 
bandying about certain rumors from the streets. Like if I were 
to say that it is known that NIN is an anti-Serb publication. As 
far as Veljko Knezevic and his political mission in Zagreb are 
concerned, he has only family ties with Krajina, i.e., he is 
from the Knin region by origin. But if that mission contributes 
to transforming military options into political ones, then we in 
Krajina will be the first to welcome him. 
  [Miceta] Naturally, it is inevitable to also ask to what 
extent this choice of "ours" will be received negatively both by 
the Croats and by the world, due to the animosity toward 
communism. 
  [Martic] As far as the Croats, or rather official Croatian 
policy, are concerned, I have already said that I do not believe 
that their intentions are serious. The question of the political 
option adhered to by Veljko Knezevic is not as important as the 
question of what the Croats actually intend to achieve through 
this move. I am profoundly convinced that their real goal comes 
down to creating the impression among Croatian public opinion 
that this means the return of Krajina of Croatia. On the other 
hand, toward international public opinion they are trying to 
create the impression that they are opposed to the military 
option and that they want to offer political cooperation to the 
Serbs. 
  [Miceta] In a recent interview, the former head of the 
civilian sector of UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces], Cedric 
Thornberry, offered a plan to solve the Croatian-Krajina 
problem. In short, it all comes down to a confederal or federal 
relationship between Croatia and Krajina. That corresponds to a 
significant degree to the views of certain relevant political 
circles in Belgrade, who feel that the problems in the territory 
of the former SFRY can be solved qualitatively within the 
framework of a union of independent states, where the RSK would 
have certain political but also territorial autonomy. What is 
your appraisal of this? 
  [Martic] I think that a resolution to the conflict in the 
former Yugoslavia, and thus a resolution to the Croatian-Krajina 
conflict as well, cannot be sought in some sort of political 
laboratory, contrary to the will of the people. We have had 
three referendums, three and a half years of war, and a large 
number of victims, burned-down villages, and refugees. We now 
have a state that is a reality. It is frivolous to seek any 
political solutions that disregard that reality. We are willing, 
if necessary, to hold yet another referendum under the utterly 
strict supervision of the international community, and to take 
it as the basis for seeking political solutions to the crisis in 
the former Yugoslavia. We have suggested to Mr. Thornberry and 
other world politicians and diplomats that they hold a 
referendum among the Croats concerning whether they want to live 
in the same state with Serbs. We are sure that the results of 
such a referendum would be negative. 
  [Miceta] The Serbian Assembly--at the prompting of the 
socialists, DEPOS [Democratic Movement of Serbia] deputies, and 
Djindjic's democrats--postponed debate on the ultimatum to the 
Bosnian Serbs. The Krajina assembly concluded that an attack on 
Pale would be regarded as an attack on Knin. How do you 
interpret these two fundamentally different stances by two Serb 
assemblies? 
  [Martic] I feel that the Serbian Assembly postponed debate 
on 
this issue exclusively because it did not want to take any step 
that might hinder the position of the Serb nation as a whole. As 
far as the republic of Serbian Krajina is concerned, we are 
committed to mutual defense by the Prijedor Declaration. But I 
do not believe that there is a fundamental difference between 
Knin and Belgrade in their stance toward the NATO threats. 
<H5>  [Box, p 18] </H5>
<H5>  Milosevic Is Number One </H5>
  [Miceta] What is your opinion of the kidnapping of Mr. 
Veljko 
Dzakula? 
  [Martic] Why do you call it a kidnapping? 
  [Miceta] What would you call it? 
  [Martic] He was simply detained according to regulations. 
  [Miceta] Who detained him? 
  [Martic] The Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
  [Miceta] Of Yugoslavia or of the republic of Srpska? 
  [Martic] Yugoslavia. There is an agreement, in case you did 
not know, on international cooperation among organs of internal 
affairs, to which Interpol is also party. This is inter-state 
cooperation. There was no kidnapping involved. Dzakula was 
simply detained because he did not have the right to leave his 
place of residence owing to the fact that criminal proceedings 
had been brought against him for serious criminal acts. 
  [Miceta] Why was the Serbian public not informed of this in 
a 
timely fashion? 
  [Martic] Why are you raising such a stink about Veljko 
Dzakula when there are thousands of cases like this, both here 
and around the world? I do not know where all this interest in 
Veljko Dzakula is coming from. 
  [Miceta] It is not Veljko Dzakula who is important, it is 
the 
way in which he was arrested! Because Veljko Dzakula could be 
any one of us! 
  [Martic] I do not know what the controversy is here. The 
person who did this identified himself and did this according to 
all regulations. This was not a kidnapping, but rather a normal 
action against a citizen of the RSK at the request of the 
judicial authorities and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the 
RSK. 
  [Miceta] Why did the local authorities not explain it? 
  [Martic] Go ask them. 
  [Miceta] You have said, to paraphrase, that once all Serb 
lands are united you will gladly hand power over to Mr. 
Milosevic! 
  [Martic] I have no ambition to be either ruler or prince. 
  [Miceta] But what if Milosevic does not want to be the 
president of all Serbs and of their borderlands? 
  [Martic] Given his merits and the fact that he has done 
everything for the Serb nation, he is the number one person for 
that. He is the best solution. That is my opinion. 
  [Miceta] If Mr. Milosevic does not accept it, do you see any 
other Serb politician who could hold that post? 
  [Martic] If he does not accept it, pan-Serb elections will 
be 
held, at least I hope so, and in that case everyone who feels 
that they can hold that post will have the opportunity to run 
and the people will decide who that will be. The people are the 
authoritative source for determining who their leader will be. 
  [Miceta] Will you run? 
  [Martic] No. I do not want to be a candidate. 
  [Miceta] I did not want to be malicious, but simply wanted 
to 
point out this contradiction when you said that you do not want 
to run. 
  [Martic] Well, I don't. I have already said that I was 
persuaded to run for RSK president. 
  [Miceta] What is the difference between Milan Babic and you, 
Milan Martic? It appears that Milan Babic wanted to be 
politically emancipated from Belgrade, but also to be 
economically linked to Serbia, to Yugoslavia. 
  [Martic] Please do not classify me as a puppet or regard me 
as a vassal, as some people wish to depict me. My political 
positions and political option have been accepted and respected 
by the ruling team in Serbia and Yugoslavia because they are 
identical in many regards. It is completely normal for the RSK 
leadership, the leadership of the republic of Srpska, the 
leadership of Serbia, and the leadership of Montenegro to be in 
close cooperation. That is the will of the people. 
  I have nothing to say about Milan Babic's personality. He 
had 
his option, I had mine, and the people decided. There were these 
two circles, everything took a rather long time, but the people 
appraised the situation and decided according to their will. 
  [Miceta] But you must admit that the elections were rather 
dramatic? 
  [Martic] Well, they were, and that is normal. Babic too had 
a 
chance to win, as did I. 
  [Miceta] Do you ever think that perhaps you were in a sense 
favored by the fact that you had the official political circles 
of the Republic of Serbia behind you, as well as their 
television? 
  [Martic] I have already answered that question. It is clear 
why someone supported someone and why a certain option was 
closer to them. 

