Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Engineering Test Satellite-VII (``ETS-VII'') is 
an engineering test satellite scheduled to be launched in 1997. 
  Future space activities require a whole new set of 
techniques 
related to delivery and retrieval of materials to and from 
spacecraft, as well as assembly of the spacecraft itself. 
ETS-VII is designed to perform a rendezvous and docking (RVD) 
experiment and a space robotics experiment to learn those 
techniques. 
  ETS-VII consists of a chaser satellite and a target 
satellite 
to perform the rendezvous experiment. After the chaser satellite 
separates the target satellite and distances itself from the 
target satellite about 30-50 km, it tries to approach the target 
satellite again in an accurate maneuver and dock with the target 
satellite at a safe speed with the help of the GPS receiver and 
optical sensor (rendezvous radar and proximity sensor). It is 
equipped with a remote-controlled robotic arm to conduct various 
RBT experiments, such as the coordination control experiment 
between the arm and the satellite attitude control system, 
various remote-control experiments using the task board, the 
in-orbit equipment replacement experiment using ORU, and the 
propellants supply simulation experiment. We will also learn 
techniques for performing in-orbit work via data relay 
satellites (COMETS, etc.) as a result of those experiments from 
the ground via data relay satellites. Those techniques represent 
not only first experiences for us, but also world-class frontier 
technologies. 
  Also, various national research institutions are expected to 
participate in this project to conduct various engineering 
experiments with the onboard space robotics element engineering 
experiment equipment in combination with their own experiment 
equipment, and sometimes with NASDA's own experiment equipment 
as well. 
  Participating organizations and experiment equipment are as 
follows: 
  (1) Advanced robotics arm (MITI; Electrotechnical 
Laboratory); 
  (2) Antenna assembling mechanism (Communications Research 
Laboratory); 
  (3) Truss construction (National Aerospace Laboratory) 
  In addition to the above, the feasibility of various other 
experiments is being studied now, including the world's first 
attempt to manipulate the target satellite with a robot arm 
combining the RVD and RBT technologies. 
  Heightened expectations for ETS-VII in terms of its rich 
variety of possibilities are being reflected in numerous 
requests not only from domestic sources, but also from overseas, 
in terms of opportunities to conduct experiments using these 
resources. 
  At the moment, the ETS-VII project is in its preliminary 
design (Phase 2) stage and a system configuration that is 
capable of conducting not only the basic experiments, but also 
advanced experiments, are being studied. We are trying to 
achieve, within the constraints of schedule and development 
costs, the optimum use of this unique experiment opportunity, a 
rare opportunity even on a worldwide scale. 

