Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pei Jianfeng] </F>
  [Text] China is hoping that co-operation with foreign 
engineering companies will help provide more large-capacity 
generators to meet the country's rising demand for power. 
  Foreign companies are welcome to invest in the production of 
thermal, hydroelectric and nuclear power-generating equipment, 
according to official sources. 
  Attracted by the country's huge market for power stations, 
foreign big names in the industry are eagerly searching China 
for co-operative partners. 
  Giants like ABB, Siemens, General Electric and Westinghouse 
Electric are negotiating with Chinese manufacturers to set up 
joint ventures in the country. 
  A joint venture between Siemens AG of Germany and Dongfang 
Electric Co., a major electrical machinery producer based in 
Southeast China's Sichuan Province, is awaiting approval from 
authorities. 
  The main problem in Sino-foreign co-operation is the 
question 
of who will hold the majority of shares in the joint ventures. 
Chinese and foreign sides both demand controlling stakes in 
their joint ventures. 
  The issue is crucial, since setting up joint ventures in 
China is one strategy for foreign companies to use in winning 
contracts for the Three Gorges project, the world's largest 
hydroelectric project. 
  The huge project revolves around 26 hydroelectric generating 
units, each with a capacity of 700,000 kilowatts. China hopes 
that these generators will be produced co-operatively by Chinese 
and foreign companies. 
  According to the latest statistics from the Ministry of 
Machinery Industry, China's power generator production reached 
12.78 million kilowatts last year, an increase of 7.7 percent 
over the previous year. 
  But production still lags behind domestic demand, said Xu 
Lianyi, director of the ministry's Department of Major 
Industrial Equipment. 
  The government plans to raise total installed capacity from 
last year's 180 million kilowatts to 280 million to 300 million 
kilowatts by the end of the century. 
  This means that in the next seven years China must install 
generators with the capacity of 100 million to 120 million 
kilowatts. 
  To do this, the ministry has to approve the production of 
more than 14 million kilowatts annually, Xu said. 
  He said that the biggest obstacle for domestic manufacturers 
is the shortage of money, which will hamper planned production 
this year. 
  Chinese-made generators cost only half the price of imported 
units, but since domestic manufacturers earn little in profits 
they cannot raise enough capital for future development. 
  Still, in recent years China has exported generators worth 
$230 million to developing countries, including Pakistan, 
Bangladesh and Indonesia. 

