Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ZHONGGUO SHUIWU BAO [CHINA TAXATION JOURNAL] reporter </F>
Wang Yongli (3769 3057 7787): "The First Week After the New 
Taxation System Was Put Into Effect"] 
  [Text] The new taxation system has been implemented for a 
week. Has the work of levying tax on enterprises and tax 
payment returned to normal? Are commodity price fluctuations 
caused by the taxation reform? Bearing these questions in mind, 
this reporter visited Beijing Municipal Administration of 
Taxation in the tax- levying period. 
<H5>  Speaking a Few Words on Consumption Tax Again </H5>
  In the current taxation reform, we adopt the turnover 
taxation system with value-added tax at its core, which is a 
relatively standard one in the international community. 
Value-added tax reduces the occurrence of repetitive levies and 
embodies the general international principles of being 
impartial, neutral, universal, and simplified. Since a basic 
tax rate of 17 percent and a low tax rate of 13 percent are set 
in the value-added tax, all kinds of enterprises are subject to 
this levy and have to pay 17 (or 13) percent in accordance with 
the regulations. The value-added tax covers the whole process 
of commodity production and circulation, simplifies the taxation 
system, brings about a fair share of tax burdens, and is 
conducive to converging with the international market. However, 
in the process of implementing a value-added tax, the tax burden 
on commodities, which is also heavily taxed in the international 
community, markedly drops. In the current taxation reform, we 
apply the method of implementing a consumption tax to carry out 
special readjustment. Some people think that the "Provisional 
Regulations on PRC Consumption Tax" are precisely equivalent to 
the special consumption tax of the past. Hence, small 
fluctuations were stirred up several days ago. 
  On 5 January, invited by this reporter, Sun Zhiqiang, 
director of Beijing Municipal Administration of Taxation, spoke 
a few words on consumption tax again. Director Sun said that 
consumption tax should be grasped from four aspects: 1. A 
consumption tax, which derives from product tax and value-added 
tax in the former taxation system, is the conversion of the old 
taxation system into the new taxation system. In the past, 
prices with a consumption tax levied contained product or 
value-added taxes, and the proportion was high. As far as the 
new value-added tax implemented at this time is concerned, taxes 
levied on these commodities drop and will be collected by the 
State through levy of a consumption tax; this is a change in the 
internal structure of our taxation system. The levy of 
consumption tax does not increase the overall tax burden of 
these commodities, therefore, the consumption tax does not 
directly affect commodity prices. 2. As far as the scope of 
levying and collecting a consumption tax is concerned, it 
embodies the principle of "imposing a ban on something through 
levying taxes." For example, this principle applies to 
commodities other than daily necessities, such as valuable 
jewelry and cars; some commodities which are not suitable for 
over-consumption, such as cigarettes, liquor, and firecrackers; 
and some commodities which are resources in nature and which 
cannot be regenerated, such as gasoline and diesel fuel. 3. 
There are 11 categories of items on which the consumption tax is 
levied, which will not affect daily lives of the masses. 4. 
Carrying out special readjustment through levying a consumption 
tax on certain commodities is the usual practice of most of the 
countries in the world. 
<H3>  Value-Added Tax Is An Important Link in the Chain of 
Economic Life </H3>
  As far as large-scale and open specialized trades in society 
are concerned, production, circulation, and consumption form an 
interlinked chain. The new value-added tax reforms ends, once 
and for all, the old taxation system, and it is also an 
interlink which strengthens the chain of economic life. What 
counts is to help all taxpayers understand and master the 
system. Following the promulgation of the "Provisional 
Regulations on PRC Value-Added Tax" on 13 December, all cadres 
of the taxation sector were urgently mobilized to use the 
fastest way in the shortest period of time to convey this 
"Regulation" to tens of millions of taxpayers, and to explain 
and sell value-added tax special vouchers to be used by 
enterprises from 1 January. In the following 10 days or so, 
taxation cadres tried very hard to explain the new measures to 
the people. 
  On 5 and 6 January, which was in the tax-levying period, 
this 
reporter visited the Cuiwei Road Taxation Office under Haiding 
District Taxation Sub-Bureau, the No.1 and No. 3 Taxation 
Offices under the Chaoyang District Taxation Sub-Bureau, and 
taxation sub- offices dealing with cases involving foreign 
investors. In the Cuiwei Road Taxation Office, a comrade from 
the Rongjie Technological Development Company of the Haiding 
District Maintenance Station of Metal Structures asked, "Our 
unit in-charge pays sales tax, what tax should we pay?" Liu 
Jianxin, an official especially dealing with the case, asked in 
reply, "Is your enterprise's accounting work done 
independently?" The comrade replied, "Yes." Liu Jianxin said, 
"Then, you should pay the value- added tax." The taxpayer said, 
"What we produce is non-standard pressure containers, and 
processed materials must be supplied by senior units, but there 
is no special voucher and we are not able to cast accounts." 
Liu Jianxin said, "Your internal operating mechanism should be 
readjusted." The taxpayer said, "Our earnings also come from 
running training classes and doing maintenance work." Liu 
Jianxin said, "A sales tax is levied on income earned from 
training classes whereas a value-added tax is levied on income 
earned from maintenance work, they are accounted and taxed 
separately..." According to this reporter's calculation, more 
than half an hour was spent on this case. 
  At the No.3 Taxation Office under Chaoyang District Taxation 
Sub-Bureau, a comrade of Zhongxin Motor Company asked, "We have 
kept over 100 cars in stock, now customers want to buy them, 
what kind of vouchers should we issue?" Jia Yongxuan, head of 
the administrative group, replied, "You should issue special 
value-added tax vouchers." The taxpayer asked, "How are they 
issued?" Jia Yongxuan answered, "You should first calculate the 
cars' import prices, profits, and taxes, then divide them into 
different categories and calculate the prices with taxes 
deducted and the amount of the new value-added tax, and fill in 
special vouchers separately." Since the taxpayer still did not 
understand, Jia Yongxuan unfolded two sheets of paper, wrote 
down the calculations and explained in detail to the taxpayer at 
the same time. It was only when the two sheets of blank paper 
were fully filled with calculations that the taxpayer said, "I 
get it." For a long time in the past, taxes were included in 
calculated prices, but now taxes are not included in the 
calculated prices. This sudden conversion, together with the 
task of breaking down enterprise stocks into prices and taxes 
and enabling taxpayers to properly use value-added tax vouchers, 
is the very beginning of the normal operation of the new 
taxation system as well as the point of convergence between the 
new taxation system and economic life. This is complicated and 
delicate work, and only when taxpayers study it for a certain 
period of them can they grasp it. 
<H3>  Problems of Understanding and Operation Must Be Solved As 
Soon As Possible </H3>
  Since the new taxation system has been introduced for only a 
short time, some enterprises do not have a clear understanding 
of the concept of deducting the new value-added tax from prices. 
For example, the enterprise in the first link of production 
issues a correct special voucher, but the enterprise in the 
second link of trade makes a mistake when calculating the retail 
price, that is, it adds the purchase price to the tax amount 
levied in the previous link and multiplies it by the difference 
between the two prices, thus increasing the commodity's retail 
price. Moreover, some enterprises simply add a proportion of 
the amount of sales tax to the original prices which have 
already included taxes, thus leading to an extremely large rate 
of price rise. These are problems of understanding and 
operation, which can be solved through constant training and 
propaganda. 

