BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Transport Minister Nobuaki Futami by NHK </F>
announcer Yoshiaki Kawabata -- via live relay from the Ministry 
of Transportation in Tokyo; from the "NHK News 7" program] 
  [Text] [Kawabata] Mr. Futami, the China Airlines [CAL] 
crash took place just before you took office. I believe the 
crash was a very tragic accident. First of all, I would like to 
ask you what kind of take safety measures are you going to take 
for the airline industry? 
  [Futami] I toured the crash site on 6 May. I landed at Chubu 
Airport aboard a YS-11 airplane that flew the same route as the 
China Airlines plane. The crash was a very tragic accident. I 
am resolved to do everything in my power to prevent the 
recurrence of such a crash in our nation. I have asked an 
investigative committee to speedily determine the cause of the 
crash for the sake of future safety. At the same time, I have 
asked the committee to make public information obtained as a 
result of the investigation to prevent a recurrence of such a 
crash. The voice recorder has been analyzed and the result of 
the analysis came to light on 30 April. The Transport Ministry 
is now taking various necessary safety measures while 
instructing or guiding concerned aviation organizations. 
  [Kawabata] This question concerns compensation negotiations 
between the bereaved families of victims and China Airlines. Mr. 
Futami, you have said the Transport Ministry would provide the 
bereaved families with maximum assistance. Would you spell out 
maximum assistance? 
  [Futami] I think that the negotiations will begin between 
the 
bereaved families and the China Airlines. As you know, there are 
no diplomatic relations between Japan and Taiwan. I think the 
bereaved families are at a loss over how to proceed with the 
negotiations. The Transport Ministry intends to provide the 
bereaved families with all possible support while consulting 
with the Foreign Ministry. For the moment, I cannot specifically 
explain how our ministry plans to help the bereaved families 
since the negotiations have yet to begin. The Transport Ministry 
intends to provide the bereaved families maximum support while 
watching the progress of the negotiations. 
  [Kawabata] Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you about 
deregulation. As I reported at the outset of this evening news 
program, Keidanren [the Federation of Economic Organizations of 
Japan] today presented Prime Minister Hata with a report calling 
for the deregulation of 196 items. Upon receiving the report, 
Prime Minister Hata promised to take the leadership. Mr. 
Futami, how do you plan to exercise your leadership in 
deregulation in the transport area? 
  [Futami] I intend to aggressively work on deregulation on 
the 
basis of free enterprise. I have seen the report presented by 
Keidanren. I think it is a good one, compiled after months of 
hard study. I am thinking of asking my ministry officials to 
study it without haste. 
  [Kawabata] I would like to ask you about deregulation of the 
airline industry. The Aviation Council is expected to compile a 
report in June, at the earliest. I believe that the report will 
call for deregulation of the airline industry in order to 
bolster the industry's competitiveness. How are you going to 
deregulate domestic airfares, which are higher than fiercely 
competitive international airfares? 
  [Futami] Japanese airlines spend too much on personnel 
compared with foreign airlines. For their sound management, we 
have to study how to cut personnel expenses. I believe that it 
is desirable for the Japanese airlines to hire more foreigners. 
I believe that the Japanese airlines need to examine the 
possibility of selling tickets at a certain discount rate for 
domestic flights. It is said that domestic air fare is cheap in 
Europe. They are offering discount tickets. I think it is a 
good idea. 
  [Kawabata] The Hata government was formed by political 
parties holding a minority in the Diet. How do you think the 
Hata government should resolve issues in the future? 
  [Futami] Generally speaking, the present political situation 
is a tough trial for the ruling coalition parties. I believe 
that Japanese politics itself is now going through a major 
trial. At present, no single political party in Japan can hold 
the majority in the Diet unless the Liberal Democratic Party and 
the Social Democratic Party of Japan forge a coalition. Under 
this political situation, if each party pursues its own 
interests, nothing can be done, leaving Japan in a state of 
anarchy. The government, therefore, needs to put forth clear 
policies to the people while asking both ruling and opposition 
parties to debate those policies in the Diet. I believe that if 
the ruling and opposition parties debate those policies in the 
Diet, it would pave the way for dispelling public distrust in 
politics. I think it is important that the ruling and opposition 
parties show the people that they are vigorously engaged in 
policy debates in the Diet without pursuing their own interests. 
  The work of the Transport Ministry is related closely to our 
lives. I therefore am confident that not only the ruling 
coalition parties, but the opposition parties will gladly 
cooperate with the Transport Ministry. I am also confident that 
as far as the Transport Ministry is concerned, all opposition 
parties will fully cooperate with any proposals made by the 
ruling coalition parties, even if they hold a minority in the 
Diet. 
  [Kawabata] Mr. Futami, thank for being with me. 

