Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Pacific Ocean" Program] </F>
  [Text] Folk wisdom says that a promise takes three years 
to keep. Sovetskaya Gavan residents have found this saying to 
be true. A decision was adopted exactly three years ago to 
withdraw nuclear submarines from the Sovetskaya Gavan Bay. This 
decision was adopted by the Pacific Fleet command and by the 
former commander Admiral Khvatov personally, under public 
pressure. However... our correspondent Yevgeniy Chuyev comments 
on this significant date. 
  [Chuyev] Military chiefs had promised to begin a gradual 
withdrawal of the dangerous submarines from the teeming waters 
of the bay by 1991. The rest of story proceeded as usual, and 
the situation just dragged on. You might remember an old joke: 
The important thing is not to achieve anything, but to show a 
readiness to do so; after an order is given, the main thing to 
do is to say: Yes, sir! The year 1991 was noted for the 
turbulent political events in our country, and for the August 
putsch attempts. The year 1992 saw economic collapse and 
financial failures of well- intentioned schemes, such as the 
intention to withdraw the submarines. As this year was nearing 
its end, money was finally found for the withdrawal of the first 
submarine. Here is where the problem started. As some officers 
have said, this is how it started: A submarine arrived at one of 
the restricted factories of Maritime Kray -- or, to be exact, in 
one of the Maritime Kray units. The moment it arrived they 
shouted: We cannot accept you, there is no place we can put 
you. In short, the submarine was received like a stepdaughter: 
it was supplied neither provisions nor water, and the sailors 
had to carry their own provisions just to survive. Allow me to 
quote a part of the story as told by Captain Third Rank 
Aleksandr Orlov, who witnessed it all first hand. He said: 
People who work at the factory are not practical, and the 
principle of pay before work is very well rooted here. It is 
called early pay nowadays. However, even this solves nothing 
because first, there was no [word indistinct] conversion order 
-- namely, for disarming the submarine; second, the floating 
pier where the submarine was supposed to dock was missing; 
third, the submarine was considered to be cruising independently 
still, and thus had not really arrived. Can you believe it? 
Although they say that the situation at the factory has calmed 
down, the crew still wonders about its future. 
  The submarine will leave the factory and head to [words 
indistinct], where it will await its turn to be dismantled. 
Considering the fact that the waiting line is very long, it is 
safe to assume that the grueling waiting and ordeal will drag on 
for years. But what about the others? After all, three more 
nuclear submarines remain in Sovetskaya Gavan, and there are 
many more in the Far East region's waters. Undoubtedly, it is 
simpler just to build submarines than to think of a proper way 
to dispose of them. This situation involves ethical issues as 
well as material ones. It is not the sailors' fault if someone 
failed to think of their future. But as for civilians -- people 
like you and me, those who live on the coast -- we should not 
also be forced to carry the burden of nuclear hostages and bad 
planning. The submarines have certainly done no wrong, and 
after faithfully serving the Motherland, they have the right to 
eternal peace without having to undergo the current ordeal and 
tribulation. We have waited patiently for three years, but the 
promise is sticking in our throats. 

