BFN 

<F P=106> [Xinjiang Government Work Report delivered by Abulaiti </F>
Abudurexiti, chairman of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional 
People's Government, on 24 February at the Second Session of the 
Eighth Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional People's Congress] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Regional People's 
Government, I now submit a government work report for your 
examination and approval, and also for suggestions and comments 
from the members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference. 
<H5>  Review of the 1993 Work </H5>
  For us, 1993 meant a year of advancing victoriously along 
the 
path of socialism with Chinese characteristics, and a year of 
achieving remarkable results in reform, opening up, economic 
construction, and other undertakings in the autonomous region. 
In 1993, under the correct leadership of the CPC Central 
Committee, the State Council, and the autonomous region's party 
committee, and under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
important remarks and guidelines set forth at the 14th CPC 
National Congress, we persisted in making economic construction 
the central task; constantly carried out indepth reform, opened 
ourselves up wider to the outside world in line with the 
requirements for building a socialist market economic system; 
and timely adopted macroeconomic regulation and control measures 
to deal with contradictions and problems which cropped up in the 
course of economic development, to restore financial order, to 
stabilize economic situation, to help maintain the sustained and 
healthy development of the national economy, and to bring about 
great progress in various social undertakings. The total value 
of the gross domestic product of the entire region is projected 
at 49.796 billion yuan (current year value; the same below), up 
9.5 percent from the previous year; gross industrial and 
agricultural output value at 63.564 billion yuan, an increase of 
8.5 percent; revenue at 3.47 billion yuan, up 33.08 percent; 
expenditures at 6.446 billion yuan (including new expenditures 
due to wage adjustments in fourth quarter); various bank deposit 
balances at 40.632 billion yuan, an increase of 6.742 billion 
yuan over the previous year; various loan balances at 46.765 
billion yuan, an increase of 8.65 billion yuan; and the region's 
total social product retail amount at 18.465 billion yuan, up 
17.2 percent. Savings deposits of urban and rural citizens 
increased, and the people's standard of living improved. The 
region fulfilled or overfulfilled annual targets in most of the 
major economic indices. Political stability, national unity, 
economic development, and social progress in the region can be 
witnessed from the following: 
<H5>  1. Sixteen Consecutive Bumper Harvest Years for </H5>
Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Production 
  In 1993, all levels of government conscientiously 
implemented 
the party's rural policies; constantly deepened rural reform; 
established and improved rural cooperative economic 
organizations and socialized service system; timely readjusted 
agricultural and crop-growing structures by taking the law of 
the market into consideration; attached greater importance to 
science and technology and to popularizing advanced agricultural 
technologies which are suitable for rural areas; increased 
investments in agriculture through various means; 
conscientiously implemented projects financed by the World Bank; 
expanded the program of providing job opportunities instead of 
simply handing out subsidies; adhered to the policy of promoting 
infrastructural construction in agriculture and animal husbandry 
centering on water conservancy projects; improved conditions for 
production; managed to cash all "IOUs" from farmers and herdsmen 
despite fund shortages; and timely scrapped documents on 
irrational burdens and eliminated excessive fees imposed on 
farmers and herdsmen, thereby protecting the interests of 
farmers and herdsmen. The region won the fight against a number 
of natural disasters and achieved a sixteenth consecutive bumper 
harvest year thanks to the joint efforts of all cadres and the 
broad mass of farmers and herdsmen of all nationalities, and to 
the support rendered by all trades and professions. The total 
output value of agricultural products for the entire year is 
projected at 18.753 billion yuan, an increase of 4.4 percent 
over the previous year; total grain output at 7.09 million 
tonnes, up 0.4 percent over previous year, another record; total 
cotton output at 680,000 tonnes, an increase of 1.9 percent; 
total output of edible oil crop at 370,002 tonnes, up 3.9 
percent; total beet output at 2369,100 tonnes, down 28 percent; 
total amount of livestock at 35,147,200 head, an increase of 0.6 
percent; and total meat production at 383,000 tonnes, up 6 
percent. Reforestation on flatland areas exceeded 100 million 
mu for the first time, an increase of 28 percent. Village and 
township enterprises saw great development, with gross output 
value and total income reaching 6.209 billion yuan and 6.492 
billion yuan, representing increases of 42.4 percent and 57.3 
percent respectively over the previous year and registering the 
fastest growth in recent years. The lives of farmers and 
herdsmen improved, with per capita annual net income reaching 
778 yuan, an increase of 38 yuan and a growth of 5 percent. New 
progress was made in the work of helping the poor, with the rate 
of poor households advancing out of poverty reaching over 93 
percent. 
<H5>  2. Industrial Output Continues To Grow and Transport Service </H5>
Continues To Expand 
  In 1993, various localities and departments continued to 
deepen enterprise reform and to readjust enterprises' structure 
and product mix. Thanks to attaching importance to 
technological progress and intensifying technical 
transformation, 150 new products of autonomous-regional grade 
were developed. Supervision over product quality was tightened, 
and the manufacturing and sale of fake and shoddy goods was 
cracked, so as to help improve product quality. To help 
enterprises turn losses into profits and rationally conserve 
energy and reduce consumption, implementation of the system in 
which enterprises are responsible for their own profits and 
losses was continued. Measures were taken to reduce stocks; to 
recover capital; to tighten control over financial resources; to 
clear overdue debts; to restructure the transportation sector 
rationally; and to divert management over highways from that 
over railways. Industrial production started to rebound since 
March. The region's total industrial output value reached 
44.811 billion yuan, up 10.9 percent over the previous year; the 
volume of rail freight was 20.174 million tons, an increase of 
6.8 percent over the 1992 figure; and the volume of airway 
passengers was 2.1 billion person-km, up 16.7 percent over the 
previous year. Highway transportation was further improved, and 
fairly rapid progress was made in the posts and 
telecommunications business. 
<H5>  3. Major Progress Was Made in Capital Construction in </H5>
Infrastructural Facilities and Basic Industries 
  In 1993, the region's total investment in fixed assets 
amounted to 23.195 billion yuan, up 36.4 percent over 1992. Of 
this total, local investment was 7.385 billion yuan, an increase 
of 30.9 percent. Of local investment, investment in capital 
construction was 3.560 billion yuan, up 23.9 percent; investment 
in technical transformation was 1.110 billion yuan, up 56.3 
percent. Fairly good progress was made in 35 key construction 
projects, of which eleven have achieved all their objectives and 
went into operation; another seven were partially put into 
operation with their single item or part of the projects 
completed as scheduled. Among these key projects, the first 
phase of Urumqi petrochemical polyester project was put into 
operation completely; Xinjiang Sodium Carbonate Plant went into 
operation on a trial basis ahead of schedule; installation of 
major equipment for the Dushanzi ethylene project was basically 
completed; investment of 307 million yuan was made to expand No. 
8 Iron and Steel Plant; and investment of 980 million yuan was 
made to accelerate construction of the Urumqi Railway Bureau 
section of the Lanxin Railway. Track-laying for 475.5 km of the 
main line was completed, and 191 km of the line was put into 
operation. Nine major highways were completed; the total length 
of newly-built and reconstructed highways totalled 724.6 km; the 
Beitun-Dahuangshan section of state highway 216 was inaugurated; 
construction began on the (?Xian)-(?Lanzhou)-(?Urumqi) optic 
fiber communication line; a 550-million-yuan investment was made 
to develop posts and telecommunications industries; 100,000 
telephones were installed; construction of key ports was 
accelerated; investments of 9,500 million yuan was made to 
explore oil, up 39 percent over 1992; generating capacity was 
110,000 kw; and the storage capacity of dams was 640 million 
cubic meter. 
<H5>  4. New Progress Was Made in Foreign Trade and Economy </H5>
  Various localities and foreign trade departments actively 
developed foreign trade and consolidated economic and technical 
cooperation and exchange with foreign countries. Border trade 
in particular grew by a large margin on the basis of 
breakthrough progress achieved in 1992, and has become a vital 
foundation of regional foreign trade. The total volume of 
imports and exports amounted to $912 million, up 30.3 percent 
over 1992. Of the total, the volume of imports and exports on a 
barter basis was $577 million, up 80.2 percent and accounting 
for 63.3 percent of the total volume of foreign trade. Three 
hundred and sixty three foreign-funded enterprises were approved 
in 1992, and foreign capital of $243 million was utilized, an 
increase of 86.9 percent. This was a year when the greatest 
amount of foreign capital was utilized. Great progress was made 
in outward investment and service cooperation. The second 
Urumqi trade fair was successfully launched. Foreign exchange 
income from tourism grew in a stable manner, and comprehensive 
capacity to receive tourists was further strengthened. In 1992, 
Xinjiang received 241,000 tourists from home and abroad, earning 
foreign exchange of $40 million, an increase of 12.6 percent. 
<H5>  5. Marked Acceleration in the Pace of Economic System Reform </H5>
  Last year the region saw new progress in reforming the 
economic system. Centering on implementing the "Regulations on 
the Transformation of the Management System of State-Owned 
Industrial Enterprises," the transformation of the government 
functions, and the changing of enterprises' management 
mechanisms, the autonomous region introduced 10 sets of policies 
which played a positive role in invigorating the economy and 
enterprises. Over 400 enterprises and 200,000 staff members and 
workers across the region were involved in reforming the labor 
and employment system; some 100,000 staff members and workers 
from 100 enterprises took part in the scheme of linking their 
job positions and wages to job performance and technical skills. 
More enterprises were selected to experiment with shareholding 
and the shareholding cooperative system. The autonomous region 
approved the establishment of 112 shareholding enterprises, with 
a total registered capital of 1.47 billion yuan. Experiments 
with civilians managing state-owned enterprises were gradually 
conducted. New progress was made in readjusting the enterprise 
organizational structure. Now the region boasts 31 different 
types of enterprise groups. Efforts to foster market systems 
showed initial results. Distribution systems were further 
improved and developed. Major reform of the grain procurement 
and marketing system was conducted, resulting in improved 
distribution of agricultural and animal husbandry products. 
Commercial procurement and marketing for state-run cooperatives 
witnessed brisk development. The pace to accelerate price 
reforms was accelerated. The authority to decontrol prices was 
further delegated. The proportion of market regulated prices 
increased markedly. Reform of the housing system was carried 
out step by step. The structure of the ownership system was 
further improved. The development of the individual and private 
economy showed excellent momentum. There were 280,000 private 
industrial and commercial enterprises employing 430,000 people 
in the autonomous region, representing an increase of 15.9 
percent and 19.5 percent respectively from the previous year. 
<H5>  6. Comprehensive Development of Science, Technology, </H5>
Education, Culture, Public Health, Sports, and Other Social 
Undertakings 
  The autonomous region implemented an economic 
construction-oriented policy in developing science and 
technology. By adapting to the requirements of a market 
economy, the autonomous region constantly deepened reform of the 
scientific and technological structure, greatly developed 
technology market, and energetically tackled scientific and 
technological projects and technology popularization, thereby 
promoting economic development. Implementation of the 
"Help-the-Poor Through Science and Technology," the "Spark 
Plan," and the "Torch Plan" went smoothly. The autonomous region 
achieved 330 major scientific and technological achievements 
last year, 140 more than the previous year. Construction of a 
new and high technology industrial development zone proceeded 
smoothly. Some 200 new and high technology projects were 
realized. Income derived from technology trading is expected to 
top 922,000 yuan. Work on patent rights achieved great 
development. The autonomous region saw the application of 
patent rights for 642 products, an increase of 28 percent. 
Education saw further development. Primary education was 
further enhanced; vocational education achieved progress. Adult 
education developed steadily. More autonomy rights for running 
institutes of higher learning were granted. Measures were taken 
to encourage people to run schools. Remarkable results were 
achieved in promoting education among minority nationalities. 
Efforts to establish public health network in counties, 
townships, and villages were beefed up. Medical and sanitation 
conditions improved in rural and pasture areas. Greater 
importance was attached to the work of family planning, and 
constant efforts were made to promote family planning among 
minority nationalities. A total of 16 prefectures and cities 
comprehensively fulfilled the population and family planning 
responsibility plan. Major breakthroughs were made in the area 
of sports. Athletes of the autonomous region won medals at the 
Seventh National Games. The autonomous region further 
invigorated and enhanced management over the cultural market. 
Radio, film, television, news, and publishing departments 
contributed to the spreading of the party's line, principles, 
and policies as well as to reform, opening up, and stable 
development in Xinjiang. Xinjiang also conscientiously unfurled 
a major campaign to check enforcement of the law on 
environmental protection. Greater importance was attached to 
enhancing environmental protection work. 
<H5>  7. A Good Social and Political Environment Was Preserved </H5>
  While making efforts to deepen reform and accelerate 
economic 
development, we paid attention to correctly handling the 
relationships between reform, development, and maintaining 
stability, and applied ourselves to maintaining stability. We 
insisted on regarding the preserving of nationality unity as an 
important task, and conducted in-depth nationality unity 
education in various forms and other activities aimed at 
promoting nationality unity and making progress among all 
nationalities. We carried out the anticorruption struggle in 
depth, and results were achieved. Results were also achieved in 
dealing with the "three illegalities," [illegal fee collection, 
imposition of fines, and apportioning of expenses] thereby 
reducing the burden on enterprises and urban and rural 
residents. We resolutely cracked down on the sabotage and 
subversive activities conducted by a very small number of 
nationalist splittists. We applied ourselves to taking 
comprehensive measures to improve social order. We made 
thorough efforts to clamp down on all kinds of crimes and 
illegal economic activities and to wipe out social evils, 
thereby further purifying the social environment. We launched 
educational activities to popularize legal knowledge among the 
masses, enabling cadres and people of all nationalities to have 
a better understanding of democracy and law. We placed greater 
importance on legislation of law. Last year, the Xinjiang 
Regional Government submitted five local laws and regulations 
for examination by the Xinjiang Regional People's Congress and 
its Standing Committee. These laws and regulations have been 
promulgated for enforcement. In addition, 12 administrative 
regulations of various natures were promulgated in the form of 
decrees of the Xinjiang regional government chairman. Because we 
insisted on tightly gripping with two hands and placed 
importance on promoting spiritual civilization, we were able to 
effectively ensure social and political stability, creating a 
good social environment for reform, opening up, and economic 
construction. 
  Over the last year, the Xinjiang Production and Construction 
Corps, adhering to the central task of economic construction, 
quickened the pace of reform and opening up, making considerable 
progress in economic construction and work in other fields, and 
making new contributions to maintaining stability in Xinjiang 
and to the region's development. Chinese People's Liberation 
Army [PLA] units in Xinjiang and the region's armed police force 
and public security cadres and policemen, following the 
honorable tradition of working diligently and selflessly 
dedicating themselves, further built themselves up in the new 
situation and enthusiastically supported Xinjiang's work in all 
sectors, making important contributions to safeguarding and 
developing the frontiers, to consolidating social stability, and 
to strengthening unity. 
  Xinjiang's general situation in 1993 was indeed good. The 
good results should be attributed to the correct leadership of 
the party Central Committee and the State Council, and to the 
spirit of working hard in unison of people of all nationalities 
in Xinjiang. On behalf of the Xinjiang Regional People's 
Government, I hereby express my heartfelt thanks and high 
respect to cadres, workers, peasants and herdsmen, staff members 
and workers of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, 
intellectuals, and scientists and technical workers of all 
nationalities in Xinjiang; to personnel of democratic parties, 
patriots without party affiliation, PLA units in Xinjiang, and 
the region's armed police force and public security officers and 
men; and to cadres, staff members, and workers of central 
authorities units in Xinjiang. 
  Since the 14th CPC National Congress decided to build a 
socialist market economic system, Xinjiang, as other provinces 
have done, has made new progress in carrying out reform and 
opening up. The market mechanism has played an increasingly 
important role in people's economic life; new achievements were 
made in economic construction and work in other sectors. But we 
must realize that in the process of transforming the planned 
economy into a market economy, inadequate emancipation of the 
mind and the lagging behind in reforms in some areas have 
affected our efforts to build a new system and have prevented 
the economy from developing in a healthy manner. While some old 
problems in economic functioning have not been thoroughly 
solved, we need to study many new situations and solve many new 
problems and contradictions. Growth in agricultural investment 
slowed down, providing little potential for future development. 
The weight of village and town enterprises in the rural economy 
was comparatively small. Xinjiang has a weak industrial base, 
its enterprises have far lagged behind in carrying out 
technological transformation, and it has been slow in 
readjusting its industrial structure and product mix. Because 
of these and the restraint caused by shortage of circulating 
funds and transportation capacity, Xinjiang was unable to 
achieve its industrial growth targets and its economic 
efficiency was poor. The ownership structure urgently needs to 
be readjusted; the weight of collective, individual, and private 
economies has been too small. The region's financial 
difficulties worsened. Efficiency of fund utilization was poor, 
and the contradiction between the supply and demand of funds 
remained prominent. The overall retail index totalled 112.6 
percent; price increases were comparatively high. Transformation 
of government functions was carried out slowly, making it 
difficult to meet the needs arising from developing a socialist 
market economic system. Some of the aforementioned problems are 
problems in our work, and some are indications of in-depth 
problems of economic and social development. The fundamental 
way to solve these problems is to deepen reform. 
<H5>  Strive To Make Rapid and Highly Efficient Development of the </H5>
Region's Economy 
  Fellow deputies, 1994 will be another year for continuing to 
maintain good momentum in economic development as well as a 
crucial year for carrying out reforms in an all-around manner. 
The gap between our region and other parts of the country in 
economic development is widening; we are facing more problems 
and difficulties, and our tasks are more arduous. Thus, we 
should enhance our sense of crisis and urgency. However, at the 
same time we should also note we are rich in natural resources 
and have geographical advantages in opening up to the West; the 
state has adopted a preferential industrial policy for the 
western portion of the country; the second Asia-Europe bridge 
has been opened to traffic; and great efforts are being made to 
exploit petroleum. In addition, through more than 10 years of 
reform and opening up, our region has built an economic 
foundation, acquired certain material conditions, and gained a 
wealth of experience. We can certainly bring about highly 
efficient development of the region's economy, provided we 
conscientiously implement the guidelines of the Third Plenary 
Session of the party's 14th Central Committee and the sixth 
plenary session of the fourth regional party committee; make the 
best use of our favorable conditions; seize the opportunity to 
deepen reform and open up wider to the outside world; and 
develop the economy by readjusting its structure and raising its 
efficiency. We are determined to work hard to achieve this 
purpose. 
  In 1994, the main targets of the autonomous region's economy 
are: To increase the total annual output value of goods and 
services for the region to 43.4 billion yuan (the constant value 
of 1990; the same below), an increase of 11 percent over last 
year, and to increase the region's total industrial and 
agricultural output value to 56.5 billion yuan, up 10.8 percent; 
of this 56.5 billion yuan, total industrial output value will be 
36.9 billion yuan, up 13.5 percent, and total agricultural 
output value will be 19.6 billion yuan, up 6 percent. Total 
investment in fixed assets will amount to 9.8 billion yuan, up 
32.7 percent. According to the tax assignment system, revenues 
are expected to total 2.448 billion yuan, and expenditures 6.615 
billion yuan (exclusive of special appropriations by the central 
government); bank deposits will increase by 5.2 billion yuan, 
and bank loans by 11.8 billion yuan. The region's total export 
volume will be $550 million, of which bartering will amount to 
$270 million. The general price index of retail sales will be 
kept at about 110 percent. To achieve the above targets, we 
should do our work well in the following aspects: 
<H5>  1. Accelerate Agricultural and Rural Economic Development </H5>
and Increase Farmers' Incomes 
  Agriculture is the foundation for economic stability and 
development. At no time must we relax our efforts at 
agriculture. We should further strengthen agriculture as the 
foundation of the national economy, stabilize the party's 
various rural policies, and continue to deepen rural reforms; we 
should uphold and improve a multiform system of contracted 
responsibility based on the household contract responsibility 
system with remuneration linked to output and the dual 
management system that combines household with collective 
operations; we should vigorously develop a multiform network of 
social services in rural areas, and strengthen the collective 
economy step by step. 
  We should vigorously readjust and optimize the structure of 
rural production and the internal structure of crop cultivation; 
we should develop a high-yield, good-quality, and 
high-efficiency agriculture, with a view to stabilizing grain 
production, increasing cotton output, improving economic 
results, and raising farmers' incomes. Under no circumstances 
should we relax our efforts at grain production. We should make 
sure we are more than self-sufficient in grain, that grain 
supply and demand are balanced in most localities, and that 
major grain-producing areas should ensure grain supply for urban 
and grain-deficient areas. Various localities and production 
and construction corps must maintain their 1993 levels of grain 
production, and the region's total grain output must not be less 
than 7 million metric tons. Meanwhile, we should vigorously 
develop cotton production and strive to produce over 800,000 
metric tons of cotton in all. We should appropriately increase 
the acreage sown to oil-bearing crops, and do a good job in 
horticulture and in the production of silkworm cocoons and other 
cash crops. We should further improve seeds and varieties as 
well as increase unit production. We should pay attention to 
animal husbandry. While accelerating the settlement of herdsmen 
and the construction of grasslands and promoting a steady 
development of animal husbandry on grasslands, we should develop 
animal husbandry in agricultural areas and intensive, modern, 
and high-efficiency animal husbandry in suburban areas. We 
should readjust the structure of livestock; increase breed 
improvement; and raise the output, quality, and marketable rate 
of livestock. We should vigorously develop forestry work as 
well as continue to improve the natural environment and the 
environment we live in. We should further develop aquatic 
breeding. We should develop a diversified economy by combining 
crop cultivation, breeding, and processing industry in order to 
increase incomes for farmers and herdsmen. We should make full 
use of our agricultural resources and build export-oriented 
agricultural-production areas that combine trade with industry 
and agriculture. We should do a good job in the "vegetable 
basket" project to ensure the supply of non-stable foods for 
urban areas. 
  We should further increase input into agriculture and 
strive to improve production conditions by strengthening the 
construction of farmland infrastructure focused on supplementary 
water conservancy and large and medium key projects, and by 
persistently building irrigation facilities on crop land and 
grassland. We should continue to energetically popularize 
various effective water conservation measures and raise water 
utilization rates. We should pay close attention to 
comprehensive development of agriculture and systematically 
expand crop areas by improving middle and low yield fields, 
controlling saline-alkali land, and building a batch of high and 
stable yield fields. We should continuously raise the level of 
comprehensive farm mechanization. We should strengthen land 
management and protection and encourage compensatory use of 
land. We should continue to promote the building of "five 
good's" in rural areas. 
  Input into science and technology is the key to pushing 
Xinjiang's agricultural and animal husbandry production to a new 
height. We should go all out to promote agricultural production 
with science and technology and, in conjunction with the 
"harvest program," continue to popularize advanced technologies 
for increasing the output and improving the quality of grain, 
cotton, sugar, and livestock. We should stabilize the existing 
ranks of grass-roots scientific and technical personnel, and 
establish and perfect service networks for the diffusion of 
agricultural technology at various levels. We should encourage 
scientific and technical personnel of institutes of agricultural 
sciences at all levels in Xinjiang to go deep into the frontline 
of production to offer technical guidance and service. We 
should step up training in agricultural technology and improve 
the scientific and cultural standards of the masses of peasants 
and herdsmen. 
  We should accelerate the development of village and township 
enterprises and invigorate county economies to promote an 
all-around development of the rural economy. In line with the 
principle of "active support, rational planning, correct 
guidance, and strengthened management," and on the basis of 
stabilizing, consolidating, and improving existing enterprises, 
we should implement "multi-wheel drive and multi-track 
operations," encouraging enterprises to gear production to 
market demands, to rely on scientific and technological 
progress, and to adopt flexible measures and give different 
guidance to suit different local conditions. In localities with 
better conditions, we should concentrate resources to develop a 
number of high quality and efficiency enterprises; in frontier 
counties and townships, we should expedite the development of 
tertiary industries focused on border trade; and in remote poor 
areas, we should introduce commercial and trade activities and 
quicken the development of individual and private economic 
sectors. We should further strengthen macroeconomic guidance 
over village and township enterprises, resolutely closing 
enterprises with poor efficiency and going all out to support 
and create the conditions for enterprises with good efficiency 
so as to achieve a simultaneous increase in output value, sales 
volume, profits, and tax payments of village and township 
enterprises in Xinjiang. While building small rural towns and 
reforming the household registration system, we should pay close 
attention to the construction of small industrial and trade 
areas. 
  We should continue to assist the poor. On the basis of 
consolidating and raising the quality of current aid-to-the-poor 
work, we should unswervingly carry out state and regional 
policies and measures on assisting the poor. Particular 
attention must be paid to supervising, and formulating detailed 
rules for the implementation of the regional preferential 
policies for the four prefectures in southern Xinjiang, exerting 
every effort to fulfill the targeted requirement of making 94 
percent of the population cast off poverty. In addition to 
striving to win more state aid, we must also increase regional 
investments in poor areas, concentrating funds on reinforcing 
agricultural capital construction and improving communications, 
energy, and telecommunications. Meanwhile, we should encourage 
departments and enterprises in economically developed areas to 
assist their counterparts in poor areas, including economic 
cooperation and assistance in terms of scientific, 
technological, and intellectual resources. We should adopt 
special policies toward poor areas and further delegate 
authority to expedite their economic development and efforts to 
shake off poverty. 
<H5>  2. Seriously Do a Good Job in Industrial Production and </H5>
Transport and Improve Economic Efficiency in a Comprehensive Way 
  Accelerating the development of industrial production and 
transport is the key to achieving rapid and highly effective 
economic development. We must seize the opportunity to 
seriously improve the management and overall coordination of 
industrial production and transport services and promptly deal 
with new circumstances and new problems during the course of 
economic operations. It is particularly necessary for us to do 
a good job in coordinating the supply of energy, raw and 
processed materials, and funds and vigorously support the 
production of marketable products of good economic returns. A 
further step should be taken to improve management and marketing 
and increase the share of our industrial products in domestic 
and international markets. We must continue to improve the 
planning and management of railroad transport, increase the 
volume of highway transport to relieve the pressure on 
railroads, make overall arrangements for transporting goods 
eastward, and try in every possible way to complete this year's 
industrial production and transport tasks. We must attach great 
importance to the technological transformation of existing 
enterprises and promote their technical progress in an 
all-around way. We should concentrate our energies on the 
technological transformation of some basic industries and 
infrastructure. Those basic industries include light industy 
and the textile industries with cotton textiles and food as main 
products, the chemical industry with petrochemicals and 
sali-chemicals [yan hua gong 7770 0553 1562] as main products, 
the metallurgical industry with non-ferrous metal and high-grade 
steel as main products, and the construction industry with new 
building materials as main products; while the stress of 
infrastructural construction is on energy sources and 
telecommunications. To ensure good results from the 
technological transformation investment, we must pay attention 
to engineering quality, put completed projects to effective use, 
and strive to achieve desired objectives. We should accelerate 
the importation of advanced technology, make great efforts to 
promote the development of new products and the application of 
new technology by enterprises, and strive to enhance our 
competitive power in the market. We should step up 
technological transformation, ensuring that the total investment 
in technological transformation of state-owned enterprises in 
various localities exceeds 1.5 billion yuan this year. We 
should encourage enterprises to join national enterprise groups 
or transnational corporations. We should recommend that our good 
enterprises enter into cooperation with enterprises of other 
parts of China and attract investment from outside Xinjiang. We 
should boldly conduct experiments on leases and the auction and 
sale of shares of our enterprises, particularly our large and 
medium enterprises which have certain special strength. In this 
way, we will be able to divert some or all of the assets of 
existing enterprises to starting new industries and new 
enterprises, promoting the readjustment of the industrial 
structure, and increasing the scale of production. We should 
vigorously support the establishment and development of central 
enterprises and take advantage of their strength to attract more 
capital and technology investment from other parts of China and 
abroad. We should transform and develop a number of industries 
which are related to the exploitation of petroleum resources, 
and which will help local economic development. We should 
further deepen enterprise reform. We should seriously conduct 
experiments on a modern enterprise system and lay good 
groundwork for it. We should particularly pay attention to the 
implementation of the "Enterprise Law" and "Regulations on 
Transforming the Operational Mechanisms of State-Owned 
Industrial Enterprises" so as to make a breakthrough in changing 
the operational mechanisms of state-owned enterprises. We 
should seriously reappraise the stocks and assets of 
enterprises, define their property rights, and clarify the debts 
receivable and debts payable. We should resolutely stop 
unwarranted pooling of funds, arbitrary requisitioning of 
donations and exactinf fees from enterprises. We should speed 
up the establishment of the social security system and reduce 
the financial burden of enterprises. We should actively create 
the necessary conditions for developing the private economy and 
boldly develop it. We should enlarge the scale of enterprise 
operations and constantly increase the ratio of the individual 
and private sector in the national economy. 
<H5>  3. Step Up the Building of Infrastructural Facilities and </H5>
Basic Industries To Strengthen the Momentum for Economic 
Development 
  We should vigorously reform the investment system and 
gradually establish a financial investment system that is 
conducive to giving play to the basic role of the market in the 
allocation of resources under macroeconomic regulation and 
control. We should rationally define the scopes and 
responsibilities of the regional government and the local 
governments under it in investing in infrastructural facilities 
and public works, establish risk liabilities for corporate 
investment, and change procedures for the examination and 
approval of projects and for starting them; we should institute 
a system for reporting projects to higher authorities for the 
record and a system for registering new projects; we should 
accelerate the development of an investment market, improve the 
investment information feedback network, further expand the 
scale of using foreign capital, and raise funds for investment 
through various channels. 
  We should continue to readjust the investment structure and 
step up the building of key construction projects by investing 
more in them. Effective measures should be adopted to ensure 
the full or partial completion of the construction of the 
Lanzhou-Xinjiang Multiple-Track Railway, the Xian-Lanzhou-Urumqi 
optical-fiber cable project, No. 8 Steelworks' extension 
project, and the Manas Power Plant's second-stage project this 
year as scheduled. We should do a good job in building the 
Dushanzi ethylene project, the second-stage Urumqi petrochemical 
polyester project, the Qingshuihe-Yining section of National 
Highway 312, and other key projects and make every possible 
effort to achieve planned progress. We should make full 
preparations for starting the construction of the Urumqi 
Airport's extension project, the high-grade Turpan-Urumqi- 
Dahuangshan Highway, the Urumqi No. 2 Petrochemical Fertilizer 
Plant, No. 9 generating unit of Xinjiang's Hongyanchi Power 
Plant, and the key Wuluwati irrigation project on schedule. We 
should work hard to extend the railway in southern Xinjiang, to 
plan the construction of the key Ertix River diversion project 
and a reservoir in southern Xinjiang, and to make preparations 
for the construction of the key Aksu River diversion project, 
the Jilintao Hydroelectric Power Station, the Hongyanchi No. 2 
Power Plant, the project for comprehensive use of Tarim natural 
gas, as well as other basic projects in agriculture, irrigation, 
communications, energy, important raw and semifinished materials 
which have an important bearing on the region's economy. Every 
effort should be made to successfully build key projects and 
reservoirs. 
<H5>  4. Vigorously Develop a Market Network and Further </H5>
Stimulate the Circulation of Commodities 
  We should stabilize and improve the existing management 
systems for agricultural and livestock products and continue to 
decontrol the management of such products. Agricultural and 
livestock products should be allowed to circulate through 
various channels. We should further reform the region's grain 
purchase and sale system. The autonomous region should continue 
to act according to the state requirements for "ensuring grain 
supply and decontrolling prices" and to implement the "six 
guarantees" and "four decontrols" [bao liu fang si 0202 0362 
2397 0934] policy. Grain selling prices should be decontrolled. 
The grain farmers cannot sell on the market will be purchased 
by state-owned grain departments without limits. The grain 
wholesale right is in the hands of the state-owned grain 
departments in order to ensure that most sources of grain are 
under state control. We should continue to improve the 
management systems for cotton and agricultural capital goods and 
strengthen market management. We should continue to do a good 
job in purchasing agricultural and livestock products and 
conscientiously implement various preferential policies in this 
regard. Banking, financial, and grain departments should 
coordinate closely with one another in raising funds and pay 
farmers and herdsmen for their products in full and on time. We 
should encourage and guide farmers and herdsmen to circulate 
their products on markets. As the markets for grain, cooking 
oil, cotton, fur, and other commodities are picking up, farmers 
and herdsmen should seize this opportunity to sell their 
products. We should quickly change the operating mechanisms of 
commodity-circulation enterprises and strive to make progress in 
implementing the shareholding system and the cooperative 
shareholding system in order to promote enterprises being owned 
by the state and managed and operated by individual people. We 
should develop chain stores step by step and make full use of 
commodity-circulation enterprises' favorable conditions. We 
should accelerate the reform of wholesale enterprises and work 
hard to open markets inside and outside the region, especially 
markets in rural and pastoral areas, so as to expand the 
circulation of commodities. 
  We should comprehensively accelerate the development of 
various kinds of markets, placing emphasis on cultivating 
markets for capital goods and factors of production and 
continuing the improvement of consumer goods markets. It is 
necessary to emphatically take good charge of the development of 
various kinds of wholesale markets, to consolidate and upgrade 
existing wholesale markets for grain, oil, meat, vegetable, and 
other bulk commodities, and to improve services and modes of 
transaction. In market cultivation, we must suit measures to 
local conditions, proceed from realities, and guard against 
building redundant markets. It is necessary to remove the 
barriers between different regions, as well as trade monopolies. 
We should implement the policy of simultaneously committing the 
state, collectives, domestic and foreign capital, as well as 
urban and rural areas, and work hard to secure diversified 
sources of investment in the markets. Departments in charge of 
industry, commerce, taxation, commodity prices, public health, 
urban development, and public security at various levels should 
make a concerted effort and provide the necessary policy 
support. We will then be able to really spur on local industry, 
invigorate the local economy, and make local people prosper with 
every market we set up somewhere, thus promoting distribution 
modernization in the region. 
  We should attach great importance to work related to 
commodity prices and keep price inflation strictly below the 
planned targets. We must view the current price inflation 
correctly and acquire a new mentality toward prices under market 
economic conditions. Because the market economy demands the 
optimization of resource use based on the principle of 
efficiency and open competition among products in accordance 
with the law of value, a rise in market prices within a certain 
limit would be an inevitable and normal phenomenon favorable to 
arousing production initiative and promoting economic 
development. Owing to the introduction of numerous price reform 
measures this year, it is very difficult to hold price inflation 
at around 10 percent under the dual impact of cost increases and 
demand-driven price hikes. We must under no circumstances take 
this lightly. We should keep the general retail price index of 
commodities in check while advancing price reform. It is 
particularly important to take effective measures to resolutely 
contain the rise in the price index of living costs. We should 
take prompt measures to earnestly resolve problems caused by 
rising prices. Efforts should be made to strengthen price 
control and inspection, to reduce intermediaries, to strictly 
prohibit unjustifiable price hikes, to crack down on cheating 
and monopolies on the market, and to investigate and deal with 
the illegal and ultra vires raising of prices in accordance with 
the law to conscientiously protect consumers' rights and 
interests. 
<H5>  5. Advance the Reform of the Fiscal and Banking Systems and </H5>
Take Earnest Charge of Financial and Monetary Work 
  Because new financial sources are limited while essential 
spending has expanded, the regional financial situation in 1994 
will be even grimmer and more difficult than in past years, and 
this situation will remain difficult to fundamentally change for 
quite some time. According to the budget drawn up under the new 
system, this year's spending will exceed revenue by 1.071 
billion yuan, of which the additional spending on wage reform 
alone accounts for more than 900 million. Coupled with deficits 
accumulated over the years, financial shortfalls for 1994 come 
to over 2 billion yuan. We must have a correct, clear 
understanding of the extent of financial difficulties ahead, 
attach great importance to financial problems, and take 
extraordinary measures to realistically increase revenue and cut 
spending, overcome difficulties, and properly settle the issue 
regarding a better livelihood. 
  Based on the principle of "survival first, construction 
second," we have to take strong measures to push down 
expenditures, accelerate organizational reform, streamline 
organs, reduce staff, divide personnel, and cut administrative 
and operating expenses. All party and government organs and 
institutions throughout the region should set up special wage 
funds to guarantee that personnel receive their wages first; the 
remaining funds, if any, may be used for other purposes. We 
should stop processing and the approving construction of various 
unproductive new buildings, halls, and premises, as well as 
various activity centers; resolutely curb unauthorized housing 
renovations, relentlessly eliminate the practice of throwing 
parties and offering gifts using public funds, strictly control 
the criteria for assigning vehicles to party and government 
organs at various levels and institutions and the number of 
vehicles to be allotted, firmly check the unhealthy practice of 
entering a race for buying luxurious cars, realistically cut 
down meeting expenses, rigidly control expenses to be incurred 
by personnel traveling abroad and performing official duties out 
of the town, and continue to exercise control over social group 
consumption, particularly the purchase of minicars. The five 
autonomous prefectures and six autonomous counties that will 
mark their 40th founding anniversary this year should 
realistically use their allotted subsidies for something 
beneficial to the masses. They may well make a change by 
presenting their concrete results in reform, opening up, and 
economic construction as gifts for the occasion. Various 
localities and departments, particularly leading cadres at 
various levels, should firmly foster the thinking of waging hard 
struggle, be prepared to lead a tough life for a long period, 
and resolutely check extravagance and waste. We should 
intensify the management of nonbudgetary funds, tighten 
financial and economic discipline, and creatively solve local 
financial difficulties through self-reliance and by increasing 
local revenues and reducing spending. 
  We should foster the concept of taking the situation as a 
whole, actively and steadily promote financial and taxation 
reforms in Xinjiang in accordance with the central authorities' 
uniform arrangements, accelerate the branching out of taxation 
mechanisms by setting up local taxation organs at various 
levels, properly handle relations between local and state tax 
bureaus, and strengthen tax imposition and collection to ensure 
a steady rise in the collection of revenue. Tax departments at 
various levels must act strictly according to the rules and must 
make tax calculations and collections as stipulated. Except for 
reductions and exemptions authorized by the Tax Law, all 
localities and departments have no power whatsoever to make any 
decision on this subject. We should eliminate practice of tax 
contracts in varied forms, vigorously clear overdue taxes and 
tax money retained by the banks, take serious actions against 
individuals and units found to be dodging and resisting taxes, 
see to it that the old tax system is being smoothly replaced by 
the new one, check possible tax "evasion, fraud, drips, and 
leaks" in the course of transition, make sure that all taxes to 
be collected this year go to the treasury in time and in full, 
actively support production and development, and promote a 
steady rise in revenue by nurturing more sources of taxes. 
  Efforts should be made to continue rectifying the financial 
order by steadily pushing forward the financial reform. Loaned 
capital obtained in violation of the rules will be recalled. We 
should firmly curb illegal fund-raising, indiscriminate 
investment, irrational fund outflows, unauthorized or covert 
interest rate increases, illegal financial institutions, and 
nonfinancial organizations conducting illegal financial 
business. We should establish a strong central bank regulatory 
system in accordance with the central authorities' uniform 
arrangements, steadily push forward the reform of state-owned 
commercial banks and rural financial setups, develop a 
cooperative bank system, further reform the insurance and 
foreign exchange system, and strengthen foreign exchange 
management. We will continue mobilizing the entire society to 
increase bank savings as much as possible, vigorously organize 
urban and rural savings, stabilize and increase bank deposits 
among enterprises and rural institutions, enliven capital funds, 
further rectify the "triangle debts," accelerate cash flows, 
enhance capital returns, actively readjust the credit structure, 
and energetically support local economic development. 
<H5>  6. Further Open Up to the Outside World, Promote the Greater </H5>
Development of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade 
  We should take advantage of this opportune time of the major 
reform of the system of foreign trade, work hard to expand 
exports, increase foreign exchange income, and do a good job in 
spot trade. While continuing to promote the major export of 
traditional products such as cotton, we should strive to develop 
petrochemical and other key products which have a stable market. 
We should increase our competitive power in the international 
market, promote the export of new and high technology products, 
and actively increase the stock of commodities for export. We 
should do a solid job of building bases for producing 
export-oriented commodities. We should vigorously develop a 
diversified international market and take advantage of the local 
situation to develop the border trade. We should pay attention 
to the quality and fulfillment of contracts, reduce the 
favorable trade balance [jian shao shun cha 8096 1421 7311 
1567], strive to raise economic efficiency, and give full play 
to the important role of local and border trade in developing 
overall foreign trade. We should transform and improve the 
present specialized trading companies, and encourage companies 
with good conditions to form integrated large-scale enterprise 
groups combining industry, agriculture, technology, and trade 
through investment and participation in stock. These companies 
will jointly develop, produce, and operate in the form of an 
enterprise group with production and scientific research as the 
core and trade as the leading force, and develop international 
operations. By delegating the power of foreign trade operations 
and of doing business as agents to those units, we should create 
conditions for and encourage and guide these large and medium 
industry-commerce-trade enterprise groups to enter the 
international market and become the main force in earning 
foreign exchange. We should strive to form a pattern of foreign 
trade with multilevel and coordinated operations to connect with 
the international market. We should actively improve the 
investment environment and expand the scope of utilizing foreign 
capital and of economic and technological cooperation. We 
should further expand investment fields and attract more foreign 
investment. We should effectively strengthen the administration 
of foreign investment, increase the rate of actual investment, 
and do a good job of running present joint ventures. We should 
actively expand various ways of cooperation with neighboring 
countries and seriously run well enterprises in other localities 
with funds invested by Xinjiang. We should strengthen 
management and raise economic efficiency. We should expand 
lateral ties, open up wider, and extensively attract business 
from other locales. We should continue to run well the 1994 
Urumqi Trade Fair and find new ways to achieve breakthroughs. 
We should step up the construction of open cities, development 
zones, and cooperative zones in the region. We should fully 
utilize tourism resources, and accelerate the development of 
tourism in the autonomous region to earn more foreign exchange. 
We should improve facilities for and develop the border trade. 
<H5>  7. Speed Up Scientific and Technological Research, Make </H5>
Progress in Educational Work, and Promote Economic Development 
  We should attach importance to the role of science and 
technology as the primary productive force, constantly deepen 
the reform of the scientific and technological system, and 
promote a close link between science-technology and economic 
development. We should implement the policy of "development on 
the basis of stability" and accelerate the readjustment of 
scientific research organizations, the change of the operating 
mechanism, and the assignment of capable people. We should 
actively develop privately operated scientific and technological 
research organizations under different ownerships. We should 
encourage the integrated operation of science-technology, 
production and marketing, and continue to support 
science-technology personnel to set up, run, contract for, or 
lease enterprises at the county and township levels. We should 
step up the cultivation and establishment of the technologies 
market, develop science-technology consultative and information 
services, and develop intermediaries for the transfer of 
technologies. We should promote the compensatory transfer of 
technologies and speed up the transformation of scientific and 
technological findings into productive forces. We should 
extensively develop scientific and technological exchanges and 
cooperation based on mutual benefits. We should continue to 
carry out the 305 state projects and other scientific and 
technological projects. We should strive to properly develop a 
new- and high-technology development zone in Urumqi. We should 
find more ways to obtain funds for the development of science 
and technologies, and establish a new system for investment in 
science and technology through various channels and at various 
levels. 
  We must attach great importance to developing education. We 
must earnestly implement "China's Education Reform and 
Development Program" to accelerate the reform of China's 
education structure. We must gradually develop a new system 
that combines the efforts of the government, which assumes 
primary responsibility in education, and the efforts of all 
circles of society. We must further improve nine-year 
compulsory education, adopt effective measures to earnestly stop 
the increase in school dropout rates, and try to achieve the 
goal of universal elementary education as soon as possible. We 
must vigorously develop vocational technical education, 
primarily industry-operated schools, and adult education, 
primarily on-the-job training, to further eliminate illiteracy. 
We must continue to deepen higher educational reform and 
actively adjust college disciplines and courses based on the 
needs of the region's economic and social development. We must 
carry out a reform of student recruitment and graduates' 
employment systems. In light of the region's conditions, while 
advocating that both graduates and units meet face to face and 
choose as they see fit, we propose that this year's graduates 
receive job assignments primarily according to established 
plans. We must strengthen the management and building of the 
ranks of teachers according to the "Law Governing Teachers" and 
work hard to improve educational qualities. We must attach 
greater importance to the development of education for ethnic 
minorities and to the improvement of teaching materials of their 
cultures. We must vigorously promote work-study programs, make 
constant efforts to improve school conditions, and create a 
better environment for educating people. We must firmly 
cultivate an awareness of the importance of talents and develop 
a fine social ethic of respecting knowledge and talents in 
society. We must protect intellectual property rights and 
safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of scientific and 
technological personnel. 
<H5>  8. We Must Earnestly Make Adequate Arrangements To Meet the </H5>
People's Daily Needs and Work Hard To Improve Their Living 
  While attending to economic construction, leaders at all 
levels must pay attention to meeting the daily needs of people 
of all nationalities. We must provide adequate supplies of 
vegetables, nonstaple foods, and other daily essentials and keep 
their prices relatively stable. We must make earnest efforts to 
resolve difficulties encountered by people in outlying rural and 
pastoral areas in attending schools, seeking medical care, and 
drinking tap water. We must earnestly repair and rebuild unsafe 
primary and middle school buildings and build township (town) 
public health centers. We must continue our efforts to improve 
drinking water for disease prevention and bring our primary 
public health centers up to standard. We must resolve the 
problem of counties that still have no electricity. We must 
rebuild disaster-stricken areas. We must accelerate housing 
reform, raise more funds to build homes, and make earnest 
efforts to resolve housing problems encountered by people living 
in unsafe houses and houses with problems. We must step up 
urban construction and county and township road, postal, and 
telecommunications construction to improve people's living 
environment. We must continue to earnestly implement the 
relevant state and regional regulations on reducing peasants' 
and herdsmen's burdens to ensure an increase in their real 
income. We must concern ourselves with the livelihood of 
teachers at local schools, retired personnel, and workers of 
problem enterprises. We must continue to carry out labor 
employment work, give special care to disabled servicemen and to 
families of servicemen and revolutionary martyrs, make 
arrangements for Army cadres who are transferred to civilian 
work, and provide relief to impoverished urban and rural 
residents. We must attach greater importance to disabled 
people's welfare. 
<H5>  9. Make Use of the Xinjiang Production and Construction </H5>
Corps' Strong Points To Revitalize Its Various Undertakings 
  The Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps is an 
important component of the region. Promoting its development 
has a direct bearing on the region's overall task of reform, 
development, and social stability. It must continue to 
emphasize agriculture as the foundation of the region's economy. 
It must deepen the reform of its agricultural and pastoral 
farms, develop its economy, and increase workers' income. It 
must earnestly adjust the distribution of its production forces. 
The corps' armies and divisions shall concentrate on key large 
and medium enterprises while its farms shall focus on village 
and town enterprises. It shall develop new industries centering 
on the oil industry in southern Xinjiang and the mining industry 
in northern Xinjiang. It shall carry out the construction of 
roads, posts, telecommunications, and other infrastructures, as 
well as the construction of key projects. It shall gradually 
resolve the problem that some of its farms have no electricity. 
It shall deepen enterprise reform, carry out the technological 
transformation of its enterprises in groups, and raise their 
management standards. It shall open itself wider to the outside 
world, improve circulation, and help its farms, enterprises, and 
workers enter the market. It shall continue to strengthen 
science and technology as well as basic education, establish a 
sound social security system, and vigorously develop various 
social undertakings. It must continue to carry forward its 
glorious traditions of supporting local construction. People's 
governments and departments at all levels must also support the 
corps' construction as they did in the past and work hard to 
create fine conditions for its development. 
<H5>  Persistently "Grasping Two Links at the Same Time, Attaching </H5>
Equal Importance to Both" To Promote Comprehensive Social 
Progress 
  Establishing a socialist market economy and accelerating the 
modernization drive are a great historic task in the new period. 
To ensure the success of this unprecedented, pioneering task, 
we must uphold the policy of "grasping two links at the same 
time, attaching equal importance to both," earnestly strengthen 
socialist spiritual civilization, consolidate and develop 
political stability and unity, and promote all-around social 
progress. 
<H5>  1. We Must Continue To Promote Stability To Create a </H5>
Favorable Social Environment for Reform and Development 
  Without a stable social and political environment, reform, 
opening up, and modernization are out of question. We must 
firmly bear in mind Comrade Xiaoping's important thinking that 
"stability is the last word" and unwaveringly promote stability. 
Unity constitutes the foundation of stability. We must hold 
high the banner of great unity between all nationalities; 
persistently, extensively, and profoundly carry out propaganda 
and education on the Marxist view of nationalities and the 
party's nationalities policy among cadres and the masses of all 
nationalities, effectively launch activities to promote national 
unity and progress, and constantly strengthen and develop a 
socialist relationship characterized by equality, mutual 
assistance, unity, cooperation, and the common prosperity of all 
nationalities. We must do so to ensure that the hearts of the 
people of all nationalities are linked to each other and that 
they share a common fate. We must earnestly do a good job on 
matters related to nationalities and religions and 
comprehensively implement the party's policies toward 
nationalities and religions. We must conscientiously implement 
the "Law of the Regional Autonomy of Minority Nationalities" and 
pay particular attention to the training and promotion of ethnic 
minority cadres, especially specialized technical and managerial 
personnel. We must continue to launch activities to support the 
Army and give preferential treatment to families of 
revolutionary soldiers and martyrs as well as activities to 
support the government and cherish the people. We must 
conscientiously strengthen the unity between the military, 
government, civilians, local authorities, the Xinjiang 
Production and Construction Corps, and state enterprises. We 
must strengthen national defense education and enhance the 
people's national defense awareness. We must strictly 
distinguish between and correctly handle two different types of 
contradictions. We must earnestly study and promptly resolve 
new problems and contradictions that might appear as a result of 
interests redistribution and relations readjustment necessary in 
the process of in-depth reform. 
  National separatism still remains the principal threat to 
Xinjiang's stability. We must persistently and relentlessly 
carry out propaganda and education to oppose national separatism 
and safeguard the motherland's unification. We must trust and 
rely on cadres and the masses of all nationalities, take a 
clear-cut stand in struggling against a very few national 
separatists, and sternly crack down on the subversion, 
infiltration, and sabotage activities of hostile forces inside 
and outside Xinjiang. We must earnestly and comprehensively 
tackle problems of public order. We must do a good job of 
mobilizing the masses in maintaining public order and continue 
to uphold the policy of combining professional work with the 
mass line; of combining the efforts of the military, the police, 
and the people; and of combining crackdowns with prevention. We 
must mobilize all forces in society to maintain public order, 
perfect public security and crime-prevention systems, and 
enforce comprehensive crime-prevention measures down to the 
grass roots. We must further improve the method for managing 
the migrant population. We must bring into play the specialized 
functions of judicial, procuratorial, and public security organs 
and adopt effective measures to intensify the struggle against 
serious crime, concentrating on violent crimes and crimes 
committed by gangs. We must launch targeted struggle and 
control activities and punish, in accordance with the law, 
criminals endangering public order. We must firmly stop the 
momentum in the increase of major criminal cases and cases of a 
heinous nature. We must attach importance to strengthening 
militia and reserve forces and bring into full play their 
important role in safeguarding social stability. We must 
continually and persistently wage struggle against all kinds of 
social evils. 
<H5>  2. We Must Strengthen the Building of a Clean Government </H5>
and Continue To Deepen the Struggle Against Corruption 
  Strengthening the building of a clean government and 
combating corruption constitutes the essential condition for 
establishing a socialist market economy; it is also a major task 
vital to the fate of reform and the destiny of the party and 
country. Leading comrades at all levels must be fully aware of 
the importance, necessity, and long-term nature of the struggle 
against corruption and wage it constantly and relentlessly. We 
must further consolidate the achievements made by leading cadres 
in maintaining integrity and self-discipline and in 
investigating and rectifying their own misconduct. Leading 
cadres at all levels must be strict with themselves, consciously 
enforce central and regional regulations on strengthening party 
style and building a clean government, and take the lead in 
combating corruption. We must step up the investigation of 
major and important cases. We must step up our efforts to close 
the investigation of cases with irrefutable proof and with no 
doubts whatsoever, particularly major cases involving leading 
cadres at and above the county and department level, and 
promptly prosecute them. We must continue to control the wanton 
collection of fees and fines and the wanton apportioning of 
expenses and work and rectify unhealthy practices of various 
trades. We must particularly strengthen the supervision and 
inspection of administrative fees and set strict restrictions on 
the authority to approve their collection. 
<H5>  3. Strengthen the Building of Socialist Spiritual </H5>
Civilization and Foster Civilized, Forward-Looking Ethnic 
Standards 
  We should earnestly implement the guidelines of the national 
propaganda and ideology work conference, persist in arming 
people's minds with scientific theory, guide people with the 
correct public opinion, and portray people with a noble spirit. 
We should make ample use of newspapers, radio and television 
broadcasts, publications, and other mass media to publicize in 
depth Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics, and to continuously enhance the 
awareness, steadfastness, and creativity of the masses and 
cadres of all nationalities in implementing the party's basic 
theory and basic line. We should strengthen ideological and 
ethical education -- focusing on patriotism, collectivism, and 
socialism -- and educate the masses and cadres in the spirit of 
building up the country through thrift and hard work, in 
professional and social ethics, and in the basic national 
conditions. We should adhere to the orientation of serving the 
people and socialism and the principle of letting a hundred 
flowers blossom and a hundred schools of thought contend in 
promoting flourishing socialist literature and art. To provide 
multitudinous fine-quality spiritual nourishment for the people 
of all nationalities, we should inherit and carry forward the 
fine traditions of national culture and art, and create more and 
better literary and artistic works a with novel style which 
reflect the spirit of the era of socialism, the rich flavor of 
life, and national characteristics. We should further enliven 
the masses' cultural life, bring radio and television broadcasts 
to a wider audience, broadcast more ethnic language programs, 
publish more books, especially books in ethnic languages, and 
step up efforts to preserve and use cultural relics. We should 
make social science theoretical research serve reform and 
development. We should strengthen the supervision over cultural 
markets according to the law and fight relentlessly against 
pornography, to further purify the social environment. In 
keeping with the requirements for establishing the new system, 
cultural, radio and television, and press and publications 
departments should mobilize the people of all nationalities to 
support and take part in reform, in guiding the attention of the 
masses and cadres to deepening reform and accelerating 
development, and in promptly giving guidance for solving 
problems related to ideology and understanding in the course of 
reform. 
  We should improve work related to physical culture, actively 
prepare for the participation in the Eighth National Games, and 
strive to stage a superior performance once again at this year's 
national games. We should make the third regional people's 
sports meet a great success and should make ample preparations 
for next year's eighth regional sports meet. We should launch 
extensive mass sports activities to improve the people's 
physique. We should deepen the reform of public health and 
actively explore a public health management system and operating 
mechanisms that are compatible with a socialist market economic 
structure. We should reform free medical care, experiment with 
a medical insurance system at selected points, and actively 
develop a sound rural cooperative medical system. We should 
earnestly improve medical ethics and the work style of medical 
personnel, publicize the fine traditions of healing the ill and 
rescuing the dying and of serving the people wholeheartedly, and 
foster a good image of medical personnel by improving the 
attitude and quality of service. We should energetically unfold 
the mass patriotic health campaign. We should reinforce family 
planning and strictly control the population from growing beyond 
the targeted rate. We should continue to implement the regional 
regulations governing family planning among minority 
nationalities in Xinjiang. We should increase environmental 
awareness and strengthen environmental protection by effectively 
implementing the target responsibility system on environmental 
protection and by properly handling the relationship between 
resource exploitation and ecological balance. 
<H5>  4. Actively and Yet Prudently Advance the Reform of the </H5>
Political System 
  We should change the functions of the government, strengthen 
macroeconomic regulation and control, and actively and yet 
prudently advance institutional and personnel reform in close 
conjunction with the establishment of a socialist market 
economic system. In line with the principles of separating the 
functions of the government from those of enterprises, 
simplifying structures, and promoting unity and efficiency, we 
should step up efforts to revise and perfect the general plan on 
institutional reform in the region, which, after approval by the 
central authorities, should be implemented as soon as possible. 
We should strive to complete institutional reform in 
regional-level organizations and have them converge with the 
national public service system before the end of this year. We 
should advocate the rational distribution of personnel by 
systematically dispatching a number of young office cadres to go 
down to replenish the grass roots. While carrying out 
institutional reform, we should rationalize relations, clearly 
define powers and functions, and strengthen the management and 
comprehensive coordination of various trades and professions. 
We should improve intermediary organizations, organize the 
establishment and development of accounting, auditing, and law 
offices and organizations for appraising assets and credits, and 
set up associations of trades and commercial organizations to 
help the government supervise economic activities. We should 
step by step establish and perfect a scientific personnel 
management system of different categories. 
  Strengthening the political construction of socialist 
democracy is the goal of the reform of the political structure 
as well as an important component of the effort to build 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. We should set up a 
sound decisionmaking system and procedures and constantly strive 
to place such a system and procedures on a more democratic and 
scientific footing so as to further harness the enthusiasm of 
the people of all nationalities in promoting reform, opening up, 
and modernization construction, and to effectively protect, 
guide, and mobilize such enthusiasm. Governments at all levels 
must conscientiously accept the supervision of people's 
congresses and their standing committees at the corresponding 
level. We should step up contacts with people's political 
consultative conferences and the democratic parties and bring 
into better play their role in political consultation and 
democratic supervision. We should earnestly handle suggestions 
from people's congress deputies and political consultative 
conference members. To continually broaden channels for the 
masses to take part in the administration and discussion of 
regional affairs, we should set up a sound system under which 
trade unions, the Communist Youth League, women's federations, 
and other mass organizations can take part in the work of the 
government in a democratic manner. We should attach great 
importance to improving the legal system, ensuring the unity 
between reform and opening up on the one hand and improving the 
legal system on the other, and seeing to it that economic 
affairs are managed according to the laws. We must pay close 
attention to legislative planning; step up efforts to formulate 
regional laws and administrative rules for standardizing market 
norms, keeping the market in order, strengthening macroeconomic 
regulation and control, improving social security, and 
facilitating opening to the outside world; and promptly amend or 
abolish rules and regulations which prove inappropriate to the 
establishment of a socialist market economic structure. We 
should step up publicity on the legal system to increase the 
whole society's awareness of laws and the legal system. 
Governments at all levels must exercise their powers and do 
things according to the law. We should strengthen the 
construction of law-enforcement personnel, enhance their 
competence and quality of law enforcement, and establish a sound 
law-enforcement supervisory system and legal service 
organizations to provide legal norms and a guarantee for the 
socialist market economy. 
<H5>  5. Further Emancipate Minds To Effectively Improve Work Style </H5>
  To fulfill this year's heavy tasks in reform and 
development, 
we must firmly establish the ideological line of emancipating 
minds and seeking truth from facts, and must dare to do away 
with the outdated ideas of self-enclosure and of sticking to 
conventional practices. Work in all fields must surround, be 
subordinate to, and serve the center of economic construction. 
We must dare to experiment with and explore new reforms using 
the "three conducives" as the criterion for judging the merits 
or demerits and right or wrong of a reform measure. Leaders at 
all levels should set a good example in emancipating minds and 
should carry out work in a creative manner in light of the 
actual condition of each locality. Governments at all levels 
and their functioning departments, and leading cadres in 
particular, must go deep into the grass roots to energetically 
conduct investigations and studies. They must make a determined 
effort to overcome bureaucratism and formalism and work hard to 
free themselves from "mountains of official documents and oceans 
of meetings." In line with Comrade Jiang Zemin's instruction on 
"studying more and socializing less; investigating and studying 
more and airing less subjective views; and doing more concrete 
work and making less empty talk," we must make relentless 
efforts to seek truth from facts, deal with concrete matters, 
and implement policies and measures. Policies, measures, and 
decisions already adopted by the autonomous region must be 
supervised by concerned officials and implemented to the letter. 
Leading cadres at all levels must always bear in mind the 
fundamental objective of serving the people of all nationalities 
wholeheartedly, earnestly heed the opinions of the masses, be 
ready to look into their feelings, show concern for their 
hardships, conduct meticulous and penetrating ideological work 
among the masses, and strive to solve practical problems 
concerning the masses' vital interests, seeing to it that they 
accomplish several concrete tasks for the masses each year 
during their tenure. As long as we closely rely on the masses 
and forge close ties with them, our work in all fields of 
endeavor will be invincible. 
  Fellow deputies, we are facing glorious and yet arduous 
tasks, but we are full of hopes and confidence in Xinjiang's 
future. Guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics and led by the party 
Central Committee, the State Council, and the regional party 
committee, let us adhere to the party's basic line, unite and 
rely on the people of all nationalities, aim at Xinjiang's 
development, make a determined effort at reform, and work hard 
with one heart and one mind to establish a socialist market 
economic structure and to develop Xinjiang's economy with rapid 
speed and high efficiency! 

