BFN 

  [Text] After ending with glorious success a five-day 
official friendship visit to the Lao People's Democratic 
Republic [LPDR], His Excellency [H.E.] Than Shwe, chairman of 
the State Law and Order Restoration Council [SLORC] of the Union 
of Myanmar [Burma], his wife, and a high-level delegation of the 
Union of Myanmar left Vientiane for home this morning. A 
ceremony to bid farewell to H.E. Than Shwe, his wife, and 
delegation was held at the Hokham Presidential Office in 
Vientiane at 0740. Attending the ceremony were H.E. Nouhak 
Phoumsavan, president of the LPDR, and his wife; H.E. Khamphoui 
Keoboualapha, deputy prime minister and chairman of the Planning 
and Cooperation Committee; H.E. Somsavat Lengsavat, minister of 
foreign affairs; H.E. Choummali Sai-gnason, minister of national 
defense; H.E. Sisavat Keobounphan, minister of agriculture and 
forestry; and H.E. Thongdam Chanthaphon, minister and chief of 
the Presidential Office; along with ministers, deputy ministers, 
and many high-ranking cadres. Also on hand to see the Myanmar 
delegation off at the airport was H.E. Kideng Thammavong, 
ambassador of the LPDR to the Union of Myanmar. 
  During the five-day visit to Laos, H.E. Than Shwe and his 
delegation called on and held talks with H.E. Nouhak Phoumsavan, 
president of the LPDR, and delegation. They also paid a 
courtesy call on H.E. Khamtai Siphandon, chairman of the Lao 
People's Revolutionary Party Central Committee and prime 
minister of the LPDR. Following the meeting and talks, three 
cooperation agreements were jointly signed. In addition, the 
high-level delegation of the Union of Myanmar visited several 
cultural and production establishments in Vientiane and Luang 
Prabang Provinces. It also viewed and paid respects to the That 
Louang Pagoda, Sisaket, and Phakeo Temples in Vientiane. The 
Myanmar delegation also visited the friendship bridge across the 
Mekong River and the Multiethnic Cultural Park in Vientiane 
Municipality. 
  At the farewell ceremony at the Hokham Presidential Office, 
H.E. Than Shwe expressed thanks to H.E. Nouhak Phoumsavan, wife, 
and delegation for the warm welcome accorded him and his 
delegation in an atmosphere of fraternal and neighborly 
friendship and profound mutual understanding. 

