Language: <F P=105> Span </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jesusa Cervantes] </F>
  [Text] San Cristobal de las Casas -- Some 2,000 Indians 
from nine Chiapas municipalities yesterday marched from their 
communities to this city's Mayor's Office, where they staged a 
sitdown strike, and said they will take up arms if their 
problems are not resolved. 
  The participants of this demonstration, which began at 1100, 
entered San Cristobal de las Casas on the two main roads from 
the municipalities of Las Margaritas, Ocosingo, Comitan, 
Palenque, Chanal, Hiuxtan, San Juan Chamula, Altamirano, and 
Zinacantan. 
  Domingo Lopez, the leader of those who were displaced from 
Chamula, stated that: "We do not want this peace if there is no 
justice, freedom, and democracy, and we warn that if the 
government does not listen to us, we will take up arms. If we 
are killed, the government will be responsible." 
  The demonstration was called by State Council of Indian and 
Peasant Organizations [CEOIC], which groups Indian associations 
together. The demands include the immediate dismissal of all 
municipal presidents on the grounds that they were appointed and 
do not answer the demands of the citizens. They also demand the 
dismissal of all members of the local congress. 
  Lopez said: "If the government does not listen to us, what 
we want to avoid will occur -- there will be more bloodshed, we 
are poor Indians and have nothing to lose." Lopez added: "We 
will not allow the deaths of our brothers of the Zapatist 
National Liberation Army [EZLN] to be in vain." 
  The communique was signed by CEOIC members, who explained 
that only Indians who had not been forced to go -- as has been 
done in ceremonies staged by the governor -- attended the 
demonstration. 
  Slowly, Indians from the Chiapas mountains arrived at the 
Municipal Palace, where the EZLN issued the Lacandona Jungle 
declaration on 1 January. For a minute-and-a-half, raising 
their fists, the demonstrators payed homage to fallen EZLN 
members. 
  Representatives of the various organizations stressed their 
unconditional support for the EZLN and its causes. 

