Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Bhaskar Menon; quotation marks as published] </F>
  [Text] New York, November 6. Robin Raphel, United States 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs, lobbed a 
smoke-bomb into Indo-U.S. relations last week when, at a 
briefing for South Asian journalists in Washington, she said: 
"We view the whole of Kashmir as disputed territory, the status 
of which needs to be resolved." Responding to a question on why 
President Clinton in his United Nations speech had mentioned 
Kashmir, she said: "It was meant to say we see Kashmir on the 
radar screen along with Yugoslavia and Somalia and lots of other 
places in the former Soviet Union, Georgia, where there is civil 
conflict going on. We can't easily overlook it and there is a 
message in that." 
  At about the same time, former Congressman Stephen Solarz, 
who is expected to be the next American ambassador to India, was 
knocking the socks off a group of visiting Indian members of 
Parliament. At a meeting with them in Washington, with the media 
present, he asked a "hypothetical" question: "What effect would 
the secession of Kashmir have on the rest of India?" 
  In sum, these incidents point to the fact that after two 
decades of agreeing with New Delhi that the Kashmir issue should 
be settled bilaterally under the Simla Agreement, Washington has 
decided to internationalise it, and is doing so in the most 
disruptive manner. In negating Kashmir's accession to India, it 
is in effect questioning the integrity of the country as a 
whole. And by picturing India as analogous to Yugoslavia or 
Somalia, it is quite deliberately introducing tensions into a 
relationship that otherwise has improved substantially in recent 
years and looked ready to take off into a growing economy 
partnership. Despite State Department clarifications, there is a 
clear perception among Indian observers of a new and dangerous 
thrust to American policy. 
  To make sense of that policy, it is necessary to see it as a 
product of powerful domestic forces contending to shape the role 
of the United States in the post-Cold War world. Largely 
responsible for what Indians would consider the negative aspects 
of American policy are the forces of the national security 
establishment, involving the military sectors of the economy, 
the vast intelligence and cover operations community, and the 
military itself, with the Pentagon serving as their joint 
institutional power-base. And largely responsible for what 
Indians would consider the positive elements of American policy 
are the mainstream forces of the country's vital and liberal 
democracy, its enormously productive industrial and trading 
establishments, and its cultural and intellectual institutions. 
During the Cold War, these forces worked coherently together to 
face the common threat of communalism, but since the collapse of 
the USSR, they have been in an increasingly uncomfortable 
relationship domestically. Inevitably, that is projected into a 
Jekyl and Hyde foreign policy. 
  This split personality of American foreign policy emerged to 
public view in 1992. At precisely the time when the Bush 
administration was talking of a New World Order centred on a 
revitalised United Nations, the Pentagon was circulating a 46 
page strategy document that called for the Untied States to 
maintain a one-superpower world by thwarting the development of 
any potential rivals. The secret document was leaked to The New 
York Times, which, in a front-page story on 8 March 1992, said, 
"The Pentagon document articulates the clearest rejection to 
date of collective internationalism," the post World War II 
strategy incarnated in the United Nations. 
  In essence, the Pentagon strategy aims at blocking any 
country from going down the road to global competition with the 
United States. Nuclear proliferation is deemed a high priority 
in that context, and the paper supported the use of violence to 
prevent it. Articulating the Pentagon's priorities in South 
Asia, the document said that the United States "should 
discourage Indian hegemonic aspirations over the other States in 
South Asia and on the Indian Ocean. With regard to Pakistan, a 
constructive U.S.-Pakistani military relationship will be an 
important element in our strategy to promote stable security 
conditions in South West Asia and Central Asia. We should 
therefore endeavour to rebuild our military relationship, given 
acceptable resolution of our nuclear concerns." 
  In another section pertinent to India, the Pentagon paper 
referred to nations "that could, in the future, develop 
strategic aims and a defence posture of regionwide or global 
domination." Because the United States no longer faced either a 
global threat or a hostile, non-democratic power dominating a 
region critical to its interests, it said, "We have the 
opportunity to meet threats at lower levels and lower costs." 
What steps might be involved at these lower levels was not 
addressed in the excerpts published in The New York Times. But 
in some cases they have been clearly evident. In Iraq, it 
involved the American ambassador suckering Saddam Hussein into 
invading Kuwait and precipitating international action to rid 
the country of all weapons of mass destruction. In North Korea, 
it involved getting the government to sign the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty in the expectation of economic 
largesse, and then conducting war games in South Korea that 
drove Pyongyang to violate its agreement with the IAEA. 
  In South Asia, faced with democratic India on one side and 
long-standing American ally Pakistan on the other, the approach 
has been more covert, and can be described only by resorting to 
a kind of join-the-dots journalism. Harshad Mehta's allegations 
against the Prime Minister and the fact that Ms Robin Raphel, a 
CIA analyst before she joined the Foreign Service, was the 
political Counsellor at the American embassy in New Delhi till 
the summer of 1993 could be some of these dots. The picture that 
merges is of an attempt to destabilise India and split it along 
communal lines. Recent American attempts to highlight the issue 
of Kashmir would fall into that pattern, and it behooves Indians 
to take that as a working hypothesis in formulating popular and 
policy response, especially to possible terrorist events during 
the current elections. 

