BFN 

  [Text] The first day of the visit of Vaclav Havel, 
president of the Czech Republic, to Romania included two rounds 
of talks between the heads of state and a meeting with Prime 
Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu, concluding with an official dinner at 
Cotroceni Palace given by Romania's President Ion Iliescu in 
honor of the guests. 
  [Begin Iliescu recording] Esteemed President Vaclav Havel, 
esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen: I take great pleasure in 
extending on this occasion our warmest welcome to Romania, a 
country in which, regardless of the hardships of history or of 
the current political fashion, friendship with neighbors and 
those to whom we are connected through a past of so many common 
sufferings remains a constantly respected treasure for us. 
  This first official visit to Bucharest in your capacity as 
president of the newly established Czech Republic makes me 
believe that we are sharing the same feelings, Romania and 
Czechia being connected not only through history and their 
special position in the Central and Eastern European region, but 
also through their aspirations for civilization and humanity in 
this uniform and yet so diversified area that is present-day 
Europe. 
  In the person of President Havel, we greet the political and 
cultural personality, who, under such bitter political and 
ideological conditions in which this part of Europe was kept 
prisoner, through the Charter 77 movement, voiced noble 
aspirations and heroically reaffirmed not only the dignity of 
the Czech and Slovak peoples but also of all peoples in Europe. 
In his act, as well as the act of all those who were close to 
him, one could also recognize the ideals of the Romanian people, 
who, as prisoners of an absurd dictatorship, had to pay such a 
heavy price to win freedom. That is why, on behalf of all those 
present here and of our fellow citizens, allow me to pay homage 
to our distinguished guest. 
  Although in completely different fashion, upon the collapse 
of the Iron Curtain, our countries were confronted with similar 
problems emerging from the complex process of transition to a 
democratically structured society based on the market economy. 
Now, after more than four years, we are facing a time of 
political realism and concrete solutions, which are capable of 
giving real support to our hopes. Those comprehensive 
discussions and arguments that took place during our official 
talks, which focused on cooperation between our countries in the 
process of integration in Euro-Atlantic economic and security 
structures, represent positive proof of our intentions. Our 
talks emphasized the strength of the interests that bind us, 
taking into account the common nature of the problems that we 
have to cope with, the complementary nature of our economies, 
and the high potential of international economic and political 
cooperation. 
  Actions aimed at strengthening bilateral cooperation between 
Romania and Czechia, just like other regional cooperation 
projects, not only do not conflict with our joint goal of 
European integration -- an idea that some people have tried to 
disseminate -- but, on the contrary, represent a direct 
contribution to the establishment of favorable conditions for 
this integration. Through their cooperation, Romania and 
Czechia are making preparations for this integration. In our 
capacity as politicians and state leaders, we are duty-bound to 
cooperate in this respect. The treaty on relations of 
friendship and cooperation between Romania and the Czech 
Republic, which we shall be signing tomorrow, represents a 
political sign in this respect and creates the appropriate 
judicial framework, based on European democratic principles, for 
the development of solid Romanian-Czech relations. This 
represents a positive and important contribution to the progress 
of bilateral relations as well as to the organization of 
political and economic cooperation in the entire geo-strategic 
area of Central and Eastern Europe. The organic development of 
our relations in various areas, mainly represents a contribution 
to the creation of appropriate conditions for our relations to 
move forward with our partners in the West, from the stage when 
we are merely regarded as people requesting assistance or 
searching for potential markets, to the stage when we become 
real partners in establishing a new democratic, prosperous, and 
peaceful life in Europe. 
  I propose that we drink a toast to this future of our 
continent, a future for which it is not enough for us just to 
wish but also to build together, to the ever increasing 
friendship and cooperation between our countries, to the 
prosperity of the Romanian and Czech peoples, and to the good 
health of all those present. [end recording] 

