Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, March 14 (CTK) -- Outgoing Slovak Prime 
Minister Vladimir Meciar told journalists on Monday [14 March] 
that as soon as a new Slovak Government was formed, President 
Michal Kovac should fulfill his moral duty and resign. Meciar 
confirmed that the whole government and he himself were 
resigning from their posts. 
  At a midday press conference Meciar announced he had 
received 
a letter from Kovac calling on him to resign. The parliament 
passed a vote of no-confidence in Meciar and his government on 
Friday [11 March]. 
  Meciar said Kovac was likely to persuade some government 
members to keep their posts, but added that they were bound by 
the resolution passed by the government at its last meeting this 
morning. According to the resolution, no member of Meciar's 
government will accept Kovac's offer to stay in office until a 
new cabinet is appointed. 
  Meciar said the president should be not only a 
constitutional 
but also a moral authority. A president who tells lies to the 
whole world saying that a government fighting corruption is 
itself corrupted must either prove this or leave, he added. By 
his speech in parliament on Wednesday [9 March], Kovac "has 
dishonored the HZDS" and must apologize for it. The HZDS is the 
abbreviation for Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, 
the strongest political entity in Slovakia. 
  Meciar claimed that Kovac's letter dismissing him had been 
delivered to the Government Office before Kovac had received the 
parliament's resolution on the no-confidence vote in the 
government. "He could have been decent enough to wait for the 
mentioned resolution... culture has never been a strong feature 
of his," Meciar said. 
  He said that as a parliamentary deputy he reserved the right 
to explain certain aspects of the president's conduct which he 
had not mentioned as yet. Meciar said that he would justify on 
the parliamentary soil the view that the president's figure was 
"tragic for Slovakia's history." 
  In case the HZDS wins the planned early elections or regular 
1996 elections, Meciar is ready to be sworn in by the president 
under the condition that he would resign afterwards, he said. 
  "But he should resign earlier, it is his moral duty. No 
other constitutional official has breached the constitutional 
law so vulgarly as Michal Kovac," Meciar said. 
  He pointed out that Kovac had met with the chairmen of 
political parties, while the HZDS was represented by the 
chairman of the parliamentary group. "This offends the movement 
as a whole," Meciar said. 

