BFN 

<F P=106> ["Aggression Forces Targeted Against Asian Countries" -- </F>
KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 3 (KCNA) -- The U.S. bellicose 
quarters' cries for reinforcement of the U.S. Forces stationed 
in Japan allegedly to "cope with the increasing danger of 
disputes" show they still pursue the policy of strength toward 
Korea and Asia, stresses NODONG SINMUN in a bylined article 
today. 
  The article says: 
  The U.S. and Japanese reactionaries claim that the 
maintenance and reinforcement of the U.S. Forces in Japan is 
something for "Japan-U.S. security." But it is a lie, a 
deception and a mockery of the peaceloving peoples in Asia and 
the rest of the world. 
  The purpose of the U.S. strategy toward Asia is to dominate 
and control the Asian countries with strength. In this the 
United States is going to use its ally Japan close to the Asian 
continent as well as South Korea as a military foothold and 
bridgehead. 
  In Japan there are more than 120 U.S. bases and setups, 
about 
50,000 U.S. troops and large quantities of military hardware. 
  The U.S. troops and bases in Japan are a product of the U.S. 
cold war policy. Now that the cold war has ended, they must be 
withdrawn. 
  The United States' reinforcement of its forces in Japan 
shows 
it schemes to realise its aggressive designs on Asian countries 
at any cost. 
  The major task and function of the U.S. troops and bases in 
Japan are to maintain U.S. military threat and ensure its armed 
intervention in Asia. The basic mission of the U.S. Forces in 
Japan is, in a nutshell, to play the role of a shock brigade in 
the aggressive Asia strategy of the United States. 
  The aggressive nature of the U.S. troops and bases in Japan 
finds graphic expression in that they never stay away from the 
war exercises staged in the Asia-Pacific region. 
  They were feverishly active in Rimpac, Pacex and other 
large- 
scale military exercises, which were not for "U.S.- Japan 
security" but against Asian countries. 
  By keeping its aggression forces and military bases in 
Japan, the United States plans to prevent Japan's deviation from 
its track of war and strengthen the U.S.-Japan military 
integration. The United States installed nuclear bases in 
Japan, armed its troops in Japan with nuclear weapons and turned 
Japan into an "unsinkable nuclear aircraft carrier," increasing 
the danger. 
  This proves that the United States uses its forces in Japan 
as a lever to gain nuclear predominance in Asia and threaten and 
attack other countries with nuclear weapons. 
  It must not go unnoticed that the operations of the U.S. 
Forces in Japan focus on Korea. They are on alert for operation 
in Korea any moment. The description of the forces as a 
"deterrent to disputes" by the U.S. ruling circles is a sophism. 
  The U.S. Forces and bases in Japan are the root cause of 
threat to the sovereignty and independence, peace and security 
of Korea and other Asian countries. Nothing can conceal their 
dangerous nature. 

