Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Salamah Ni'mat: "Amman Disturbed by 'Arafat's </F>
Giving Priority to Agreement With Israel Before Jordan"] 
  [Text] Amman--King Husayn's statements two days ago have 
revealed the extent to which relations between Jordan and the 
PLO have deteriorated in the wake of the PLO's failure to 
coordinate with Jordan, its refusal to approve a bilateral 
economic agreement, and its ignoring Jordan's position on border 
crossings between the Jericho autonomous area and the kingdom. 
  King Husayn's warnings to the PLO of the consequences of 
continued neglect in coordinating with Jordan came as a signal 
that his patience had run out after weeks of repeated calls to 
resume coordination and Mr. 'Arafat's refusal to sign the 
economic agreement with Jordan worked out last November. 
  These statements have been seen as the clearest indication 
of 
Jordan's uneasiness over the repercussions on the kingdom of any 
Palestinian-Israeli agreement in the framework of a peaceful 
settlement. 
  Official Jordanian sources say that King Husayn feels 
offended by the Palestinian leader's insistence on giving 
strategic priority to reaching an agreement with Israel before 
concluding any agreement with Jordan, rather than vice versa. 
These sources point out that Mr. 'Arafat "is trying to 
strengthen his negotiating position with Jordan by agreeing 
first with Israel, instead of strengthening his negotiating 
position with Israel by agreeing with Jordan." Some Jordanian 
officials interpret the Palestinian leadership's position as 
indicating "'Arafat's desire to link the occupied territories to 
Israel, instead of linking them to Jordan." 
  One Jordanian leader asked: "Does Abu 'Ammar [Yasir 'Arafat] 
intend to cut the umbilical cord between the newborn Palestinian 
entity and Israel and wean the Palestinian economy from its 
current attachment to the Israeli entity?" 
  The Jordanian leader thinks that Mr. 'Arafat is pushing in 
the direction of "full attachment to the Israeli entity, and 
rejects all kinds of accord, integration, and agreement with 
Jordan." He explains that Jordan's reservations about linking 
the occupied territories to Israel spring from the fact that 
such linkage will impose on Jordan relations with the occupied 
territories defined by Israeli interests, rather than by joint 
Jordanian-Palestinian interests. He stresses that Jordan, 
"because of its political, geographic, demographic, and economic 
links to the West Bank, cannot allow its relations with the 
Palestinian entity to be defined by Tel Aviv." He adds that in 
the context of any peaceful settlement with Israel, Jordan 
"wants to deal with Israel as with any other county, not being 
forced to cooperate with it by necessity, but in accordance with 
the dictates of the national interest." 
  In his speech before senior officers of the Jordanian armed 
forces two evenings ago, King Husayn described his meeting with 
Mr. 'Arafat last Thursday evening as "decisive" and said that 
both of them had been "extremely frank." King Husayn gave the 
Palestinian leader until tomorrow, Tuesday, to resume 
coordination "to deal with the required priorities as quickly as 
possible and with the required agreement and clarity. We, for 
our part, said that this was the last chance and that afterward 
we would bear all responsibility separately." 
  Some analysts think that the Palestinian leader's failure to 
coordinate with Jordan at this stage is related to his fear of 
Jordan's future ambitions to "swallow up the West Bank" in the 
context of a more powerful and stable Jordanian regime. They say 
that Abu 'Ammar "sees no rivalry to his leadership of the 
Palestinian people by any other Arab leader except King Husayn, 
who in Jordan now rules the largest concentration of 
Palestinians outside the occupied territories and who was able 
to rule the West Bank with relative success between 1952 and 
1967." Contributing to these fears is the fact that Jordan is 
the only Arab state that has worked to incorporate Palestinian 
refugees and immigrants by giving them the right to 
naturalization, to political activity within the political 
system, and to equality under the Constitution, while the 
majority of Palestinians in Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt have 
remained outside the political systems of these countries, 
however different their demographic makeups may be. 
  The suspicions of the Palestinian leaders are increased by 
the fact that King Husayn has not moved to amend the 
Constitution, which specifies that the West Bank is an 
inseparable part of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, despite the 
1988 decision to break the linkage. This leaves the door open 
for Jordan to reimpose its sovereignty on the West Bank if 
circumstances become favorable. 
  Although some Jordanian politicians show understanding of 
the 
PLO's fears, they warn at the same time that these fears should 
not drive the Palestinian leadership to increased links to 
Israel. 
  A PLO official says that Jordanian fears are "exaggerated" 
and that the future Palestinian entity "is interested in links 
with the Arab world, not with Israel." However, he points out 
that the facts on the ground and over a quarter century of 
economic linkage between the occupied territories and Israel do 
not permit a rapid breaking of the linkage with Israel and 
restoration of the linkage with Jordan. 

