BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Development Minister Michel Roussin by </F>
Donaig Ledu and Assane Diope on 30 May; place not 
given--recorded] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] [Ledu] On several occasions, 
France has been accused of supporting President Habyarimana's 
regime in Rwanda. The Rwanda Patriotic Front [RPF] has rejected 
both the sending of French UN troops to the country and the 
sending of French weapons to equip UN troops. 
  We asked Michel Roussin how he reacted to these criticisms: 
  [Begin recording] [Roussin] First of all, I am surprised by 
these attacks because I do not see why, in all these affairs, 
France is exposed to condemnation although France has always 
done its utmost, everything it could, to encourage all the sides 
to get organized in that country, in Rwanda, whatever side they 
may belong to, and we thought that, since we had instigated the 
Arusha summit, and the agreement which was signed in 1993, we 
had played our part. 
  We also thought that the replacement by an international 
force of two French units which were in Rwanda was to prevent 
what has happened lately. Therefore, I believe that these are 
groundless accusations and I remember in particular a letter 
sent to the president on 1 September last year by the RPF 
president, who expressed his most sincere thanks for the role 
played by France in these negotiations, the role of an observer. 
  [Ledu] Mr. Minister, the RPF does not want to know anything 
about French soldiers in Rwanda, it does not even want to know 
anything about French weapons which may be used by UN troops. 
There are indeed accusations levelled at France. 
  [Roussin] [words indistinct] the position of the RPF is a 
political position. The RPF has adopted a more radical 
position, it is continuing an offensive and gaining ground in 
order to sit down at the negotiation table in due course, and I 
for one hope that there will be a cease-fire and that the peace 
we have relentlessly been asking for will be achieved as soon as 
possible. 
  The international community may be helpless, but France 
continues despite everything to provide help -- considerable 
help -- to the Rwandan refugees as much as we can since we 
cannot intervene in Rwanda itself, and in Tanzania, where there 
is a huge camp which has been visited by my colleague, the 
health minister, and we are also helping to alleviate the 
suffering and misery of the refugees who are in Burundi. 
  Therefore, it is the international community that I, for 
one, 
find helpless. France is continuing an airlift which has been 
operational for three weeks now and we have distributed 
considerable quantities of food and medicine. We have put 
trucks at the disposal of non-governmental organizations to 
distribute this help. 
  Finally, I believe that France is fully carrying out its 
role. I for one hope that the African community will wake up 
and condemn this genocide, and I hope that this will take place 
soon and that we are going to have a major intervention by all 
our African friends which will placate public opinion which is 
shocked and traumatized by the Rwandan tragedy. 
  [Ledu] Mr. Minister, it goes without saying that France is 
making a huge humanitarian effort right now, but let us go back 
to the RPF. What are the grievances of the RPF? 
  [Roussin] What are you interested in? What are you 
interested in, Madam? Is it the fate of these people, horrific 
pictures of whom we see every day, or is it a political analysis 
which is actually no longer topical? What is topical is the 
fact that the belligerents have stopped at last, that there may 
be a cease-fire, that we may finally be able to look after these 
people. This is the true issue. The motivation of the RPF or 
other movements is a problem for the Rwandans to look into. 
France is not involved in that. French policy has always been 
the following: See to it that this African issue be dealt with 
by Africans. We have always wanted Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi, 
Zaire, since it is a regional issue, and -- in a wider debate -- 
the other Africans to mobilize in order to see to it that this 
massacre ends. 
  [Ledu] Assane Diop: 
  [Diop] Mr. Minister, you are saying that this is an issue 
which the Africans should be concerned with. Having said that, 
you did support the Arusha accords, but, as a supporter, didn't 
you withdraw too early? Should you not have waited for this 
national union government to be formed? 
  [Roussin] Not at all, because this was part of the Arusha 
accords. Given that the accords had been signed, a significant 
international force comprising 2,500 people, armored vehicles, 
helicopters was to see to it that calm and peace reigned in 
Rwanda. Given that there had been that killing [of Habyarimana] 
and that violence had started, we realized that the force called 
UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda [UNAMIR] was not in a position 
to avert the fighting. It is not [changes thought], we were not 
a party to that force, UNAMIR. 
  [Diop] Is it enough to say that this Rwandan conflict, as we 
say in the west, is an ethnic conflict? It is a political 
conflict more than anything else. 
  [Roussin] As far as we are concerned, we.... 
  [Diop, interrupting] When France is accused, it is for 
instance because of the 70 military instructors who were still 
with the Rwandan army until last May in the framework of 
cooperation, of course, Mr. Minister. 
  [Roussin] No. First of all, the figure is wrong, it is. The 
figure is totally wrong, and, and also, I do not [changes 
thought], even if there were 70 instructors, it is not these 
people who started the slaughter we have been witnessing. We 
have, we have cooperation, it was very limited because, as soon 
as the Noroit operation was dismantled and the international 
force, UNAMIR, took over from it, we no longer had any role 
apart from traditional cooperation. Therefore, I believe that, 
again, these are more groundless accusations. 
  [Ledu] Officials of your ministry, the Ministry of 
Cooperation, were shocked by the fact that some Rwandan 
employees with the embassy, the French Cultural Center, etc., 
were abandoned to certain death. 
  [Roussin] No, people were not abandoned to certain death. 
Besides, I will demonstrate that this is not the case. First of 
all, those who wished to return did return. Then French 
citizens died for having protected Rwandans. I lost two people 
with the Voluntary Service Overseas and the wife of one of them; 
they were killed and cut up with machetes for protecting Rwandan 
families with whom they were very close in their home and I 
believe that this is the best answer I can give you. [end 
recording] 

