BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 25, IRNA -- Members of the Iranian 
economic delegation took part in the 50th official ministerial 
meeting of the Group 24 here Sunday. Present in the session 
were ministers of economy and governors of the central banks of 
the developing countries. The participants expressed hope for a 
favorable world economic prospect and discussed various 
financial and economic issues. 
  Governor of the Central Bank of Iran Mohammad Hoseyn 'Adeli 
who heads the Iranian delegation to the meeting voiced 
developing countries' concern over the recent fluctuations in 
the price of raw materials, oil and gas in particular, and their 
negative impact on the programs for economic adjustment in those 
countries. 
  The Group 24 stressed that although there has been some 
improvement in the balance of payment of certain developing 
countries, the heavy repayment of foreign debts still imposes 
pressure on their financial situation. 
  In this connection, the developing countries called for more 
easy-term financial assistance and urged the industrial 
countries to open their markets to their export commodities. 
The Group 24 also called for the allocation of a new Special 
Drawing Rights (SDR) and underlined its importance in the 
establishment of economic adjustment in their countries. 
  They expressed satisfaction with the successful outcome of 
the Uruguay round and underscored its significance in increasing 
the volume of trade and accelerating world economic growth. 
They also warned against the negative impact of population 
growth on sustainable development of world economy. 
  Referring to the importance of investigation into the issue 
of refugees, the Iranian Central Bank governor reminded the 
necessity of international assistance to eliminate this major 
problem. 
  According to the statistics of the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank, due to the presence of foreign refugees 
Iran is shouldering more burden than other countries. The 
staistics showed that about 25 percent of the total world 
refugees are living in Iran. 

