BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria Clara R.M. do Prado in Brasilia] </F>
  [Text] Brazil and the 12 other countries that make up the 
so-called Rio Group are willing to continue holding talks about 
the Summit of the Americas proposed by the United States. In 
this way, the Rio Group will define issues of common interest, 
and thus achieve a more thorough integration among the countries 
of the American continent. 
  Ambassador Roberto Abdenur, Foreign Ministry secretary 
general, said: "The Latin American answer to this proposal has 
been positive." In Brasilia, Abdenur coordinated the meeting 
between the so-called "troika" faction of the Rio Group 
(comprised of Chile and Ecuador, in addition to Brazil) and the 
representatives of the Argentine and U.S. Governments. There 
are, however, issues on which no agreement has been reached. 
These must be discussed before a consensus on a specific agenda 
and a coordinated plan of action is reached. 
  One of these issues involves trade and the contrary opinions 
held particularly by Brazil and the United States. The U.S. 
Government supports the idea of adding other American countries 
to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) through the 
signature of bilateral agreements. Negotiations with Chile have 
advanced, and talks with other countries, such as Argentina, 
have already started. The Brazilian Government, however, 
believes the agreements must be reached through subregional 
blocs as in the cases of NAFTA, Mercosur [Common Market of the 
South], and the Andean Pact. 
  The Brazilian deputy foreign minister said: "The expansion 
of 
NAFTA has not been mentioned. What has been discussed is a 
gradual process in which the Brazilian side values subregional 
groups, such as Mercosur and Andean Pact, as the basis for a 
gradual deregulation of trade in the region." 
  The U.S. Government's interest in the summit, which was 
officially proposed by the Clinton administration during Vice 
President Al Gore's recent visit to Latin American countries, 
can be measured by the high-ranking level of the U.S. 
representatives who have been sent to the meeting with the Rio 
Group in Brasilia: Lawrence Summers, U.S. Treasury under 
secretary for international affairs; Alexander Watson, assistant 
secretary of state for inter-American affairs; in addition to 
delegates from the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), the trade 
organization that represents the interests of the United States 
and the National Security Council. 
  After the Rio Group meeting, Summers met Central Bank 
President Pedro Malan during the afternoon. On 24 May, he will 
be in Sao Paulo to participate in meetings with entrepreneurs. 
There is also a meeting with Finance Minister Rubens Ricupero 
on his agenda. 
  The Summit of the Americas will continue to be discussed at 
a 
meeting of the Rio Group member countries, which will 
specifically deal with the issue, during the Ibero-American 
conference of presidents and chiefs of state. The meeting will 
be held in Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, on 14 and 15 June. 
These talks seek consensus on other issues, such as investment, 
which are as important as trade. 
  Abdenur said: "The idea that sustained development can be 
financed by private capital is a good one, but this is a 
volatile and unpredictable source of capital, which could cease 
being available for the long term. The region must therefore 
count on public resources that can be obtained from 
international organizations such as the World Bank and the 
Inter-American Development Bank." He believes these 
multilateral loans must be granted more swiftly and contain 
fewer conditions. He stressed: "It is very important to 
remember that during the talks." 

