Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] A group of switchable molecules which when "switched 
on" conduct electrical current and when "switched off" serve as 
insulators has been produced by French scientists. These 
molecules might be used some day in organic computers to 
transmit impulses. Such computers would be many times more 
advanced in calculating time and storage capacity than today's 
computers of comparable size made with silicon semiconductors, 
because the components would be significantly smaller. 
  As reported by the research group in the Journal of the 
Chemical Society, Chemical Communications (1993, Number 18, page 
1439), the molecules can be chemically altered by irradiation 
with ultraviolet light. A new bond is formed between two parts 
of the molecules. This brings about a new structure which 
conducts electrical current, unlike the original molecule. If 
the molecules are irradiated with infrared light, the new bond 
is dissolved again. The original condition is restored and the 
molecules no longer conduct electricity. 
  The molecules owe their special abilities to the 
circumstance 
that two thiophene rings are close to one another. In the 
transformation electrons are displaced, bringing about a 
socalled conjugate system. This arrangement of bonded electron 
pairs permits electrons to migrate, i.e. permits current to flow. 
  In addition the molecules have the property that they react 
to light of completely different wavelengths in the "on" and 
"off" states. This is important in making switching on and off 
possible, and also serves to distinguish between the two states. 
  The path to molecular computers is still a long one: The 
molecules must be precisely adjusted and incorporated into a 
complex system of components. This could be achieved if the 
molecules are arranged in ultrathin layers. Nobel prizewinner 
Jean-Marie Lehn, leader of the research team at the College de 
France in Paris, expressed himself cautiously in a report in the 
journal New Scientist (1003, Number 1901, page 16): "We have 
only created a basic unit." 

