BFN 

<F P=106> [By Linda Choy, Louis Won, So Lai-Fun, Fung Wai-Kong, Doreen </F>
Cheung, and Mark Hughes] 
  [Text] Government officials yesterday abstained from an 
appeal for the Chinese authorities to respect the freedom of the 
press in Hong Kong and release jailed journalist Xi Yang. This 
was despite pledges that it would continue to pursue the case. 
  After a heated debate the three ex-officio members joined 
the 
Liberal Party and independents Martin Barrow, Elsie Tu, and 
Roger Luk Koon-hoo, in abstaining from the vote. 
  The Secretary for Home Affairs, Michael Suen Ming-yeung, 
said 
in the official reply that the government shared the concerns of 
legislators who supported the motion. The government had tried 
to seek more authoritative information about Xi, the Ming Pao 
reporter jailed for 12 years by Beijing for allegedly stealing 
state secrets, through the British Embassy. 
  Citing the lack of guidelines for Hong Kong reporters 
regarding the definition of state secrets, Mr Suen said: "The 
Hong Kong Government fully appreciates the depth of this anxiety 
and has forcefully conveyed it to the UK Government. As a 
result, clarification of the law on state secrets and the 
promulgation of clear rules and guidelines on news gathering has 
been a key request made by the British Government in its 
exchanges with China on Mr Xi's case." 
  The motion, proposed by the United Democrats' Yeung Sum, was 
endorsed by a majority of 24 to one. It was backed by Meeting 
Point, the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood's 
Frederick Fung Kin-kee, as well as the Hong Kong Democratic 
Foundation's Jimmy McGregor together with some other 
independents. 
  Pro-China legislator Chim Pui-chung voted against the 
motion, 
following a heated exchange with United Democrat Szeto Wah. 
  Tabling the motion, Mr Yeung said the sentence handed down 
to 
Xi was a signal for Hong Kong reporters to practise 
self-censorship. Rejecting the accusations made by the Chinese 
Government against Xi, Mr Yeung said the heavy sentence was 
based on "unfounded `facts', unclear evidence, and inappropriate 
application of judicial process and laws." He criticised the 
secretive manner in which the trial was conducted, saying this 
had undermined Hong Kong people's confidence towards what China 
called "an independent decision made by the judiciary." He also 
accused the Chinese authorities of lying when they said the Xi 
case had nothing to do with press freedom in Hong Kong. He 
cited as proof the fact that China had retaliated against 
reporters who had signed a petition in support of Xi. The 
reporters had been barred from covering a visit to the mainland 
by relatives of the Taiwanese victims of the Qiandao Lake 
killings. 
  Mr Yeung's call was echoed by United Democrat chairman 
Martin 
Lee Chu-ming, who urged the Governor, Chris Patten, to "practise 
what he preached" and take positive steps to protect press 
freedom. Mr Lee said the lack of initiative from Mr Patten 
would leave Hong Kong vulnerable to intimidation by China after 
1997. 
  However, the United Democrats' view was rejected by Mr Chim, 
who accused them of a lack of understanding of the case. Mr 
Chim questioned how much the party knew of Xi's background. "We 
must get an in-depth understanding of the issue before making 
criticisms, or else we will be misleading the public," he said. 

