BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Rongdian (1728 2837 0368)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 13 Jun (XINHUA) -- State President Jiang 
Zemin held talks with Estonian President Lennart Meri at the 
Diaoyutai State Guesthouse this afternoon. 
  Jiang pointed out that relations between the two countries 
have developed smoothly. Meri said there is a good basis for 
the development of mutually beneficial cooperation between the 
two countries. 
  The talks proceeded in a cordial and friendly atmosphere. 
Jiang warmly welcomed President Meri on his visit, saying that 
he was very glad to make the latter's acquaintance. He said: 
The maintenance of exchanges between state leaders can help 
enhance mutual understanding between leaders, and plays a 
particularly important role in promoting the development of 
state-to-state relations. 
  Jiang told Meri: "Your Excellency's visit is an important 
event in the history of relations between the two countries, and 
will surely breathe new life into cooperation between the two 
countries." Jiang expressed his appreciation for the positive 
attitude adopted by the Estonian Government and President Meri 
on developing Sino- Estonian relations. He said: Thanks to 
joint efforts by the two sides, relations between China and 
Estonia have developed smoothly since the two countries 
established diplomatic relations three years ago. China is 
satisfied with this development, and is full of confidence in 
future development prospects. 
  Meri expressed his thanks for China's recognition of Estonia 
soon after it regained independence. He said: "My current 
visit to China is very important and historically significant. 
Estonia and China have differences as well as lots of common 
points. There is a good basis for the development of mutually 
beneficial cooperation between the two countries." 
  Meri said: Although Estonia is a small country, it is in a 
favorable geopolitical and geoeconomic position, and can play an 
important role in China's entry into the West European market. 
He said: "Estonia and China have signed agreements on economic 
cooperation, trade, and investment. A number of Estonian 
entrepreneurs are accompanying me on my current visit to China. 
I hope Estonian and Chinese entrepreneurs will increase 
contacts in order to expand economic cooperation between the two 
countries. There is vast potential for economic cooperation 
between Estonia and China." 
  Jiang said: China is pleased with Estonia's achievements in 
consolidating its state sovereignty and national independence, 
in invigorating its economy, in maintaining social stability, 
and in protecting its people's lives. He said: Estonia is a 
country which has regained its independence. China respects and 
understands the way Estonia determines its social and economic 
development paths, as well as its foreign policy, according to 
its specific circumstances. He said: "Countries differ from 
each other in terms of population and size. However, we have 
always held that all countries -- whether they are big or small, 
rich or poor, strong or weak -- are all equal members in the 
international community. In international affairs, we are 
against the pursuit of hegemony and power politics, as well as 
interference in other countries' internal affairs. We advocate 
a new international political and economic order whose core is 
noninterference in other countries' internal affairs." He said 
emphatically: China adheres to its independent foreign policy. 
Its principal task is to handle its own affairs well and 
develop its economy. By handling its own affairs well, China 
can make major contributions to the world. He expressed his 
belief that China and Estonia share common ground in this 
respect. 
  On economic relations and trade between the countries, 
Jiang said: Economic relations and trade are an important part 
of relations between the two countries; we can say that they are 
the material basis for political relations between the two 
countries. Although China and Estonia have conducted direct 
trade for only a short time, they have made a good start. He 
said: "Your Excellency has brought along a delegation of 
entrepreneurs during your current visit, thus creating a good 
opportunity for people in the industrial circles of the two 
countries to establish contacts with each other. We are ready to 
work with Estonia to tap potential; open up new fields of 
economic cooperation on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, 
and common prosperity; introduce diverse forms of cooperation; 
and improve the quality of cooperation, in order to raise 
economic cooperation and trade between the two countries to a 
new level." 
  The two leaders also briefed each other on the situation in 
their own countries. Meri expressed his agreement with Jiang's 
view that stability is the prerequisite for development, 
maintaining that every country should have a "brake" to act on 
its economic development. He said: China has achieved positive 
results in its economic reform. 
  Jiang and Meri also exchanged views on regional and 
international issues of common concern. 
  After the talks, President Jiang and President Meri signed 
the "Joint Declaration of the People's Republic of China and the 
Republic of Estonia." Afterward, Jiang hosted a reception to 
welcome President and Mrs. Meri, as well as their delegation. 
  Before the talks, Jiang presided over a ceremony in the 
square outside the eastern gate of the Great Hall of the People 
to warmly welcome President Meri. Present at the welcoming 
ceremony were Qian Qichen, State Council vice premier and 
foreign minister; Wang Bingqian, National People's Congress 
Standing Committee vice chairman; Wang Songda, China Zhi Gong 
Dang Central Committee vice chairman; Liu Songjin, Chinese 
Government Reception Committee chairman and vice communications 
minister; Helle Meri, wife of President Meri; and Estonian 
Foreign Minister Juri Luik. 

