Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guangzhou, January 28 (XINHUA) -- Following the 
successful implementation of its first farmland protection 
program, south China's Guangdong Province recently launched a 
new drive in that line. 
  The new plan aims to set the province's cultivated area at 
2.5 million by 1997, when the present provincial government will 
end its term. 
  Governments at all levels in the province have been asked to 
sign "responsibility contracts" with the provincial government 
to see to it that they will carry out the new plan properly, 
according to official sources. 
  The province's first farmland protection program was carried 
out between 1991 and 1992. The sources said that by the end of 
1992, the province had 2,547,000 ha of farmland, which was 0.52 
percent more than the preset goal. 
  With the area of farmland continuing to shrink as a result 
of 
the steady March of industrialization onto its land space, and 
the ever increasing demands for food supplies to the swelling 
urban population, the southern province is facing mounting 
pressure to protect its limited farmland. 
  The provincial government also demanded that governments at 
all levels speed up the implementation of the regulation on the 
setting up of farmland protection areas, which was passed by the 
provincial people's congress last September and aims to put 
under strict protection some two million ha of farmland 
considered "essential" to its grain production. 
  As only 40 percent of the work has been completed so far, 
the 
provincial government ordered that all the cities must complete 
the work by June. Those failing to do so would not be permitted 
to take any farmland for non-agricultural construction, the 
sources said. 
  In another development, the provincial government decided 
that it would reclaim 47,000 ha of new farmland from 1993 to 
1997, and that a special fund would be established for the 
better development of its land resources. 

