Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Sarishvili: "Have Breakfast or a </F>
Shave?"] 
  [Text] The next morning I had one last mug of water left. 
Running a hand over my chin I decided that I still looked 
respectable and I would be allowed into parliament. So I used 
the water to boil an egg for breakfast. And I decided to have a 
wash and clean my shoes in parliament. 
  That day was perhaps the last in the chain of the 
unprecedented energy crisis, at least for the people of Tbilisi. 
As Eduard Shevardnadze said, the entire government together 
with the head of state is now performing the functions of a 
controller in order somehow to keep the situation under control. 
  I asked deputies Tengiz Sigua and Irina Sarishvili the 
strange but urgent question of who is to blame for the fact that 
I had to go to parliament unshaven. Sigua did not stop to think 
for a second: "The Georgian national bank. Over the first 10 
months of 1992 the former leadership of the national bank issued 
credits to the sum of $400 million. Whereas in the previous 
heating season the country consumed 38-40 million kilowatt-hours 
of electricity using procured fuel oil and energy resources 
while its need was for 48-50 million, this year it consumed 
nearly half as much. Why? Because the commodities with which we 
were to pay for the deliveries of fuel have been purchased with 
these credits and exported beyond the republic and, turning into 
rubles and dollars, have settled in foreign banks. Only 8 
percent of the credits issued were used to help the country. As 
a result Georgia is on famine rations as far as energy is 
concerned." 
  In the opinion of Irina Sarishvili the situation has been 
aggravated by the sale of energy resources to Armenia. I would 
call this not political but purely parasitical sabotage," 
Sarishvili said. "But it is hard to find someone here who will 
say anything directly. The facts? There are no facts in this 
state. They turn off your light, then you pay money and they 
turn it on." 
  What way out of the overall crisis can I see? The government 
program built on slogans will provide nothing although that 
program, Shevardnadze's program, and other programs contain many 
theoretically correct recommendations. We must have a 
government in which the people the people will have a sense of 
political trust so that people do not think they are being 
misled and robbed. Then it will be possible to speak of the 
inception of trends toward improving the situation." 

