BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sinan Yilmaz] </F>
  [Text] Ankara -- Moderate Kurds and extremists are on a 
collision course as preparations to establish new parties reach 
their final stage. 
  According to political observers close to Kurdish sources, 
citizens of Kurdish origin who have no sympathies or links with 
the clandestine PKK (Kurdistan Workers' Party) are at the point 
of forming new political parties. They say that in the coming 
months such new parties and faces will emerge in the political 
arena. 
  However, they warn, the differences between these Kurdish- 
oriented parties will lead to an increase in political tension. 
According to some radicals, former social democrat Serafettin 
Elci's party will become the Motherland Party (ANAP) of the 
Kurds. The militant Kurds led by pro-PKK sympathizers have 
already condemned Elci's attempts to form a new political party. 
  There are important developments taking place on the left 
since various socialist groups have united and formed parties. 
  The Socialist Union Party (SBP), for example, was dissolved 
following a Constitutional Court decision on the matter. The 
former members of the SBP then set up the United Socialist Party 
(BSP) on Wednesday, after cooperating with certain socialist 
circles such as the Salvation, New Way and Socialist Policy 
groups. 
  Sadun Aren was elected chairman of the new party, along with 
the old communist Mehmet Bozisik, who is one of the founding 
members of the BSP. "All citizens have equal rights and are 
free; a classless society, with all its institutions and 
elements, in a world free of exploitation and war," sums up the 
program of the new party. 
  Elci's party has been harshly criticized by pro-PKK circles, 
which accuse it of pretending to represent the Kurds and charge 
Elci with receiving financial support from the government. The 
radical pro-Kurdish newspaper Ozgur Ulke, in an article by 
Bedran Yilmaz, lambasted Serafettin Elci saying he had 
collaborated with the government for financial gain. 
  The paragraph on Elci ran: "Some remain quiet and witness 
the murder of a group. They can remain silent since they get 
credits from the government, while a systematic murder campaign 
has been launched against Kurdish partisans and businessmen. 
Crooks like Serafettin Elci `sit up and beg' for the money they 
receive from the government." 
  In the midst of such forceful political accusations, the 
formation of a separate moderate party by political circles 
known to be close to the "Kurdistan Socialist Party" (PSK) 
leader, Kemal Burkay, is considered important. 
  These political circles want to leave the Democracy party 
(DEP) and form their own party. It is not yet known what this 
party will be called, but it will soon make its appearance on 
the political scene. "We are not a Kurdish party. We are a 
`Turkic' party and Turkey needs our political views," said the 
speaker of the future party, Ibrahim Aksoy. 
  According to Aksoy, people from the Social Democrat People's 
Party (SHP) will also join their party. Aksoy identifies 
"constitutional citizenship" (national citizenship recognizing 
ethnic origin) as the most important principle guiding the party. 
  Although it is said that the new party will be a "Turkic" 
party, it seems that the majority of its members will be Kurds. 

