Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By PRESS ASSOCIATION correspondents John Deane and Keith </F>
Manning] 
  [Text] A number of incendiaries were fired at London's 
Heathrow airport tonight -- the second major security incident 
there in less than 36 hours. An airport spokeswoman confirmed 
incendiaries were fired in the vicinity of terminal four, but it 
appeared none had detonated. Damage appeared to be minimal. 
Heathrow press officer Anita Newcourt said: "It looks like the 
same as last night. Some incendiaries have been fired. There 
has been very little damage." 
  London Ambulance Service said there were no reports of any 
injuries. A spokesman said the service was alerted at 12.11am 
when it was told of "an act of aggression" at Heathrow. 
  Five ambulances, two paramedic units and a command unit have 
been sent to the airport. Four fire engines are also standing 
by. The ambulance spokesman said they had also received reports 
of two suspicious packages. 
  The incident was centred on terminal four, which was 
evacuated as a full-scale alert went into operation. The 
southern runway has been closed down, but the northern runway 
remains open. 
  Security services were alerted shortly after midnight when 
there were reports of a "bang or thud" close to the terminal, 
although not on any runway, said a spokesman. 
  Anti-terrorist squad officers were combing the airport after 
a "metal object" landed close to terminal four. There were no 
casualties or any damage to any buildings, he added. 
  A spokeswoman for the Hilton Hotel at Heathrow said police 
telephoned the hotel shortly after midnight asking staff to 
check the roof for anything suspicious. Nothing was found, she 
added. 
  The Yard spokesman said at this stage there was no 
indication 
there were any warnings. The latest alert comes after the IRA 
fired four mortars packed with high explosives at the airport on 
Wednesday evening from the back of a stolen car left in a nearby 
hotel. They did not detonate. 
  Scotland Yard said three mortars were recovered at the 
south-east end of the airport, close to terminal four. 
  A number of non-specific warnings were telephoned to various 
news organisations from 5.25pm yesterday, Scotland Yard said. 

