BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina by </F>
Barbara Betancur; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Betancur] Mr. Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina, 
could you evaluate your extensive tour of Asia? 
  [Robaina] I would say that it was as fruitful as it was 
extensive. We opened broad channels of communications, which 
both sides needed. The entire region, which is an example of 
significant economic progress, is eager to know more about Cuba, 
what Cuba can offer, and what it needs. Cuba needs to know more 
about this economic progress or how to attain the economic 
results Asia enjoys today. 
  [Betancur] Did you find any experiences we can apply here in 
the economic reactivation process we are now conducting? 
  [Robaina] Yes, I believe so. I believe there are many 
things, but, most important, there is room for many businessmen 
from all of these countries to come here. There is a great deal 
of interest in the results we have achieved in this project -- 
namely, results in the areas of education, health, sports, and 
science. They are interested in seeing, studying, and learning 
about many things in our sugar harvest and tourism. Several 
foreign ministers, in a reciprocal gesture, announced they will 
visit us soon, accompanied by members of their respective 
business communities. We updated several agreements and signed a 
few new ones. I think this, more than anything else, was a visit 
for today's diplomacy. Today's diplomacy is none other than that 
which opens the way to resolving the basic problems of nations 
and people. Our basic problem is our economy. Therefore, this 
visit was marked especially by an open exchange of opinions on 
strictly economic issues. 
  [Betancur] What kind of receptiveness did you find for 
Cuba's 
position in countries like Thailand or Myanmar [Burma], with 
which we have no major contacts at this time considering the 
geographical distance between us? 
  [Robaina] Apart from the distance problem, it was quite 
impressive to see the degree of interest in commercial trade. 
They are convinced that Cuba represents a viable place to do 
business with opportunities and a future. Now, this is solely 
dependent on what we are doing here. We exist today and we 
receive all of this respect and understanding from these 
countries because of the people's will to resist. I believe this 
is true in India, Malaysia, and other countries. Then, of 
course, there are those with which we have normal relations, so 
we met on very different terms. Vietnam is one example of this. 
  All in all, it was a truly extensive and fruitful trip that 
opened opportunities in both directions. Let me stress this 
issue of opportunities in both directions, because Cuba is not 
wandering around the world as a beggar. Cuba simply has many 
needs that provide investment opportunities for others. At the 
same time, Cuba has achieved many results which can provide 
significant solutions to the needs of others. 
  [Betancur] Closely related to this issue is the fact that 
there is a sports delegation from Malaysia that is about to 
arrive, unless it already has arrived. 
  [Robaina] Yes, it should be arriving soon. They have great 
interest in the results of our efforts and are interested in 
making more efficient use of trainers in all types of sports. 
  [Betancur] One last question: I believe Cuba is a member of 
a 
trade and development database exchange center. What benefits 
does this offer us, and what kind of outlook did you find for us 
there? 
  [Robaina] This allows us to put all of Cuba's economic 
information into the database and receive all of the information 
we need to complete economic transactions, with very little 
negotiation needed with each nation. This was created by a group 
of 15 nations. There were 14 up until now, and Cuba is the 15th 
nation to join this group and the fourth from Latin America. 
  [Betancur] One last question, and this is really the last 
one: You have just arrived, but we will have to ask you for 
another interview very soon. You are leaving for Latin America. 
What will your mission be this time? 
  [Robaina] I believe anything that has to do with our foreign 
policy is essentially related to our immediate surroundings, the 
region to which we belong and take pride in. America is our 
natural environment. Here we find the greatest opportunity for 
us to grow, given our geography, our culture, and our 
traditions. We are also answering invitations from several 
foreign ministers and making certain contacts before the 
Ibero-American Summit in order to get a feel for the 
opportunities and perspectives the summit itself will offer. 
  [Betancur] Thank you for the interview and I wish you 
success. 

