BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 24 May -- "To examine within three days the 
issue of suspending for the duration of activity by the joint 
working group the validity of the acts passed by the Supreme 
Councils of Ukraine and Crimea on 20 May 1994." This was a 
proposal made to the parliaments of Ukraine and the Crimean 
autonomy by the Supreme Council of Ukraine commission for 
problems of a settlement to the situation in Crimea, led by 
Borys Oliynyk. It is, in particular, said in the final 
document, read aloud at a news conference on the results of a 
consultative meeting between the Supreme Council of Ukraine 
commission and a Supreme Council of Crimea delegation, headed by 
Borys Oliynyk and Supreme Council of Crimea chairman Serhiy 
Tsekov, respectively: "The Supreme Council of Crimea delegation 
informed the Supreme Council of Ukraine commission of the 
situation in Crimea, that arose after the adoption by the 
Republic of Crimea Supreme Council of the laws and other 
legislative acts of 20 May 1994. In the course of an exchange 
of opinions, it was stated that there lacked conformity between 
the above documents and the Constitution and legislation in 
force in Ukraine, and there existed inefficiency in decisions by 
the supreme bodies of legislative and executive power in Ukraine 
and Crimea being put into practice. Participants in the meeting 
were unanimous in acknowledging the necessity of effective steps 
to be taken with the aim of achieving the stabilization of the 
situation and the most effective resolution of Crimea's 
socioeconomic problems. It was emphasized that the mass media 
were not always objective in their coverage of events. It was 
decided to recommend that the Supreme Councils of Ukraine and 
the Republic of Crimea should set up the Ukrainian and Crimean 
Supreme Councils' joint working group for proposals to be 
coordinated and submitted for consideration by the former 
bodies." 
  In the opinion of Serhiy Tsekov, Republic of Crimea Supreme 
Council chairman, the meeting was held in a difficult situation, 
which was influenced by the latest events in Crimea. "We believe 
that this situation was caused not only by the adoption of 
relevant legislative acts by the Supreme Councils of Crimea and 
Ukraine but also by inconsistency in actions by politicians on 
Crimean issues in the course of the past two years." In Serhiy 
Tsekov's words, the work of the group will help resolve the 
Crimean problem so that differences in relations between Ukraine 
and Crimea will not occur invariably. "We want stability in 
Crimea and we want stability in Ukraine as a whole," said the 
Supreme Council of Crimea chairman. 
  As for the final goal of the Russia bloc, which is to 
reunite 
Crimea with the Russian Federation, Serhiy Tsekov expressed the 
hope that in the future Crimea would join Russia together with 
the State of Ukraine. The main point in a future treaty with 
Ukraine, in the view of the autonomy's parliamentary chairman, 
should be the delegation of powers by Crimea to Ukraine and not 
the other way round. Borys Oliynyk pointed out that the Supreme 
Council's resolution on bringing Crimea's legislation in line 
with the Ukrainian constitution within the term of 10 days was 
remaining in force and that the mechanisms of appropriate 
executive structures were continuing to function under the 
procedure established. 
  The Crimean delegation leaves for Crimea on 24 May. 

