Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Sali Berisha by Jas Gawronski in </F>
Tirana; date not given: "`The World Must Save Kosovo' -- 
Albanian Leader: Belgrade Is Lying in Wait"] 
  [Excerpts] After the embargo imposed on FYROM [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] by Greece to force it 
to change its name, Albania offered its services to Skopje as a 
route to the sea. The gesture of goodwill toward this former 
Yugoslav republic -- which yesterday established diplomatic 
relations with Belgium -- is in danger of triggering another 
Balkan crisis, but it also testifies to the enterprising spirit 
of a country that is experiencing a minor economic boom and a 
new political season; yesterday, Albania became the 10th country 
from the former communist bloc to sign the "Partnership for 
Peace" with NATO. [passage omitted] 
  Berisha, 50, dynamic, charismatic, was born into a family of 
prosperous farmers and, by studying in Albania and abroad, 
became a heart specialist of repute in his country. He founded 
the Democratic Party in 1991 and progressed from one electoral 
success to another, arriving at the presidency. Sitting across 
the table from him in the rectangular dining room paneled in 
reddish wood, I cannot but begin by pointing out that Enver 
Hoxha had eaten his meals at that same table until just a few 
years ago. 
  [Berisha] That is true. You cannot even begin to imagine 
what used to happen here in Albania. It was much worse than the 
Soviet Union in Stalin's days. Perhaps a comparison could be 
drawn with the Pol Pot regime in Cambodia. I am against 
witch-hunts, partly because more or less everyone had a hand in 
it: At the last election under the dictatorship, only 35 
Albanians voted against the Communist Party. But the most 
glaring cases must be punished, such as those three district 
leaders who executed a number of youths who had tried to 
emigrate illegally then had their corpses towed through their 
villages by a truck to terrorize the inhabitants, to discourage 
other attempts. What could I tell the mothers of the victims? 
That it was nothing? Those men must be punished. Or the 
former head of the secret police, Zylyftar Ramizi, who used to 
go to the prison every Saturday, when he had nothing else to do, 
and torture young men and women, for no reason at all, for want 
of anything better to do, a case of sheer sadism. We have had 
tens of thousands of deaths in the concentration camps, it has 
even been described as genocide, but we accuse no one of this 
crime. We do not condemn ideas, but actions. 
  [Gawronski] It looks as if you have had difficulty striking 
a 
balance between justice and vendetta. 
  [Berisha] If we had decided against trials, as other former 
communist countries have done, there would have been an 
uprising. The fact of the matter is that post-dictatorship 
societies lack charity because they are emerging from a state of 
fear and intolerance. But a symbolic form of justice at least 
is necessary to forestall vendetta, which is a cancer in society. 
  [Gawronski] Whose is the merit for the changes in Albania? 
  [Berisha] I would say that two factors played a major role: 
The first was events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, 
without which we would not even have been able to make a start. 
I remember when Gorbachev said that the USSR belonged to no 
one, whereas all the sacred texts said it belonged to the 
Communist Party. That day I was really happy: There is a man, 
I thought, who is setting himself up against the most oppressive 
instrument in all time, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. 
The pope, too, gave us fortitude and inspiration that day in 
Bari, when he prayed during a mass for "my martyred Albanian 
brothers." The second factor was economic collapse; the army 
and the secret police did not put up too much resistance because 
they knew that they would have to cope with a catastrophic 
situation. 
  [Gawronski] And is the economy doing better now? 
  [Berisha] We are still the poorest country in Europe, but we 
also have the highest growth rate, 8 percent. We have 
privatized all agriculture, and with amazing results: In some 
privileged areas, income has risen from $200 to $2,400 per year. 
Foreign investment is starting to flow in as well. I must 
admit that I believe blindly, fanatically, in the free market, 
in private initiative. You see, you live in a country where, 
more or less, the state is capable of administering what belongs 
to it, where public ownership has not given such scandalous 
results as it has here. Just think of the 600,000 bunkers that 
Hoxha built to defend Albanian territory against hypothetical 
attacks by NATO and the Warsaw Pact: completely useless, even 
in the event of an invasion, and each one cost almost as much as 
an apartment. And it would cost just as much now to demolish 
them. 
  [Gawronski] How do you explain the fact that Hoxha wanted 
to keep the country so cut off, alone against the rest? 
  [Berisha] I have given the matter a lot of thought. I think 
that, from his point of view, he was right, because he realized 
that if he had opened the country to the outside world communism 
would have collapsed immediately. He did all he could to 
isolate himself, to give annoyance. He knew what the 
destruction of a church meant to those living outside Albania, 
and he had no need to destroy it, but he did it on purpose so 
that the world would say: The man is mad, he is dangerous. 
  [Gawronski] As a matter of curiosity, is the story that you 
were his doctor true? 
  [Berisha] No, I met him a couple of times, but I never 
treated him for the sole reason that he never asked me to: I 
would have, because I would never refuse to treat a patient, 
whoever he was. 
  [Gawronski] But even now, Albania seems a bit isolated from 
the diplomatic point of view, surrounded as it is by countries 
such as Serbia, the FYROM, and Greece, with which it hardly 
enjoys excellent relations. 
  [Berisha] What worries me most is the situation in Kosovo, 
where the population is almost entirely Albanian. If the 
international community were to accept a Serb coup in Kosovo, it 
would be a tragedy for our region. Then there is Bosnia: Tough 
action is needed there, but do not ask me what, as I am not a 
military man. The leaders on the Bosnian political scene no 
longer have the power, the capacity to decide, they are too 
dependent on one another. Tough action is needed to force them 
all to accept a compromise. As to isolation, my dream is to 
integrate my country into Europe. We are at the center of 
Europe, and we feel European more than anything else. 
  [Gawronski] You are considered very pro-American. Is it true 
that you have a preference for the United States? 
  [Berisha] I consider the United States to be a stabilizing 
factor and I attach importance to its presence in Europe. I 
have met Bush, and I regard him as a great champion of freedom: 
He began his adult life fighting for freedom in the skies above 
Japan, and he left the political scene fighting for freedom in 
the communist world. Reagan, too, was a great president, a 
protagonist, like the pope, of the change in the Soviet Union. 
But as far as I am concerned, I am first and foremost 
pro-Albanian. 
  [Gawronski] And Italy? Italian aid has been accompanied by 
suspicion, disputes, and even investigations. 
  [Berisha] A distinction must be drawn between the two 
levels. 
On the humanitarian level, as regards the generosity, 
friendliness, and hospitality that the people of Puglia showed 
our compatriots at the time of the landings, I believe that 
Italy's conduct was supportive, even moving, and I am extremely 
grateful. It is the country that helped us most, but at the 
intergovernmental relations level I cannot be so lavish with 
compliments. There was Craxi, who accepted honorary membership 
of the Albanian Communist Party, our enemy, and there was the 
Italian Embassy, which had turned into a divisional Communist 
Party headquarters during the transition period between the 
former regime and the present one. And there have been lots of 
other incidents that I prefer not to discuss. I would just say 
that I am open to honest relations with honest opposite members. 
You now have the bribe city issue, and I hope that a lot of 
matters will be cleared up. I prefer to say no more. 

