Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tunis, Dec 31 (AFP) -- PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat 
said late Thursday [30 December] that Jordan's King Husayn had 
affirmed his support for the Palestinian position in talks with 
Israel on the autonomy accord. 
  'Arafat arrived back in Tunis after stopping off in Amman to 
see Husayn following a visit to Cairo during which he met with 
Egyptian leaders for talks on implementing the Israeli-PLO 
accord signed in Washington in September. 
  'Arafat told the Palestinian agency WAFA that King Husayn's 
support came at "one of the most important moments in the 
Palestinian cause". 
  The PLO has sent Israel its own modified version of a 
working 
paper aimed at ending the deadlock on the launch of the accord, 
a Palestinian source said earlier Thursday in Cairo. 
  The source, declining to be named, said the paper was the 
Palestinian version of a draft understanding, details of which 
were released earlier the same day in Israel. 
  During the two-hour meeting at Amman airport, 'Arafat and 
King Husayn "consolidated Palestinian-Jordanian coordination in 
all matters", the PLO leader said. 
  A meeting is now to be held next week to determine the kind 
of coordination between the two countries. 
  'Arafat said his meeting with the Jordanian king would give 
a 
"new impulse" to bilateral relations, highlighting that the 
Palestine Liberation Organisation was anxious "to widen and 
improve the level of these relations". 
  According to a Palestinian source the two sides agreed to 
reactivate a joint commission to meet in Amman next week. 
  An Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and the West Bank town of 
Jericho, under the September 13 autonomy accord, was to have 
started on December 13 but the deadline passed because of three 
main stumbling blocks. 
  The PLO and Israel are at loggerheads over the size of 
Jericho, the control of international crossing points and 
security for Jewish settlers in the Gaza Strip. 
  According to Israel's draft, the size of an autonomous 
Jericho will be doubled from the original offer and the border 
crossings into Jordan and Egypt will be jointly manned but 
Israel would have the final say. 
  But 'Arafat said Thursday in Amman that his organisation had 
rejected the Israeli draft. 

