Language: <F P=105> Slovene </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Alain Lamassoure, minister for European Affairs 
in the French Government, is visiting Slovenia. He was received 
by Prime Minister Drnovsek and Foreign Minister Peterle, while 
the esteemed guest also held talks with the members of the 
Parliamentary Commission for International Relations. Tomaz 
Gerden reports from a news conference by Lamassoure and Peterle: 
  [Begin recording] [Gerden] Alain Lamassoure, minister for 
European Affairs in the French Government, is in Slovenia for 
the third time. The previous two meetings took place at the 
party level, when Mr. Lamassoure supported Slovene efforts to 
gain independence in 1991. With Foreign Minister Peterle and 
Prime Minister Drnovsek they discussed French-Slovene relations, 
which are excellent according to Minister Lamassoure. [passage 
omitted] 
  The French, that is to say, the Renault automobile factory 
will continue to invest in Novo Mesto Revoz factory and broaden 
its economic cooperation with our country. Both delegations 
discussed the role of Slovenia in the European Union in great 
detail. Minister Lamassoure assured that France views Slovenia 
as a Central European country that is no longer a part of the 
Balkan events. [passage omitted] 
  Minister Lamassoure said that France will support Slovenia 
in 
negotiations on the association agreement. This agreement could 
be signed as soon as during the French chairmanship of the 
European Union after the new year. Regarding the lifting of the 
arms embargo for Slovenia, France continues to be cautious, 
however, in the foreseeable future it will support Slovene 
demands in the UN Security Council. 
  Slovene Foreign Minister said the following about the talks 
with Minister Lamoassoure: 
  [Peterle] I am glad that there are no particular open issues 
on a bilateral level and that relations are developing well. I 
am, of course, particularly pleased that the emphasis is being 
placed on economic development. [passage omitted] 
  The bulk of our discussion concentrated on multilateral 
affairs, especially the issue of our drawing closer to the 
European Union, and within this context we also discussed our 
rapprochement with, that is to say, the formalization of our 
relations with the WEU. We also discussed the Partnership for 
Peace and to so-called Balladur Plan, or the stability plan, in 
which Slovenia is interested along with some other countries. 
[end recording] 

