Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On 29 January, the municipal intermediate people's 
court tested and verified, according to laws, five criminals who 
premeditatedly killed persons and two criminals who 
premeditatedly hurt others. These criminals were escorted to 
the execution ground and were shot. 
  These seven criminal offenders were as follows: Zhou 
Tonglun, a temporary worker at Dazhong electrical appliance 
plant of Fengtai District, attempted to kill, but seriously 
maimed, a young woman. Xie Gongran, a peasant at Zhuangnian 
Village of Baoshanshi Township of Huairou County, raped and 
killed a woman. Zhang Jinchao, a worker at Xinhua printing 
house, killed his sister-in-law due to household dispute. Ge 
Yanyu, an unemployed person in the municipality, killed a young 
woman. Zhang Jianguo, a worker at the No. 5 pharmaceutical 
plant of Beijing, killed two persons and hurt two persons. Wang 
Chengke, a worker of No. 1 installation team of the boiler and 
freezing company under the equipment installation company of 
Beijing Municipality, created disturbances and killed a person 
after getting drunk. Ma Yongge, an employee of Shuanghe farm of 
Gannan County of Heilongjiang Province, beat to death a citizen 
who tried to stop Ma from engaging in illegal activities. 
  While working as a temporary worker at the electrical 
appliance plant, Zhou Tonglun, 22, attempted to pay court to a 
young woman, 22, called Wei who was also working at the plant 
and was rejected. So, Criminal Zhou premeditatedly killed Wei 
and her boyfriend called Feng. On 10 February 1993 at Dazhong 
electrical appliance plant of Fengtai District, Criminal Zhou 
caught Wei off guard and used a kitchen knife to stab Wei in the 
head 10 times. He later chased Feng, but failed to catch up 
with him. After being given emergency treatment, the young 
woman was fortunately free from danger, but became seriously 
maimed. 
  Xie Gongran, 33, committed adultery with his sister-in-law 
called Zheng for a long period of time. Xie was not happy when 
Zheng became estranged. On 13 June in 1993, Xie rushed into 
Zheng's house, damaged Zheng's television set and video 
recorder, and beat Zheng to death with an iron tube. 
  The municipal intermediate court maintained: The above seven 
criminals killed and hurt persons with tools and seriously 
damaged the social order of the capital. The evil criminal 
nature and the serious consequences of the cases have brought 
extreme damage to the society and have made the people feel 
aggrieved. 

