BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, June 13 (XINHUA) -- The governments and 
peoples of Asia-Pacific countries and areas will surely play an 
influential role in the global course of women's progress and 
development. 
  Chen Muhua, vice chairman of the National People's Congress 
of China and chairman of the All-China Women Federation, who is 
also the head of the Chinese delegation at the second Asian and 
Pacific ministerial conference on women in development, made the 
remarks at the ministerial meeting here today. 
  She said that the governments and peoples in Asia and 
Pacific, an economically most dynamic region in today's 
turbulent and volatile world, have made their own efforts in 
implementing the Nairobi forward-looking strategies adopted at 
the 3rd World Women Conference in 1985 and achieved positive 
fruits since then. 
  She mentioned the fact that in this region we have the 
largest number of poverty-stricken women, which account for 
about 60 percent of the world total. 
  Therefore, she noted, solving the problem of women's poverty 
in this region will be a great contribution to the advancement 
of women in the world at large. 
  She is confident that the government and peoples of this 
region will surely play an influential role in the global course 
of women's progress and development. 
  Chen Muhua appreciated the Jakarta declaration and plan for 
action submitted by the earlier senior officials meeting held 
here from June 7 to 11. 
  She noted that the Jakarta declaration has pooled the wisdom 
and experience of all the participants, demonstrates the 
determination and will of the governments in this region to 
accelerate the realization of the goals of the strategies, and 
reflects the aspirations and voices of the women in this region. 
  She said the experiences of the Chinese women also show that 
women's progress and development can be pursued only in the 
favorable environment of national economic growth and social 
development. 
  The Chinese Government has all along attached great 
importance to women's progress and development and been 
committed to the advancement of women. 
  However, she pointed out that in China today, there is still 
inequality between men and women in the sharing of power and 
decision-making, women have less employment opportunities than 
men, violations of women's rights in marriage and family and 
their rights and interests of the person take place from time to 
time in some areas. 
  In view of this, the Chinese Government has taken measures 
to 
address these problems. 
  Chen Muhua said that the Chinese Government and people will 
go all out to prepare for the Fourth World Conference on Women 
to be convened in 1995 in Beijing. 
  The Chinese Government and people will conscientiously 
fulfill the obligations and duties as the host country so as to 
make due contribution to the success of the grand global 
gathering. 

