BFN 

  [Text] Hangzhou, June 10 (XINHUA) -- The trial of three men 
accused of the murder of 32 people in the March 31 Qiandao Lake 
tragedy opened here today in public in the Intermediate People's 
Court of Hangzhou city in east China's Zhejiang Province. 
  Wu Lihong, Hu Zhihan and Yu Aijun are accused of robbery and 
murder in the boat-fire tragedy which claimed the lives of 24 
Taiwan tourists and eight mainland crew, at Qiandao Lake, a 
major tourist attraction in Hangzhou city. 
  A deputy chief procurator from the Hangzhou People's 
Procuratorate opened the proceedings against the three accused. 
  He told the court that the three accused seized large 
quantities of other people's property by threatening them with 
violence and then murdered their victims by blowing up the boat 
and setting fire to it to cover up the crime. 
  The indictment said that the acts of the accused were in 
violation of article 150 and article 132 of the criminal law of 
the People's Republic of China. 
  The indictment described the case as very serious and very 
harmful to society. 
  It said that there was enough evidence to prove the criminal 
acts of the accused. The three accused committed the crimes 
jointly and the sentence should be for all the crimes combined. 
  The court was composed of one presiding judge and two other 
judges. The case for the prosecution is being put by three 
public prosecutors, and the accused have lawyers to defend for 
them. 
  The public hearing, under the regulations of China's 
criminal 
procedural law, will consist of a court investigation, court 
arguments, final pleadings of the accused, court verdict, 
followed by sentence. 
  Court decisions will be reached after thorough investigation 
and verification to make sure that the accused have been proved 
to be the perpetrators of the crimes. 
  The court must also decide the nature and seriousness of the 
crime and what the appropriate punishment should be. 
  The 200-seat court was crowded with members of the public 
this morning, including local residents, relatives of the 
victims, Taiwan businessmen and representatives of a Taiwan 
travel agency. 
  About 60 reporters from China's mainland, Hong Kong and 
Taiwan followed the entire hearing via a special closed-circuit 
TV in a room set aside for this in the court building. 

