BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text of Mayor Huang Ju's Speech at the First Meeting of </F>
the Shanghai Municipal `Vegetable Basket' Project Leading Group, 
on 2 June 1992" -- place not given] 
  [Text] Comrades: 
  This is the first brief meeting of all members of the newly 
formed municipal "Vegetable Basket" Project Leading Group. 
Forming the leading group is an important decision of the 
municipal CPC Committee and government. There are two basic 
considerations in making this decision: First, the "vegetable 
basket" is a project of the people's wishes -- it affects 
Shanghai's economic development and all residents' livelihood. 
Party committees and governments at all levels should regard it 
as a top priority. Second, it is a complicated systems project 
-- it involves production, circulation, transportation, 
technology, fund supply, material supply, government policy, 
legislation, and work in other areas. In the current new 
situation of building a socialist market economic system, only 
by establishing an organ with high authoritativeness that suits 
the new situation can we ensure the project will be built, 
managed, and operated properly, and that it will be successful. 
  In short, the municipal government's decision to establish 
this special leading group is based on the overall situation -- 
it is a decision with great significance. For this reason, all 
members of the leading group, including myself, should have a 
strong sense of having an historical mission and should do our 
job with a strong sense of responsibility. We must not forget 
for a moment that all of us are members of the command of the 
"project of the people's wishes." We are not allowed to commit 
the slightest negligence or dereliction of duty -- we must 
succeed, we cannot afford to lose. This is the first thing I 
want to say at this meeting. 
  On behalf of the leading group, Comrade Jianzhu just set 
forth the leading group's work. I completely agree with him. 
Here, I would like to set four guidelines for ensuring the 
project's success: 
  First, we should carry out the project from the perspective 
of correctly handling the relationship among reform, 
development, and maintaining stability. Comrade Zemin said: 
"Anything that affects the people's basic daily needs and vital 
interests is a matter of top priority." The "vegetable basket," 
although small, affects all households and the stability of the 
entire society. Reform and development are inseparable from 
social stability. Only by truly and properly accomplishing work 
that affects the people's daily life and vital interests can we 
truly ensure success in our reform and development. Therefore, 
fundamentally speaking, the "vegetable basket" project is a 
matter of top priority waiting to be carried out by party 
committees and governments at all levels. Especially at a time 
when our reform is entering a stage in which we are striving to 
make breakthroughs in key areas and are launching package reform 
to tackle key issues, the "vegetable basket" project is a matter 
of top priority that affects our reform, development, stability, 
as well as the whole party and country. Success in the project 
is bound to have an important, far-reaching, and positive effect 
on deepening reform, broadening the scope of opening up, 
quickening the pace of development, and maintaining stability. 
  Second, we should aim high with new ideas and set a goal of 
developing a new round of the "vegetable basket" project. At 
present, Shanghai's "vegetable basket" project has developed to 
a certain scale and level. This is because the leadership of 
the past and present municipal party committee and government 
has always shown concern for, attached importance to, and 
seriously grasped the project. Now, in a new situation the 
municipal party committee and government have clearly put 
forward a proposal for completing a new round of the 
high-standard "vegetable basket" project for Shanghai within 
three years. At the same time, the municipal party committee 
and government are actively exploring new ways to undertake the 
"vegetable basket" project for an international metropolis from 
the 1990's to the beginning of the 21st century. Regarding this 
point, I put forward some opinions at the municipal conference 
on rural work held on 5 February this year. Today, I want to 
emphasize again that in undertaking a new round of the 
"vegetable basket" project, we must give prominence to two 
things: We must begin from a high starting point and have new 
ideas. By high starting point, this means we must fully embody 
the characteristics of Shanghai as a big city opened entirely to 
the outside world, and we must have in mind a huge market and 
smooth circulation of commodities. The general demand is that 
Shanghai must rank first in the nation in the field of 
agricultural modernization, and in particular, Shanghai must be 
determined to set an example to the nation in building the 
"vegetable basket" project. By new ideas, this means we must 
actively explore a new path for developing agriculture by 
opening it up to the outside world, as well as a new path for 
expanding agriculture through the application of science and 
technology. It means we should give up the past practice of 
attaching importance to building production bases to the neglect 
of commodity circulation and shift to the way of simultaneously 
grasping the building of production bases and commodity 
circulation. This means we must truly integrate the building of 
a new pattern of production with the building of a new 
production and marketing operation mechanism. 
  Third, we must further try to build a sound responsibility 
system for the "vegetable basket" project. The practice of the 
system of having administrative leaders assume responsibility 
for "vegetable basket" projects should be instituted, and the 
responsibility should assumed by leaders of different levels. 
In the municipality, I, as mayor, will assume responsibility. 
In the districts and counties, the responsibility shall be 
assumed by you, district and county heads. In building a sound 
"vegetable basket" project responsibility system, we must 
clearly define responsibilities on the basis of the system of 
management by the governments at two levels, the municipal 
government and the district and county governments. (1) The 
responsibility of the municipal government and that of the 
district and county governments must be clearly defined; (2) 
agricultural and commercial administrative departments must link 
up and coordinate their operations closely; and (3) government 
departments at all levels have the responsibility to participate 
in and support the project by coordinating efforts in the areas 
of funds, material, science and technology, transportation, and 
legal administration. At the same time, we must actively 
explore a new mechanism through which districts and counties can 
establish lateral links when undertaking the "vegetable basket" 
project. We must seriously sum up experience, explore new ways, 
and strengthen legal administration over the "vegetable basket" 
project. 
  Fourth, we should continue to improve policies on the 
"vegetable basket" project. In the past few years we have 
formulated a series of policies and measures to improve the 
project, but they are far from perfect and have not been able to 
meet the needs of a new round of the high-standard "vegetable 
basket" project. We shall strive to improve our policies and 
measures in three aspects: (1) Administrative assessment; (2) 
macroeconomic regulation and control; and (3) risk security. 
The general demand is to strive to satisfy the municipal 
people, vegetable growers, and traders through the improvement 
of policies. 
  These are the opinions that I have put forward in principle. 
It is like placing before you a test paper. Whether this test 
can be done well depends on the cooperation and dedication of 
those who are present here today. In conclusion, I want to 
emphasize this point once again: Ours is a highly prestigious 
leading group. Therefore, it must also do a high-standard job. 
This is not only the demand of the municipal party committee 
and government but also the great expectations of the people of 
the whole municipality. I am convinced we will live up to their 
expections! 

