Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Berezovskiy report: "`Gold' Moves Into Turkestan"] </F>
  [Text] Tashkent -- At the end of last year, an Afghan 
merchant by the name of M. Khafizullo [name as transliterated] 
was arrested in Termez. On investigation, 24 kilograms of raw 
opium were discovered in a large travel bag in his Mitsubishi 
Galant car concealed in 56 chewing gum boxes [upakovka]. A 
recent trial sentenced the drug pusher to eight years. 
  In the last two years the law-enforcement bodies of the 
Central Asian republics have been encountering the problem of 
the large-scale transit through Turkestan of Afghan opium, known 
among junkies as "gold." It is distinguished by its sharp odor, 
which can be "sniffed out" by specially trained dogs even after 
several months. Another of its "attributes" is that it is 
cheap. In the province of Kunduz, bordering Tajikistan, the 
asking price is just $50 for a kilogram of opium. Moreover, it 
is possible to pay with metal crockery, soap, and tools. But 
upon crossing, say, to Bishkek, a "legitimate hit"--as a 
three-gram dose of opium is known in junkie-speak--can cost as 
much as R3,000. While in Moscow, the price soars to at least 
three times as much again. 
  According to data from the Uzbek National Security Service, 
Afghanistan dumped roughly 650 tonnes of opium on the drugs 
black market last year. This is a rise of 50 percent in 
comparison with 1992. Analysts link this directly with the 
civil war in Tajikistan. 
  But it is Gornyy Badakhshan, controlled to a significant 
degree by drugs mafia paramilitary formations, which has become 
the veritable gateway. From here, the opium makes its way via 
the Sarytash pass to neighboring Kyrgyzstan. Thousands of local 
inhabitants, deprived at times of the basic means of survival, 
are involved in the criminal business. The "stuff" is 
transported under piles of sheepskins, in spare tires, and, more 
frequently, in metal tubes fitted with magnets which can be 
fastened to the undersides of vehicles. 
  The largest haul of "stuff" fell to the credit of Uzbek 
customs officers. They "stumbled across" 13 tonnes of narcotics 
dispatched in raisin containers from an Afghan trading firm to 
Belgium and Canada. 
  Turkestan itself, which since time immemorial has been and 
indeed remains the largest supplier of drugs to the ex-USSR, 
entices Afghan drugs barons only as a convenient corridor for 
transferring opium to Russia and Europe. The transparency of 
the CIS borders merely serves their purposes. And this is why, 
according to I. Abdullayev, an official staffer of the Uzbek 
National Security Service, the former Soviet republics' 
law-enforcement bodies have no other option but to restore 
severed contacts immediately and together to forge a shield to 
deter a very real threat. 

