BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by 'Aqiva Eldar in Washington: "Where Are </F>
Israel's Friends?"] 
  [Excerpts] If Bill Clinton does not do "something" about 
Bosnia, he might find a senate resolution on his desk this week 
forcing him to lift the embargo imposed on Bosnia. Facing a 
weak President, the U.S. Congress, probably one of Israel's most 
important strategic and political assets, is gaining strength 
the likes of which it has not had since the low days of Richard 
Nixon. 
  Congressional involvement in determining U.S. foreign 
policies has already had an impact on the peace process. And 
yet, there are no signs that Israel is aware of the depth of the 
change in the balance of power between the legislative and the 
executive branches in Washington or the impact this might have 
on the Middle East peace efforts. [passage omitted] 
  For many years, mainly during the Yitzhaq Shamir era, Israel 
and the Jewish lobbies specialized in recruiting congressmen to 
repel pressure by the U.S. Administration for political 
concessions by Israel. 
  Since then, the Israeli and U.S. administrations have 
changed, and the term "friends of Israel" in Washington has 
taken on a new shape. Clinton and Rabin are blessed with 
relations of friendship and understanding cultivated through the 
peace process. The term "U.S. pressure" was filed away, and the 
watchdogs on Capitol Hill have become almost non-essential 
(with, of course, the exception of defense and civilian aid, and 
other matters not directly related to political issues). 
  Nevertheless, this space was not left empty. Marginal, 
though loud and effective, right-wing Jewish groups -- well 
guided by the settlers and Likud activists -- are garnering the 
support of American officials for initiatives that aim to foil 
the peace moves by the two governments. They had 82 senators 
sign a letter calling on Clinton to veto the UN Security Council 
resolution regarding the Hebron massacre, designed to the get 
the PLO back to the negotiating table. 
  An ephemeral organization called the Zionists of America 
found 15 senators from constituencies densely populated by Jews 
and turned them into watchdogs over the PLO. Their duty is to 
hold on to every slip by Yasir 'Arafat in order to disturb the 
U.S.-PLO relations and the continued negotiations on the fate of 
the West Bank. 
  Official, elected Israel chose to remain vague. Often (as, 
for example, during the struggle against the appointment of 
Strobe Talbott as deputy secretary of state) the congressmen 
believed that Jerusalem is pleased that its work is being done 
by others. The members of the congress did not hear a clear 
Israeli Government stand regarding the monitoring of the PLO or 
the veto on the condemnation of the Hebron incident. 
  The only Middle East-related initiatives they could find 
were 
those of the right. This, therefore, was the only way for them 
to demonstrate their friendship to their Jewish voters. These 
very days, some two dozen senators pledged to the right-wing 
activists that they would work to foil the initiative of placing 
U.S. troops on the Golan Heights in the framework of a peace and 
withdrawal agreement between Israel and Syria. 
  A new poll conducted among Jewish communities found that 88 
percent support the Israeli Government's peace moves. This 
contradicts the claim that the game is rigged, that U.S. Jews 
are leaning to the right, pulling their congressional 
representatives in that direction. Even if the findings had 
been slightly bolstered, there is a great political might there. 
Once the Israeli Government decides on its course of action, it 
will find a wall-to-wall coalition supporting it in Washington. 

