Language: <F P=105>Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] At a news conference this afternoon, Vladimir 
Meciar expressed his views on the new government. In his view, 
it will not be a majority government, and if early parliamentary 
elections are not called by 1996, it will not last. 
  He was basing his argument on the new balance of power in 
parliament, where the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] 
will have 56 seats, the Slovak National Party nine seats, and 
the Hungarian coalition--whom, he said, no one wants in the 
coalition government--will have 14 seats. 
  Vladimir Meciar predicts that very soon there will be 
conflicts of interest among the rest of the parliamentary 
subjects. He did not exclude the posssibility that a new 
coalition, new relations inside the government, and new 
conflicts of interest would soon lead to a considerable 
differentiating process in these parties. He expects that the 
greatest changes will be in the Party of the Democratic Left, 
which, he said--I quote--is not pure and does not play a fair 
game. He also said--I quote--on 14 March 1939, a different 
government was formed here, and I am worried that this new 
government might be similar. 
  Vladimir Meciar said considerable changes will very soon 
take 
place in the HZDS, on the basis of which the movement, which 
until now focused its attention on fulfilling national 
democratic tasks, will start implementing socioeconomic tasks. 
  He stressed that in the interests of this state, the HZDS 
will try to make a political comeback. 
  In connection with the continuation of the 27th meeting of 
the Slovak Parliament, Meciar said that the HZDS will not 
support the constitutional bill reducing the term of the 
parliament and on calling early elections for 30 September and 1 
October. 
  The movement insists that a referendum be held and early 
elections immediately called. In the event of a HZDS victory in 
the early elections, Vladimir Meciar would be willing to be be 
sworn in as premier by the president only if the president 
immediately resigns. He thinks, however, that it is the duty of 
Michal Kovac to resign now. No other constitutional official 
has violated constitutional rights in such a vulgar manner as 
Kovac, Vladimir Meciar said. He added that Michal Kovac has 
violated the interests of state, and that he failed in both 
political and moral respects. Meciar and members of his cabinet 
are determined to speak about this everywhere they go. [passage 
omitted] 

