Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andrey Stawrow, director of the Republican </F>
Training and Information Center for Nuclear Security, Power 
Engineering, and Education, by Anatol Slanewski; place and date 
not given: "Construction of Nuclear Power Stations: To Be or Not 
To Be?" -- first two paragraphs are ZVYAZDA introduction] 
  [Excerpts] The September issue of NEMAN included an article 
by three of the Republic's most well-known scientists -- Radzim 
Haretski, Anatol Kudzelski and Yawhen Pyatrayew -- entitled 
"Beware of Atomic Stations!" The authors discussed some 
chapters of the energy program adopted by the Cabinet of 
Ministers, which is "overwhelmingly oriented toward the 
development of nuclear power engineering." How did they explain 
why Belarus should opt for another direction in its development? 
Some 2 million tons of oil are extracted from the Prypyat oil 
and gas basin. Haretski, Kudzelski, and Pyatrayew estimate that 
as much as two-thirds of our oil deposits remain trapped 
underground because of low extraction coefficient. The 
deposits of brown coal in the same Prypyat basin are estimated 
at about 1 billion tons, while oil-shale deposits are put at 11 
billion tons. Scientists calculate that the energy potential of 
the two richest deposits, at Turawski and Lyubanski, are 340 
million tons of arbitrary fuel. (The heat value of 1 tonne of 
arbitrary fuel is 60 percent that of 1 tonne of oil). 
  We interviewed Andrey Stawrow, director of the Republican 
Training and Information Center for Nuclear Security, Power 
Engineering, and Education at the Cabinet of Ministers, on his 
opinion about the fate of the country's nuclear power 
engineering. [passage omitted] 
  [Slanewski] Many publications devoted to the future of 
Belarusian nuclear power engineering have recently appeared, 
generating even more discussion on this issue. Is someone 
trying to "score political points" here? 
  [Stawrow] One should remember that this issue is not about 
nuclear power engineering as such, but about the mainstay energy 
source for Belarus. We have no major energy sources in our 
country -- quite the opposite of what some authors of the 
above-mentioned articles are trying to tell us. Truth be known, 
there are minerals on the Republic's territory, such as brown 
coal and shale. However, their processing technology is too 
expensive, labor-intensive, and simply flawed. We have nothing 
except for 2 million tons of oil and a handful of accompanying 
natural gas. This is my first point. The second one is that 
about half of our thermoelectric power stations are worn out and 
dilapidated. They should be either radically overhauled or 
replaced with entirely new ones. Our problem is a lack of large 
deposits. We think that it can be resolved in three ways. 
First, we should continue to import energy. You understand that 
one can transmit electrical energy -- heat cannot be transmitted 
through wires. At the same time, electric energy accounts for 
only a quarter of all the energy we consume, with 70-75 percent 
represented by thermal energy. This means that we would have to 
buy resources for generating thermal and electrical energy, 
which is the second solution. The third way would be to search 
for some deposits within the country. Following careful 
analysis, we have reached quite a simple conclusion. There are 
only two options -- to orient ourselves toward Russian gas and 
oil, basing our power engineering system on imports, or to 
develop our own deposits. The latter can only be implemented in 
the form of nuclear power stations. The energy program, 
referred to by the article's authors, proved that given our 
conditions, nuclear energy is the most appropriate option. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Slanewski] Let us touch upon definitely the most sensitive 
issue for us. After we build nuclear power stations, would we 
be able to say that we live in safer ecological conditions than 
before? 
  [Stawrow] This is an easy question to answer. Nuclear power 
plants are, ecologically speaking, the safest source of energy. 
Of course, one can ask, "What about Chernobyl?" My answer is 
that the Chernobyl accident showed us how not to develop nuclear 
power, and in no way should lead us to abandon it altogether. 
This is borne out by the recent decision by the Ukrainian 
Cabinet of Ministers in favor of continuing operation of the 
Chernobyl nuclear power station. I have always said that 
Ukraine will never shut down that station because it is hard to 
throw away 3 million kilowatts of energy -- almost half of 
Belarus' needs. We are frequently threatened that another 
accident may strike once again. But we have already been 
sitting on the powder keg for a long time, with the Ignalinsk 
nuclear station only 15 km from our border. As an example, one 
of the biggest nuclear stations in France is located within the 
Paris city limits, while in Japan, one of their nuclear plants 
is in a resort area. There are generally accepted rules on 
where to construct such stations, depending on geological 
conditions, weather patterns, etc. There are also many projects 
to construct strong concrete "shells" around the stations. Or 
take, for example, the idea of Andrey Sakharov to build nuclear 
stations underground. [passage omitted] 
  [Slanewski] Nuclear power plants require a great deal of 
nuclear fuel. Besides that consideration, where would we get 
the personnel? 
  [Stawrow] The sooner we start thinking about this, the 
better. It is no secret that the former Belarusian Institute of 
Nuclear Power Engineering managed to make possible the operation 
of two nuclear stations. It is another thing that our experts 
have started to leave, and it is hard to keep them. If we are 
to launch our stations by, say, the year of 2005, our institutes 
and universities must set out to prepare specialists now. 
Otherwise, we will have to invite them from abroad. As for 
fuel, there are several options. Some reactors, such as the 
Canadian-made "Candu," require no concentrated fuel, and can 
work on natural uranium. Plus, the amount of uranium available 
on the open market is immense -- you can buy it everywhere. 
There will be no problem if we build a reactor that operates on 
concentrated fuel. Let me note the following: While prices for 
conventional fuels -- oil and gas -- keep climbing, nuclear fuel 
is becoming even cheaper. 
  [Slanewski] What about burying and destroying wastes? How 
serious is this problem? We still remember the recent conflict 
between Japan and Russia. 
  [Stawrow] This problem is pretty serious. However, as the 
experience with the Chernobyl station showed, nuclear stations 
do not produce much waste. This also applies to medium-active 
wastes. As for highly active wastes, it is the spent fuel 
itself, which is stored at the station, sometimes for decades. 
The question then comes down to whether to keep that waste on 
our own territory or make arrangements with countries that allow 
such waste to be buried on their territory. This is a key 
issue, which is more of an economic consideration than a 
technical one. 

