BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren and Bruce Gilley] </F>
  [Text] China last night unleashed a stinging attack on the 
British and Hong Kong governments for allowing Han Dongfang, the 
exiled dissident, to return to the territory where he is helping 
to organise the mainland's budding free labour movemement. A 
Hong Kong-based Chinese official said the Government supported 
"subversive actions" against China. 
  The official also condemned the scheduled visit next month 
of 
Wu'er Kaixi, a leading Tiananmen Square student activist. "Of 
course the Government knows perfectly well what kind of persons 
Han and Wu'er Kaixi are. Just look at what they've done," he 
said. "Wu'er Kaixi came to Hong Kong secretly last year. He is 
coming again this year. Han will stay here as long as the visa 
allows him to stay. So it is fair to say the Hong Kong 
government deliberately connives with their subversive actions 
against the Chinese government. It will be very interesting to 
know how Britain would react if we deployed thousands of IRA in 
Shenzhen or near the border of Britain." 
  The official said the Government had ignored China's request 
to stop Wu'er and Han from coming to Hong Kong. "The Hong Kong 
government has allowed Han to stay in Hong Kong even though Han 
does not possess a Chinese passport. It has also granted him a 
work visa," he said. "The Government has done all this, which 
is a departure from all conventions. Does it want to turn Hong 
Kong into a pioneering battleground for subverting China? We 
should wait and see. We have, through normal channels, informed 
the Hong Kong government about our thoughts, but it does not 
want to co-operate with us. There is nothing we can do.... We 
don't think we should protest to the Government. Han is not 
worth a word of protest. A few years ago, Deng Xiaoping said if 
the US wanted this kind of person [mainland dissidents] it could 
take them, and we could give the US thousands of them. The US 
government has always been providing asylum to these so-called 
democracy advocates who try to overthrow the Chinese government 
and the Chinese Communist Party. Now Britain follows suit." 
  Han, who announced on Tuesday that he has temporarily 
abandoned his efforts to return to China and is concentrating on 
the mainland's free labour movement from Hong Kong, remained 
defiant last night. "China's strong reaction will not cause me 
to change my plans to remain in Hong Kong. Their reaction to my 
staying here was even worse last year," he said. "Now they 
suddenly realise that they have no way to control me here and 
they are very angry. At least up until 1997 they will not be 
able to control me unless they come to Hong Kong to arrest me. 
From last year they realised that forcing me to stay here was a 
bad thing. But they are unwilling to recognise their error. 
Now that I have changed my original plan, and realise I can do 
in Hong Kong what I once did in Beijing, they have become even 
more outraged ... it has become a big headache for them. They 
have no right to criticise the British or the Hong Kong 
governments because they (the Chinese) forced me here in the 
first place." 
  Han, 30, the founder and leader of the Beijing Workers 
Autonomous Federation, was jailed for 22 months for his part in 
the Tiananmen Square uprising in 1989. He was freed to obtain 
medical treatment for tuberculosis in the US in September 1992. 
He said last night that China will attempt to make life 
difficult for him. "Maybe, as 1997 draws near, they will put 
more and more pressure on the Hong Kong government or on those 
who can influence the decision-makers in the Hong Kong 
government," he said. "But if I strictly abide by my legal 
status here, at least until 1997, there should be no problems. 
They may alternatively decide to use some methods to penetrate 
my activities here in order to clearly understand what I do." 
  Han is setting up a network of correspondents in China, to 
whom he will provide information about agitating for workers' 
rights. He was stopped from returning to China in August 1993. 
Chinese officials later declared his passport "cancelled", 
rendering him stateless. The Hong Kong government granted him a 
three-month work permit in March and another this week, after 
Han returned from visiting his wife in the US. 
  The Governor's spokesmen were unavailable for comment last 
night. 

