Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Tang Ke (0781 2706)] </F>
  [Text]A clash between soldiers and officers over 
leave approval killed and wounded a number of people and shocked 
the Central Military Commission. There had been resentment 
among the troops and the incident was an eruption of a long-term 
contradiction. 
  In mid-November 1993, turmoil broke out in an anti-chemical- 
warfare company of the 3d Division of the Anhui Military 
District and Huainan Military Subarea, leaving five officers and 
soldiers dead, all from gunshots. Military notices pointed out 
that it was an incident of political turmoil, caused by 
anarchism and developing into opposition to military discipline 
and leadership. The Central Military Commission General Office 
cited a report by a General Staff Headquarters investigative 
group as saying: This was a criminal act that seriously 
disrupted military discipline. 
<H3>  Unfair Leave Approval Left Soldiers Dissatisfied and 
Complaining </H3>
  In early November, officers and soldiers of an 
anti-chemical- 
warfare company all applied for two-day weekend leave for a 
pleasure tour of Huainan City. The battalion command rejected 
their applications and told two company-level cadres to make 
preparations for a military exercise with live ammunition at 
Luanshan the following week, which was the reason company 
soldiers were not allowed leave. However, that weekend the 
company commander and the deputy commander approved a tour by 
three platoon commanders and some 40 soldiers of Huainan City, 
but rejected the same request by 40 other soldiers. The company 
commander said: It was the battalion command that approved the 
leave of some platoon commanders and soldiers. On Sunday 
morning, when the regimental and battalion commanders discovered 
in their barracks inspection that 40 people had obtained 
approval for a Huainan City tour, they demanded an explanation. 
Meanwhile, officers and soldiers whose leave applications were 
rejected refused to eat their breakfast and questioned the 
regimental and battalion commanders: Why grant holiday trips to 
some and not others? The 40-odd officers and soldiers 
surrounded the regimental and battalion commanders. Some 
started shouting slogans: We want fairness, justice, rest, 
entertainment; we oppose bureaucratism.... The battalion 
commander read aloud sections of military discipline before 
these soldiers, ordered them to leave and return to barracks, 
and instructed the company commander to make a self-criticism, 
find out who instigated the slogan-chanting, and report the 
findings to the battalion command. 
<H3>  During the Commotion, the Company Commander and Instructor 
Were Beaten to Death </H3>
  By noon that day, some 40 officers and soldiers had 
collectively petitioned the regimental command for retirement 
and going home, shouting: "We want to retire and go home!" 
"Officers and soldiers join hands in opposing brutality!" The 
regimental commander notified cadres of the company to take back 
the petitioning soldiers. In the meantime, the soldiers again 
shouted slogans such as: "We don't want the crooked company 
commander," and "replace the vagabond company commander." The 
situation was getting out of hand. The company commander fired 
warning shots and told the soldiers to return to barracks, 
shouting: "Damn you, my bullets do not recognize anybody..." 
Furious, the soldiers rushed forward and grabbed his gun. The 
deputy company commander and the company instructor fired at 
soldiers leading the slogan chanting, and the regimental and 
battalion commanders also fired warning shots in the air. In 
the commotion three soldiers were killed; the company commander 
and instructor were beaten to death [as published]; the deputy 
company commander was injured; and a deputy regimental commander 
was hurt through being pushed to the ground and crushed. A 
company of military police arrived at the scene and prevented 
the incident from worsening. That evening the regimental 
commander called an emergency regiment-wide meeting, declaring 
that this was organized opposition to Army discipline and 
political in nature, and that the leading five officers and 
soldiers, including two platoon commanders, would be put in 
isolation and interrogated, with the rest ordered to write 
self-criticisms. 
<H5>  Places of Origin Was the Precipitating Factor </H5>
  The anti-chemical-warfare company was garrisoned near 
Songji, 
Anhui, about 24 km from Huainan City. Company soldiers came 
from Sichuan or Hebei, while most of its cadres hailed from 
Hebei. The company comprised new recruits, recruited mainly in 
1991. In training, promotion, leave approval, and military 
training, company cadres were biased in favor of soldiers from 
Hebei; but beat up Sichuan soldiers under any excuse, had them 
give them gifts at festivals or on their birthdays, opened their 
letters from their families, and even stated that they wanted 
soldiers from Chengdu and Chongqing to buy them tributes. The 
soldiers had reported against them before. When the company 
command found out, it ordered a soldier whose family name was 
Liu to retire on the excuses of poor discipline and ideological 
problems. This spring, two Sichuan soldiers were 
court-martialed for assaulting the company instructor and 
claiming they would kill the little bully in the Army, and were 
discharged after serving six months in jail. 
<H5>  Some 50 Cadres Were Replaced </H5>
  Sources said a great reshuffle took place after the 
incident: 
The anti-chemical-warfare company was dissolved and reassembled, 
with a complete reorganization of the company command; the 
regimental commander and barracks trainers were removed with 
unofficial instructions that they retire; political, 
organizational, and Army discipline education was launched 
within the military base; and over 50 cadres at or above company 
rank were replaced. 

