Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Democratic Party Representative Na Pyong-son </F>
by reporter Kim Tang; place and date not given; first paragraph 
is source-supplied introduction] 
  [Text] Theories of a war crisis surrounding the North 
Korean nuclear issue are endlessly being put forward. In the 
stock market, however, prices are actually rising, as if 
ridiculing these ideas. How are the members of the National 
Assembly's National Defense Committee accepting these 
contradictory phenomena? We got an answer to this from 
Democratic Party [DP] lawmaker Na Pyong-son. A graduate of the 
14th class of the Korean Military Academy, Representative Na is 
an operations expert, having passed through the positions of 1st 
Army operations and intelligence staff officer, Army 
Headquarters deputy director of operations, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff operations bureau director, and 6th Corps commander, to 
transfer to the reserves as a lieutenant general. Representative 
Na is one of the newly elected lawmakers to get the most 
attention from various media for his sharp questions on national 
defense policy during this regular session of the National 
Assembly. 
  [Kim] An emergency meeting was held in the National Assembly 
National Defense Committee last November in which Kim Tok, 
director of the Agency for National Security Planning, and 
Defense Minister Kwon Yong-hae gave a situation report on DPRK 
trends. In your judgment, how much of a danger is there of war 
on the Korean peninsula? 
  [Na] To begin with my conclusion, it is not easy for 
conditions to develop that would lead to an outbreak of war on 
the Korean peninsula. When viewed geopolitically, the influence 
of the surrounding four great powers is absolute. That is to 
say, neither the North nor the South can attack the other by the 
will of its own government alone. Also, national power and the 
circumstances surrounding the Korean peninsula are now 
completely the reverse of those at the time of the Korean war. 
  [Kim] But senior U.S. officials and foreign news agencies 
continue to speak of crisis. 
  [Na] There are two external factors that could support the 
DPRK. One is forces giving ideological support, that is, the 
communist bloc. But it collapsed. The other is forces giving 
economic support, that is, allies of the DPRK. But the DPRK 
cannot depend on them either. Internally, the most important 
factors enabling a nation to wage war are military and economic 
power. However, at the time of the Korean war, South Korea [ROK] 
was not only inferior militarily, but even in economic power was 
far behind the DPRK. With factory-operation rates below 40 
percent, DPRK economic growth is unlikely. The scale of its GNP 
is one-sixth that of the ROK. In the case of military power, at 
the time of the Korean war, when ROK forces were less than 
100,000, DPRK forces were over 200,000. In tanks and guns, the 
DPRK held absolute superiority. But things are different now. 
One things that must be considered, however, is that the DPRK 
continues to build up its military. Although there may be 
criticism of its quality, the general analysis is that the DPRK 
military has numerical superiority. However, unlike the start of 
the Korean war, which saw no U.S. troops in Korea, now they are 
here by a strengthened security treaty based on the ROK-U.S. 
Mutual Defense Treaty. Thus, the combined forces of the U.S. 
military stationed in Korea and the Korean military are a 
sufficient deterrent to war. 
  [Kim] However, quoting secret U.S. Defense Department 
documents or senior officials, foreign news agencies are 
reporting very believable war scenarios. 
  [Na] Concerns about an invasion of the South or scenarios 
predicting short-term occupation of Seoul reported by the media 
are only hypothetical. They have almost no validity. According 
to the situation report, its economy is so bad recently that the 
DPRK is carrying out a campaign to eat two meals a day. This is 
intertwined with problems of the preservation of the regime and 
the transfer of power. It knows that waging war cannot be a way 
to preserve its system. A war with no chance of winning cannot 
but lead directly to its collapse. Linking the possibility of 
war with the nuclear issue despite this, while backing the DPRK 
into a corner, the American media are saying that if the DPRK is 
backed into a corner, there is a chance of war breaking out. 
This actually gives one the feeling that they are inciting this. 
This is an erroneous and dangerous logic. 
  [Kim] It is reported that in two recent surveys questioning 
whether there should be military sanctions against the DPRK 
concerning its nuclear program over half of Americans supported 
sanctions. Do you believe there is some special background to 
these surveys and reports? 
  [Na] This comes mostly from the linkage of U.S. interests 
with the nuclear issue. The prevention of nuclear proliferation 
has been a consistent U.S. strategy for world domination and was 
a Clinton campaign promise. The U.S. Defense Department recently 
announced that it set up the Defense Nuclear Proliferation 
Prevention Plan (DCI). The nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT) expires in June 1995. Then, it will have to be extended or 
concluded again. The disappearance of the NPT would be a 
decisive disadvantage for U.S. world strategy. If it cannot 
block DPRK nuclear development, the NPT will definitely come 
apart. Thus, for the United States, DPRK nuclear development 
must be stopped no matter what. Thus, my perspective is that the 
United States may be coming out with these theories of imminent 
invasion of the South as a means to pressure DPRK. And this is 
also used to pressure ROK. It is for stressing that the problem 
cannot be solved by appeasing DPRK, when the ROK Government 
takes an appeasing attitude or appears to do so. 
  [Kim] This is a very important analysis. Do you have grounds 
to prove it? 
  [Na] It is my understanding that even when the elderly Yi 
In-mo was returned to the North, the United States opposed this. 
With the reform-drive policy which came pressing in after the 
birth of the new administration, as policy toward DPRK, 
including the nuclear issue, began to flow somewhat in the 
direction of appeasement and change, the United States appears 
to have had misgivings that if things continued as they were, 
Korea would head in a nationalistic direction. Thus, it appears 
to come from ideas of giving these actions a declarative 
significance, with even concerns over Korean nationalism in 
mind. Otherwise, given various conditions, such as the end of 
the Cold War, the disappearance of forces supporting the DPRK, 
and the DPRK's worsening economy, how could the United States 
haphazardly talk about a DPRK invasion. Hence, the talk of an 
invasion of the South and the heightened sense of crisis flowing 
out of the United States appear to be strategic moves targeting 
both the ROK and the DPRK nuclear issue. The way I see it, 
although the DPRK may do it if it assumes the collapse of its 
government, there is no possibility of it starting a full-scale 
war which would definitely be suicidal. However, one thing I'm 
worried about is a limited war. Considering its capability for a 
protracted war, it is impossible for the DPRK to communize the 
ROK if the Korean-U.S. alliance is put into action. Since Seoul 
is close, however, the DPRK does have the offensive capability 
to do considerable damage to the capital in a short time. The 
DPRK has large quantities of chemical and biological weapons. 
Combined with artillery in range of Seoul, this means that it is 
possible the DPRK could break part of Seoul's defensive line, 
even if it wouldn't be an all-out war. Of course, I'm saying 
this militarily under the assumption the North would launch a 
surprise attack and would risk the collapse of its regime to do 
this. 
  [Kim] Then, is there no possibility that the theories about 
a 
possible DPRK invasion, stories of crisis and the opinion polls 
on sanctions against the DPRK presented by the United States are 
not only for pressuring North and South Korea to solve the 
nuclear issue, but that they also have U.S. military sanctions 
in mind? 
  [Na] Well, we can't really draw a conclusion on that, right? 
However, the industry having the greatest difficulty in the 
United States is the defense industry. Enormous defense 
industries are downsizing now. Because war or the threat of war 
vanished with the end of the Cold War, foreign demand for 
weapons is diminishing. The ROK is the U.S. weapons industry's 
greatest Asian customer. From its very beginning, the Korean 
military was founded according to the organizational equipment 
charts of the U.S. military. But, beginning in the late 1980's, 
in the course of finishing with conventional weapons and going 
to high-tech weapons, Korea moved away from being pro-American 
in its equipment and is becoming multilateral in its weapons 
purchases. Our submarines are from Germany. For our destroyers, 
we make the hulls themselves, but the other equipment is from 
the United Kingdom or Germany. For helicopters, which have 
become very important in modern warfare, we are presently using 
American-made equipment, but if something better and cheaper 
comes out, there is no need to purposely continue using it. The 
U.S. defense industry is hard-pressed right now. Furthermore, 
Russian weapons are coming out at rock-bottom prices. The 
creation of the present sense of crisis about the DPRK is not 
unrelated to the circumstances of the U.S. defense industry. 
  [Kim] Do you have actual evidence reflecting pressure by the 
U.S. military-industrial complex? 
  [Na] I have no tangible evidence. However, it is a fact that 
they are expressing dissatisfaction with Korea's 
multilateralization of its weapons purchases. They did so this 
last time when we imported submarines and destroyers. Up to now, 
weapons purchases have always followed the spread of theories of 
crisis on the Korean peninsula. Also, these crisis stories 
generally come about the time Korea's national-defense budget is 
being passed. 
  [Kim] In November, in an unprecedented move, the U.S. 
Defense 
Department published its 1993 United States Forces Korea [USFK] 
Inspection Report. Central to the report were the claim that 
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces were unprepared for an emergency and 
the suggestion that a wartime support-forces operational plan 
should be set up. Never before published because it was 
classified Secret, what is behind the publication of this 
inspection report? 
  [Na] That is an important point. It is in the same context 
as 
I mentioned before. There is no such thing as a perfect wartime 
support plan. If examined from a purely military perspective, 
every country has weaknesses. The U.S. Defense Department's 
inspection report is done not just once, but every year. And 
this is not the only year preparations have been found to be 
unsatisfactory. This was the case last year too, and the year 
before that. The way I see it, this is the inadequacy. In 
connection with the wartime support plan, in last year's annual 
Korea-U.S. security consultative meeting, a switch was made to a 
new strategic concept called the Flexible Deterrence Option 
(FDO). In actuality, however, the wartime support plan itself, 
included in the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command [CFC] 
operations plan (OPLAN 5027), is arranged in such a way as to 
require a considerable amount of time. DPRK strategy, however, 
emphasizes short-term conflict and blitzkrieg. The support plan 
is lax compared with this. The problem, however, is that it 
didn't become lax just this year; the problem has always been 
pointed out. 
  [Kim] The focus of the inspection appeared to be whether the 
Wartime Host Nation Support Agreement (WHNS),, concluded in 
November 1991, would be observed. 
  [Na] The Wartime Logistics Support Agreement is presently 
being carried out a little at a time. Generally, an agreement is 
the reinforcement and observance of a security treaty. 
Therefore, every year when the Korea-U.S. security consultative 
meeting is held, progress on this is supposed to be checked and 
furthered. So, I cannot help but view these statements, that 
preparations are inadequate and that the ROK would fall in the 
event of war, made in spite of the great progress which has been 
made compared with the past, as means for pressuring North and 
South Korea, under the premise of a crisis situation. 
  [Kim] Some point out that there are problems in the makeup 
of 
and cooperation on the FDO package. 
  [Na] The FDO concept was adopted as the new world strategy 
of 
the United States after Clinton came on board. The concept is 
one step more developed than the wartime support plan of the 
past. In the past, if a war broke out, the commitment of combat 
forces was supposed to be timed with the response stage. With 
FDO, however, this has changed: forces are to be sent to deter 
war. This means that they are already coming at the stage in 
which a war-crisis situation is forming. That is to say, let's 
prevent a war by putting forces in place. In the case of FDO, it 
is my understanding that the work is in progress of actually 
forming them and including them in the present operational plan. 
But details are secret. I can point out this, however. In the 
annual Korea-U.S. security consultative meeting held in 
November, it was agreed that during wartime, the Seventh Fleet 
would be put under CFC operational control. Then, this too must 
be included in the CFC operational plan. Of course, this work 
has not yet been completed. Of the attachment of the Seventh 
Fleet, they say it guarantees automatic wartime intervention, 
but, if war should break out at the same time in the Indian 
Ocean or the Middle East, we cannot know whether they will 
actually intervene on the Korean peninsula. I question whether 
there is a need to irritate the DPRK by publicly announcing and 
stressing the CFC attachment of the Seventh Fleet. It is 
actually of more strategic benefit to keep this secret between 
Korea and the United States. This put things the other way 
around. This kind of unnecessary public statement is telling the 
Korean military not to increase its naval forces. Concerning the 
DPRK, it is wrong in that it can be interpreted, just as the 
DPRK claims, as a threat of "nuclear blackmail." 
  [Kim] According to THE WASHINGTON POST, the U.S. secretary 
of 
defense reported to President Clinton on an emergency defense 
plan based on "USFK 5027." What is the basic concept of the CFC 
operational plan, OPLAN 5027? 
  [Na] Generally, when new tactics or strategy is developed, 
it 
is reflected in operational plans after passing through the 
process of map exercises and actual maneuvers training. The 
blind spot of the CFC operational plan is that the CFC is not 
supposed to make a first strike. Our Free World allies generally 
adopt a strategic concept of not launching a first strike. 
However, because, in accordance with our armistice agreement, 
the guilty party is determined by who fired first, the 
operational plan is set up to observe the armistice agreement. 
However, surprise attacks and first strikes are absolutely 
essential in war. First strike means that, in war, the attacking 
side has the choice of time and place. Thus, the side suffering 
a first strike is at an absolute disadvantage, particularly 
early in the war. Supplementing this disadvantageous condition 
is the air-land battle concept developed by the U.S. Army in the 
early 1980's. This was a development of operational and 
strategic ideas following the change of its weapons systems to a 
form suited for three-dimensional warfare. This approach is 
possible assuming intelligence, destructive power, and 
maneuverability. When this rapid-deployment-maneuver force 
system is in place, a deep-strike strategy becomes possible, 
whereby, when an opponent makes a first strike, his main axis of 
attack is blocked while another axis maneuvers, striking the 
enemy's rear. 
  [Kim] This strategic concept ultimately signifies a fluid 
offensive defense posture, that, when the DPRK has made a first 
strike, would move the main line of battle to the north. When 
was this included in the CFC OPLAN 5027? 
  [Na] Let's say the mid-1980's. Although not as good as a 
first strike, it keeps the spirit of the UN armistice agreement 
and is a strategy which supplements striking power against an 
opponent's attack. I think it is probably the best strategic 
concept possible under the present UN armistice agreement system. 
  [Kim] Considering the DPRK nuclear issue, I have misgivings 
regardless of whether they have nuclear weapons. The Bush 
administration withdrew USFK nuclear weapons. Has this been 
reflected in the CFC OPLAN? 
  [Na] It is my understanding that plans for the use of 
nuclear 
weapons were dropped from the OPLAN after the withdrawal of USFK 
nuclear weapons. However, as long the Korea-U.S. Combined Forces 
system exists, there is no possibility of war breaking out on 
the Korean peninsula. 
  [Kim] As a legislator who is former military, you seem to 
have a particularly progressive perspective toward the United 
States. This is a sharp question. Representatives Kang 
Chang-song, Im Pok-chin, and yourself are called the Three 
Musketeers of the National Defense Committee. Of those still on 
active duty in the military, is there anyone with thoughts 
similar to your own? 
  [Na] For those at the Ministry of National Defense directly 
responsible for the work of national defense, it is natural that 
they would concentrate on the war-deterrence capability of the 
military. If you talk with them, however, there are many, 
particularly of those responsible for national defense policy, 
who think the same way I do. But they cannot speak of this 
outright. Ultimately, it is the politicians who must indicate 
this. So I'm speaking on their behalf. Times are now changing. 
We are moving into an era in which even a superpower such as 
the United States cannot guarantee its security with its own 
power alone. However, we must continuously develop national 
defense policy in a direction that would enable us, with only 
our nation's resources, to have at least a minimum of deterrence 
capability. This is because if we have nothing, we have no 
capability to negotiate either. 

