BFN 

  [Text] Vilnius, Jun 16, BNS -- "The government is 
implementing in consecutive order the main principles of its 
program," said Lithuanian Prime Minister Adolfas Slezevicius 
replying to the draft resolution of no confidence presented to 
parliament by the Social Democratic faction Thursday. 
  Slezevicius said the Sixth Cabinet entered upon office at a 
time when the national economy was increasingly deteriorating. 
Among the most pressing circumstances were exorbitant 
inflation, a catastrophic decline in people's real income, an 
entirely ruined agriculture, declining industry, high crime 
rates, and a nearly $100 million debt to Russia for imported 
energy resources, according to Slezevicius. 
  "The average salary at that time was $27.00 while the 
average 
pension stood at merely $8.00. In the three years that had 
preceded a site was not allotted for the construction of an oil 
terminal on Lithuania's Baltic Sea coast. Instability reigned 
in Lithuania's monetary system and the foreign and economic 
policies were inefficient," Slezevicius enumerated. "At that 
point Lithuania was desperately lagging behind Latvia and 
Estonia. This was stated by both foreign experts and our 
neighbors who ruled out any possibility of economic cooperation 
under the circumstances," said Slezevicius, adding that 
"therefore the government was first of all trying to overcome 
the difficulties and stabilize the economy." 
  The prime minister stated that a boost was given to the 
economy after the government fixed adequate prices for energy 
resources, abandoned unnecessary subsidies, liberalized exports 
and imports and -- most significantly -- introduced, together 
with the Bank of Lithuania, the national currency, the lit. 
Later a law on the stability of the currency was passed. 
  The prime minister said that inflation decreased from its 
high 1,160 percent in 1992 and 189 percent in 1993 to the 
present level of 20.3 percent within five months of the fiscal 
1994. "Inflation is the main macroeconomic indicator of the 
state of things in the whole economy," Slezevicius noted. 
  The premier said that the real income of the Lithuanian 
population in 1992 had dropped by 69.2 percent, but a 12.7 
percent increase in it was achieved the following year. 
According to Slezevicius, "this is not much but a certain 
progress has been made." This year, in spite of inflation owing 
to the newly introduced Value Added Tax, the growth of the real 
income was 4.8 percent, according to the prime minister. 
  Comparing the growth of people's income in the three Baltic 
States, Slezevicius said that in Lithuania the average salary 
has increased 2.8 times, while the respective figures in Latvia 
and Estonia are 1.9 and 1.3. "Taking into account the 
differences in prices for municipal services /in Lithuania, 
Latvia and Estonia/, we can state that the former two and a half 
times gap in the purchasing power has been evened entirely," 
said the prime minister. 
  According to him, all international financial organizations, 
including the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, 
are predicting good prospects for economic development in 
Lithuania. 
  The prime minister said that 55 percent of all investment 
into the Lithuanian economy last year came from oversees, "which 
illustrates the growth of foreign investment". 
  The prime minister regretted that, in their draft resolution 
of no confidence to the government, the Social Democratic 
faction failed to notice even a single positive shift in the 
governing Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party's [LDLP] policies. 
Their accusations are presented "in a very biased manner search 
narrow political interests," Slezevicius said. 
  The prime minister also reminded members of parliament that 
nearly all Lithuanian political forces have refused to take part 
in "the constructive activities," but opted for "the road of 
traversing and opposing" the activities of the LDLP, its 
parliamentary majority and government. 
  "All political forces were invited to take part in the work 
of the government, but the proposals got no response," 
Slezevicius said. He added that "the government is determined 
to continue the reforms and critically evaluates its own work." 
An amended program of action drawn up by the government is 
expected to be handed in to parliament soon. 

