CSO 

  [Text] The State Law and Order Restoration Council is 
investing huge sums of money to develop the country. Strenuous 
efforts are being made to secure and smoothen lines of 
communications. Roads are being built across the whole country. 
Railroads are being built on the hills, on the plains and along 
the coasts. Bridges are being built wherever needed along these 
new roads. The Bayint Naung bridge being built on the 
Yangon-Pathein Road is nearing completion. 
  At the Co-ordination Meeting 1/94 of the Speical Projects 
Implementation Board, Construction Minister U Khin Manung Yin 
explained arrangements made to build a bridge across Toe River 
near Maubin, a bridge across Myaungmya river near Myaungmya and 
a bridge across Thanlwin River near Pa-an which are some of the 
bridges to be built in different States and Divisions for 
regional development. Acting Railways Minister, Brig-General 
Maung Maung, explained arrangements to be made for construction 
of bridges across the River Chindwin and the River Myitthar on 
the Pakokku-Gangaw-Kalay railroad now under construction. 
  Of these six bridges, the bridge across the River Thanlwin 
near Pa-an is most interesting next to the bridge across the 
River Ayeyarwaddy near Pyay. On completion of this bridge 
across the River Thanlwin, direct communication between Kayin 
State, Mon State, Bago Division and Yangon Division will become 
ossible and Hlaingbwe, Kyondoe, Kawkareik and Myawaddy on Thai 
Border will become easily accessable. Kayin State is on the 
east of the Union of Myanmar and shares a land border with 
Thailand. The 11,730-square mile Kayin State is surrounded by 
Mandalay Division, Shan Sate, Kayah State, Mon State and Bago 
Division. In the 410 village tracts and town quarters of the 
seven townships of Kayin State dwell Skaw Kayins, Po Kayins, Bwe 
Kayins, Paku Kayins, Shans, Pa-ohs, Bamars and Mons. Kayin 
State produces paddy, groundnut, tobacco, betel nut, sugar-cane, 
rubber, iron, lead, copper, tin, wolfram and antimony. Half of 
the State is covered with evergreen forests that produce 
precious teak and Pyinkadoe woods. There are 13 industrial 
plants in the State of which the Myaing Galay Cement Mill is 
well-known. 
  Despite its wealth in food grains, fruits and flowers, Kayin 
State has a rugged topography with rivers and chaungs forming 
natural obstacles and separated from the rest of the Union of 
Myanmar by the Thanlwin River. Communications within the State 
are difficult and slow resulting in lack of development and 
progess. There is a direct air transport service to Pa-an, the 
capital of Kayin State though there is no direct land route: 
the River Thanlwin has to be crossed in a Z Craft at Myaing 
Galay in Thaton District. There is a river transport service 
from Mawlamyaing direct to Pa-an up the Thanlwin River. 
Transport of cement made at the Myaing Galay Mill is being 
distributed across the whole country only because there is a 
bridge across Thami Chaung at Dooyinseik on the border between 
Kayin State and Mon State. 
  Insurgency broke out in Kayin State simultaneously with the 
achievement of national Independence, and there has been 
virtually no peace or rule of law. Inter-communication with 
other parts of the country was difficult, intercourse was 
negligible, trade was sluggish, and development was 
non-existent. Kayin State is adjacent to Thailand yet 
cross-border trading was undeveloped for lack of peace and 
security in the State. 
  Just as the State Law and Order Restoration Council is 
striving to secure and smoothen lines of communications it is 
simultaneously also striving day and night to develop border 
regions where national races dwell. Frontiers have now been 
developed and frontier towns are today viewing TV programmes the 
same as in Yangon. The State Law and Order Restoration Council 
is strenuously striving to develop Kayin State just as trying to 
do the same with other border States of National races. Hand in 
hand with all national races the State Law and Order Restoration 
Council is endeavouring to build up a peaceful and modern Sate 
out of the Union of Myanmar. However, peace and security is 
necessary for the State Law and Order Restoration Council to be 
able to join hands with the national races and build up the 
country into a peaceful and modern State. 
  A bridge is now to be built across the Thanlwin River for 
development of Kayin State and of the frontier region. It is to 
be a steel girder bridge on reinforced concretge pylons, 900 
meters long and 8.5 meters wide with 1.5 meter foot-paths on the 
two sides. The water way under the bridge will be 110 meter 
(350 feet) wide with a head clearance of 12 meters (38 feet). 
The bridge wiith a load carrying capacity of 60 tons will cost 
about 650 million kyats (10 million US dollars.) 
  This bridge across the River Thanlwin near Pa-an will, on 
completion, will contribute a lot to national reunification, 
uniforn development of the mainland and the frontier regions, 
secure and smooth transportation and communication, and social 
and economic development of regional peoples. Kayin State will 
also become a strategic trading post in Thai-Myanmar cross 
border trading. Its trade will achieve an immediate boom. 
Myawaddy border town in Kayin State is comparatively the 
shortest route between Myanmar and Thailand. Myawaddy is a mere 
266 miles away from Yangon and about as far away from Pyinmana 
Yezin is from Yangon. A shorter route will certainly promote 
more active trading. 
  On completion of the bridge, Pa-an the capital town of Kayin 
State will be only 177 miles away from Yangon on a direct motor 
road. The pious from Yangon and all parts of the country will 
be able to make a one-day pilgrimage to the Reverend Thamanya 
Sayadaw. 

