Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Natalya Nikulina: "He Left Moscow. For His Own </F>
Funeral: Privatized Housing Has Become a Victim of Criminal 
Business"] 
  [Text] Since the beginning of the year, 1,299 persons have 
disappeared without a trace in Moscow--almost twice as many as 
last year. A considerable number of them were legal residents of 
Moscow, had privatized their housing, and were single. Putting 
their signature on the document formalizing a swap or sale of 
their apartment, these people effectively signed their own death 
sentence. 
  An unrealized tragedy was unfolding in front of my very 
eyes. 
Close to one another, in a row, some men and women sat across 
the desk from Viktor Kasyanenko, chief of the operational 
investigations department of the city of Moscow GUVD 
[Administration of Internal Affairs], and his staff. They were 
discussing some tangled routine story: a fictitious marriage, 
apartment privatization, official replacement of a primary 
tenant, a female hostage, the OMON [Special Purpose Militia 
Detachment], a complex three-step (or more) housing swap through 
a single broker, one of the "swappers" convicted three times for 
apartment burglary... Frankly, I understood little of what I 
heard. One thing was clear: as a result of this "swap," two 
families had been left without a place to live. As to the 
broker, having made profit on the deal and having sold other 
people's apartments at a premium, he had disappeared in the huge 
city. 
  "All right, that is it!" Kasyanenko summarized the hour-long 
conversation with the victims. "Leave a written explanation and 
go in peace. You have claims against one another--handle it 
through the court." 
  In truth, however, until recently people's courts did not 
even accept claims from victims in these matters, and they are 
only now shifting into gear. The city procuracy keeps a watchful 
eye on swindling associated with the housing privatization. 
Rayon procurators, on the other hand, try to avoid dealing with 
such matters. So it appears that apparently nobody is interested 
in this except for Kasyanenko and his colleagues, who are 
shoveling through the criminal consequences of the ill-conceived 
privatization of housing in Moscow. 
  This incident from the life of 38 Petrovka Street 
unfortunately is typical of the work of operational 
investigations department detectives and the 2d Criminal 
Investigations Administration of the GUVD; it is, however, far 
less dramatic than those they encounter on a daily basis. A hunt 
by criminals for owners of privatized housing in Moscow is in 
full swing. You can judge for yourself the "fat" in this new 
trade: a one-room apartment costs 20-30 million rubles [R]; a 
two-room one--R40-60 million; and a three-room one--about R100 
million. The crazy money blows the mind of those who had just 
recently made a "modest" living by theft, racketeering, and car 
theft. Selling other people's apartments turns out to be much 
more profitable, and criminals involved in this are willing to 
go to any length: swindling, extortion, and then, as a rule, 
criminal disappearance of the dwelling's owners. Apartment 
owners are threatened verbally; they are tortured and subjected 
to physical violence; they are force-fed alcohol (sometimes even 
technical grade) in enormous quantities. The criminals also use 
psychotropic substances that cause death. Most often the victims 
are single and elderly people, whom Moscow detectives already 
have included in a "high-risk group." There are currently almost 
9,000 of them in the capital, and almost all of them have 
privatized their apartments. Although, judging by all signs, any 
one of us may get caught in the privatization meat grinder. 
According to the department staff, not only the elderly but 
entire families that decide to swap or sell their housing 
disappear without a trace. We can also count among potential 
victims those who have surrendered residence permits for their 
privatized apartments and then disappeared without a trace. 
  Really, who would believe the "tale" that Vera Nikolayevna 
T-va, an orphan who has no family and in all her 72 years had 
never (!) left Moscow, suddenly decided to settle in a Tver area 
village, having first privatized her three-room apartment in the 
center of Moscow?! This "tale" was told to the department staff 
by new black-mustached owners of the spacious dwelling, against 
whom a criminal case has now been initiated. So far, however, 
grandma Vera has not been found either in Moscow or in the 
remote village. 
  Among the persons missing since 5 November was 50-year-old 
Muscovite M-ein. Her body was recently discovered in the woods 
in suburban Moscow. In the course of preliminary investigation 
it has been established that M-ein made the acquaintance of two 
men, who offered to buy her apartment. As soon as the woman 
signed the sale contract and handed over all the documents to 
the buyers, they got her into a car under some plausible pretext 
and while driving forcibly injected her with a psychotropic 
medication, from which the poor woman died. 
  Criminal proceedings have been initiated again V-a, an 
apartment swindler who bought up apartments in Moscow using fake 
documents. In addition, two persons have disappeared through the 
actions of the swindler. 
  Among the disappeared is a woman who used the services of 
the 
Stolitsa joint-stock society in swapping her apartment. There 
are hundreds, if not thousands, of such firms in Moscow. Their 
"will buy-sell-rent-swap" ads fill newspaper pages and cover all 
the poles and glass enclosures at bus stops around Moscow. They 
offer bait--one sweeter than the next--to irresponsible naive 
owners of super-expensive Moscow housing. One firm offers free 
privatization and expedited processing. Take note, absolutely 
"free"! And why such generosity all of a sudden? Another 
corporation quite seriously promises "comfort at the time of the 
deal and for the rest of your life." How long will that life be, 
however, for those who take advantage of such questionable 
offers? For instance, MUR [Moscow Criminal Investigations 
Department] officers detained the head and staff members of the 
Help Center. They killed, strangled, shot to death, and then 
burned people who entrusted them with their privatization 
documents. Over a short period of time these criminals 
dispatched to the other world many gullible Muscovites. 
  According to expert estimates, the entire territory of 
Moscow 
is divided into spheres of influence among criminal groups 
specializing in the apartment "business." Each such group has 
reconnaissance agents, paid informers, and shock-troopers--those 
who carry out "death sentences" and those who work only with 
documents (counterfeiting, fabrication of signatures, seals, 
texts, etc.). Drawn into the orbit of this horrible bloody 
"business" are employees of housing management offices, passport 
desks of housing offices and rayon departments of internal 
affairs, prefecture, civil registration office, and military 
draft office clerks, doctors issuing fake medical certificates, 
notaries who formalize privatization and issue power-of-attorney 
for apartment buying and selling, and militia personnel in 
territorial departments of internal affairs. In short, the 
stratum of middle-level office personnel, whose members we 
encounter on a regular basis. And from whom, by the way, one 
rarely gets on the first try "certification of a certificate." 
This should not be surprising: for a bribe, some office 
employees (and a considerable number of them, by the way) 
without properly checking privatization documents will register 
people in and out of the city without having them to appear in 
person. 
  So the rumors that circulated in Moscow in the summer--about 
alleged militia-housing office gangs killing single apartment 
owners--are being partially confirmed. Of course, the criminals 
do not walk around buildings carrying guns and axes. They do not 
need to do so. It is quite enough that these clerks have 
information about the tenants of their territorial unit, that 
is, each of us. As you may well see, such information costs a 
lot these days. More than someone's life even. In my presence, 
two passport clerks from a Moscow militia precinct and three 
employees of a housing office in the same territory were brought 
to 38 Petrovka. Criminal proceedings have been initiated against 
all of them on charges of falsifying privatization documents and 
"selling" information about owners of privatized housing. A 
militia major--a passport desk officer--has apparently been 
detained on the same charges. What do these people--and people 
like them overcome with greed--care that on the basis of this 
information a Kuntsevo-Solntsevo criminal group has tortured to 
death several people, having first obtained under torture their 
signatures attesting to selling their housing. Gypsy gangs also 
rage. They kidnap unfortunate apartment owners and take them to 
their encampments. Through torment and torture they extract 
signatures attesting to the sale of their housing. A notary 
present during this horror immediately certifies the document. 
After which the former owner disappears forever, while a new 
owner of the square footage moves into his apartment. 
  An out-of-town woman recently came to the operational 
investigations department; she said that she had not heard from 
her distant Moscow relative for quite a while. She finally came 
to Moscow herself, and discovered that completely different 
people lived in the apartment. The old man had allegedly moved, 
first having sold his dwelling. But where would the poor guy go, 
considering that he does not have any kin closer than the woman? 
The detectives sorted the situation out quite quickly. The old 
man fell for the bait in a newspaper ad: such and such company 
will rent an apartment for its employees; payment in hard 
currency guaranteed. They struck a deal; fed the old man some 
foreign food and even showered him with "greenbacks" at first. 
Then they talked him into signing a contract that he, the old 
man, would receive life-time maintenance in exchange for the 
apartment. Why do you need all this space, they said? Sell it to 
us, and in return we promise to keep you supplied with good food 
and when the time comes, will bury you with a ceremony. The old 
man happily agreed and signed all the papers in the presence of 
a notary. Now other people live in his apartment. And quite 
legally, as supported by the documents shown to the detectives. 
From these documents it follows that the apartment was sold to 
them by some brokerage firm which at this point has "liquidated 
itself." As to the old man, they heard that he had left Moscow. 
Where did he go, one wonders? To his own funeral perhaps? 

