BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 2 (YONHAP) -- A North Korea family of 
five who in defection arrived in Seoul last Saturday said on 
Monday that people in the North suffer heavily from food 
shortage as food ration has been virtually suspended since 
August last year. 
  Yo Man-chol, age 48, told a press conference at the Seoul 
Press Center that he and his family had escaped North Korea 
partly because of food shortage and partly because his family 
had been treated unfavorably after he was removed from the 
Public Security Ministry in 1989. 
  Yo said he was working as a guidance officer with the rank 
of 
captain at Hamhung City office of the Public Security Ministry 
when he was sacked after his acceptance of money from a traffic 
violator was uncovered. 
  He said he and his family fled North Korea into northern 
China through the frozen Yalu River on last March 18. 
  "Once in China, we moved to southern China by train and 
could 
come to South Korea through a third country with the help of an 
ethnic Korean in China," Yo said. 
  His wife, Yi Ok-kum, 45, who had worked as a kindergarten 
master in Hamhung, said they had to live mainly on corn since 
last August when food ration came to a virtual halt. 
  "We were so hungry that I had to go to the countryside and 
beg my sister and brother there for some grains," she said in 
tear. 
  Saying "the food situation in the North is worse than you 
may 
presume," Mr. Yo stated that mainly because of the food problem, 
the North Koreans' loyalty to Kim Il-song and his son, Kim 
Chong-il, had visibly declined. 
  In the past, he said, almost all people attending public 
events wore Kim Il-song badges. "Nowadays Kim Il-song badges can 
be seen on the chest of only about 20 percent of attendees," he 
said. 
  Yo said his listening to South Korean radio programs had 
helped him decide to defect to South Korea. 
  When North Korea sells radios to people, all channels except 
North Korean stations, are sealed off with soldering, Yo said, 
adding that lately many people break the seal to clandestinely 
listen to South Korean programs as he himself did. 
  Asked if she readily agreed to her father's suggestion for 
escape, Yo Kum-ju, age 20, a kindergarten teacher, said that at 
first she resisted the offer because she did not want to be a 
"traitor." 
  "But, I changed my mind later after listening to South 
Korean 
broadcasts with a radio my father gave me," she said. 
  The two other family members were Yo Kum-yong, 18, a middle 
school sixth grader, and his younger brother, Un-yong, 16, a 
middle school fourth grader. 

