BFN 

<F P=106> ["Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation </F>
(MOFTEC) Circular on Printing, Distributing `Regulations on 
Application for and Administration of Export Licenses'"] 
  [Text] To foreign economic and trade departments and 
commissions, foreign trade bureaus, MOFTEC special 
representatives offices in various localities in all provinces, 
autonomous regions, municipalities, and cities separately listed 
in state plans, the Quota and License Affairs Administration, 
chambers of commerce for importers and exporters, corporations, 
industrial and trade companies, the Guangdong Branch 
Administration of Customs, and Customs at the bureau and 
department levels: 
  In order to give the work of foreign trade 
administration a more standardized form in law, the General 
Administration of Customs and this ministry have formulated 
"Regulations on Application for and Administration of Export 
Licenses," and now have printed them and distribute them to you. 
The Regulations are in effect from 1 April 1994. 
  Annex: Regulations on Application for and 
Administration of Export Licenses MOFTEC of the PRC 23 February 
1994 
<H5>  Annex: Regulations on Application for and Administration of </H5>
Export Licenses 
  In order to further deepen the restructuring of foreign 
trade 
and strengthen and perfect the work of export license 
administration so that the foreign trade export business will 
develop in an orderly and healthy way, the regulations on 
application for and administration of export licenses are now 
laid down as follows: 
  Article I. Organs responsible for the administration and 
issue of export licenses 
  1) MOFTEC is the administrative organ for export licenses 
and 
is responsible for formulating, revising, and interpreting 
relevant administrative regulations. 
  2) MOFTEC is responsible for promulgating and interpreting 
the scope and list of commodities under the administration of 
export licenses and for making adjustments according to the 
situation of the international market and the domestic supply of 
goods. 
  3) MOFTEC's Quota License Affairs Administration, offices of 
MOFTEC special representatives in various localities, foreign 
economic and trade commissions (departments), and foreign trade 
bureaus empowered by MOFTEC in all provinces, autonomous 
regions, municipalities, and cities separately listed in state 
plans are license-issuing organs under the state export 
authorization system. 
  Article II. Principles of issuing export licenses 
  1) When exporting commodities administered by export 
licenses, export units should apply for export licenses in 
advance. 
  2) The principle of graded administration is implemented 
when 
issuing export licenses, and license-issuing organs at all 
levels must issue export licenses in strict accordance with the 
scope authorized by MOFTEC and never overstep it. 
  3) When exporting commodities which must have licenses 
issued 
by license-issuing organs in places of production attached, all 
export enterprises must apply for export licenses from 
license-issuing organs at designated places of production; 
whereas departments in charge of economic and trade work in 
places of production should take the responsibility for 
investigating commodity market quotations, price information, 
and market demand, and promptly report it to MOFTEC. 
  4) Foreign trade (industrial and trade) companies under 
various central departments implementing a single-track system 
of planned administration and foreign trade (industrial and 
trade) corporations under various central departments 
implementing a double-track system of planned administration run 
some of the exports by themselves and apply for export licenses, 
on the basis of their quotas, from MOFTEC's Quota and License 
Affairs Administration. For commodities which must be attached 
with licenses issued by designated license-issuing organs and 
places of production, licenses must be collected at designated 
license-issuing organs and places of production. 
  5) All kinds of export quotas are valid for a year, and 
export units must apply for export licenses by 15 December. 
  6) In order not to affect the export business in the 
following year, before MOFTEC assigns commodity quotas to lower 
levels, all export enterprises with annual export quotas in the 
previous year (not including supplementary parts) can collect in 
advance, from 15 December, export licenses for the following 
year according to one-fourth of their export quotas in the 
previous year. Regarding the issue date of export licenses, 1 
January of the following year should be filled in, and the 
export licenses will become effective from 1 January of the 
following year and will be considered as part of export quotas 
in the following year and counted in the following year's 
statistics of licenses issued. For commodities which export 
licenses cannot be collected in advance, MOFTEC will inform 
various license-issuing organs beforehand. 
  Article III. Validity period of export licenses 
  1) The system of "a license for a batch" is, in general, 
implemented for commodities under the administration of export 
licenses. Starting from the day of issue, every export license 
cannot last for more than three months and can only be used once 
for customs declaration during its validity period. Once a 
license is signed and sealed by Customs, the original 
license-collecting unit must return it to the license-issuing 
unit for verification and cancellation. 
  2) The system of "a license for a batch" is not 
implemented for the following commodities: 
  1. Commodities exported by foreign-funded enterprises and as 
items of compensation trade; 
  2. A total of 26 products--rice, soybeans, corn, bean 
dregs/bean cake, live pigs, live oxen, live sheep, fowl, frozen 
beef, frozen mutton, frozen pork, frozen poultry, frozen 
suckling pigs, frozen young pigeons, hairy crabs, swimming 
crabs, chestnuts, pears, Hami melons, tea, fireworks and 
firecrackers, toilet paper, hand-made embroidery, crude oil, 
finished oil, and coal; 
  3. For export commodities not under the system of "a license 
for a batch," the maximum validity period of export licenses is 
six months and licenses are allowed to be used for customs 
declaration for as many as 12 times. The licenses are not 
renewable and the volume of export commodities is marked down by 
Customs batch by batch. Once a license is used, the 
license-collecting unit must return it to the license-issuing 
unit for verification and cancellation. 
  3) Once an export license is signed and issued, no 
license-issuing organ and export unit can alter the license 
content. In general, export licenses cannot be carried over to 
and used in the following year, and they are valid until 31 
December of that year at the latest. When an export license has 
to be carried over to and used in the following year, it must be 
renewed at the original license-issuing organ. It is valid 
until the end of next February at the latest and cannot be 
extended. 
  Article IV. The export license administration of special 
commodities 
  1) Commodities banned from export are: musk, natural bezoar, 
copper and copper radical alloys, platinum, arsenic trichloride, 
dioxane (methane, ethane-n-propane, or isopropane) amino 
ethyl-2-alcohol and related chemical compounds made of 
quaternary ammonium, such as: N.N-diethyl ethanolamine, 
N.N-dimethyl ethanolamine, N.N-isopropyl ethanolamine, dithiol 
(dihydroxyethyl and thiodiglycol), and commodities banned from 
export according to regulations of relevant international 
conventions. 
  No enterprise is allowed to run export business of 
commodities banned from export. 
  2) Chemicals for military and civilian use (see the attached 
list) 
  No matter what kind of trading form is taken, all chemical 
exports for military and civilian use must be reported to and 
authorized by MOFTEC, and export licenses must be applied for 
according to regulations. In seeking MOFTEC authorization, 
export enterprises must produce letters of guarantee issued by 
relevant government departments of commodity-importing 
countries, pledging not to apply any commodities purchased to 
producing chemical weapons and not to transfer the commodities 
to the third countries. 
  3) Chemicals easily made into poison (see the attached list) 
  No matter what kind of trading form is taken, all chemical 
exports for military and civilian use must be reported to and 
authorized by MOFTEC, and export licenses must be applied for 
according to regulations. When exporting ephedrine, 
pseudo-ephedrine, yellow camphor, and piperonal, export 
enterprises should ask importers to produce certificates of 
legal application issued by relevant government departments of 
commodity-importing countries (regions). 
  4) Deuterium oxide 
  No matter what kind of trading form is taken, exports of 
deuterium oxide must be reported to and authorized by MOFTEC, 
and export licenses must be applied for according to regulations. 
  5) Administration of exported live pond fish, fresh 
vegetables, and fruit 
  As far as the administration of live pond fish, fresh 
vegetables, and fruit exported to Hong Kong and Macao is 
concerned, clearances are still issued according to existing 
regulations. 
  Article V. Content to be examined and verified when issuing 
export licenses 
  1) When applying for an export license, an export unit has 
to 
submit to the license-issuing organ relevant documents of 
approval and information and the export contract (all copies of 
the original). If necessary, a letter of credit must be 
produced and an application form for an export license must be 
filled in. The license-issuing organ must strictly rely on 
these formalities to issue the export license. 
  2) Strictly examining and verifying whether or not the 
export 
unit has a concrete record of export, is capable of running 
export business, or has the right to export that commodity. 
  3) Examining and verifying export prices. License-issuing 
organs at all levels must examine contracts and issue export 
licenses in strict accordance with pricing packages drawn up by 
various import and export chambers of commerce. 
  Article VI. Administration of exports in barter and border 
trade 
  1) For commodities exported to the former Soviet Union, 
Eastern Europe, the DPRK, Mongolia, Vietnam, and Laos on a 
barter basis--grain (soybeans, rice, corn, and wheat), tungsten 
sand, and crude oil and finished oil, arrangements are made to 
export them on a barter basis. The export of such commodities 
as chemicals for military and civilian use, chemicals easily 
made into poison, and deuterium oxide must be reported to MOFTEC 
for examination and verification, then enterprises take MOFTEC's 
documents of approval to the ministry's Quota and License 
Affairs Administration to apply for export licenses; whereas 
such formalities are no longer apply to other export commodities. 
  2) For exports to other countries and regions through barter 
and border trade, export licenses are applied for according to 
the regulations of graded administration of export licenses. 
  3) Trading with Taiwan is not within the realm of border 
trade and is carried out according to the regulations of Taiwan 
trade. For commodities under the export license administration, 
export licenses are applied for according to the regulations of 
the graded administration of export licenses. 
  Article VII. Administration of foreign-funded 
enterprises' exports 
  1) For commodities which are produced and exported by 
foreign-funded enterprises and which are administered by export 
licenses (including processing imported materials for export), 
export licenses are applied for according to the regulations of 
graded administration of export licenses. License-issuing 
organs at all levels must issue export licenses in strict 
accordance with annual quantities of export commodities issued 
by MOFTEC to foreign-funded enterprises. For commodities the 
prices of which are required to be examined, these prices are 
strictly examined before licenses are issued. 
  2) Foreign-funded enterprises must export self-made products 
in line with the scope of business and the scale of production 
and export authorized by the prescribed procedure, and must 
never export products purchased or run their business beyond the 
approved scale without authorization. 
  3) For newly established and existing foreign-funded 
enterprises which want to widen the scope of business or expand 
production scale, if their exported products are under the 
export license administration and the state quota 
administration, they should be reported to and authorized by 
MOFTEC at the stage of setting up the production projects before 
the products can be examined and approved according to the 
prescribed procedure. License-issuing organs at all levels will 
not issue export licenses to the above-mentioned projects 
approved by enterprises themselves without MOFTEC's 
authorization. 
  4) For projects undertaken by foreign-funded enterprises and 
projects of compensation trade approved before the revision of 
the catalog of commodities under the export license 
administration, products which become newly-added commodities 
under the export license administration owing to the catalog 
revision can be listed in the catalog of foreign-funded 
enterprise export commodities during the effective contracting 
period according to the scope of business and the scale of 
production and export authorized by law. 
  Article VIII. Administration of processing supplied 
materials and assembling supplied parts for export 
  Enterprises processing supplied materials and assembling 
supplied parts for export are exempted from applying for export 
licenses. Such exports are supervised, checked, and released by 
Customs according to relevant regulations. 
  Article IX. Administration of processing imported materials 
for export 
  1) Processing imported materials for export is within the 
normal scope of trade. Any authorized enterprises having the 
right to running import and export trade can engage in this type 
of business. 
  2) The business of processing imported materials for export 
is handled according to the regulations of the Customs' 
"Circular on Issuing the 'PRC Customs' Administrative Method of 
Import and Export Goods Processed From Imported Materials'" 
(No.403 of the Customs' Goods No.88) and is no longer reported 
to MOFTEC for examination and verification. 
  3) For export commodities processed from imported materials 
(with the exception of rolled steel, pig iron, and zinc) which 
are under the export license administration and the state quota 
administration, export licenses must be applied for before 
registering with Customs for entering in the records according 
to quotas issued to them by the State. 
  As far as the processing of imported materials of rolled 
steel, pig iron, and zinc is concerned, units running the 
business of processing key imported raw and processed materials 
for export should apply for export licenses from license-issuing 
units by producing the "Registration Manual of Processing 
Imported Materials" and export contracts, which will not be 
counted in the annual quota targets. 
  4) As far as the processing of imported materials of 
ordinary 
commodities administered by export licenses is concerned, units 
running this type of business should apply for export licenses 
from license-issuing units by producing the "Registration Manual 
of Processing Imported Materials" and export contracts. 
  5) In doing the business of processing imported materials, 
foreign-funded enterprises should strictly control it within the 
originally authorized scope and scale of business. 
  Article X. Administration of export of goods and materials 
needed for establishing enterprises overseas 
  As far as joint-venture, cooperative, and PRC-invested 
enterprises established overseas by the country are concerned, 
if shares are bought in the form of various raw and processed 
materials and spare parts, or the supply of domestic raw and 
processed materials and spare parts is needed after the 
enterprises have been established and put into production, 
export licenses should be applied for according to regulations 
since these practices are considered normal trade and export. 
  Article XI. Administration of projects contracted, complete 
sets of equipment exported, and goods and materials shipped out 
by companies engaging in external economic and technological 
cooperation 
  1) Companies authorized to contract external projects and 
engage in labor cooperation with the outside can ship out 
Chinese-made equipment, materials, and construction machines and 
tools to be used in the projects as well as public articles used 
daily by working personnel. For commodities not within the 
scope of license administration, customs declarations of export 
goods should be filled in and the export formalities prescribed 
by Customs should be gone through by producing project contracts 
and indicating the quantities provided for in foreign enterprise 
instruments of ratification, and there is no need to apply for 
export licenses. But if equipment and construction machines and 
tools are shipped back to the country again, customs 
declarations of import goods should be filled in and the import 
formalities prescribed by Customs should be gone through by 
simultaneously producing the original customs declarations of 
export goods. For commodities under export license 
administration, export licenses must be applied for according to 
regulations. 
  If commodities administered by export licenses are shipped 
out for company use, project contracts should be produced to 
apply for export licenses from license-issuing organs at 
respective levels. Foreign trade (industrial and trade) 
companies under various central departments should apply for 
export licenses from MOFTEC's Quota and License Affairs 
Administration; whereas companies and production enterprises at 
various local levels should apply for export licenses from 
provincial license-issuing organs in which they are located, 
irrespective of which level of license-issuing organs should 
issue licenses to the commodities. 
  2) Projects and daily articles shipped out by contracting 
project companies must be really needed for external projects 
and labor cooperation, cannot be over-reported, and cannot be 
misappropriated or resold. 
  3) For commodities under the administration of export 
licenses which must be shipped out when exporting complete sets 
of equipment, contracts of exporting whole sets of equipment 
should be produced and applications handled by license-issuing 
organs at respective levels in light of the method of applying 
for export licenses for contracting projects. 
  Article XII. Administration of tourist commodities brought 
out of the country by foreign tourists, compatriots from Hong 
Kong, Macao, and Taiwan, and overseas Chinese, who purchase the 
commodities with foreign exchange they have taken into the 
country 
  1) Tourists entering the country (including foreign 
attendants of means of transport) can use foreign exchange they 
have taken into the country to purchase unrestricted numbers, 
value, and varieties of tourist souvenirs and arts and crafts. 
Customs will clear tourist commodities after examining invoices 
issued by departments selling the commodities as well as foreign 
exchange receipts. Traditional Chinese crude drugs and Chinese 
medicine, whether or not they are purchased by foreign exchange, 
are handled with restrictions in value according to customs 
regulations. 
  2) With the exception of commodities administered by export 
licenses (including commodities administered by quotas), 
domestic departments selling other tourist commodities can, 
after seeking MOFTEC's approval, accept export orders of small 
batches under $50,000 (or at $50,000). Customs will clear the 
tourist commodities after examining customs declarations of 
export goods filled in by domestic departments selling the 
commodities and relevant certificates (contracts). 
  Article XIII. Administration of exhibits, exhibits for sale, 
and small items for sale shipped out of the country and shown 
and sold at overseas exhibitions 
  1) Administration of exhibits shipped out of the country 
  For various exhibits shown (and not for sale) at overseas 
exhibitions sponsored by the country, there is no need to apply 
for export licenses. When shipping out the exhibits, Customs 
will clear them after checking certificates and customs 
declarations of export goods produced by units sponsoring the 
exhibitions. All exhibits must be shipped back to the country 
after the exhibitions. 
  2) Administration of exhibits for sale and small items for 
sale shipped out of the country. 
  1. As far as exhibits for sale and small items for sale 
taken to overseas exhibitions sponsored by foreign trade 
(industrial and trade) companies are concerned, there is no need 
to apply for export licenses for commodities not administered by 
export licenses, and Customs will clear them after examining 
customs declarations of export goods filled in by export units 
and detailed lists attached. For commodities administered by 
export licenses, these must be applied for at appropriate 
levels, whereas commodities administered by quotas are not 
counted as part of quota targets. 
  2. As far as exhibits for sale and small items for sale 
taken to overseas exhibitions sponsored by units not engaging in 
foreign trade are concerned, whether or not the commodities are 
administered by export licenses, these must be applied for at 
appropriate levels. 
  Article XIV. Administration of samples shipped out of the 
country 
  1) Regarding experimental samples provided to the outside 
world by units not engaging in foreign trade or technological 
exchange and other activities, if the quantities are reasonable 
and each batch of samples is worth 2,000 yuan or less, whether 
or not the commodities are administered by export licenses, the 
units are exempted from applying for export licenses, and 
Customs will clear the samples after examining certificates 
produced by and customs declarations of export goods filled in 
by departments (at and above the department and bureau levels) 
supervising units shipping out the samples; to ship out samples 
valued at more than 2,000 yuan, units must apply for export 
licenses. In order to make things convenient for enterprises, 
export licenses are issued by provincial license-issuing organs 
in places where units shipping out samples are located after 
examining certificates produced by departments (at and above the 
department and bureau levels) supervising the units (units at 
the central level still have to apply for export licenses from 
MOFTEC's Quota and License Affairs Administration), and the word 
"samples" must be clearly stated on export licenses. 
  2) If foreign trade enterprises and production enterprises 
entitled by MOFTEC and its authorized departments to run import 
and export business need to ship out samples, their cases must 
be handled according to the following regulations: 
  1. If Customs consider, after examination and verification, 
quantities of sample commodities not administered by export 
licenses reasonable, no matter how much the goods are worth, 
units are exempted from applying for export licenses, and 
Customs will clear the samples after examining customs 
declarations of export goods filled in by the units shipping out 
the samples. 
  2. If Customs consider, after examination and verification, 
quantities of sample commodities administered by export licenses 
as reasonable and each batch of the samples is worth less than 
2,000 yuan, units are exempted from applying for export 
licenses, and Customs will clear the samples after examining 
customs declarations of export goods filled in by the units. 
For samples valued at a range from over 2,000 yuan to 10,000 
yuan, export licenses must be applied for. In order to make 
things convenient for enterprises, export licenses are issued by 
provincial license-issuing organs in places where 
license-collecting units are located (foreign trade and 
industrial and trade companies of various central departments 
under the single-track planned administration still apply for 
export licenses from MOFTEC's Quota and License Affairs 
Administration), and the word "samples" must be clearly stated 
on licenses. For samples valued at more than 10,000 yuan, the 
issue of export licenses is handled according to normal 
regulations of trade administration. 
  3) Cases of shipping out samples of traditional Chinese 
crude 
drugs and Chinese medicine are still handled according to 
Customs' regulations of value restriction. 
  Article XV. Administration of exporting goods and 
materials to foreign countries as economic aid 
  Customs can clear various goods and materials exported in 
the 
name of projects of giving economic and technical aid to foreign 
countries after examining MOFTEC's letters on entrusting 
enterprises the task of aiding foreign countries or invoicing 
notices issued by the China National Complete Sets of Equipment 
Import and Export Corporation on external aid projects and 
customs declarations of export goods filled in by enterprises 
taking on the task of aiding foreign countries. If units 
providing and transporting goods and materials export goods and 
materials not intended for external aid in the name of granting 
goods and materials to foreign countries as economic aid, these 
cases should be handled by Customs according to the customs law. 
  Article XVI. Export administration on the question of 
tolerance 
  According to international trade practice, it is considered 
normal if the tolerance of large batches of goods in bulk is 
within a five percent limit, and license-issuing organs will not 
indicate it when issuing licenses and Customs will clear the 
goods. For goods exceeding the five percent limit, 
license-issuing organs should increase the number of licenses 
issued and deduct them from the planned quotas accordingly when 
issuing licenses. 
  Article XVII. Regulations on punishment 
  When applying for export licenses, export units must furnish 
authorities with real conditions in all respects. Moreover, 
they are strictly prohibited from exporting, without 
authorization, goods which they do not have quotas for or which 
exceed their quotas or reporting unreal situations and using 
such means as fake contracts and fake letters of credit to gain 
export licenses by cheating. Reselling or transferring export 
licenses in any form is strictly prohibited. Violations of the 
regulations will be punished in order of importance, such as 
circulating notices to criticize violators, seizing their 
foreign exchange, or suspending or abolishing the right of 
running an export business or issuing licenses. Once 
discovering the above-mentioned violations of the regulations of 
export license administration when doing supervisory work, 
Customs should handle them in strict accordance with relevant 
customs laws and regulations. Those who forge export licenses 
and documents, inflict heavy loss upon the state, and violate 
criminal law will be transferred to judicial organs to 
investigate and affix their responsibility for the crimes. 
  Article XVIII. Any stipulations and methods of export 
license administration previously issued by MOFTEC which are 
inconsistent with these regulations are subordinate to the 
latter. 
  Article XIX. These regulations are effective from 1 April 
1994. MOFTEC is responsible for their interpretation. 
Attached List: Names of Some Export Commodities (A Total of 34 
Commodities) 
  I. Chemicals for military and civilian use 
  Hydrocyanic acid, phosgene, phosphoryl chloride, phosphorus 
trichloride, sulfur chloride, sulfur dichloride, thionyl 
chloride, phosphorus pentachloride, cyanogen chloride, 
chloropicrin, dimethyl ester of phosphorous (P3) acid, and 
diethyl ester of phosphorous (P3) acid 
  II. Chemicals easily made into poison 
  Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, potassium permanganate, 
toluene, ethyl ether, acetone, butanone (methyl ethyl ketone), 
1. phenyl group, 2. acetone, acetic anhydride, phenylacetic 
acid, anthranilic acid, N-acetyl anthranilic acid, isosafrole, 
3. 4-methylene dioxophenyl group-2-acetone, safrole, piperonal, 
piperidine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ergometrine, lysergic 
amine, and lysergic acid 

