Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Since the 1990's, our province's population 
situation has gradually changed from the previous sustained and 
rapid growth into a low growth stage. According to statistics 
issued by the provincial statistics bureau, the birthrate of the 
whole province in 1993 dropped to 14.08 per thousand, and the 
natural growth rate fell to 6.95 per thousand. Population 
increase rate was more than 50 percent lower the average rate in 
the 1980's. 
  Since last year units at all levels and various localities 
have conscientiously summed up their previous experiences. On 
this basis, they have increased the weight of family planning 
work,and enhanced the scientific level of the work. From the 
highest organizations down to the grass roots, a series of 
guiding principles, policies, and measures which suit the 
present situation have been formulated. The provincial CPC 
committee and government have strengthened their leadership over 
family planning work and provided systematized guidance for 
various prefectures, autonomous prefecture, cities and counties, 
and signed relevant contracts with governments at all levels. 
They assess and examine their goal-direct management 
responsibility system every year. They closely link the results 
of family planning work with the achievements of leaders at all 
levels, main party and government leaders in particular. They 
also link leaders' responsibility with their obligations and 
power. Thanks to persistent efforts to carry out propaganda and 
education on family planning work over the past few years, in 
addition to the gradual development of old-age pension and 
insurance undertakings in rural area related to economic growth, 
peasants have also markedly changed their concept on child 
births. Some 97 percent of peasants maintain that it is best to 
have one or two children. Among those babies born in 1993, 80 
percent were the first child, and only 2 percent were third 
children or more. 

