BFN 

  [Text] A British major in the Secret Services, who is based 
at Episkopi on Akrotiri Base, is in "Direct Liaison" with the 
Turkish Secret Services. The same English spy participated in 
the mixed team of English-American spies who acted at Larnaca 
Airport when an aircraft was transporting war materiel for the 
defense of Cyprus. He travels in a "Land Rover" with a Cypriot 
license plate, and he has been seen many times entering the 
Turkish-occupied areas at Dhekelia-Pergamos. 
  I MAKHI reveals today that: "He is Major Edwin Dougan, who 
is one of the leading members of the British Espionage Service 
MI-6, serving (seemingly) at the Episkopi Camp." 
  The "hardcore team" of the English-American spies who were 
arrested by members of the National Guard--and then handed over 
to the police--consisted of three officers: Two English and one 
American. According to I MAKHI's information, English Maj. 
Edwin Dougan of the "MI-6" was the "companion...." of American 
Maj. Scott David Dorney, assistant military attache at the U.S. 
Embassy. Coordinator of these two spies was Lieutenant Colonel 
John Anderson, who serves as military attache at the British 
High Commission. 
  I MAKHI has information revealing that on the day of his 
"espionage action" Edwin Dougan was traveling in a "Land Rover" 
with civilian license plate numbers BB495. 
  Diplomatic sources have revealed to I MAKHI that the "Land 
Rover" with license plate BB495 has been seen many times in the 
past heading for the Turkish-occupied areas and entering these 
areas from the direction of Dhekelia-Pergamos. 
  According to other I MAKHI's information, American Maj. 
Scott 
David Dorney graduated from the War School of Greece in 
1989-1990, speaks Greek fluently, and frequently visits Greece. 
  However, concerning this serious case of espionage against 
the defense of Cyprus and the security of the Republic of 
Cyprus, although there is no official follow-up to it--for the 
time being--the competent security authorities (Central 
Intelligence Service and the Second Staff Bureau of the National 
Guard General Staff) "have not been inactive." 
  Every piece of information is evaluated and cross-checked 
carefully. It appears that the tentacles of espionage against 
the National Guard are long. 
  What causes concern are that the recipients (as was also 
revealed by I MAKHI) of the espionage material are the Turks and 
what the spies' aims are. 
  Meanwhile, the English and American diplomatic spokesmen in 
Nicosia deny all this "about espionage and they do not want to 
hear another word...." 
  Moreover, in order to show that their men are not 
spies...they have announced that "their men are not going to be 
sent home...." In any case, the American Dorney and the 
Englishmen Anderson and Dougan have cut their movements to a 
minimum, rarely leaving their offices.... 

