Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Within the framework of enhancing Jordanian-U.S. 
trade relations, His Highness Crown Prince Hasan, the regent, 
received U.S. Secretary of Commerce Ronald Brown at the Royal 
Hashemite Court today. At the beginning of the meeting, the 
U.S. secretary of commerce handed a message to His Highness 
Crown Prince Hasan, the regent, from U.S. President Bill Clinton 
to His Majesty King Husayn. 
  His highness explained to the American guest Jordan's 
concept 
of world trade and the need to base this trade on human 
requirements rather than on abstract dimensions on the levels of 
Jordanian-U.S. relations and the region as a whole. 
  His highness, the regent, called for defining just and human 
criteria in the world trade system to guarantee the rights of 
states and individuals, particularly in the Middle East. 
  [Begin recording in English] [Brown] Well, we had a very 
frank and cordial discussion. Some creative new ideas about not 
only how to enhance the bilateral relationship between the 
United States and Jordan, but how to engender some real regional 
cooperation, some focus on specific goals, some focus on 
mechanisms for achieving those goals and to really create a 
public-private partnership. So, it is not only bilateral 
relationships or regional relationships between governments, but 
getting the private sector involved as well. It is clear that 
there are many other economic challenges that the region faces 
and many that Jordan faces, and the United States wants to play 
a helpful role in trying to deal directly with those issues. I 
think the peace process moving forward gives us a very real 
opportunity. As we move towards peace, expectations that 
people's lives will change in a real and positive way are 
accelerated, and we have to find ways to meet those 
expectations. I was very pleased with the conversation that we 
had with his royal highness the crown prince, and I believe that 
we will pursue those discussions very actively in the future. 
  [Reporter] Did you discuss the U.S. inspection team in the 
Port of Aqabah? 
  [Brown] I discussed it with some of the ministers of the 
Jordanian Government earlier today. I now am increasingly 
sensitive about the impact that it is having on the Jordanian 
economy, and I intend to pursue those discussions when I get 
back to Washington. There certainly ought to be ways for us to 
be in compliance with the United Nations' resolutions, but in 
ways that do not debilitate the economy of Jordan. 
  [Reporter] Your Excellency, Your Royal Highness: Would you 
like to give us a statement about the meeting? 
  [Hasan] Well, I just like to say that when we met with 
President Clinton and Foreign Minister Peres on the White House 
lawn, we said that there is much to be done on the ground, and I 
would like to say that the secretary of commerce's visit to 
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Israel, and Egypt is a clear indication of 
the desire to achieve results in terms of understanding trade 
patterns, in terms of encouraging investment, in terms of 
thinking regionally, and it is a very practical series of 
meetings I believe that it had been held here today. And given 
the optimism coming out of the meetings in Geneva and the 
forthcoming meeting between His Majesty King Husayn and 
President Clinton, I think that we are certainly putting a lot 
practical paint on the canvas in terms of our joint 
understanding of what it takes to make peace matter to people on 
the ground here in the region. [end recording] 

