Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Israel is continuing its military pressure on 
Lebanon in an attempt to confuse the social peace process and to 
cover up its crimes and intimidation of Lebanon. Israel 
implemented its threats last night when it carried out 
large-scale aggression against the south. Shortly after 2000 
yesterday, Israeli forces bombarded Lebanese villages. The 
bombardment of several areas is continuing at this moment. A 
NATIONAL NEWS AGENCY correspondent in al- Nabatiyah reports: 
  [Correspondent] There is a high alert in al-Nabatiyah and 
nearby villages, particularly the Iqlim al-Tuffah villages, as a 
result of violent artillery and rocket fire to which they have 
been subjected since last night. The bombardment, which grew 
more violent at dawn today, was continuing when this newscast 
was being prepared. Heavy rounds are falling in the villages of 
Habbush, Kafr Rumman, 'Arab Salim, Jarju', Jabal al-Rafi, Mlita, 
Jabal Safi, and al-Luwayzah. The explosions are heard 
throughout the whole region. Shells also fell on the main 
highway linking al-Nabatiyah with Iqlim al-Tuffah, particularly 
the Sit Zubaydah bridge. The bombardment is accompanied by 
bursts from heavy and medium machine-guns in Israeli and agent 
[South Lebanese Army] positions in al-Suwayda', Sujud, and 'Ali 
al-Tahir mountain. Violent clashes involving the use of machine 
guns and rockets raged in the 'Ali al-Tahir hills and al- 
Suwayda' area at 2030 yesterday between the resistance men and 
the Israeli forces and their agents. 
  Panic is gripping the people in these areas as a result of 
the continuing shelling. They have not slept for fear of 
indiscriminate bombing. 
  Just in from the editor's desk: All villages in Iqlim 
al-Tuffah have been under violent bombardment since 0615 today. 
Thirty-five shells have landed in these areas this morning. 
  A NATIONAL NEWS AGENCY correspondent reports that groups of 
the resistance men attacked enemy positions in Saydun and Dayr 
Shaqadif at dawn today. The Islamic Resistance issued a 
statement saying that its men succeeded in gaining control these 
positions and killing the personnel manning them. The statement 
said that Islamic Resistance men also attacked hostile positions 
in al-Burj, Qasr Salim, Kafr Falus, Sujd, and Bi'r Kallab. 

