BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Conor Cruise O'Brien: "Desperation of a Deadly </F>
`Peace'"] 
  [Text] This week in Belfast, the IRA admitted 
responsibility for an attack on an RUC [Royal Ulster 
Constabulary] Land Rover which was patrolling the Shankill Road 
area during he funerals of two loyalists killed last week by 
nationalist gunfire. About the same time as the Shankill 
incident, gunmen belonging to the loyalist Ulster Volunteer 
Force [UVF] opened fire on a group of Catholics who were 
watching the Ireland-Italy football match on television in a pub 
in Loughinisland, Co Down. Six of the Catholics were killed. 
  The Downing Street Declaration of 15 December 1993 was 
intended and expected to lead to a cessation of IRA violence. 
But six months later, IRA violence continues much as before. 
The effect of the declaration was, meanwhile, to enrage the 
Unionist community, and stimulate loyalist paramilitaries into 
greater activity. The total level of violence is now higher: 
Northern Ireland is in a state of incipient civil war. The 
"peace process," which is supposed to quench the flames, is 
pouring petrol on them. 
  In its psychological effects on the two communities in 
Northern Ireland, the "peace process" works like this: the two 
communities are not in disagreement as to their understanding of 
how the peace process is working. Both sides see the British 
government as making concessions to nationalists out of anxiety 
to be rid of the problem, and in the hope of buying off the IRA. 
But their feelings about this are radically different: 
nationalists are encouraged, and Unionists alarmed. And both 
the encouragement and the alarm have the effect of stimulating 
the extremists in both communities. 
  In an interview in Boston on Monday [20 June], the Irish 
Taoiseach [Prime Minister], Albert Reynolds, announced that he 
is seeking a form of Anglo-Irish cross-border authority "with 
executive powers." This means that the nationalist demand is 
being stepped up, from the "consultative status" accorded to 
Dublin in the Anglo-Irish Agreement, to a share for Dublin in 
the actual governance of Northern Ireland. 
  Almost incredibly, this provocative statement was made on 
the 
same day that the news had broken of the massacre in 
Loughinisland. Mr Reynolds and his colleagues seem to have no 
idea of the kind of impact that their words and actions are 
making inside Northern Ireland, especially in the Protestant 
community. And Mr Major and his colleagues also seem either not 
to know or not to care what effect their trafficking with Dublin 
is having in the same quarter. Neither government appears yet to 
see the need for much more drastic security measures, applied 
evenhandedly against both sets of paramilitary godfathers. 
Internment is not ruled out, but neither is it yet being 
seriously considered. 
  Mr Reynolds's apparent bid for a share in the governance of 
Northern Ireland should not be taken literally. 
  I don't believe Dublin really wants anything of the kind. To 
share responsibility with Britain for the governing of Northern 
Ireland would be very onerous indeed for any Dublin government. 
It would mean having to carry responsibility, before the 
Catholic electorate of the Twenty-six Counties, for the actions 
of security forces (however composed in Northern Ireland). 
Those actions could well be seriously inconvenient to the 
Catholic population in Northern Ireland and, therefore, 
unpopular in the Republic. Consultative status is vastly more 
comfortable, and it is most improbable that Mr Reynolds has any 
real yearning to proceed beyond that point. 
  I think the real reason for the ostensible bid for 
constitutional limits with "executive powers" was to fend off 
change rather than bring it about. Mr Reynolds, it seems, is 
under pressure from Downing Street to consent to the amendment 
of Articles 2 and 3 of the Republic's constitution, the Articles 
that lay claim, by implication, to Northern Ireland as part of 
"the national territory" of the Irish State. Mr Reynolds does 
not want to do this, because it would be unpopular with 
important elements in his own Fianna Fail party. It might even 
result in a challenge to his own leadership of his party, 
something more vivid in his mind than the dimly conceived 
reactions of people living in Northern Ireland (and not voting 
in the Republic). 
  Albert Reynolds does not seriously propose to put the 
amendment of Articles 2 and 3 to a referendum. But neither does 
he want to irritate the British by a point-blank refusal. So he 
makes a counter-proposition which he knows the British are 
unlikely to accept and which, if they did, would be even more 
obnoxious to the Unionists than the mere retention of Articles 2 
and 3. So he makes the counter-proposition: "We'll drop 
Articles 2 and 3 if you give us a share in the government of 
Northern Ireland." That should hold Mr Major for the moment. 
  Mr Reynolds is primarily concerned with the internal 
politics 
of his side of the Border. The trouble is that the 
repercussions of that kind of politicking on the other side are 
becoming far more dangerous than the present Dublin government 
seems capable of imagining. Already the nationalist 
point-scoring that has become intrinsic to the "peace process" 
is costing more and more lives inside Northern Ireland. But 
things could get far worse, and quickly. 
  Mr Reynolds may not be too worried about destabilising 
Northern Ireland. He may even be gratified, as a politician, by 
the political browniepoints his tactics are earning him from the 
most benighted of his own backbenchers. But he should bethink 
himself that a destabilised Northern Ireland could speedily 
destabilise Republic, too. Driving a community n to desperation 
is a dangerous business, and Ulster Protestants have been driven 
far down that road. Further attempted progress down the 
nationalist agenda could be fatal. 
  I don't think John Major is likely to make much further 
progress. The results of the Downing Street Declaration have 
hardly been encouraging for him and the parliamentary arithmetic 
is against further concessions. But a future Labour government 
would be under pressure to show itself even nicer to Irish 
nationalists than Tories have been. In that connection, the 
sort of thing Mr Reynolds was talking about this week -- joint 
administration -- could well be attempted. If it were, it would 
precipitate a revolt among Ulster Protestants. British troops 
would be under fire from both sides, and British withdrawal 
would follow. The consequences would be shattering, for the 
North and the Republic. 
  In the Republic, there are some signs that people sense the 
danger. The leader of Fine Gae, John Bruton, has been 
courageously warning against the dangers of the course, and is 
beginning to attract significant support. I am all for 
opposition, in the Republic. But I live in mortal fear of a 
victory by the Opposition in Britain, and its probable 
consequences for Ireland. 

