Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Harish Mehta] </F>
  [Text] Singapore -- A new bank, Singapore Commercial Bank 
Ltd (SCB), opened recently in Phom Penh, becoming the second 
Singapore bank to do so. SCB pipped five other Singapore firms 
which have been given in-principle approvals to start banks, but 
have not yet done so. SCB's general manager Teoh Sam Ming told 
BUSINESS TIMES that the bank got its licence last December from 
the National Bank of Cambodia, the central bank, and started up 
soon after with a paid-up capital of U.S.$3 million. It offers 
savings and fixed deposit accounts. 
  SCB occupies five shophouses on the prestigious Monivong 
Boulevard, formerly known as Achar Mean Boulevard. SCB, 
registered in Phnom Penh, is owned by Singapore property 
developer Kong Look Sen, who is behind various residential 
buildings and real estate developments in Johor Baru. Mr Teoh 
said that Mr Kong views Cambodia with the same optimism as he 
does China when it began liberalising its economy in 1980s. 
  Mr Teoh said, however, there are operational problems as 
Cambodians are wary of banks because of a massive scam when the 
Khmer Rouge guerillas banned money after capturing power in 
1975. Many Cambodians lost money when banks closed down during 
the rule of the Khmer Rouge. "People still don't trust banks. 
We'll be there first to install safe deposit boxes in Phnom 
Penh, and this will be a major service," Mr Teoh said. 
  He hopes that a new land law will come into force so that 
foreign banks can extend loans and accept land as collateral. 
"Currently, loan applicants are required to transfer their land 
to the bank. But in reality, the applicants have many copies of 
their land titles which they pledge to many banks," he added. 
  About 20-odd foreign banks are operating in Phnom Penh. The 
first Singapore-backed bank opened for business last May just a 
few days before the national elections. 
  Four Singapore businessmen involved in property, diamonds 
and 
pottery invested U.S.$16 million to set up the Singapore Banking 
Corporation Ltd (SBC Bank). The four are Lim Kim Chong, Kun Kay 
Hong, Tay Ah Kiang, and Kwek Meng Kwang. 
  Mr Lim -- who is SBC Bank chairman -- is also chairman of 
Singapore-registered Diamond Industries Pte Ltd, and is involved 
in the property and diamond trade in Singapore, Malaysia and 
Australia. SBC Bank's managing director Mr Kun is in the 
property business. 
  The five Singapore firms given in-principle approvals to set 
up banks are Maya Manufacturing and Trading Pte Ltd , Goodhill 
Enterprise (S) Pte Ltd, Broadland Enterprises Pte Ltd, Wiselink 
Pte Ltd, and a project by Singapore businessmen Khoo Lim Leng 
and Eng Liat Kiang who plan to set up the Euroasia Bank Ltd. 

