Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Zdenek Jicinsky: "The Risks Arising From the </F>
Ideologization of Vaclav Klaus's Points of View"] 
  [Text] How many Klauses do we actually have? And which is 
the real one? The pragmatic one, for whom--from the point of 
view of economic transformation--we have already crossed the 
Rubicon, from which it should logically ensue that the issue of 
a struggle over the nature of our social and economic system 
has, in essence, been resolved? 
  Or, the one who, a little later, at a seminar on the 
government's economic strategy in Prague on 4 February 1994 
raised an admonitory finger: "The unfinished ideological 
dispute over the future of our social order will continue--one, 
under the slogan of consumer protection; two, under the slogan 
of environmental protection; three, under the slogan of 
protection for professional groups or chambers; and under other 
slogans. This dispute is taking place in the mass media and is 
there for all who want to see it explicitly, although it is 
camouflaged behind catchy phrases. The issue involves whether 
we are to have a truly free society and a free market or whether 
we are to have an interventionist, cooperative, neosocialist 
system that will lead us--albeit by more subtle means--into the 
same pitfalls as the former communist regime." 
  Klaus has accentuated this caustic tone and vocabulary very 
much in a number of his recent speeches. As a man who, in a 
relatively short period of time, has undergone extraordinary 
development and been transformed from a recognized economist and 
finance minister into the Czech prime minister and the most 
influential Czech politician, he has also learned to adapt his 
behavior and frequently proceed very pragmatically in practical 
policy. If recently, in the spirit of his ideology, he was 
again acting as a mentor to the Czech, and, in Davos, to the 
international public, then this was certainly intentional. 
  In view of the overall political situation, it seems--from 
his point of view--expedient to establish a clear and 
unequivocal strategy in the period prior to the approaching 
local and senatorial elections and, thus, to put the Civic 
Democratic Party [ODS] on the right track as the strongest 
political party and the main force in the government coalition. 
At the same time, a signal will also be given to the partners 
in the government coalition so that they do not forget who plays 
the leading role in it--both as a party and personally--and who, 
first and foremost, determines government policy. 
  Attacking the critics "from the right"--from CESKY DENIK and 
various organizations such as the Club of Non-Aligned 
Activists--who reproach the ODS and Klaus for deviating from the 
preelection promises, for not implementing a genuine right-wing 
policy, for not fighting hard enough against the communist past, 
and so on is also a specific form of defense. This could also 
be a signal to the bulk of the ODS--where, in various contexts, 
it is apparent that his views and stances meet with 
disagreement--that he is still the leading personality in this 
party. 
  At the same time, the acerbity of his views is directed 
against the opposition indiscriminately. He is attempting to 
politically disqualify and discredit it by identifying it with 
the old communist regime or by attributing to it the intention 
to revive socialism in a new form. The attitude prevalent among 
the public at the moment is not as uncritical as it used to be, 
although his "moral wear-and- tear" is still relatively slight. 
His ill-considered and one-sided points of view on various 
foreign policy issues in particular are criticized quite openly 
in the press. There are various reservations within the 
governing coalition with regard to Klaus's statements. 
Therefore, it will be necessary to monitor how the public 
perceives his ideological confirmation of his strategy and what 
kind of practical consequences this will have in Czech politics. 
<H5>  Adversaries From the Third Way </H5>
  Klaus, in all sorts of situations, categorically turns 
against the so-called third way and those whom he considers to 
be its advocates. He declares them to be the main adversaries 
in the endeavor to create a market economy. A very broad 
spectrum of people support this third way; almost everyone who 
disagrees with Klaus's concept that the free market is the basis 
and main instrument for dealing with all economic, ecological, 
and social issues belongs to it. So, he can indirectly proclaim 
himself to be the most conceptual and most consistent 
representative--and, undoubtedly, he feels this way--of the 
transition from the communist system to the market economy and a 
free society. This was also the spirit in which he addressed 
the international economic forum in Davos. 
  There he criticized Western Europe, among other things, for 
its etatist thinking and for its prevailing ideas about a social 
welfare state, while just a few people realize that the state 
can only fulfill this function if its citizens sacrifice a 
considerable amount of their freedom. 
  I have cited these views expressed by Klaus to illustrate 
the 
ideological nature of his way of thinking. Klaus adjusts the 
facts in accordance with his ideas so that he can more 
convincingly formulate his views. Klaus's ideology, however, is 
false knowledge. His ideas about a free market and a free 
society are implemented in virtually no European country. It is 
necessary to say the following: While Margaret Thatcher 
governed in Britain according to similar ideals, there was no 
economic growth there and even her resistance to the integrative 
processes within the European Community had unfavorable 
consequences for her country. This, however, ultimately caused 
her political downfall. The Czech Republic cannot be compared 
with the UK, either in terms of its economic and political power 
or in terms of its population and geographic position. The 
latitude for an isolationist position by the Czech Republic is 
much smaller. 
  A logical question arises in connection with these 
ideological, almost demagogically concluded formulations about 
the only correct method of transformation and the changes 
associated with it: Is any idea about economic transformation, 
apart from the one espoused by Vaclav Klaus, an example of this 
adverse third way? 
  R. Dahrendorf, whom perhaps even Klaus cannot regard as a 
crypto- communist and advocate of the "third way," wrote the 
following in his analysis of the potential for the development 
of the postcommunist countries in an open society: "Within the 
framework of the constitution of freedom, hundreds of paths lead 
forward, and they will all mix elements of economic policy and 
social reform in a way the purists will not like." He pointed 
out in this context that fundamentalism is more attractive than 
had been anticipated. "Fundamentalism may take on various forms, 
including nationalism, but, in each case, it deviates from the 
path toward an open society" (Reflections on the 
Revolution in Europe, page 144). 
  I am concerned that Klaus's economic 
fundamentalism--moreover, associated with a certain political 
nationalism--is diverting us from a path toward an open society; 
this view is borne out by recent Czech experience. 
<H5>  Oversimplified Condemnations of the "Welfare State" </H5>
  Questions about how Czech society will develop in the 
future, 
and the kind of relations it will forge with its neighbors and 
the whole of Europe, and the answers the relevant political 
forces give, will be very important for the Czech Republic's 
future development and its standing in Europe. The way the 
Czech Republic views the complicated and contentious 
ramifications of the integrative processes in Western Europe, 
especially the European Union as its basis, will be particularly 
important in these relations. 
  Klaus's ideas about a free society and a free market along 
with his condemnation of the bureaucratized, etatized society in 
Western European countries with their "welfare states" are 
oversimplified. In this ideological form, they could hardly 
become the positive vision for the future development of Czech 
society, which Klaus often talks about. In this regard, his 
ideas are too one-sided and lack substance. 
  In Western Europe in recent years some people have been 
critical of the intolerable social burden associated with the 
welfare state, a burden that has become a barrier to economic 
stimulation and motivation. It is a burden that continues to be 
intolerable, and not only in view of the economic recession. 
Those who want to alter economic and social policy--and it 
makes no difference whether they are social democrats or 
conservatives--are, however, very well aware that they cannot 
return to the stage preceding the evolution of the welfare state 
with its complicated system of sociopolitical relations and the 
institutions associated with them, a system that guarantees a 
way of life for society and, at the same time, does not endanger 
the principles of its arrangement. 
  This system of relations associated with a welfare state 
can, 
in any case, be altered and amended, but while maintaining its 
basic values and structures. It is strange that the concept of 
social justice, so reviled by Vaclav Klaus, is an element of the 
programs of all significant parties, parties of a social 
democratic and a conservative nature. 
  Fundamental legal acts, the constitutions of Western 
European 
countries, the International Agreement on Social, Economic, and 
Cultural Rights, and the European Social Charter have been an 
intrinsic element and manifestation of this development since 
World War II. No influential political forces are trying to 
abolish it and they do not treat it with disdain--as is 
customary in our country--as an undesirable "infestation" of the 
constitution by something that does not belong to it. 
  The government draft law on state employees, which strips 
them of their right to organize themselves in trade unions, is 
also an expression of this cold-shouldered attitude toward the 
Charter on Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. It is strange that 
right-wing oriented journalists consider the stipulations of the 
International Agreement on Social, Economic, and Cultural Rights 
and the conventions of the International Labor Office--which 
guarantee working people the right to organize themselves in 
trade unions and other rights--to be a negative consequence of 
socialist tendencies that, in their opinion, were broadly 
applied in Western Europe after World War II. 
  Views that the Czech Republic can develop quite separately 
and that it will not have to respect these main trends and rules 
of modern social and legal development (which is obviously what 
Klaus had in mind at the ODS assembly in Koprivnice when he 
described the Czech Republic as a "country trying not to repeat 
the errors the advanced Western countries have made in their 
policy in recent years") are groundless. If they were, however, 
to become fact after all, this would not mean that the Czech 
Republic would avoid the mistakes made by the advanced Western 
European countries, but it would be a sad testimony to its 
economic and social decline and to its inability to economically 
advance itself. From these points of view, Klaus's ideological 
opinions could have directly and indirectly unfavorable domestic 
and international political consequences. The complaint made by 
the Czech trade unions to the International Labor Office against 
the Czech Government concerning the aforementioned issue is 
oddly reminiscent of the complaint that Charter 77 sent to this 
organization under the former regime about the violation of 
various rights of the working people. I do not think this is to 
the Czech Republic's credit or that it will improve its 
international prestige. 

<H5>    Integration Is Not Only Economic </H5>
  The same also applies to Vaclav Klaus's negative attitude 
toward integrative processes within the European Union 
associated with the Maastricht Treaty and the problems that 
currently exist inside the European Union. In this context, 
Klaus has been critical of the too high and unnecessary 
ambitions for a unitarian or almost unitarian concept of Europe. 
(As is his wont, he modified this issue, because integration 
within the European Union cannot be identified with unification 
and federalization is not unification). According to him, 
Europe's future does not depend on the existence and activities 
of multilateral European institutions, but on the quality and 
structure of the political, social, and economic system in the 
individual European countries. 
  It goes without saying that, following the collapse of the 
communist system and the Soviet empire, a new situation has 
arisen in Europe and new and previously unanticipated problems 
are cropping up from the point of view of the integrative 
processes in Western Europe. However, Klaus, in the grip of his 
economic reductionism and unilateral criticism, is overlooking 
certain political facts here that could have very serious 
repercussions for the Czech Republic. 
  Criticism of the shortcomings of the integrative processes 
within the European Union--in which, incidentally, Klaus is in 
no way original, because it is commonplace in Western European 
political circles--must not lead to neglect of the essential 
political chain of events. If the integrative process does not 
continue and the will for a common foreign and security policy 
does not increase, destabilization could spread throughout the 
former post-communist countries from Russia all the way to 
Western Europe, where the policy of power-wielding interests 
could again begin to be asserted and Germany could again become 
an uncontrollable power. Former FRG Chancellor H. Schmidt said 
in an interview with P. Glotz that it is in the interests of all 
of Germany's neighbors to integrate this huge state and that the 
political elite in all the states of Europe have a pressing 
interest in "trussing up Germany." This is, according to him, 
one of the important reasons for ensuring that, despite the 
current Maastricht crisis, European integration continues 
(DIE NEUE GESELLSCHAFT No. 1/1994, page 7). 
  No Czech politician, let alone the Czech prime minister, can 
ignore facts of this kind, because they are vitally important 
for the future fate of the Czech state and the Czech nation. 
The problem of European integration is a complex one and it 
cannot be limited to an economic dimension. 
  Following the breakup of the CSFR, the Czech Republic is a 
relatively small state in a geopolitically important region, in 
Central Europe. Therefore, it must give careful thought to 
providing for its fundamental national and state interests while 
being aware of its possibilities and its role. It must, first 
and foremost, strive for good relations and cooperation with its 
neighbors. Putting on airs and isolationism--as a specific 
manifestation of Czech nationalism--are only to its detriment 
here, especially since, following the collapse of the communist 
regimes, the prerequisites have been created for relations 
between the Czech Republic and its neighbors to gradually free 
themselves from the negative heritage of the past and become 
relations of genuine cooperation. The ideologization of foreign 
policy, which manifests itself in some of Klaus's statements, is 
an obstacle to a well-balanced and promising Czech foreign 
policy. 

