BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement on Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini's presentation </F>
to ANC President Nelson Mandela on 8 April issued by Office of 
the Chief Minister of kwaZulu on the SAPA PR Wire Service] 
  [Text] Our meeting is taking place at a most crucial 
juncture in the history of our country. I feel that this meeting 
is somehow overdue and that because of the many postponements of 
our meeting we are now faced with a more difficult situation. 
  Before we proceed into any discussion I think it is 
important 
to remind oneself of the background which leads us to meet today. 
  The most immediate element of that background is the Shell 
House massacre of my subjects. I would fail in my duty and 
responsibility to my subjects if I were not to raise this issue 
at the very outset of our discussions. No words can express the 
horror I feel for the massacre of my father's people who were 
peacefully demonstrating for the restoration of the Kingdom of 
kwaZulu. 
  In this respect my pain is great and I do not wish that my 
grief obfuscates my objectivity in assessing and describing what 
happened in front of the headquarters of the political 
organisation you lead. In order to be objective I wish to refer 
to the description of the relevant facts in the editorial of the 
Sunday edition of THE TIMES of London, a paper with a world-wide 
reputation for objectivity and impartiality. 
  "... Last week's horrific events in central Johannesburg: 
the 
ANC is determined to take power by riding roughshod over whose 
who stand in its way. The movement's true nature was exposed 
when its gunmen mowed down Zulu traditionalists exercising their 
democratic right to demonstrate their opposition to the election 
and their support for their king's call for independence for 
kwaZulu/Natal. As our investigation of events shows, witnesses 
(including ANC officials) saw Zulus slaughtered in cold blood 
merely for having the temerity to march close to the ANC 
headquarters. 
  "Yet three days earlier tens of thousands of ANC supporters 
had marched through Durban, a city divided between it and 
Inkatha. They went past Inkatha's offices, yet none was shot. 
When the Zulus did the same last Monday in Johannesburg, 53 of 
them were slaughtered. While it preaches democracy, the ANC 
practices totalitarianism. It prefers to kill its opponents 
rather than use reason and argument. Its intolerance to 
criticism and its adherence to communist ideals means South 
Africa will be a virtual one-party state. As its officials 
gloated over its `victory' last Monday, they refused to allow 
the police entry to their headquarters to gather ballistic 
evidence." 
  It will take time to heal this wound, but some steps can be 
taken immediately and must be taken immediately. In the name of 
my father's people I must ask that you allow access to all 
information in the possession your organisation related to the 
Shell House massacre, including ballistic evidence. I must ask 
that you do whatever is in your power as the president of the 
ANC to ensure that all those who plotted, organised and executed 
the massacre are arrested and tried for their crime. Until and 
unless you personally distance yourself from the shedding of the 
innocent blood of my father's people by means of your personal 
initiative leading to the conviction of those who are guilty of 
this crime our dialogue will remain difficult if not impossible. 
  Our meeting today takes place after you cancelled at the 
last 
moment our scheduled meeting in Ulundi on March 18, 1994. I 
hoped to meet you in Ulundi as originally scheduled. Ulundi is a 
very special place for me, and it is very right that I meet you 
here in this place which is so poignant with the living history 
of the Zulu people. It was on the plains of Ulundi around us 
that the British finally defeated King Cetshwayo's army. When 
decisions had to be made about the location of the kwaZulu 
legislative assembly, there was only one decision which we Zulus 
could make -- to locate the kwaZulu legislative assembly there 
on that historic site in order to rise again from the ashes of 
British conquest on July 4, 1879. 
  We have, as a nation, been involved in a struggle for our 
very existence, and we have gone through wars and rebellions and 
two of the great Zulu kings, in whose footsteps I now walk, 
suffered arrest, banishment and exile. Our choice of Ulundi as 
the capital of kwaZulu reflected a historic decision to use the 
kwaZulu legislative assembly and this place to unite the Zulu 
people, and to face them towards the final phase in our struggle 
for liberation from colonialism and apartheid. 
  I feel I have to pause, sir, to help you understand the 
reasons underlying my previous request that you meet me in 
Ulundi. And I want you to understand why it was the refusal of 
Mr Walter Sisulu and those who were released with him to do so, 
and their demand that they meet me in one of my palaces located 
in the Nongoma district, that was so offensive to the Zulu 
people. You will remember that when you and I spoke on the 
telephone shortly after your release, you tried to persuade me 
to meet Mr Sisulu as he had demanded, as a condition for you to 
subsequently meet with me. 
  The Zulu monarchy and all its institutions are surrounded 
and 
protected by hallowed traditions and protocol that have evolved 
over nearly two centuries. Zulu kings are kings indeed, and 
today I speak as the king of the Zulu nation when I say that the 
Zulu monarchy is so fundamentally important that each Zulu king, 
each in his own term, is no more than the humble custodian of 
the institutions of the monarchy. When I speak of the monarch as 
a reigning Zulu king, I do not speak for myself, and I 
personally claim no great eminence. I am speaking of it as an 
institution of the Zulu people. Any Zulu king who sought 
personal eminence would betray the institutions of the monarchy, 
and individual kings were never more important than the monarchy 
itself. They evolved as part of the developing soul of the Zulu 
people. However much I subsume the unity and the well-being of 
my father's people in my own being, it is not I the person, 
Zwelithini, who has any pre-eminence. 
  When therefore I say, Mr Mandela, that you, sir, offended 
the protocol which surrounds myself and which has surrounded 
other great Zulu kings in whose footsteps I walk, I am not 
putting myself above yourself when I say what I am saying to you 
on this question. I very much regret the fact that we are only 
meeting today four years after your release from prison. When 
you requested through the prince of kwaPhindangene as your 
former colleague in the ANC and lifetime friend, to see me, I 
immediately agreed. I had planned to see you in the important 
traditional home of King Dinuzulu at Osuthu Royal Residence on 
the 10th of May 1990. 
  I stated that I would then have another meeting with you on 
the 11th of May at kwaKhangelamankengane Palace for a discussion 
which I hoped was to be around the violence that has so racked 
my nation. You requested that I should accompany you with my 
prime minister, the prince of kwaPhindangene, to lay a wreath at 
the grave of the founder of the Zulu nation, King Shaka, and I 
agreed to do so, regardless of the fact that it is not our Zulu 
tradition to lay wreaths on our king's graves, but I was 
prepared to do so in deference to you. 
  Why did we want to do all these things for you, particularly 
as I do not know you at all? I wanted us to honour you as a 
friend of both my late father, King Bhekuzulu ka Solomon, and of 
my uncle, Prince Mangosuthu. I also felt that whatever the 
circumstances of your incarceration were, you deserved honour 
after having sacrificed 27 years of your life in jail for the 
cause of black liberation. 
  This is why I was saddened by all sorts of issues that crept 
in and upset all the arrangements that my prime minister and I 
had so carefully made for your visit to kwaZulu. I heard that it 
was stated by you, and repeated in one of your letters to me 
that you were told to come alone. I think this is a 
misunderstanding as we could never expect anyone of your status 
to come alone. The only distinction we wanted to make to your 
visit to Osuthu, was that this would be a visit to our important 
ancestral home where there would be no need to bring all your 
colleagues, who could be present at the discussion we were 
hoping to have the following day. But there was no suggestion 
that you should visit Osuthu just by yourself. 
  You will recall that my uncle, Prince Mangosuthu, broke 
protocol and gave you all my private phone numbers. By doing so, 
this showed the measure of the high esteem with which you are 
regarded by us. You phoned me from England and I spoke to you 
and agreed to a time when you expected to see me. I have never 
been unwilling to receive you, Mr Mandela. Why should I be 
unwilling to see you with the background that I have given. 
  I was quite insulted when a suggestion was made that I was 
prevented from seeing you by my prime minister and uncle, Prince 
Mangosuthu. This was repeated by many people in your camp, such 
as Mr Phathekile Holomisa, and several Natal leaders of your 
organisation. This I took as an insult to me, my uncle and my 
people. Why would the chief minister see you with alacrity each 
and every time you have wanted to meet with him, and then be 
unwilling that I should meet with you. 
  When you were quoted in your address to a rally at Princess 
Magogo stadium in kwaMashu as saying that you have asked Mr Zuma 
to ask me to give you a date on which you can have an audience 
with me, and you added that this was the last time you would 
make such a request, I was astounded. With the respect I have 
for you as someone of your age and as a leader, i began to 
wonder what sort of person you are, as I do not know you. And 
when you added that you would not kiss the ground before me, I 
became even more confused. I have never demanded that anyone 
does that before me. 
  I think it would be wrong for me not to get all these things 
off my chest. I am not expecting these things to cloud the 
issues that you have publicly stated you wish to discuss with 
me. I put them down for the record without expecting them to be 
the cause of any acrimony between us. 
  I also want to say that various members of the National 
Executive Committee of the ANC and leaders of the ANC in the 
region of kwaZulu-Natal, have also failed to understand the 
protocol sur- rounding myself as the Zulu monarch. A Zulu king 
is not just another black leader who should be approachable by 
just anybody. When your lieutenants either sought to see me 
themselves, or sought an audien- ce with me for you, they did 
not understand that the way to the monarch had necessarily to go 
through the protocol of making ar- rangements through my prime 
minister, the prince of kwaPhindangene. In fact, they approached 
various IFP [Inkatha Freedom Party] leaders who have nothing to 
do with the Zulu royal court. 
  I hope, sir, that the audience that I have given you will be 
conducted with the dignity and the wisdom of Zulu protocol. The 
introduction of yourself to me by my prime minister was very 
correct, and I sincerely hope that you, sir, will accept that in 
future protocol will be properly observed. 
  Mr Mandela, I have to say these things to show my own 
respect 
to the institutions of the monarchy in which I serve as reigning 
king. I also want you to understand that the slight to my person 
and to my dignity I am talking of so simply and so openly, took 
on many forms and was repeated many times. I, as the reigning 
monarch of the Zulu people, have thus far been protected and the 
monarchy has thus far been preserved for a provisional time by 
my location in the kwaZulu legislative assembly as a 
constitutional monarch. 
  The ANC's attitude to the kwaZulu legislative assembly in 
which I am located and surrounded by kwaZulu legislative 
assembly protocol, has also been most offensive to me. There can 
be no action against the kwaZulu legislative assembly without it 
at the same time being action against me as reigning king. The 
kwaZulu legislative assembly is a place where debates take place 
and it is a place where policy is formed. It is therefore a 
place where opinion and counter- opinion is pitted against each 
other. There is room in the kwaZulu legislative assembly and its 
proceedings for differences of opinion. 
  The insults that many spokespersons of the ANC, and 
particularly the Natal leaders of the ANC, have hurled at me 
numerous times that I am on the pay roll of the kwaZulu 
government, or that my prime minister, Prince Mangosuthu, is my 
paymaster, is something which is more than just offensive. It is 
the traditional duty of my people to build my residences, to 
till my land and to look after me as their king. The Ethula 
custom obliged many of the subjects of the king to deliver gifts 
of cattle to the king and this is our tradition. The Zulu nation 
is the only one in southern Africa that developed to statehood 
to the extent of having a standing army. This is why even now I 
am the only ruler or king who has what are called amabutho or 
regiments. Even my uncle the chief minister belongs to one of 
the king's regiments -- called the Manukelana Regiment. It was 
set up by prince Mshiyeni ka Dinuzulu during the interregnum 
when he was acting for my late father, King Bhekuzulu ka 
Solomon, during his minority. 
  The British monarch is supported from state coffers. The 
Swedish king is supported from state coffers. The Norwegian king 
is supported from state coffers. The Belgian king is supported 
from state coffers. The Danish monarch is supported from state 
coffers. The Dutchc monarch is supported from state coffers. The 
king of Tonga is supported from state coffers. The king of 
Lesotho is supported from state coffers. The king of Swaziland 
is supported from state coffers. What should be so exceptional 
about the Zulu monarchy in this respect? Why does the ANC do 
what it is doing to hurl these sort of insults at me? My uncle 
the prince of kwaPhindangene as chief minister, and members of 
his cabinet, have a national duty to uphold the dignity of my 
office, my monarchy and kingdom. 
  The African National Congress has never entered any kwaZulu 
election and has been completely unrepresented in the kwaZulu 
legislative assembly. It has been unrepresented because the ANC 
disdained the assembly itself, and talked about it, and 
propagandised against it, in terms which my people will insist 
are vile terms. When the ANC launched a national mass action 
campaign in July 1990 after your release from jail to destroy 
the kwaZulu government and to have the kwaZulu Police disbanded, 
all Zulus true and good were offended. 
  The ANC promoted by means of the TEC [Transitional Executive 
Council] and the declaration of the state of emergency the 
invasion of kwaZulu by the South African Defence Force and the 
South African Police. I want to make it clear that I, the king 
of the Zulu nation and my father's people consider the 
declaration of a state of emergency in kwaZulu to be an act of 
foreign aggression, an invasion of our territory, and a rape of 
our national dignity and pride. I the king of the Zulu nation 
and my father's people shall never recognise the legitimacy of 
the actions taken in terms of the declaration of the state of 
emergency. 
  I also wish to mention that the constant stigmatisation of 
my 
uncle, the prince of kwaPhindangene, as a surrogate leader by 
yourself, sir, also gave rise to great offence. My uncle, the 
traditional prime minister of my people, proudly takes his place 
in the kwaZulu legislative assembly as an arena in which he has 
confronted apartheid. It was he who destroyed the South African 
Government's homeland policy, and it was his refusal to accept 
so-called independence that destroyed Mr John Vorster's and Mr P 
W Botha's dream of establishing a confederation of South African 
states. You, sir, I understand, have latterly given credit where 
credit was due in praising the role of the prince of 
kwaPhindangene in these matters. For us participation was a 
strategy. You yourself, sir, wrote that non-participation was a 
strategic concept and should not be elevated to a principle. 
  I want also, sir, to say that I could go on for some 
considerable time to talk of the offenses to which the Zulu 
nation has taken exception, and to the many ways in which the 
ANC has shown disdain for the Zulu people, the monarchy and the 
kwaZulu legisilative assembly. We meet today against the 
background of two direct and intolerable attacks on the Zulu 
nation and to any Zulu in South Africa: the Shell House massacre 
and the declaration of the state of emergency in kwaZulu, with 
consequent military invasion. 
  I have only done as much as is needed to clear things from 
my 
heart so that we can talk openly and simply about the prime 
purpose of our meeting. 
  I understood the purpose of this meeting to enable you, sir, 
to express whatever views you wish to express on my demand for 
the recognition of the sovereignty of the Zulu kingdom. A 
kingdom is either sovereign or not. Sovereignty can not be 
granted, nor can it be pleaded for. It is not something that can 
be negotiated for or conferred on us by anyone. 
  Allow me, sir, to talk to you briefly about the sovereignty 
of the Zulu kingdom. The Zulu nation is the only nation in the 
whole of southern Africa which had to face the full might of the 
British or any other army. The Zulu nation was the last nation 
to take up arms against the colonial enemies of black South 
Africa. When the Bambatha rebellion erupted, it led to the 
arrest, conviction for treason and the exiling of King Dinuzulu 
ka Cetshwayo, who was my great-grandfather and the maternal 
grandfather of my uncle, the prince of kwaPhindangene, whom your 
organisation so disdains. 
  The Zulus were the only people in the whole of South Africa 
on whom the bantu authorities system had finally to be forced, 
and throughout the period between the forcing of the bantu 
authorities system on us and the final fall of apartheid, Zulus 
played as proud a role as they had previously played between 
1910 and 1948. 
  It was through the kwaZulu legislative assembly that my 
prime 
minister, Prince Mangoshuthu Buthelezi, as chief minister, with 
his colleagues, foiled the plans of the National Party 
government to denationalise all black South Africans. This is 
what prompted the former chairman of the Anglo-American Company, 
Mr Gavin Relly, to say of him in May 1986: 
  "No one, the ANC included, has done more to halt the 
ideological thrust of apartheid than Buthelezi because he has 
rejected violence as an instrument to bring about national 
change, he naturally stands in a better light for many than 
those who do not. It is easy to forget that he was the only 
black leader with an authentic power base to have faced the 
heat, a long time ago, of a government still determined to 
enforce apartheid. I think history, if reasonably and 
objectively written, will endorse the fact that he was the anvil 
on which apartheid ultimately faltered." 
  The founding father of the old African National Congress was 
a Zulu, Pixley ka Isaka Seme, who was married to my grand-aunt, 
Princess Phikisile ka Dinuzulu, and it was a Zulu, Chief Albert 
Lutuli, who salvaged the ANC from disarray and disrepute in the 
first five years of National Party rule, when it was almost 
moribund. 
  Throughout the period of conquest and subjugation, it was 
Zulu identity which kept the Zulus intact as a vibrant force 
against colonialism and apartheid. The British set out to 
dismember and destroy the Zulu kingdom after we were finally 
defeated at the battle of Ulundi. They did conquer us, but they 
never crushed us. 
  The sovereignty that was indisputably ours in the 19th 
Century remained a living reality in southern Africa. Our 
sovereignty was forged by history. It is simply a fact, sir, 
that sovereignty forged by history can not be undone by 
political edict, or by the passing of a law, or by the forcing 
of a constitution on the people of a sovereign kingdom which 
they reject in part and in whole. 
  I repeat, that under the kwaZulu legislative assembly the 
Zulu monarchy was given interim protection by the South African 
drama as the struggle for liberation ran its course. Now that 
apartheid has been finally destroyed and a new South Africa is 
being shaped, there shall emerge a sovereign Zulu kingdom. I am 
not prepared to talk to you, sir, about whether or not there 
shall be a sovereign Zulu kingdom in the new South Africa. The 
only thing to talk about are the modalities of bringing the 
sovereignty of the Zulu kingdom into full recognition and 
relating the kingdom properly to the rest of South Africa. 
  In these matters about which I am prepared to talk, there is 
a great deal to discuss. I and my prime minister have always 
known that the kwaZulu legislative assembly was a transitional 
structure which would finally evolve into a permanent 
governmental structure within the context of the wider South 
Africa. The kwaZulu government initiated the Buthelezi 
commission and then later the kwaZulu-Natal indaba [meeting] in 
two very serious attempts to break new ground in negotiation 
endeavours to conceive of race-free alternatives to apartheid. 
  It was my great, great-grandfather King Cetshwayo ka Mpande, 
who was in many respects the first new South African who saw 
that the old historic order of things in the sub-continent would 
have to be changed. It was he who took to diplomacy and the 
writing of letters and dispatches which he used to replace the 
shield and the spear. He recognised that it was by diplomacy and 
the drawing up of treaties that the new South Africa would be 
shaped. He saw over a century ago what we now call the new South 
Africa. He recognised that the Zulu empire which actually spread 
its influence from the Caledon River in the south, right through 
what is now the centre of Mozambique and Zimbabwe, would have to 
be abandoned. He recognised that the kingdom of kwaZulu, bounded 
by the Umtamvuna River in the south, the terrains of King 
Moshoeshoe in the west, the Mcmahon boundary between kwaZulu and 
Mozambique and the boundaries of Swazi domain in the north, set 
fixed boundaries. He also recognised the final kwaZulu boundary 
in the west would be fixed by treaty and negotiation, but would 
extend well into the present day Transvaal. 
  One of the wisdoms distilled out of the colonial and post- 
colonial periods was that post-colonial Africa had to start with 
boundaries of states as they were produced by history in the 
colonial period. There is virtually no state in Africa which 
could not lay traditional claim to territories beyond its 
boundaries. But African states have generally employed the 
wisdom of not fighting wars over claims and counter-claims to 
the territorial limits of states. I accept this wisdom of 
Africa, and I say that the sovereign kingdom of kwaZulu will be 
bounded by the Transvaal in the west, Mozambique and Swaziland 
in the north, and Transkei and Lesotho in the south and south 
west. 
  Mr Mandela, I must inform you, sir, that I reject the 1993 
constitution even as amended, because it extends the politically 
greedy arm of Pretoria right across the Zulu kingdom. The 
kingdom of kwaZulu must preferably be made part of the new South 
Africa, but never at the expense of the sovereignty of the 
kingdom. I and my people would like to have just elbow room 
within a greater South Africa. My people can police their 
region. A nation such as ours must have militia, for example, 
and all these things are not possible under this constitution. 
The 1993 constitution makes no provision for this sovereignty. 
It equates the Zulu monarchy with the institutions of 
chieftainships elsewhere. The provisions it makes for the 
representation of traditional leaders quite obviously were not 
drawn up by anybody who had any insight into Zulu society and 
who were prepared to accommodate the Zulu monarchy. 
  When I saw the failure of negotiations and particularly the 
failure of negotiations to deliver federalism, in which the 
kwaZulu-Natal province would be sufficiently autonomous to 
accommodate a sovereign Zulu kingdom, and the role of the Zulu 
monarchy, I had to act decisively. 
  I therefore informed the prince of kwaPhindangene that I 
wished to see the state president and to lay before him the 
claim of Zulu sovereignty for the kingdom. I did so. To my 
dismay the state president sat and listened, and then sought to 
establish negotiations about the sovereignty of the kingdom. 
There was no acceptance of the sovereignty of the kingdom which 
would have permitted discussion about how that kingdom would be 
organised internally, and how its internal organisation would 
interface with the rest of South Africa. 
  I now see that you, sir, and the prince of kwaPhindangene, 
have agreed to submit your differences to an international 
mediation process. Inevitably that process will deliver either 
failure or success which will impact on my own position. 
  As things now stand I cannot encourage my fathers's people 
to 
vote on the 26th, 27th and 28th of April and thereby lend 
legitimacy to what will be destructive of the very foundations 
on which the sovereignty of the Zulu kingdom rests. You, sir, 
are rushing into an election which I and the Zulu people reject. 
After the Shell House massacre, the Zulu nation carries an 
additional open wound: those who died because they were 
exercising their democratic right to oppose the election, shall 
be celebrated and remembered in various ways which we will 
announce soon. This makes discussions between us on this vital 
matter both extremely urgent and very, very difficult. 
  As you react to my introductory words, sir, you must 
consider 
that I am bound by my duties and responsibilities towards my 
father's people and towards the Zulu nation. It is my duty and 
responsibility to ensure that the interests of the Zulu nation 
are protected and preserved in the present unfolding of 
historical events in South Africa. As I speak about the 
interests of the Zulu nation, I am deeply aware that such 
interests combine together the wants and aspirations of all the 
past and present generations of Zulus, and of all the 
generations of Zulus yet to come. 
  I, as the king of the Zulu nation, am part of that 
continuum. Throughout that continuum of unfolding historical 
events, the Zulu nation has sought its right to exist on its 
land as a nation and as a people. Since the battle of Ulundi the 
Zulu nation remained a sovereign nation, even if our sovereignty 
was limited by the external coercion of the governments which 
had conquered us. In fact, the Zulu nation and my father's 
people continued to exercise their sovereignty and 
self-government to the fullest extent allowed under the 
circumstances. It is true that the Zulu nation not only 
preserved its language and culture but also its laws and 
societal organisation. The sovereignty of the Zulu nation in 
this respect continued to exist through the institution of the 
Zulu monarchy. The Zulu nation did not choose to be organised in 
the form of a self-governing territory within the grand scheme 
of apartheid, for the self-governing territory was imposed on 
the Zulu nation. However, the establishment of the kwaZulu 
government under the regime of apartheid provided a structure of 
convenience for the self-governance of the Zulu nation. 
  As we are moving into the final stage of liberation, I, as 
the king of the Zulu nation, have a duty to ensure that my 
father's people and the Zulu nation preserve their right of 
self-governance. The Zulu nation never considered its right of 
self-determination to be an exclusive one, for the Zulu nation 
has always expressed its right of self-determination along with 
all the other people who share its ancestral Zulu territory. 
  This was clearly shown by the effort of the Buthelezi 
Commission and the kwaZulu-Natal indaba which led to the joint 
administration of the territory of the Zulus by the joint 
executive authority. Throughout this process, the Zulu nation 
sought to harmonise its interests with the interests of all the 
other people living in kwaZulu/Natal in a shared vision of 
democracy, freedom, mutual respect and pluralism. 
  This process culminated in the adoption of the constitution 
of the state of kwaZulu-Natal on December 1, 1992. The adoption 
of this constitution expressed more than the right of 
self-determination of the Zulu nation. It was also a covenant 
which the Zulu nation undersigned for the benefit of all the 
other people living within the ancestral territory of the Zulu 
nation. 
  The constitution of the state of kwaZulu/Natal set out the 
bottom line for the Zulu nation. It was a compromise between the 
aspirations of the Zulu nation to self-governance and its 
willingness to participate in a united South Africa. The 
constitution of the state of kwaZulu/Natal has the purpose of 
bringing together the Zulu people along with all the other 
people living in the territory. At the same time it recognised 
Zulu sovereignty and translated it into the formation of a 
member state of a federation of states. We dearly hoped that a 
federation of states, such as the United States of America, 
could be formed through negotiations at central level. We had 
hoped that such negotiations would recognise the constitution of 
the state of kwaZulu/Natal. 
  I, the king of the Zulu nation, supported the adoption of 
the 
constitution of the state of kwaZulu/Natal as a compromise 
document and as a means of reconciliation. The constitution of 
the state of kwaZulu-Natal would have left the people of our 
region to decide on all matters of importance to us. The 
constitution would have recognised to our region the right to 
decide on all matters related to our societal organisation. 
Among those matters are important things such as family, 
criminal, contract, commercial, and administrative law. 
  Moreover, the constitution of the state of kwaZulu-Natal had 
the purpose of entrenching a special area of protection and 
autonomy for the Zulu monarchy. In fact the constitution 
entrenched traditional law and customs of which I, as the king 
of the Zulus, am the custodian. The production and protection of 
traditional law would have remained within my domain. No law of 
the central or provincial parliament could have undermined or 
interfered with the importance of traditional law in organising 
and preserving our society. Moreover, and very importantly, the 
constitution would have entrenched communal property and our 
system of courts. In addition, the electoral system adopted in 
that constitution was particularly designed to cater for the 
needs of the Zulu monarchy and our traditional structures, such 
as amakhosi [chiefs] and indunas. 
  The process of negotiation at the World Trade Centre ignored 
the constitution of the state of kwaZulu-Natal and proceeded to 
develop a constitutional framework in which I as the king of the 
Zulu nation and the Zulu nation itself, had no space or 
recognition. Under the 1993 constitution as amended, the 
national parliament could legislate on any matter related to 
communal property on the land of the Zulu nation. Moreover, the 
central parliament will have all residual powers which will 
allow the central government to establish a unitary form of 
societal organisation with only one family or criminal law, for 
instance. Under the World Trade Centre constitution the Zulu 
nation will not have the opportunity to remain a society within 
a broader South African society. 
  It was for this reason that the demands for sovereignty and 
self-determination of the Zulu nation cannot be accommodated 
within the structure of the 1993 constitution. It was for this 
reason that I, the king of the Zulu nation, had no choice but to 
pursue the restoration of the kingdom of kwaZulu as it existed 
before its conquest by those who undermined our sovereignty. 
  I have met on several occasions with Mr F W de Klerk in his 
capacity as the state president of South Africa. To him I 
clearly and with no uncertainty signified that the claim of the 
Zulu nation for its sovereignty and self-determination cannot be 
accommodated within the structures of the 1993 constitution. To 
him I clearly with no uncertainty said that I as the king of the 
Zulu nation am under an obligation to ensure that the 
sovereignty and the aspirations of the Zulu nation would not be 
obliterated by the 1993 constitution. In that respect, I made it 
very clear that since the sovereignty and self-determination of 
the Zulu nation, as I expressed them to the state president, are 
irreconcilable with the present constitution, it becomes 
necessary that the sovereignty of the Zulu nation shall continue 
to exist irrespective of the present constitution. 
  For this reason on March 18, 1994, the day on which we were 
supposed to meet in Ulundi, I gave a report to the Zulu nation 
detailing the history of my negotiations with the state 
president on the issue of the restoration of the kingdom of 
kwaZulu. On the occasion I made the following statements to my 
father's people and the Zulu nation: 
  "History is calling on us to finalise the liberation of our 
people from over a century of foreign domination. We have 
reached the point of no return at which we are faced with 
enormous responsibilities. 
  "We have reached the end of a road and we are faced with the 
harsh reality that the South African Government can not and will 
not facilitate the restoration of the sovereign kingdom of 
kwaZulu. We are faced with the harsh reality that the South 
African Government can not and will not facilitate the 
restoration of the sovereign kingdom of kwaZulu. We are faced 
with the historical dilemma of either succumbing and forever 
relinquishing our inalienable right and sovereignty, or to take 
it upon ourselves to realise and bring into existence what is 
ours, what belonged to our fathers and what belongs to our 
children. The Zulu nation is now left with the responsibility of 
finding the strength and the resources to bring about the 
restoration of our kingdom and to achieve our national 
self-determination in a free and independent country." 
  We must have faith in our final victory and in the success 
of the liberation of our people. We shall resist any attempt to 
constrain the forces of our liberation. I have requested 
President de Klerk to sort out this issue of our sovereignty and 
the future of the kingdom of kwaZulu, before the election. 
  The holding of elections under the 1993 constitution in 
terms 
of a unified South Africa, is an immediate denial of our claim 
for sovereignty and self-determination. In this regard, there 
can be no compromise or flexibility and I have the duty as the 
king of the Zulus to express this message in clear and 
unequivocal terms. In the circumstances, I find it quite 
impossible to recommend that any of my subjects who are loyal 
to the throne should participate in the forthcoming election, 
unless this matter is settled. 
  I call on you, my father's people and the Zulu nation, to 
bring to reality the realisation of our dream. The call for 
our freedom can no longer be delayed. Freedom is never 
granted, sovereignty is never granted. Either it exists and is 
recognised, or it does not exist. We the Zulu nation convene 
today on the battleground which subjugated the freedom of our 
forefathers. 
  We here today proclaim before the world our freedom and 
sovereignty and our unwavering will to defend it all costs. 
  I, King Zwelithini Goodwill ka Bhekuzulu, fulfil today my 
historical role and responsibility to declare my commitment to 
the freedom and sovereignty of the Zulu nation, and to assert 
the sovereignty of my father's people over their ancestral 
territory. 
  I call on all Zulus to unite in the name of the kingdom of 
kwaZulu. I call on all Zulus to fulfil their sacred duty to 
defend our freedom and sovereignty to anyone in southern Africa 
who will dare to challenge it. The road ahead is not going to be 
an easy one, but I know that you, my father's people and the 
Zulu nation, will meet with courage, determination and pride the 
challenge that history has put on all of us. God bless all our 
efforts for the restoration of our kingdom. 
  I hope that my comments to you, sir, have made it clear that 
the restoration of the kingdom of kwaZulu is a now fact of 
history. It is also a fact of history that I will not encourage 
the Zulu nation to participate in any election under the 1993 
constitution in its present formulation. The rejection of the 
Zulu nation's self-rule within a federal formula leaves us with 
no other option, whatever it may cost us. 
  The position of the kingdom of kwaZulu in relation to the 
rest of South Africa is something that will emerge through our 
negotiations and dialogue. 
  It is therefore with some interest that I will sit back and 
listen to whatever comments that you and members of your 
executive care to make, and i hope you will also listen with 
attention to what some of my people may want to say on this 
important matter of the Zulu monarchy, the Zulu kingdom and the 
position of that kingdom within a free South Africa. Whether we 
end up as part of one federal state of South Africa, or as a 
completely autonomous state, will depend on what you and others 
in South Africa do to me and my people. The key thing is whether 
you are prepared to listen to our just aspirations, or whether, 
like those who conquered us, you think you must trample with 
your feet on those just aspirations of my nation. 

