Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["South Side Must Bear Responsibility for Stalled Working </F>
Contact" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 20 (KCNA) -- The working-level 
contact for the exchange of presidential envoys between the 
North and the South which was held Saturday was foiled due to 
the South side's behavior. Commenting on this, a NODONG SINMUN 
analyst today says now the South Korean ruling quarters will be 
unable to duck their criminal responsibility for bringing the 
North-South relations again to an unpredictable phase of 
confrontation to attain their political aims. 
  The news analyst notes: 
  The whole course of the working-level contact tells that the 
South Korean authorities are, indeed, a group of heinous 
anti-national, anti-reunification separatists only seeking 
confrontation, division and war. 
  If the South side had really intended to exchange special 
envoys, it should have admitted and apologized for its criminal 
act in having abused the working contact to attain its political 
purpose and shown an affirmative response to the just proposal 
of the North side. 
  The South side, however, insulted the North side's proposal 
to take the stand and attitude of national independence as a 
"far-fetched redundancy". This is virtually a declaration that 
it has no intention to exchange special envoys. 
  At the negotiating table the South side let loose a string 
of 
provocative remarks getting on the nerve of the dialogue 
partner, and, behind the scene, made a virtual declaration of 
confrontation and war like "strong countermeasure". This was a 
deliberate and premeditated act to put the brakes on the 
DPRK-U.S. talks by foiling the working-level contact for the 
exchange of special envoys. 
  The South Korean people will never pardon the Kim Yong-sam 
group for foiling the working contact for the exchange of 
special envoys and bringing the North-South relations to a worst 
phase. 
  The South Korean authorities must admit and apologize to the 
nation for their criminal act in having abused the exchange of 
special envoys for their political stratagem to obstruct the 
DPRK-U.S. talks. 

