Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] All over the world, great efforts are being made in 
various directions to make wider use of solar power. In 
addition to solar heat collectors, which are primarily used to 
heat water, solar cells also make it possible to generate 
electrical current directly from sunlight (photovoltaics). 
Photovoltaics is already being widely used to generate 
electricity in remote areas and for small- scale applications in 
appliances. Photovoltaics is also being used in numerous 
demonstration plants in conjunction with mains electricity. The 
electricity from main-connected photovoltaic systems still costs 
about 10 times as much as conventionally generated mains 
electricity. Of the several approaches being explored in an 
attempt to lower the cost of photovoltaics, it is considered 
that the scientific quest for more effective solar cell 
materials and the development of cheaper production methods hold 
out the best prospects. High-absorption thin-film solar cells 
and novel production processes involving cost-saving material 
deposition onto a substrate take on particular significance in 
this respect. The Berlin-based Hahn-Meitner Institute, working 
with the University of Stuttgart's Institute of Physical 
Electronics, has recently achieved a significant improvement in 
efficiency in a thin-film solar cell made of copper, indium, and 
sulfur. This sulfurous material is largely 
environment-compatible. The efficiency of this novel solar cell 
was raised to 10.2 percent -- in natural daylight and without 
further optimization in the form of, for example, an 
antireflection coating. 
  This material's theoretical efficiency exceeds the maximum 
performance of silicon. The thickness of the absorber layer, 
which has a direct bearing on production costs, needs to be only 
three-thousandths of a millimeter, so copper-indium disulfide 
has great development potential. It was possible to raise the 
degree of efficiency in the new cells because the vapor 
deposition process produces copper-rich photoactive material 
with a high sulfur surplus. An improved ``window material'' 
used as a transparent, conductive contact layer also contributed 
to this positive result. 

