BFN 

  [Text] The sudden visit to China by Choe Kwang, chief of 
the General Staff of the North Korean Army, on 6 June, when the 
international community's moves for sanctions against North 
Korea were in full swing, undoubtedly prompted a lot of 
attention at home and abroad. Of course, the focus of the 
attention was directed to his meetings with high-ranking Chinese 
leaders, including Jiang Zemin. However, we also focused our 
attention on the fact that he is 76 years old. 
  If he were in our country, he would be at the age of taking 
care of his grandchildren at home. However, he is still playing 
a most important role in the North Korean society. What is more 
unique is that most of the members of the supreme leadership of 
the North Korean Army are in their seventies and over. 
  In April 1992, North Korea took the large-scale personnel 
action of promoting 664 general officers on the occasion of the 
60th anniversary of the founding of the People's Army. This 
personnel action was aimed at strengthening the control of Kim 
Chong-il, who assumed the post of supreme commander of the 
People's Army in 1991, as well as at promoting general officers' 
morale. At that time, Vice Marshal O Chin-u, minister of the 
Ministry of People's Armed Forces, was promoted to marshal; and 
eight officers, including Paek Hak-nim, minister of the Ministry 
of Public Security, was promoted from general to vice marshal. 
  These officers are core figures in the People's Army, and 
all 
of them are over 70 years and some are almost 80. 
  This is because the only organization that Kim Il-song can 
trust is the North Korean military establishment, and again the 
class that he can trust in the North Korean military 
establishment is none other than the anti-Japanese guerrilla 
faction. There is no age retirement system or grade retirement 
system in the North Korean Army. Accordingly, they can stay in 
these high positions until they die. 
  Let us examine the biographies of North Korean military 
leaders. 
  O Chin-u, 77, is from Pukchong, North Hamgyong Province. He 
moved to Jiandao, Manchuria with his parents and spent his 
childhood there. He is known to have participated in 
anti-Japanese guerrilla activities under Kim Il-song in 1933. He 
participated in the 25 June Korean war as commander of a 
guerrilla unit. After the war, he served as commander of a 
People's Army corps and, later, as commander of the Air Force. 
In 1961 he became member of the Central Committee of the Workers 
Party and ranked 24th in the committee. 
  His emergence in a core position of power was possible 
because he played a leading role in the two purges staged to 
establish Kim Il-song's unitary system. He was in the lead when 
Kim Il-song purged his political rivals Yi Hyo-sun and Pak 
Kum-chol in March 1967. In recognition of his merits in the 
purges, he was promoted to director of the General Political 
Bureau of the People's Army. 
  In 1969, he also played a leading role in purging some 
high-ranking general officers such as the then National Defense 
Minister Kim Chang-pong and the then anti-South Korean 
operations director Ho Pong-hak. Thus, he gained Kim Il-song's 
absolute confidence. Since 1976, he has assumed the post of 
minister of the People's Armed Forces. Afterward, he made great 
contributions to building the foundation for Kim Chong-il's 
hereditary power. 
  In particular, on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of 
the 
founding of the Workers Party in 1975, he published the treatise 
"Our Party Is a Revolutionary Party Led by the Great Chuche 
Idea." Through this treatise, he was actively involved in 
building the Kim Il-song-Kim Chong-il system. As a result of 
this treatise, it has become a usual practice for general 
officers to publish a treatise pledging loyalty on the occasion 
of the party founding anniversary day and the People's Army 
founding anniversary day. 
  In a nutshell, he ranks third in the order of power and is 
"the incarnation of Kim Il-song and the guardian of Kim 
Chong-il." 
  Choe Kwang is the figure who has traversed the roads of 
life's vicissitudes by being relegated from the post of chief 
of General Staff of the Army to a mine worker and returning to 
the post of chief of the General Staff of the Army again. He was 
born in Huchang, North Hamgyong Province and traversed a path of 
life similar to that of O Chin-u. 
  After he moved to Manchuria with his parents, Choe Kwang 
participated in anti-Japanese guerrilla activities with Kim 
Il-song in 1935. He participated in the Korean war as the 
commander of a division. After the Korean war, his promotion was 
faster than O Chin-u's; he became vice minister of the then 
National Defense Ministry in 1962 and chief of the General Staff 
of the People's Army in 1963. 
  In 1969, however, he was demoted to a mine worker for his 
sympathy with an "antiparty plot" involving Choe Chang-pong. 
  When he worked as a mine worker, Choe Kwang worked hard in 
tunneling work. He wrote a letter of self-criticism everyday and 
sent it to the party. Thus he showed repentance. Such an 
attitude was reported to Kim Il-song, and he was reinstated in 
1977. Afterward, he became chairman of the South Hwanghae 
Provincial People's Committee and, later, candidate member of 
the Political Bureau of the party Central Committee. In 1988, he 
returned to the post of chief of the General Staff of the North 
Korean People's Army. Since then he has firmly held the post of 
regular member of the Political Bureau until now. 
  Paek Hak-nim, 76, is a politically-oriented military man who 
is enjoying the absolute confidence of Kim Il-song and Kim 
Chong-il. He is from Pungsan, North Hamgyong Province. He 
participated in the anti-Japanese guerrilla activities. After 
the country was liberated from the Japanese domination, he came 
to Pyongyang as the commander of a company in the security guard 
unit for Kim Il-song. He participated in the Korean war as the 
commander of a regiment. He served as commander of a corps and 
member of the Military Armistice Commission. From 1961 to 1969 
he served as Kim Il-song's senior aide and as commander of Kim 
Il-song's security guard unit. 
  After serving as vice minister of the People's Armed Forces, 
he has served as minister of the Ministry of Public Security 
since 1986. 
  He is known to have looked after Kim Il-song at the houses 
of 
O Chin-u and Kim Il after Kim Chong-suk, his wife and Kim 
Chong-il's mother, died. It is known that when Kim Chong-il was 
a university student and a primary-level party cadre Paek 
Hak-nim looked after Kim Chong-il so that he could grow up to 
become the "successor." As a result of this, it is known that he 
has maintained very sincere and friendly relations with Kim 
Chong-il. 
  The background of Yi Ul-sol and Chu To-il, members of the 
Military Commission of the party Central Committee, is similar 
to that of Paek Hak-nim in term of their careers during the 
period from the days of their anti-Japanese guerrilla activities 
up to the fifties. Afterward, however, they grew up to be combat 
unit commanders. 
  Yi Ul-sol, 74, is from Musan, North Hamgyong Province. He 
served as commander of a company in Kim Il-song's security guard 
unit and as commander of the public security officers training 
unit. He was commander of a regiment during the Korean war. 
Later, he served as commander of the 15th division. He studied 
at the Soviet Military Academy. Afterward, he held important 
posts in the Army such as the commander of the Fifth Corps, 
commander of the First Army, and first deputy chief of the 
General Staff of the People's Army. 
  He attracted Kim Il-song's attention for the first time in 
January 1969, when he dealt with the Kim Chang-pong incident. At 
that time, he played a leading role in arresting Kim Chang-pong 
and Ho Pong-hak and personally interrogated them. Thus, he 
played a leading role in purging high-ranking Army officers who 
were under the influence of Kim Chang-pong and Ho Pong-hak. 
  In 1978, he played a leading role in purging Yi Yong-mu, 
director of the General Political Bureau of the People's Army; 
and Chang Chong-hang, vice minister of the People's Armed 
Forces; who were reportedly opposed to Kim Chong-il's succession 
to power. 
  Chu To-il, 78, is known as a figure who played a leading 
role 
in modernizing the North Korean People's Army and, in 
particular, as a top expert in the light infantry sector. He is 
from Wangqing, Manchuria. His military career and the role he 
played in purging those opposing Kim Chong-il's succession to 
power were not inferior to that of Yi Ul-sol. He is now 
commander of the Pyongyang Defense Command. 
  Vice Marshal Kim Kwang-chin, vice minister of the People's 
Armed Forces, was a member of the North Korean delegation to 
North-South high-level talks and is well known to us. He studied 
at a high school in the Soviet Union and a Soviet Army artillery 
school. He participated in World War II as a Soviet Army 
artillery officer. He participated in the Korean war as deputy 
commander of a division of the People's Army. He is known to 
have advanced to Taegu during the Korean war. His age is known 
to be 76 (born in 1918). However, when he came to Seoul as a 
member of the North Korean delegation he reportedly told our 
side's delegate: "I am not that old." 
  The career of Vice Marshal Kim Pong-yul, 77, is very similar 
to that of Kim Kwang-chin. He was born in Sinuiju and studied at 
Leningrad University. He came to Pyongyang in 1945 with the rank 
of Soviet Army master sergeant. He served as deputy commandant 
of the Kaechon public security officers school. He participated 
in the Korean war as artillery commander at the Supreme 
Headquarters of the People's Army. He also served as vice 
minister of the National Defense Ministry [predecessor of the 
Ministry of People's Armed Forces]. He is now vice minister of 
the People's Armed Forces and concurrently member of the 
National Defense Commission of the party Central Committee. 
  Yi Tu-ik, member of the National Defense Commission of the 
party and military theorist, was born in Manchuria and graduated 
from the public security officers school in Manchuria. He is 73 
years old. He is known to have contributed to the publication of 
many articles calling for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from 
South Korea. He served as commander of the Ninth Division and as 
director of a bureau at the National Defense Ministry. Since 
1980, he has assumed the post of member of the Military 
Commission of the party Central committee. 
  Choe In-tok, president of Kim Il-song Military University is 
also a military theorist like Yi Tu-ik. He is 78 years old. He 
is from Kangwon Province. He served as commander of the Hamhung 
District Corps of the People's Army. He was elected member of 
the party Central Committee in 1980. 
  Besides these North Korean general officers mentioned above, 
there are many general officers in their seventies and older in 
the North Korean Army. 
  General Kim Chol-man (member of the National Defense 
Committee) who is known to have mapped out North Korea's four 
major military lines, is 76 years old. General Cho Myong-nok, 
commander of the Air Force of the People's Army, is 70 years 
old. General Cho Myong-sin, who is commandant of Kanggon 
Military Academy, is 78 years old. 

