Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Regarding the alleged Coordinating Committee on 
Multilateral Export Controls (Cocom) violation by Yokohama Kikai 
Boeki [Yokohama Machinery Trading Co.] and other companies who 
have reportedly exported spectrum analyzers to North Korea, the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] is 
increasingly concerned about the case, saying, "largely due to 
the fact that the Japan-U.S. economic framework talks are facing 
rough going, this case may increase criticism of Japan by the 
United States" (according to a senior official). 
  Following the end of the East-West cold war, banning of arms 
exports to the Communist bloc is losing its meaning, and Cocom 
is scheduled to be abolished in March. However, the Cocom 
member nations are considering creating a new export control 
system to control export to "strife-potential" countries and 
regions. For that reason, MITI thinks "this illegal export case 
has occurred at a bad time." 
  Together with Iraq and Libya, North Korea is included on the 
list of countries to which exports are controlled. Furthermore, 
the U.S. Government has been criticized by the Congress and 
other observers for being weak-kneed in its ongoing negotiations 
with North Korea about nuclear facilities inspection. In 
addition, within the United States there is growing 
dissatisfaction with Japan about Japan's position on whether 
objective criteria should be established in the framework of the 
Japan-U.S. economic talks, which are entering the final stage. 
  Since the case has occurred amid such a situation, MITI is 
concerned it will invite criticism of Japan such as in the 
Toshiba case in 1987, wherein Toshiba Machine Co. Ltd. violated 
Cocom, resulting in Japan-bashing by the United States. At that 
time, for example, a member of the Congress smashed Toshiba-made 
products, reflecting growing criticism of Japan. Because of 
that bitter experience, MITI is now wary of the situation and 
says: "There is the possibility that the Congress or other 
sources will apply more pressure at the Japan-U.S. economic 
framework talks." 
  MITI is scheduled to examine the case involving the trading 
house with emphasis on "whether the manufacturer was involved in 
the case." According to a senior MITI official, "The U.S. 
Government itself probably does not want to make a fuss about 
the case because its talks with North Korea are facing an 
important turning point." However, it seems that what MITI 
really hopes is that the case will end up "as just a case of a 
trading firm acting illegally." 

