BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Vasiliy Fatigarov of KRASNAYA ZVEZDA and </F>
Aleksandr Mukomolov of the Russian Federation Federal 
Counterintelligence Service Public Relations Center, under the 
rubric "Crime Report": "Submachine Guns Made by Crooks..."] 
  [Text] It is no longer all that difficult to equip 
yourself with a factory-made weapon nowadays if you want one and 
you have the cash. Even "private gunsmiths" are not out of 
work. Custom-made weapons are in ever-increasing demand among 
the compatriots of Don Corleone.... 
  But in the opinion of Lieutenant Colonel of Militia Viktor 
Golovanov, deputy chief of the Moscow Criminal Investigation 
Department, it is too soon to talk about large-scale underground 
manufacture of firearms. In the main what we are talking about 
here is small-caliber hand guns, which are not difficult to 
make. In the capital this year more than 10 people have been 
detained carrying such guns in their pockets. Furthermore, 
home-made guns of this kind have been encountered before. 
  But attempts to make serious "pieces" have been noted. For 
example, at the Krasnogorsk Plant, which produces the well-known 
Zenit cameras, three "craftsmen" manufactured revolver parts 
which they then assembled at home. They worked this way for 
over six months. The creative endeavors of the Krasnogorsk 
Kulibins [reference to self-taught Russian engineer] were 
thwarted when the murder of a paramilitary security forces 
member was being investigated. 
  Also in 1993, counterintelligence agents became interested 
in 
the activity of a small enterprise housed in the workshops of 
the Varshavskoye subway depot. It transpired that initially 
swords and daggers were being forged there but when a certain 
T., a major weapons specialist, joined the small enterprise they 
switched to "batch" production of the PPT-93, a new type of 
submachine gun. The depot did not monitor the activity of Mr. T. 
and Co. and, as one of the operatives joked, eventually you 
might even see an armored train emerging from the subway tunnel. 
  T.'s activity was thwarted and nine PPT-3s, ammunition, and 
more than $10,000 were recovered. In addition, when the 
enterprise premises were searched, 39 rifle barrels and a large 
quantity of billets for various weapon spares were found. In 
short, production had been expanding.... 
  It has to be noted that the weapons made were of good 
quality. The parts -- the burnished steel sections and the fine 
wooden handles -- fitted together well. The 9-mm submachine 
guns were made especially for mafia showdowns -- they fire in 
short bursts, the scatter range is insignificant, the lethality 
is greater than the PM [Makarov pistol], and the magazines 
contain 20 or more Makarov pistol shells. It is obvious that T. 
had great experience of gun making, because all the 
manufacturing processes had been strictly observed. 
  In the words of Lieutenant General of Militia Vyacheslav 
Ogorodnikov, chief of the Main Directorate for Protecting Public 
Order, in the past three years the number of crimes involving 
the use of firearms has increased from 4,000 to 22,500. In the 
past year 1,366 pistols and revolvers, 1,946 automatic rifles, 
140 machine guns, six rocket launchers, and 33 grenade launchers 
have been confiscated from criminals. Weapons are not only 
obtained from the "hot spots" but are also stolen from arms 
dumps, and thefts from weapons plants are also on the increase. 
At the Tula Weapons Plant alone, 14 criminal groupings engaged 
in weapons theft were recently exposed. Automatic rifles had 
also been stolen from the Izhmash Production Association for 
subsequent sale. 
  So, regrettably, there is no problem in obtaining weapons. 
Russian-made, Chinese, Western -- whatever your taste. If you 
want something exotic, Mr. T. and his Krasnogorsk colleagues 
will oblige. Admittedly, this will cost you more, as will 
anything made to order in small batches. For example, a PPT-93 
cost half a million from a secondhand dealer at the beginning of 
1993 -- there is a market for it even as far away as Africa. 
However, sooner or later someone will have to answer for this. 

