Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Norri Kageki] </F>
  [Text] Tanegashima--After a decade of development marred by 
two engine explosions, one fatality and a long lift-off delay, 
Japan launched its H-II rocket last week, a 260-ton declaration 
of independence from U.S. aerospace technology. 
  The blast-off of the 50-meter-high, &yen;270 billion ($2.45 
billion) rocket--the first such space vehicle entirely made in 
Japan--brought with it a medley of cheers and sighs of relief. 
  Pressure on the 800 engineers engaged in the operation, 
already intense due to a two-year-long delay, was heightened by 
last month's failure of a European Arianespace rocket in French 
Guiana. 
  ``Japan has finally completed a means of transportation in 
space that we can use at our free will,'' said Kenji Seyama, 
director of the Space Development Division at the Science and 
Technology Agency. 
  Yet the scientific achievement by the National Space 
Development Agency of Japan (NASDA) won't erase doubts that the 
satellite-launching business, from which the rocket could help 
to pay for itself, is already saturated worldwide. 
<H5>  Number 5 </H5>
  After all, Japan is merely taking its place behind four 
other 
nations in the ranks of space superpowers--the U.S., Russia, the 
European Arianespace consortium and China. 
  Japan has developed three major rockets over the past 30 
years, but each relied heavily on U.S. technology, and 
Washington placed restrictions on their use. 
  One major constraint on the H-I rocket, the H-II's 
predecessor, was that Japan was prohibited from launching 
foreign satellites with it. The H-II rocket, for its part, can 
lift a 2.2-ton satellite into geostationary orbit--35,786 km 
altitude above Earth--so it can launch almost any kind of 
satellite. 
  That means now that Japan is free from constraints, it can 
forge into the commercial launching business. But few officials 
seem all that enthusiastic about the idea. 
  ``The space development business isn't paying well at the 
moment, and we don't see a rosy future,'' said Hiroshi Harada, 
general manager of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries' space systems 
department. 
  Added Jean-Louis Claudon, Asia-Pacific representative of 
Arianespace: ``Because the worldwide commercial-satellite market 
is not growing, and the number of rockets (needed to launch the 
satellites) is growing, the market is getting very competitive. 
It's not going to be easy for the competitors to make profits.'' 
  The pride of the H-II is the first-stage main engine, dubbed 
the LE-7, whose development caused the two explosions that 
claimed one life and delayed the launch. The engine is fueled by 
liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen--the H for H-II stands for 
hydrogen--and functions in the same way as the motor of the U.S. 
space shuttle. 
  Yet even though the H-II's technology is advanced, that is 
``not really important from the point of view of 
commercialization,'' said Arianespace's Claudon. The technology 
``doesn't mean much to customers,'' who attach greater 
importance to proven reliability and cost, he said. 
  The Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] 
estimates that the annual domestic space industry market is 
&yen;308 billion. Yet in a departure from usual practice, MITI 
has declined to project the future size of the market, 
implicitly acknowledging that the question is too politically 
charged. 
  The reason: Two-thirds of the &yen;308 billion cost comes 
from the national budget, and ``the question of how big a market 
it will become is equivalent to asking how much the government's 
allowance is going to increase,'' said Masao Omichi, director of 
MITI's Space Industry Division. 
<H5>  Small budget </H5>
  The government's total space-related budget for fiscal 1993, 
ending next March, is &yen;201.7 billion ($1.83 billion), 
whereas NASA in the United States spent $14.33 billion in fiscal 
1993. 
  ``We won't be able to get along without depending on the 
national budget,'' although government projects are not 
profitable, said Harada of Mitsubishi Heavy. Half the money 
spent on making the H-II was collected by Mitsubishi, Japan's 
largest launching-vehicle producer, which records space-related 
sales of up to &yen;50 billion a year. 
  ``The development of the H-II is designed to advance Japan's 
technology'' rather than generate new business, said Harada, 
echoing the comments by many of those involved in the space 
program here. 
  The H-II is booked until its sixth launching in summer 1997. 
Apparatus such as the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite and 
Communications and Broadcasting Engineering Test Satellite will 
be hoisted. 
  Although several more satellites are planned to come after 
that, none of them are for commercial purposes. 
  ``The future of the H-II is utterly black,'' said Nobuo 
Nakatomi, an aerospace analyst who is a fellow scientist at NASA 
of the United States. 
  ``Japan has to think seriously about which area the H-II can 
be most useful,'' he said. ``Unfortunately, it seems that no one 
here is doing that.'' 
<H5>  Unmanned Shuttle Planned </H5>
  But commercial uses or not, Japan still has big plans for 
the 
H-II. 
  The rocket is meant to hoist the nation's unmanned space 
shuttle--dubbed HOPE--by the year 2010, although its development 
is still in the primary stages. 
  An orbital re-entry experiment (OREX) vehicle launched on 
the 
H-II rocket's maiden flight is designed to contribute to the 
construction of the HOPE. Two hours after the lift-off, the OREX 
vehicle successfully splashed into the Pacific Ocean, after it 
completed transmitting all the important basic data to the 
ground stations on how it endured the 1,600 C heat and other 
conditions in re-entering the atmosphere. Also, NASDA will be 
trying to work out plans to send man to the moon with the H-II 
to investigate and collect resources. 
  Still, two significant barriers remain for the space 
program, 
said Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System 
Corp., Japan's only rocket-purchasing and launching company that 
was established in 1990 by NASDA and 75 aerospace firms. 
  One is that the H-II may be launched from Tanegashima--40km 
off the southern coast of Kyushu, Japan's southernmost main 
island--only twice a year. 
  NASDA pledged to five fishermen's unions that operate in the 
surrounding waters that the rocket will be launched only during 
a 45-day period during the summer and a similar period in the 
winter, times when fishermen take breaks from work. 
  The other barrier is the vast cost of the undertaking. 
  It costs about &yen;19 billion for a single launching of the 
H-II, &yen;16 billion of which goes toward manufacturing the 
vehicle. 
  Arianespace, the world's first commercial 
satellite-launching 
company that now holds about 60% of the market, charges 
only 
half the price that Japan's H-II would. Arianespace launches a 
satellite once a month on average, although its next launch will 
be delayed for a few months because of the January mishap. 
  When the H-II was initially planned 10 years ago, the 
currency-exchange rate was &yen;220 to the dollar. Since then, 
the yen has surged up to the &yen;110 level, which makes it hard 
for Japan to compete in the commercial launching market. 
  Not surprisingly, Imamura said his company is ``trying to 
find a way to reduce costs by 30%.'' 

