Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Mini Reactor for All"] </F>
  [Text] At the German boat fair in Hamburg, one Russian 
company was unusually restrained. As a subtenant of a joint 
stand, "Roseco" retreated to the last row in hall number 12 and 
was not mentioned in the catalogue at all. For a good reason, 
as it now turns out: "Roseco-Atom Co, Ltd" from St. Petersburg 
wants to sell entire nuclear reactors discreetly. 
  "Our company," Roseco manager Venyamin Skvirskiy says in his 
office in Sestroretskaya 2 in St. Petersburg, "has permission to 
sell reactors and steam generators of submarines, warships, and 
ice-breakers to other countries" -- both plans and entire 
facilities. Russian President Boris Yeltsin himself reportedly 
gave the permission -- the only condition: The use must be 
"peaceful." 
  Russian military officers fear the potential sell-out of 
their most secret drive technologies. Already before 
Skvirskiy's trip to the boat fair, the Russian intelligence 
service told German authorities about alleged nuclear smuggling 
that is controlled by Skvirskiy. 
  When the nuclear manager arrived at Kiel on the Baltic Sea 
ferry "Anna Karenina," customs officers arrested him. They did 
not find any radioactive material -- Skvirksiy was only carrying 
advertising brochures. 
  These brochures, however, were explosive: His offers include 
two reactors for ice-breakers with a capacity of 70 megawatts 
for $100 million. Big numbers do not frighten Skvirskiy: He 
demands $1 billion for 10 reactor units in relay, which yield 
500 megawatts together. 
  Roseco also has steam generators of the new PCVS [expansion 
unknown] type in its program -- for $930 million. Skvirskiy 
does not see any safety problems: He praises the "systems of 
passive safety" of the reactor, which regulates "itself in line 
with temperature." 
  Thomas Schulz-Jagow, nuclear expert of Greenpace in Hamburg, 
knows of already initiated negotiations between Russians and the 
Philippine Government about the delivery of a floating reactor 
unit. The contract has not yet been concluded, because the 
island state lacks foreign currency. 
  Schulz-Jagow says that the facilities' safety standard is 
"disastrous." In the compact reactors, there is hardly any room 
for safety technology. 
<H3>  Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA]: Trade in 
Missiles Soon </H3>
  In an internal paper, the BKA notes a skyrocketing increase 
in illegal nuclear trade in Germany. In 1993, 241 cases became 
known, in 1992 there were only 158. These cases included 118 
"fraudulent offers" -- cashing in without delivery or offers of 
non-radioactive materials (in 1992 there were 59 cases). 
  Weapons-grade material (plutonium and highly enriched 
uranium) was offered but, according to the BKA, "there is no 
information that confirms that the persons making the offer are 
actually in possession of weapons-grade material." 
  For the future, the BKA fears a drastic increase in nuclear 
material, which could get into the wrong hands in the former 
USSR, "if the existing nuclear weapons are disassembled on the 
basis of the disarmament treaties." 
  The summary of the investigators: "The situation is not 
improving regarding crimes in this field." 

