BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on a statement by Foreign Minister Ernesto Leal in </F>
response to a fishing boat incident in Nicaraguan waters in the 
Pacific Ocean with a patrol boat of the Costa Rican Navy; from 
the "Events" newscast] 
  [Text] [Begin Leal recording] We have no explanation to 
give. We uphold the position this incident is totally 
unacceptable and is even more unacceptable now that the 
presidents, with a clear, political willingness, have decided on 
the procedure to follow concerning the incursions in territorial 
waters of another nation. 
  In this case, the report I have from our Navy is that the 
fishing boat was in Nicaraguan waters, and, subsequently, there 
was a violation of our sovereignty. This is an incident that 
seriously reflects a lack of information. This boat was 
undoubtedly in Nicaraguan waters. 
  We consider this a hostile action by the Costa Rican C-105 
patrol boat. This is the second time this patrol boat has been 
involved in this type of action. We had a problem with that 
same Costa Rica patrol boat the last time 
  Our Navy acted as it should, with great caution. One person, 
Seaman Benito Quintanilla, was wounded. We have not presented 
our protest to the Costa Rican authorities. We demand, however, 
an immediate meeting, because this situation must end. This 
type of situation should never happen again. We want this 
patrol boat to be investigated. We have had problems with that 
patrol boat several times. 
  We have contacted the Costa Rican authorities, and we will 
hold a meeting as soon as possible to clarify this type of 
problem once and for all. [end recording] 
  The foreign minister has said no official reply has been 
received yet from the Costa Rican Government, which is engaged 
in an ongoing investigation of the incident. 
  [Panama City ACAN in Spanish at 1919 GMT on 18 June reports: 
"Following a shoot-out in its waters of the Pacific Ocean, the 
Nicaraguan Naval Coast Guard today rescued the `No Solar,' a 
Spanish shrimping vessel that was confiscated by a Costa Rican 
Government vessel, a spokesman for the Sandinist Army has 
reported."] 

