CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Christopher Lord, professor of </F>
international politics, Charles University, Prague: "The West 
Europeanization of `Not Western Europe'"] 
  [Text] The following is based on an address delivered 
March 10 at an international conference titled "Civil-Military 
Relations in a Democracy" in the National Assembly of 
Slovenia. 
  First I must excuse my clumsy title. Originally I wrote "The 
Europeanization of the Balkans," which seems on the face of it 
easier to understand. But as I reflected on the problem a little 
more, it occurred to me that this political question affects not 
just the Balkans, but the entire post-Soviet complex of 
countries and territories, some "European," some "Asian" and 
some lying somewhere in between. Many writers these days use 
expressions such as "Central and Eastern Europe" or "Central, 
Eastern and Southeastern Europe," but it seems to me that these 
expressions are actually dishonest. They are used to suggest 
that a place called "Eastern Europe" does exist somewhere or 
other, but that the particular country or countries being 
discussed are not necessarily part of it. 
  The only thing that really unites all the countries we might 
want to talk about is that they are not--not so far, anyway--in 
Western Europe. For that reason, then, I have decided to adopt 
the term suggested by Michelle Bertelli: "Not Western Europe." 
  The difficulty of locating Eastern Europe on a map these 
days--does any country now identify itself as East 
European?--leads me to suspect that "Europe" itself is merely 
the figment of our political imagination. But "Western Europe" 
anyway does seem to have a real meaning, even if the West 
European identity, too, is vague in places. 
  So I hope this is enough to explain my title. What I want to 
analyze is the spread of the political culture of Western Europe 
to countries formerly under Soviet Marxist-Leninist, Titoist, 
Hoxhaist and other so-called "socialist" regimes. 
  As a resident of the Czech Republic and a visitor to 
Slovenia, I am struck by the fact that these two countries both 
now look like very good candidates for integration into Western 
Europe at an early date. This naturally leads to self-satisfied 
self-congratulation from the populations, and also maybe some 
envy from neighboring states. 
  But apart from these emotional reactions--and I would say 
that most of the political rhetoric we hear about "peace," 
"security," "democracy" and so on is in reality merely 
emotional--perhaps we can suggest some objective reasons why 
this might be the case, and this will then help us to understand 
some larger issues. 
  There are, I think, three factors that link the Czech 
Republic and Slovenia. The first is the preservation of the 
broadly liberal intellectual habits of the professional people 
in society; the second is a more or less homogeneous population 
(in terms of national self-identification, anyway); and the 
third is the existence of appropriate borders isolating that 
population from neighboring groups. 
  First, the intellectual culture. It should be obvious to 
anyone with the smallest knowledge of "Not Western Europe" that 
only a few people had any serious involvement in its political 
structures. While many people felt compelled to use Party 
jargon, and maybe attend some "political" social and sporting 
events, most people simply tried to get on with their lives and 
pursued private interests. For educated, professional people, 
these interests were reading, writing, playing chess or a 
musical instrument, visiting the theater, the ballet or the 
opera--the kind of intellectual interests, in fact, that sadly 
have decayed in the West. Now, these people, who are mostly 
still just trying to get on with their lives and struggling to 
make sense of the chaos of transition, represent a reservoir of 
civilized values that is crucial for the process of cultural and 
political regeneration we can call "democratization." 
  Without naming names, countries that abandon these values 
and, instead of preserving some version of this intellectual 
culture, seek to set up some more fanatical, extremist set of 
values, are not likely to be accepted into Western Europe. So 
this is one factor. 
  The second and third factors are related to the idea of the 
nation-state. Countries hoping to join Western Europe will have 
to resemble West European countries first. And to do that they 
need to fulfill two conditions: have a homogeneous population 
and be isolated in their own territory. This is a 
political-cultural demand made by the West European countries, 
which are apparently not able or willing to deal with other 
countries on any other basis. 
  France is the territory where the French people live; 
Portugal is the land of the Portuguese. And Western Europe as a 
whole, with a common political-cultural origin in the successor 
state of the disintegrated Western Roman Empire, is now 
searching blindly for its own reflection in the turbulent waters 
of the very large and very chaotic political-cultural complex on 
its eastern border. 
  According to these criteria, the Czech Republic and Slovenia 
come out pretty near the top of the list--though, of course, we 
can add some remarks and qualifications. Czech bourgeois 
intellectual values look as solid as ever. The Czechs tolerate 
some political extremism, certainly, but this is a sign of 
political maturity and not of failure or incompetence. There is 
a characteristic style of skeptical intellectualism which, 
whatever other defects it might have, is unlikely to provide a 
basis for ideologies of hatred and fanaticism. 
  The territorial question is closely bound up with the 
"divorce" with Slovakia. This was accepted, in the end, as a sad 
necessity, though it disrupted life for many people. It was most 
difficult for those caught on the "other side," but now that the 
situation is more or less stable, we can say that the Slovaks 
now living in the Czech Republic are living as Czechs--either as 
actual Czech citizens, or at least as permanent members of the 
Czech population. Since they share a common recent history and 
Czechoslovak political culture, this means that the criterion of 
homogeneity is more or less fulfilled--adding the qualification 
that the smaller populations of Romanies, Germans, Poles and 
others are not numerous or well-organized enough to have a 
material effect on political life. 
  The same thing cannot be said for Slovakia, where there is a 
large and politically active Hungarian population. The division 
of Czechoslovakia has created an imbalance as far as my two 
criteria are concerned--and so we see that the Czech Republic is 
closer to integration, for these objective reasons, than the 
Slovak Republic. The mismatch between borders and populations 
means that Slovakia will have to solve its problems with Hungary 
before it can look like an acceptable nation-state as far as the 
West is concerned. 
  Hungary is locked in a similar situation with Romania, and 
other countries meshed into this "Not Western Europe" type of 
cross-border politics will find it significantly more difficult 
to reorient themselves to the political-cultural values of the 
West. 
  Slovenia is also in a "proto-nation-state" condition, but 
for 
very different reasons. Having escaped the Yugoslav wars by a 
whisker, the Slovenes now find themselves in a state of their 
own. There are no significant enclaves of "foreign" populations 
inside Slovenia and no significant exclaves of Slovenes outside 
the country. Business seems to be booming, even if most of it is 
probably black (or at least dark gray), and the language of 
everyday politics is calm and professional--definitely not the 
case in some other former Yugoslav republics one could mention. 
  To take the argument a little further, let's look at 
Kazakhstan, the only post-Soviet state in which the titular 
population, the Kazakhs, is actually a minority. The approximate 
figures are 40 percent Kazakh, 38 percent Russian and 22 percent 
others, including 5 percent Germans and, bizarrely, a small 
minority of Czechs. Although the borders of this very large 
country (2.7 million square kilometers) may roughly correspond 
to the boundaries of the territories over which the originally 
nomadic Kazakh tribes once roamed, the territory is not at all 
homogeneous, since in many areas Russians and Kazakhs live 
separate if parallel cultural lives. 
  Kazakhstan is very far from being a "nation-state." And if 
we 
put Kazakhstan at the far end of the spectrum of integration, we 
can at last compare the prospects of the various candidates for 
West Europeanization according to objective criteria. 
  Estonia, say, despite its very civilized population, must be 
placed closer to the Kazakh end of the spectrum. Its territory 
is at present also home to a large population of Russians, most 
of whom are certainly not living as Estonians, but still enjoy 
the vodka-and-misery lifestyle of the dear old USSR. 
  If we want to find another country to put somewhere near the 
top of the list, Poland looks like a good bet. Its population is 
pretty much homogeneous, but it doesn't quite fulfill the border 
requirement, since a significant number of Poles reside in 
neighboring countries. This problem is most serious in 
Lithuania; but while this makes Polish-Lithuanian relations a 
bit sticky it does not actually create any serious international 
difficulties for Poland. 
  By the same logic, we could put Hungary and Albania on the 
list, but significantly lower down, because of the difficulties 
experienced by Hungarians and Albanians living in other states. 
Readers will be able to fill in the names of whatever other 
states they may be interested in. 
  What are the consequences of this analysis for practical 
policy? Let's take a look at two other countries with extremely 
serious and difficult problems: the Russian Federation and the 
rump Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). 
  It is quite clear that these tow countries at present fail 
to 
fulfill our three criteria, and by wide margins. In the case of 
Russia, though, I think we must still be patient, since it is 
still in a phase of transition, and the wide swings in Russia's 
internal politics illustrate the instability of its general 
situation. The populations and borders bear little relationship 
to one another, and due to the enormous expansion of the various 
incarnations of the Russian state, there are many enclaves of 
other populations still living on their ancient homelands within 
what we tend to think of as "Russia." Add to this mix the 
effects of the large population movements of the Soviet period, 
and the result if a Russian-speaking federation that is actually 
polycultural and polynational. 
  I would like to draw one important conclusion from this in 
connection with the rump Yugoslavia. In the USSR, there was an 
attempt to create a synthetic Homo sovieticus Soviet 
nationality; Marshal Tito made a similar effort with the 
so-called Yugoslavs. When the Yugoslav Federation began to break 
up, under complex and tragic circumstances, the West, in a 
political reflex action, tried to find a Yugoslav nation-state 
to bargain with. This had the immediate effect of giving 
international legitimacy to the factions in the Yugoslav 
People's Army and elsewhere who were soon to bring the phrase 
"ethnic cleansing" to the ears of a horrified world. 
  It would be too much to suggest that the West is responsible 
for the wars of the former Yugoslavia; but the blind policy of 
seeking West-European-type nation-states where none existed 
before has definitely contributed to the tragedy. 
  What is the alternative? It is to deal with states and 
populations as they actually are, and not as we might like them 
to be in some "European" fantasy world. The fact that 
Kazakhstan, for example, does not have the population structure 
of a West European nation-state does not mean it should 
automatically and permanently be excluded from the political, 
cultural and economic life of the international community. 
  What right do we have to penalize states just because they 
are culturally pluralistic? We should develop a political 
culture sophisticated enough to deal with the objective 
complexities of the problem concerned. 
  And lest anyone think this is just a theoretical or abstract 
problem, let me leave you with this thought: 
  The political and cultural structure of Yugoslavia had many 
things in common with that of the USSR, to the point that many 
analysts speak of Yugoslavia as the USSR in miniature. Apart 
from differences of scale, though, there is also the difference 
that the former USSR still has a formidable nuclear arsenal at 
its disposition. If the Soviet successor states, by the same 
logic, and supported by an indifferent "Europeanizing" Western 
policy, begin to follow the same path of expulsion and genocide 
in the name of national purity, then I for one will be moving to 
Africa. 

