Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Meetings of the higher Jordanian-Palestinian 
political committee will begin in Amman today to discuss 
bilateral cooperation. The committee, which is chaired on the 
Jordanian side by Dr. Sa'id al-Tall, deputy prime minister and 
minister of higher education, and on the Palestinian side by 
Faruq Qaddumi, head of the PLO Political Department, will also 
discuss all living aspects in the wake of the security agreement 
the PLO signed with Israel on Wednesday [9 February] on the 
implementation of the Palestinian autonomy agreement. 
  In a statement to reporters on arrival in Amman yesterday 
evening, Qaddumi said: The Middle East is witnessing momentous 
events and there is no doubt that the joint higher committee 
meetings are for cooperation and not coordination in order to 
chart a future concept for the sons of the one homeland who are 
living on the two banks of the Jordan River. It is imperative 
that we explore this future, he added. 
  Asked about the most important topics on the agenda of the 
higher committee, he said: It will discuss all living aspects 
of our people on the two banks and in Gaza. It will also 
discuss all proposed issues out of our desire to build a just 
peace while maintaining our full rights in the bilateral and 
multilateral negotiations. He stressed the need for Arab 
coordination. 
  He said: We as a joint delegation must assess our 
coordination on clear bases for the sake of serving the pan-Arab 
causes and our joint issues. Qaddumi said all topics of 
discussion will be identified and passed on to subcommittees. 
He added that a suitable program will also be drawn up so that 
these subcommittees will continue their work without 
interruption. 
  He indicated that the Palestinians went to Madrid on the 
basis of the land-for-peace formula. If Israel does not 
withdraw immediately, he said, then that means it has violated 
the agreement and there will be no peace. He said Israel does 
not want peace. Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin has not 
abided by the agreement. This, he added, shows that Rabin has 
violated the agreement when he said dates are not sacred 
although they are an article in the agreement signed by Israel 
and the PLO. Therefore, every article in the agreement is, in 
his opinion, not sacred. 
  Addressing the states sponsoring the negotiations, Qaddumi 
said: Rabin does not want peace in the region. He emphasized 
the need for Jordanian-Palestinian coordination firstly and 
Jordanian-Palestinian-Arab coordination secondly in order to try 
to overcome the obstacles placed by Israel. 
  Talal Sat'an al-Hasan, minister of state for foreign 
affairs; 
al-Tayyib 'Abd-al-Rahim, Palestinian ambassador in Amman; and 
several officials received Qaddumi and his delegation on their 
arrival. 
  The Palestinian delegation comprises PLO Executive Committee 
members Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh, head of the PLO Information 
Department; Muhammad Zuhdi al-Nashashibi, head of the Economic 
Department; and Ahmad Quray', director general of the Economic 
Department; and Akram Haniyah, special adviser to the 
Palestinian president. 
  It is noteworthy that the joint higher committee supervises 
seven committees formed a year ago to coordinate the 
Jordanian-Palestinian positions in all fields. 

