Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Benjamin Yeh] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, Feb. 26 (CNA) -- Taipei's top negotiator 
to the U.S.-Taiwan tariff reduction talks Saturday denied 
reports that the ROC [Republic of China] would sign an agreement 
on government procurement one year after Taiwan is admitted to 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). 
  Vice Economic Affairs Minister Sheu said the reports, which 
appeared on the front-page of local newspapers Saturday, 
misrepresented his statement following the end of discussions 
Friday. 
  He said the ROC delegation had agreed only to negotiate with 
the U.S. on the issue one year after Taiwan is given GATT 
membership. The 14-member American delegation is headed by 
Dorothy Dwoskin, an assistant U.S. trade representative. 
  Taiwan applied to GATT in 1990 under the name of "Customs 
Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu," and was granted 
observer status in September 1992. The present round of talks 
mark the beginning of a series of consultations with GATT 
members. 
  Few results were reported during the second day of talks 
although the U.S. described the consultations as "productive." 
  Friday's consultations centered on the General Agreement on 
Trade in Services (GATS) and on the Tokyo round agreement, which 
the U.S. side stressed in a news release "must be part of 
Taiwan's GATT obligations." 
  Since Taiwan did not participate in the Uruguay Round, the 
U.S. side spent considerable time briefing the ROC delegation on 
GATS, which the U.S. negotiators claimed will require Taiwan to 
liberalize its service sector, including banking, securities, 
audio-visual, telecommunications and professional services. 
  "This service liberalization, which will be confirmed in 
Taiwan's schedule of services commitments, will make Taiwan more 
internationally competitive and more attractive to foreign 
investors," the U.S. statement said. 
  According to Sheu, the U.S. is scheduled to provide Taiwan 
with a specific and detailed services request after April. 
  Meanwhile, Lin Yi-fu, deputy director-general of the Board 
of 
Foreign Trade and also a member of the ROC delegation, said 
another round of talks will be needed as the two sides were 
still divided on tariff issues during the talks on Saturday 
morning. The present round will end Saturday. 
  A Ministry of Finance official, who requested anonymity, 
said 
Taiwan may lower tariffs on 94 percent of the 2,786 items 
presented by the U.S. but only 14 percent of the cuts would meet 
the U.S. recommendations. 
  The U.S. has insisted that Taiwan's tariffs should not 
exceed 
20 percent on agricultural imports and 10 percent on industrial 
products. 

