Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Michael Smith and political editor Mary Binks] </F>
  [Text] Friction between Britain and China over the crucial 
question of funding for the Chek Lap Kok airport has come to a 
head, with Governor Chris Patten urging Beijing to stop "playing 
politics" with the project's future. Negotiations over airport 
funding-- already deadlocked--have been hindered further by 
deteriorating Sino-British relations on constitutional reform. 
  Legislators will this morning debate whether to approve a 
further injection of funds into the airport project to allow key 
contracts to continue in line with the 1997 completion date. 
But Beijing this week reacted angrily, lambasting the Hong Kong 
government for taking "unilateral action" in defiance of 
previous agreements. 
  Patten yesterday sharply rejected the allegation, saying 
that 
China was fully aware the project was now at the crossroads. 
"Everyone in Hong Kong, except conceivably the director of the 
NCNA (New China News Agency), knows that we could actually solve 
the problem of the airport like that if there was the will," he 
said. "I hope that will can be created in the coming weeks and 
months because if it is not it will be the SAR [Special 
Administrative Region] government, and the people of Hong Kong, 
and the people of southern China who will suffer most. 
  "So let's talk in the airport committee and stop making 
political points, we are not going to do that and I hope no 
Chinese officials will." 
  Financial Secretary Sir Hamish Macleod and Secretary of the 
Treasury Donald Tsang also implied the dilemma now facing the 
government had been brought about by Beijing's intransigence. 
"We informed the Chinese side through the JLG (Sino-British 
Joint Liaison Group) on 15 December that, in order to minimise 
delay and extra costs, we would be approaching the Legislative 
Council to discuss additional funding that would enable further 
urgent steps on the airport to be taken while discussions 
between the two sides continued," Macleod said. 
  "We explained that the options we were putting forward were 
designed to save money and reduce the risk of increased costs. 
  "Surely, it would be much better if the Chinese side would 
make their specific proposals on the financing clear." 

