BFN 

  [Text] Amman--A few days after they were criticised for 
their "bias" coverage of the civil war in Yemen, Jordan's 
official media have stopped referring to forces of southern 
Yemeni leader Ali Salim al-Bid as "secessionists." 
  While they are still calling loyalists of Yemeni President 
Ali Abdallah Salih the "government forces," the media are now 
covering the activities and statements of the South Yemeni 
forces as those of the Yemen Socialist Party. 
  The media were last week severely criticised by a group of 
journalists and writers for their "biased coverage" of the 
five-week civil war in Yemen pitting the forces of Mr. Salih 
against those of Mr. al-Bid amidst little chances for a decisive 
military victory for either side. 
  In a letter to Minister of Information Jawad al-'Anani, the 
group urged a review of the media's policy in covering the 
Yemeni war and an end to its "encouragement of the illusion of a 
military solution" to the conflict in the Arabian Peninsula 
country. 
  This review seems to have taken place, said one observer. 
  A seasoned political analyst who held a number of cabinet 
portfolios in the past said: "It was harsh to refer to the 
southerners as secessionists and if this (position) has been 
reconsidered then it is a good thing." 
  Jordan has repeatedly denied having taken sides in the 
Yemeni 
conflict, defending the media's reference to the warring parties 
as "government" and "secessionists" as factual statements 
because Aden seceded from the Yemeni republic. 
  Many, however, questioned this argument, emphasising that 
Jordan should be extremely careful in maintaining its neutrality 
on the conflict because of the large role it had played in 
mediating between Mr. Salih and Mr. al-Bid before war erupted on 
May 4. 
  The Kingdom has said it will not interfere in internal 
affairs of Yemen but stressed its support for the integrity of 
Yemen and the unity of its people. 
  "We should encourge the spirit of unity and invite the 
spirit 
of unity and invite the southerners to maintain it but we should 
be careful not to antagonise he south," said the analyst, who 
demanded anonymity. 

