BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Tsuneo Yoshihara, editor and military analyst </F>
with JIJI PRESS and researcher at JIJI Research Institute: "How 
Far Japan Can Go Under Domestic Laws in Case of Emergencies"] 
  [Text] Nonmilitary Measures -- Economic Sanctions 
Naturally Bring Disadvantages 
  The DPRK is racing ahead with its nuclear armaments, in 
spite 
of criticism from the international community; United Nations 
sanctions on that country are set to be gradually strengthened. 
Once sanctions are applied, naturally Japan will be asked to 
follow suit. Furthermore, it is more likely than not that Japan 
will be asked to play a central role in sanction activities, 
because the DPRK, the target of the sanctions, is a neighboring 
country and has an important effect on Japan's security. 
  The government has made its policy clear that "it will do 
its 
utmost within the framework of the Constitution." Whenever the 
matter of sanctions is raised, however, what matters is legal 
limitations. In the post-Cold War international community, 
increase in various sanctions, including those by the United 
Nations, is expected, not excepting the recent DPRK case. 
Therefore, it is most urgent to examine how much Japan can do 
under the present laws and what kinds of legal preparations are 
necessary to fulfill international obligations. 
  In the international community during the Cold War, the two 
super powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, played the 
roles of "world police." Other countries had no need to 
participate even if they were asked to go in tune with military 
sanctions, and could manage just by making gestures of going 
along with it when nonmilitary sanctions were applied. In the 
post-Cold War international community, however, it became 
inevitable to maintain order by cooperation among leading 
nations. Thus, UN-initiated sanction activities are on the 
increase, and Japan, a leading nation, cannot avoid taking part 
in such activities. 
  During Cold War days, Japan participated in nonmilitary 
sanction activities on many occasions. A typical example was an 
economic sanction against southern Rhodesia following a UN 
resolution. When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, Japan 
was asked to participate in the U.S.-initiated economic 
sanctions but took only a cooperative pose. Against the DPRK, 
Japan followed suit in nonmilitary sanctions following the 1983 
Rangoon bombing assassination attempt against the ROK president 
and the 1987 Korean Air bombing incident. Fresh in our memories 
is Japan's following suit in the post-Cold War sanctions against 
Iraqi aggression of Kuwait. 
  In Japan, it has been emphasized that "international 
disputes 
should not be settled by military means." But when it was asked 
to participate in economic sanctions -- a powerful nonmilitary 
measure -- cautious views were dominant at all times in that 
"effects of sanctions are dubious because damage to be suffered 
by Japan is larger than that afflicted on the subjected 
country." In an international society that has a diversified 
sense of value, economic sanctions in many cases end up 
incompletely enforcing effective embargo measures as intended. 
This tendency will be accelerated due to the multipolarization 
of international society following the Cold War's end. In that 
sense, the aforementioned view seems to be right. 
  However, that view is based on a misunderstanding about 
economic sanctions. Economic sanctions are political acts, 
despite the modifier "economic" found in the term. Economic 
activities are meaningless if they end up in red figures. On 
the other hand, expenses are required if political activities 
are to achieve desired objectives. So, the minus figures earned 
by sanctions are expenses as a matter of fact. Economic 
sanctions force the subjected country to make sacrifices and 
change its policy and at the same time they underline the 
intention of protests that the counterpart activities will not 
be tolerated at the cost of damages on the part of the 
protesting country. In the latter's case, the larger the minus 
figures on the part of sanction enforcing countries, the 
stronger the intention of the protests. With this in mind, let 
me examine how far Japan can participate in various sanction 
acts under the existing laws. 
  These sanctions may be classified into three categories: 
nonmilitary, semimilitary, and military. The nonmilitary 
sanctions will restrict the subjected country's flow of men, 
goods, and money. Japan has participated in this kind of 
sanction. In the sanctions against the DPRK in connection with 
the Rangoon assassination attempt and the Korean Airlines 
bombing incident, movement of men was restricted according to 
existing laws and ordinances as follows: 1) restriction of 
contacts among diplomats, 2) banning, in principle, national 
public service personnel from making trips to the DPRK, 3) 
banning, in principle, the entry to Japan of public service 
personnel and more strict entry examination of private citizens 
from the DPRK, 4) banning special aircraft from flying into 
Japanese airports, and so on. 
  If the DPRK adamantly continues to refuse the IAEA from 
inspecting nuclear facilities, the UN Security Council will most 
likely define the DPRK act as a "threat to peace" as defined in 
Article 39 of the UN Charter and adopt a resolution to impose 
economic sanctions in accordance with Article 41 of the charter. 
They include such measures as restricting or stopping trade and 
remittances, and further freezing DPRK overseas assets. In the 
beginning, they will be moderate but they will gradually become 
stricter with eyes on the DPRK response. 
  Whatever shape economic sanctions take and Japan is asked 
to follow, such a precedent as the sanctions against Iraq will 
make it possible for Japan to fully respond with the existing 
laws and ordinances. In restricting and or stopping trade, the 
international trade and industry minister can restrict or stop 
it in accordance with the provision of Article 25 of the Foreign 
Exchange and Foreign Trade Control Act says that if "it is 
deemed to interfere with the maintenance of the international 
peace and security." 
  In imposing sanctions on the DPRK, the most effective and 
decisive measure is said to be stopping remittances from Japan 
of money estimated at 60 billion yen a year as well as an oil 
embargo. This kind of stoppage of remittances of various kinds 
of money can be handled by amendments to the finance minister's 
notice and there is no need for amendments to laws. As a means 
of sending money, quite a few travelers to the DPRK take cash 
with them. This can be dealt with by amendments to the finance 
minister's notice and by enforcing strict checking at harbors 
and airports. As a matter of fact, it is extremely difficult to 
legally restrict or ban the remittances through or via 
enterprises in third countries. Thus, there is a strong 
possibility that restricting or stopping remittances may become 
ineffective, but it is significant in stressing the intent of 
protest that Japan will not tolerate the DPRK's nuclear 
armaments. 
<H5>  Semimilitary Sanctions -- Logistic Support and Sea Blockade </H5>
  What matters next is legal problems arising from Japan's 
cooperation with semimilitary sanctions. For this, examining 
the problems at five levels becomes necessary. 
  The first is related to participation and cooperation with 
UN 
peace keeping activities. In this connection, a prerogative 
interpretation has been made to the effect that sharing 
expenses, surveillance, supply, transportation, construction of 
facilities, and communications and medical activities in areas 
of dispute" are not construed to be use of force prohibited by 
the Constitution." And part of these activities were already 
brought into effect following the enactment of the Law on 
Cooperation in UN Peacekeeping Operations [PKO]. There will be 
no legal complications in cooperating, except for political 
judgment, with the United Nations, if ever its peacekeeping 
forces are to be dispatched to the Korean peninsula. 
  The second problem is participation and or cooperation with 
activities mentioned before by multinational forces, which in 
the future become the central part of peace enforcing 
activities. When the multinational forces with the United 
States as the core become involved in military sanctions against 
the DPRK, Japan will face the issue. Legal problems pertaining 
to sharing the costs have already been cleared during the Gulf 
war days. Multinational forces are expected to take action 
under the authority given by the United Nations, so there is 
little problem under present laws. The participation in 
noncombat activities will become possible, however, if the PKO 
cooperation law and some of its provisions are amended. 
  The third problem is related to how to respond to logistic 
supply when armed conflicts take place in neighboring countries, 
including the Korean peninsula, and the United Nations uses 
military intervention. In other words, there are legal problems 
that will arise when Japan is used as a base of sorties, 
supplies, and repairs and maintenance of weapons. If an armed 
conflict occurs in the Korean peninsula, which is in a state of 
cease-fire, it is the resumption of combat between UN forces in 
Korea and DPRK forces, reviving the already existing Agreement 
Regarding the Status of UN Forces in Japan and Japan will be 
obliged to execute support services to eight nations, including 
the U.S., the UK, France, and so on. To let other countries 
make use of Japanese facilities, there will be a need either to 
amend the existing agreement regarding the status of UN forces 
in Japan or sign another agreement with Diet consent. 
  It becomes necessary to sign a new agreement on the status 
of 
forces when armed conflicts occur in neighboring countries other 
than the Korean peninsula and the United Nations decides on 
armed intervention and to use Japan for bases. The existing 
agreement regarding the status of the UN forces was signed under 
the present Constitution and there has never been any 
significant interpretation construing it unconstitutional. 
Therefore, there will be no legal problems in signing a new 
agreement on the status of forces. It is a policy judgment 
problem. 
  The fourth problem is related to a case when the 
multinational forces, that include U.S. forces, make armed 
intervention in armed conflicts in Japan's neighboring countries 
and want to use Japan for bases in the rear. As for the United 
States, it can use them when both Japan and the United States, 
in prior consultations, agree that it is necessary "to 
contribute to maintenance of international peace and security in 
the Far East," as provided in Article 6 of the Treaty of Mutual 
Cooperation and Security between Japan and the United States. 
If U.S. utilization is constitutional, utilization by 
multinational forces can be constitutional, too. Only in the 
latter's case, another law or agreement on the status of forces 
becomes necessary, if Japan decides to let the multinational 
forces use Japan for bases. 
  Meanwhile, supplying materials including oil to U.S. 
warships on the high seas by Japan's Maritime Self-Defense Force 
[SDF] is possible under the SDF Law as long as the condition 
that "there are no hindrances" is met as provided in Article 29 
of the Commodities Law. But for other countries, it is 
understood there is a need to make an apparent mention about it 
in the SDF Law. 
  The fifth is legal problems in the case of participating in 
military actions taken to effectuate economic blockade. The 
action of blockade at issue here is not a "wartime blockade" as 
part of military operations, but a "peacetime blockade" in 
general terms. Therefore, the use of military force is not 
indispensable as in wartime blockade. But, as a matter of fact, 
some naval and ground forces are still used in parallel with the 
major component, naval forces, in many cases to make a blockade 
effective. In Japan, not a few take an economic blockade as a 
"nonmilitary measure," but in fact, it should be regarded as a 
"semimilitary measure." 
  Joining in blockade activities is not intended as a "use of 
arms" but there may be cases of firing arms and shelling as a 
warning to ships that refuse to lie to for searches. Because of 
this, it is feared that the act may conflict with the 
government's present prerogative interpretation. In addition, 
there is an interpretation that construes it "legally 
impossible," since there are no provisions of duty on the 
participation in sanction activities in duty regulations in 
either the SDF Law or the Maritime Safety Agency [MSA] Law. 
  The Defense Agency revealed that Japan's participation in 
sea 
blockades "will be dealt with first by coordination with the 
MSA's patrol ships and seaplanes and if they are found 
insufficient, the SDF may be called upon" for support. Defense 
Councilor Ken Sato presented an opinion to the Liberal 
Democratic Party section related to national defense that "it is 
possible that SDF aircraft or ships are dispatched to the scene 
if it is within the territory or territorial waters." But this 
sort of interpretation is so unique that it is applicable only 
in Japan. The MSA is in charge of police activities for 
maintaining public peace and order and its activities are 
restricted, except for exercising the right of hot pursuit, 
within the territory and exclusive economic zone. By 
international law, it is limited to armed forces that can carry 
out blockades on the high seas adjacent to the territorial 
waters of the country against which a blockade is imposed. 
  In the blockade against Haiti, the U.S. Coast Guard is 
participating with the U.S. Navy, because the Coast Guard is one 
of the five branches of the U.S. Armed Forces. Meanwhile, 
Japan's MSA is not a part of the SDF -- armed forces. 
Therefore, the MSA's government ships do not have the authority 
to board and search on the high seas authorized by international 
law to naval ships of other countries and Japan's Maritime SDF. 
  In the SDF Law are found Article 84, covering measures 
against violation of territorial air space, and Article 82, 
covering guarding activities at sea. The Japanese Government 
seems to interpret these two provisions as "police activities," 
but in foreign countries, they are a part of defense activities 
in a stage still far from full-scale military actions. Retired 
Major General Hiroki Miyazaki, one of those who helped writing 
the SDF Law, said these activities are intended for defense 
activities in the stage not quite up to issuing sailing (or 
marching) orders for defense. Therefore, it is possible to 
participate in peacetime blockade activities by making little 
amendments to the provision covering guarding activities at sea. 
<H5>  Military Sanctions -- Is Dispatch of SDF Possible? </H5>
  Next comes the problem of participation in international 
sanction activities. At present, the government interprets the 
Constitution as allowing only use of arms in "self-defense," but 
bans any acts beyond it, like the exercise of rights to 
collective self-defense; something like dispatching self-defense 
forces abroad for the purpose of use of arms. Until before the 
time of the Ikeda cabinet, however, the exercise of rights to 
collective self-defense was not construed unconstitutional and 
until very recently it was interpreted that what the 
Constitution bans is "war as a means of settling international 
disputes," thus leaving room to permit international sanction 
activities as the matter of fact. 
  For Japan to participate in international military 
sanctions, 
there are three choices: The first is to delete the second 
section of Article 9 of the Constitution, end the queer 
interpretation that only passes in Japan and make legal the 
interpretation in accordance with legal theories and common 
sense that can pass in the international community. It is an 
internationally accepted theory that what the first section bans 
is aggressive wars but sanctions or international sanction 
activities are out of question. Even without inserting a 
provision regarding rights to collective self-defense, and 
according to the science of law, acknowledgement of rights 
include permission of exercise. It is just like the 
acknowledgement of freedom of speech includes permission of the 
exercise of such freedom in writing and speech-making. But this 
choice has the political hurdle that constitutional amendments 
are extremely difficult to make. 
  The second is to open the way to participating in military 
sanctions, as part of "international security," as an entirely 
different concept found in the report of the Ozawa Investigating 
Committee of the LDP. [The term "international security" was 
created by the Ozawa committee] The same report, based on a 
tacit premise that exercising the right to collective 
self-defense violates the Constitution, interprets international 
security as constitutional. 
  However, this interpretation also has a fault, because the 
right to collective self-defense originates from the similar 
legal concept of international security. U.S. defense reports 
have mainly dealt with matters relating to alliance based on the 
right to collective self-defense and it was only two or three 
years ago when they began dealing with matters relating to 
collective security, such as PKO. NATO is a typical alliance 
based on the right to collective self-defense and at the same 
time it bears the character of a regional organization of the 
collective security system of the United Nations. Therefore, it 
is hardly possible that one is constitutional while the other is 
not. 
  Military sanctions that Japan can participate in based on 
the 
theory of constitutionality of international security have not 
been organized so far and they are restricted to regular UN 
forces, which are difficult to form. Therefore, they cannot be 
answers to the problems we face. As was learned from the 
Somalia case, it must be remembered that conflicts with 
comparatively low intensity can be dealt with by UN peacekeeping 
activities but that the multinational forces method must be 
employed in compulsorily enforcing peace of high intensity. 
  The third method is to alter the government's prerogative 
interpretation in a way to make exercise of the right of 
collective self-defense and international acts of sanctions 
constitutional for the time being, with constitutional 
amendments to that effect in later days. It is proper to say, 
in view of dealing with the Diet and the power balance, that it 
is returning the present government interpretation, which is 
conspicuously against legal principles and international common 
sense, to its original place where it belonged. The people find 
this kind of interpretation easier to understand than forcing 
the way through by a sophistry that "hahei [despatching troops] 
is unconstitutional, while haken [sending them] is not." It 
must be prepared to face greater resistance from bureaucrats of 
the cabinet legislation bureau who attach importance to piles of 
past interpretations and from defense bureaucrats who find 
comfort in the present interpretation, in addition to resistance 
from forces insisting on "Constitution protection" and those old 
guards who do not want changes in the present status regardless 
of reasons. 
  However, the aforementioned three choices are applicable 
when 
armed conflicts in neighboring countries, including the Korean 
peninsula, are not extended to Japan. In the event of organized 
attacks against Japan, varied by degrees of their extension, it 
will be possible to take defensive actions by initiating 
"defense mobilization" in accordance with the SDF Law. For 
example, the present prerogative interpretation makes it 
possible to counterattack launching bases with aircraft and so 
on, if the DPRK attacked Japan by missiles. But, even in that 
case, it is said that the present interpretation does not permit 
sending ground troops to the Korean peninsula. 
  For emergency evacuation of Japanese nationals from 
countries 
and areas engulfed in armed conflicts, it is said that the use 
of SDF aircraft or ships is not unconstitutional but they cannot 
be used because of a lack of legal support. Although the ruling 
and opposition parties agreed to deal with the problem of using 
SDF aircraft in such emergencies by adding amendments to the SDF 
Law, the plan was stillborn in the midst of confusion of 
political reform bill deliberations. 
<H5>  Use of Military Power Subject To International Law </H5>
  As for participation in international sanctions, the passive 
people in Japan halt the thought by raising such reasons as 
"unconstitutional" or "without legal provisions." Granted, even 
if they are unconstitutional or violate laws, such 
interpretations are not a conclusion for politicians. If it is 
judged necessary politically, it is a beginning for adjusting 
such laws. 
  As discussed above, existing laws and ordinances are 
sufficient to launch nonmilitary measures and it is apparent 
that quite a few semimilitary measures can also be put into 
practice. As for military measures, a certain amount can be 
dealt with, if sophisticated or self-contradicted replies made 
toward opposition arguments of the Social Democratic Party of 
Japan and the Japan Communist Party were altered in their 
interpretation on the basis of international common sense and 
legal principles. Therefore, it can be said that the government 
is evading its political judgment with the excuse of 
unconstitutionality and inadequate laws. 
  It does not end there. As commentator Mr. Kenichi Takemura 
pointed out: "World common sense is absurdity to Japan and 
Japan's common sense is absurdity to the world." A typical 
example is the interpretation of and attitude toward the laws 
regarding activities of the SDF, armed forces by international 
law. In foreign countries [and pre-World War II Japan], there 
is no need for provisions in domestic laws over the exercise of 
national power in the international community, such as military 
power, and it is a basic rule for this exercise to follow 
international law and practice. 
  However, every nation has enacted laws and ordinances on 
rules of hostilities in the exercise of military power in 
international society. This is aimed first to restrain such 
acts from going beyond the framework permitted by international 
law or practice in consideration of political as well as moral 
matters; and secondly, it is due to the situation that the 
domestic society's support is indispensable in taking such 
military action. Therefore, it does not mean that no action can 
be taken because no domestic laws or ordinances mention them, 
but it does mean that actions can be taken in accordance with 
international law and practice. 
  In this connection, it is necessary to clearly state in 
domestic laws the authority to use military power within one's 
society, including involvement in disaster relief activities to 
provide help to people in need as well as to maintain public 
peace and order with the possibility of using arms against its 
own people. In these cases, actions should be taken in 
accordance with domestic laws and ordinances and arms can only 
be used in cases allowed by domestic laws and ordinances. 
  After World War II, why did the interpretation that the SDF 
cannot take any international action due to lack of legal 
provisions, contrary to cases of various foreign countries, 
become "an accepted theory?" The reasons are: 1. Due to 
neglect on the part of the government, the legal interpretation 
made at the time of the police reserve force for maintaining 
public peace and order still drags on even after it developed 
into the SDF, armed forces with national defense as their major 
duty. 2. From the time of the police reserve force, police 
officers have continued to keep important decisionmaking 
authority on defense administration, hence contributing to 
interpreting the defense law system in the context of the police 
law. 3. There has been a strong political tendency to restrain 
SDF activities because there have been powerful political 
parties that insisted on the SDF's unconstitutionality and the 
repenting of the military's wartime acts. 
  In Cold War days, Japan could pass as a "special nation" 
with 
a queer legal interpretation that can only apply to Japan. In 
post- Cold War international society, however, Japan may well 
lose its international trust and endanger its national security 
if it continues to act from the past force of habit. It is 
haughty of legislators to think they can control and regulate by 
law in advance all SDF acts in a complicated international 
society. Constitutional amendments may be needed, but most of 
the hurdles blocking the SDF's activities in international 
society and problems pertaining to international contributions 
can be solved by interpreting the relation between international 
and domestic laws based on international common sense and legal 
principles even before constitutional amendments are considered. 

