CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with EU Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan by Luis </F>
Tiberio in Portugal; date not given: "To Change the Criteria for 
Convergence Would Be Premature and Dangerous"] 
  [Excerpts] For the media in general, the evidence is 
undeniable: Leon Brittan is in the race for the presidency of 
the European Commission, some 13 years after he joined the 
British Government as Margaret Thatchers's chief secretary to 
the treasury, "at the request of Geoffrey Howe," chancellor of 
the exchequer, as "Maggie" relates in her memoirs. [passage 
omitted] 
  Last year Brittan won the post for foreign economic 
relations 
of the European Union [EU]. He came into the limelight as the 
EU's chief negotiator in the Uruguay Round of the GATT. Now the 
hour has arrived to run as successor to Delors. 
  In an interview with EXPRESSO, Brittan conducts his 
campaign, 
but does not proclaim it.... Attempting to overcome resistance 
to the fact that he is British, he tries to dispel the image of 
a faithful "Thatcherite" and to distance himself from the 
positions of the Major government. 
  For now, he succeeds in being seen as London's most 
European-minded possibility. Otherwise, he would not be 
defending the role of the Commission, the criteria for 
convergence, and the single currency. 
  [Tiberio] So you are campaigning for the presidency of the 
European Commission.... 
  [Brittan] (laughing) No, I am not campaigning. The truth is 
that my name was mentioned in the context of the presidency. And 
I believe in openness and clarity. For this reason, for those 
who would like to know my opinions, I am more than pleased to 
explain them. 
  [Tiberio] If you are not campaigning, what brings you to 
Portugal? 
  [Brittan] The Uruguay Round of the GATT is of enormous 
importance to Portugal. I was with the Portuguese prime minister 
in October, hence before I had completed the negotiations of the 
Uruguay Round. Now I want to inform him of the results. There is 
no mystery. I am aware that people will ask me questions about 
the presidency and I am prepared to answer them. But this is not 
an election campaign. 
  [Tiberio] I do not say it is an election campaign, because 
there has never been a formal campaign for the presidency of the 
Commission. But no one believes that it would be a sacrifice for 
you. 
  [Brittan] A sacrifice? Clearly not. I mean, it is a 
difficult 
job, but I have been on the Commission for five years, first in 
the post for competitiveness and now that of foreign economic 
relations of the EU. So, either we feel bored and tired (and I 
do not feel this way) or we are ready for new tasks that people 
wish us to perform. Hence it is natural that we explain our 
points of view. 
  [Tiberio] But this means competing for a post that, in your 
country, is categorized as a "civil servant." 
  [Brittan] They may call it what they like. The fact is that 
it is necessary to have a Commission that will guarantee a fair 
balance between the interests of the Community as a whole -- 
particularly of the small member states, because the Commission 
is the guardian of the rights of the small countries and the 
vanguard of the policies of cohesion -- and excessive 
bureaucracy. We have to achieve a balance between moving forward 
too far and too fast and not moving forward at all. 
  [Tiberio] Then the Commission is an ally of the small 
countries? 
  [Brittan] Without the Commission, there would be no cohesion 
policies and there would be too many conflicts of interest. When 
I was responsible for competitiveness, I had to seek limits to 
government subsidies in the richer countries -- for the benefit 
of countries like Portugal. It is a tremendous mistake to think 
that an efficient Commission is a danger to small countries like 
Portugal. But, at the same time, the lesson of Maastricht that 
we must learn is that people are concerned about too much 
bureaucracy. We must explain, and explain clearly, what we are 
doing. As it happens, I was the one on the Commission who 
suggested the principle of subsidization, which was accepted and 
which is now in the treaty. We must give guarantees to people 
for them to accept what we are doing. But this is why we must 
offer explanations. 
  [Tiberio] It appears to be a statement of principles or a 
program. And it is precisely this week -- when you have almost 
finished your "tour" of the capitals of the Twelve (only the 
Paris-Bonn axis was left for later) -- that your book 
Europe: The Europe We Need is coming out. Does what 
has already been said constitute "your" concept of the Europe we 
need? 
  [Brittan] Well, if it were a simple message, it would not 
have been necessary to write 320 pages. My message is that we 
must address the problems of Maastricht with more clarity, more 
democratically, and with more subsidization. Except that, at the 
same time, we must go forward with what the Twelve have 
undertaken, such as the Economic and Monetary Union [EMU], in 
which, I hope, Portugal will participate -- and your prime 
minister is quite interested in this. We have to find a way to 
do this within the framework of change resulting from the 
alterations to the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European 
Monetary System (EMS). But we must also develop a policy that 
benefits the Europe of the citizens -- a concept that I call 
"stewardship." 
  We have to make our industry more competitive and I have a 
program to do this. And we must be open to the outside world 
(both in foreign policy and commercial terms) and, at the same 
time, be strong enough to protect our interests. And we have to 
have a balance: We will not turn only toward the north and east, 
but we will have an effective policy in relation to the south. 
  [Tiberio] Let us return to the EMU. You have already 
publicly 
advocated convergence for the EMU, but without the need to go 
back to the narrow band of the ERM. Would the criteria for 
convergence be altered? 
  [Brittan] No, no. The criteria must be maintained, because I 
feel they exercise a salutary pressure for economic change in 
all the countries of Europe and this will be to the benefit of 
these countries. For example, Portugal benefited from the 
criteria for convergence. It was not easy. It required courage 
on the government's part, but the Portuguese economy would be 
worse off without the criteria. 
  It is clear, however, that these are not mathematical 
criteria to be applied in the strictest sense. When the time 
comes, we will have to look not only at the grid and the 
position on the grid, but also at the trajectory. 
  In any event, I feel that, for the time being, the criteria 
should not be changed. They may be extremely unpopular, but they 
are very beneficial. To change them would be premature, 
dangerous, and ill-advised. 
  [Tiberio] Even though you are presumably in favor of free 
exchange, you also support a single currency. 
  [Brittan] Yes. I have been in favor of a single currency for 
many years. There are at least two disadvantages to not having a 
single currency. The exchanges are costly for private 
individuals and in international negotiations (bilateral or 
multilateral), companies are too vulnerable and dependent on the 
exchange rates. 
  [Tiberio] But do you go along with the intransigent 
positions 
of the United Kingdom and Spain in the "guerrilla action" 
regarding the number of votes necessary for a group of countries 
to form the so-called minority blockade? 
  [Brittan] The positions are not the same. I think that we 
are 
making great progress in the negotiations for expansion to the 
Scandinavians and to Austria, and now there is a persisting 
problem with the right to vote, for which a compromise has been 
presented. I myself, on Monday [28 March] morning, publicly (on 
the BBC) urged my country to accept this compromise. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Tiberio] You called the GATT agreement "the greatest 
liberalization ever carried out." But on the verge of the formal 
signing of the accord, there are those (such as France, Italy, 
Canada, and Greece) who are advocating the introduction of a 
"social clause" to restrict child labor and forced labor by 
prisoners. As chief negotiator of the EU, are you in agreement? 
  [Brittan] This will not be included in the GATT accord, but 
will be discussed only on the next "round" of trade 
negotiations. Everyone accepts that it is not an issue of 
including the matter in the accord, but of putting it on the 
agenda for the future. And the EU will fight for this two weeks 
from now in Marrakech. 
  [Tiberio] You stated that to have left the audiovisual 
[category] out of the GATT accord made the Twelve more 
vulnerable to retaliatory measures by the United States. Do you 
in fact fear the most "notorious" of the U.S. retaliatory 
measures, the "Super 301" clause, or is it the case that -- as 
someone has already said -- "`the Super 301' is 20 percent 
economic and 80 percent political?" 
  [Brittan] No, I am not afraid of it. As a result of the GATT 
agreement, we have limited its possible effects. And Mickey 
Kantor (the U.S. chief negotiator) has personally assured me 
that he accepts that the "Super 301" may not be applied in any 
way contrary to the present or future rules of the GATT. 
  And since the future rules of the GATT will be quite 
restrictive, the Americans will not be able to use it against 
Europe in any dangerous way. 
  [Tiberio] But they continue to use it against other GATT 
signatories, as was the case now with Japan. 
  [Brittan] Well, the Japanese must look out for themselves. 
But even in relation to Japan, they [the Americans] are limited 
by the new GATT rules. 
  [Tiberio] The GATT negotiations earned you harsh attacks 
"within" Europe, especially from the French. Marie France Garaud 
(former adviser to the French Government for the GATT) accused 
you of "behaving like a Trojan horse" and Alain Juppe, French 
minister of foreign affairs, went so far as to call you a 
"traitor." 
  [Brittan] (laughter) If you were to ask Mr. Juppe what he 
thinks of me, I do not think he would speak this way any longer. 
  [Tiberio] On 13 December, Portugal stressed its reservations 
regarding the GATT accord and Minister Durao Barroso stated: "As 
it stands, the accord is unacceptable." Your response was: "I 
would prefer not to comment." 
  [Brittan] By 15 December, it was already acceptable. Well, 
there is no mystery. Portugal had a problem, and we were able to 
solve it. An agreement was reached, and Portugal was a party to 
the unanimous vote. 
  [Tiberio] Precisely because it was "unacceptable" on 13 
December and "acceptable" on 15 December, many people said that 
Portugal had "sold out" its textile sector for 400 million 
ECU's.... 
  [Brittan] The accusation is extremely unjust. Portugal 
fought 
hard in defense of its textile industry and, incidentally, as a 
result of Portuguese pressure, we managed to achieve a change in 
the Uruguay Round. Above all, we succeeded in winning more 
concessions from the North Americans, because I repeatedly 
insisted on Portugal's needs. 
  In the second place, on the very last day, in Geneva, we 
managed to arrive at a statement affirming that we will not go 
ahead with the dismantling of the Multifiber Accord if the 
developing countries do not meet their obligations both 
regarding the rules and regarding the opening of their markets. 
  Moreover, Portugal brought up the problems in its industry 
and the Union responded very positively, with a new financial 
instrument to assist the industry. In short, I think Portugal 
fought hard and quite successfully for the textile industry and 
the Commission and the Council responded very positively. The 
final result was a victory for the Portuguese Government. 
  [Tiberio] The EU representative to the GATT has changed: 
Paul 
Tran van Tinh was replaced by Jean-Pierre Leng, who has been in 
Tokyo until now. 
  [Brittan] Both men are highly professional civil servants, 
truly public servants in this case. I think Jean-Pierre Leng 
will do excellent work; incidentally, we chose him because of 
his performance in Japan. And he will be, I am certain, an 
effective defender of EU interests in Geneva. 
  [Tiberio] There was another change, earlier. Arthur Dunkel 
was relieved by Peter Sutherland as director general of the GATT. 
  [Brittan] I would not like to make comparisons. But Dunkel 
struggled hard for many years, bringing the Uruguay round to 
"near conclusion." Sutherland provided the final impetus. Now 
that we have an accord, no more need be said. 
  [Tiberio] When Clinton chose him, Mickey Kantor was 
denigrated by trade experts. They "accused" him of not having a 
trade background and of being simply a skilled lawyer connected 
with the film industry in Los Angeles. What is your image now of 
your great adversary in the GATT? 
  [Brittan] I found him an energetic counterpart who fought 
hard for the interests of the United States, but who was 
concerned with reaching an accord. And he was capable of making 
the necessary compromises. We fought hard, but we achieved an 
accord. 
  [Tiberio] You two have something in common besides being 
jurists; you are both of Lithuanian descent. 
  [Brittan] Yes, but I don't believe that it was a great help. 
In both cases, the lineage is so remote as to be much more a 
part of family history than an important factor in the 
negotiations. 
  [Tiberio] Curiously, you share the same roots with Yehudi 
Menuhin, who had extravagant praise for your musical learning. 
  [Brittan] It was extremely kind of him. And, I must say, it 
is always more flattering to be praised by someone from the 
world of art than by a politician. [passage omitted] 
  [Tiberio] Let us move to the European Commission. Jacques 
Delors.... 
  [Brittan] There is no doubt. Jacques Delors greatly advanced 
the development of Europe. And he also greatly strengthened the 
status of the Commission. Without a doubt. 
  [Tiberio] And potential successors, such as Ruud Lubbers.... 
  [Brittan] He is prime minister of the Netherlands, and 
highly 
successful. 
  [Tiberio] Yes, but can he be as successful as president of 
the Commission? 
  [Brittan] This question is entirely up to the chiefs of 
state 
and government to decide. 
  [Tiberio] Felipe Gonzalez.... 
  [Brittan] It is the same question. I am not going to give 
grades to all the chiefs of government. But it is obvious that 
Gonzalez is a prime minister who is highly respected in Spain. 
  [Tiberio] You will end by saying precisely the same thing 
about all the chiefs of government. 
  [Brittan] Not all of them. I would not say the same, for 
example, about Colonel al-Qadhdhafi. (Laughter) Obviously it is 
not the place of a member of the Commission to say one prime 
minister is good and another one is bad. 
  [Tiberio] But there are potential candidates to succeed 
Delors who are not chiefs of government. For example, a former 
commissioner such as Peter Sutherland. 
  [Brittan] I was partly responsible, with Mickey Kantor, for 
recommending (first to the Community countries and then to the 
rest of the world) that Sutherland be appointed director general 
of the GATT. And he has met my expectations fully. 
  [Tiberio] Finally, a completely different figure. Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy.... 
  [Brittan] I do not think the danger lies in Zhirinovskiy, 
because he is too ridiculous to be dangerous. The real danger 
would be someone who espouses Zhirinovskiy's principles, but in 
a more temperate and credible manner. 

