BFN 

<F P=106> ["Legal System Forum" column by Yang Haikun (2799 3189 </F>
0981): "Beat the Drums To Clear the Way for `Judicial 
Independence'"] 
  [Text] As we march toward the 21st century, the objective 
of China's economic structural reform is to establish a 
socialist market economic structure, and in keeping with this 
goal, the objective of its political structural reform is to 
build a socialist democratic country with a legal system under 
the leadership of the CPC. 
  The two crucial points concerning the construction of a 
socialist democratic country with a legal system are the 
necessity of placing the law in a supreme position and that of 
realizing judicial independence. Placing the law in a supreme 
position conforms to the principle of China's Constitution. The 
Constitution of the PRC provides: "The state upholds the 
uniformity and dignity of the socialist legal system. All state 
organs, the armed forces, all political parties and public 
organizations, and all enterprises and undertakings must abide 
by the Constitution and the law. All acts in violation of the 
Constitution and the law must be looked into." The Constitution 
and law were formulated by the people, which are the 
concentrated expression of the people's interests and will. 
Therefore, regarding the Constitution and law as supreme means 
regarding the interests and will of the people as supreme. 
Without the supremacy of law, it is impossible to uphold the 
principle that all men are equal before the law. How can people 
talk about all men being equal before the law if certain 
individuals or organizations are able to place themselves above 
the law? 
  Since the objective of establishing a socialist market 
economic structure was defined, China's economic legislation has 
been promulgated very rapidly, and its achievements have been 
obvious to all. At present, however, a very universal and 
urgent issue is how to practice the law in real life situations, 
that is, how to ensure that there is the law to abide by, that 
the law is strictly enforced, and that acts in violation of the 
law are looked into. The most vital point among these is the 
realization of judicial independence. It can be stated that, in 
the political systems of most countries in the contemporary 
world, it is a universally accepted principle that the judicial 
department and its affiliated organizations with courts at their 
center are placed in an independent status. In particular, in 
the power structure of those countries practicing a market 
economy, the independence of the judiciary is of paramount 
importance to stabilizing public order and developing the 
national economy. During his recent visit to China, the 
Argentine justice minister told Chinese reporters: "There are 
many laws in Argentina, but our Constitution is most important 
of all. A major characteristic of the Argentine judicial 
department is its independence. Under no circumstances can a 
president of the republic exercise judicial powers, 
presumptuously make judgments on unsettled cases, or retry 
concluded cases. No one can dismiss a staff member of a 
judicial department if his actions are not censurable, but he 
will be removed from office if he violates the law and 
discipline or commits any ordinary crime." In my view, this is 
the most simple and profound way of summarizing judicial 
independence. In emulating the foreign judicial system, both 
the advanced experience of the developed countries and the 
useful experience of the Third World are worth emulating. Can 
we not obtain any valuable enlightenment from the principle and 
spirit of judicial independence in Argentina? 
  Doctor Ople [ou pu le 2962 2528 0519], who has conducted 
in-depth research on the Japanese judicial system, has pointed 
out: "The intensified authority of judicial departments, the 
enhanced reputation of judges, and the entire independence in 
organization and function based on the above are particularly 
important to a country in which administrative power holds a 
predominant position." According to a survey, great changes have 
taken place in the scope and structure of the cases accepted by 
the people's courts at all levels in China over the past few 
years. Civil and economic disputes as well as maritime and 
business cases directly accepted by the courts have increased 
noticeably. However, there are still many factors that have 
seriously affected fair trials and the strict execution of 
judgments and, in particular, the rate of accepting 
administration-related cases has declined by a large margin. An 
analysis shows that the principal causes are: People dare not 
bring charges before a court for fear that they will suffer 
retaliation; some administrative organs will not answer charges 
due to their poor legal awareness; some judicial personnel dare 
not try cases for fear that their relations with the 
administrative organs will be damaged, or they make judgments 
that pervert the law because they cannot resist the intervention 
from the administrative organs. Practice has proven that, 
without judicial independence, it is very difficult to have laws 
-- even the best ones -- effectively enforced. A judicial 
officer from a grass-roots court sighed with feeling, saying: 
"The courts have become the executive bodies of the government 
organs. As judicial and administrative powers are pulled 
together to jointly deal with people who have no connection with 
the administration, how can there be a procedural system for 
taking action against the administration?" 
  Therefore, in the course of rectifying and punishing 
corruption and establishing a socialist market economic system, 
nothing is more urgent and practical than the establishment of 
an independent judicial structure. It is neither strange nor 
terrible to discover that some corrupt phenomena exist in the 
economic and noneconomic spheres, but it is our inability to use 
powerful means to avoid the abuse of power and maintain a sound 
social and economic order that is really dreadful. Judicial 
fairness is generally regarded as the ultimate and most 
effective means of achieving social justice, so, if judicial 
independence and fairness are not guaranteed and if even the 
courts, procuratorates, and the lawyer system -- which has just 
been established -- are polluted and lack popular trust, then, 
it is merely empty talk when we claim to set up a fair and 
competitive socialist market economic order. 

