BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Bernd Ziesemer: "Emotionally Charged"] </F>
  [Text] It is not difficult technical problems, but rather 
problems of political style that make Boris Yeltsin's official 
visit to Germany tomorrow [11 May] a tricky event for the 
Federal Government. The president will come to Bonn only two 
days after celebrating the anniversary of the end of World War 
II in Moscow. The Russian nation was even more emotionally 
charged on this year's "Victory Day" than it had been in 
previous years. 
  Even a sober Westernized paper such as IZVESTIYA at the 
weekend carried a headline reading "Eternal Thanks to You, 
Soldiers of Victory." On the front page of the paper, the 
well-known democratic writer and Yeltsin adviser Otto Lazis 
complained about the Germans' "stupid and dangerous" wish to 
move the official farewell ceremony for the Russian troops to 
Weimar. 
  Entirely unexpectedly for some, symbols are once again at 
the 
center of a fierce struggle in German-Russian relations. Thus, 
many Russians suddenly consider the return of German cultural 
assets that were taken away to the Soviet Union after World War 
II to be a national embarrassment. And even Foreign Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev takes every opportunity to emphasize Russia's 
role as a superpower: "We are not weak, and we do not have an 
inferiority complex." 
  Yeltsin seems to want to use his visit to Germany to 
emphasize this message very clearly. Symbolic concessions at 
the farewell ceremony for the last Russian soldiers will not be 
enough. Yeltsin's advisers want to use the Germans to put even 
more pressure on the other Western industrial nations. They 
want Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl to help bring about a 
special agreement with NATO and ultimately turn the G-7 Club of 
Western industrial nations into a G-8 with permanent Russian 
participation. Yeltsin's advisers could thus kill two birds 
with one stone: Russia's standing in the outside world would be 
improved, and the strong nationalist opposition appeased. 
  Following the dispute over a joint East-West strategy in 
former Yugoslavia, Moscow has decided on a negative attitude 
toward NATO's Partnership for Peace program. In the view of 
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, Russia's superpower interests 
call for different forms of cooperation with the Western 
alliance. 
  The only problem for Yeltsin: Russia's superpower airs and 
its continual requests for more financial aid from the West 
hardly go together. For the visit to Germany, the ministries in 
charge have once again put together a long list of new and old 
demands: further concessions on refinancing, more favorable 
conditions for Hermes loans, and more direct investment from 
Germany. 
  A Foreign Trade Ministry official in Moscow said, 
surprisingly openly, that Yeltsin's talks will have to help make 
Bonn continue to play its role as the most important Western 
financier. Many economic experts in Moscow seem to be worried 
that German aid sources might suddenly dry up after the troops 
withdraw in August. 

