Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Alfonso Millares G.] </F>
  [Text] Gregorio Rodriguez Benitez, the right-hand man of 
Francisco Rafael Arellano Felix (the presumed drug trafficker 
captured in Tijuana on 5 December), was arrested yesterday in 
Mazatlan, Sinaloa, by Federal Judicial Police agents. They were 
implementing an arrest warrant issued by the sixth district 
judge of that state, based on a charge that he committed the 
crime of collecting firearms that were for the exclusive use of 
the National Army, Navy, and Air Force. 
  With "El Goyo's" capture, the judicial authorities are 
confident that they will apprehend the rest of the ring that 
participated in the May shooting at the international airport in 
Guadalajara, Jalisco, resulting in the death of Cardinal Juan 
Jesus Posadas Ocampo. The prelate was mistaken for Joaquin 
"Chapo" Guzman, a member of the Sinaloa cartel currently 
confined in the maximum security prison in Almoloya de Juarez, 
Mexico State. 
  As was reported last Tuesday, these three persons had been 
fugitives from justice since the judge issued arrest warrants 
for them as persons presumed guilty of committing the 
aforementioned crime. Francisco Rafael Arellano Felix is now 
imprisoned at Almoloya de Juarez, Mexico State; and Jose Alberto 
Loza, at the Rehabilitation Center in Mazatlan, Sinaloa. 
  As for the four subjects arrested with Arellano Felix, the 
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic remanded them to 
the fifth district judge of criminal proceedings in the Federal 
District. They are presumed guilty of having committed crimes of 
concealment and criminal association. 
  These individuals, Luis Enrique Cortes Satarain and Tomas 
Adan Velarde Espinoza, were also wanted for their probable links 
with the criminal group headed by Francisco Rafael Arellano. 
  Upon making their respective statements to the Public 
Prosecutor's Office, the accused admitted being in Arellano 
Felix's service. Some were engaged in surveillance activities to 
prevent the capture of their chief, whom they were providing 
with security as well. 
  All the accused, declaring that they were fully aware that 
Francisco Rafael was a fugitive from justice, admitted that, 
despite this, they were working to aid his concealment. 
  The legal status of those in custody will have to be decided 
by the judge in the case, based on the terms stipulated by law. 

