Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs yesterday received 
from Washington yesterday a report on the lifting of the U.S. 
trade embargo against Vietnam. President Bill Clinton made the 
decision after the U.S. Senate on 28 January voted 62 against 38 
for the abrogation of the law on a trade embargo against 
Vietnam. The lifting of the U.S. embargo can be regard as the 
opening of the door to the world market for Vietnam because the 
trade boycott created numerous obstacles to trade and investment 
development in that country. As a result, not only Vietnam but 
also all countries, including the U.S. private sectors, will 
benefit from this new move for they will be able to do business 
in Vietnam, which is one of the markets and investment areas in 
the Asia and Pacific region that is of high potential. 
  As a close neighboring country of Vietnam, Thailand is 
extremely pleased with the U.S. president's decision and regards 
it as ending the past conflict and beginning a period of peace 
and economic development in Indochina and the Southeast Asian 
region. 
  Speaking to reporters during an interview right after 
learning about the report at Government House yesterday, Deputy 
Prime Minister Amnuai Wirawan said: 
  [Begin Amnuai recording] Not only the United States but also 
other countries will invest in Vietnam because the process of 
economic development is currently being carried out with the 
cooperation of several countries in line with the so-called 
globalization system. For this reason, all countries, including 
Thailand, will benefit from the lifting of the embargo. We will 
have to closely monitor this new development. Our 
entrepreneurs, business people, and industrialists should render 
their cooperation because they can also share in the benefit 
along with Vietnam and other countries. [end recording] 
  Asked about the anticipated increase of Thai investment in 
Vietnam, the deputy prime minister said: 
  [Begin Amunai recording] There is nothing wrong with this if 
it is for mutual interests. If we have the resources, we can 
form joint investment ventures with them. This is a common 
practice because all the parties concerned will gain. 
Meanwhile, it does not mean that we will not invest in our own 
country. In fact, Thailand's economy is much more advanced than 
theirs. Our market is big and wide. We have the buying power. 
Nobody wants to turn away from Thailand. Provided we manage 
our economy properly, our market will continue to expand 
rapidly. This new development will benefit our region, 
particularly in the areas of international security and 
political stability. [end recording] 

