BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] For the first time since the beginning 
of the aggression against our country, a delegation of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran visited Sarajevo today. The 
delegation, headed by 'Ali Akbar Velayati, was received by 
president of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, Alija 
Izetbegovic. Senada Cumurovic reports: 
  [Cumorovic] President Izetbegovic was the first to address 
the reporters after the talks, saying that the visit of the 
Iranian delegation would have taken place earlier if UNPROFOR 
[UN Protection Forces] had enabled it, and stressing that Iran 
was one of the first states to recognize Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  [Begin Izetbegovic recording] We must point out that the 
course of our struggle for freedom would have been different and 
less successful without Iran and its aid. Iran has given us 
great support and aid, and it is continuing to do so today. You 
are aware that Iran has also offered its military aid, which was 
turned down by UNPROFOR. I am sorry to say that it was easier 
for them to witness the destruction of Gorazde and the murder of 
the people in Gorazde than the presence of Iranian soldiers. 
Why? Those who refused to accept several thousand Iranian 
soldiers in the ranks of UNPROFOR could explain this. We of 
course cannot understand this, as well as many other things. 
  Our representatives recently visited Teheran. As you know, 
our deputy premier was recently in Teheran as well as the 
Bosnian minister of defense, and they made certain deals there. 
[end recording] 
  [Announcer] The Iranian foreign minister also mentioned the 
lack of will by UNPROFOR to enable the visit of the Iranian 
delegation to Sarajevo. However, as this has taken place now, 
here are Mr. Velayati's impressions after the talks. 
  [Begin Velayati recording in English, with superimposed 
Serbo-Croatian translation] We admire the people and the 
government of Bosnia-Herzegovina for offering such resistance to 
the Serb aggression. The Islamic Republic of Iran is trying to 
help with humanitarian aid. Bilateral issues, the main areas of 
cooperation and the current situation regarding the resolution 
of the Bosnian issue were discussed during the talks. [end 
recording] 
  [Announcer] Minister Velayati said the Washington agreement 
between Bosnia and Croatia was positive. This is what Velayati 
said in connection with the activities of the Islamic Conference 
Organization [OIC]. 
  [Begin Velayati recording in English, with superimposed 
Serbo-Croatian translation] As an active member of the OIC's 
contact group we have resumed our efforts to organize the 
Islamic states. We are also insisting on our demand to send 
troops here. We are prepared to send 10,000 soldiers under the 
UN flag, but we have not received any logical and acceptable 
response from the United Nations. [end recording] 

