Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "What's Inside the Association of </F>
Jabal 'Amil Ulema?"] 
  [Text] We received the following statement from a member of 
the Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema. The statement dealt with 
the association's recent meeting, the conditions surrounding the 
leaders of the association, and the relationship between those 
leaders and Shaykh Hasan Akhtari, Iran's Ambassador to Damascus. 
  The meeting started at 0930. It was started by Shaykh Ahmad 
Talib, imam of the village of Jibshit. He spoke about the 
objectives of the meeting, and he reminded attendees of the 
transgressions of members of the administrative board, which is 
made up of Shaykh 'Afif al-Nabulsi, Shaykh Yusuf Da'mush, Shaykh 
Muhammad Kawtharani, Shaykh Hasan Baghdadi, and Shaykh Ahmad 
Sadiq. 
  Then the discussion among the attendees focused on the 
transgressions of the administrative board. Ulemas [religious 
scholars] opposed to these transgressions had taken this action 
and called for this meeting. 
  The most important of these transgressions which the 
attendees dealt with were: 
  1. The attendees took up the matter of administrative board 
members holding on to their positions even after the expiration 
of the one-year term to which the general assembly had 
previously agreed. It is known that the administrative board was 
elected two years ago, but the general assembly has not called 
for an election so that an administrative board can be elected 
for a second term. 
  2. The attendees took up the matter of Shaykh al-Nabulsi's 
sudden announcement that he would preside over the Association 
of Jabal 'Amil Ulema even though members of the association had 
previously agreed that the association was to have no presiding 
officer and that it was to have an administrative board only. 
That decision was made after the resignation of the late Holy 
Sayyid 'Abd-al-Muhsin Fadlallah, the association's spiritual 
guide. His resignation was the result of comments he made on the 
activities of the administrative board, in particular, the 
personal remarks he made about Shaykh 'Afif al-Nabulsi. The late 
Sayyid Fadlallah, who became aware of Shaykh al-Nabulsi's 
fondness for fame and power, had made those remarks to some of 
the ulemas. 
  3. The attendees took up the administrative board's 
deliberate management failures, and they inquired into what 
members of the administrative board had achieved during their 
term in office since their election. 
  The attendees opined that members of the administrative 
board 
were not engaged in any cultural or social activity to speak of 
except for the fact that they issued statements to the media 
condemning one activity or supporting another, depending on the 
circumstances and the occasions. Their aim was to remind people 
of their presence lest they be forgotten. Also, they did that to 
receive payment from the Islamic Republic of Iran for making 
those statements. 
  4. The attendees also took up the administrative board's 
appropriation of official invitations extended by Iran to the 
association so that association members could travel to perform 
the pilgrimage or to visit Iran. Everybody noted that the 
conduct of members of the administrative board in this matter 
did not meet any religious or rational standards and controls, 
which could explain the board's appropriation of these 
invitations. There was no justification for the conduct of the 
board members. They did what they did to satisfy their desires 
because they found frequent travel to be [an opportunity for] 
tourism and recreation. 
  Their most recent trip to Iran was one of their 
extraordinary 
and ironical recreational trips. Accompanied by their wives and 
children they traveled to Iran after persistently and repeatedly 
asking Shaykh Akhtari to arrange for them such a visit to Iran 
in the name of the association. When Shaykh Akhtari did finally 
comply with their request, they traveled to Iran on that day on 
which Israel ended its shelling of the villages of Jabal 'Amil 
during the seven-day war. 
  To them that trip was their opportunity to reap the fruits 
of 
the efforts that were made and the steadfastness that was 
demonstrated by the dispossessed citizens of Jabal 'Amil. It was 
their opportunity to suggest to the Iranians that they deserved 
credit for their efforts and their strife in south Lebanon, 
which foiled Israel's plan of aggression. At the same time, 
everyone knew that all of them had fled to Beirut where they 
could be safe from Israel's aggression on south Lebanon. 
Everyone knew that they had played no part in supporting the 
people's steadfastness. 
  5. [The budget] was one of the important points taken up by 
the attendees in their comments on the conduct of the 
administrative board. The attendees inquired into the legal 
causes for which the association's $16,000 budget was spent. 
That amount is sent every month by Shaykh Akhtari to members of 
the administrative board for the Association of Jabal 'Amil 
Ulema. And yet, members of the general assembly [of the 
association] know that most of them receive nothing of this 
budget. Where then do these board members stand on the life and 
conduct of 'Ali ibn Abu Talib and his style of government? In 
one of his sayings 'Ali ibn Abu Talib said, "If the money were 
mine, I would establish equity between them. But since the money 
is God's, it is even more incumbent upon me to do that." When 
'Ali appointed Ashtar ruler of Egypt, he admonished him: "Don't 
conduct yourself like a ferocious lion, and don't consider their 
bread and butter to be your spoils. People come in two kinds: if 
they share your faith, they are your brothers, [and if not,] 
they are creatures just like you." 
  Of course, if one wants to find out what became of the 
association's budget, one has to look for all the telltale 
signs: the apartments in Beirut, which members of the 
administrative board have been buying, the luxurious cars they 
have been driving, the businesses in which they have become 
partners, and the splendor and luxury they have been 
experiencing with their families. The telltale signs are many. 
When the source of their property becomes the topic of 
conversation, and they are asked where all that property came 
from, they say that all of it had been given to them as personal 
gifts. 
  Our retort to that so-called answer, one that was given to 
get out of a difficult question, is one which the Prophet, may 
God bless him and grant him salvation, gave one of his friends. 
That friend, who had recently returned from battle, was 
distributing the spoils of war in front of the Prophet, may God 
bless him and grant him salvation. While distributing the loot, 
he told the Prophet, "This is for you and this is for me. They 
were given to us as gifts." 
  The Prophet replied, "Would these gifts have found their way 
to you if you had stayed home?" 
  Of course these gifts would not have found their way to him 
because they were given to him in his official capacity, not 
because of who he is as a person. 
  These were the most important points that were dealt with by 
those who attended the meeting. 
  At the end of the meeting the attendees drafted a concluding 
statement summarizing their demands, and they entrusted a 
five-member committee with the task of presenting those demands 
to Sayyid Hasan Nasrallah, to Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah, 
and to Shaykh Akhtari, ambassador of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran in Syria. The attendees were hoping that these individuals 
would help them achieve their demands. These demands are: 
  1. We consider the Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema to be 
the 
framework within which the ulema can do their work. As such the 
association is not to be duplicated or divided. 
  2. We demand that a charter be drafted for the association 
to 
define mandatory duties and due rights. 
  3. The charter shall become legal upon approval by the 
ruling 
jurisconsult and ratification by the association's general 
assembly. 
  4. The term of office for the former administrative board 
shall be deemed to have expired one year ago, one year after the 
members of that board were elected. That was the period of time 
which was determined for the board by the general association. 
  5. All decisions made by the administrative staff after the 
expiration of the term during which they were authorized by the 
general association to take action shall be considered void and 
illegal. 
  6. The attendees have entrusted a committee, which was 
formed 
with their consent, with the task of following up on the 
decisions they made and the task of drafting bylaws for the 
association. If such bylaws do exist, they are to be presented 
to the committee for its consideration. Then they are to be 
presented to the general assembly within a period of time that 
shall not exceed 10 days, and the general assembly shall either 
approve or amend those bylaws. 
  The attendees then signed the statement. 
  Afterwards 10 other ulemas who had not attended the meeting 
signed the statement. By signing the statement they were adding 
their voices to those of the opposition. [The following] are 
among the signatories: 
  1. Shaykh Khalil Rizq, Hizballah's cultural officer in 
Beirut 
  2. Shaykh Ahmad Kurani, former mayor of the village of Shhur 
  3. Shaykh Taysir Rizq, imam of the village of Zifta 
  4. Shaykh 'Ali Yasin, an official of the religious school in 
Sidon and imam of the village of Majdal Silm 
  5. Shaykh Husayn Surur, imam of the village of Burj 
al-Shamali 
  6. Shaykh Muhammad Hamud, imam of the village of 
al-Hallusiyah 
  7. Sayyid al-Sharif al-Sayyid, imam of the village of 
al-Marwaniyah 
Three other ulemas signed the statement. The number of members 
in the opposition came to 43 ulemas. 
  After some time we asked the follow-up committee how far it 
had come in its efforts, and committee members told us with 
resignation that the opposition's efforts had failed and that 
Shaykh Akhtari, Iran's ambassador to Damascus, had not granted 
their request. It was understood that Shaykh Akhtari wanted to 
keep Shaykh al-Nabulsi because of some advantage that he found 
in keeping him, and he dismissed the opposition of 43 ulemas. 
  The secretariat general of Hizballah was the second 
obstacle, 
which the opposition came up against even though Sayyid Hasan 
Nasrallah himself had given opposition leaders the green light 
for their action. A handwritten letter sent by Sayyid Nasrallah 
to Shaykh Nabil Qawuq, Hizballah's representative to the 
Consultative Council for south Lebanon, attests to that. Sayyid 
Nasrallah indicates in that letter his approval of the 
opposition's action for reform. Opposition leaders got hold of 
this letter, and they used it to allay the fears of some ulemas 
and to encourage them to join them in their action. This letter 
was seen by many ulemas in the opposition. 
  When Sayyid Nasrallah heard the news that some ulemas in the 
opposition had seen his secret letter, he became angry, and he 
withdrew his sponsorship of the opposition's action. 
  Those members of the administrative board whom the 
opposition 
had in mind tried to dissuade some of the ulemas in the 
opposition from their action. They spread rumors that the 
opposition was being backed by Shaykh Subhi al-Tufayli even 
though everybody knew that the opposition's action was launched 
after the green light from Sayyid Nasrallah and Sayyid Fadlallah 
was received. 
  Everybody also knew that Shaykh al-Tufayli was the president 
of al-Tablighiyah Foundation and that Shaykh al-Nabulsi and 
Shaykh Kawtharani, members of the administrative board of the 
Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema, were involved with that 
foundation. Some of the members of Hizballah's Consultative 
Council are also involved with that foundation. If there was any 
truth to that rumor, what would Shaykh al-Tufayli have to gain 
by backing this opposition? 
  If Shaykh al-Tufayli were not a good man and if he were a 
dangerous man, why did the Iranians appoint him to head 
associations for ulemas in Lebanon? 
  In conclusion we would remind Shaykh al-Akhtari that the 
position he took on the opposition conflicts with the policy on 
questioning rulers and holding them accountable that was pursued 
by Imam 'Ali, peace be upon him. It also conflicts with Imam 
'Ali's policy of encouraging the populace to make their 
complaints and comments about the rulers known. Imam 'Ali used 
to listen quite seriously to those complaints, and after 
investigating them, he would boldly take the decision to remove 
the ruler, indifferent to everything but the approval of 
Almighty God. The history of the rule of Imam 'Ali, peace be 
upon him, is full of such instances which illustrate his 
conduct. Since this is not the place where all of them can be 
mentioned, we will limit ourselves to one incident that we will 
relate in the hope that we might learn from it. 
  Imam 'Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him, wrote to 
al-Mundhir Ibn-al-Jarud al-'Abdi, one of the rulers [he had 
appointed] who had failed him in some of the tasks, which had 
been entrusted to him. 
  "Now then, I was misled in thinking that you would follow 
the 
example of your father's righteousness and walk in his 
footsteps. It was reported to me that you are led by your 
passions, that your work makes no allowances for the afterlife, 
that you enrich your life by undermining the foundation for an 
afterlife, and that the relationships you have with your 
community are forged at the expense of your relationship with 
your religion. If what was reported to me about you is true, 
then your family's camel and the soles of your shoes would be 
better than you are. Someone like you does not deserve the space 
he occupies. Someone like you does not deserve to be the means 
by which an order is carried out. Someone like you is not worthy 
of a promotion, nor is he worthy of anyone's trust. 
  "Accept this until you receive a letter from me, God 
willing." 
  [signed] Nahaj al-Balaghah: one of the ulemas in the 
opposition 
<H5>  The Signatories </H5>
  On Saturday, 1 October 1993, 34 of the ulemas from the 
Association of Jabal 'Amil Ulema met in the mosque of the 
village of Jibshit. These ulemas are: 
  Shaykh 'Abd-al-Rasul Hijazi, imam of the village of 
al-Dwayr; 
Shaykh Hasan Hariri, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun al-Nahr; 
Shaykh Muhammad Tahini, imam of the village of 'Aytit; Shaykh 
Muhsin Baghdadi, imam of the village of Ansar; Shaykh Hatim 
Isma'il, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun Ra's al-'Ayn; Shaykh 
Muhammad Kurani; imam of the village of Yatar; Shaykh Yasin 
'Isa, imam of the village of Tayr Falsayh; Shaykh 'Uqayl 
Zayn-al-Din, imam of the village of Safad al-Battikh; Shaykh 
Kazim Yasin, imam of the village of al-'Abbasiyah; Shaykh 
Murtada Hasan, imam of the village of 'Arab Salim; Shaykh Ahmad 
Talib, imam of the village of Jibshit; Shaykh Hasan Mushaymish, 
imam of the village of Kfar Sir; Shaykh 'Adil Nadir, imam of the 
village of Nabatiyah al-Fawqa; Shaykh 'Adil Mu'nis, imam of the 
village of al-Hallusiyah; Shaykh 'Abbas Harb, imam of the 
village of al-Hallusiyah; Shaykh Ahmad Murad, imam of the 
village of Brayqi'; Shaykh 'Abbas Kawtharani, imam of the 
village of al-Sarafand; Shaykh 'Ali 'Abbas, imam of the village 
of Kfar Rumman; Shaykh Zayn-al-'Abidin Bakri, imam of the 
village of al-Siddiqin; Shaykh Hasan (Karasht), imam of the 
village of Batulayh; Shaykh Asadallah Jba'i, imam of the village 
of 'Aytit; Shaykh Hassan (Rutayl), imam of the village of 
Mayfdun; Shaykh 'Adnan Mahdi, imam of the village of Khartum; 
Shaykh 'Abd-al-Karim Karnib, imam of the village of Haddathah; 
Shaykh 'Ali Salih, imam of the village of Kfar Dunin; Shaykh 
Khudr Majid, imam of the village of Bi'r al-Salasil; Sayyid 
'Abd-al-Sahib Fadlallah, imam of the village of Khirbat Silm; 
Sayyid Hasan Zalzali, imam of the village of Dayr Qanun al-Nahr; 
Sayyid Husayn Hijazi, imam of the village of Qabrikha; Sayyid 
Amin Tarhini, imam of the village of 'Abba; Sayyid Muhammad Taqi 
al-Musawi, imam of the village of 'Ayn Qana; Sayyid Ghazi 
al-Husayni; and Sayyid Muhammad al-Amin, imam of the village of 
Shaqra. 

