BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, April 25 (XINHUA) -- Russian Defense 
Minister Pavel Grachev said on Monday [25 April] that despite 
the failure of his talks with the Ukrainian side on the disputed 
Black Sea Fleet the dialogue must continue at a higher level. 
  Speaking at a news conference in Moscow, the Russian 
minister 
said that it is pointless to begin a new round of talks unless 
top level officials agree to take part. In his opinion, the 
talks should involve the first vice-prime ministers or even the 
prime ministers of the two former Soviet Republics. 
  Grachev told reporters that at his last week's talks in 
Sevastopol Ukraine set forth unacceptable conditions including 
joint location of the Ukrainian Navy and the Black Sea Fleet in 
Sevastopol. This contradicts the agreement reached by Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin and his Ukrainian counterpart Leonid 
Kravchuk earlier this month, he pointed out. 
  Ukraine suggested that Russian Black Sea Fleet ships should 
enter and leave their temporary bases through two-mile sea 
corridors and request permission three days in advance. 
  In addition, it also proposed to regulate the navigation of 
Russian warships in Ukrainian territorial waters and the 
economic zone by Ukrainian laws instead of international acts, 
Grachev said. 
  Before the future higher-level talks, the minister stressed, 
it is necessary to agree to some navy terms in order to rule out 
any misinterpretations in the future. 
  He said Ukraine has been considering the term "navy" as 
including only ships and other navy vessels. However, he noted, 
in reality the navy includes, apart from ships, navy aviation, 
marines, bases and logistics units. 
  "The Navy is not only what floats but also what provides 
support on the ground. The division of ships and vessels of the 
Black Sea Fleet is only one tenth of the implementation of the 
decision on the division of the fleet on the whole, only its 
first stage," Grachev stated. 
  In Kiev, Kravchuk said in a Sunday TV program that the 
problem of the Black Sea Fleet can be resolved only with the 
participation of the Russian and Ukrainian top leaders. 
  In his opinion, the long crisis over the fleet can be 
overcome by leasing Sevastopol to Russia for a long period of 
time as a base of the Russian Black Sea Fleet "on the terms, 
generally accepted in the world." He cited as an example 
Russia's agreement with Kazakhstan over the Baikonur Space 
Center. 
  The talks between Russian and Ukrainian defense ministers in 
Sevastopol last week on a gradual settlement of Black Sea Fleet 
problems ended virtually fruitlessly. 
  Grachev refused to sign any agreements due to an 
"unconstructive position" taken by the Ukrainian side on the 
main (according to Grachev) issue: bases for separate 
stationing of the Russian and Ukrainian Black Sea Fleets. 
  "We cannot agree that the headquarters of the two states' 
fleets should be based in the same city," Grachev told reporters. 
  Despite the fact that no documents were signed on the Black 
Sea Fleet, the sides reached a principled agreement on 
parameters of its division. 
  Under the agreement, 669 out of 833 ships or vessels are to 
be handed over to Russia, while 164 to Ukraine. Taking into 
account earlier understandings, Russia is to pay compensation to 
Ukraine. 

