Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vitaliy Portnikov under the rubric "Concepts and </F>
People": "The Faces of Power or the Power of Faces in Russia: 
Outlines of the Political Portraits of Leaders of the Russian 
Republics"] 
  [Text] When in 1991 I completed my article "The Faces of 
Power or the Power of Faces?" dedicated to then members of the 
USSR Council of the Federation, I had occasion to devote a small 
section, "Aspiring Figures," to leaders of the former Russian 
autonomies. Three years have gone by and the "aspiring figures" 
have turned into real, active politicians, often quite well 
known, who are actively influencing the situation in the Russian 
Federation. And so these new observations are devoted to 
them--more or less an expanded version of my previous section, 
but written in recent times when it is not so much the component 
parts of the Russian Federation that are desirous of sovereignty 
as much as Russia itself. 
<H5>  AUSHEV </H5>
  The very appearance of the president of Ingushetia on 
Russia's political scene is akin to the emergence of his native 
republic. Ingushetia has emerged, one might say, under extreme 
conditions, following the proclamation of independence of the 
Chechen Republic and the actual collapse of a united entity that 
existed for many years--the Checheno-Ingush Republic, in which 
the Ingush people occupied far from a dominating position. 
Likely hoping for a return to the status quo, the federal 
authorities were in no hurry to recognize the new republic and 
contribute towards the structuring of its organs of power. In 
the meantime, a territorial question lay at the center of 
Ingushetia's political life--the fate of Prigorodnyy Rayon, 
which found itself part of neighboring North Ossetia after the 
deportation of the Ingush people. Nazran associated the return 
of the territory in dispute with Moscow, a factor that was not 
least important in leading to tragedy and an almost complete 
loss of trust in the federal center and in Boris Yeltsin. Then 
we see emerging in this catastrophic situation in 
Nazran--General Ruslan Aushev, a veteran of the war in 
Afghanistan and former Union people's deputy, appointed head of 
the provisional administration in Ingushetia. Indeed, the 
situation that had taken shape as of that moment in the republic 
demanded a leader of precisely such "generalship." But Aushev 
also showed himself to be a quick-witted politician. Resigning 
from the position of head of administration, he distanced 
himself from the center, which had lost its prestige, and was 
viewed in the presidential elections as the undisputed national 
leader. But this prestige has not diminished Ruslan Aushev's 
difficulties. After all, he must construct virtually brick by 
brick the power of a republic that until quite recently did not 
exist, a republic with undetermined borders and a chaotic 
political life. And he must do all this under conditions of a 
state of emergency and unsettled conflict with Ossetia... At the 
same time, Ruslan Aushev is managing to preserve a certain 
loyalty from afar in his relations with President Boris Yeltsin 
and the federal leadership. One example of this diplomacy of the 
Ingushetian president is Boris Yeltsin's recent Caucasus trip 
and Ruslan Aushev's handshakes with North Ossetian President 
Akhsarbek Galazov. 
<H5>  BIRYUKOV </H5>
  Nikolay Biryukov, chairman of Mordvinia's Supreme Soviet, 
has 
managed to show quite convincingly that it is he who is the real 
"boss" in the republic. Losing the presidential election in 
December 1991 to the Democratic Russia nominee--engineer Vasiliy 
Guslyannikov, the Supreme Soviet chairman did not content 
himself with the role of "second fiddle." In confrontation with 
President Guslyannikov, Nikolay Biryukov, an experienced party 
functionary who attained the position of secretary of the 
Mordvinian party obkom [oblast committee], has successfully 
taken advantage of the mistakes of the young administration and 
Guslyannikov's lack of understanding of the processes of 
sovereignization in the Russian republics. The Mordvinian 
president--of Russian nationality in addition, has become an 
active ally of Moscow (and just about the only one) in the 
struggle against the apparition of separatism. Perhaps it is 
precisely the Mordvinian president's lack of a stance in favor 
of independence that proved the decisive factor in the decision 
of the republic Supreme Soviet to eliminate the position of 
president in April of last year and elect a new government 
headed by Valeriy Shvetsov: Authority and the initiative were 
returned to Nikolay Biryukov. Despite the support the central 
authority attempted to render Vasiliy Guslyannikov, the duality 
of power was not long preserved. The Kremlin's gestures could be 
perceived as lack of respect for the decisions of the republic 
parliament, and the constitutional courts of Russia and 
Mordvinia confirmed the legality of the Supreme Soviet 
resolutions. Following the October events, President Yeltsin 
appointed his own representative to Mordvinia. Nonetheless, even 
under conditions of the triumph of the central authority, 
Nikolay Biryukov's enemies failed to collect the necessary 
number of votes to remove him from the post of Supreme Soviet 
chairman. In addition, results of the Russian parliamentary 
elections in Mordvinia registered a change in the mood of the 
electorate: New Prime Minister Shvetsov and two members of the 
Communist Party became deputies. And so, nothing now stands in 
the way of Nikolay Biryukov--having shown what republic 
independence means in practice--from joining with the group of 
republic leaders most supportive of the concept of sovereignty. 
<H5>  GALAZOV </H5>
  Recently elected the president of North Ossetia, Akhsarbek 
Galazov is one of the best well known leaders of the Caucasus. 
This is due both to the geopolitical role of his little 
republic, which finds itself in the middle of two intricate 
territorial conflicts (Georgian-South Ossetian and North 
Ossetian-Ingushetian), and to his own personal capabilities, as 
became clear during the course of the presidential election 
campaign. Indeed, the recent Supreme Soviet chairman has easily 
managed to show that he is the number one leader in the 
republic: Aleksandr Dzasokhov, one of the strongest aspirants to 
the office of president, former member of the Politburo of the 
CPSU Central Committee and first secretary of the North Ossetian 
party obkom, withdrew his own candidacy, and Viktor Khetagurov, 
chairman of the Council of Ministers of North Ossetia, was 
defeated and forced to resign the post of prime minister. Two 
experienced party and economic leaders fell by the wayside 
before the former rector of North Ossetian University, who 
served in the educational system almost his entire life--a 
situation atypical overall of the republic elite. But over the 
four years of his stay at the head of North Ossetia, Galazov has 
been able to become not simply its leader, but a symbol of the 
republic's rigid position in the territorial conflicts as well. 
Appearing on the post-USSR political scene alongside Torez 
Kulumbegov, chairman of the Supreme Soviet of South Ossetia, 
Galazov never concealed the support his republic has been 
showing its warring brother on the other side of the border, and 
the parliament of North Ossetia has even recognized the former 
Georgian autonomy as an independent state. Akhsarbek Galazov 
adopted an even more irreconcilable position during the 
Ossetia-Ingushetia conflict. But it should be noted for the sake 
of fairness that in both cases the interests of Vladikavkaz 
coincided in part with those of Moscow, which in no way objected 
to the weakening of Zviad Gamsakhurdia's Georgia and strove to 
preserve the status quo in Russia's North Caucasus--violated by 
Ingushetian territorial claims. Is this not wherein lies the 
secret of Galazov's increased political influence upon the 
Moscow leadership and Boris Yeltsin's standing in North Ossetia? 
But now, having been elected president, Galazov faces a choice: 
either continue to advance the hard line advocated in fact by 
the voters or, leaning on the prestige he has already won, try 
to settle the conflict with Ingushetia and pull the republic out 
of the "front-line" state it has been in for several years now. 
<H5>  DZHARIMOV </H5>
  Adygea is the only one of the former autonomous oblasts 
transformed into republics to decide on introduction of the 
presidential form of government. Just the fact that Adygeys 
comprise slightly under one-fourth of the population of the 
republic testifies as to the complexity of the tasks to be 
accomplished by Aslan Dzharimov in this office. The separation 
of Adygea was received with a certain nervousness by the 
leadership of Krasnodar Kray, which used to include the 
autonomous oblast. Therefore, Dzharimov's role in alleviating 
the situation that has come about can be compared with the 
stabilizing role of the leaders of the new independent states 
who graduated from the Moscow political school (the Adygea 
president served many years in leading positions in the kray 
center, and his informal relations with Krasnodar leaders 
without any doubt helped in Adygea's "informal" withdrawal from 
Krasnodar Kray): In addition to concluding an agreement with the 
former "mini-mother country," the republic government introduced 
the special position of chairman [as published] at the head of 
administration of Krasnodar Kray, with the rank of minister. 
  President Dzharimov became well known to broad segments of 
society after his sudden incursion into Caucasian geopolitics. 
In the heat of the Georgia-Abkhazia conflict, the Adygey leader 
offered intermediary proposals. Like other leaders of Russia's 
Caucasian republics, however, the president of Adygea turned out 
all the same to be a resolute supporter of the Abkhaz side. This 
is explained not only by the ethnic proximity of Abkhazians and 
Adygeys and the natural sympathy Maykop has for the Sukhumi 
leadership--holding analogous status, albeit within another of 
the former Union republics, but also by the influence in Adygea 
of the Confederation of Peoples of the Caucasus, even though 
such influence is far more limited here than in neighboring 
Caucasian republics. Despite support for the concept of Adygey 
national rebirth (specifically, the republic leadership has 
assisted the Worldwide Cherkess Association, one of whose 
congresses was convened in Maykop), Aslan Dzharimov is compelled 
to proceed with special caution so as to avoid encroachment of 
any kind upon the Russian community (although Maykop is 
constantly accused of this by certain political circles in 
Krasnodar) while simultaneously ensuring the power potential of 
the "titular" people. Adygea's recent election of a new 
parliament demonstrated the great complexity of this task. 
Nonetheless, the republic remains one of the calmest regions of 
the Caucasus. 
<H5>  DUDAYEV </H5>
  The Chechen president immediately stands out within the 
overall list of leaders of the Russian republics in that he does 
not consider his republic to be a part of the Russian 
Federation. Thus, for long time now Chechnya has been existing 
in a situation that has no analog in international law (or in 
the practice of federative or confederative relations): 
Considering itself an independent state, the republic appears in 
the constitution of "a neighboring state" as a Federation 
entity. All the same, the Moscow authorities, for example, 
equate Chechens with foreigners, obliged to undergo registration 
when they arrive in the capital. This inconvenience can also be 
seen as a triumph for Dzhokhar Dudayev--one more in-fact 
recognition of Chechen independence, and as an admission that 
the federal authorities finally have to concur with the 
separation of the Chechen-Ingush Republic, accomplished "from 
below"--in Groznyy, and not "from above"--in Moscow. As well as 
the fact that there is an ever dwindling number of politicians 
in the general-president's entourage interested in finding any 
real compromise with the center--as if in response to Boris 
Yeltsin's recent speech in the Caucasus in which the Russian 
president termed Chechnya the main factor of instability in the 
region, once again ruling out any possibility of reaching some 
kind of agreement with Groznyy. 
  It is possible that the secret of Dudayev's political 
survivability also lies in the fact that his mannerisms are 
often strikingly similar to Yeltsin's. The striving to achieve a 
presidential republic, to concentrate all real power in the 
hands of the presidential administration, easy parting with 
those who were recently the closest comrades-in-arms and now the 
source of irreconcilable conflict, the ability to collect 
oneself brilliantly in an extreme situation but perform 
illogical actions in "days of peace"--all these parallels are 
familiar to observers in both Groznyy and Moscow. And indeed, 
Dudayev became the leader of Chechnya during the violent 
dissolution of the Supreme Soviet of the Chechen-Ingush Republic 
following the August putsch, while it was precisely following 
the August events that Yeltsin grew into a true state leader. 
Yeltsin's struggle with the party machine assisted in his 
formation as a political figure. The Dudayev phenomenon was 
supported not only by the trend toward sovereignization of 
Chechnya which was gathering force, but also by the sincere 
desire of the victors of August in the Russian leadership to get 
rid of "disobedient" republic leaders. A campaign of propaganda 
was launched against an entire series of leaders (both Union and 
republic leaders). Only the Zavgayev regime in Groznyy fell, 
however, and Dudayev's appearance became a fitting illustration 
of the results of this campaign. Moscow's continued struggle 
with the Dudayev regime just about led to a tragic result and 
facilitated the formation of the Chechen president as a 
charismatic personality with no other alternative. It is likely 
that under any other conditions the authoritarianism of Dudayev 
would elicit rejection of the leader and even cause his 
replacement, but in the extreme situation, the general's 
opponents simply have nothing with which to oppose him. 
Especially since not a single one of them is opposing the 
concept itself of independence, and General Dudayev is seen as 
the symbol of this concept. It is this "symbolic" aspect and a 
special economic and political freedom that allow the president 
of Chechnya to be a geopolitical figure of the Caucasus as well 
(we need only recall the congress of the Confederation of 
Peoples of the Caucasus in Groznyy, or Zviad Gamsakhurdia's long 
stay in the Chechen capital). 
  All the same, however, it would be difficult to call 
Dzhokhar 
Dudayev's position stable, even if he succeeds in resolving his 
internal problems. The positions of Russia and Chechnya relative 
to one another are such that, sooner or later, they will have to 
embark upon some path of compromise. Having already managed to 
become the symbol of an unwavering, principled position, the 
general will hardly be capable of being the bearer of such 
compromise. 
<H5>  ZOTIN </H5>
  The president of the Republic of Mari El is one of the 
"calmest" of the Volga leaders. Actively communicating with the 
leaders of neighboring Tatarstan, Bashkortostan, and 
Udmurtia--well known as leaders of "the opposition" among the 
republics, Valeriy Zotin nonetheless has maintained decent 
relations with the federal authority. It is clearly no accident 
that President Boris Yeltsin began his series of postelection 
meetings with leaders of the Russian republics by conferring 
with the presidents of Tatarstan and Mari El. Zotin's position 
in this regard was brought about by the political and economic 
situation in Mari El, where the mood in favor of 
sovereignization is finding less support than in the other Volga 
republics, due to a lesser concentration of indigenous 
population and Yoshkar-Ola's economic dependence on grants from 
Moscow--the republic cannot boast about stores of energy 
resources in the manner which gives Kazan and Ufa the 
opportunity to claim special rights. Thus, Mari El is trying to 
use the sovereignization achievements of its neighbors primarily 
in a symbolic way. Supreme Soviet Chairman Valeriy Zotin was one 
of the first in the Russian republics in this position to be 
elected president of the republic. Zotin was also sufficiently 
careful during the constitutional crises, when many other 
republic leaders hastened to announce their sympathies and 
antipathies. But such caution is easily explainable by Valeriy 
Zotin's previous activity, having spent many years in secondary 
roles in the Komsomol and party apparatus. The flow of power 
from the party to the soviets made him the head of the 
republic--it did not take away the circumspectness he had 
acquired. 
<H5>  ILYUMZHINOV </H5>
  Kirsan Ilyumzhinov is perhaps the most extravagant leader 
among the republic presidents. Just the simple fact of election 
of the 30-year-old businessman as head of Kalmykia demonstrates 
the arrival of a new political era in the Russian Federation, 
when representatives of groups not traditionally found in the 
"corridors of power" are capable of taking advantage of 
relatively free, multi-candidate elections (the success of 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy's party in the election to the Russian 
State Duma simply confirms this hypothesis). Like Zhirinovskiy, 
Ilyumzhinov is to a certain extent a puzzling figure. The 
seeming "simplicity" of his biography in no way explains the 
emergence of the Ilyumzhinov phenomenon--neither in business nor 
in politics. Ilyumzhinov's preelection promises constitute a 
classic example of a populist program--unrealizable if only 
because of its grandiose nature and always victorious for the 
same reasons, and his political activity following the election 
has been an odd mixture of establishment of an authoritarian 
regime in his own republic with support for soviet 
parliamentarianism on the federal level. Ilyumzhinov dissolves 
the Supreme Soviet of Kalmykia, eliminates the multiparty system 
and the republic Ministry of Security at the same time, suspends 
the federal program of privatization in Kalmykia... Having 
previously told journalists that Yeltsin agreed to view the 
republic as a "political testing ground" at a meeting with him, 
the president of Kalmykia then--during the days of 
October--turns out to be the most energetic supporter of the 
Congress eliminated by the Russian president. It is through his 
efforts that the "alternative Council of the Federation," of 
opposition regional leaders, is being instituted. It is 
Ilyumzhinov who issued statements most critical of Boris 
Yeltsin--including in the blockaded White House, and who called 
Yeltsin "the former president." Nonetheless this position held 
by Kirsan Ilyumzhinov has not swayed his standing in Kalmykia, 
judging from the results of the election to the upper chamber of 
Russia's Federal Assembly. Moscow has not yet developed 
effective mechanisms for toppling republic leaders who are 
objectionable to the center. Subject to far more heated debate 
than President Ilyumzhinov's current standing is the problem of 
the real results of his economic policy--capable either of 
bringing about a change of authority in the republic or of 
making the Kalmyk leader far more loyal in his relations with 
the center. 
<H5>  KOKOV </H5>
  The president of Kabardino-Balkaria must be referred to as a 
leader who has proven both his independence from Moscow and his 
ties with the center--which are even stronger than those of most 
of his republic president colleagues. Displaced from his 
position as chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of 
Kabardino-Balkaria following the August (1991) events, Valeriy 
Kokov nonetheless easily reacquired power in just a few months, 
sustaining victory in the presidential election. Kokov's solid 
position within the power elite is entirely expected and stems 
from his previous party career, terminating in the position of 
first secretary of the CPSU republic committee. The president's 
position and prestige among leaders of the new national 
movements are far less solid. Valeriy Kokov had to play the role 
of arbiter, fighting for the concept of a united 
Kabardino-Balkaria to counter supporters of a Republic of 
Kabarda and Republic of Balkaria. He has hardly been able to 
successfully manage this role, however. In any event, a mass 
meeting of the Congress of the Kabardin People in the autumn of 
1992 almost ended in the president's resignation. It was only 
energetic support from Moscow (which probably learned a lesson 
as a result of the overthrow of Doku Zavgayev, chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet of the Chechen-Ingush Republic, and did not 
desire to repeat the Groznyy scenario in Nalchik) that helped 
Valeriy Kokov retain his position. To complete the picture one 
must recall that one of the main opponents of the president 
during those days was Yuriy Kalmykov--then president of the 
Congress of the Kabardin People and now federal minister of 
justice. 
  The unstable position of the president of the Republic of 
Kabardino-Balkaria is probably related to a lesser degree to 
personality, and to a greater degree to the very vulnerability 
of the institution of head of a "dual" republic. After the 
collapse of Checheno-Ingushetia, there remained just two such 
explosive formations in Russia, and flashes of instability in 
the Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria have shown how complicated 
the republic's future can be if national elites reach agreement 
with one another, while the "party in power"--no less interested 
than Moscow in the existence of a unified 
Kabardino-Balkaria--loses the ground on which it is standing. 
<H5>  MAGOMEDOV </H5>
  Magomed-Ali Magomedov rules the most complex--by ethnic 
composition--republic in the Russian Federation. Dagestan is a 
country whose present borders were outlined just after 1917, a 
mountainous region on whose small flatlands clashed the 
interests of the Avar, Lak, Dargin, Kumyk, Lezgin, Nogay, and a 
great many other peoples, a land whose ethnic saturation and 
intermingling many times exceeds that of sadly renowned Bosnia. 
One cannot envy the leader of such a republic, especially since 
Magomedov seems to have found himself in the top position by 
accident. Since olden times Makhachkala has visibly observed the 
"Lebanese" principle of distribution of leadership positions. 
Magomedov, a Dargin, was appropriately appointed chairman of the 
Council of Ministers and was elected chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet of Dagestan, while the true head of the republic was the 
first secretary of the Dagestan party obkom, an Avar by 
nationality. However, the decay of party structures made 
Magomedov "the number one man in Dagestan" and simultaneously--a 
figure striving for caution and compromise even more than 
yesterday's republic leaders from the party obkom. The striving 
of the present leaders of Dagestan to "temporarily close down" 
sociopolitical processes, related to their understanding of the 
full danger of the interethnic conflicts in Dagestan and a 
desire to counter the ambitions of new national movements, 
constitutes conservatism at the very least. Magomedov has 
seemingly become the personification of this course in the 
republic, a republic that repudiated in referendum both the 
introduction of presidential rule and the possibility of private 
ownership of the land, as well as the symbol of a certain 
"permanent temporariness" of the present Dagestan leadership. 
  Makhachkala is also restrained in its relations with Moscow. 
Although President Yeltsin's standing in Dagestan is extremely 
low, Magomedov refrained from harsh criticism of the president 
even during the days of crisis, but at the same time did not 
participate in the work of the Council of Heads of Republics, 
where even the far more independent president of Tatarstan 
appeared. But--that is what Magomedov is all about. 
<H5>  NIKOLAYEV </H5>
  The president of Yakutia is one of the most colorful 
political figures on the republic scene. He has succeeded in 
transforming himself into a leader on the federal level, 
attaining prestige among his colleagues, and simultaneously 
establishing decent contacts with the presidential 
administration and with Boris Yeltsin. Even former Mordvinian 
President Vasiliy Guslyannikov, far more inclined to support the 
center, and one who declared his objection to republic 
sovereignty (as opposed to Mikhail Nikolayev), could not boast 
of one-tenth of such a relationship with the Russian 
leadership--the center "noticed" him following his overthrow. 
  The bond of such status held by the president of Yakutia is 
his resolute support of the Russian president during the crisis 
months. Mikhail Nikolayev was the only regional leader to 
participate in negotiations between the president and the 
parliament on Boris Yeltsin's behalf. And this was not simply 
support of a political position--it was primarily personal 
solidarity. 
  It is precisely for this reason that Yakutia's economic 
sovereignty is just about the most significant of all the 
Russian republics, even when considering republics with a 
"special position," like Tatarstan and Bashkortostan, or even 
Chechnya. Mikhail Nikolayev was one of the first to sign a 
bilateral agreement with Moscow, leaving Yakutia a significant 
share of the profit from diamonds extracted in the republic. The 
Yakut leaders engage in energetic foreign economic activity in 
both the former Union republics and the "far abroad" (without 
evoking censure from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
incidentally). Even following the October events of last year, 
when Moscow's offensive against republic sovereignties began, 
the president of Yakutia succeeded in preserving what had been 
achieved, even in augmenting it. The Republic of Sakha became 
one of the few regions of Russia where elections to a new 
legislative organ were scheduled right after the Federation did 
so. But even during the time of the old Supreme Soviet, Mikhail 
Nikolayev managed to be the undisputed leader of his republic, 
especially since he acceded to power in the classic manner, 
substituting the presidential office for the post of first 
secretary of the party obkom. If this highly experienced 
politician continues to succeed in implementing in practice, 
without complications, the model he has found of exchanging 
political support for economic privileges, then diamond-rich 
Yakutia, in the absence of external crises or confrontations 
with the center, will find it much easier than other aspirants 
to sovereignty to effect transformation into a "state within a 
state," enjoying a special role in federal affairs. 
<H5>  OORZHAK </H5>
  The career of Sherig-ool Oorzhak, president of the Republic 
of Tuva, is somewhat unusual. Holding the post of prime 
minister, in August 1991 he lost the election to the position of 
chairman of the Supreme Soviet to Kaadyr-ool Bicheldey. Then 
just a few months later, Oorzhak was elected president and 
chairman of the Government of Tuva in an election in which the 
chairman of the parliament did not even run. But the president's 
first loss resulted in further developments of the political 
situation in the republic and altered mutual relations among the 
power elite. Stated more simply, a great deal began to be 
determined by the complex interaction between the president and 
Supreme Soviet chairman, quite dissimilar leaders. Oorzhak, a 
cadre party functionary who advanced through all the career 
stages of the Tuva Party obkom administration and apparatus, has 
exhibited an understandable loyalty to the federal executive 
authority and was rather cautious in fighting for sovereignty of 
the republic (which prior to 1944 was an independent state, 
although in the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union). The 
chairman of the parliament, unexpectedly heading the republic 
following the August events and reputed prior to this to be more 
an oppositionist from the world of science, was able nonetheless 
to find a common language with the fairly conservative body of 
deputies and turned the Supreme Soviet into the major instrument 
of sentiment towards sovereignization. As a result, an article 
was secured in Tuva's new constitution on the prospect of its 
withdrawal from the Russian Federation. And so the republic 
president must take into account the sentiment in today's brand 
new parliament, the popularity and influence of its 
chairman--who kept his post, and the complete dependence to date 
of Tuva's economy on federal grants. At the same time, Tuva's 
monoethnicity--greater than that seen in many other Russian 
republics, its border location, and historical traditions enable 
the republic's leaders to continue a policy of sovereignization 
without aggravating relations with the Kremlin or forcing events. 
<H5>  POTAPOV </H5>
  The chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Buryatia twice had 
occasion to return himself to power in the republic. Leaving the 
post of first secretary of the Buryat CPSU Obkom, he worked for 
some time in Turkmenistan, but soon returned to Ulan-Ude to head 
what had become the republic party obkom, which was then swept 
away by the August 1991 events. However, in contrast to many 
other first secretaries who left politics or shifted to 
secondary roles, in just three months Leonid Potapov once again 
headed the republic, becoming the chairman of its parliament. 
These facts of Potapov's political biography alone illustrate 
fairly well the durability of his standing in the republic with 
the complex ethnic mix (additionally, Leonid Potapov himself is 
Russian), a republic burdened not only with trying to maintain a 
balance between the Russian majority and the indigenous 
population but also with potential territorial problems. As a 
result of all possible kinds of repartitionings, the Aga Buryat 
and Ust-Orda Buryat Autonomous Okrugs find themselves located 
outside the borders of Buryatia, in neighboring Siberian 
oblasts, an occurrence unprecedented even for the Russian 
Federation. Of course this has been influential in the 
development of the national movement in Buryatia and on mutual 
relations with its neighbors. For the time being, however, 
Leonid Potapov has managed to skirt around the sharp edges of 
these problems and has in fact established decent relations with 
the leaders of Tuva and Khakassia. Beginning the search for its 
own foreign policy channel, Ulaanbaatar is also watching 
Ulan-Ude with understandable interest. Thus, Leonid Potapov has 
potential for maneuver, although this has diminished somewhat in 
recent times due to a certain lack of understanding between the 
Supreme Soviet chairman and Buryatia Prime Minister Vladimir 
Saganov, a politician with less traditional views who actively 
supported Shakhray's Party of Russian Unity and Accord in the 
elections, and who additionally is Buryat in nationality. The 
upcoming election of president of the republic will constitute a 
new and fairly significant ordeal for the rule of Leonid 
Potapov. In this regard, the deep-rooted rivalry with Vladimir 
Saganov may lead to the "Kalmyk" alternative--the departure of 
both Buryat leaders from the political arena. 
<H5>  RAKHIMOV </H5>
  Recently elected president of Bashkortostan but for a long 
time head of the Supreme Soviet of the republic, Murtaza 
Rakhimov has been able to manifest himself as one of the most 
influential, while at the same time most refined regional 
leaders. Rakhimov's capabilities were fairly well demonstrated 
during the recent election. Voters turned out in sufficient 
numbers, rejected the draft Russian Constitution presented in 
referendum, elected the head of the republic parliament as 
president and as deputy to the Council of the Federation of 
Russia, and then in voting for deputies to the State Duma--left 
both Zhirinovskiy's party and Russia's Choice out in the cold, 
showing preference for the "more reliable" Agrarian Party and 
sympathizing with the regional problems of Shakhray's party. In 
this manner, Murtaza Rakhimov has confirmed once again how great 
is his prestige in the republic and how unlimited is the 
potential in Bashkortostan's vertical chain of command. 
Moreover, Rakhimov is in no way a "hereditary" party leader of 
the former autonomy; he belongs to the next layer of the ruling 
elite--the industrialists. Confirmation of the Supreme Soviet 
chairman as undisputed number one man in the republic was a 
complicated process and ended in replacement of the Bashkir 
prime minister. In addition, the republic leadership has had to 
take into account the complex ethnic composition of 
Bashkortostan both in its internal politics and in its relations 
with the center. The Bashkirs themselves constitute a minority 
here, but taken together with the Tatars they surpass the entire 
remainder of the populace in number. This circumstance was 
probably not the least significant in influencing Ufa's choice 
of a kind of "soft version" of Tatarstan politics: On the one 
hand, Rakhimov affixed his signature to the Federation Treaty, 
and on the other--achieved the signing of a virtually 
simultaneous, closed, bilateral agreement with Moscow, giving 
significant powers to the republic leadership in the economic 
sphere and opening the way for an entire series of similar 
bilateral treaties between the center and other republics. 
Hardly anyone will deny that under the conditions the Russian 
republics presently find themselves in, genuine sovereignty 
comes down to the economy, and not ethnic considerations. Ufa 
perhaps came to understand this sooner than others. 
  Rakhimov's resolute rejection of the actions of the 
presidential team during the days of conflict between the 
legislative and executive powers influenced somewhat the 
solidity of his standing. At that time Bashkortostan undertook 
steps--unexpectedly rigid for this republic--with respect to 
legislative confirmation of its sovereignty, and a campaign of 
propaganda was unleashed against Rakhimov in the Moscow 
governmental mass media. But today perhaps this conflict is 
already a thing of the past. Rakhimov was elected president. He 
is one of the most influential deputies of the Council of the 
Federation and, like many representatives of the regional elite, 
is simply necessary to the Kremlin today. 
<H5>  SPIRIDONOV </H5>
  The chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Komi Republic has 
been maintaining a successful balance to date between the center 
and a group of opposition republic leaders. Taking into account 
Komi's status in the Russian Federation, the degree to which 
republic elites exert pressure on the Kremlin may depend on the 
position of the Komi leader. In this regard, Yuriy Spiridonov 
may be compared with Yakutia President Mikhail Nikolayev--the 
Komi leader is devoting his main attention to economic 
prerogatives of the republic (especially since Komis do not make 
up a great part of the republic population; indeed, Yuriy 
Spiridonov himself is Russian). We can also make the comparison 
by career pattern. Spiridonov headed the Supreme Soviet of the 
Komi Republic after spending many years in the party, a career 
crowned by his election as first secretary of the Komi CPSU 
Obkom (which career also included the position of prison warden, 
showing that Spiridonov is no stranger to the realities of his 
region). In confrontation with Prime Minister Vyacheslav 
Khudyayev, Spiridonov has managed to date to sustain an 
impressive victory. The Council of Ministers chairman, Komi by 
nationality, has in practice supported an alternative draft 
constitution for the republic which enhances its 
sovereignization opportunities. Supreme Soviet deputies 
supported the "Spiridonov draft," however, and today the leader 
of the parliament has become a more substantive candidate for 
the highest position in Komi--that of universally elected head 
of the republic. Yuriy Spiridonov's expected success in the 
election only promises to solidify his status among his 
colleagues, who are somewhat bewildered by the Komi parliament's 
recent refusal to introduce the office of president of the 
republic. The adoption of the constitution shows, however, that 
Spiridonov has simply postponed major decisions until the 
post-October period, which will be more tranquil for him and 
marked by a strengthening of the republic elite. 
<H5>  STEPANOV </H5>
  The chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Karelia is one of just 
a few regional political figures also well known on the federal 
level. He was among the most noticeable participants at the 
deputy Congress (even heading the faction Communists of Russia 
during the period of its greatest power), and was nominated as 
this faction's candidate to the position of chairman of the 
Russian Supreme Soviet as a counterweight to "democratic" 
nominee Ruslan Khasbulatov (although today it is easy to 
understand how much more moderate and pragmatic the Congress 
would have been had it shown preference to the "communist" 
alternative over the "democratic" one). He actively participated 
in the negotiations process with the president and was one of 
the initiators of the "crisis" council of regional leaders. A 
political flexibility he acquired over long years working in the 
apparatus helped Stepanov avoid turning into an odious figure 
and helped him retain his position despite opposition attacks 
after August 1991. It also helped him understand sooner than 
others the prospects for "cautious" sovereignization. For the 
Republic of Karelia, in which Russians constitute the 
overwhelming majority of the population, this sovereignization 
is exclusively economic in nature and can perhaps be viewed as 
the "key" to possible analogous processes in the oblasts and 
krays of Russia. This process is acquiring political overtones 
because of a certain estrangement between the republic and 
federal leadership, and because of the proximity to Finland. 
Economic ties with Finland should be shored up by Karelia's 
special ethnographic image. Incidentally, Viktor Stepanov is 
Karelian in nationality and heads a parliament in which only a 
few Karelians are deputies. This is a problem in itself. 
  In recent times, due to an emerging conflict between 
parliament and the government that resolutely supported Boris 
Yeltsin in 1993, some observers cite a weakening of Stepanov's 
standing. Already he is not being perceived as the consolidator 
of the republic elite. Even if we surmise that Viktor Stepanov 
will be forced to leave Petrozavodsk, however, this would hardly 
signify an end to his political career. The Karelian leader has 
sufficiently strong ties and prestige both in Moscow and among 
his colleagues in the leadership positions of the Russian 
republics. 
<H5>  TUBYLOV </H5>
  Chairman of the Udmurt Supreme Soviet Valentin Tubylov is 
one 
of the energetic members of the Volga group of leaders of the 
Russian republics gravitating most toward sovereignty. Although 
it must be immediately acknowledged that the economic prospects 
of Udmurtia, one of the most important ancestral lands of the 
military-industrial complex of the former Union (it is not by 
chance that its capital, Izhevsk, was at one time called 
"Ustinov" in honor of the famous "patriarch" of the 
military-industrial complex), can hardly be compared with the 
prospects of Tatarstan or Bashkiria. Tubylov, therefore, in 
addition to acceding to the highest post in the republic without 
the obkom career traditional for many leaders (he headed just 
one party raykom [rayon committee] and a sovkhoz vocational 
school), may not be able to render his colleagues anything more 
than political support. But here too certain problems may arise: 
within Udmurtia--the Supreme Soviet chairman has not built a 
relationship with leaders of the government. The parliament 
replaced Nikolay Mironov, who came to power in the republic 
simultaneously with Tubylov. Concerning the new head of 
government, Aleksandr Volkov, however, "the honeymoon is over" 
(although it is the prime minister, like the recent head of the 
apparatus of the Federal Assembly, Vladimir Podoprigor, adhering 
to centrist views, who will represent Udmurtia in the Council of 
the Federation). The future political biography of Valentin 
Tubylov will therefore be determined to a great degree by the 
prospects of all the Volga republics and the fortress of their 
informal "coalition." 
<H5>  FEDOROV </H5>
  Nikolay Fedorov, the recently elected president of the 
Chuvash Republic, could turn out to be the "dark horse" among 
republic leaders were it not for his preceding political 
biography. Fedorov is a political figure on the federal level 
who left Moscow for Cheboksary--an atypical act at first glance, 
but further regionalization of the country may make such steps 
the rule rather than the exception in the game of Russian 
political chess. A lawyer by profession, Fedorov bound his 
career to Gorbachev's perestroyka. He was one of the many USSR 
people's deputies "withheld" in power thanks to the 
multi-candidate parliamentary elections in the Soviet Union. 
Nikolay Fedorov was minister of justice of Russia in the 
cabinets of Ivan Silayev and Yegor Gaydar. After the August 
events, however, a crevice appeared between him and the 
presidential administration. Specifically, the minister of 
justice came out in opposition to the establishment of a unified 
Ministry of Security and Ministry of Internal Affairs of the 
Russian Federation, and when Boris Yeltsin announced proposals 
for a special procedure for governing the country in spring of 
last year, he resigned. Like another former minister, Sergey 
Glazyev, Fedorov ran for deputy to the Russian Federation State 
Duma on the slate of Nikolay Travkin's opposition Democratic 
Party of Russia. But immediately following the resignation of 
Fedorov, who initially did not issue sharp statements, 
conjecture surfaced that his departure was related to a desire 
to occupy the office of president of Chuvashia. However, even 
confirmation of such conclusions shows that the future president 
understood in time that success in the republic could be 
achieved only at a great distance from the Kremlin. For this 
reason one can foresee that in the office of president of 
Chuvashia, Nikolay Fedorov can hardly be expected to become an 
ally of his recent colleagues in the Russian Government. The 
former minister of justice will probably easily find like-minded 
thinkers among the presidents of the neighboring Volga 
republics. The results of the election in Chuvashia can only 
intensify the already existing gravitation of Volga republics 
toward greater independence. 
<H5>  KHUBIYEV </H5>
  One of the final resolutions of the Supreme Soviet of 
Karachay-Cherkessia on the eve of parliamentary elections in 
this republic was the decision to entrust the functions of head 
of republic to Prime Minister Vladimir Khubiyev. In this manner, 
the Supreme Soviet acknowledged a fact long known to all in the 
republic which somewhat differentiated its political system from 
that of other Federation entities: that it was the prime 
minister, and not the Supreme Soviet chairman, who was the 
leader of the republic, the "uncrowned president" of 
Karachay-Cherkessia. Khubiyev has been the leader of 
Karachay-Cherkessia since 1979, when he was elected chairman of 
the ispolkom [executive committee] of the Soviet of People's 
Deputies of the autonomous oblast. His commanding position was 
confirmed as well by edict of President Yeltsin, who appointed 
Khubiyev acting head of administration of Karachay-Cherkessia, 
and by resolution of the Supreme Soviet which confirmed him as 
prime minister, and now as head of the republic. Karachay by 
nationality, Khubiyev seems to be living proof that it is 
possible for a united Karachay-Cherkessia to exist--which 
certain national movements have attempted to oppose with 
separate nation-state formations. In addition, it is important 
to take into account the indisputable influence Khubiyev wields 
within the most diverse political circles of his republic, in 
order to understand how closely intertwined the very existence 
of the Karachay-Cherkess Republic is with the personality of its 
leader. 
<H5>  CHAPTYNOV </H5>
  Valeriy Chaptynov, chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Altay Republic, managed to accede to power in a somewhat 
unexpected manner: At a time when, in other autonomies, it was 
the first secretaries of party obkoms that headed the soviets, 
as a rule, Chaptynov was first elected chairman of the 
Gorno-Altay Oblast Soviet, and only then elected first secretary 
of the Gorno-Altay Party Obkom. A cadre Komsomol and party 
functionary (very few--even of Chaptynov's colleagues among the 
leaders of republics can boast of such a personal history, which 
includes just about all the possible jobs on the oblast level), 
Chaptynov maintained a consistently conservative stance during 
the days of crisis. He supported the activities of the GKChP 
[State Committee for the State of Emergency] in August 1991 and 
sided with the opponents of President Boris Yeltsin in 
September-October 1993. However, this did not sway the standing 
of Valeriy Chaptynov in the republic. Attempts to remove him 
following the August events did not meet with success and after 
October, the Supreme Soviet chairman won a confident victory in 
the election to the Council of the Federation of the Russian 
Federation (the second seat went to Vladimir Petrov, chairman of 
the Government of Altay, whose positions in no way always 
coincide with the views of the speaker). Clearly the leader of 
the Altay Republic not only occupies a solid position within the 
power elite of the region--he also knows very well the moods of 
the voters in this small, mountainous country. 
<H5>  SHAYMIYEV </H5>
  The president of Tatarstan has managed to become one of the 
acknowledged leaders among the heads of the Russian 
republics--thanks to Kazan's special view of the future status 
of the Republic of Tatarstan, which did not sign the Federation 
Treaty and also did not declare its independence (as did 
Chechnya), but rather agreed to sign a heretofore unprecedented 
bilateral treaty defining the relationship between the Russian 
Federation and Tatarstan, and also thanks to his methods of 
asserting his position. This position is traditionally far from 
extremist. From the very beginning, when the republic declared 
its special position (in particular, it strove to independently 
sign the Union Treaty), the president of Tatarstan attempted to 
be more an active participant in the negotiations process than 
an orator reciting slogans on sovereignty. The course he 
pursued, not well perceived initially by the Russian center, was 
later applied to other republics. Following the rejection of 
inclusion of the text of the Federation Treaty into the Russian 
Federation Constitution, bilateral "republic-Kremlin" contacts 
and contacts among republics in general may now become 
prevailing. 
  For the sake of fairness it should be recalled that even in 
the old Union hierarchy, the first secretary of the Tatar party 
obkom (and Mintimer Shaymiyev held this post) occupied a special 
position hardly comparable with the position of the other first 
secretaries/leaders of autonomies: A place was "reserved" for 
him not just in the CPSU Central Committee, but in the Presidium 
of the USSR Supreme Soviet as well (as was the case for the 
first secretaries of the capital--Moscow and Leningrad--party 
committees). If only for this reason, Shaymiyev had no special 
problem standing out among his colleagues. But as an experienced 
administrator, he knew full well that maintaining tranquility in 
a republic undergoing sovereignization, where half the 
population was non-Tatar, depended on economic stability and the 
prevention of interethnic conflict in Tatarstan. Here the 
president of Tatarstan can be compared with the president of 
neighboring Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. It is no accident 
that in both the case of Kazakhstan and that of Tatarstan, this 
concept proved its worth. In any event, the majority of 
Tatarstan voters participate (or more accurately--do not 
participate) in federal events behind the republic leaders. 
Whereas following the August (1991) events, Kazan was the party 
more interested in concluding an agreement with Moscow, today 
the leadership of Tatarstan is quite happy to maintain the 
current ambiguous status. So much simpler it is for President 
Shaymiyev to appear as an arbiter between Tatar national forces 
advocating independence for the republic and the parliamentary 
opposition oriented on the center, which believes that 
Tatarstan's status must be determined on "common" principles 
(these "common" principles change with time, incidentally, and 
will do so a good many times more in favor of the Kazan 
Kremlin--the residence of the Tatarstan president). 
<H5>  SHTYGASHEV </H5>
  Vladimir Shtygashev, chairman of the Supreme Soviet of 
Khakassia, is perhaps the most irreconcilable enemy of the 
presidential administration to be found among the leaders of the 
republics. To the very last day, Shtygashev was a consistent 
supporter of the leaders of the White House (in a recent 
interview for NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA he again named Ruslan 
Khasbulatov "a great Russian patriot"). He was among the 
initiators of the idea to create an "alternative" council of 
regional leaders, and travelled to the White House on an 
intermediary mission along with President of Kalmykia Kirsan 
Ilyumzhinov and President of Ingushetia Ruslan Aushev. However, 
whereas Ilyumzhinov and Aushev, like many other creators of the 
"alternative" council, managed almost immediately following the 
October events to smooth up tensions arising in their relations 
with the Kremlin, Shtygashev stuck to his previous positions and 
categorically refused to run for the new Russian parliament. 
  Taking into account the remoteness of Khakassia from the 
centers of power, we can presume that Moscow will hardly 
undertake a serious attack in the near future against the 
authority of Vladimir Shtygashev. Especially since even in 
Abakan itself, the position of the Supreme Soviet chairman is 
complicated by difficult relations not only with the prime 
minister--traditionally closer to the executive power, but also 
with his own first deputy, whose orientation is alongside Moscow 
democrats. Vladimir Shtygashev's regional views are simpler, 
although he leads a republic transformed from a former 
autonomous oblast and detached from what is now the neighboring 
Krasnoyarsk Kray. Nonetheless, Abakan and Krasnoyarsk today 
share not only a certain political mutual understanding, but 
also active participation in the "Siberian Agreement"--converted 
from an economic alliance into the embryo of a kind of new 
regional formation in Siberia. National status can hardly be 
expected to hinder Khakassia from participating in the creation 
and construction of such a formation. After all, Khakass people 
comprise not more than 12 percent of the population here, and 
republic leaders themselves treat the republic's independence 
primarily as an economic consideration. 
  It cannot be ruled out that these comments provide far from 
an exhaustive treatment of the palette of regional power in the 
Russian Federation--of course it is far from exhaustive! It 
would probably be a very difficult task today to draw "a 
collective political portrait" of the leaders of the oblasts and 
krays of the Russian Federation. However, it was equally 
impossible until quite recently to turn to portraits of the 
leaders of republics, although we have here the very same 
people... The complex situation in the country and permanent 
sovereignization processes have turned the leaders of the 
republics into politicians. Are we not dealing with similar 
processes (perhaps they would be better termed processes of 
regionalization) when we look at the oblasts and krays? No, it 
is still to early to mark the end of the cycle "The Face of 
Power or the Power of Faces?" 

