CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rustam Arifdzhanov and Anatoliy Yershov: "Reform </F>
Fair: Nizhegorod Alternatives"] 
  [Text] Nizhniy Novgorod-Moscow--There were always 
things to see in Nizhniy Novgorod. Its own kremlin. The 
spit--the confluence of the waters of the Volga and the Oka. The 
old merchant houses. The fair itself--it was in Nizhniy in the 
past that the all-Russia price of grain and salt and the 
European price of tea were established. There was little 
admiration for Nizhniy in the recent past. A closed city, 
"off-limits." Now the Volga city is not being denied attention 
by business people, despite the stinging prices of the hotels, 
trains, airplanes, and public and private catering outlets--they 
are coming to see the reforms. And the city, knowing what makes 
it attractive, is trying to put itself on display. There is 
already a whole reform fair here--noisy, shrill, 
venturesome--but beneath the clamor and sham gaiety--business is 
getting done, the bargaining proceeds. 
<H5>  Money Purse or Head </H5>
  The economic guide in Nizhniy currently is the round-faced 
man of Vyatka, Vladimir Yefremov, deputy leader of the 
Department of Economics and Forecasting. A student of Aganbegyan 
and a professor who acquired his black gown in the city of 
Springfield, Massachusetts. Only there is no way he could be 
called a "Chicago boy," although he is the coeval of the 
reformers of Gaydar's team. A "Springfield man," rather. 
  The style of all the reforms here is, according to local 
governor Boris Nemtsov, "a mixture of Nizhegorod and 
Anglo-Saxon." Yefremov, who turned down a monthly salary of 
$10,000 in the States and who was summoned here after Yavlinskiy 
to continue the reforms, could not be better suited to this 
style, just as he could not be better suited to today's 
post-Gaydar government policy. 
  This is the generation of 30- to 40-year-old conservatives, 
as we understand it here, which was pushed back by the Moscow 
reformer-liberals, but which is now gaining strength and finding 
its voice to the affable approbatory smiles of the "good old 
types"--from the directors through the prime minister. One of 
their main slogans: We should not be reinventing the wheel. We 
had everything. What we needed to do was fix, but we broke. They 
call themselves marketeers, but commonsensical. 
  The proposition is this: Property in Sweden is still 50 
percent state-owned, and the state manages this property. We had 
this experience of management also. According to Yefremov, you 
can purchase a brochure containing a plan of the state's 
development for the year at a newsstand in any state in America. 
We had an excellent planning system. It was not preserved. Yes, 
it was excessively detailed, but it merely needed enlarging, yet 
we threw out everything. According to the principle: All or 
nothing. 
  Yefremov's principles are shorn of details. Freeze energy 
prices and rail tariffs. Introduce a fixed currency exchange 
rate. "It is impossible to imagine that our economy is 1,700 and 
more times weaker than the American economy" (quotation). The 
distortion of pricing is obvious. And, of course, revise the tax 
system. Not collecting from profits, say, but for land. World 
practice: As soon as the sum total of taxes exceeds 35 percent, 
entrepreneurial activity winds down. With us 4-7 kopeks are left 
for development from R1 of profit in light industry, for example. 
  Inflation is not, of course, to be feared. In Brazil it 
reached an annual 1,800 percent--and was overcome. In Germany 
after the war, 1,300 percent--and it was endured.... 
  Nizhniy Novgorod was in recent times always in some 
opposition to Gaydar's reforms. Yavlinskiy spent six months on 
the building of a capitalism with its own character here, in the 
military-industrial Volga citadel. Yefremov is not as famous as 
the author of the "Nizhegorod EPIlog" program, but he is a 
manifest antimonetarist. "Good old types" are his favorite words. 
  "I could be saying something that is faintly ridiculous 
here, 
but sensible types will understand. Moscow has always been 
Russia's head, Petersburg, its heart. Nizhniy, its pocket, its 
money purse. Why not combine head and purse. Take Yeltsin, ours 
is a popularly elected president, and Chernomyrdin also, a 
sensible type, it would seem, and bring them here to us, to the 
Kremlin. Let them work here. And the servants, the entourage, 
all these bureaucrats mired in intrigues and the devil knows 
what all else, leave them in Moscow. Many states have only 
benefited from a change of capital...." 
  Generally speaking--a fair! 
<H5>  The Algorithm Is Regulated Common Sense </H5>
  Money purse is putting it somewhat strongly, of course. The 
assets of all Nizhegorod's banks do not amount to R40 billion. 
Receipts from small and medium-sized business--R30 billion. Not 
that much. But Nizhegorod's aim is to maintain the social 
protection of the population and average wages at a level 10-15 
percent higher than in the adjacent oblasts. "By uncovering 
local potential." Nizhegorod people love at odd moments to reach 
for their purses, emphasizing that they live in an area of high 
population solvency. There is money to spend. There are, 
accordingly, things to buy. Commodities do not leave but enter 
the region. Neighbors, understandably, complain: "You are 
sucking up everything like a vacuum cleaner." 
  In terms of level of development Nizhegorod Oblast is 
approximately on a par with Ulyanovsk Oblast. Only the 
approaches are different. The Nizhegoroders are constantly 
raising the social plank of protection of the populace--they are 
paying more--from their budget. In terms of price 
liberalization, on the other hand, they are in first place in 
Russia, just about. Merchandise is more expensive. In Ulyanovsk, 
on the other hand, it is subsidized. Prices and wages are lower. 
It is believed in Nizhniy Novgorod that sooner or later the 
Ulyanovsk policy will bring about a landslide and a social 
explosion which will sweep all away there. 
  The Nizhegorod algorithm, once again as they themselves 
claim, is regulated common sense. Russia, they believe, does not 
have enough of this. And the continuity, not the darting here 
and there, and stability of the decisions that are made. 
  ...Two Japanese professors came to Nizhniy. Also to study 
the 
reforms--the level of decisionmaking, competence, and so forth. 
And the Japanese reiterated a truth we ourselves know full well: 
Russians could manage 250 kg in the clean and jerk--as distinct 
from us. But 10 kg each day--this is tedious and difficult. 
  The Nizhegorod reform is undoubtedly Russian in spirit. 
Closer, that is, to a clean and jerk than actual weight-lifting. 
Regulated common sense suggests to Governor Nemtsov that gradual 
work is by its gradualness imperceptible. And here--the fair! 
The merchandise must be colorful. Otherwise, it will not be 
purchased. Moscow must notice and evaluate what is happening in 
Nizhniy, otherwise it will not provide any money. It is with 
them, after all, only the purse that is of local workmanship, 
the money in it comes from Moscow. Or that which is their own, 
but which has to be given to Moscow in the form of taxes, so 
that this, you have to reckon, is "Moscow's" also. 
  In principle, the entire Soviet time Gorkiy Oblast lived on 
money obtained from the center. Enterprises of the 
military-industrial complex comprise the oblast's main 
industrial potential. The sovereign's domain. Even now Governor 
Nemtsov is free from Moscow in his actions only in respect to 
the money that remains in the oblast budget. Fifty percent means 
a half-baked freedom. Less means even less freedom. So it is 
everywhere, for that matter. He could be reconciled to this. 
What is he governor for? To convey to his parts the will of the 
center and to watch to ensure that it is executed and to 
unswervingly execute it himself. But freedom is a sweet-sounding 
word. And he wishes to press the weight.... 
  ...There is a fable in Nizhniy Novgorod to the effect that 
Nemtsov and Yavlinskiy are bosom pals. This is hardly the case. 
A tremendous distance separated the radiophysicist who broke 
into big politics in an antinuclear (against the building of a 
nuclear power station) demonstration movement and the deputy 
chairman of Silayev's Council of Ministers. But Nemtsov, the 
deputy of the Russian Parliament, was striking on account of his 
youth, energy, and talent. In August 1991 he stood alongside 
Yeltsin, and the photo made the rounds of the world's press. 
Alongside the vigorous president, a young man in an unusually 
fashionable long coat. Tall, a curly mop of hair, and a flashing 
smile. A leader out of the ordinary for the Soviet image. In 
that, now absolved, August it was Nemtsov, it is rumored, who 
was sent by the president to negotiate with the Taman Division. 
He did so. The Taman Division did not support the putschists. 
Nemtsov was appointed presidential governor-general in Nizhniy, 
and then became head of the administration. The first session of 
the oblast soviet decreed his glorification as governor. 
  Even in this there was a certain challenge to tradition. But 
common sense suggested to Nemtsov that this was necessary. 
<H5>  The Best Opposition to the Reformers--Our Own Reforms </H5>
  By virtue of his age (he is now 35), love of experimentation 
(the radiophysicist), and ineradicable desire to be in the 
public eye, Nemtsov was made for reforms. But not to execute 
someone else's, to implement his own. He lacked, naturally, 
economic knowledge. Shopfloor experience also. There was no room 
in Gaydar's team. As there was no place in it for another 
reformer--Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, who is very similar to Nemtsov 
not only in mentality ("500 Days"--was this not a clean and 
jerk?) but, take a closer look, even outwardly. The former 
deputy chairman, who had gone unclaimed by Moscow, would go to 
Nizhniy. Unrecognized by that same "Gaydarite"-replenished 
Moscow, Nemtsov invited him to devise a particular Nizhegorod 
model. 
  The model incorporated traits of their characters and the 
qualities of the strata on which the "provincial reformers" 
relied. Dislike of the haughty capital. Dislike of the 
monetarists. Dislike of daily routine.... 
  The fair is a state of mind. 
  Nemtsov, Yavlinskiy, and three local leaders--Krestyaninov, 
chairman of the oblast soviet, Bednyakov, mayor of the city, and 
Kosarikov, chairman of the city soviet--constituted Nizhniy 
Novgorod's "top five." Officially they called themselves the 
Coordinating Council, the people joked: "our Politburo." 
  The Coordinating Council met daily--for a couple of hours in 
the afternoon. The practice of urgent decisions of the governor 
was verified by the theory of specialists of the EPICenter, who 
had moved for the time being to a Nizhegorod country cottage. 
Yavlinskiy's theoretical computations were put into practice. 
  Among the most striking experiments has been the 
privatization of truck transportation. One was immediately 
struck on the oblast's roads--before the introduction of new 
license plates--by the unusually large number of trucks with 
private numbers. Small-scale and medium-sized privatization was 
carried through relatively quickly and successfully. We, a 
native Nizhegoroder and a guest from Moscow, are even today 
struck by the particular "capital" schooling of the local 
waiters and the interiors of the private cafes and restaurants. 
  The turn in the "food pipeline" in the direction of Nizhniy 
Novgorod is one of the main achievements of the local reforms. 
As also the fact that, despite the reduction in jobs at 
industrial enterprises, there is not a strong growth of 
unemployment. People are finding jobs in services and private 
business. 
  And also, of course, foreigners--initially simply the 
curious, then specialists--followed one another to Nizhniy 
Novgorod in the wake of Yavlinskiy--an economist of world 
renown. A newspaper in English, NIZHNIY NOVGOROD TIMES, was even 
started up in the city. There is the demand for it. 
  And it transpired that money for the local reforms could be 
sought not only in Moscow but in the capitals of other, more 
developed states also--the States, Great Britain. The Nizhegorod 
model of privatization of the sovkhozes and kolkhozes took a 
year of work and $2 million. Specialists of the International 
Finance Corporation headed by the American Anthony Doran worked 
without compensation practically, more, "at their own expense." 
We have already expounded the model in IZVESTIYA. The land and 
the assets are divided into shares, which each member of the 
farm receives, the retiree included, and he then puts them up at 
public auctions--land and property. At the last auction, two 
weeks ago, Chernomyrdin, together with all three of his 
deputies, was in attendance. Nemtsov was nervous, but ultimately 
got the result he wanted. The prime minister liked the 
experiment so much that he declared: "Prepare the proposals. We 
will support them." 
  The support will, most likely, appear as follows. The 
Nizhegorod model will form the basis of a national program of 
privatization in the countryside. This is tremendous moral 
satisfaction for the local reformers. The Nizhegorod people will 
receive money for continuation of the experiment--material 
satisfaction. And the money will, naturally, come, what is more, 
from the same bag on which the "agro-industrial complex" has 
already been raised. Some amounts from the trillions extorted by 
Zaveryukha will go to Nizhniy Novgorod. The Volga people may be 
congratulated on a successful trade. Reforms are a commodity 
like anything else: Sold successfully, they bring in money.... 
  Things are more difficult with industry. Collapse. 
Nonpayments crisis. Lack of investments. Nemtsov would look 
ridiculous if, like everyone else, he went to Chernomyrdin and 
pestered with him with his requests: "Give us money, Viktor 
Stepanovich." This is what everyone is doing. Nemtsov the 
reformer is asking for investment tax credit. There is no need 
for money. Permit for some period of time some of the taxes paid 
into federal coffers to remain in the oblast coffers. We already 
have an Industry Support Fund based on local commercial banks 
and local taxes, and the priority sectors of the economy have 
been determined here. Let us give it a try. We are sure that we 
will give industry a lift. Chernomyrdin fell to thinking. It 
seemed to us that the idea pleases him more than it irritates 
him. 
  Nemtsov is going further. The Ministry of Defense has run up 
debts to local enterprises of the military-industrial complex 
and has nothing with which to settle accounts. Let us, then, 
introduce bills of exchange. We have run up debts to the power 
engineers? Let us with the YeES Rossiya stock company introduce 
paper-credit relations. And they are being introduced. Is it not 
under the influence of the Nizhegorod people that Chernomyrdin 
also is talking more and more about the bill of exchange as a 
lifesaver in the sea of the general nonpayments crisis. 
  Nemtsov has quite a complex relationship with the 
industrialists. Initially the "red directors"--the main Russian 
power--greeted the young governor with ironical grins. The 
director of the GAZ, one of the Russian motor kings, said behind 
his back: "A boy, a young man, what does he know, what has he 
seen?" The directors were accustomed to the heavy tread of the 
first secretaries of the Gorkiy Oblast Party Committee. And to 
the fact that no one in the oblast would cross them. And here 
was Nemtsov--a nonclassical "boss".... 
  The dispute between the governor and Boris Vidyayev, the GAZ 
director, long ago went beyond oblast dimensions--the cause of a 
difficult struggle between the former "industrial activists," 
weakened without the "party" prefix, and the new authorities, 
which were becoming established. To the disagreements at the 
personality level--who likes to be called "boy"?--was added 
Vidyayev's management style: I am the No. 1 here, I will decide 
how the formation of a stock company is to proceed, I am the GAZ! 
  IZVESTIYA has already written about the nuances of the 
conflict, the machinations involving the purchase of stock at 
the plant, and the fact that the government has occupied an 
unequivocal position--to vote with the block of government 
shares for Vidyayev's removal. This, most likely, is what will 
happen on 8 April at the shareholders' general meeting. And then 
we can talk about the governor's next psychological victory. A 
lesson for the all-powerful directors. In addition, the local 
military-industrial complex has sensed Nemtsov's support, who is 
single-mindedly punching through for them permission for them to 
deal overseas in spares for the military product they 
manufacture. This will produce money. It will provide support on 
the world market. After all, things are becoming 
ridiculous--spares for our aircraft, say, are being manufactured 
and successfully traded by the French and the Germans. 
  A strong director reckons only with a strong individual. 
Nemtsov has established himself here. Not by indulging Moscow, 
not by toadying to it, but by outplaying it, out-bargaining it, 
as it were. 
  Nizhniy is a merchant city. 
<H5>  Third Capital </H5>
  Of course, Vladimir Yefremov's dreams of Nizhniy Novgorod's 
"capital" future are speculative. This will hardly happen. But 
the appearance of other capitals alongside Moscow and Petersburg 
on the map of Russia is an objective process. Vladivostok, 
Yekaterinburg, and Novosibirsk are increasingly becoming 
independent not by dint of their remoteness from the metropolis. 
Under the conditions of sufficient economic chaos, 
self-reliance, given a sufficiently subtle game with Moscow, is 
the healthiest style of behavior. This is working for Nemtsov 
better than the others. He has not become a hostage of local 
powerful clans and groupings, as in Vladivostok, and has been in 
no hurry to announce a Nizhegorod Republic in the style of the 
Urals people. The Nizhegorod blood of his forefathers has been 
stirred in the "Sochi city boy"--this is where Nemtsov's 
childhood was spent. Just try out-bargaining them. 
  But together with the smarts, the Volga people were always 
characterized by a certain provincial dreaminess. It is this 
that makes it possible to build far-reaching plans and to 
accomplish them with enviable doggedness. One cherished dream is 
the revival of the Nizhegorod Fair. A center of trade and, 
consequently, by no means of just the provinces. 
  The year of 1996 will be the centenary of the celebrated 
All-Russia Nizhegorod Fair. There are the following plans in 
this connection. Modernization of the airport. The organization 
of a high-speed Moscow-Nizhniy rail link. The building of a 
second block of the fair complex. World-class hotels. Permission 
for passage along the Volga of foreign ships. The construction 
of the new Yarmaka [Fair] Metro station. And a good deal more. 
  We spoke with one of Nemtsov's zealots, Vladimir Bessarab, 
director of the Nizhegorodskaya yarmaka Russian stock company, 
with a certain disbelief. But they are already building the 
second block. The main exhibition hall has been resurrected in 
all its splendor. Yarmaka recently won a prestigious prize--the 
Golden Arch--in Spain. And just two years ago Bessarab was 
staying as part of a threesome--with his secretary and 
accountant--in a cramped room of the local Rossiya Hotel. He got 
things going.... 
  An urge to reform is not always to the good, for that 
matter. 
Thus at the time of the general cash crisis it was intended in 
Nizhniy to introduce its own currency--it was christened 
"Yavlinki" at that time. This, fortunately, did not happen. At 
the present spring elections to the local authorities two of 
Nemtsov's closest associates--Krestyaninov and Bednyakov--from 
that "top five" left, not without his influence, to contest for 
the office of mayor. And although they disputed in entirely 
civilized fashion, without sharply worded attacks, the 
competitive struggle swept them onto different sides, all the 
same. Why, to what end? They would have been better together. 
  Nizhegoroders have just not understood the latest 
gubernatorial experiment. The fair style has its costs. It 
allows of noise, publicity excesses, and the theatricalized 
nature of operations. But it is not, after all, a fair for 
fair's sake. A fair for the sake of business. Supposing they 
overdo it--outplay primarily themselves. 
  And one further important point. Nizhniy Novgorod is not a 
proving ground for the development of an all-Union model. Not 
everyone can be authorized to trade in weapons. Not everyone can 
be permitted to retain for himself a large part of federal 
taxes. The experience of rural privatization, which has been 
introduced everywhere, could under different conditions hit the 
farmers hard. Nor in every city is it possible or necessary to 
organize an all-Russia fair. A Nizhniy striving to become the 
third capital is not an example to copy. Each has its own 
character and its own path. This is Nemtsov's and Nizhniy's path. 
  Nonetheless, people are coming to Nizhniy Novgorod from all 
over Russia. And to the named train "Volga"--from Moscow--there 
has been added another--"Yarmaka." But people are not coming for 
the reason that their ancestors hurried here. Not for butter and 
salt, drapery and timber. They are coming to view the reforms. 
And the old days are being revived. Nizhniy Novgorod is 
gradually dictating, as it did formerly with prices, style. 
Independent, but with a backward glance at Moscow. Reformist, 
but with regard to traditions and tenor of life. 
  Anthony Doran's American projects are combined here with the 
understanding of the peasants of the reform village of 
Kovrigino. What is wrong with this as the essence of our life? 

