Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] For a long time the view that it is not possible to 
produce silicon-based optoelectronic devices was regarded as 
sacred lore. Unlike gallium arsenide, silicon does not 
luminesce when excited optically by electric current. This 
would now appear possible. 
  Scientists at the Juelich Research Center's Institute of 
Coating and Ion Technology have accomplished a major step in 
this direction. For the first time, porous silicon layers have 
been used to fabricate complex superlattice structures of a kind 
particularly suitable for filters or semireflecting mirrors in 
combination with a light-emitting porous silicon coating. 
  Porous silicon, which is produced in an electrochemical 
etching process, has a spongy structure. Although the process 
for producing porous silicon layers has been known since the 
mid-fifties, it was only three years ago, when a British 
research team observed intensive photoluminescence, that great 
interest in this material system sprang up worldwide, whereupon 
a frantic search for potential electroluminescence began, 
several teams finding it with some speed. In 
electroluminescence, electric current is used to trigger light 
emission. All optoelectronic devices, such as light-emitting 
diodes and semiconductor lasers, are based on this mechanism. 
  Since then, more than 10 different models have been 
proposed, 
some based on the assumption that complex silicon-oxygen and 
silicon-hydrogen molecules exist. However, the Juelich Research 
Center, using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, performed a 
chemical analysis on freshly prepared porous layers detecting no 
sign of oxygen, and this finding is confirmed by infrared 
studies conducted jointly with the Physics Institute at the 
Rhine-Westphalian College of Technology in Aachen. Trials known 
as inelastic light scattering experiments performed in Juelich 
clearly confirmed that nanocrystallites are present in the 
porous layers. It is even possible to establish frequency 
distribution functions for the nanocrystallite diameters in the 
light of these results. A comparison of recorded 
photoluminescence spectra with the distribution functions has 
for the first time correlated the intensity of the 
photoluminescence with the number of nanocrystallites having a 
diameter of about 2.5 nanometers. These findings, which have 
been confirmed by other research teams, have demonstrated that 
the luminescence is definitely caused by the silicon 
nanocrystallites present in the porous layers. 
  Porous silicon normally emits light in photo- and 
electroluminescence over a broad spectrum comprising many colors 
in the visible range, although the user would obviously prefer 
to have more sharply defined light emission that could also be 
modified. The scientists at Juelich have now presented a 
completely new concept that uses what are known as porosity 
superlattices as filters. These porosity superlattices consist 
of a periodic sequence of layers of differing porosity. By 
selecting them according to the right parameters -- the 
thicknesses of the single layers ranged from 10 to 500 
nanometers (nm) with porosities up to and exceeding 83 percent 
-- they were able to produce narrow-band filters and, for 
example, use them to reduce the breadth of the photoluminescence 
band by a factor of more than 10. 
  These porosity superlattices also present an extremely high 
reflection factor of up to 95 percent in the visible spectral 
region, where only about 30 percent is observed with normal 
silicon layers. Porosity superlattices can be produced in the 
same process step as the active electroluminescence layer. 
Initial trials show, moreover, that porosity superlattices with 
lateral structures measuring about 150 micrometers can be 
produced. This is more or less the pixel (picture element) size 
of a flat video screen. In view of its extremely high 
light-emitting efficiency, porous silicon is currently applied 
on top of other, for instance silicon layer system, coatings. 
The application potential of porous silicon is enormous, far 
greater than can be fully appreciated at the present time. 

