Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Libyan and Chadian delegations met this morning at 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Their discussions centered on 
the application of the verdict of the International Court of 
Justice at The Hague, which was handed down a month ago. For 
Chad, the meeting is to examine with the Libyan delegation how 
the Chadian administration could take back the Aouzou Strip or 
fix the date for the withdrawal of Libyan forces from the 
Chadian territory. The nine-member Libyan delegation, led by 
'Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir, secretary of the General People's 
Committee for External Liaison and International Cooperation, 
arrived this morning in Ndjamena at the invitation of the 
Chadian Government. After welcoming the Libyan delegation, 
Foreign Minister Fakadi Lokna stated that this meeting is in 
line with contacts between the leaders of the two countries 
following the pronouncement of the verdict by the International 
Court of Justice. Let us listen to him. 
  [Begin Lokna recording] Our meeting today must enable us to 
examine the modalities for the execution of the verdict 
pronounced on 3 February by the International Court of Justice. 
I would like to assure you that my delegation has come here 
with the strong determination and an open mind to discuss with 
you the timetable for this withdrawal which will usher in a new 
era in the relations between our two countries. I am convinced 
that a rapid implementation of the verdict of the International 
Court of Justice will enable us to strengthen the basis for the 
fruitful cooperation that we are all yearning for. [end 
recording] 
  'Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir, leader of the Libyan delegation, 
noted that the verdict of the International Court of Justice is 
a permanent solution for the problem. 
  [Begin al-Muntasir recording, in Arabic fading into French 
translation] We think that the verdict of the International 
Court of Justice provided a permanent solution for the problem 
which existed between us. We must therefore agree to implement 
the (?agreements) between our two countries, including the 
decision of the International Court of Justice. We are 
therefore prepared to implement those agreements and accords as 
best as we can. I assert that we will endeavor to seriously 
implement all the decisions on which we have agreed and work 
seriously to build strong relations for the future well-being of 
our two countries. [end recording] 

