BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Walid Abi-Murshid: "Iraqi Plan To Market Oil Via </F>
Foreign Front Companies"] 
  [Text] London -- Well-informed Iraqi sources stress that 
Baghdad has begun to implement a new marketing strategy for its 
oil sales under the direct supervision of Iraqi President Saddam 
Husayn's son, 'Udayy. 
  The new marketing policy relies on Iraqi-Iranian cooperation 
in connection with export facilities and on a network of front 
companies registered abroad as foreign companies, even though 
they are in practice owned by the Iraqi Government. 
  To this end the Iraqi Oil Ministry has set up two broker 
companies abroad under foreign names: the first in Amman to 
represent the seller (the Iraqi Government) and the second in 
Cyprus, headed by an Iraqi citizen, to represent the buyer. 
Under this arrangement Iraqi oil deals are concluded directly 
between the broker company in Amman (represented in the Iraqi 
Oil Ministry) and the Cypriot broker company (represented in the 
buyers) with a view to conceal the source of the oil sold. 
  The Iraqi sources say that the first deal concluded by the 
two companies in question involves exporting 6 million tons per 
year of Iraqi crude oil -- that is equivalent to 120,000 barrels 
a day -- at a value reaching $360 million. The price in this 
deal is set at $10 a barrel (provided it is changed according to 
market price fluctuations). Baghdad gets $5 from the price and 
Iran $3, on the basis that the Iraqi oil is transported to Iran 
either by land or sea -- via Umm Qasr port -- and then 
re-exported via Bandar-e Khomeyni. 
  As for the buyers, they consist of two quarters so far: a 
consortium comprising several international companies and an 
export and import company owned by East Europeans who have been 
dealing with Baghdad since the days of the Eastern bloc. They 
are now playing the role of broker between Baghdad and their 
governments. 
  The deal with the East European team includes exporting arms 
and military spares to Iraq in return for oil imported by the 
Cyprus-based company. 
  The Iraqi sources say that the Iraqi contract with the 
buying 
party includes opening a letter of credit by the buyer in a 
certain bank in Paris. 
  After the buyer receives the bill of lading, he orders the 
transfer of the sum to be paid to the Cyprus-based company's 
account in the same bank. 
  The Iraqi sources add that most of these sums are diverted 
to 
finance the Iraqi armament plan. 

