Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Chernyshov: "Mir + Freedom = Alpha. The </F>
Americans Pay and Profit"] 
  [Text] In the middle of December Russian prime minister 
Viktor Chernomyrdin and American vice president Albert Gore most 
likely will sign an agreement on the construction of an 
international space station. 
  The two countries for a long time and with great efforts 
went 
as far as they could go to acquire absolute supremacy in the 
manned space sphere. As a result, Russia will not have a new 
gigantic Mir and the United States will not begin construction 
on the Freedom station. But nevertheless an intricate structure 
designated Alpha will appear in orbit. This orbital complex will 
be a "cluster" of several laboratory modules. In addition to 
Russia and the United States, Western Europe, Japan and Canada 
are participating in the project. The cooperating participants 
assume that with minimum financial expenditures -- due to the 
sharing of expenses -- each will have the opportunity to carry 
out research in a unique celestial center outfitted with the 
most modern technology. 
  In the first stage the technique for joint flights is being 
perfected and the capabilities of the vehicles developed for the 
project are being clarified. 
  In the two subsequent stages work will begin on station 
assembly. It will be made up of living and specialized modules, 
solar panels of enormous area and docking units making it 
possible to dock ships of different types (Soyuz, Progress and 
Shuttle) to the orbital scientific research institute. If 
everything goes OK, by the beginning of the coming century the 
international station will constitute a permanently operating 
orbital structure designed for six researchers. The useful 
volume of the living and research compartments is 1200 cubic 
meters and the electric power produced by the sources is 120 kW. 
  At first glance the project is attractive. In the opinion of 
Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, station 
Alpha is much like a straw which by grasping Russian manned 
cosmonautics will be able to survive. His optimism is 
attributable to the fact that in the first stage the United 
States intends to spend 400 million dollars on the project. A 
large part of this money will go for paying for the services of 
Russia, because this stage involves the intensive use of 
elements of Russian rocket and space technology. 
  To be sure, there also must be an increase in allocations 
"for space" from the Russian federal budget. 
  For the sake of correctness it must be noted at once that 
this project has not only its vigorous proponents, but also not 
less equally opinionated opponents. This applies to virtually 
all the participating countries. 
  Not so long ago the NEW YORK TIMES published interesting 
calculations applying to the American space program. They 
indicate that NASA is still receiving considerable funding from 
the federal budget: over 14 billion dollars annually. Much of 
this sum will go for the construction of an orbital station and 
flights of multiply reusable ships. But these two cost items 
have recently been those most severely cut back. Private space 
business, already today, incidentally, earning good money, has 
moved to the forefront. According to an estimate of the American 
Department of Commerce, five billion dollars of profit were 
earned in this sphere during last year. Most of the income has 
been from communication satellites and space information used in 
environmental research. 
  The largest commercial project is now considered to be the 
Iridium project, carried out by Motorola. Its cost is three 
billion dollars. By the end of the century several tens of 
satellites of this system will provide clients with wireless 
telephonic communication with any point on the planet. NASA is 
not participating in the project, but the Russian enterprise 
Khrunichev is involved, to be sure, with a very modest role. In 
general, however, the very fact of financing of such a 
large-scale scheme completely with private capital, in the 
opinion of analysts, definitely indicates that there have been 
fundamental changes in approaches to space in the United States. 
  In Russia there has been a strong outflow of personnel. The 
branch has aged in a blink: those have remained who have no 
place to go. The production of many components of rocket-space 
equipment without which the implementation of long-term space 
programs is impossible has been put on the shelf. 
  Viktor Chernomyrdin visited the Flight Control Center at 
Kaliningrad, near Moscow. He advised a "downsizing." However, 
now at the very top, according to Mr. Koptev, proposals have 
been made which should fundamentally improve the situation in 
the branch. The wage is being increased eightfold in comparison 
with the present-day minimum. Provision also is being made for a 
number of other payments. Alas, even with such a sharp "jump" in 
wages the salary will remain much lower than the earnings not 
only of people from commercial organizations, but even workers 
in many ordinary production fields. But as long as the stage of 
regularization continues, inflation will succeed in reducing 
everything to the former level. 
  In order for Russia to participate in the Alpha project it 
will be necessary to restore connections among tens of 
enterprises not only in Russia, but also in nearby foreign 
countries. That is, return to the same circles from which we 
just emerged. How much will participation in the project cost 
Russia? No one knows the answer. But it is clear that this will 
be hundreds and hundreds of billions of rubles. 
  Western participants see in the project a sort of locomotive 
which will favor further advance in many branches of science and 
technology: medicine, biology, materials science and use of the 
environment. Will Russia be able to use space attainments as 
effectively as our partners? All earlier experience in national 
cosmonautics forces us to doubt this. Just consider space 
environmental science. It earlier remained a "thing unto 
itself." Now environmental surveys, if we speak of the territory 
of Russia, are becoming virtually impossible. 
  Alpha will be put into an orbit with an inclination of 
approximately 52 degrees, traditional for our stations. It is 
advantageous from the energetics point of view, but the northern 
territories will not fall in the station field of view. Earlier 
we settled for this: nevertheless the most populated southern 
part of the USSR was clearly observable. Now from aboard the 
station it will be possible to observe only 7% of the 
territory 
of Russia. 

