BFN 

  [Text] The Hongqiao District people's court examined and 
concluded a case of trafficking in and counterfeiting state 
money; and punished, according to laws, the criminal offenders 
relating to this case. Zhao Zhixiang was sentenced to six 
years imprisonment and a 5,176 yuan fine was imposed. Sun 
Yuhong was sentenced to six years imprisonment. Lu Zhenjie was 
sentenced to three years imprisonment and three years probation. 
  While chatting with Sun Yuhong, a peasant from Anhui 
Province 
working in Tianjin, Criminal Zhao Zhixiang was informed that 
Renminbi can be changed for counterfeit Renminbi in Jieshou city 
of Anhui Province, where Sun was from. Zhou thought that he 
could seek profits from this. Therefore, they ganged up with Lu 
Zhenjie, with whom they were acquainted. Through premeditation, 
these three persons went to Jieshou city last September. Lu 
Zhenjie waited for them at an inn. Through the contacts of Sun 
Yuhong, Zhao Zhixiang and Sun Yuhong respectively changed 10,000 
yuan, which were offered by Lu Zhenjie, for 27,650 yuan 
according to different exchange proportions. In this very 
period, Zhao Zhixiang did not return to the place where they 
stayed at the appointed time. Lu Zhenjie thought that the real 
fact was exposed and went back to Tianjin. Zhao and Sun went 
back to Tianjin with counterfeit money and gave Lu 20,800 yuan. 
Zhao, Sun, and Sun Yumin, Sun's brother (who had once been 
transformed through labor) bought, on several dozen occasions, 
cigarettes, foodstuffs, handkerchiefs, and some other goods with 
the counterfeit money in Tianjin. They spent more than 3,000 
yuan of counterfeit money. 
  After learning of Lu's activities, Lu's relatives met with 
Zhao Zhixiang several times and asked him to exchange the 
counterfeit money for 10,000 yuan in Renminbi. Zhao refused and 
both sides argued with each other. On 26 September last year, 
accompanied by his relatives, Lu Zhenjie took his counterfeit 
money, totaling 20,800 yuan, and surrendered to the security 
organ. Simultaneously, Zhao and Sun were arrested under Lu's 
guidance. 
  The security organ discovered 3,100 yuan of counterfeit 
money 
at Zhao Zhixiang's house. In addition to 20,800 yuan 
surrendered by Lu Zhenjie, 23,900 yuan of counterfeit money was 
withdrawn by the Tianjin branch of the People's Bank of China. 

