BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, 5 June -- Sister A'ishah Mu'ammar 
al-Qadhdhafi yesterday afternoon received Mrs. Queenie Fletcher, 
the mother of British policewoman Yvonne Fletcher who was 
accidentally killed in front of the Arab People's Bureau in 
London 10 years ago. The British authorities wanted to accuse 
the Libyan Arab side before any impartial joint investigation, 
which the Great Jamahiriyah was very keen on, provided that it 
would include all the parties involved in the clashes, whether 
those who were attacking, those in a position of defense, and 
those who were present [words indistinct] their presence in the 
area was merely coincidental. 
  Sister A'ishah expressed her sympathy to Mrs. Fletcher on 
the 
loss of her daughter and Mrs. Fletcher in turn expressed her 
sympathy on the loss of the Qadhdhafi family's daughter, Hana'. 
  Sister A'ishah saluted the brave step taken by Mrs. Fletcher 
by coming to the Great Jamahiriyah to acquaint herself with the 
civilizational project of the Arab Libyan people and see for 
herself the consequences of the aggression and the consequences 
of the unfair measures imposed by Western countries on the Great 
Jamahiriyah through the so-called Security Council. 
  Mrs. Fletcher rejected that the regrettable incident which 
led to the death of her daughter Yevoun be exploited in harming 
the Libyan Arab people and its relations with British people. 
  Sister A'ishah Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi has extended an open 
invitation to Mrs. Fletcher to visit the Great Jamahiriyah which 
would remember her, as well as history between the two countries 
would, that her initiative had closed the road before whoever 
intends to harm the relations between the two peoples and had 
opened the way for establishing good relations between them. 
  It is worth mentioning that sister A'ishah Mu'ammar 
al-Qadhdhafi had informed Mrs. Fletcher that she could assume 
that she has a daughter in Great Jamahiriyah fully prepared to 
cooperate with her to turn the names of "Yevon" and "Hana'" into 
a symbol of and a testimony on the end of the era of brute force 
and the prevalence of the era of law, justice, and right and on 
the extension of bridges of amity, love, and peace. 
  Mrs. Fletcher had left Great Jamahiriyah following a 
five-day 
visit. 

