Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The ROK and the United States plan to conduct the 
18th annual Team Spirit exercise in mid-March. The two countries 
will not, however, conduct the exercise if the North Korea 
nuclear issue is resolved before the exercise begins. They have 
also decided to immediately stop conducting the Team Spirit 
exercise even when they are in progress if North Korea takes 
"different" [pyonhwadoen] steps to accept the nuclear inspection 
by the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA]. 
  According to the Defense Ministry on 30 January, the ROK and 
the United States decided to conduct the Team Spirit exercise 
for approximately 10 days beginning in 10 March along with the 
field training exercise and the command post exercise. So far, 
it has been unclear whether they would conduct the Team Spirit 
exercise because North Korea has been uncertain regarding the 
IAEA's nuclear inspection. 
  Concerning the Team Spirit exercise, a relevant Defense 
Ministry official said that "the consistent policies of the ROK 
and U.S. Governments have been to conduct the Team Spirit 
exercise every year in order to strengthen the ROK-U.S. Combined 
Defense System and to raise the combat readiness of their 
forces." He also said that "the final decision whether they 
would conduct the exercise will be, however, determined by North 
Korea's attitude toward the IAEA inspection, which is now being 
discussed between the IAEA and North Korea." He added that 
"accordingly, this year's Team Spirit exercise will be fully 
suspended if North Korea accepts the nuclear inspection before 
25 February, the day the regular meeting of the IAEA Board of 
Governors ends." He added that "although the exercise continues 
through mid-March, it will be immediately suspended if the 
nuclear issue is resolved at that time." 
  The official said this decision was made after consulting 
with the U.S. Government. 
  Another relevant government official said that "it is true 
that we do not have enough time to prepare for the exercise 
because there are only 40 days left before mid-March, but there 
is no problem because we will conduct it by giving more 
consideration to the war games and the map exercise than to the 
field training exercise." 
  It was learned that, unlike the case of the Team Spirit 
exercise conducted last year, which mobilized 120,000 troops, 
including 50,000 U.S. soldiers, this year's Team Spirit exercise 
will mobilize a minimum of U.S. troops stationed in South Korea 
and the ROK Armed Forces and that, in particular, the field 
mobile exercises will be reduced to the minimum. The joint 
amphibious operations between the ROK and the U.S. naval forces, 
as well, will likely reduce their scope greatly by mobilizing 
only ROK forces. 

