BFN 

  [Text] When meeting the press in Beijing on the afternoon 
of 10 March, Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC Central Committee 
Political Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai Municipal CPC 
Committee; and Shanghai Mayor Huang Ju, both of whom are 
Shanghai deputies currently attending the Second Session of the 
Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] said: We have earnestly 
studied and examined Premier Li Peng's "Government Work Report" 
and, following the instructions of the party Central Committee 
and the State Council, will thoroughly study the situation and 
grasp the spirit and guidelines of the report to ensure that 
Shanghai's work is properly carried out. The central 
authorities' policy of promoting the tax revenue sharing system 
is a general demand. Shanghai, as a part of the country, should 
comply with the demand and make more contributions to the nation 
while developing its economy. 
  Wu Bangguo said: We should not practice the socialist market 
economy without having any rules. Reform of the financial and 
taxation system is designed to regularize the interests between 
the state and enterprises and between the central and local 
authorities. The characteristics of our original taxation system 
are that there were too many tax categories and the tax burdens 
were not reasonably shared. This will create difficulties for 
fair competition between enterprises. We actively support the 
implementation of the tax revenue sharing system. The 
excessively small percentage of the central financial revenue 
will have adverse effects on macroeconomic regulation and 
control. If the general situation is out of control, Shanghai 
also will be unable to develop. Regarding the system of sharing 
between the central and local authorities, our position is as 
follows: Shanghai will resolutely carry out anything that has 
been decided by the central authorities; Shanghai will not be 
exceptional on things that apply to the whole country; Shanghai 
will make more contributions to the central authorities annually 
while developing its economy. 
  Huang Ju said: Implementation of the tax revenue sharing 
system is a major reform that concerns the overall situation. 
In carrying out the reform, we have to consider the need to 
strengthen the central authorities' macroeconomic regulation and 
control ability and to pay attention to rallying localities' 
enthusiasm. In deciding the sharing relationship between the 
central authorities and Shanghai, the central authorities once 
again assured that the policy of developing and opening up 
Pudong will not change and that the original mechanism with 
which Shanghai repays its own foreign debts will not change. 
All these show the party Central Committee and State Council's 
support for Shanghai's work. The only way for Shanghai is, 
under the conditions of macroeconomic regulation and control, to 
strive to make the "cake" bigger to make greater contributions 
to the country. 

