Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 138 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun: </F>
"Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
  [Text] Around the Time of My Leaving China. From 
Hope to Disappointment (Part One of Four) -- Hongkongers Going 
North After 4 June Did Not Wish To See Li Peng, Who Unexpectedly 
Endorsed the Plans of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp To 
Move Its Registration 
  After 4 June, it was hard for me to accept the way that 
Jiang 
Zemin and Li Peng dealt with a series of incidents concerning 
Hong Kong, so that my hopes for Jiang Zemin quickly turned to 
disappointment. 
  As stated above, to restore the confidence of Hongkongers, 
we 
organized visits by mid- and upper-level Hongkongers to Beijing. 
While most of those who we repeatedly invited could not refuse 
under the circumstances, they agreed to go to Beijing to see 
Jiang Zemin, but were unwilling to meet with Li Peng. After 
Jiang Zemin had met independently with several Hong Kong figures 
in Beijing, Li Peng expressed displeasure, so that Jiang Zemin 
was no longer willing to hold such independent meetings. So in 
order to break this impasse, we worked specially to win over 
some who were willing to meet with Li Peng, with Lo Te-ch'eng 
being the first after 4 June to publicly ask for a meeting with 
Li Peng. 
  In an attempt to resume as quickly as possible Hu 
Ying-hsiang's [5170 2019 3276] investment in the 
Shenzhen-to-Guangzhou expressway project, and to restore the 
confidence of Hongkongers, I worked on Hu Ying-hsiang, who said 
that he had long since had such hopes. When he mentioned that 
he was having certain coordination difficulties with Guangdong 
Province, I expressed a willingness to go to Guangzhou to 
expedite matters. So I went to Guangzhou, seeking out and 
consulting with Guangdong Governor Ye Xuanping, who consented to 
support [the project]. As Hu's investments in mainland power 
plants and expressways had been supported in the past by Zhao 
Ziyang but not by Li Peng, Hu Ying-hsiang immediately consented 
when I suggested that he go to Beijing to see Li Peng, as well 
as agreeing to have his visit reported in the press. As it 
seemed that Hu was willing to take advantage of the opportunity 
to improve his relations with Li Peng, I telegraphed Beijing, 
asking Li Peng to see him. After having sent two telegrams 
with no reply, I sent a third pressing for an answer. 
Whereupon Li Hou phoned me to say that Li Peng's secretary had 
told the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office that "the chief 
would not see Hu." When I asked why, he said that he did not 
know. This was hard for me to accept, that the premier of a 
large country would be so narrow-minded! How could I explain 
to Hu Ying-hsiang? I could only send someone to tell him 
insincerely that "Beijing has not yet responded." 
  After 4 June, Li Peng and Lu Ping met with Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corporation Board Chairman P'u Wei-shih [3184 
0251 1102], who expressed confidence in Hong Kong on one hand, 
while telling them on the other that the Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corporation was going to "reorganize," by 
moving its headquarters to London, and was exploring plans for 
the bank's pullout. 
  Li Peng, who possibly did not understand the situation, 
expressed his "appreciation" with absolutely no concern, while 
Lu Ping, who was familiar with the situation, surprisingly did 
not play the proper "advisory" role either, or make any attempt 
to "remedy" the situation. Thus, P'u Wei-shih won a great 
victory. On his return to Hong Kong, he immediately began to 
take the designated withdrawal actions, finally announcing that 
he had bought the British Midlands Bank, and was going to move 
his headquarters to London, to complete his so-called 
"reorganization" scheme. 
  The Hong Kong media pointed out that the Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corporation's leadership was "reorganizing" to 
preserve their interests in Hong Kong, so that they could 
continue their business activities in Hong Kong and on Mainland 
China, while avoiding the factors that might arise after 1997 in 
China or Hong Kong, which might "lose them their controlling" 
influence over the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation's 
leadership authority. This comment hit the nail right on the 
head. 
  The Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation [HKSBC] 
charter provided that no shareholder could hold more than 1 
percent and, while Hong Kong shareholders owned 50-60 percent, 
the board members made their decision without regard for such 
percentages. While the board chairman should have been elected 
by the board members according to the articles of association, 
all insiders knew the real case. Of course, as to who actually 
"had the final say" behind the scenes on the elections of the 
board chairman and members, outsiders did not know. And while 
I had investigated this when I was in Hong Kong, I did not find 
out either. Before 1997, during the period of rule by the 
British Hong Kong administration, such a situation might 
continue, but not for long. But after 1997, might not Hong Kong 
shareholders ask for an amended charter, to elect a board of 
directors based on shareholder holdings, which board would then 
elect its chairman? In order to prevent this, P'u Wei-shih 
exploited the "reorganization" to make Britains the major 
shareholders, turning the HKSBC into a "subsidiary" company of 
the London HKSBC, for a permanent resolution. So the wisdom of 
the respective tactics employed by China and Britain was 
immediately clear. 
  In another test of strength between China and Britain, 
Britain also won, with the Chinese harming not only themselves, 
but even more so Pao Yu-kang. And I played a sad role in this 
battle too. 
  Zhao Ziyang had proposed establishing an air carrier company 
in Mainland China or Hong Kong, to stimulate China's civil 
airlines to import and assimilate outside experience. The 
"Hong Kong Dragon" air carrier company was created in Hong Kong 
based on this proposal, with the support of the State Council 
and the Hong Kong Office of the NCNA, and through cooperation 
between the Hong Kong and Macao International Investment 
Corporation and Ts'ao Kuang-piao [2580 0342 1753]. Right from 
the start, Ts'ao Kuang-piao bragged about the Chinese Government 
backing of his company, bringing it to the attention of the 
British airlines business and the British Hong Kong Government, 
which passed a new law restricting the establishment of new air 
carrier companies in Hong Kong, as well as stating that "Hong 
Kong Dragon" was not British-funded, so did not conform to Hong 
Kong laws and regulations, which long delayed its approval. So 
I got involved, asking Pao Yu-kang to become "Hong Kong 
Dragon's" first board chairman, by buying a majority share. 
Pao Yu-kang, together with Ts'ao Kuang-piao's son (of 
British citizenship), bought over 50 percent of the shares, 
turning "Hong Kong Dragon" into a mostly British-owned air 
carrier company, enabling its establishment to be approved. 

