Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 3 (ITAR-TASS) -- Under the headline 
"What Will the Prime Minister Offer?", today's ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI 
newspaper forecasts a scenario of an upcoming government meeting. 
  In the newspaper's opinion, Viktor Chernomyrdin "will 
possibly submit to the meeting mechanisms for implementing ideas 
outlined in the recent state of the nation message by President 
Boris Yeltsin to the Russian parliament". 
  The same newspaper quotes opinions expressed by two members 
of the presidential council -- full member of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences Andrey Zhukov and politologist Leonid 
Smirnyagin concerning priority tasks facing the Russian 
Government. 
  Zhukov calls on the cabinet "to concentrate on the economy 
and ignore political discussions", while Smirnyagin calls for 
ending "a war between regions and the centre for rights which 
have already been granted to them". 
  The NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA newspaper carries a monthly rating 
of 
100 leading Russian politicians in February, based on polls 
carried by the public opinion agency "VP" together with the 
newspaper. The latest poll shows that the Russian president 
yielded the first place to his Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  The same newspaper also devotes its commentary to the 
Russian 
cabinet head. The newspaper expresses ideas on the role played 
by the present premier in pursuing the course of reforms and 
economic changes in the country. 
  In the newspaper's opinion, the present "pre-reform economy 
is in the premier's 'charge', while Chernomyrdin, the newspaper 
notes, "is born for a situation when Russia gets a respite 
before an advent of a new, and luckier than Gaydar, economic 
reformer". 
  Sergey Glazyev, chairman of the lower chamber committee on 
economic policy, analyses in NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA "compatibility" 
of the positions of the president and parliament after the 
recent message by Yeltsin to legislators. 
  In his opinion, "Russia's deindustrialisation is now an 
established fact". Nevertheless, "virtually all theses of the 
presidential message coincide with the recommendations of 
parliamentary hearings on economic policy". 
  The press points with concern to a rash of strikes in Russia 
over the past few days. The newspapers SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA, TRUD 
and ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI write about "a wave of strikes" that swept 
the country. 
  In this connection, TRUD says the following: "The 
government's numerous promises to tackle social and economic 
problems of coal- mining regions have not been fulfilled. This 
provoked a new phase of tention at mines. 
  "A pre-strike situation is observed at many enterprises. 
Steelmen, textile workers and personnel at defence and light 
industry factories have set up striking committees." 
  The PRAVDA newspaper features an interview with former 
Russian parliament speaker Ruslan Khasbulatov who recently left 
the Lefortovo Prison in Moscow after the amnesty declared by the 
lower house of the Russian parliament. 
  He stressed that he "reserves the right to tell truth to 
people how the former Russian parliament worked and how we 
defended principles of democracy and parliamentarism, as well as 
to tell truth what really happened during the tragic days of 
September- October 1993". 

