BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 19 May (NA) -- Economy Minister 
Domingo Cavallo today ruled out the possibility of joining 
Carlos Menem on a potential Justicialist Party presidential 
ticket for next year's elections, and claimed that these reports 
"aim at provoking confrontations with other candidates." 
  Cavallo stressed that he has "a great responsibility" as 
economy minister. He believes that those who are proposing him 
as a vice presidential candidate are doing it "to create an 
atmosphere of internal confrontation with other candidates." 
  Cavallo, who will participate tomorrow in a cabinet meeting 
in La Rioja Province after having returned from a tour of Korea 
and Japan, noted that "his concerns were very well received" in 
those two countries. He confirmed "the possibility of increasing 
exports" to Seoul. 
  The economy minister described as "complete nonsense" an 
article published by a Buenos Aires morning newspaper that he 
would be forced to devalue the peso without touching the dollar. 
  Cavallo emphasized: "Fortunately, markets pay no attention 
to 
this type of commentary." 
  Cavallo noted: "This is evidenced by the fact that the 
interest rates quoted in pesos are as low today as they were 
three months ago, despite the soaring interest rates quoted in 
dollars worldwide." 
  Cavallo said this "demonstrates the strength of Argentina's 
monetary and foreign exchange system." He emphasized: "Virtually 
no one speculates against the value of Argentine pesos, and the 
people are convinced that the Convertibility Law will last a 
long time." 
  Upon assessing his visit to Korea, Cavallo said he 
discovered 
in Korean entrepreneurial circles "great interest in the 
possibility of investing in Argentina." 
  Cavallo noted that some "large-scale" Korean investments in 
Argentina would begin to materialize in a short time. 
  In this regard, the economy minister said that Korea "will 
not aim to introduce goods made with cheap labor into our 
country, as there is no cheap labor in Argentina." In his 
opinion, "growth and the atmosphere of stability" attract 
investments. 
  Cavallo stressed: "In Argentina, as in Korea, they will have 
to manufacture products at a high or intermediate technological 
level, as the only way countries can pay high salaries is to 
manufacture high quality goods or create high quality services." 
  In remarks from Tokyo for radio "La 990" of Buenos Aires, 
Cavallo emphasized that "an atmosphere of stability prevails 
both in Argentina and throughout Latin America." He stressed: 
"We have the lowest inflation rate in Latin America, and we are 
growing." 
  Cavallo emphasized: "The Koreans and Japanese are interested 
in countries with dynamic growth rates, as they are used to an 
unending economic expansion, and Argentina now ranks third for 
the greatest growth rate over the past three years." 
  The economy minister also emphasized that the companies "see 
that our country has a policy that facilitates investments, as 
there are now no taxes on investments, and labor costs are being 
reduced." 
  In conclusion, Cavallo said: "I also trust in the 
implementation of a good labor reform that will allow our 
country to export to many more countries in the world, and 
specifically to all Latin American countries." 

