Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ignacio Gutierrez A.] </F>
  [Text] In order to improve the results of drug seizures on 
the nation's highways, consideration is being given to the 
feasibility of using "mobile units," under the supervision of an 
agent from the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office. The proposal 
was made yesterday, during the first meeting held by the PGR's 
[Office of the Attorney General of the Republic] assistant 
attorney for local offices and inspections, Alfonso Cabrera 
Morales, with Federal Judicial Police [PJF] deputy commissioners 
from all parts of the country. 
  At this meeting, the official also called upon the PJF 
personnel to redouble their efforts in the battle against those 
committing federal crimes, and stressed the courage and loyalty 
of those risking their lives in every operation. He cited the 
need for more animals in the force's canine unit, engaged in 
detecting drugs, as well as an increase in the number of federal 
forces in areas requiring greater attention. 
  In the name of the attorney general of the republic, Diego 
Valades, he confirmed that the PGR had continued confidence in 
public servants, and support for their work. At the same time, 
he reminded them of their commitment to overcome the delay in 
the implementation of court orders throughout the country, to 
pursue their investigations of the drug traffic, and to 
dismantle criminal organizations operating in various villages 
and towns of the respective federative states. 
  He noted that, starting yesterday, constant patrols were 
established by air and on land to prevent the landing of planes 
on natural runways in several of the country's states. He also 
announced a heightening of the surveillance on coasts and docks, 
and at bus, air, and railroad terminals. 
  The PJF's state deputy commissioners, as well as the force's 
operational, technical, and intelligence directors, submitted 
detailed reports of their activities throughout the Mexican 
Republic. They cited the feasibility of putting the "mobile 
units" into operation. 
  It should be mentioned that this practice was discontinued 
some time ago, owing to the excesses committed at the time by 
bad members of the Federal Judicial Police. Therefore, to 
prevent abuses now, it has been proposed that these operations 
be headed by agents from the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office. 
<H5>  Preventing Drug Addiction </H5>
  At the meeting, Cabrera Morales discussed the need for 
continuing talks with local and municipal authorities to prevent 
drug addiction among youth. He claimed that, to date, this has 
brought positive results in local schools and communities, 
noting that it would be advisable to promote concurrent medical 
care and treatment for drug addicts. 
  The assistant attorney for local offices and inspections 
remarked that good results could be accrued with the same 
resources available now, and called for stringent respect for 
human rights, to the maximum extent, on the part of each Federal 
Judicial Police officer and agent. 

