Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, March 29 (XINHUA) -- China cannot 
accept a Security Council resolution on the nuclear issue in the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), a Chinese United 
Nations diplomat said today. 
  "As far as the present stage is concerned, we cannot accept 
the Security Council resolution, either its form or content," 
said Chen Jian, Chinese deputy permanent representative to the 
United Nations. 
  He made the remark while answering reporters' questions 
outside the Security Council chamber, where council members had 
just finished private consultations on the DPRK nuclear issue. 
  "But", he said, "China could consider a presidential 
statement of mild, constructive and objective nature, which will 
urge the parties to implement the agreements they have already 
reached." 
  The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) suspended its 
nuclear inspections in the DPRK, blaming the DPRK for not 
allowing it to take samples from nuclear sites. 
  The DPRK responded by saying the IAEA demand went beyond the 
previous agreement between the two sides. 
  "We think it was counterproductive for the Security Council 
to exert pressure on the parties because this will complicate 
the issue and put the parties into the corner, impossible, or 
less possible, to move around," Chen said. 
  Chen further explained that China takes this position 
"because China is concerned about the denuclearization of the 
Korean peninsula and the maintenance of peace and stability in 
the region." 
  "So every action the international community takes ought to 
promote dialogue between the parties so as to achieve these two 
aims of denuclearization and the maintenance of peace and 
security," he said. 
  Chen said China has seen some progress toward the solution 
of 
the issue through the approach of dialogue. 
  "The present difficulty is a rhythm in the course of 
implementing the agreement which was reached between the DPRK 
and the IAEA on March 15," he said. 
  "That is the nature of difficulty, so we should resolve the 
issue through further discussions by the parties concerned," he 
added. 

