CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpts from body of article by V. V. Kovalenko, candidate </F>
of the medical sciences, Scientific Research Laboratory of 
Preventive Ophthalmology and Ophthalmoergonomics of the Kharkov 
Regional Union of Scientists' Technical Support Service, 
Kharkov; signed to press 26 Oct 93; UDC 617.7:613.6(477)] 
  [Text] The birth of ophthalmoergonomics as a science was 
brought about by a profound change in the nature and conditions 
of human visual activity in all types of industry due to an 
increase in visual stress, the development of new technologies 
requiring strong visual resolution, and the broad application of 
non-verbal communications systems, including visual 
information-display systems. Environmental changes that pose 
human health hazards also fall within the scope of 
ophthalmoergonomics. 
  All adult age categories have seen a considerable rise in 
the 
number of cases of visual disorders that seriously impair visual 
acuity and negatively affect the quality and efficiency of 
visually intensive types of labor. The severity of these 
impairments varies from minor visual discomfort to complete 
disability in the performance of visual work. There are numerous 
cases in which the manifestation of clinical symptoms could, 
with complete justification, be diagnosed as ``visual strain 
syndrome.'' 
  Ophthalmoergonomics exists at the intersection of the 
disciplines of ophthalmology, ergonomics, and labor physiology. 
  If the task of ophthalmology is to diagnose and treat 
illnesses of and injuries to the eye, then the purpose of 
ophthalmoergonomics is to prevent the development of 
pathological changes in the visual organ as a result of 
occupational activity. This objective is realized by carefully 
studying how a particular occupation and its attendant working 
conditions affect human visual function, by evaluating the 
relationship between the initial health of visual structures and 
their response to these effects, and by finding optimal 
conditions for visual activity. Thus, the basic tasks of 
ophthalmoergonomics are: 

  -  develop a body of specific procedures and tests for 
evaluating visual function during different types of visual 
activity; 
  -  study the relationship between the functional characteristics 
of the visual structures and particular occupations, types of 
training, age, and working conditions; 
  -  develop occupationally useful criteria for various types of 
visual activity; 
  -  develop preventative measures that can be applied to the 
general public as well as to individuals; 
  -  develop occupation-specific therapies for treating people 
with 
occupationally related visual disabilities. 


    Like any other field of medicine, the study of 
ophthalmoergonomics is divided into two main subfields -- 
general and specialized ophthalmoergonomics. General 
ophthalmoergonomics is concerned with the methodological and 
procedural questions of ophthalmoergonomics research, visual 
ergonomic physiology, visual acuity and visual fatigue, and the 
professional diagnosis and treatment of patients working in 
vision-intensive occupations. Specialized ophthalmoergonomics 
encompasses all these disciplines as they apply to specific 
industries and occupations. 
  Ukrainian researchers in the field of specialized 
ophthalmoergonomics are doing a great deal of work in the area 
of vision and visual function in people who perform very close 
visual work. They have established and are developing a new 
field -- design engineering ophthalmoergonomics. This is a new 
field not only in ophthalmoergonomics, but in labor physiology 
as well. 
  An important branch of the ophthalmoergonomic sciences is 
the 
study of the visual health and acuity of people who work with 
video displays. Ukrainian researchers have made their 
contributions to this field as well. 
  Transportation ophthalmoergonomics, especially as it applies 
to marine transportation systems, has also been studied. 
  Ukrainian ophthalmology has traditionally emphasized the 
study of the visual structures of children and adolescents. An 
important aspect of this research has been the attempt to study 
the relationship between visual health and pathology and the 
conditions under which the visual analyzer functions. The field 
of ophthalmoergonomics as it applies to school-age children was 
founded in Ukraine. 

