BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with 'Umar al-Muntasir, secretary of the Libyan </F>
General People's Committee for External Liaison and 
International Cooperation (foreign minister), by Sawsan 
Abu-Husayn in Cairo; date not given] 
  [Text] [Abu-Husayn] Do you believe there are on the 
horizon encouraging signs of a peaceful solution to the 
Lockerbie crisis? 
  [Al-Muntasir] The Lockerbie crisis will be resolved 
peacefully. There is no alternative. It is difficult to set a 
date for that now. But we are seeking to achieve it as soon as 
possible. What remains now is to agree on the foundations for a 
solution with the Western parties within the framework of some 
points proposed by the Arab League. I spoke with Arab League 
Secretary General Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid on the sidelines of 
the Nonaligned Movement [NAM] conference and agreed that the 
seven-member committee should convene after the African summit 
scheduled to be held in Tunis within days. We will discuss the 
two resolutions adopted by the NAM and the African conference 
and ways of implementing them, especially as NAM ministers 
welcomed Libya's acceptance of Security Council Resolution 731 
and stressed the need for the parties concerned to secure a just 
settlement that safeguards all interests in accordance with 
international law and the principles of the UN Charter. 
Furthermore, the international community and its organizations 
are showing solidarity with us vis-a-vis the negative results 
caused by the embargo imposed on the country. This is why there 
is an inclination to urge the Security Council to take account 
of the Arab League's new proposal. 
  [Abu-Husayn] On what basis are the Western parties 
responding to a peaceful solution with Libya? 
  [Al-Muntasir] There is a Western inclination to ignore a 
peaceful solution with Libya, especially as its moderate policy 
no longer threatens world security and peace. It is always 
trying to find a just way out that meets commitment to 
international laws. Best proof of this is Libya's full 
withdrawal from the Aozou strip [Chad], even though this is not 
in Libya's interests. That is, we lost the legal case but 
preferred to fully respect the court's decision, while we see 
the major states advocating international legitimacy and yet 
they refuse to comply with it in numerous cases. 
  [Abu-Husayn] What about the status of your relations with 
Chad at present? 
  [Al-Muntasir] Relations with Chad and between the two 
peoples are deep-rooted, and there are numerous common interests 
to which brother leader Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi and President Deby 
will devote their interest in the stage ahead. I have 
assurances that they [relations] will move toward the better 
from now on, contrary to what some people expect. 
  It is worth noting here that NAM ministers described the 
agreement concluded between the Republic of Chad and the Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriyah on the implementation of the International 
Court of Justice's decision as a positive contribution to 
reinforcing the NAM's unity. 
  [Abu-Husayn] What about the Security Council? Will it take 
account of this commitment by Libya and thus allow the gradual 
lifting of the embargo imposed on your country, especially as it 
allowed UN observers to use planes to travel to the Aozou strip? 
  [Al-Muntasir] That step is regarded as a good precedent in 
the United Nations, and we hope it will be a good gesture and a 
good start for further steps toward lifting the embargo on 
Libya. I personally am optimistic in this connection. 
  [Abu-Husayn] The African summit will be held in the 
Tunisian capital in a few days. Has Libya submitted a request 
to the United Nations to allow Libyan President Mu'ammar 
al-Qadhdhafi to use his plane to fly to Tunis? 
  [Al-Muntasir] We will participate in the proceedings of the 
African summit. But so far we have not submitted a request to 
exempt the brother leader from the blockade. I believe that it 
is difficult for him to participate in the proceedings of any 
international conferences until the blockade has been lifted on 
the country. But as a Libyan citizen, he can go to Egypt and 
Tunisia through well-known means, namely by land. 
  [Abu-Husayn] What issue will Libya include on the Tunis 
summit's agenda? 
  [Al-Muntasir] The Lockerbie issue is our main issue. It 
will be raised in the framework of the demand for lifting the 
blockade, taking account of the NAM resolution and the Arab 
League's resolution. 
  [Abu-Husayn] What is your impression of the NAM proceedings' 
results? 
  [Al-Muntasir] I think the movement is destined to continue, 
especially as the recent conference was more positive with 
regard to correcting some conditions -- which will nudge it in 
the direction it was following in the days of Presidents 
al-Nasir, Nehru, and Tito. 
  [Abu-Husayn] A final question about Yemen: What about the 
Libyan position, especially after the resolution adopted by the 
Security Council? 
  [Al-Muntasir] Libya has announced its position from the 
outset, namely to safeguard Yemen's unity and declare a 
cease-fire. Because unity cannot be achieved by force or by 
arms. We believe that a halt to the fighting is fundamental in 
order to safeguard unity. President al-Qadhdhafi's contacts 
with President 'Abdallah Salih and 'Ali Salim al-Bid are moving 
in that direction, in order to safeguard Yemen's unity. 
  [Abu-Husayn] Will you recognize the southern state? 
  [Al-Muntasir] We are talking about unity. 
  [Abu-Husayn] What are the latest developments in the Libyan 
position on the peaceful settlement in the Middle East? Do you 
still reject the Gaza-Jericho agreement? 
  [Al-Muntasir] We do not reject the peace agreement in the 
Middle East. We object to Israel's noncompliance with the peace 
process and demand that the international community adopt just 
stands on its policy toward the Arab states and its daily and 
organized aggression on Lebanon and in the other occupied Arab 
territories in the West Bank and the Golan. [passage omitted] 

