Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Twelve Agree on Program of Greek </F>
Presidency"; as released by Brussels TEXTLINE database] 
  [Text] The president of the Union Council, Theodoros 
Pangalos, briefly presented his colleagues the priorities of the 
Greek presidency, at the now traditional session open to the 
public at the beginning of the "General Affairs" Council. 
Noting that work in the coming half-year would have to be 
greatly accelerated due to the European elections (the last 
parliamentary session will take place early May), Mr. Pangalos 
said in particular that the presidency wanted, before the Corfu 
Summit, to make "great progress" in implementing the 
Commission's White Paper in a concrete manner. Mr. Pangalos 
stressed the importance of the European elections (if the 
citizens are not interested in them, it will be "fatal," he 
said) and considered that the role of the European Commission 
would have to be strengthened. He also reaffirmed that the work 
of the Intergovernmental Conference in 1996 on institutional 
reform should begin in good time, reason why the presidency is 
proposing setting up a working party with representatives from 
the Commission, member states, European Parliament [EP] and 
observers from countries wanting accession. As for enlargement, 
he pointed out that, if we want to remain within the deadline 
the dossier would have to be handed to the EP by 10 March at the 
latest. 
  Mr. Pangalos (who informed his colleagues over lunch about 
his rounds of the capitals of the candidate countries) also 
repeated that there were "two small countries in the south that 
had a right to full membership of the Union," i.e. Cyprus and 
Malta. 
  During the nearly two-hour long public session, all the 
ministers stressed the need to: 

  -  Relaunch employment and 
growth by implementing the White Paper; 
  -  Succeed in the Uruguay 
Round in all its details; 
  -  Conclude accession 
negotiations; 
  -  Tighten links with Central and Eastern 
countries; 
  -  Achieve the Common Foreign and Security Policy [CFSP]. 
  Britain's Mr. Hurd urged the member states to do more for 
the 
economy's competitiveness, on the basis of the White Paper: 
"There is no point in accepting the prescription and failing to 
take the medicine." He also said "we should not become fixated 
with institutional problems," as there was a "danger of 
indigestion." Luxembourg's Mr. Poos agreed with this: According 
to him, we should not embark on such a "perilous path" which 
risked compromising the referenda in the candidate countries. 
As for the rest, Mr. Poos insisted on the need really to 
achieve the free movement of goods in the Single Market, while 
strengthening security and cooperation between the forces of law 
and order. Dutchman Mr. Kojmans however was in favor of the 
proposal of setting up a working party on institutional reform 
with the participation of representatives from the European 
Parliament; this would be a demonstration of openness to 
Parliament, which according to him is absolutely vital. The 
Minister recalled that the Netherlands had fought for 
transparency and "true openness in the decisionmaking process": 
We are not satisfied with the results obtained, he said. Mr. 
Kojmans also pleaded in favor of "total free movement," 
regretting the slowness in Maastricht's "third pillar" being 
implemented. Denmark's Mr. Petersen also insisted heavily on 
transparency and Citizens' Europe, and found the Greek 
presidency's program a little weak as regards the introduction 
of the tax on CO2 and energy. Germany's Mrs. Sailer-Albring 
(Mr. Kinkel arrived later) set the problem of the contributions 
by member states in the Community budget (the United Kingdom's 
"rebate" has recently been put into question in Bonn, especially 
by the Social-Democrats -- editor's note), pleading in favor a 
"fair distribution of the charges" which, she said, is a 
commandment of solidarity." Indirectly addressing France (which 
will not ratify the decision on the number of EP seats as long 
as Mr. Klepsch has not signed the lease for the new hemicycle in 
Strasbourg -- editor's note), she stressed the need for all 
member states to adopt the increase in the number of seats in 
time for the European elections. 
  Spanish Minister Mr. Solana was among those who stressed 
the importance of the European elections, saying that the 
European Parliament should make full use of the new competencies 
given it by the Maastricht Treaty. As for enlargement, he said 
that the southern countries should not be forgotten. This was 
also mentioned by Italy's Mr. Andreatta (who in particular 
mentioned Malta), and who moreover stressed that enlargement 
would pose an institutional problem, and spoke in favor of 
Greece's proposal of setting up a working party to prepare for 
1996. The minister, moreover, said that in the enlarged Union 
all farmers will have to be treated equally, whatever the region 
they came from or lived, and that thus the regulations over 
Mediterranean products would have to be renewed. Finally, he 
insisted on developing relations with the East, noting that, 
according to some calculations, only around 1 fifth of trading 
possibilities with these countries are currently being taken 
advantage of. French Minister Mr. Juppe said discussions must 
not get "bogged down" but that the prospects for future 
enlargement of the Union to East Europe must not lead to neglect 
of the south because "the European Union is also a European 
power." Regarding Algeria in particular, he said that if this 
country is not helped, the "domino effect" in the region will be 
"dreadful." Belgian minister Mr. Claes also mentioned the 
situation south of Europe, saying that European security is 
threatened in the South by fundamentalist threats and in the 
East by nationalism. Portuguese minister Mr. Barroso also 
insisted on relations between the Union and the southern 
Mediterranean countries and sub-Saharan Africa, stressing the 
importance of the negotiations with the ACP states to begin 
under the Greek Presidency for a partial review of the fourth 
Lome Convention. Irish minister Mr. Spring called for greater 
participation by the Twelve in the peace efforts in the Middle 
East (which prove, he said, that when there is a will for peace, 
seemingly insoluble disputes can be settled). Mr. Spring also 
recalled that Ireland has begun giving concrete effect to the 
positions set out in the Commission's White Paper, especially 
those concerning the reduction of wage costs. Vice-President 
Manuel Marin said that, for the European Commission, the timing 
of implementation of the White Paper is "of vital importance." 
The member states, which have developed an operational plan 
from the frame of reference set out by this document, must now 
move into action. Mr. Marin highlighted the Commission's will 
to meet the deadline for conclusion of the enlargement 
negotiations but warned that this would take "great efforts" by 
everyone, because "there are numerous obstacles and time is 
flying." The Greek presidency's priorities are the same as the 
Commission's in this period when it is important for the 
institutions to cooperate closely, said the Commissioner. 
  Regarding the finalization of the Uruguay Round, he said the 
Commission is "concerned about the difficulties that have arisen 
in the last few days." As far as external relations are 
concerned, Mr. Marin said the European Union must be able to 
"offer association" to the southern Mediterranean countries and 
underscored the need for a "comprehensive analysis" of relations 
with East European countries. 

