BFN 

  [Text] Amman, May 6 KYODO -- Jordanian Prime Minister and 
Foreign MInister al-Majali said in talks Thursday [5 May] with 
Japan's Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa that Jordan will 
cooperate with the Middle East peace process. Majali, meeting 
Kakizawa for an hour and a half in Amman, described the recent 
peaceful developments as a "new era" in the peace process, 
Japanese Foreign Ministry officials said. 
  Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin and Palestine 
Liberation 
Organization (PLO) leader Yasir 'Arafat on Wednesday signed a 
historic agreement on limited Palestinian self-rule for Gaza and 
Jericho. Majali said Jordan is taking the basic line that it 
will comprehensively negotiate with Israel over bilateral 
disputes including border and water feuds, the officials said. 
  The West Bank, including Jericho, had been under Jordan's 
jurisdiction, but was occupied by Israel in 1967 and Amman 
renounced its sovereignty there in 1988. 
  Majali reiterated Amman's support for Japan's bid to gain 
permanent membership in the United Nations Security Council, the 
officials said. 
  Kakizawa pledged to al-Majali that Japan will grant a 13.14 
billion yen loan to Jordan to help finance energy programs, 
after a lapse of three years since Tokyo granted a 700 million 
yen loan, they said. The Japanese minister exchang268460096 a 
memorandum with Jordanian Planning Minister Ziyad Fariz about 
Japan's grant in aid worth 400 million yen to help increase 
Jordan's food production, they said. 
  Kakizawa also visited Jordanian King Husayn, who said Jordan 
should negotiate with Israel over the West Bank in light of the 
signing of the self-rule accord, the officials said. Earlier in 
the day, Kakizawa visited the West Bank town of Jericho, a day 
after he attended the signing ceremony in Cairo of a historic 
agreement on limited Palestinian self-rule for Gaza and Jericho. 
He visited a local hospital in Jericho to which Japan has 
offered to supply medical equipment. Kakizawa is visiting 
Jordan during a tour of the Middle East which has already taken 
him to Egypt and Israel. 

