Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ana Ale; all company name expansions unknown] </F>
  [Text] Bridas, the oil company owned by the Bulgheroni 
family, has won two bids for the exploitation of oil and gas in 
the former Soviet Union and is negotiating a third contract to 
drill 1,000 wells in Siberia. Meanwhile, Tecpetrol, of the 
Techint group, is looking for new opportunities. The two 
companies do not want to lose reserves that are abundant and 
cheap, particularly because the geological risk is minimal. The 
purpose of venturing into the former USSR extends beyond those 
borders though. The undertaking will allow them to build bridges 
to the coveted European market. 
  Business is promising in those latitudes and some Argentine 
oil companies went there in search of good and cheap reserves. 
Tecpetrol of the Techint group and Bridas have dared to 
challenge the former USSR's geography already, but other 
companies are ready to follow suit. 
  Both oil companies know that the first blow is half the 
battle. And even though Tecpetrol and Bridas agree on the 
philosophy of exploring new area, only Bridas closed an 
agreement with what today is called the Community of Independent 
States, which is still ranked among the top world producers. 
  Tecpetrol was very close to signing a contract but preferred 
to wait for the political climate to clear up a little more. The 
company still has a foot inside because Siderca, which is a 
group member, maintains an office here for the sale of seamless 
tubes. 
  Bridas learned of the existence of the reserves in 1985 when 
the mission was considered only a possible destination. They had 
to wait for the collapse of the former Soviet Union to take the 
next step. The slogan was: abundant resources at a low 
geological risk. The priorities were gas and Europe, the market 
for the sale of the fuel that contaminates the least. 
  Two years later they studied the area where this large 
reserve was located. In 1990 they had the folder with the 
project ready and a red cross on the map: The deposit went 
through Turkmenistan, on the Caspian Sea, and Iran. Here they 
found all the right conditions: little exploratory risk, 
facilities to export, a stable government, absence of ethnic 
problems, and a need for capital and technology. 
  Turkmenistan, the world's third-largest gas producer, 
organized bids for both gas and oil fields with conditions 
according to international standards. Bridas won two biddings. 
  -- In Yashlar, they and their American partners signed an 
exploration and development contract in which Turkmenistan had a 
25 percent participation. The company found gas in the first 
well, and if the estimates prove right, they will find in the 
area a volume of gas equal to all Argentina's reserves. 
  -- In Keimir, the contract involves oil exploration and 
exploitation, also with foreign partners. Turkmenistan 
participates in the consortium with 50 percent of the profits 
and spending. Today they are extracting 1,800 cubic meters of 
oil per day, which is equivalent to the mean production of 200 
Argentine wells. They also found gas, but the deposit is not 
developed yet. 
  The company might add another field in Russia. In that 
country the company won a private price bidding to drill 1,000 
wells in a Siberian oil field. But the issue of taxes is still 
being negotiated. 
  The high taxes temporarily scared Tecpetrol people from the 
area. Marcelo Martinez Mosquera and Jorge Viero (formerly with 
Bridas) visited the territory and traveled up to the Arctic. 
They made seven visits to Kazakhstan in Central Asia, the second 
largest former Soviet Republic. They almost participated in a 
bid there, but at the last moment officials changed the 
conditions and added taxes. The result was that no one 
participated. 
  Tecpetrol thinks the high political risk must be compensated 
for by a lot of profit. Because the conditions are not right 
yet, they returned and decided to expand in Latin America 
instead. 
  Bridas continues to look toward Moscow and its surroundings. 
The next gamble will be to build a gigantic gas pipeline if an 
agreement can be closed with Turkmenistan to export gas. The 
pipeline would cross Iran, Turkey, and Bulgaria, a long enough 
span to permit the company to enter the European market with 
firm steps. 

