BFN 

  [Text] During their talks in Bonn yesterday, Prime Minister 
Benazir Bhutto and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl especially 
discussed international and regional issues of mutual concern as 
well as bilateral ties. After the talks, Pakistan's Foreign 
Secretary Najmuddin Sheikh, told newsmen that the talks between 
the two leaders were held in an extremely cordial atmosphere 
wherein there was complete understanding and unanimity of views. 
  The prime minister and the German chancellor expressed deep 
concern over the situation created in Bosnia-Herzegovina due to 
the aggression by the Serbs and demanded the lifting of the arms 
embargo on the Muslims to enable them to defend themselves. 
Chancellor Kohl briefed the Pakistani leader of his efforts, 
including his telephone talks with Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin and other world leaders, to halt the Serbian attacks on 
the Bosnian Muslims. Apprising the German Chancellor of the 
situation in occupied Kashmir, Benazir Bhutto said that, owing 
to the Indian atrocities, the occupied valley has become the 
Asian Bosnia. She said despite political apprehensions at home, 
she expressed readiness for foreign secretary-level talks with 
India, but, India vitiated the situation before the start of the 
dialogue. Pakistan had to take the Kashmir issue to the UN 
General Assembly and later to the UN Human Rights Commission in 
Geneva. She said whenever this issue is raised at international 
level, there is some reduction in Indian atrocities. Therefore, 
the international community should maintain its pressure on 
India to save the Kashmiris from the atrocities. Chancellor 
Kohl said Germany is fully aware of the Kashmir problem and has 
apprised the Indian Government of its concern over the 
atrocities and gross human rights violations in occupied 
Kashmir. He expressed the hope that a peaceful solution to the 
issue will be found at the earliest. During the discussion on 
bilateral issues, the prime minister made several proposals to 
enhance economic cooperation between Pakistan and Germany. The 
prime minister stressed the need for resuming German commodity 
assistance and credit facilities to developmental financial 
institutions in Pakistan. The German chancellor said his 
government will soon give a positive response to Pakistan. 
  Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said as long as the Kashmir 
issue remains unresolved, permanent peace cannot be established 
in South Asia. Answering queries after her address to a German 
organization on foreign policy in Bonn last night, she appealed 
to the international community, especially the Western 
countries, to raise their voices to prevent the gross human 
rights violation in occupied Kashmir and to exert pressure on 
India for a solution to the issue and fulfill its pledges to the 
international community to grant the right of self-determination 
to the Kashmiris. She made it clear that until a solution is 
found to the Kashmir dispute on the basis of the right to 
self-determination, the threat of proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and missiles will persist and defense expenditures will 
mount. She said Pakistan believes in a peaceful solution to the 
Kashmir dispute through dialogue and has begun secretary-level 
talks with India. She regretted that before and after the 
talks, Indian troops committed massacres in occupied Kashmir, 
particularly in Sopor and Kupwara. The prime minister also 
expressed regret that India did not pay attention to Pakistan's 
appeals for permission to human rights organizations and foreign 
diplomats to visit occupied Kashmir to investigate the situation 
there. When Pakistan brought the issue before the UN Human 
Rights Commission, India agreed to grant permission not only to 
the human rights organizations but to foreign diplomats as well. 
Referring to the presence of 600,000 Indian soldiers in 
occupied Kashmir, the prime minister said that, after the World 
War II, such a vast number of occupation forces could not be 
seen in any part of the world. Referring to the Indian 
allegations about the unrest created by Pakistan in occupied 
Kashmir, Benazir Bhutto said her country is ready for the 
deployment of UN troop contingents along the Line of Control for 
verification of the facts. She emphatically stated that the 
freedom struggle in occupied Kashmir was launched by the people 
themselves and Pakistan has always supported the right of 
self-determination of the people there and it cannot give up its 
support to the just struggle of the Kashmiris. On the nuclear 
issue, she said Pakistan is determined to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and despite a nuclear explosion 
by India, Pakistan has exercised extreme restraint. Pakistan has 
also agreed on several occasions to the U.S. proposal for talks 
on the issue. On Afghanistan, the prime minister said Pakistan 
sincerely wants the establishment of peace in this brotherly 
country. She made it clear that her country will never support 
any particular group. Pakistan, however, will continue its 
efforts to normalize the situation in Afghanistan. 
  In her address to the German organization on foreign policy, 
the prime minister said there is extensive scope for meaningful 
cooperation in South Asia. However, benefits could not be 
reaped due to the unfavorable situation created by the 
outstanding disputes between various countries. She said it is 
regrettable that India not only hinders a peaceful solution to 
the disputes with its neighbors, but increased the hardships of 
its small neighbors as well. 

