Language: <F P=105>Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Juan Manuel Pereyra; from the "At Noon" newscast] </F>
  [Text] There are more evident signs that the situation is 
going back to normal here in San Cristobal de las Casas. In 
this town, located in the higher area of Chiapas, the troops 
were withdrawn from the main square, but strict vigilance 
continues by the military police, pardon me, the municipal 
police. 
  Last night, after eight days in the dark, street lights were 
turned on. Traffic became normal since then. 
  At noon, the Cardenist National Reconstruction Party began 
its presidential campaign, in the main square, which shows that 
the situation is returning to normal. 
  Candidate Rafael Aguilar Talamante gave a speech expressing 
support for the people of Chiapas. He demanded that the 
struggle against the insurrection should not be used as a 
pretext to fight the true leaders of social struggle. 
  I also want to report that the Special Autonomous Commission 
-- which consists of Senator Eduardo Robledo, writer Heraclio 
Cepeda, and anthropologist Andres Fabrega--is visiting Palenque 
to meet with social organizations seeking channels of 
communications that can lead to a solution for the armed 
conflict being experienced in this region. 
  The commission members will arrive during the afternoon and 
will report on what they accomplished during the day. 
  I also want to inform that Manuel Camacho Solis, the peace 
commissioner appointed by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, 
is expected in Tuxtla Gutierrez at approximately 1400 and in San 
Cristobal between 1600 and 1700. We will find out about the 
details of his mission when he arrives here. There have been 
reports, however, about it through a news conference that 
Camacho Solis held in Mexico City. 
  To conclude, I must inform you that air patrolling near the 
higher Chiapas region by Mexican Air Force aircraft is constant 
to fight rebels and prevent them from reaching towns. 
  In the meantime, the garrison of the 7th Military Region in 
Rancho Nuevo is still harassed by the guerrillas who are 
executing sporadic attacks there. 

