BFN 

  [This is an updated version of an article of the same 
title published in the 31 March edition of the Arms Control 
Report.] 
Russia has signed a long-term lease with Kazakhstan for 
rights to the 
Baykonur Cosmodrome. However, the commander of Russia's 
Military-Space 
Forces is advocating development of a new cosmodrome at a former 
ICBM base 
on Russian territory. The new facility would use converted 
SS-19 missiles 
to orbit light payloads as well as a new Russian heavy 
booster. 
<H5>  Agreement Signed on Baykonur </H5>
  On 28 March Presidents Yeltsin and Nazarbayev signed a 
series 
of bilateral agreements in Moscow. Among the documents was a 
leasing arrangement for the Baykonur Cosmodrome arrived at after 
weeks of intense negotiations. Under its terms Russia will 
lease the cosmodrome from Kazakhstan for a 20-year period with 
an option for a ten-year renewal. Baykonur will be under 
Russian sovereignty and Russians working at the cosmodrome will 
be subject to Russian legal jurisdiction. Russia will also be 
permitted to station its Military-Space Forces at the cosmodrome 
to conduct space launch operations. The agreement also 
recognizes Russia's property rights to all cosmodrome facilities 
in place as of 31 August 1991 (TRUD 30 Mar). 
  Russia agreed to pay an annual leasing fee of $115 million 
(ITAR-TASS 28 Mar). At the exchange rate as of the signing 
date, the annual fee would be over R2OO billion. According to 
press reports the leasing fee was a compromise between the 
Russian offer of $80 million and the Kazakh demand for $150 
million (INTERFAX 28 Mar). Kazakhstan had reportedly offered a 
lease term of only three to five years while the original 
Russian position was for a thirty-year term. The Kazakhs' 
demand for $7 billion compensation for environmental damages 
caused by past comodrome operations was relegated to a special 
bilateral commission for discussion as a separate issue 
(INTERFAX 14 Mar, 20 Mar). 
  In a 1 April interview, Yuri Koptev, Director of the Russian 
Space Agency (RSA), stated that Russia's draft budget for 1994 
allocates R135 billion (about $82 million) for leasing of 
Baykonur (INTERFAX 1 Apr). According to Koptev, the $33 million 
shortfall in the $115 million due to Kazakhstan will be made up 
in the form of services. These will include Russian assistance 
to Kazakhstan in developing its national space program. For 
example, transmission capacities on Russian Gals satellites will 
be allocated to Kazakhstan for direct TV broadcasting. Koptev 
also announced that the cosmonaut crew to be launched to the Mir 
orbital station on 20 June will include an ethnic Kazakh. 
<H5>  Alternatives to Baykonur </H5>
  With the breakup of the Soviet Union the Baykonur Cosmodrome 
became the property of Kazakhstan. Basic questions concerning 
Russian rights to the facilities, the status of the Russian 
Military-Space units staffing Baykonur, and the financing of the 
cosmodrome and its associated city of Leninsk remained 
unresolved. Despite a May 1992 agreement on financing of the 
cosmodrome signed by Presidents Yeltsin and Nazarbayev, numerous 
media reports have indicated a sharp deterioration in conditions 
and losses of skilled personnel. Some commentators have raised 
the question of whether Baykonur can continue to operate if the 
situation did not improve. 
  Creation of a new space launch complex for military and 
civil 
use on Russian territory as a replacement for Baykonur has been 
under consideration. In May 1993 the Russian government was 
reportedly examining a proposal made by the high command of the 
Military-Space Forces together with the Russian Space Agency to 
create a new cosmodrome in Russia. Locations under 
consideration at that time included Krasnoyarsk Kray and the 
Kapustin Yar Missile Test Range (K0MMERSANT DAILY 22 May 93). 
In December 1993 a statute issued by the Russian Government and 
Council of Ministers set forth provisions for state support and 
maintenance of space activities in Russia (Statute No. 1282, 
dated 11 Dec 93, published in R0SSIYSKAYA GAZETA, 29 Dec 93). 
The statute set Russian autonomy in space operations as a basic 
strategic goal. Among its provisions was a directive to the 
Russian Ministry of Defense, the Russian Space Agency, and other 
national Ministries to draw up proposals for upgrading Russia's 
northern cosmodrome at Plesetsk and for construction of a new 
cosmodrome in the Russian Far East. 
  In February of this year media reports indicated that the 
city of Blagoveshchensk in Amur 0blast was being considered as a 
cosmodrome site. The First Deputy Director of the Russian Space 
Agency (RSA) Valeriy Alaverdov stated that the project was for 
the distant future and that Russia was doing everything possible 
to ensure that Baykonur remained operational (R0SSIYSKIYE VESTI 
10 Mar). However, General Vladimir Ivanov, commander of Russian 
Military-Space Forces, claimed that a Far East launch center 
would be operational by the year 2000 (INTERFAX 9 Mar). 
<H5>  Svobodnyy-18 ICBM Base </H5>
  In a speech in early March the head of the Amur 0blast 
administration claimed that the Russian government was seriously 
considering a launch facility at the city of Svobodnyy, located 
about 200 kilometers north of Blagoveshchensk, and urged 
President Yeltsin to issue a directive to proceed with 
construction at the site (IZVESTIYA 12 Mar). The site in 
question is the Svobodnyy-18 ICBM base. On 15 March, General 
Ivanov, headed a delegation of more than sixty military and 
civilian aerospace experts on a tour of the former Strategic 
Missile Forces base at Svobodnyy-18. Speaking to leaders of the 
Amur region, Ivanov claimed that the first test flights from the 
Svobodnyy site are planned for 1996 (INTERFAX 16 Mar). 
  Proponents of the plan claimed that use of missile silos and 
other facilities of the former Svobodnyy-18 ICBM base would make 
it possible to begin launch operations quickly and with 
relatively low costs for site development. Major-General 
Aleksandr Vinidiktov, the former commander of the Strategic 
Missile troops at Svobodnyy-18 and now designated as commander 
of the Svobodnyy Cosmodrome, claimed that virtually no 
government funding would be needed to begin space launch 
operations at the site (ITAR- TASS 18 Mar). According to this 
plan, silos, originally built for 55-11 ICBMs and now scheduled 
for destruction under the START-2 Treaty, could be modified for 
launching the "Rokot" space launch vehicle (SLV). The Rokot is 
one of several conversion projects involving modification of 
ICBMs for use as space launchers. "Rokot" is the designation 
for such a conversion of the SS-19 ICBM. Under this scenario, 
two silos would be used initially to launch light payloads with 
the Rokot SLV, which has been claimed to have a payload capacity 
of two metric tons to a 500 km orbit (K0MMERSANT DAILY 7 Apr 
93). Three additional silos would then be activated for Rokot 
launches and two launch pads for heavy SLVs would be constructed 
(ITAR-TASS 17 Mar 94). 
  Officials in the Russian government and the Russian Space 
Agency reacted negatively to the proposed development of 
Svobodnyy and emphasized that no official government approval 
has been given for such a project. According to Boris 
Ostroumov, Deputy General Director of the Russian Space Agency, 
any potential advantages of the Svobodnyy site would be more 
than offset by its remoteness from the primary research and 
production facilities of Russia's space infrastructure. In 
Ostroumov's formulation, construction of a major space launch 
site in the Far East would be "tantamount to building it out of 
diamonds" (IZVESTIYA 12 Mar). Given the restricted national 
space budget, the RSA argued for maintaining existing facilities 
and trying to reach an acommodation with Kazakhstan on Baykonur. 
  While Svobodnyy's location in eastern Siberia presents 
problems, its latitudinal position is a point in it favor. 
Lying somewhat further north than Baykonur (51 24 N versus 47 
50 N) it is situated in the southernmost region of Russian 
Federation territory, a basic consideration for launches to 
equatorial or low-inclination orbits. A further advantage of the 
location in the Russian Far East was said to be the possibility 
that such a facility could open the way for Russia to enter the 
developing market for space launch services in Southeast Asia 
(IZVESTIYA 12 Mar). 
  On 23 March Russian First Deputy Prime Minister Oleg 
Soskovets denied reports that construction had begun on a new 
cosmodrome in the Far East and stated that the matter was not 
under discussion in the government. He went on to say "We are 
unable to ensure the normal functioning of the available launch 
pads, not to mention building a new one." Soskovets' position 
was supported by Yuriy Semenov, head of NPO Energiya, who stated 
that Russia would not be able to retain the status of a space 
power if it lost the Baykonur Cosmodrome (ITAR-TASS World 
Service 23 Mar). Semenov described the current situation at 
Baykonur as "catastrophic" and claimed that the cosmodrome would 
cease operating unless remedial actions were started by April. 
<H5>  Angara-24 Heavy Launcher </H5>
  A replacement for the Baykonur Cosmodrome would have to 
include a capacity for launching heavy SLVs. Russia currently 
has no facilities for heavy launchers at its northern cosmodrome 
at Plesetsk. Launch facilities for the Zenit (SL-16), Proton 
(SL-12, -13), and Energiya (SL-17) boosters are available only 
at Baykonur and all manned flight missions are launched from 
there. Russian space launches supporting the Alpha 
international space station program would have to be conducted 
from Baykonur. 
  Commentators have referred to a new Russian heavy launcher, 
designated "Angara-24," as the SLV that would be launched from 
two pads to be built at the Svobodnyy facility. These are the 
first references to such a booster to appear in Russian media. 
However, in mid-1993 a French aerospace journal reported a 
Russian plan to consolidate its SLV inventory to only four types 
by the end of the century. The "Angara" was to be one of the 
four Russian SLVs. According to the French report, the Angara 
would be an "improved Zenit" that would be manufactured in 
Russia and replace the current Zenit produced in Ukraine 
(See FBIS PERSPECTIVES Vol 8 No 8, August 1993). 
  According to the current references the two-stage 
"Angara-24" 
will combine elements from both the Zenit and the Energiya-Buran 
systems as well as new design features. It will use relatively 
non-polluting kerosene and LOX-hydrogen propellants. The head 
of the Military-Space Forces press center claimed in an 
interview that the Angara would be more powerful than the Proton 
(Mayak Radio Network 26 Mar 94). The first stage will be 
designed to make a gliding return to the launch site and be 
reused. First flight tests are scheduled for 1998-1999 with 
operational launches from Svobodnyy to begin around 2000-2001 
(ITAR-TASS 16 Mar). The Angara is reported to be under 
development by NPO Energiya, the Khrunichev Scientific 
Production Center, and the Makeyev Design Bureau in Miass, 
Chelyabinsk oblast (SEGODNYA 24 Mar). 
<H5>  Continued Interest of Military </H5>
  In an interview given just before the announcement of the 
leasing agreement on Baykonur, Lt-Col Gorbunov of the Russian 
Military-Space Forces press center responded to a suggestion 
that the publicity devoted to building a new Russian cosmodrome 
in the Far East was a tactic to put pressure on the Kazakh side 
in the negotiations. He responded that politics was not 
involved, but rather the basic goal of Russia's guaranteed 
access to space, especially to launches to geostationary orbits, 
currently performed only from Baykonur (Radiostantsiya Ekho 
Moskvy 28 Mar). 
  Media commentaries appearing after the 28 March leasing 
agreement reflected a continuing divergence between civilian 
specialists and the command of the Military-Space Forces. At 
the end of March a Moscow press report claimed that work was 
proceeding on the Angara-24 heavy launcher project and that it 
will be launched from a new space center at Svobodnyy starting 
in 2000 or 2001 (MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA 31 Mar). RSA director 
Koptev stated that all of Russia's major space programs, 
including commercial launches of Western satellites as well as 
the international space station project, are planned for 
launches from the Baykonur Cosmodrome (Ostankino Television 
First Channel Network 1 Apr). On the issue of a new launch 
facility at Svobodnyy, Koptev announced officially that no 
decision has been taken by the Russian government to build an 
eastern cosmodrome. He stated that the government has directed 
only that a feasibility study of such a project be carried out 
and that the findings be reported this year. 
  Boris Ostroumov, RSA Deputy Director, repeated his previous 
criticism of the Far East cosmodrome plan on grounds of 
excessive costs and remoteness from space production centers. 
He also claimed that discussing such a plan at present would 
have a disrupting effect while the leasing agreement is being 
considered for ratification (ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 1 Apr). Igor 
Barmin, chief designer at the Design Bureau of General Machine 
Building, also criticized the plan on grounds of high 
development costs, but agreed in principle that Russia should 
have its own low-latitude launch site for civil and military 
programs. 
  At the beginning of April a press agency report claimed that 
the viewpoint of the command of Russia's Military-Space Forces 
was different from that of the Russian government on the issue 
of the Svobodnyy cosmodrome. According to unnamed sources at 
the Space Forces' press Center, General Ivanov has directed the 
units at Svobodnyy to proceed with preparations for launching 
light payloads with Rokot boosters starting in 1996 (ITAR-TASS 1 
Apr). 

