Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "US economic sabre-rattling in Asia to force </F>
trade concessions"] 
  [Text] The recent objection raised by the European Union on 
the methods adopted by the United States in its efforts to get 
into Asian markets by force represents the "stick and carrot" 
approach, which is counter to the GATT agreements, should serve 
as an eye-opener to the leaders of this region. 
  In the US endeavor to penetrate the markets of China, 
Indonesia, Japan and Thailand, talking to them as individual 
countries, exploiting its adept diplomacy for its own survival, 
exposes the US designs of not willing to come to terms with a 
collective Asian forum. 
  The objections raised by the United States during the time 
of 
President Bush and the diplomatic shuttle across Asian capitals 
by the then Secretary of State James Baker against the East Asia 
Economic Group proposed by Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir, is 
now becoming clearer by their latest efforts now undertaken by 
incumbent Warren Christopher to keep other East Asian countries 
from joining hands with ASEAN and speak out as a single voice. 
  It is incumbent upon the leaders of this region, and they 
owe 
it to the generations yet unborn, to play a productive role in 
the making of the new international economic order with a 
collective consensus and to refuse to play into American hands. 
  This is a time for the most creative ASEAN initiatives for a 
productive role and continued progress. Our joint collaboration 
should extend beyond the ASEAN and the ASEAN sub-region, beyond 
Southeast Asia, beyond East Asia and even beyond the 
Asia-Pacific region. 
  ASEAN must of course be aware of its own limited weight in 
the international arena. Japan -- the Asian economic giant -- 
on the other hand, should realize and do some soul searching 
concerning her own position, both in the economic and political 
areas in the region is weakened, unless Japan inclines towards 
ASEAN and other Asian countries in her own interest. 
  Whatever the political beliefs in China, the "one country 
with two policies" has to be taken seriously. China has been 
opening up her economy to world trade and investments for the 
past decade and has fairly successfully juxtaposed a free market 
system with a centrally-planned economy. 
  There is no doubt that China today is economically healthier 
than the China of the Cultural Revolution and Maoism. ASEAN and 
other Asian states cannot ignore China in any "Asian" regional 
economic forum of the future apart from APEC [Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation]. ASEAN leaders, from its inception in 
1967, have reviewed progress achieved and so plan new directions 
for the future. Unfortunately the record of achievements, 
particularly in the field of economic cooperation, has been 
dismal. 
  The political and economic scenario of the world under ASEAN 
which existed in the 70s and 80s has been radically transformed. 
The socialist command economics of Eastern Europe have collapsed 
and are being replaced by a free market system. The Soviet 
Union is undergoing a political and economic upheaval of 
unprecedented proportions which will move it away from the rigid 
centrally-planned economies of the past to a more 
market-oriented system. We witness now the early failures of 
the free market and democracy in the former Communist countries. 
Indeed their situation now is worse than when their economies 
were centrally planned. 
  On the other hand, there are a host of problems for the 
world 
arising out of the structural weakness on the world's biggest 
economy and the biggest debtor nation -- the United States. We 
now live in a world where the developing countries are deprived 
of the past leverage of "defection to the other side". There is 
the sole American giant, with immense problems at home and no 
longer driven by the imperatives of the Cold War, forcing its 
way into the growing Asian economies with a carrot and stick, 
"look our way or else" threat. 
  We see a situation today of a dramatic rise in the 
political, 
diplomatic and military clout on the US and a severe erosion in 
its economic position. The increased pressures will be 
political and social as well as economic and deviation from the 
principles of democracy towards total "plutocracy", which sees 
the driving force of the US establishment gearing an economic 
war where the growth is -- in Asia. 

