BFN 

  [Text] Thailand has rejected China's proposal to sell 
electricity that would be generated from seven large-scale 
hydroelectric projects to be built in southern China, opposite 
the Kingdom's northern region. 
  Senior officials of the Yunnan power utilities made the 
proposal to the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand 
(EGAT) which rejected it out of hand because the Thai body views 
the undertaking as not economically viable. 
  EGAT's rejection could restrict the southern Chinese 
authorities' ambitious plan to develop hydroelectric plants 
along the Manwan River (Lan Xan in Thai) which offers a massive 
generating potential of 19,000 megawatts (MW). 
  Yunnan wants to establish Thailand as a major market for its 
electricity exports, aside from supplying the power from the 
proposed schemes to Canton [as published], the other 
economically vibrant southern area. It initially offered to 
supply 500 MW to EGAT. 
  It also aborted the effort by a group of Thai companies 
which 
had been seeking to play a key part in the investment and 
development of those hydroelectric schemes to meet Thailand's 
explosive growth in electricity demand, now growing at 10-12 
percent a year. 
  Senior EGAT officials said their rejection was based on two 
reasons. First, there was sufficient indigenous power supplies 
in northern Thailand generated by EGAT's huge lignite-fired Mae 
Moh power complex and therefore, supplies from China would be 
redundant. 
  Secondly, importing and transmitting the Chinese electricity 
to central Thailand would be limited by prohibitive costs. The 
length of the transmission line involved would be some 1,000 km, 
they said. 
  As far as the importation of electricity from neighbouring 
countries is concerned, EGAT appears to give a higher priority 
on importing power from Laos and much preparation is underway in 
this direction. 
  Last June, the Thai government through EGAT had signed a 
memorandum of understanding with the Lao government for 
Vientiane to supply up to 1,500 MW of electricity to the Kingdom 
by the turn of the century. 
  Laos has recently signed a memorandum of understanding with 
an international consortium for it to develop a major 
hydroelectric project in Laos as part of the June memorandum. 
  The consortium will invest US$1 billion to develop the Nam 
Thuen T1 hydroelectric plant with a generating capacity of 600 
MW to be entirely exported to Thailand under terms which have 
vet to be agreed upon. 

