Cocaine   Smugglers 

<F P=102> 94WD0342A Castries CRUSADER in English 26 Feb 94 p 13 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0342A </F>
<F P=104>  Castries CRUSADER </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
CSO 

  [Text] Piracy and drug trafficking pose a growing threat to 
tourists and yachtsmen who once regarded the Caribbean waters as 
a place to get away from it all, say American and European 
officials who monitor the area. 
  Residents of the twin-island Caribbean nation of Antigua and 
Barbuda, visited by thousands of British tourists every year, 
are shocked by the death of two English sailors and an American 
couple, who were found killed three weeks ago and suspect that 
drug traffickers may have been involved. Scotland Yard 
detectives have not discovered the motive for the killings. 
  Drug-running routes criss-cross the Caribbean as the 
traffickers shift their operations and adapt their modes of 
transport in a battle to outwit the authorities. "It's crazy. As 
soon as we are successful in one area they move elsewhere," an 
anti-drug official said. 
  The eastern Caribbean islands of Antigua, Anguilla and St. 
Martin have in recent years become a "preferred area" for 
cocaine smugglers on routes from Colombia to America and Europe, 
said William Mitchell, the American Drug Enforcement 
Administration chief in Puerto Rico. Last year his agency broke 
up a drug operation involving Colombian cocaine which was "air 
dropped" off the coast of Antigua in waterproof "bales." In a 
series of raids, agents seized a tonne of cocaine and arrested 
25 suspects. 
  The murders of four people on a luxury yacht have 
tarnished the image of a carefree holiday destination. Cocaine 
gangs are using the area as a transit zone for the United States 
and European markets. 
  Traffickers normally load the cocaine into waiting "stealth 
boats"--fast low-riding craft that avoid radar detection--and 
carry the drugs to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic from 
where they are taken to America. "We are seeing more and more 
cocaine air-dropped from small planes," said Elliott Richardson, 
the Anguilla police commissioner. "Sometimes our local fishermen 
pick it out of the sea and bring it to us." 
  Drugs are also transported through the area to Britain. One 
man working for an Antigua-based drug smuggler was recently 
arrested as he entered the UK with 66 lbs of cocaine after he 
had carried it by plane from St. Martin to Paris, and on to 
Dover. In November 1992 more than a tonne of cocaine was seized 
on a ship moored on the Thames which has sailed from the Dutch 
island of Aruba off the coast of Venezuela. 
  Drug-running has also increased in the western Caribbean. 
Last year a record two tonnes of marijuana was seized in the 
British Cayman Islands, according to Trevor Cutts, the drugs 
squad superintendent. He said that drugs arrive in the islands 
from Honduras and Jamaica and are transported in smaller loads 
to Florida. He said: "It's like a giant warehouse for the United 
States." He explained that an American naval blockade of Haiti, 
designed to enforce an international embargo and prevent an 
exodus of boat people, may be forcing more drugs towards the 
Caymans, due to extra patrols of U.S. Coast Guard and navy 
vessels off the Haitian coast. Piracy of boats in the Caribbean 
is an added anxiety of sailors. "Many carry guns because of the 
fear of piracy," Mr. Mitchell said. "There's still a certain 
amount of piracy. I'm not talking about Jolly Roger, and the 
patch over the eye. It's almost like carjacking. They don't take 
your car or your boat, but they take everything of value." 
  Local businessmen are worried that piracy and drug 
trafficking could hurt the Caribbean tourism industry, which 
accounts for a higher percentage of national income than in any 
other region of the world. In Antigua there are fears that the 
murders might interfere with the island's sailing regatta in 
April, the Caribbean's top racing event which attracts some of 
the world's finest yachts. 

