BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 13 Apr (PL) -- The availability of electric 
generation systems in Cuba currently averages 50 percent of 
capacity and is not meeting the nation's demand for this vital 
energy source because a large number of plants are undergoing 
maintenance or repairs. 
  GRANMA newspaper today says that, under normal conditions, 
the island's generation capacity is 70 percent -- a level 
considered normal at the international level -- because no 
system operates full-time given the time needed for maintenance 
and the number of breakdowns. 
  The newspaper stresses that the country, despite its 
monetary 
limitations, already has the necessary funds and has already 
purchased spare parts and other materials to work on repairing 
the system. 
  The newspaper states that the demand for electricity 
increased significantly at different times during the day in the 
first quarter of 1994, compared with the previous quarter. This 
was attributed to many causes, particularly the use of electric 
stoves that are not in the best of operating conditions. 
  The newspaper stresses the importance of having national 
crude oil, which guarantees about 30 percent of electric power 
generation, particularly at the Maximo Gomez thermoelectric 
plant in Mariel and the Santa Cruz del Norte plant, both in 
Havana Province; the Rente plant in Santiago de Cuba Province; 
and the Jose Marti plant in Matanzas Province. 
  In addition, electric union specialists note that most of 
Cuba's plants came from the former Soviet Union and 
Czechoslovakia, and no spare parts have been received for this 
equipment since 1990. 
  Cuba has been able to maintain a certain response level to 
deal with unexpected breakdowns and scheduled maintenance. 
Nevertheless, it was reported that now 570 megawatts of the 
nation's production capability are affected by repairs to the 
plants, 821 megawatts are affected by breakdowns, and 372 
megawatts are affected by other other limitations. 
  Extended outages will begin to decrease throughout the 
country as soon as maintenance and other work concludes at the 
generating facilities, according to the source. 

