Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "U.S. Formula on Kashmir"] </F>
  [Text] The JANG has been informed through its Lahore 
correspondent that Pakistan and India have agreed on the 
three-point formula that the United States proposed on Kashmir. 
According to this formula both countries will recall their armed 
forces from Siachen in the first phase and from Azad Kashmir and 
occupied Kashmir in the second phase. In the third phase, an 
interim government in Jammu-Kashmir will be established to hold 
a plebiscite. According to high-level U.S. sources, the United 
States wants to implement this plan before September 1994, and 
Pakistan and India will reduce their defense expenditures after 
it. 
  Ostensibly, this U.S. formula appears to be harmless and 
promising. However, it is being kept a secret as to who in 
Pakistan agreed to this formula. If the present government has 
agreed to it, then who gave it the right to secretly and quietly 
make an agreement over this extremely important national issue? 
The Kashmir issue is unlike electing a party chairperson where 
they call a meeting of the executive committee and make a 
decision. This issue involves not only the Pakistani people but 
also the question of the life and death of 10 million Kashmiris. 
At present, we are not concerned with the formula itself. The 
question is why were the Pakistani people and the Kashmiris not 
taken into confidence over it? It is a proven fact that any 
project done stealthily always has some flaws in it. We already 
have found problems with this formula. According to our 
information, this formula was not created in one day; the U.S. 
representative has been coming and going here for it. Deputy 
Secretary of State Clifton Wharton and Assistant Secretary for 
South Asia Robin Raphael played very important roles in its 
formation. They had the Indian Foreign Secretary J.N. Dixit come 
to Washington in August 1993 to inform him about this formula. 
Later, General Hoover, an important American official, had 
informed the Pakistani caretaker government about this formula. 
It was decided that this formula would be implemented after the 
"elected" government in Pakistan was established. As soon as 
this "elected government" was established, Robin Raphael arrived 
in Pakistan and, after settling all the details, started moving 
things around to pave way for its implementation. Muyeen Qureshi 
was asked to present himself at the U.S. behest and details were 
settled with his help. However, he did not open his mouth for 
three months, and decided with the United States that the plan 
will be carried out when the elected government is in office. 
  Madam Rafael arrived here with the formula a few days before 
the new government took over. If this is true then why did the 
elected government not present it to the elected National 
Assembly? What was the reason for keeping quiet about it? There 
is no doubt that something is wrong? 
  As for the formula itself, its third phase especially calls 
for some attention. According to it, Jammu-Kashmir will either 
be under UN custody or India and Pakistan will find a way for 
joint administration. An interim government with India and 
Pakistan's agreement and Kashmiri leaders' involvement will be 
established in Kashmir. This interim government will hold a 
plebiscite within a short period. Obviously, Azad Kashmir is 
included in this formula. A third option will be included in the 
plebiscite. As for the question of placing the whole of Kashmir 
under the United Nations supervision, we have stated in these 
columns in the past that this idea was also presented during 
Nawaz Sharif's government. According to one source, the former 
prime minister had agreed to this formula. He had mentioned 
support for the third option himself after it. This is not a new 
idea. However, the most dangerous aspect of this formula is 
putting Kashmir under the United Nations for a long period. We 
can easily imagine what would happen during that time. After it, 
the possibility of the third option will become stronger. 
Perhaps, this is the real formula and India would have agreed to 
it. It would be safer this way. Anyhow, whatever the issue is, 
it must be presented in the National Assembly for open 
discussions. It is difficult to eat rice pudding if you cook it 
quietly. 

