BFN 

  [Text] Damascus (SANA) -- Comrade Dr. Sylayman Qaddah, 
assistant regional secretary of the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party, 
yesterday opened the meetings of the comrade secretaries of the 
party branches and governors. The opening session was attended 
by 'Abdallah al-Ahmar, assistant secretary general of the party; 
comrade 'Abd-al-Qadir Qaddurah, speaker of the People's 
Assembly; Prime Minister Mahmud al-Zu'bi; comrade members of the 
party Regional Command; deputy prime minister for services 
affairs; comrade ministers; presidents of popular organizations, 
trade unions, and professional organizations; presidents of 
universities; and directors of media institutions. 
  Following the official opening of the meeting, the 
participants observed one minute of silence in honor of the late 
national hero Staff Major Engineer Paratrooper Basil al-Asad. 
The comrade assistant regional secretary also conveyed the 
affection and appreciation of the party secretary general leader 
struggler President Hafiz al-Asad. 
  The comrade participants then began discussing the items on 
the agenda. The comrade secretaries of the party branches and 
governors presented a detailed review of the organizational, 
economic, and services conditions and the working circumstances 
of the Progressive National Front branches in the governorates, 
as well as the stages that have been reached in carrying out 
work plans in the various fields. They also assessed the level 
of production and administrative performances and made their 
future predictions concerning all aspects of life with the view 
to developing work, improving performance, and increasing 
production. 
  The discussions of the comrade participants underscored the 
high standard of performance in providing services and all 
requirements, solving citizens' daily problems, entrenching the 
solid national unity, and reinforcing the security and stability 
enjoyed by Syria under the historic leadership of the comrade 
party secretary general and president of the republic. 
  The comrade secretaries of party branches and governors 
continued their meetings yesterday evening under the 
chairmanship of comrade Dr. Sulayman Qaddah and the presence of 
comrade 'Abd-al-Qadir Qaddurah; Prime Minister Mahmud al-Zu'bi; 
Regional Command members; the deputy prime minister for services 
affairs; some comrade ministers; the chairman of the party 
Control and Inspection Committee; deputy heads of party offices; 
presidents of popular organizations, trade unions, and 
professional organizations; presidents of universities; and 
directors of media institutions. 
  The comrade secretaries of the party branches and governors 
discussed the items on the agenda and made their comments on 
organizational, economic, and services issues as well as on the 
problems and difficulties facing the progress of work. 

