Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Macedonia for European Option"] </F>
  [Text] "The Balkans' European integration is a key factor 
for the peace and stability, not only of the region, but of 
entire Europe, as well. No attempts for forced changes of 
borders and legalization of methods of ethnic cleansing must be 
allowed," President Gligorov stated during this year's Third 
European Dialogue Conference, speaking on the subject "The Road 
to Europe -- Too Many Conflicts." The conference was attended 
by Germany's top level scientists and politicians and a part of 
its diplomatic corps. Gligorov especially stressed the necessity 
of technical, financial, and other forms of aid for countries in 
transition. For developed Europe, this is a safest investment 
in a social peace and democracy on the continent. Macedonia's 
long-lasting determination is a process of European integration 
of the Balkans, and its place in it. That is why, Gligorov 
added, Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- 
FYROM] insists on neighborly relations, cooperation, and 
inviolability of present borders of all Balkan countries. With 
Greece, we want to go into the future, and not some 2,000 years 
in the past, President Gligorov said. The one-sided embargo of 
this country is a threat to the stability in the region and 
worsens the social and economic situation in Macedonia, Gligorov 
ended. 
  Slovenian President Milan Kucan was also present at the 
conference, which was led by Bundestag's President Mrs. Rita 
Suessmuth. Mr. Kucan, who also pointed out his country's 
determination for an European option, answered participants' 
questions together with Mr. Gligorov. The Greek-Macedonian 
relations were in the focus of interest. Answering the 
questions Gligorov said: "The problem is irrational and of an 
emotional nature. The Balkan is too preoccupied with its 
history. The Republic of Macedonia has no territorial 
aspirations. It is ready to continue the dialogue with Greece, 
but without any ultimatums, accompanied by embargoes." 
President Gligorov requested that EU puts pressure on its 
member Greece, which is trying to solve problems through 
one-sided and illegal acts. 
  During his meeting with President Kucan, Mr. Gligorov 
discussed bilateral issues and the problems in the region. 
  Yesterday afternoon, President Gligorov was received by 
Germany's President Richard von Weiszecker. Among other things, 
they also discussed the dispute with Greece. The German 
president was interested in a way his country could help 
Macedonia to overcome this problem, emphasizing the Greek 
embargo is completely unacceptable. 
  President Gligorov also visited the Macedonian Embassy in 
Bonn. 

