BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Kang Yong-chin from Bangkok on the </F>
news conference by Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu held in the VIP 
room at Bangkok's Don Muang airport on 17 May] 
  [Text] [Reporter] Is there any change in the situation of 
the North Korean nuclear problem? 
  [Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu] Although there were some 
hardline remarks, including those of U.S. congressional leaders 
and Defense Secretary Perry, there is no noticeable change in 
the situation. 
  The International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] inspection 
team, which entered North Korea on 17 May, will pay the greatest 
attention to examining the degree of progress in the replacing 
of fuel rods in the five-megawatt atomic reactor, which North 
Korea announced has already begun. In the event that the 
inspection team decides that the replacement of fuel rods has 
progressed, exceeding the dangerous level designated by the 
IAEA, it will suspend inspections and leave North Korea. It is 
the right of IAEA to decide this, and both the ROK and the 
United States will respect its decision. It is not an 
appropriate act for North Korea to have independently conducted 
the replacement of fuel rods without IAEA presence. However, if 
North Korea selected fuel rod samples of its own accord and is 
keeping them, and if there is a way for measuring them 
afterwards, a third round of U.S.-North Korea talks may be held. 
  The additional inspection of the radiochemical experimental 
power station in Yongbyon demanded by the UN Security Council 
should also be conducted. It seems difficult that the third 
round of U.S.-North Korea talks will be held late this month. 
The talks could be possibly held early next month. 
  [Reporter] There are reports that the United States will 
push for hardline measures against North Korea, including 
sanctions through the UN Security Council, prompted by remarks 
by U.S. congressional leaders. What is your opinion? 
  [Han] I understand that they did not mean immediate 
sanctions. Their intention is that sanctions should be imposed 
when the IAEA inspection team's report indicates the crossing of 
the dangerous level. Secretary Perry's remarks that North Korea 
came to possess used nuclear fuel that would enable it to 
produce four to five nuclear weapons means that this would be 
true when the replacement of fuel rods, which is ongoing 
presently, is totally completed. 
  [Reporter] Yun Ho-chin, councilor in the North Korean 
mission in Vienna, said that the replacement of fuel rods 
already began a month ago, and that North Korea is now taking 
out fuel rods. 
  [Han] The beginning of the replacement means that the 
replacement started from the moment of the suspension of 
operation. Therefore, whether fuel rods were actually taken out, 
and how many rods were taken out will be decided only after the 
IAEA inspection team submits the report. 
  [Reporter] More than half of all questions raised during 
the regular briefing by the U.S. State Department in the morning 
of 16 May were related to the North Korean nuclear problem. 
Therefore, it seems that this issue is now in an extremely 
important point. What is your opinion? 
  [Han] That is quite natural. The United States repeatedly 
warned in the past that if it decides that North Korea has 
advanced the replacement of fuel rods to a considerable extent, 
it will suspend efforts for solution through dialogue. Thus, 
the situation in which North Korea-U.S. dialogue was suspended, 
means the beginning of discussions of sanctions through the UN 
Security Council. 
  [Reporter] In the event that the UN Security Council begins 
discussion for sanctions, what is the future prospect of the 
situation? 
  [Han] The replacement of fuel rods is quite different from 
what was an issue in the past. The additional inspection should 
be conducted because North Korea "failed to do what it should 
do," and the replacement of fuel rods presents a serious problem 
because North Korea "is doing what it should not do." In the 
event that North Korea goes beyond the line, which it should not 
cross, the atmosphere in the United Nations will change. As a 
result, I believe, China will not show a negative attitude 
toward sanctions against North Korea. 
  [Reporter] What is the standard to decide the level which 
North Korea should not go beyond in replacing fuel rods? 
  [Han] The minimum work in the activities that the IAEA 
should perform is to carry to accomplishment the three 
principles of selecting, storing, and measuring the samples of 
fuel rods. This work is intended to find out past nuclear 
activities. However, the situation, in which one cannot decide 
what work North Korea carried out with the nuclear rods it took 
out, is indeed even more serious. 
  [Reporter] Is there any possibility of holding a 
working-level contact between North Korea and the United States 
in order to convey concerns of the international community to 
North Korea even before IAEA forwards the report on the result 
of its inspections? 
  [Han] If the inspection team leaves North Korea, for 
instance, tomorrow, a working-level contact will not likely be 
held. It is not likely that a contact will be held before the 
inspection team forwards the report on its inspection results. 

