BFN 

  [Text] The situation in the city of Kuito has changed from 
critical to tragic. In the military field, there has not been a 
significant alteration over the past 24 hours. Jonas Savimbi's 
soldiers are still shelling the city, the civilians are still 
dying as a result of war and hunger, and people have not been 
buried in the graveyards for a long time. Our correspondent 
reports from the area: 
  [Begin unidentified correspondent recording] The city has 
once again been violently shaken by B-30 and other guns of 
various calibers belonging to the National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola [UNITA] rebels. Although the shelling is 
less intense than in the first days of the clashes, between 
yesterday and today more than 10 civilians were killed and 18 
others seriously wounded. Reliable sources of the Angolan Armed 
Forces [FAA] Operation Command yesterday told our newsdesk that 
UNITA rebels are once again preparing to take over the city of 
Kuito. Second Commander Lucume, however, has said the FAA is 
following closely the Black Cockerel's actions so as to respond 
adequately should such an attempt take place. So many people 
have been killed in Kuito that there is almost no place to bury 
the dead. For instance, one of the warehouses that served as a 
cemetery over the past few days has no more place for graves. 
The city of Kuito is facing a tragic situation, with residents 
being killed by war and famine. [end recording] 
  On the battlefront, the government forces are still 
inflicting heavy losses on Black Cockerel soldiers. A source 
from the FAA General Staff says that government forces have 
retaken Mupa and Cuvelai in Cunene Province, and Zela commune in 
Bengo Province. Meanwhile, JORNAL DE ANGOLA quotes the same 
source as saying that in Malanje Province, UNITA guerrillas are 
laying mines over roads leading to farms, particularly on the 
Quessua Road of the city of Malanje. 
  About 700 guerrillas of N'Zita Tiago's Front for the 
Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave-Armed Forces of Cabinda, and 
the Renewed Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave of 
(Jose Pimbursio) surrendered to government authorities in 
Cabinda Province. This was revealed yesterday by Cabinda 
Provincial Governor Augusto da Silva Tomas. Tomas said the 
armed operations carried out by N'Zita Tiago's armed faction in 
the north of Cabinda will not affect the current process for 
future talks on the Cabinda conflict. 

