BFN 

  [Excerpts] Geneva, April 27 (AFP) -- The Russian and 
French foreign ministers Wednesday called for a rapid 
ministerial meeting to examine a new international peace effort 
on Bosnia, and renewed their calls for a summit on the conflict. 
Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev and his French 
counterpart Alain Juppe spoke after meeting at the Russian 
embassy here as part of the new four-sided contact group formed 
in London Monday [25 April] to coordinate policy to end the war 
in Bosnia- Hercegovina. 
  The two ministers said the "ministerial meeting should be 
held as quickly as possible" after the contact group submits its 
report on Bosnia, which they said was due a week from now. The 
contact group comprises representatives of the United States, 
Russia, the European Union and the United Nations. 
  "We must not let this opportunity go by. We have agreed that 
the contact group has one week to submit its report which is to 
be examined as quickly as possible during a ministerial 
meeting," Kozyrev said. 
  "We must act quickly, we must step up pressure to hold this 
ministerial meeting and a summit that Russia and France have 
called for," said Juppe at a joint press conference. 
  U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who met here 
with 
Kozyrev on Tuesday, said afterwards that members of the contact 
group would be in Sarajevo on Thursday and Friday to meet with 
Moslem and Serb officials on resurrecting peace talks. 
  Juppe and Kozyrev -- who heads on to Bonn Thursday for talks 
with German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel -- said Wednesday they 
felt a European-brokered peace plan for Bosnia was still valid. 
But they said that if the belligerents could not agree on how 
to divide Bosnia, the contact group would present "its own 
proposal" for the country's division. [passage omitted] 
  Christopher and Kozyrev had stressed after their meeting 
that 
Washington and Moscow were pursuing joint aims in Bosnia and 
shared the view that the trouble there cannot be solved 
militarily. [passage omitted] 
  Russia has been fiercely critical of any use of NATO air 
strikes in Bosnia, but has conceded that from now on such 
"extreme measures" would be justifiable for major problems. It 
has insisted however on the necessity a political solution to 
the conflict. 
  Kozyrev told the press conference Wednesday that the use of 
force "depends on concrete situations." "When the fighters 
transgress international norms by shelling hospitals and 
villages," it would be justified, the Russian minister said. 
[passage omitted] 

