BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ellen Tordesillas: "Cooperation Not </F>
Confrontation] 
  [Text] One of the topics to be discussed in the third 
national security meeting under the Ramos administration on 
Thursday is the president's proposal to demilitarize the South 
China Sea made during his visit to Vietnam two weeks ago. 
  The president's Spratly initiative has activated the South 
China Sea problem in a positive way. From merely a pledge of 
all claimants to solve the conflict in a peaceful manner, the 
president challenged all claimant estates and other Southeast 
Asian nations to jointly study the possible demilitarization of 
the area and a freeze on all destabilizing activities related to 
the Spratlys conflict. 
  Although all claimant countries have been a model of 
rationality, at the back of everybody's mind is the fear that 
something might spark a violent confrontation that will make the 
Spratlys the "flashpoint" that it has been described by the 
region's military and political analysts. 
  Of the 104 islands in the Spratlys covering a stretch of 
some 
1,000 kilometers, 45 are occupied by the claimants' armed 
forces. Vietnam occupies 25, China eight ; Philippines eight; 
Malaysia three, and Taiwan, one (Itu Aba, the largest island and 
confirmed to contain all deposits). 
  The oil-rich, tiny kingdom of Brunei is the only claimant 
that does not maintain a military presence in the Spratlys 
because the island it is claiming, the Luisa Reef, is nearly 
completely submerged at high tide. 
  Vietnam, which knows more than anybody else the destructive 
effect of engaging in hostilities with other countries, has 
responded positively to the proposal of President Ramos. 
  China, whom everybody is wary about because of reports of 
its 
military buildup in the area, merely reiterated its line to the 
effect that although Chinese sovereignty over the whole South 
China Sea is a fact and not a matter of negotiations, they are 
willing to talk about joint projects. 
  The question in many people's mind is: in case of 
hostilities 
in the Spratlys, will the self-proclaimed policeman of the 
world, the United States, come in? 
  Vietnamese officials said there's very little at stake for 
the United States in Southeast Asia for the United States to 
warrant its involvement in hostilities in South China Sea. 
  Philippine officials, however, think otherwise. 
  A paper presented in 1990 by Jorge R. Coquia, former legal 
adviser of the Department of Foreign Affairs, in the first 
workshop in the management of conflict in the South China Sea 
held in Bali, pointed out: "In the case of the United States, 
the South China Sea is one of the four alternate eastbound 
routes used by tankers sailing for the West Coast from the U.S. 
from the Persian Gulf. [as published] The South China Sea region 
is the nexus for energy material transportation between the 
Middle East and East Asia and the United States. More than 90 
per cent of Japan's oil imports move through this region as does 
most of the oil supply of the Republic of Korea." 
  The Coquia paper further said: "A break in the subtle chain 
of some two hundred tankers en route would mean a fatal clot in 
Japan's "life blood." The oil embargo of 1973-1974 revealed 
Japan's vulnerability and its dependence on the lanes in the 
South China Sea." 
  Despite categorical statements from U.S. officials that 
conflict in the Spratlys is not covered by the Mutual Defense 
Treaty (MDT) which binds both parties to come to each other's 
help in case of an armed attack in any of the areas of either 
party, an NSC [National Security Council] official believes that 
the United States can be enticed to get involved if its 
interests in the region is threatened. 
  That's why, the official said, it is best to let the MDT 
remain ambiguous as far as U.S. commitment to the defense of the 
Philippines is concerned. 
  He said ambiguity gives room for "creative imagination." 
  The official said the MDT could provide the United States an 
excuse to intervene militarily in a South China Sea conflict, in 
case the China threat becomes real. 
  The official also said unlike during the Gulf War when the 
United States had to get U.N. approval to intervene in the 
Iraq-Kuwait conflict, the U.S. can invoke the MDT to intervene 
in a Spratly hostilities. 
  But that is one of the extreme scenarios. The more 
attractive one is the president's call for demilitarization and 
freeze to all destabilizing activities activists in the area 
with the end in view of transforming the South China Sea "from 
the waters of contention to an area of cooperation." 

