Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Central People's Broadcasting Station reporter Fu Li </F>
(0265 4539) and XINHUA reporter Luo Yuwen (5012 3768 2429)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 11 Jan (XINHUA) -- Speaking at an all-Army 
literary and art work conference today, Yu Yongbo, member of the 
Central Military Commission [CMC] and director of the People's 
Liberation Army [PLA] General Political Department, said 
emphatically: To promote a boom in literary and artistic 
undertakings and to develop such undertakings in the Army under 
the new situation, we must conscientiously carry out Deng 
Xiaoping's thinking on literature and art under the guidance of 
the theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
  The all-Army literary and art work conference opened in 
Beijing on 10 January. The main items on the conference's 
agenda called for seriously studying and solving new 
circumstances and problems in the Army's literary and art work 
under the conditions of accelerating reform and opening up and 
of establishing a socialist market economic structure, in 
accordance with the set of important directives recently issued 
by CMC Chairman Jiang Zemin on the Army's literary and art work, 
and under the guidance of Comrade Xiaoping's theory on building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics; gaining a clearer 
understanding of the situation; setting clear missions; working 
hard in unity; blazing new trails and putting forward new ideas; 
and promoting the development and flourishing of the Army's 
literature and art. 
  In his speech, Yu Yongbo said: As with other work, the 
Army's literary and art work has yielded substantial 
achievements. The new situation and new tasks, however, have 
created new and even stricter demands on the Army's literary and 
art work. In carrying out literary and art work, the Army 
should follow the correct orientation, accommodate the evolving 
situation, constantly blaze new trails and put forward new 
ideas, render better services for the people and socialism, and 
serve the need of improving the combat effectiveness of military 
troops. 
  Yu Yongbo said: Comrade Xiaoping's thinking on literature 
and art is an important component of the great treasure house of 
his theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
By inheriting Mao Zedong's thought on literature and art, he 
set forth many new ideas and theoretical viewpoints on socialist 
literature and art in accordance with the new historic 
conditions and the party's central task. In implementing CMC 
Chairman Jiang Zemin's recent set of directives on the Army's 
literary and art work, the most fundamental task is to promote 
the flourishing and development of the Army's literary and art 
undertakings and to permit large quantities of positive, 
wholesome, and popular outstanding literary and art works to 
occupy the Army's ideological and cultural front in accordance 
with Comrade Xiaoping's thinking on literature and art. To 
promote a literary and artistic boom in the Army, we should 
vigorously publicize the main theme of the times. In 
publicizing the main theme, our Army should set higher standards 
and do a better job so that the theme will become more distinct 
and resounding in our literary and artistic creations, in our 
performances, and even in the entire cultural life of military 
camps. In literature and art, the Army should uphold the spirit 
of the times and give priority to social benefits. 
  Yu Yongbo said: To create a literary and artistic boom in 
the Army, we must strive to promote a boom in creations and 
performances with military themes. Our writers and artists 
should work hard to exploit and record our military themes, be 
they historical or current. To promote a boom in literary and 
art works with military themes, we still need to further 
emancipate our minds, put forward new ideas while carrying on 
our tradition, seek development while drawing upon others' 
experiences, and move forward steadily along the road toward 
incorporating national features in our works. Each year, the 
entire Army should focus on producing a number of high-quality 
works and strive to produce nationally influential and good 
novels, movies, television dramas, plays, and songs and dances. 
  Speaking on Army building, Yu Yongbo said: To create a 
literary and artistic boom in the Army, we should rely on the 
hard work of the vast numbers of literary and art workers and on 
improving the general quality of the literary and art ranks. 
Our literary and art workers should foster a lofty sense of 
responsibility toward society, promote the spirit of dedication, 
unflaggingly engage in artistic pursuits, and persistently go 
into the thick of life. Leaders at all levels should strengthen 
and improve leadership over literary and art work, unify the 
thinking of writers and artists, further cement the literary and 
art ranks, and inspire everyone's enthusiasm. 
  Yu Yongbo also expressed his hope concerning strengthening 
cultural construction in the Army, enriching the cultural life 
of military camps, maintaining the high standard and style of 
cultural life in military camps, and carrying out mass and 
regular recreational activities. 
  More than 160 people attended the conference. They included 
Zhou Ziyu, Du Tiehuan, and Xu Caihou, deputy directors of the 
PLA General Political Department; Tang Tianbiao, assistant 
director of the PLA General Political Department; leaders from 
the political and cultural departments of various units and from 
professional theatrical troupes in the entire Army; veteran 
writers and artists; and young and middle-aged backbone cadres. 

