Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] During our radio program today entitled "Live 
Contact With Our Listeners," Teodor Melescanu, state and foreign 
affairs minister, answered a number of questions regarding the 
foreseeable chances for Romania's international policy in 1994. 
  Commenting on our security, which is ensured by the 
Partnership for Peace plan, the head of Romanian diplomacy said 
that the guarantees offered by that initiative, combined with 
the international bodies that Romania is gradually joining, as 
well as the opening up of our society for investments from West 
Europe and other regions, will result in the establishment of a 
network of contacts and solidarity that is necessary so that 
political and security promises do not remain merely promises. 
  One of the principal changes that occurred in our diplomacy 
after December 1989, Melescanu said, is that our foreign policy 
no longer follows the political color of our partners; 
therefore, our relations with various countries are based on a 
principle that is totally separated from ideology. The PRC 
represents one of our most important partners, both economically 
and on the level of dialogue maintained with Chinese officials. 
China is one of the permanent members of the UN Security 
Council and a country that could offer essential help to Romania 
at any time, which is something we never forget, Romania's 
foreign affairs minister said. 
  For Romania's diplomacy, we hope that 1994 will be the year 
of Asia -- that is, a year in which our relations with Asian 
countries are developed extensively. 
  Regarding the annulling of the consequences of the 
Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact [concluded in 1940, when Romania lost 
Bessarabia and Bucovina to the Soviet Union], Romania has made 
and is making sustained efforts so that the juridical effects 
and the territorial consequences for the Romanian population 
should be annulled. It is just a matter of time, Melescanu 
said, since the problem will be solved as democracy develops in 
our country and in other neighboring countries, and a European 
system will be established based on the fundamental values of 
democracy and legality. 
  During the program, the head of Romanian diplomacy also 
referred to the efforts being made to recover the Romanian 
treasure from the Russians, one of the main issues tackled 
during negotiations with the Russian Federation. Melescanu 
pointed out that the Russian authorities officially admitted 
that the Romanian state treasure had been transferred to Russia. 
Negotiations are currently under way to clear up the status of 
the treasure. A Russian delegation will arrive in Bucharest 
next month to hold talks and appraise the treasure. 

