BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by N. Colli: "11,000 Young People Became Objectors </F>
in March"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- Justice Minister Juan Alberto Belloch 
yesterday described the increase in conscientious objection 
applications over the past few months as "spectacular." 
Following his appearance in the Senate in order to explain the 
new Conscientious Objection Plan yesterday, Belloch quantified 
the considerable increase in objectors by announcing that during 
March a total of 11,000 young people swelled the lists by 
refusing to perform military service for reasons of conscience. 
This "spectacular" figure -- in Belloch's own words -- 
represents a 196-percent increase over those recorded six years 
ago, in March 1988. 
  In Belloch's opinion, this increase is mainly due to 
"shortcomings" in the current "model of management and 
administration," which the Conscientious Objection Plan approved 
by the government 11 March is intended to eliminate. The 
justice minister acknowledged the difficulty of its 
implementation, and made its success conditional on cooperation 
by the autonomous communities' administrations. 
  The justice minister said that the regional participation in 
the plan is "crucial" if it is to work. This would make it 
possible to end the current uneven geographic distribution of 
Alternative Social Service (PSS) places. 
  "I have decided to present the plan to the Senate, because 
this is a problem which can only be resolved through regional 
cooperation. Either we succeed in inducing the autonomous 
communities to undertake the responsibility of creating quality 
PSS places, or the plan cannot be implemented at the envisaged 
pace," Belloch told the members of the Senate's Justice 
Committee. 
  Belloch warned that lack of regional cooperation would be to 
their detriment, since objectors would be forced to fill PSS 
places away from their places of residence. 
  In his speech, the justice minister pointed out some of the 
general guidelines followed in drafting the plan. Among others, 
he drew attention to the combining in a single document of the 
recognition of conscientious objector status and the allocation 
of a place to perform the PSS. This will make possible greater 
coordination. 
  The other points cited by Belloch concerned the fact that 
the 
new plan makes it possible to relinquish objector status and to 
conduct personal interviews in cases deemed "dubious"; it will 
attempt to reduce the waiting time from recognition of objector 
status to the allocation of a place to under a year; and 
includes compulsory postings away from the place of residence. 
  For her part, People's Party Senator Rosa Vindel 
acknowledged 
the plan's "good intention," but reminded the minister that 
conscientious objection is a very delicate matter -- a right 
acknowledged by the Constitution -- and that therefore "haste is 
not a good thing." She also stated that the most important 
thing is not the creation of many PSS places but the quality of 
the performance of social service, for which she deemed it 
"essential" that objectors receive training courses. 

