BFN 

  [Text] Today a news conference was held at the Kazakhstani 
Foreign Ministry on the outcome of Foreign Minister Saudabayev's 
visit to Russia. Deputy Minister Konstantin Zhigalov told 
correspondents about the main problems of the visit, which took 
place on 2-3 June. The main aim of the visit was to monitor the 
implementation of agreements signed at a summit level during the 
first official visit by President Nazarbayev to Moscow, as well 
as to prepare Yeltsin's visit to Kazakhstan. 
  The foreign minister met Russia's First Vice Prime Minister 
Soskovets, State Duma Chairman Rybkin, Moscow Mayor Luzhkov, and 
Yakovlev, head of the federal service for teleevision and radio. 
Talks were held with the foreign minister of Russia. During 
these meetings, problems related to the economy, defense, and 
the Caspian Sea were discussed, taking into account social and 
legal norms. Particular attention was paid to the problem of 
citizenship. Kazakhstan's proposals on the problem met 
understanding and support from the Russian side. 
  It is worth noting that the stance of Kazakhstan on dual 
citizenship is unequivocally negative. In the context of 
further deepening the integration processes, Nazarbayev's ideas 
on a Eurasian union was discussed during the meetings. The 
Russian side gave a positive assessment of this concept. 
However, not everybody had a detailed knowledge of the 
document. Today its draft was published in the republican press. 
  Great attention was paid to international problems, in 
particular participation of the two states in the NATO 
Partnership for Peace program. As is known, Kazakhstan has 
signed this document. The situation in hotbeds of war was 
discussed. By the way, in the draft of the Eurasian Union, in 
state where civil war is occurring, they will not be accepted as 
members of the union. 
  Deputy Foreign Minister Zhigalov answered questions and said 
that the correspondents could acquaint themselves in full detail 
with the documents signed during the visit. 

