Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Address to the nation by Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto; </F>
place and date not given -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] My dear countrymen! Today, I want to talk about an 
issue that has no relation to day-to-day politics. Democracy 
does not just mean a war to secure power. The country has 
witnessed enough of the tussle for power. The people are fed up 
with this tussle. That is why the people elected a popular 
government in the most free and fair elections in the history of 
the nation. The people voted in favor of political stability, 
and they want to see changes in their lives. They want 
prosperity for their children. God willing, your government will 
provide this prosperity. 
  There were people who forgot the poor masses in the tussle 
for power. This could not continue for long. The country was 
faced with severe difficulties when we assumed office. We took 
the steps to speedily overcome these difficulties. Political 
independence is incomplete if the economic difficulties remain 
unsolved. We have to work for the people's economic stability 
so as to maintain our political independence. We have to make 
our people satisfied and prosperous. 
  It is not possible to bring about economic prosperity merely 
by the government wishing to do so. It cannot be realized by 
merely providing a legal infrastructure. It cannot be possible 
merely through deregulation. A strong infrastructure needs to 
be built to achieve this objective, and the most important 
component of this infrastructure is energy. The Water and Power 
Development Authority [WAPDA] is practicing power-load shedding 
due to the deficit in power generation during the last few 
years. Fifteen or 16 years ago, people did not even know what 
load-shedding was. Now, it has become a routine affair. There 
are power outages for several hours daily in cities and 
villages. In rural areas, sometimes there is no power for 
several days. Factories have been closed in urban areas due to 
the lack of power, thereby leading to lower industrial 
production. In rural areas, the irrigation tube wells cannot be 
operated due to load-shedding, thereby affecting agricultural 
output. 
  On the one hand, there was no increase in power production 
during the past few years, while on the other, demand kept 
increasing by 12 percent annually. The country is currently 
facing a deficit of nearly 2,000 megawatts of power. Urgent 
steps are needed to meet the demand for power and to stop the 
load-shedding. If we fail to do so, then it will shatter all 
our dreams of economic development and we will be lost in a 
blind alley. 
  Incorrect policies of the past are the main reasons behind 
this serious crisis. Special attention was paid to power 
production during the first tenure of the popular government. 
Work was going on with full speed on huge hydroelectric and 
thermal power projects to meet the increasing demand. There 
were the big projects such as the Mangla and Tarbela power 
plants and the Guddu thermal power station. This doubled 
electric production within the short period of five years. 
Attention from these developmental activities was diverted when 
Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's elected democratic 
government was toppled. Work on oil and gas exploration came to 
a standstill. No new hydroelectric power projects were started. 
The result was that the country faced an acute power shortage 
after 1982 and the whole country kept sinking in the darkness. 
  When we assumed office the last time in 1988, we 
wholeheartedly tried to deal with this situation. We designated 
billions of rupees in the budget for the power sector and 
started a number of new projects. We concluded agreements with 
France and the PRC to set up nuclear power plants. We tried to 
mobilize resources for power and oil and gas production with the 
cooperation of the private sector, and in December 1989 we 
concluded an initial agreement on the Hab project. The popular 
government was relieved of office by a conspiracy in August 
1990. The agreement with France on the nuclear power plant also 
ended as soon as the new government took over and no progress 
could be made on the Hub project. Projects were started based 
on the wrong priorities. The delay of only three years in 
executing these projects has caused a loss of 35 billion rupees 
to the national exchequer. 
  Wrong priorities resulted in great deterioration of the 
energy situation. Immediately after coming to power, I decided 
to set up a task force on energy to deal with the situation. In 
addition, I have taken some more important rapid steps without 
waiting for the recommendations of the task force. They include 
the decision to launch the Ghazi-Barotha hydroelectric power 
project costing more than 70 billion rupees and the Hab project 
in the private sector at a cost of more than 50 billion rupees. 
The swift government action in making decisions can be 
understood from the fact that the heads of delegations from 45 
international banks, which provide financial assistance to the 
Hab project, said that the progress achieved within two weeks is 
greater than that of the past three years. 
  Now, the task force on energy has submitted its 
recommendations for a new energy policy and the federal cabinet 
has approved them. This is the first time in the history of 
Pakistan that the government has formulated an integrated 
policy. Under this policy, there will be balance in the 
development of the oil, gas, coal, and hydroelectric sectors. 
Over the next five years, more than 700 billion rupees will be 
needed for power generation and oil and gas exploration. The 
government can invest 330 billion rupees of this, but we will 
have to find the remainder through private sector investment. 
In order to create interest in power generation and oil and gas 
exploration within the private sector, we are announcing some 
major incentives. 
  The government has decided to purchase electricity from 
private investors at the rate of 6.5 cents per kilowatt. This 
price is the most attractive in the entire region, which will 
provide a great incentive to the private sector in power 
generation. Investors who complete power plants within three 
years will receive a special premium. This concession is to 
encourage private investors to complete power plants as soon as 
possible. Power projects have been totally exempted from 
surcharges on education and flood relief. The import license 
fee has also been completely waived. Until now, the private 
sector was hesitant to invest in power generation projects as 
they took a considerable amount of time to enter into various 
agreements with the government. Your government has 
standardized all these conditions. Now private investors will 
have no difficulty in signing agreements with the government. 
In a like manner, these incentives will certainly draw the 
attention of foreign investors. 
  The situation now is that without taking revolutionary and 
drastic steps, it is impossible to overcome power outages. This 
crisis cannot be overcome simply by starting up new power 
projects. In addition to this, we should also strictly control 
waste, theft, and the nonproductive of electricity. We will 
launch a major program of demand regulation [preceding two words 
in English]. Under this program, the waste of electricity will 
be reduced. The pilferers will be identified through computers 
and legislation will be enacted under which they will be liable 
for imprisonment up to five years and heavy penalties. 
  A five-year plan has been prepared for this purpose. Under 
this plan, consumers will be provided with a new kind of meter. 
The consumers will be encouraged to use fluorescent lights 
rather than incandescent bulbs. It will not only greatly reduce 
electricity bills for consumers, but also immensely reduce the 
load on the WAPDA systems. In order to reduce the demand for 
electricity in the evenings, a new scheme has been prepared. 
Under this scheme, the electricity tariff will be calculated 
according to the amount of time a consumer uses electricity. A 
process of providing off-peak [preceding word in English] power 
to tube wells will begin. All these measures will reduce 
government expenditure on electricity generation by 11.5 billion 
rupees annually. At the same time, the difference in the demand 
and supply of electricity will be reduced to a point where 
load-shedding will be nominal, God willing, in three years. 
  Likewise, in order to slow the excessive consumption of oil 
in the transportation sector, some steps of fundamental 
importance also have been proposed. Currently, oil imports are 
45 billion rupees annually and the bill increases by 10 percent 
every year. More than half of this fuel is used in 
transportation. During the past few years, emphasis was placed 
on importing new and old motor vehicles instead of trains, large 
buses, and mass transit facilities which caused an unrestrained 
increase in the consumption of oil, besides creating serious 
traffic and pollution problems. We have, therefore, decided to 
develop such means of transportation, especially in major 
cities, which will reduce the level of pollution and traffic 
congestion on streets and also slow the undue consumption of 
oil. About 90,000 new engineers, technicians, and skilled 
workers will be required to translate all these programs into 
action, which will in turn create new avenues of employment. 
Some long-term policies have also been prepared for the 
development of the energy sector, which include construction of 
hydroelectric and coal-operated power plants, local manufacture 
of generators and transmission equipment, and accessories. 
  Dear brothers and sisters, the people's government has come 
into power by virtue of your votes and blessings. We have to 
fulfill your dreams and aspirations. When there is no light in 
a poor man's house, when factories are closed due to the lack of 
electricity and gas, the movement of the glittering yellow taxis 
on the six-lane highways cannot be described as the sign of 
development. The days of amusing the nation with games and 
pageantries are over. Now is the time for hard work and wise 
decisions. We must not waste this opportunity, otherwise, in 
the words of the poet Iqbal, may God forbid, our story will fail 
to be recorded in the annals of history. Let us make 
whole-hearted and sincere efforts for the success of the new 
energy policy, so that our dreams of development and progress 
within five to seven years are fulfilled with Pakistan entering 
the 21st century as a strong country and our hard-working people 
sharing equally the fruits of development, God willing. Long 
Live Pakistan. 

