Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The new Max Planck Institute of the Biology of 
Infection is due to begin work in the eastern part of Berlin at 
the beginning of 1994 and to move into new premises close to the 
Charite in 1998 at the latest. The establishment of this 
institute is regarded as a rare scientific opportunity to devote 
appropriate attention to this area, which is of importance in 
terms of both basic research and medical practice. 
  A third of all fatalities in the world can be traced to 
diseases caused by microbial pathogens. One and a half billion 
people -- primarily in the third world, suffer from the 19 
infectious diseases (excluding AIDS), for which American doctors 
consider new vaccines must be developed as a matter of priority. 
  The methods used in molecular and cytobiology, immunology, 
epidemiology, and structural chemistry now make it possible to 
arrive at a better understanding of the biology of the infection 
process and, consequently, at new approaches to the prevention 
and treatment of infectious diseases. Research into the biology 
of infection has thus increased considerably worldwide, 
although, apart from exceptions such as virus-dependent 
infectious diseases, it has not yet attained an internationally 
competitive level in Germany. 
  With the founding of a Max Planck Institute of the Biology 
of 
Infection to carry out multidisciplinary research the MPG [Max 
Planck Society] has taken a decisive step toward establishing 
this field in the Federal Republic of Germany. 
  By the time the institute is complete, it will comprise four 
departments: 
  -- Immunology (headed by Professor Stefan E.A. Kaufmann), 
which will primarily study the interactions between immune 
systems and microbial pathogens, with particular reference to 
defensive and pathogenic mechanisms; 
  -- Molecular Genetics, which will work on the molecular 
basis 
of the pathogenesis of infectious diseases and identify and 
analyze the factors responsible for virulence; 
  -- Cytobiology, which will focus primarily on the invasion 
of 
host cells by microbes and on topics relating to intracellular 
proliferation and cell-to-cell spreading. Methods provided by 
cytobiology, electron microscopy, and biochemistry will be used 
to study communication between pathogen and host cell; 
  -- Epidemiology, which will set out to identify virulence 
and 
resistance characteristics relevant to the spread of infectious 
diseases and to study microecosystems involved in infectious 
diseases. 
  The plan from the outset is to include clinical research as 
an integral part of the institute's overall approach and to 
recruit clinicians specializing in infectious diseases to work 
with research teams. Programs of research into infectious 
diseases in developing countries will also be drawn up and 
undertaken either in collaboration with the research 
laboratories already established in the countries concerned or 
by setting up field stations there. It is also planned to 
extend the institute's scientific range by establishing 
independent teams of young scientists to work on topics that 
complement the research undertaken in the institute's own 
departments. 

