Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Andrey Varlamov] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo January 8 TASS -- The U.S. Administration is 
holding talks with the Russian Government with the aim to 
specify the content of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM), 
concluded by the USSR and the United States in 1972, prominent 
U.S. politicians Senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar said today, 
responding to an ITAR-TASS question during a press conference in 
Tokyo. 
  Sam Nunn, who is head of the Committee on Armed Services in 
the U.S. Congress, explained that the point at issue is not the 
revision of the fundamentals of that unlimited document aimed at 
continually reminding people of the nuclear threat, but the 
clearing up and fixing of basic differences between the ABM 
system within the framework of an individual theatre of 
operations, which is not banned by the ABM treaty, and a 
strategic nuclear ABM system, which is the main subject of that 
document. The NIHON KEIZAI newspaper reported today that the 
settlement of the issues dealing with the ABM treaty may be 
speeded up by the Russian-American summit in Moscow, scheduled 
for next week. 
  Touching upon the nuclear problems facing former USSR 
republics, the U.S. senators, who visited Russia recently, said 
that the ensurance of long-term storage, safe elimination and 
prevention of smuggling abroad of the splitter materials, 
released as a result of the dismantling of combat missiles and 
nuclear-powered submarines, are the most important of them. 
  According to Lugar, the problem for Russia, Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan is how to divide in a just way the responsibility for 
the storage and processing of highly enriched uranium. He 
stressed that in principle the U.S. is ready to purchase from 
the former USSR republics part of that uranium and process it so 
that it can be used for peaceful purposes. 
  The problem of Ukraine, which is not living up to its 
commitment to become a nuclear-free country, should be resolved 
as soon as possible. According to Nunn, Kiev should join the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and ratify the START agreements 
without setting the terms, which make the ratification senseless. 
  The senators stressed that, along with problems created by 
the nuclear disarmament, there are others, which are potentially 
no less dangerous and which are connected with nuclear power 
plants on the territory of the former USSR. Of course, it is 
economically expedient that the International Monetary Fund and 
other international financial institutions are prompting Russia 
and other republics to fully liberalise prices of energy 
carriers, reducing the way to the world market, Sam Nunn pointed 
out. However, one cannot rule out a possibility that in case of 
such a transition some countries, like Ukraine for example, will 
have to put to full use all the nuclear power plants they have 
in order to obtain sources of cheap energy, which will increase 
the probability of serious accidents. 

