BFN 

<F P=106> [Owen Bowcott article: "Dublin Shift Exposes Voice Ban to </F>
Critics"] 
  [Text] One of the actors who regularly impersonates Gerry 
Adams on the airwaves is also believed to provide the voice-over 
for anti-terrorist television advertisements by the Northern 
Ireland Office. 
  Such coincidences are the product of the Government's 
six-year-old ban on broadcasting the spoken words of Sinn Fein 
politicians. The revoicing of Mr Adams's interview on Radio 4's 
Today programme yesterday morning was a typical application of 
the rule. 
  The ban was based on the Irish Government's long-standing 
broadcast restrictions, but Dublin's decision to lift the ban 
earlier this year has left London increasingly exposed to 
criticism from international civil rights groups. Dick Spring, 
the Irish foreign affairs minister, referred to the ban in 
January as "a crude form of censorship." 
  Introduced after the Ballygawley coach bombing in 1988 -- 
when six young soldiers were killed by the IRA -- its original 
purpose was according to Lady Thatcher, to deprive the 
"apologists of terrorism of the oxygen of publicity." 
  In his most recent intervention on the issue last autumn, 
the 
Prime Minister fiercely attacked the way in which broadcasters 
were interpreting the ban. The sophisticated "lip-synching" of 
television interviews with Sinn Fein officials was making a 
nonsense of the restrictions, he claimed. Their voices appeared 
almost unaltered. 
  The regulations were reviewed again. The Heritage Department 
this year announced that although the process would be monitored 
carefully it did not intend to change the rules. 
  It has been alleged that some cabinet members, such as 
Douglas Hurd, now favour removing the restrictions altogether. 
  The European Commission on Human Rights this month rejected 
a 
challenge to the regulations by the National Union of 
Journalists. 
  The BBC has revealed that it pays actors 120 pounds a time 
for re-voicing the words of Sinn Fein officials but declines to 
name any of those who have volunteered their services. 
  In news and current affairs reports there is often not the 
time to ring around for an Equity card holder and those with 
similar accents closer at hand are sometimes press-ganged into 
providing the voice track. 
  One undoubted effect of the broadcasting ban has been to 
provide the republican movement with a political grievance to 
exploit. 
  Several years ago a rather unsubtle hoarding was erected on 
a 
derelict building on the Falls Road. It portrayed an IRA gunman 
in a balaclava carrying a semiautomatic weapon. Along the 
barrel of the gun the caption read: "Uncensored." 

