BFN 

<F P=106> [By Flor Wang] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 20 (CNA) -- Taiwan's automobile and 
motorcycle exports rose substantially to new heights in 1993, 
the Industrial Development Bureau reported Friday [20 May]. 
  Bureau statistics show that more than 3,000 compact cars and 
320,000 motorcycles were exported last year, mainly to Asia and 
Europe. Only about half as many motorcycles were exported in 
1991. 
  Currently, there are 20 motorcycle and car makers and about 
500 motorcycle and car parts manufacturers in Taiwan. They were 
capitalized to the tune of US$5.2 billion and employed 120,000 
workers in 1993, or 5.6 percent of all Taiwan's manufacturing 
employees. 
  Locally made cars were first exported in 1986, and then just 
to the United States and Canada. In the past three years, 
automobile output increased an average 7 percent annually, with 
yearly output reaching 400,000 cars last year. The annual 
production of motorcycles is about 1.5 million. 
  The production value of auto and motorcycle parts 
manufacturers was US$11.3 billion last year, accounting for 5 
percent of the overall output value of the nation's 
manufacturing sector, bureau tallies show. 
  About 70 percent and 90 percent of automobile and motorcycle 
parts and components, respectively, were produced by Taiwan 
manufacturers in Taiwan rather than overseas, including some 
sophisticated car engines, frames and bodies, the bureau said. 
Many local makers have been producing made-to-order car and 
automobile parts and components for some leading international 
companies, the bureau added. 
  It said a new engine jointly produced by the industrial 
technology research institute and four local car makers -- China 
Motor, Yeu Tyan Machinery MFG, Yulon Motor and San Yang Motors 
-- will soon enter production. 
  Additionally, the semi-official China External Trade 
Development Council said it will lead a delegation composed of 
10 local car and motorcycle parts and components companies to 
Europe Sunday for a two-week-long promotional tour. 
  Parts manufacturers will meet with major German, French, 
British and Belgian car makers to seek original equipment 
manufacturing cooperation as part of their effort to further 
exploit European markets, the bureau said. 

