BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Filadelfo Martinez] </F>
  [Text] Managua, 7 May (EFE) -- The Nicaraguan Government 
closed the chapter on negotiations with armed groups and this 
weekend sent a combined military force backed by aerial units to 
pursue "bands of criminals" responsible for robbery, cattle 
rustling, kidnapping, and rape. 
  Government Minister Alfredo Mendieta and Major General 
Joaquin Cuadra Lacayo, chief of the Sandinist People's Army 
general staff, met late this week to implement a joint Armed 
Forces-National Police plan to stamp out violence in rural 
areas. Soviet-made MI-17 helicopters are being used to 
transport troops and logistical supplies and to observe the 
movement of armed groups in the mountains in the country's 
central and northern regions in this operation against "bands of 
armed delinquents." 
  "The important thing in this case is the will of the 
Nicaraguan state to eliminate this cancer ("armed groups")," 
army spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Ricardo Wheelock told the 
local press. 
  Deputy Government Minister Joaquin Lovo stressed that with 
the 15 April disbandment of some 600 armed men who were led for 
two years by Jose Angel Talavera, alias El Chacal, the 
government closed the chapter on talks and negotiations to get 
the rebels to lay down their weapons. 
  According to this official, close to 500 of these men are 
involved in such actions "part time," since they spend some days 
working the land and other days breaking the law. 
  Lovo said the civilian population, chiefly farmers and 
peasants, "feels imprisoned by these bands," which operate near 
El Tuma-La Dalia, Pantasma-Muy Muy, Pantasma-Quilali, and Muelle 
de los Bueyes and use the names of various organizations for 
their criminal activities. 
  "This is no longer a matter of (rearmed) groups making 
socioeconomic and political demands but of strictly criminal 
bands, and we are hitting them," he noted. 
  Although a large-scale military offensive is under way, Lovo 
affirmed the idea is not to "exterminate" the groups but to 
capture their members for trial. That is why he asked the 
Supreme Court of Justice to send "auxiliary judges" to the north. 
  The deputy minister noted that Ciriaco Palacios, alias 
Charrito, who is heading one of the most belligerent bands, was 
given a job in the Special Disarmament Brigades (BED) with a 
salary of $500 following his surrender last year. 
  Instead of helping disarm civilians carrying war weapons, 
Charrito murdered a BED chief and stole a lot of rifles, 
according to the official. 
  Lovo said BED officials tried unsuccessfully to talk with 
Charrito on six occasions, so the authorities will not agree to 
meet with him now. 
  Charrito continues to seek a meeting with members of 
Cardinal 
Miguel Obando y Bravo's verification commission to present his 
conditions for surrender. 
  The former 3-80 Northern Front forces headed by El Chacal 
have organized an agricultural and livestock cooperative devoted 
to harvesting coffee and basic grains and raising cattle on over 
3,000 hectares in the north. A state bank granted these former 
rebels a $1 million loan to acquire the land. They have several 
years to repay the loan. 
  El Chacal voiced his concern over the lack of an agreement 
between the Government Ministry and the National Police for 500 
former recontras to take over police precincts in 13 northern 
municipalities, in accordance with the agreements signed with 
the government. 

