Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 31 (XINHUA) -- The Ministries of 
Public Security, Construction and Agriculture as well as the 
State Commission for Restructuring the Economy have started 
surveys as a preliminary step to reforming the system of 
household registration in small towns and cities. 
  The reform is aimed at gradually abolishing the distinction 
between the agricultural and non-agricultural populations, which 
is now rigidly drawn under the current system of household 
registration. 
  In order to control the expansion of big cities, China 
divided its population into agricultural and non-agricultural in 
the 1950s. Under this system, those people registered as members 
of the agricultural population could not get grain and 
non-staple food rations and could not be given housing and jobs 
in urban areas. 
  But since the country started to adopt the policy of reform 
and opening to the outside world many rural people have become 
workers in industrial or service enterprises in nearby towns. 
By the end of 1993 there were 116 million farmer-turned 
workers. Because of the old system of household registration, 
however, these people were still regarded as members of the 
agricultural population, in spite of the fact that they no 
longer engaged in agricultural production. 
  Statistics show that China's gross non-agricultural product 
accounted for 75 percent of the gross national product in 1992. 
But 80 percent of the country's population was still registered 
as agricultural. Currently, the country's 20.79 million rural 
industrial enterprises are scattered among over 19 million 
villages. As a result, these enterprises find it difficult to 
engage in large- scale and high-tech production. Besides, the 
situation is not ideal as far as utilization of the land and 
transportation is concerned. Moreover, it is difficult to bring 
pollution under control in these circumstances. 
  Experts point out that it is now necessary to reform the 
system of household registration to encourage farmers to enter 
small towns to engage in various kinds of business, thus 
promoting the development of small towns throughout the country. 

