Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Berlin, DDP/ADN -- Russian right-wing radical 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy has described former Soviet President 
Mikhail Gorbachev as "mad." In an interview with the Berlin 
daily B.Z. (Friday edition), the chairman of the Liberal 
Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) said of Gorbachev's accusation 
that he (Zhirinovskiy) was a KGB puppet that Gorbachev had "gone 
mad. It's just envy because he has destroyed his own party and 
the Soviet Union." 
  With regard to the refusal to grant him a visa to enter 
Germany, Zhirinovksiy said he did not get a visa "because Gorby 
sold you the GDR." 
  Once again Zhirinovskiy demanded reparations from Germany 
for 
the damage inflicted in Russia during the World War II, referred 
to Soviet war victims, and heavily criticized German reparations 
to Jews. He demanded "an agreement" on Russian property in 
Germany and said that Gorbachev sold East Germany "so cheaply, 
for 14 billion marks," when Chancellor Kohl had offered 140 
billion. Zhirinovskiy said: "We accept this offer." 
  He seeks "good relations" between Russia and Germany, he 
went 
on to say. Twice "our countries have been driven into war." 
This was "wrong," Zhirinovskiy said. "Only we Russians and 
Germans can guarantee stability." 
  With regard to the future of eastern Prussia, Zhirinovskiy 
told Germany: "Solve that with Poland. We don't give a damn 
about it." 
  Concerning his readiness to meet with Foreign Minister Klaus 
Kinkel, Zhirinovksiy referred to wishes for talks expressed by 
Austria, Spain, France, Norway, and Australia and added: "When I 
have some time again then we'll meet." 
  Zhirinovskiy also said he is ready for a meeting with U.S. 
President Bill Clinton, but added that in his view Clinton fears 
him and is afraid. Clinton is "exactly the kind of democrat you 
find in our government". Zhirinovskiy went on: "Tell him from 
me: In Russia there is only one party, my LDPR, there are no 
other parties." Boris Yeltsin does not represent the interests 
of Russia, so Clinton had "better meet with us". 

