Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Feb. 2 KYODO -- U.S. Trade Representative 
Mickey Kantor and Japanese Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata 
appeared Wednesday [2 February] to have disagreed over 
Washington's demand to set numerical targets to measure the 
progress of foreign access to Japanese markets, government 
sources said. 
  Kantor, who flew to Tokyo on Tuesday in a bid to break the 
deadlock in bilateral trade framework talks, urged Hata to 
accept the demand for "objective criteria." But Hata refused, 
the sources said. 
  Officials declined to reveal what Kantor and Hata discussed. 
The two men will hold another round of talks on Thursday, the 
sources said. 
  "It's been an interesting afternoon," Kantor told reporters 
after emerging from the meeting with Hata. He did not elaborate. 
  Asked if he was still optimistic about the framework talks, 
Kantor replied, "realistic." 
  A Foreign Ministry official, who spoke to reporters on 
condition of anonymity, refused to comment on whether Kantor and 
Hata had failed to close the gap in their talks, but described 
the 90-minute meeting as "severe." 
  Kantor and Hata, who is also deputy prime minister, 
discussed 
the framework talks in general, not specific terms, the official 
said. The official said the Japanese side and the United States 
both reiterated their basic stances in the talks. 
  Foreign Ministry sources said Kantor did not openly threaten 
to impose sanctions if the framework talks failed but rather 
explained that the negotiations are being held to avoid 
bilateral trade friction. 
  On the macroeconomic front, Hata told the U.S. side that the 
government is scheduled to hammer out an economic stimulus 
package soon, the sources said. 
  Also in the talks, Kantor congratulated the Japanese 
Government on its passage of political reform bills, ministry 
officials said. 
  Hata told Kantor the Japanese Government is doing its best 
to 
prepare for the February 11 meeting between Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa and President Bill Clinton, they said. 
  Japanese and U.S. officials are supposed to draw up a 
progress report on the framework negotiations before Hosokawa 
meets Clinton in Washington, the third time the two leaders will 
have met since Hosokawa assumed his post last August. But the 
two sides remain deadlocked over the definition of the 
"objective criteria," with the U.S. calling for setting 
numerical targets to measure foreign access to Japanese markets 
and Japan opposing any indicators on the grounds they could lead 
to managed trade. 
  On Tuesday, Hata told a news conference Japan will never 
accept the U.S. demand to set numerical targets, saying "such 
criteria run counter to Japanese Government efforts to promote 
deregulation." 
  The framework accord, concluded last July, calls for a 
"highly significant decrease" in Japan's current account surplus 
and promised "tangible progress" in access and sales of foreign 
goods in the Japanese market. 
  The two governments designated the Japanese automobile 
market, insurance, and government procurement in 
telecommunications and medical equipment as priority areas that 
must be settled before the February meeting. Negotiations on 
key pending issues are being held in Tokyo this week. 
  Kantor, accompanied by W. Bowman Cutter, deputy presidential 
assistant for economic policy, is scheduled to hold separate 
talks later in the day with Hiroshi Kumagai, minister of 
international trade and industry. He is also expected to meet 
Hosokawa and Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii during his stay in 
Japan. 

