Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement "exclusively for Bosnia-Herzegovina Radio and </F>
Television" by Bosnia-Herzegovina Prime Minister Haris Silajdzic 
on his 5 January meeting with Croatian representatives in Vienna 
-- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Today's meeting had several specific items, i.e. 
results. First, both sides insisted on restarting convoys, that 
is the passage of humanitarian convoys, including a debate on 
new routes. We maintain that as much food as possible should 
enter Bosnia-Herzegovina from various directions. We all know 
that despite an agreement, there were problems with the last two 
convoys, for Nova Bila and Maglaj. On 6 January the possibility 
will be examined of sending further humanitarian convoys from 
various directions. We spent a great deal of time discussing 
this, so we hope that this operation will be successful. 
Unfortunately, the last convoy for Nova Bila and Maglaj -- we 
all know that the convoy for Maglaj has not reached its 
destination because of the Serb side. The food is still in 
Zenica. We hope that this time we will have more luck. 
  We also talked about the field hospital which has for months 
been kept in the port of Ploce. This is a mobile hospital 
stored in about 40 containers, and it has been impossible to 
transfer it to its destination as specified by the donor, to the 
left bank of Mostar. In other words, the field hospital should 
leave Ploce very soon for the left bank in Mostar, where it is 
being awaited eagerly in view of a large number of wounded 
[words indistinct]. It cannot possibly reach the left bank of 
Mostar. [passage indistinct] 
  We also agreed to hold a meeting to discuss exchanges of 
prisoners. This is a very important issue, a very difficult 
issue. This is nevertheless a question that constantly straddles 
the path to resolving some other problems we are going to try to 
solve. As for agreements about Mostar, our public knows that it 
has been agreed that Mostar is to be placed under EC 
administration for up to two years. Hence, during this period 
some solutions should be found. We called this, in a rather 
popular way, the Mostar for the Mostarers project. In any case 
we agreed that a meeting between these two commissions be also 
held on 7 January at the Spanish UN Protection Forces Battalion 
headquarters in Medjugorje, and that the question of preparing 
programs of restoration and revitalization and the return of 
Mostarers to their town be approached in line with what was 
agreed in Brussels. 
  We discussed the port of Ploce. There were some.... [pauses] 
The latest meeting in Brussels revealed that the Croatian side 
had made changes to our last agreement, reached on the 
Invincible, in other words, a free zone in the port of Ploce in 
line with the agreement reached on board the Invincible. These 
are some of the concrete results of our meeting. These are some 
of the concrete results of our meeting. 
  We also discussed a cease-fire. This has always been the 
most difficult problem. We did not want to say anything 
resolute or precise on a cease-fire. There can be no cease-fire 
for a day or two. We have to reach an agreement on the ground 
and we also have to agree about the technicalities, date, etc. 
Let us hope that some results will be achieved over this. I 
must say that this is the most difficult point of our talks. 
All I can say on my part is that the talks were held in a 
constructive working atmosphere. We are aware of the fact that 
we made a small step forward and I can just add on my part that 
the constructive atmosphere was a result of efforts on the part 
of everyone. Mr. Akmadzic represented the Herzegovina side this 
time and I think this greatly contributed to the talks taking a 
positive and not a negative turn. Let us hope this will remain 
so in the future, and we have guarantees from the Croatian side 
that Mr. Akmadzic will from now on represent this side and we 
see this as a positive development. 

