Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Focus" by Keiji Urakami: "U.S. Replacing Japan as </F>
Global Leader in Key Industries"] 
  [Text] Tokyo, March 19 KYODO -- American companies are 
making a comeback as global industrial leaders, with the 
technological edge long enjoyed by Japanese makers recently 
shaken in key sectors. 
  "Japan has completely lost out to the United States in the 
industrial race in leading sectors like electricals [as 
received] and autos," Ryuzaburo Kaku, chairman of Canon Inc., 
said, voicing fears over the accelerating U.S. counteroffensive. 
Kaku is not alone in such fears. 
  Fumio Sato, president of Toshiba Corp., said, "Japanese 
companies, if the current situation is left unattended, will end 
up becoming subcontractors of U.S. firms." The sense of crisis 
has spread to corporate managers at many of Japan's major 
companies, which had until only a few years ago enjoyed an 
overwhelming dominance in global markets. 
  It was not long ago that Sony and Matsushita were regarded 
as 
a menace to many U.S. companies when they marched out in the 
U.S. marketplace brandishing superior products and enormous 
financial power. 
  THE NEW YORK TIMES recently reported U.S. companies have 
regained competitiveness against Japanese and German firms 
thanks to efforts at introducing innovative technologies. 
  Per-capita productivity for U.S. workers has become the 
world's highest at 49,600 dollars, surpassing that for German 
workers by 5,000 dollars and Japanese workers by 10,000 dollars, 
the paper said. 
  "Although Nintendo was born in Japan, further imagination 
does not seem to have been born in this country," [Salomon 
company employee] Chiwaki said, citing lagging infrastructure 
for interactive multimedia compared with Western countries. 
  As an example of Japan's unpreparedness to support the 
multimedia revolution, Chiwaki cited the limited 20 percent 
penetration of cable television in this country against 60 
percent in the U.S. He also noted the lagging use of personal 
computers in school education in Japan -- about one-third the 
level of the U.S. 
  "The general consensus is growing that the interactive 
multimedia industry will be born in the U.S., not in Japan," he 
said. 
  The outlook for Japanese companies is also dismal in 
semiconductors, staple products often figuratively called the 
"rice of industry." The share of U.S. makers in the global chip 
market is believed to have exceeded that of Japanese companies 
for the first time in 1993, industry observers said. 
  According to the U.S. research company Dataquest, global 
Japanese and U.S. chip shares were roughly equal in 1992, the 
latest year for which data are available -- 42.3 percent for 
Japanese makers and 41.5 percent for U.S. makers. 
  On a maker basis, the global chip sales share in 1993 came 
to 
9.6 percent for Intel Corp. and 7.4 percent for NEC Corp., 
according to Dataquest. This means Intel's lead over NEC 
widened from 1992 when Intel outdid the Japanese company for the 
first time, by a narrow margin of 7.8 percent to 7.5 percent. 
  Japanese chipmakers have also been facing an offensive by 
South Korean firms. Samsung Electronics Co., for example, has 
become the world's biggest maker of dynamic random access memory 
(DRAM) chips. 
  "The technical lead of Japanese chip makers is a thing of 
the 
past," said an analyst at Daiwa Institute of Research who 
declined to be named. "The situation will continue to be severe 
for Japanese makers," he said, noting that U.S. and South Korean 
makers are aggressive about capital investment while Japanese 
companies are reluctant about such spending under the lingering 
recession. 
  Nor are autos and home electrical appliances immune to the 
U.S. counterattacks. 
  Chrysler Corp., for example, is outshining Japanese 
carmakers 
in the U.S. market with the launch of its exceptionally 
reasonably-priced subcompact, the Neon. The auto, dubbed the 
"Japanese-killer car," is priced at less than 9,000 dollars, 
2,000 dollars below comparable Japanese cars. 
  The Japanese auto industry fears the Neons will land in 
Japan 
in the near future. 
  "U.S. automakers learned a lot from the success of Japanese 
carmakers," said a top executive of a major Japanese auto parts 
maker. "The quality gap between Japanese and U.S. cars has 
narrowed to `10 to 8' from `10 to 5' five or six years ago." 
  Salomon's Chiwaki warned that Japan will also be in a 
disadvantageous position in the international race for the 
development of high-definition television (HDTV), unless the 
country changes its policy from support of the analog 
transmission format to support of the digital system. 
  "The global trend toward a digital format can never be 
reversed," said Chiwaki. "The U.S. is far ahead of Japan in 
this area." 
  Experts say digital transmission represents more than just a 
path to razor-sharp images on the TV screen. Digital 
technology, the same as computers use, has the potential to 
support a variety of new communications tools in the era of 
multimedia when the marriage of computers and communications 
systems is expected to dramatically transform people's lives. 
  Japan's receipts of patent-licensing revenues from abroad, a 
key gauge of a country's technology levels, came to 386.5 
billion yen in 1992 compared with a much larger 910.1 billion 
yen in payments, according to the Bank of Japan. 
  Meanwhile, the U.S. registered about 1.9 trillion yen in net 
receipts of patent-related revenues, becoming the only country 
among major nations to enjoy net technology exports. 
  Hisashi Kaneko, senior managing director of NEC, said the 
widely believed story that Japan came from behind to win an 
economic race with the U.S. from the late 1980s to the early 
1990s is "an illusion." 

