Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yutaka Kume, chairman of the Japan </F>
Automobile Manufacturers Association and Nissan Motor 
Corporation, by economic news reporter Haruyuki Aikawa; first in 
three-part series of interviews with key industrial leaders in 
priority sectors under negotiation at the Japan-U.S. economic 
framework talks, entitled: "The Japan-U.S. Economic Framework 
Talks: My Arguments"; place and date not given; first paragraph 
is MAINICHI SHIMBUN introduction] 
  [Text] The Japan-U.S. economic framework talks will enter 
a critical phase leading up to the summit meeting on 11 
February. Insurance, automobiles and auto parts, and government 
procurement (telecommunications and medical equipment) have been 
designated as the three priority sectors at the negotiations on 
specific areas. Industry leaders in these sectors give their 
"arguments" in this series of interviews. 
  [Aikawa] What is your impression of the framework talks? 
  [Kume] Reciprocity between Japan and the United States 
should be the basic principle not only in the automobiles 
sector, but also in the framework talks as a whole. However, 
what has happened so far is one-sided demands from the United 
States. There are areas under the government's jurisdiction, 
and there are areas which are not. Automobiles is a business 
sector. I think negotiations at the governmental level will not 
work. 
  [Aikawa] The United States is pushing hard for numerical 
targets. 
  [Kume] We will not compromise on that point. It is the 
United States, which needs to exert more efforts, that should be 
asked to set targets; Japan should not be asked to make 
commitments. Therefore, it is absurd to complain if we are not 
able to fulfill the voluntary plan to purchase U.S.-made auto 
parts of January 1992. If the United States attempts to extend 
or strengthen this voluntary plan, I do not think the European 
Union will remain indifferent. 
  [Aikawa] What have you done to fulfill the plan to make 
purchases worth $19 billion? 
  [Kume] All automobile companies wish to remedy the trade 
imbalance between the two countries. That was why we came up 
with the plan in 1992. However, the target was set based on a 
projection of demand at that time. The Japanese economic 
recession has been worse than expected, while economic recovery 
in the United States has not been fast enough. Under such 
circumstances, we have been working hard to fulfill the target 
even to the disadvantage of Japanese parts makers. 
  [Aikawa] Are any further efforts at the private level 
possible? 
  [Kume] Regarding auto parts, we have created a venue for 
discussion with U.S. parts makers, and held trade negotiations. 
The "design-in" method entailing joint development from the 
design phase is becoming popular. Since we have a 
responsibility to our customers, we have to buy good parts. 
  [Aikawa] How about finished cars? 
  [Kume] We have no intention to buy the Big Three's cars. As 
Japanese car makers have invested manpower and money in building 
a network of sales outlets in the United States, the Big Three 
should also do the same on their own. However, I can imagine 
that it will be quite difficult to start now because land prices 
are so high. What they can do is talk to the dealers. The 
problem lies in the attitude of claiming "it is outrageous that 
my cars are not selling" without making any efforts to launch 
cars suitable for the traffic conditions and parking lots in 
Japan onto the market. 
  [Aikawa] Automobiles make up 60 percent of the Japan-U.S. 
trade imbalance. 
  [Kume] If you take the sum of trade imbalance as the 
denominator, and the differential in Japan-U.S. auto trade as 
the numerator, you indeed come up with the figure of 60 percent. 
But that is meaningless. We import all our civilian aircraft, 
and buy a lot of agricultural products. I would like to ask: 
How do you compute that? It is unreasonable to take up trade, 
particularly, trade in specific sectors, as a bilateral issue. 
  [Aikawa] How about a political settlement? 
  [Kume] It will not be possible to come up with a political 
settlement without talking to the business sector. Even though 
we asserted that automobiles should not be included in the 
agenda of the framework talks, Former Prime Minister Kiichi 
Miyazawa made a serious concession during the last days of his 
administration. Rather than reaching a senseless compromise, we 
might as well forget about concluding the talks in haste. An 
unacceptable agreement to the automobile industry will have 
serious damage. 

