BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Franz-Olivier Giesbert: "Of Weeds and </F>
Vegetables"] 
  [Text] One may hope that, one day, a statesman will dare 
shun the customary leaden rhetoric and state clearly the 
following: There is a British problem in Europe. A problem 
which has just found a new illustration at the Corfu summit. 
  Mr. Major, whose standing in his country is now lower than 
that of any of his predecessors, has found a way to improve it 
at home. By using his right of veto against the appointment of 
Mr. Dehaene as Mr. Delors' successor to lead the European 
Commission, the British prime minister is assured to improve his 
standing in opinion polls -- an easy enough proposition given 
his current dismal approval ratings. 
  Not that he himself is hostile toward the Dehaene. By 
vetoing Mr. Dehaene, a candidate backed both by France and 
Germany, because of his pro-European views, Mr. Major was only 
expressing a deep-rooted feeling in Great Britain, a feeling 
which makes it viscerally antagonistic to the construction of 
Europe. One only has to read the British press: It is 
generally anti-European, sometimes frantically so. Once again, 
de Gaulle was right: England is an island which bridges and 
tunnels will never succeed in anchoring to the continent. 
Bringing it into the Common Market was a mistake. It should 
have been made no more than an associate member. 
  Today, the rot has set in. The British will not hear of a 
Europe that is more than a free-trade zone. All they can think 
of is to broaden it more and more, so as to dilute and drown it 
in its own contradictions. Their feet are inside Europe, but 
not so their head. This is a pathological case. It also is an 
ideological one. Should they be kicked out of the European 
Union, then? While currently taboo, this is a question well 
worth asking. One of these days, the European Union will have 
to answer it instead of sticking its head in the sand. 
  Of course, one must be wary of simplistic, knee-jerk 
anti-British notions. First of all because the land of 
Shakespeare is one of European civilization's brightest stars. 
Second, because history has shown that its people -- 
Churchillian at heart -- never fail to exceed themselves when 
the world is crumbling all around. The more perilous the times, 
the greater they show themselves to be. Of all nations, France 
should know. Even Victor Hugo said that "England will always be 
a sister to France." 
  However, no one gets married or engaged with one's sister. 
Hence Britain's feeling of isolation. It does not accept that 
Europe was built on a foundation consisting of France and 
Germany by men who were traumatized by the latest World War and 
who said: "Never again!" Britain cannot reconcile itself to 
the philosophy expressed by de Gaulle's apocryphal phrase: 
"Europe -- it is France and Germany. The others, they are but 
vegetables." 
  But is Mr. Major's Britain finally not going to be regarded 
as a mere weed? 

