Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 18 January (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--Since 
Deng Xiaoping said that "the popularization of computers must 
begin with the children" 10 years ago, more than 3 million 
primary and middle school students have received computer 
training, which is gradually becoming part of primary and middle 
school education in China. 
  To mark the 10th publication anniversary of Deng Xiaoping's 
strategic instruction that "the popularization of computers must 
begin with the children" and to promote the popular application 
of computers among the vast number of youngsters, the Children 
Work Committee under the Soong Ching Ling Foundation, the 
Central Educational Science Research Institute, and the 
Popularization Department of the China Science and Technology 
Association jointly sponsored the 1994 national activities to 
popularize Chinese- character picture coding. 
  The current activities seek to further promote the popular 
application of computers in primary and middle schools across 
the nation, to guide the vast number of primary and middle 
school students in studying and mastering the computer skills 
and techniques, to bring the important role of computers in 
promoting education and teaching into full play, and to lay a 
foundation for China to train qualified personnel who can cross 
into the next century. 
  The current activities focused on Chinese-character picture 
coding, a new type of Chinese-character input system based on 
the standard Chinese characters. Using images, the coding is 
simple and easy to master and use. Both a computer input system 
and a Chinese- character indexing system, it will play a great 
role in accelerating the students' pace of learning Chinese 
characters and will standardize the writing of Chinese 
characters. 
  The current activities will last from January to October 
1994. In March and April, the Central Television Station will 
broadcast "A Television Lecture on Popularizing the Application 
of the Chinese- Character Picture Input System" in its first 
program and its "Watching Together With Daddy and Mommy" 
program. The contest is divided into two stages: The 
Chinese-character picture coding computer input contest and the 
Chinese-character picture coding computer writing contest. 
Youngsters throughout the country, from first grade primary 
school pupils to junior and senior middle school students 
(including students of technical secondary schools, vocational 
senior schools, and polytechnic schools) can enter their names 
for participation. 

