BFN 

<F P=106> [Kieran Cooke report: "Daring Vision or Time Bomb"] </F>
  The jungle light quickly fades. The rain pounds like a 
hundred machine guns on the roof of the Long Murum longhouse. 
The men, descendants of Borneo's headhunters, their arms and 
legs covered in tattoos, sit round a flickering kerosene lamp. 
They chew betel nut and drink rice wine. Talk is of change and 
development. 
  Here, in the heart of Sarawak, East Malaysia, plans are 
under 
way for South-East Asia's biggest infrastructure project -- a 
M$15bn [Malaysian Dollars] (3.85bn pounds) dam nearly twice the 
height of the Aswan dam in Egypt. 
  The dam, at Bakun a few miles downstream from Long Murum, 
will flood an area larger than Singapore. Long Murum and 14 
other tribal longhouses will disappear. More than 8,000 
tribespeople whose families have lived and hunted in the area 
for generations will be resettled. 
  To some, Bakun is another example of Malaysia's confidence 
in 
the future and a tribute to the daring vision of Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad. "It's a project whose time has come," said Dr 
Mahathir earlier this year. 
  To others Bakun is an ill conceived scheme of doubtful 
economic merit which could bring environmental disaster to one 
of the world's few remaining areas of tropical rainforest and 
sound the death knell for a unique tribal culture. "It will be 
an ecological time bomb sitting right in the centre of Borneo," 
says Mr Sim Kwang Yang, a Sarawak-based opposition MP. 
  Bakun has been discussed for 14 years but only recently 
given 
the go-ahead by the government. Producing 2,400MW of 
electricity by early next century, the government says Bakun 
will not only meet the needs of Malaysia's fast industrialising 
economy. It will also turn Malaysia into a regional power 
exporter. 
  Bakun poses considerable technical challenges. It is being 
built at a site more than 500km upriver from Sarawak's coast. 
The journey to Bakun involves crossing a number of treacherous 
rapids. New roads will have to be built through dense jungle to 
bring in building materials and engineering equipment. 
  Taking the power out of Bakun will involve even greater 
difficulties. Some of the electricity generated will go to 
Sarawak itself and to the neighbouring Malaysian state of Sabah. 
However, the bulk of the power will go to peninsular Malaysia, 
first by 670km of overhead cables within Sarawak and then 
through 650km of cables under the South China Sea. 
  Experts point out that power transmission through such a 
lengthy underwater cable has never been attempted. "They are 
either being very daring or very foolish," said one Kuala Lumpur 
based energy company executive. Considerable power loss seems 
inevitable. 
  Bakun will be a private sector project. In January this year 
the government signed a memorandum of understanding giving 
management of Bakun to the locally based Ekran company. The 
announcement was greeted with some surprise. There was no 
tendering process involved. 
  Controlled by Mr Ting Pek Khiing, a Sarawak-based Malaysian 
Chinese, Ekran was established only in 1991 and has no 
experience in projects of the size of Bakun. Mr Ting, a 
swashbuckling entrepreneur who has made a name for himself as a 
tourist resort developer, is supremely confident. "We can build 
anything on earth," he says. 
  Mr Ting says between 60 and 70 per cent of financing for 
Bakun will be raised from domestic sources and insists the 
project can be built in six years, without federal or state 
funds. Ekran is widely believed to be backed by Mr Daim 
Zainnudin, a former federal finance minister"and an economic 
adviser to the government. 
  Some tribespeople feel the change the dam will bring is part 
of an inevitable process. "Our ways are altering anyway," says 
Mr John Bampa, who works in the small town of Belaga, close to 
vhe Bakun site. "As children we were taught to hunt wild pig 
and fish. But the new generation have been to school and have 
not been taught the old ways." 
  However, many tribespeople say they have not been consulted 
about Bakun or given any project details. Some reports say a 
series of dams are to be built in the area. In recent years 17 
technical studies have been carried out on Bakun. A government 
minister told parliament this year those documents remain 
classified under Malaysia's official secrets act. 
  Gara Jalong, one of a group of longhouse dwellers who two 
weeks ago tried but failed to present a petition opposing Bakun 
to the Sarawak State Assembly, says a government-appointed 
committee on Bakun does not represent the tribespeople. "Many 
of its members have been responsible for selling our lands to 
the logging companies." 
  Logging is very big business in Sarawak. In the past 
tribespeople who have interfered with the activities of the 
logging companies have been imprisoned. Though Malaysia says it 
is committed to curtailing logging it is still by far the 
world's largest exporter of unprocessed tropical timber most of 
it from Sarawak. 
  Over the last 12 months prices of many tropical hardwoods 
have more than doubled. In a 1991 review of forestry activities 
in Malaysia the World Bank said Sarawak's trees were being cut 
at about four times the sustainable rate -- a judgment fiercely 
denied by the government. Mr Abdul Taib Mahmud has been 
Sarawak's chief minister since 1981. In exchange for support of 
Dr Mahathir's national front coalition government, Sarawak is 
left largely to govern itself. 
  An uncle and political rival of Mr Taib once accused the 
chief minister and his political allies of controlling 30 per 
cent of Sarawak's timber concessions. Two of Mr Taib's sons are 
among Ekran's main shareholders. Mr James Wong, Sarawak's 
environment minister, also controls one of the state's biggest 
timber companies. 
  Bakun is being built on the upper reaches of the Rejang, 
Malaysia's longest river. An area of more than 80,000 hectares 
(200,000 acres), much of it virgin rain forest, will be clear 
cut to accommodate the dam. 
  Environmentalists allege logging has already caused severe 
soil erosion. Locals say ten years ago the Rejang's waters were 
clear and fish were abundant. Now the river, nearly a mile wide 
in places, is a muddy brown colour and there are few fish. 
Water levels fluctuate wildly. 
  The government seems determined that Bakun will go ahead but 
is waiting for Ekran to submit an environmental impact study on 
the project. It has yet to decide whether that study will be 
made public. 
  In the past Dr Mahathir has attacked both local and foreign 
groups that have lobbied on behalf of native peoples: he has 
said such groups would prefer to see the jungle dwellers living 
"like monkeys in trees" instead of sharing in Malaysia's 
development. 
  Lihan Ahang, a native chief at Long Murum, points to a faded 
black and white photograph of his grandfather, a warrior who 
fought against the Brookes, the White Rajahs of Borneo. "We are 
not against development," he says. "But I am sad about this 
project. It means giving up our lands and leaving the graves of 
our ancestors. It means changing our whole way of life." 

