BFN 

  [Text] Last night, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said 
the government of the republic will maintain the economic and 
social commitments made in the San Cristobal de las Casas 
dialogue, which was aimed at finding a political solution to the 
armed conflict in Chiapas. 
  After learning of the resignation of Manuel Camacho Solis, 
peace and reconciliation commissioner, the president announced 
the tasks to achieve peace in the state have been placed under 
the coordination of the spokesman of the executive office, 
headed by Governor Javier Lopez Moreno. 
  The president met with Manuel Camacho Solis, who presented 
his resignation as Chiapas peace and reconciliation 
commissioner, during the afternoon. The Mexican president 
acknowledged that the former foreign secretary had done his work 
in Chiapas "with personal honesty, political talent, and a 
desire to serve." 
  The president said the work Camacho Solis began on 10 
January 
contributed to the government-ordered cease-fire and the San 
Cristobal de las Casas dialogue. 
  Meanwhile, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, presidential 
candidate of the National Action Party (PAN), has said "it seems 
to me the decision expressed in Camacho Solis' public statement 
is respectable," adding the resignation letter of the now former 
commissioner is "serious and honorable." 
  Last night, the legislative faction of the Party of the 
Democratic Revolution (PRD) in the Chamber of Deputies issued a 
statement stating Camacho Solis' resignation "indicates a break 
with those who want to reduce the demands for democracy to their 
minimum expression and entails severe criticism of the chief of 
the executive due to his inability to restrain the government's 
most hardline sectors." 
  The PRD deputies have said Camacho's decision will create 
great tension among the participants in the Chiapas conflict and 
"increase the danger that hostilities will break out at any 
moment." 
  The PRD, the legislators have said, will insist with "every 
possible means" that it is necessary to continue seeking a 
political solution to the Chiapas conflict and a concrete and 
satisfactory reply to the Zapatist National Liberation Front's 
demands for real democracy. 
  Amalia Garcia, who participated in the meeting of 
intellectuals and politicians who proposed a peaceful transition 
to democracy, has said it was "unfortunate" that politicians 
with jobs "are relegated, while the opinions of those who 
maintain a hardline position in politics or who promote 
arbitrary decisions gain ground." She said this is a sign that 
the members of the government who "have favored dialogue and 
political negotiation are being pressured and excluded." 

