BFN 

  [Text] Russia attaches great importance to the visit to 
Moscow by the PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat (he is to arrive Tuesday 
at 18:00 at the government airport Vnukovo-2 -- "IF"). The 
statement was made in an interview with Interfax by the special 
representative of the Russian president, director of the Russian 
Foreign Ministry Middle East department, Viktor Posuvalyuk. 
  He said this would be the first visit by 'Arafat to the new 
democratic Russia where he is to meet Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin. The meeting is planned for 15:00 on April 19 in the 
Kremlin. 
  Posuvalyuk said that for Russia which along with the United 
States is a co-sponsor of the peace process in the Middle East, 
it is important to have a first-hand assessment by the 
Palestinian leader of the state of things at the 
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. The two sides will discuss 
the practical implementation of the Israeli-Palestinian 
Declaration on Principles signed in Washington last September, 
he said. 
  Posuvalyuk said that Israeli troops were to leave the Gaza 
Strip and Jerico shortly. So it would be good to speak about 
the prospects for trade and economic relations with the 
Palestinian territories, he said. 
  Posuvalyuk said that 'Arafat is to meet Tuesday with Russian 
Interior Minister Viktor Yerin (11:00, 16 Zhitnaya St -- "IF"). 
Both sides will discuss the request by Palestinians on 
assistance to them in creating and equipping the police force, 
he said. After the territories are liberated they are to be 
kept under control; naturally, the key role is to be played by 
the Palestinian police, which must be well-equipped, Posuvalyuk 
said. 
  Speaking about the situation at the Israeli-Palestinian 
talks, Posuvalyuk said that it raises cautious optimism. 
Nevertheless, there is hope that late in April-early in May the 
two sides will manage to sign an agreement on the Gaza Strip and 
Jerico, he said. 
  Posuvalyuk believes it is symbolic that Israeli Prime 
Minister Yitzhaq Rabin will arrive in Moscow on April 24-27 
after Yasir 'Arafat. 

