BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Phillip Johnston: "Major Reaffirms Hostility to </F>
Single Currency"] 
  [Text] The Prime Minister continued to push a sceptical 
line on Europe yesterday as campaigning for Thursday's elections 
entered the final few days with the Tories facing heavy losses. 
  Mr. John Major made clear that he was instinctively opposed 
to a single currency for Europe, although the Government's 
official policy is that a decision should be made by a future 
parliament. 
  Last month, Chancellor Helmut Kohl said he believed the 
Maastricht timetable for a move to a single currency by l999 was 
both achievable and desirable. But Mr. Major, interviewed on 
BBC television's Breakfast with Frost, said hostility to the 
idea was growing in Britain and across Europe. 
  "My instincts are not in favour of it," he said. "I can 
conceive circumstances a long time in the distance where it may 
conceivably be in our economic interests. 
  "I do not believe these circumstances will apply for a very 
long time, certainly not this side of the turn of the century or 
probably a long time after that. " 
  Mr. Major said he would "never say never" to the possibility 
of Britain eventually entering a currency union and while he saw 
some merits for the principle of the argument his objections 
were practical. He did not believe the economic circumstances 
of Europe would "converge" sufficiently to allow monetary union 
to happen. 
  Mr. Major's noticeably more ambivalent line towards European 
integration -- evinced by his call last week for a "multispeed", 
flexible community -- has dismayed some of his party's 
Euro-enthusiasts. It was pointed out yesterday that Mr. Michael 
Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary, was taken to task last 
month for voicing his own scepticism about a single currency, 
something the Prime Minister is now content to do himself. 
  But the bulk of Tory MPs appears happier with the line on 
Europe and believes the party now striking the right balance, 
putting clear water between them and their opponents. 
  Euro-sceptics are also anxious to exploit the change in tone 
to press Mr. Major to veto any attempt to appoint Belgium's 
federalist prime minister, M Jean Luc Dehaene, as the next 
Commission president in succession to M Jacques Delors. 
  Conservatives hope the distinctive policy the Government is 
trying to promote on Europe will encourage supporters to come 
out and vote on Thursday to forestall an anticipated debacle 
with the loss of at least a dozen seats. 
  Last week's Gallup poll for THE DAILY TELEGRAPH -- placing 
the Conservatives on 21 per cent, their poorest rating since 
1945 -- has encouraged the view that the Tories are facing 
humiliation. Significant losses, reducing the Conservatives to 
fewer than l0 of the country's 84 seats, would inevitably renew 
pressure on Mr. Major's leadership. 
  Mr. Major dismissed as "scare politics" yesterday Opposition 
claims that the Government was considering a further extension 
in the scope of VAT [Value Added Tax] in this year's Budget. 
Labour has elevated VAT to the forefront of its campaigning in 
the final few days of the European elections in the hope of 
exploiting voter anger at the taxing of domestic fuel and power 
at eight per cent in April. 
  The issue lost the Conservatives substantial support in 
by-elections last year and the latest controversy -- fuelled by 
the refusal of Mr. Kenneth Clarke, the Chancellor, to rule out 
future increases -- is seen by the Opposition as a timely 
reminder of the Government's "broken promises". 
  Mr. Major yesterday reaffirmed that the Government had "no 
plans, no intentions and no likelihood" of extending VAT to 
areas that remain zero-rated. 

