BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of letter to the chairmen of the UN Security Council </F>
and the UN General Assembly from the DRY Presidential Council, 
the chairmanship of the interim Assembly for National Salvation, 
and the DRY Council of Ministers; place and date not given] 
  [Text] We wish to convey to you and through you to all the 
member states of the UN Security Council and of the UN General 
Assembly our best greetings and to place before you this appeal 
on behalf of the Presidential Council, the interim Assembly for 
National Salvation, and the chairmanship of the Council of 
Ministers in the Democratic Republic of Yemen [DRY] in order to 
present to you the circumstances of the oppressive military 
aggression to which our people have been subjected by the ruling 
regime in Sanaa for over a month. This is to enable you to 
direct your attention and concern to bear on the matter and 
encourage you to adopt an immediate resolution providing for an 
end to the destructive war in both Sanaa and Aden, without any 
preconditions, and to invite the relevant Yemeni sides to engage 
in unconditional negotiations with a view to arriving at 
peaceful solutions to any differences between the two sides, 
under the auspices of the Arab league and the UN organization. 
In this context, we wish to place before you the following 
facts: 
  1. The ruling regime in Sanaa has in practical terms 
violated all legitimacy and constitutionality simply by having 
declared war against the Yemeni people, particularly against the 
southern and eastern governorates which currently constitute the 
DRY. 
  2. The declaration of war and its prosecution, and the 
rejection of national, Arab, and international appeals to stop 
the fighting, are scandalous violations of the fundamental bases 
of security and stability and expose the higher interests of the 
people and the homeland to great danger and damage. 
  3. Persisting with the war damages not only democratic 
Yemen, but also constitutes a danger to the whole region by 
threatening international peace and security. 
  4. The crimes which the Sanaa regime has committed through 
mounting operations of arrests, assassinations, torture and 
kidnapping of the opposition, and the political and patriotic 
[word indistinct] which rejected the method of war, are clear 
violations of human rights and the International Charter on 
Human Rights and of the two international charters [as heard] 
and of all the other international agreements which Yemen has 
signed. 
  5. The barefaced savage military aggression on the part of 
the Sanaa regime has basically targeted civilian areas and the 
civilian inhabitants in the border areas between the two 
countries. Hospitals, schools, resideces, electric power 
stations, and water reservoirs have been shelled in many of the 
DRY's cities and villages. 
  6. The declaration of war against the DRY means that the aim 
of the Sanaa regime is not unity, as it falsely states, but the 
entrenchment of more power and domination to gratify its 
ambitions and selfish interests which are basically 
irreconcilable with the higher interests of the people and 
homeland. The regime unleashed its aggression to eradicate 
these areas; to put an end to unity and to (?justify) the 
excuses it has served up. This made the establishment of the 
DRY unavoidable in order to salvage what could be salvaged for 
the homeland and the people. 
  7. Accordingly, the declaration of the establishment of the 
DRY was the logical result of this aggressive and destructive 
war. What the Sanaa regime is doing is perpetuating its 
aggression on another state. It is not an internal matter, as 
the rulers of Sanaa claim. Thus, the reestablishment of the DRY, 
with its complete leadership which it has had since 30 November 
1967, is a natural, legal act. 
  8. The Sanaa regime has recently escalated the fierceness of 
the fighting. It did so, after the matter was handed over to 
the UN Security Council by the Arab states, in a desperate 
attempt to establish a fait accompli and complete its occupation 
of a relatively large part of the territory of the DRY. In the 
face of this disastrous scenario, we appeal to you to take the 
initiative by immediately and instantly resolving the following: 
  1. An immediate and unconditional end to the war. 
  2. The withdrawal of the invasion forces of the Sanaa regime 
from the territory of the DRY to their own territory. 
  3. Dispatch of international forces to separate the forces 
of the two sides on the border between the two countries, or at 
least the dispatch of international observer forces to supervise 
observance of the cease-fire and to stop the fighting. 
  4. Issuance of an invitation to negotiate under the auspices 
of the United Nations and the Arab League. 
  5. Rejection of the principle to impose unity by force, 
which is in violation of international norms and of the new 
world order. 
  6. Application of Section 7 of the UN Charter to authorize 
the use of force if the Sanaa regime refrains from adhering to 
these resolutions. 
  7. Genocide and the destruction of the social, military and 
economic foundations of any country is an act that ineluctably 
attracts the intervention of the international community to 
protect the basic rights of any people. These rights include 
life, security, stability and to choose its political, social 
and international system -- to secure for the people all the 
guarantees declared in the international human rights 
declaration. Article 30 of the International Declaration on 
Human Rights states that it does not contain any provision which 
can be interpreted as permitting a state to take any action, 
activity or [word indistinct] aimed at destroying the rights and 
freedoms laid down in the declaration. 
  We are confident that you will respond to this appeal and 
issue your just resolution as quickly as possible with a view to 
preserving the fundamental considerations of security and 
international peace and so as to prevent the sparks of the 
destructive war from being transferred to the neighboring 
states. As for the fabrication that what is happening is an 
internal matter as claimed by the Sanaa regime, in spite of the 
fact that it is aggression against another side in the union, 
this has now become aggression against a state whose 
establishment has been declared. In this respect, Article 2, 
Chapter 7 of the UN Charter lays down at its end and that 
interference in [internal] affairs is the province of the 
internal authorities of a state but this must not detract from 
the application of curbs as laid down in Chapter 7 of the 
charter. This means that there can be intervention under 
exceptional circumstances in these affairs if international 
security and peace is threatened. 
  This is what is happening now in the broadening of the scope 
of the military battles, which are likely to expose 
international peace and security to danger. Moreover, waging 
war and declaring battle by internal authorities in any state 
cannot be regarded as an internal matter by any yardstick, 
because it is not an internal matter. Military aggression is 
now being directed against all the governorates which formerly 
comprised a UN member state and the second partner in the 
unified state, which [the unified state] alone has the right to 
wage war, as opposed to the remaining governorates which used to 
form the Yemeni Arab Republic having that right. So this is far 
from being an internal matter. On the contrary, it is naked 
aggression by one side against another. Moreover, the aims of 
this aggression and its results violate the aims of the UN 
organization and its principles, as set out in the first chapter 
of the charter. 
  Furthermore, any state which is not a member of the United 
Nations has the right to approach the Security Council in 
respect of any conflict to which it is party provided it accepts 
in advance a peaceful solution as provided for in the UN 
Charter. This is provided for under Chapter 35, Article 2 of 
the charter. Accordingly, the rejection by the other side of the 
peaceful solution also gives the Security Council the right to 
apply Chapter 7 of the charter without any hesitation. 
  In conclusion, we hope that we have clarified our position, 
which aims at preserving security and peace, the safety of the 
lives of the civilians, and ending the destruction, and we await 
from you a positive stance in this respect. We also hope that 
this appeal of ours will be classified as a document among the 
documents of the United Nations and that it will be distributed 
to the member states. Accept our compliments: 
  [Signed] DRY Presidential Council, chairmanship of the 
interim Assembly for National Salvation, and the chairmanship of 
the DRY Council of Ministers 

