Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article published in the 13 February Sunday edition of </F>
JUVENTUD REBELDE: "What Happened at the U.S. Interests Section?] 
  [Text] Havana -- The following is a chronology and analysis 
of the incidents promoted in the vicinity of the U.S. Interests 
Section in Cuba over the past three days, after the 
counterrevolution launched a wave of speculation and rumors 
about an alleged withdrawal of Cuban guards. 
  Counterrevolutionary organizations in Miami and the special 
services of imperialism are totally responsible for the 
incidents near the offices of the U.S. Interests Section in Cuba 
on 10 and 11 February 1994. 
  With the intention of denigrating the revolution and 
provoking an incident that could hinder -- and hinder more than 
one could imagine -- the nonexistent relations between the two 
countries, they tried to promote a massive incursion of citizens 
into the offices of the U.S. Interests Section. 
  In their attempt, they used a strategy of rumors. They 
circulated false reports that claimed the Cuban Government was 
interested in encouraging an action of this nature, that the 
guards had been withdrawn, that the U.S. Government would 
benefit from this, and that visas were expeditiously being 
issued to anyone who entered the diplomatic mission. 
  It did not matter to them that encouraging actions of this 
nature not only could hinder the normal activities at the 
diplomatic mission, but that such actions might even endanger 
the lives of the officials who work there. 
  With regard to the incidents, some international press 
agencies have reported their versions to the world. This is our 
version. We have nothing to hide. We have never had to hide 
anything. 
  In addition to observing absolute honesty in performing its 
functions, the Cuban Government has invariably and 
systematically practiced -- from the historical days of Moncada 
-- a policy of principles, part of which is absolute and 
unconditional respect for truth. 
  These are the facts: 
<H5>  10 February </H5>
  From the morning hours and throughout the day, a rumor 
begins 
to spread in Havana that all of the guard posts have been 
removed from the U.S. Interests Section and that visas are being 
issued to all those who present themselves at the offices. 
  1700: Twelve citizens who live in Cojimar publicly express 
their intention to go to the U.S. Interests Section. Party 
officials explain to them that the rumors are false. They give 
up on the idea. 
  1940: The rumor spreads among several groups in Centro 
Havana 
Municipality. Some residents head for the area where the U.S. 
Interests Section is located. 
  2045: Guards at the Embassy ask 25 people approaching the 
area with the clear intention of entering the U.S. Interests 
Section to turn back. Most of these people are residents of 
Arroyo Naranjo Municipality. Several of them are accompanied by 
their children and are carrying small bundles of clothes. 
<H5>  11 February </H5>
  0100: Interior Ministry forces use police barriers to cordon 
off all access to the U.S. Interests Section in an attempt to 
keep the groups from getting near the offices. 
  0230: Thirty-six people, including six children, express 
their intention of entering the U.S. Interests Section. They 
are informed about the rumors spread by unscrupulous people. 
Following several discussions, they leave the area. 
  By this time, these small groups begin mixing with those who 
have appointments at the U.S. Interests Section to complete 
their visa paperwork. 
  Up until this time, those who have gone to the U.S. 
Interests 
Section are mostly parents, some with their children, many who 
have been denied a visas in the past or who have been waiting 
for a long time for an answer. They do not create any problems 
when they are told they have been fooled. 
  0900: The police cordon is removed. 
  1130: Several bicyclists, in an openly hostile manner, begin 
to gather at the intersection of the highway and 11th Street 
only a few meters from the U.S. Interests Section. They are 
ordered to withdraw. 
  At this time, the type of people approaching the area begins 
to change. The absence of confused people is noted and the 
presence of lumpen becomes obvious, once again demonstrating 
that this is the kind of situation the counterrevolution takes 
advantage of. One of the bicyclists is spotted with a knife 
hidden under his shirt. 
  1430: At Calzada and N Streets, a group of about 80 of 
these cyclists are ordered to disperse. They withdraw. At 
1500, they return to the same place. They are again told to 
disperse. 
  1730: A group of 60-70 people, including some agitators, 
walk 
by the city's seawall toward the mission with the intention of 
breaking in. Revolutionaries stationed in that same area foil 
the attempt. The alleged leaders are arrested. 
  1800: The police cordon goes up to prevent access to the 
area 
near the building. 
  1830-1900: The worst incident so far takes place when a 
group 
of 80-90 people try to forcibly break through the human cordon. 
They do no achieve their objective. The people who incited 
this action are arrested. 
  2130: A group that planned to carry out a similar action is 
dispersed near La Piragua Pizza Parlor. 
  2345: Summoned by the Foreign Ministry, Messrs. Joseph 
Sullivan and Vincent Mayer, principal officer and deputy 
principal officer of the U.S. Interests Section, go there and 
meet with Comrade Bienvenido Garcia, the North America affairs 
director. 
  They are informed of the Cuban Government's viewpoint on the 
events that took place and the measures taken to prevent acts of 
violence against the mission. They are also told it would be 
advisable for the said mission to contribute to dispelling the 
confusion that has arisen regarding its policy and procedures on 
granting visas. 
<H5>  12 February </H5>
  No incidents take place. The police cordon is lifted in the 
early morning hours. 
  During the course of these events, 82 people were identified 
and briefly detained. Some citizens are still under arrest, and 
an appropriate investigation is being conducted to locate the 
instigators of these incidents. 
  Several of the participants indicated having heard from 
radio 
stations that broadcast to Cuba from the United States that 
visas would be freely granted. 
  The masterminds are at large. This is how the 
counterrevolutionary and imperialist mechanisms work; they are 
based on deceit and cynicism. 
  This is how they manipulate the feelings of those who are 
incapable of enduring the living conditions imposed by the 
blockade promoted by the United States and, in turn, are eager 
to migrate north. 
  Why are they promoting this now? What is it that hurts them? 
  Could it be that they, in their 35 years of frustration, 
cannot stand to see a Cuba capable of resisting and, in its 
benevolence, taking steps to reunite Cuban families? 
  Could it be that they want to create incidents to hamper the 
meeting called by Cuba? 
  Are they trying to compile a dossier with this incident to 
justify their false accusations against our country before the 
UN Human Rights Commission, which is currently meeting in 
Geneva?" 
  Did they want to taint the activities in favor of Cuba they 
knew were to take place on 12 February in New York or the 
presentation of a proposal by Charles Rangel before the U.S. 
Congress to lift the blockade? 
  Is it, perhaps, that they in their arrogance cannot take so 
many consecutive blows, such as Foreign Minister Roberto 
Robaina's successful tour of Africa; the recent statements about 
Fidel Castro by the great Jewish rabbi of Israel; Assembly 
President Alarcon's trip to several European nations; the 
agreements Cuba has signed with businessmen from several 
developed nations -- businessmen who have publicly expressed the 
viability of their Cuban projects; or the outstanding success of 
economist Carlos Lage's trip to three countries on the continent? 
  The imperialists, the counterrevolutionaries in Miami, and 
the agitators disguised as dissidents are entirely and 
exclusively responsible for what happened. 
  Cuba does not conduct policy by way of force, it has no 
military bases in any other country, it does not finance 
television or radio broadcasts aimed at any other government, 
and it does not offer its territory as a refuge for terrorist 
organizations which have the necessary materials and the radio 
broadcast capabilities to promote incidents such as this. 
  Cuba's political strength is in its proverbial fairness, its 
striking clarity, and its faithfulness to the principles it 
proclaims. 
  Embassies in Cuba will always have the necessary protection 
and the facilities to allow them to conduct their day-to-day 
activities and to provide security for their members, who, in 
turn, have the moral obligation not to promote activities other 
than their proper diplomatic functions. 
  The attempt to blame the Cuban media for this incident 
because of the recent publication of a series of works on the 
subject of immigration is merely a maneuver by some U.S. sectors 
bidding to hide the true roots of the problem. It is childish 
to try to blame a situation on those who condemn and denounce it. 
  Once again, it has been demonstrated that the streets of 
this 
country belong to revolutionaries now and forever. No one, 
under any pretext, will be able to attempt impunity when acting 
against the independence of the motherland. The Cuban economy 
might be enduring a special period, but this is not the case for 
the dignity and decency of a nation that proves its heroism 
everyday. 
  Today we must be more vigilant than ever. What imperialism 
has been unable to achieve by way of the Bay of Pigs and during 
all of these years, it is now trying to achieve -- as in the 
sixties -- by way of spreading lies and rumors to provoke 
incidents that favor their schemes. 
  The Cuban Government is not the one that must offer 
explanations to the people going to the U.S. Interests Section; 
rather, it is the U.S. officials themselves. It is true that 
the U.S. officials have disclosed the proper procedures to 
obtain visas, which has contributed to expelling the rumors and 
baseless myths some people have fabricated. Our actions and 
duties, as irrefutably shown throughout the course of events, 
are strictly within the framework of our obligations as a host 
country, and our actions and duties have been fulfilled fairly 
and efficiently. As far as Cuba is concerned, it will continue 
providing every facility to those granted visas to travel or 
immigrate to the United States. 
  Nothing happened at the U.S. Interests Section. There are no 
Cuban citizens inside the building. No one was hurt or injured. 
  Once the rumors were denied, everything returned to normal. 
Incidents of this type and irresponsible actions can trigger 
more serious consequences, and those who encourage such actions 
will be entirely responsible. 
  Let this incident be a lesson to the unscrupulous authors of 
the adventure. No country will ever be able to trample on the 
revolution because, in order to do so, it would have to trample 
on the courage and determination of millions of Cubans who do 
not believe lies or rumors when it comes to defending their 
motherland. 

