BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Professor Leszek Balcerowicz, compiled by </F>
Czeslaw Rychlewski: "What Kind of Economy?; Freedom Is a Source 
of Development"] 
  [Text] One must first of all pose the following question: 
What kind of requirements should the economic system in Poland 
meet? In my view, it should serve four goals: first, assure 
economic freedom; second, enable rapid development--that is to 
say, establish more and more jobs that would be increasingly 
productive; third, assure equal opportunities to the maximum 
extent possible--that equality of opportunity must not be 
confused with an equality of situation (for instance, of income 
levels); and fourth, limit to a minimum the harmful impact of 
practical economic activity on the environment. There is 
far-reaching coherence among these goals, meaning that whatever 
serves one of them usually serves the remaining ones, as well. 
  Long-term planning, which in enterprises is based on the 
stability of currency, the law, and politics, is the basis for 
development. Immediate goals cannot take precedence over 
long-term ones--for instance, a short-term consumption of 
investment activity. That is because the long-term consumption 
level will suffer as a result. The existence of efficient 
financial institutions is also indispensable. 
  Rapid and long-prospect development continues to require an 
economy based on private ownership. There is no justification 
for distinguishing so-called strategic branches that are 
supposed to remain in the state's hands. Telecommunications, 
transportation, and the energy industry should be subjected to 
the same kinds of requirements as other economic sectors. 
  A long-term development of the country is not possible 
without competition. Experience shows that detailed 
interventionist policies are the main source of corruption and 
inefficiency everywhere. Such policies impede individual 
entrepreneurship, which is a progressive factor provided the 
principle of equal opportunities--meaning that people's 
situations are determined by their mental and personal skills 
and not by the force of pressure applied on the state--is 
respected. With rapid development based on the principle of a 
major equality of opportunities, the discrepancy between income 
levels proves much smaller than in many countries that were 
developing at a slower pace because they were hampered by 
pressure groups linked to the state apparatus. A comparison 
between countries of Southeast Asia and Latin America proves the 
point. 
  Aside from that, capitalist principles of economic 
management 
can also be made to serve ecology--of course, to the extent that 
it is possible in the real world. If one just pays for using 
the resources of the natural environment, the huge, capitalist 
mechanism leads to a wise and reasonable exploitation of that 
environment. That can be clearly seen in developed capitalist 
countries. 
  At what stage are we? Our economy is in much better shape 
than what we inherited in 1989. But there is still a lot to be 
done, and, apart from that, some dangers are emerging for what 
we have already achieved. We should lower the inflation level 
to 5 percent per year at the most. That is going to be very 
difficult, given the strong pressure to increase earnings; the 
pressure is much greater than in other postsocialist countries. 
Trade unions must make a decision: Do they want to be a source 
of populist pressures that create unemployment, or do they want 
to contribute to creating new and productive jobs? 
Prodevelopmental relations in enterprises will take place only 
when profits are not constantly pressured by earnings but, 
instead, are devoted to investments. 
  I can also perceive dangers for economic freedoms and for 
competition. There is an attempt to return to monopolistic 
structures under the old banner of putting the economy in order. 
As a result of the introduction of compensatory payments on 
imported agricultural products, Poland is heading in the 
direction of an agricultural policy that has become the source 
of waste and social injustice in EC countries that are wealthier 
than we are. 
  There are also disturbing trends visible in privatization 
that have aroused political disputes anew. As a result of 
unstable and populist policies, we have already wasted about two 
years, and, right now, the privatization of more banks, among 
others, is being delayed again. Reforms of the social insurance 
system, the educational system, or health protection should not 
be postponed, either. Reforms condition the correct functioning 
of these important areas and are also nursing public finances 
back to health. 
  Economic reforms can be continued in an efficient manner 
only 
within an appropriate, stable political framework. 
Unfortunately, Poland lacks that at the moment. The vacuum in 
the Finance Ministry is cause for concern, as well as recent 
personnel decisions subordinated to party politics. There is no 
constitution that would protect the economy against the 
destructive influence of populist policies. Strong, 
constitutional safeguards of economic freedoms are needed. 
Constitutional provisions should also strengthen the central 
bank's position, and they should shield the budget against 
unprotected expenditures. Only then will we have a strong 
currency. 

