Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "New Triangular Relationship--Deterioration of </F>
Taiwan Firms Two Sides of the Strait Advantage"] 
  [Text] New Triangular Relationship Emerges 
In Shanghai, Acer's Neon Sign Adds Luster to the Night on the 
City's Most Crowded Thoroughfare, Nanjing Road. Near Beijing 
Airport, Lienhua Electronics--China's largest integrated circuit 
plant--shares honors with arriving and departing tourists. 
  During 1992, the 200 percent growth of the Taiwan 
information 
business' investment in the mainland far surpassed its 
investment in other areas. But investment in Taiwan itself was 
less than 20 percent. 
  No longer is the investment in traditional industries like 
shoes, umbrellas, and brief cases. Even scientific and technical 
industries on which Taiwan pins its future hopes have rapidly 
become infected with the mainland craze. Relations between the 
two sides of the strait have entered a new stage of change from 
the quantitative to the qualitative. 
  Separate interests of the scalene triangle made up of Taiwan 
firms, Taiwan, and the mainland differ. 
  Is Taiwan firms opening up of the opposite shore more 
quickly 
and more deeply just an expansion of Taiwan businesses operating 
territory or might it put pressure on Taiwan's living space? 
  At a time when the whole world is advancing along the road 
of 
regional economic integration, in the long-range picture that 
Taiwan economic decision makers portray for getting enterprises 
to put down firm roots and home and develop and grow elsewhere, 
science and technology industries are to receive the baton and 
drive ahead in replacing old industries with new ones. 
  They are completely confident about Taiwan's scientific and 
technical industries for good reason. Taiwan's information and 
electronics industries have truly won a share in the global 
division of labor system. Major information firms in Europe and 
the Americas have recently been scrambling to improve their ties 
with Taiwan manufacturers. This has made Taiwan a world class 
manufacturing site. Its fixed mount scanners, personal computer 
mainframes, and its monitoring devices rank first in the world. 
  Through the transformation of time and space, the real and 
the bogus may be turned upside down all of a sudden. Were they 
to fly less that a hour's flight distant from Taiwan to Shenzhen 
and look at the blending and transformation of the scientific 
and technical industries of both side of the Strait, they would 
certainly revise with extreme vigilance the strong convictions 
they formerly held. 
  It is ten past noon, and the narrow Shanchuan Lane in the 
Shenzhen Special Economic Zone [SEZ] is bustling. Women 
employees on lunch break are shampooing their hair beside Lutian 
Street. In the bamboo fence-decorated restaurant, Teng Hung-lin, 
who hails from Taitung, and who is wearing a pair of black 
jeans, high top athletic shoes, and a white T-shirt, is eating 
some spicy Sichuan dandan noodles. He is talking about the 
monthly output of 200,000 computer mainframes: "My output is now 
more than everyone's." Laughingly, he said, "On lunar new year's 
eve, we gave a party for 50 tables full of guests." 
  It is hard to believe that this factory could be so 
extraordinarily brave. By comparison with most Taiwan 
air-conditioned plants, the plant that this Taiwan trader has 
leased in Shenzhen looks for all the world like an old flour 
mill. The only thing in the plant's original color cement wall 
office that makes one think about modern science and technology 
is the newest NEC script writer color computer. "Our people run 
back and forth to Taiwan frequently. It is very convenient," 
Teng says. 
  "I was the one who got this plant going," Teng Hung-lin 
acknowledges. The successful experiences that Taiwan's 
information electronics industry worked out over a period of 
many years have been moved lock, stock, and barrel to the 
mainland. They have been combined here with the mainland's 
copious manpower to produce newer competition. 
  Taiwan firms have a lock on the source of computer chip 
components. They control things coming and going. Typically, 
Teng Hung-lin has also invested in a Taiwan chip designing 
company. The computer chip sockets that Taiwan entrepreneurs 
have recently produced, Teng Hung-lin is also developing in his 
own building in Shenzhen. "I can save two New Taiwan dollars on 
each one," he says shaking the part he is holding in his hand. 
In order to meet quality requirements for precision production, 
Taiwan firms have brought in NT$2 million robots that accurately 
bond small parts to the surface of circuit boards. Teng Hung-lin 
even managed to save this NT$2 million investment by simply 
training manual operators, using manpower to counter machines. 
"Now I depend on those six pair of hands," he said happily. 
  In the western suburbs of Shanghai, just a one-hour flight 
north of Shenzhen, is what Chou Cheng-jung forecast in 1959 like 
Teng Hung-lin. Although one out of every two monitors in the 
world were made in Taiwan in 1992, "by the end of 1992, Taiwan 
will be unable to make any monochrome computer monitors." Chou 
Cheng-jung, who was in charge of Taiwan Ch'uan-nao Electronics' 
European market, has now shifted his base to Shanghai where he 
is cooperating with the Shanghai Electron Tube Plant in turning 
out monitors. 
  People travel back and forth in a steady stream from south 
and north in the mainland, exploring avenues for Taiwan's 
information electronics industry. Not only have power supply 
devices, monitors, and mainframes gradually become production 
staples, but a computer software industry, which Taiwan has long 
wanted to develop vigorously but which has not been successful 
in Taiwan, is now beginning to be developed on the mainland by 
the Taiwan information industry using factory-like quantity 
production methods. Even cooperation on high definition 
television (HDTV), which is still in the developmental state, is 
being discussed between Taiwan and the mainland. 
<H5>  Transfers Abroad Too Rapid! </H5>
  Zhou Muchang [0719 1970 2490], director of the Chinese 
mainland's Ministry of Electronics Computer Research Center, 
said with a smile:"Between 70 and 80 percent of Taiwan's more 
than 400 important information concerns are cooperating with the 
mainland." 
  This tide has greatly reversed the direction of flow of 
Taiwan capital and technology. Southeast Asia has been the 
region in which the information electronics industry has 
invested heavily. During the previous two or three years, Taiwan 
had been the largest foreign investor in ASEAN countries such as 
Malaysia and Thailand, and its investment in electronics-related 
industries there was most dazzling. During the past year, 
however, the overall amount of Taiwan's investment in southeast 
Asia has fallen off sharply. Statistics from the information 
electronics industry alone provide a strong indication of this. 
The Southeast Asia fever that flourished for a time has given 
way to a mainland China fever. 
  "This is really a cause for concern. The shift abroad is 
really too fast," said Li Ta-wei [2621 1129 5898] of the 
Statistical Commission's Market Information Center, who is 
responsible for keeping track of Taiwan entrepreneurs' 
investment abroad. Pointing at the figures, he said, "In 
Southeast Asia, it is only a little more than 20 percent of 
normal growth, but on the mainland, it has been a growth of 
several hundred percent." 
  Even though the mainland is currently unable to compete with 
Taiwan on relatively high quality products, and although most 
Taiwan entrepreneurs predict that Taiwan still has a three to 
five year lead, the mainland's information electronics industry 
has recently shown itself to be on the rise. During the first 
half of 1993 alone, mainland information industry exports 
increased 200 percent over the same period during the previous 
year. The personal computer internal sales market for the year 
also caught up with Taiwan's average 350,000 units. 
  The China mainland general manager of the American 
Hewlett-Packard Computer Corporation, Cheng Tianzong [4453 1131 
4912], reminded that when looking at a competitor, "you must not 
always look at his shortcomings; you should look at the way in 
which he is changing." 
<H5>  Entry Into an Entirely New Stage </H5>
  When traditional industries such as shoe, umbrella, and 
Christmas decoration industries went ashore on the other side of 
the Strait one after another, Taiwan said complacently: This is 
an elimination of industries that is inevitable as the economy 
escalates. Scientific and technical industries will receive the 
baton and carrying on the task of pulling up the industrial 
level. Today, however, even scientific and technical industries 
can hardly escape catching the mainland craze. This is fully 
demonstrated by economic and trade relations between the two 
sides of the Strait entering an entirely new phase of change 
from quantity and the spurring of qualitative change. 
  The speed and the number of scientific and technical 
industries that have surged into the mainland has increased 
tremendously. This is bound to hurt Taiwan. Once the factories 
that Taiwan firms rushed to build go into operation, will the 
large number of scientific and technical enterprises that have a 
blood relationship with Taiwan and whose mainland personnel are 
well-versed in production skills expand the operating area of 
Taiwan enterprises, or will they turn around and put pressure on 
Taiwan's living space? 
  Zhang Jichun [1728 1807 5028], who is in charge of economic 
relations and trade in Shanghai's Taiwan Office, and who studied 
biochemistry at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, showed that 
chemistry remains his basic profession when he said, "What is 
going on is a chemical compounding reaction between both sides 
of the Strait." 
  Once a chemical reaction occurs, an entirely new material 
results. A return to the original state is impossible. Once 
economic relations and trade between both sides of the Strait 
have been largely meshed, a new stage will come into being. When 
they were in Taiwan, each increase in production that Taiwan 
firms made was a contribution to the country. The interests of 
the government and enterprises were identical. That time has 
passed never to return. 
  Henceforth, economic and trade relations across the Taiwan 
Strait will no longer be in a straight line between two sides, 
but a scalene triangle among Taiwan, the mainland, and Taiwan 
firms, each one of which will use different means to attain its 
own interests. Taiwan firms must strive to make their own 
businesses prosper; Taiwan must maintain its own security and 
open new room for maneuver; and the mainland will be intent on 
acquiring Taiwan's economic resources and experience while 
simultaneously moderately extending sovereignty over Taiwan. 
  In the new triangular relationship, the three parties will 
explore and experiment in an effort to find ideal long-term and 
near-term relations. 
  Looked at solely in terms of the development of scientific 
and technical industries, Taiwan and the mainland really need 
each other. 
  The mainland needs Taiwan because scientists and technicians 
on the mainland, which is able to launch artificial satellites 
and nuclear bombs, are truly unfamiliar with large scale 
microcomputer production and sales. Zhou Muchang, the minister 
of Electronics Industry admitted that despite having spent a 
large amount of money on computer technology to build 21 
production lines, the Chinese Communists were never able to 
establish an internationally competitive industrial base. 
"Taiwan's success is distinctive. China needs to study it, but 
complete imitation is not possible, because times have changed." 
Zhou Muchang did not try to hide the Chinese Communists hope of 
using Taiwan to guide and build its personal computer industry: 
"Technology is changing too rapidly today. We need time to 
develop, and the best way is to cooperate with firms abroad like 
Taiwan's." 
  However, Taiwan's scientific and technical enterprises must 
also narrow the distance with the mainland. 
<H5>  A Copious Manpower and Technology Market </H5>
  Hsu Hsiang-sheng [1775 3276 3932], the person responsible 
for 
Acer on the mainland who went to Beijing to set up a base in 
April 1993, affirmed in his office that no one dared 
underestimate the market potential of the mainland. "If Acer is 
to become a world class computer firm, it will have to come to 
the mainland." An ordinary single occupancy room on the eleventh 
floor of Beijing's Olympic Building is both Hsu Hsiang-sheng's 
office and bedroom. 
  An even more important pressure driving Taiwan entrepreneurs 
toward the mainland is unremitting and more varied competition 
at home and abroad. 
  Some of the scientific and technical entrepreneurs arriving 
in the mainland receive a respect that operators of industries 
in Taiwan are not accorded. Yingyeda [phonetic], which produces 
computers and script writer computers has long worked to no 
avail to recruit personnel in Taiwan to meet its professional 
needs. "We spent more than NT$2 million a month on newspaper 
ads, but we received no more than 10 letters in reply," 
assistant general manager Lai Chen-hsing [6351 2182 5281] 
reflected. 
  Finally, Yingyeda decided to set up a site in Shanghai where 
it could make use of the manpower supply network that Shanghai's 
58 institutions of higher education had set up. Lai Chen-hsing 
also remembered having spent a little more than NT$60 to join 
the Shanghai Talent Recruitment Association and finding 25 
people at one time. Today, Yingyeda is using more than 200 
technical personnel in Shanghai, each one of which has a 
computer to write computer, telephone, and electronic dictionary 
software just like the software factories in Japan. 
  When Yingyeda built its plant, the chairman of the board, 
Yeh 
Kuo-hui [0673 0948 6540] personally planned the plant site. He 
went to Shanghai at least three times monthly to superintend. In 
addition, since Shanghai listed construction of the Yingyeda 
plant as a key construction project, it was given full local 
support in the same way as the subway and the Yangpu Bridge. A 
seven story factory building was completed within 11 months. 
  The concrete gains of Taiwan firms from the use of the 
mainland may be easily quantified, but the effect on Taiwan as a 
whole is difficult to estimate. 
  Li Ta-wei of the Statistical Council warns: "The mainland's 
finest production technology is now in the hands of Taiwan 
firms." Under guidance and direction from Taiwan firms, the 
mainland's information electronics industry climate is bound to 
improve over time. He said, "Taiwan depends on an industrial 
network. If it moves out of Taiwan, Taiwan's advantage will not 
last for long." 
  Drawn by Taiwan firms, this network is gradually moving into 
the mainland. Not only has production of all computer components 
such as power supplies and keyboard been moved to the mainland, 
but Taiwan's parts importing and supply firms have also began 
vigorous development of the mainland market. The mainland's 
first goal is to hold fast to Taiwan firms that land there. Now 
that Philipps and China Kinescope have decided to set up plants 
on the mainland, the impetus of the mainland's computer monitor 
industry has recently become greater and greater. 
<H5>  Complete Transplant of Industrial System </H5>
  Some firms have adopted the methods of Japan's Toyota 
Automobile Corporation, completely moving to the mainland 
upstream and downstream firms. Gyokusei Computer, which owes its 
rise to mainframe production, has begun to build a complete 
system in Shenzhen, Guangdong Province. Not only is Gyokusei's 
mainframe plant in Shenzhen, but it is also producing keyboards 
and computer cases there. Gyokusei has also moved to the 
mainland, where it is planning to set up another base, the 
surface bonding equipment for even the script writer computers 
that it is making an all out effort to put into production in 
Taiwan. Remembering when Gyokusei had nearly 1,000 employees in 
Taiwan a year ago, one observer said, "Gyokusei used to be one 
of the world's first three mainframe plants, but today it has 
fewer than 300 people remaining in Taiwan." 
  Not only has Taiwan changed the industrial environment for 
supporting the mainland, but western nations, which formerly 
strictly controlled the export of technology to the mainland, 
have become increasingly liberal recently. In addition, Hong 
Kong and Chinese firms supply each others needs. The channels 
through which the mainland obtains components are becoming wider 
and wider. Saige [phonetic] Electronics Equipment Plaza is a 
virtual reproduction of Taipei's Kuanghua Market. One 
businessman said descriptively, "Once a foreign chip is 
marketed, Saige has it a week afterward." A Taiwan computer 
mainframe plant official who set up a factory in Guangdong 
admitted frankly, " I go through Hong Kong to buy parts. I do 
not have to have anything to do with Taiwan." 
<H5>  Island Taiwan's Challenge </H5>
  The biggest sticking point for Taiwan in the current Taiwan 
trader construction of a network that bridges the Taiwan Strait 
is how to make a distinction that does not hurt Taiwan firms 
while still protecting Taiwan. 
  In early November, Minister of Economic Affairs, Chiang 
Ping-k'un [3068 0014 0981], held a breakfast discussion with 
Taiwan industrialists. On the advice of industrial concerns, 
Chiang Ping-k'un agreed to change the way of listing mainland 
investment projects from those that are government-approved to 
those that are not government-approved. After discussion within 
the government, although the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
countermanded this order, the Deputy Minister of Economic 
Affairs, Yang Shih-chien [2799 0013 4873], agreed that the 
government would gradually decontrol the importation of mainland 
semi-manufactures. 
  This government announcement meant that in the long contest 
for economic dominance, the mainland seemed to have pushed 
another step forward. It was only two weeks before the 
controversy that Liu Zhentao [0491 7201 3447], director of the 
Economic Bureau of the China mainland-Taiwan Office emphasized 
that getting Taiwan to decontrol the importation of mainland 
semi-manufactures was an economic and trade breakthrough that 
the Chinese Communists were currently striving to obtain. He 
acknowledged frankly that this was a Chinese Communist riposte 
to the "retain roots in Taiwan" that Taiwan shouts to the skies. 
"I feel that "retain roots in Taiwan" is a Taiwan ploy against 
the mainland," Liu Zhentao said. No matter whether retain roots 
in Taiwan is really a ploy, or whether it is just a slogan, 
Taiwan firms were successful in getting the importation of 
mainland semi-manufactures decontrolled. 
  At a time when the whole work is calling for regional 
economies, the most difficult challenge to island Taiwan may be 
how to be a good regional partner, and how to be able genuinely 
to protect its own supreme national interests while being in the 
regional maelstrom. 

