BFN 

  [Text] The contents of a draft report the government plans 
to submit at the UN "International Conference on Population and 
Development" (ICPD), which is to be held this September in 
Cairo, was revealed on 1 March. In the report, the government 
touches on such issues as population trends and reduced birth 
rates. Regarding environmental hazards brought about by 
population growth concentrated in particular regions, the 
government concludes that "A high standard of education has 
enabled the nation to overcome such problems rather quickly." 
However, the government completely fails to touch on 
environmental issues which large cities face, such as huge 
amounts of garbage and air pollution. This stance is expected 
to cause a stir, inasmuch as the main theme of the Cairo 
conference includes "population, development, and environment." 
  The government's draft report consists of 17 pages of text 
divided into four major sections: 
  1) population trends and future outlook; 
  2) current situation regarding government policies related 
to 
population trends; 
  3) international cooperation regarding population issues; 
and 
  4) summary and conclusion. 
  Seven sets of graphical data, such as that showing trends in 
average lifespans, are also included in the draft report. 
  Regarding problems resulting from population movements 
within 
the nation, the government, in the report, refers to the cases 
of Tokyo, Osaka, and Kyoto as examples. It points out that in 
these cities, "the population began growing in the 1960's due to 
the development of heavy chemical industries and the urban 
living environment rapidly deteriorated." It adds that the 
nation "was able to proceed with economic development in harmony 
with environmental preservation, after succeeding in overcoming 
population, developmental, and environmental crises rather 
quickly through public support and government efforts." 
  In the report, the government contends that the nation was 
able to overcome such crises due to "an especially high standard 
of education." It adds that "putting emphasis on education and 
the government's effective use of information play an invaluable 
role in international efforts to help developing countries with 
their population problems." 
  In Tokyo and other major cities, the problem of securing 
garbage disposal sites has become very serious. Nitrogen oxide 
emissions accompanying the sharp increase in automobile traffic 
have led to air pollution. The government fails to take up 
these issues in its draft report. In this regard, an official 
of the Health and Welfare Ministry explained: "It is impossible 
to cover all population-related issues, and there is also a 
limit to the report's length." 
  However, greater interest has been shown in developing 
countries concerning air pollution and garbage issues because 
recently, the environment has been deteriorating in these 
countries due to a rapidly growing population concentrated in 
cities. 

