Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin told the Knesset 
Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee today that the dialogue 
with the PLO on the resumption of the negotiations continues but 
no agreement has yet been reached. According to him, the 
emissaries he sent to Cairo to confer with 'Arafat clarified 
Israel's policy in the aftermath of the massacre, to the effect 
that the negotiations must be accelerated. Our correspondent 
Yo'el Nir reports: 
  [Begin recording] [passage omitted] [Nir] Referring to the 
contacts with the UN Security Council [UNSC] on passing a 
resolution similar to Resolution 799, adopted in the aftermath 
of the deportation of members of Hamas [Islamic Resistance 
Movement], Prime Minister Rabin said that Israel is perturbed by 
the attempt to include Jerusalem in the definition of occupied 
territories. We are dealing with this issue in cooperation with 
the Americans, he said, but they, too, have encountered 
difficulties in their contacts with other countries. 
  Summing up this chapter, Rabin said he believes the 
Palestinians want to resume the negotiations, but that they 
first want to score some achievement in the Security Council. 
Furthermore, from now on they will make every possible effort 
to raise the question of the safety of the Palestinians in the 
territories in whatever international forum possible, arguing 
that the Jewish settlers are given arms while the Palestinians 
do not possess any. [passage omitted] 
  As for the talk by prominent settlers about a civil 
uprising, 
Rabin said he had asked the legal establishment to deal with the 
issue and is now waiting for them to move their ass, as he put 
it. [end recording] 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1500 GMT on 8 March 
carries a related report on Rabin's appearance before the 
committee, adding: "The prime minister noted that the Religious 
Kibbutz Movement would like to either evacuate Netzarim in the 
Gaza Strip or exempt it from paying its outstanding debt for 
property it had purchased. I consulted the finance minister 
about this, and it may very well be that all of Netzarim's 
property will be transferred to the Treasury, Rabin noted. He 
confirmed that inhabitants of Qiryat Arba' had inquired about 
the possibility of getting government aid and housing if they 
leave the place. The Construction and Housing Ministry will 
look into the possibility of helping the applicants on a 
personal basis but not as a policy, the prime minister said." 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1700 GMT on 8 March 
notes that Rabin told the committee that "IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] officers contend that 1,000 soldiers must be deployed in 
Hebron in order to ensure the safety of the Jewish settlers in 
the city. He defined the situation in Hebron as a time bomb." 
The prime minister went on to say "that at this point, there 
has been no change in policy with regard to the closure. 
Consequently, he will not heed the Palestinians' demands to 
increase the number of worshipers allowed to pray on the Temple 
Mount on 11 March, the last Friday of Ramadan. He added that 
the decision to evacuate Jewish worshipers from the Western Wall 
last Friday was made with his approval. It was a one-time 
decision which does not point to a systematic trend, he said."] 

