BFN 

<F P=106> [By Javier Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 2 Jun (PL) -- Today, Acting Foreign Minister 
Isabel Allende met with a Belgian delegation to discuss the 
situation created by the illegal occupation of the Belgian 
ambassador's residence. 
  Foreign Ministry sources told PRENSA LATINA that today at 
the 
Foreign Ministry, Allende, accompanied by Serafin Rodriguez, 
head of the ministry's Europe Directorate, received Belgian 
Government special envoy Willy Verriest and Paul Vermkirsch, 
head of the Belgian delegation in Cuba. 
  The discussion centered on reviewing formulas and mechanisms 
necessary for finding a final solution to the problem that began 
on Saturday with the occupation of the building. 
  In addition, the Belgian delegation officially reported to 
the Cuban ministry that three more occupants have left the 
building. In all, four people have changed their minds and 
returned home without being stopped or otherwise disturbed by 
local authorities. The envoys report that 122 people -- 66 men, 
32 women, and 24 children -- remain in the building. 
  The source denied that Cuban authorities have encountered 
any 
difficulties in feeding these individuals. The source also 
noted that there are a number of enterprises that provide such 
supplies to diplomatic offices in the country. 
  The meeting also took note of the wide coverage 
international 
newspapers and television stations have given to several 
documents released by the people inside the ambassador's 
residence. Some of these documents are political statements. 
  PRENSA LATINA has learned that Cuban authorities are 
maintaining a security cordon around the occupied building, not 
only as part of their duty to the diplomatic representatives 
accredited in the island, but also in response to an explicit 
request from the Belgian Government. 
  One conclusion reached at today's talks was that both sides 
favor a solution in which those people illegally occupying the 
building vacate it and obey all legal procedures for traveling 
abroad. 

