BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Tansu Ciller has called on the 
Turkish citizens living abroad to contribute to the country in 
order to overcome Turkey's economic difficulties. Ciller said: 
Just think that if each of the 1 million citizens working 
abroad contributes only 1,000 German marks [DM], it will amount 
to 1 billion DM. Give the Turkish economy this strength, she 
added. Ciller announced that those that will send foreign 
currency to Turkey will be entitled to certain rights. In her 
speech which was broadcast by TRT-INT, Ciller pointed out that 
in addition to contributing to the development of the country 
wherein they reside, the Turkish citizens working in Europe are 
a proof of the longing Turkish people can have for their 
country. Ciller said: We are proud of the Turkish worker in 
Europe who serves as a bridge in promoting Turkey, a developing 
and progressing country. Ciller also stressed that the Turkish 
citizens in Europe are contributing greatly to Turkey's 
development with the money they send. 
  Explaining that Turkey is going through difficult times and 
that the Turkish people want to share the blessings of the world 
with other people, Ciller said: We are determined, together 
with you, to create a leading Turkey; a developed, esteemed, 
respected Turkey with a high standard of education. 
  Ciller stressed that the reason some people do not want a 
strong Turkey is due to its deep-rooted and dignified history -- 
reigning over a variety of people of different races, religions, 
and languages from the Indian Ocean to Central Europe. 
Explaining that those who cannot stand the fact that Turkish is 
being spoken from the Adriatic Sea to the Great Wall of China 
are afraid of the influence Turkey may have on the world and on 
the region with an improved economy. 
  Explaining that some people use terrorism as a means to 
divide Turkey, Ciller added that the end of the murderers are in 
sight thanks to the success of the security forces and the 
support of the people. Ciller said: Our determination in 
fighting terrorism destroyed the separatist bandits' ploys 
concerning Turkey. We are forced to spend the money allocated 
to the development of the country to fighting terrorism. Now 
the time has come to deal with the economy. We will overcome 
the economic problems with everybody's help and sacrifices. 
  Ciller continued: This country is our country. There is no 
other Turkey in the world and we believe that we will restore 
the economy with if we are united in faith. Indicating that the 
aim of the 5 April decisions is improving the economy, Ciller 
said: 
  [Begin Ciller recording] We will crush the monster called 
inflation and we will return the money of the people to the 
people and to our children. We will reestablish trust in the 
Turkish lira, to our national money. Of course, we have to 
trust our currency. If we trust ourselves, we also have to trust 
our national currency. We want to develop the economy and base 
it on secure foundations, in short, we want to put to right our 
economy. We rolled up our sleeves and started laying the 
foundations for constructive changes in the economy and you will 
see that when this process ends our country will be stronger 
than ever. [end recording] 
  Ciller indicated that Turkish citizens who are working 
abroad 
or who own businesses abroad have also the same determination. 
Indicating that the deposits of the Turkish workers abroad 
amount to 30 billion DM, Ciller concluded that, for this reason, 
Europe needs Turkey and its workers. Explaining that Turkey's 
integration with Europe is near and that Europe has to open its 
doors to Turkey, Ciller said that during this period Turkish 
citizens everywhere have to unite and face the difficulties hand 
in hand, as a single body. Expressing that she has no doubts 
that Turkish citizens living abroad will continue to stand 
united and together in all areas of concern to Turkey, Ciller 
recalled that on 5 April she called on everybody to make 
sacrifices according to their own capacity. Stressing that unity 
breeds force, Ciller called on the citizens living abroad to 
make the same sacrifices. 
  [Begin Ciller recording] Just think that, if each of our 1 
million citizens living abroad send 1,000 DM per person, it will 
amount to 1 billion DM. Give the Turkish economy this force. 
This is a kind of economic war of independence. If we unite, 
we can win this war. Let us put our country among the leading 
countries of Europe. Let us do this all together, shoulder to 
shoulder. In addition, I would like it to be known that those 
who send foreign currency to the country will be granted some 
rights in a very short time upon presentation of the proper 
documents and receipts. Come, deposit your savings, starting 
this Monday, in Turkish banks and the Central Bank. Yes, come 
and let us make this week a turning point. [end recording] 
  Ciller said that the accounts Turkish citizens living abroad 
will open in the Turkish banks will be given more interest rates 
than their country of residence and added that all saving 
deposits are under state guarantee. 

