BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ivan Tong and Chan Wai-Fong] </F>
  [Text] China has tightened controls on Hong Kong reporters 
by barring them from an international securities symposium in 
Beijing. 
  About 12 Hong Kong business journalists, invited to Beijing 
to attend the symposium last week, were prevented from covering 
the event after a warning from the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office. 
  It was the second time in a week that Beijing had cracked 
down on Hong Kong journalists covering events on the mainland. 
  According to Richard Tsang, director of Edelman Financial 
who 
invited Hong Kong journalists to the symposium, the organisers 
were told by the office that some of the journalists invited had 
no permits and could not cover the event. "This is a sensitive 
time, and we don't want anything to happen," Mr Tsang said. 
  On Thursday, Beijing banned at least seven Hong Kong 
journalists seeking to cover a visit by a Taiwan delegation to 
the site of the Qiandao Lake tourist boat fire. The journalists 
had signed a petition expressing their concern and anger over 
Ming Pao journalist Xi Yang's 12-year sentence for "stealing 
state secrets" and were boycotted "propaganda-oriented" media 
invitations from China until the end of this month. Hong Kong 
Journalists' Association chairman Daisy Li Yuet-wah said 
Beijing's move was apparently a reaction to the journalists' 
boycott. 
  "There is no sign that it is a long-term policy to tighten 
control. And we do not want this to happen again," she said. 
  The Hong Kong journalists were angered by a statement from 
the organisers that "foreign journalists have not been formally 
invited to report" on the symposium. "The event's PR consultant 
issued invitations to the local press in black and white. I 
simply don't understand why they denied having made any 
invitation," Ms Li said. 
  Mr Tsang said journalists were invited to attend the 
symposium, but "they have been told that no reporting activities 
should be done when the symposium is on". "We won't interfere 
during recesses," he said. 

