Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Larry Jagan in the "Current World Affairs" </F>
program] 
  [Text] Dear listeners: news reports from Thailand have 
indicated that at least two Burmese ethnic rebel groups are 
close to signing cease-fire agreements with the Burmese military 
regime. In a statement issued a few days ago, the Karenni 
National People's Liberation Front [KNPLF] has cited the 
possibility of signing an agreement with Burma's military 
government, the State Law and Order Restoration Council [SLORC], 
in the near future. Furthermore, according to opposition 
sources at the Thai-Burma border, it has been learned that the 
Mon rebel group will meet with Burmese Government officials for 
another round of peace talks within the coming two weeks. Larry 
Jagan has reported that the peace talks process has gained 
momentum due to the signing of a cease-fire agreement between 
the Kachin Independence Organization [KIO] and the SLORC in the 
past week. 
  The KNPLF is one of the two main Karenni groups engaged in 
cease-fire talks with the Burmese military government. In a 
statement sent to the media on Sunday, the KNPLF has stated that 
the 40 years of civil war with the Burmese Government have shown 
that the ethnic conflict can not be solved by military means. 
According to the KNPLF, preliminary talks with Burmese 
Government officials took place last month in Loikaw, the 
capital of Kayah State, or Karenni State as it is more widely 
known. The KNPLF statement considered the talks as fruitful and 
hope to officially sign a cease-fire agreement in the near 
future. Just as in the case of the other ethnic insurgent 
organizations -- the Mon and the Kachin groups -- senior 
personnel from the Burmese Buddhist religious hierarchy acted as 
mediators before the two sides sat down face to face for talks. 
According to sources from the Thai-Burma border, the KNPLF and 
the Burmese Government are making plans to hold further talks in 
the state capital of Loikaw. As the KIO has opened a liaison 
office in Myitkyina for further talks and other activities, the 
KNPLF has similarly opened an office in Loikaw. If a cease-fire 
agreement is reached with the Karenni, it will be a politically 
strategic opening for the Burmese Government. 
  Historically and somewhat unnaturally, the Karenni state was 
administered by the British as a separate state without ties 
from Burma. The Karenni state was a state which was allowed to 
secede according to the 1947 Constitution of Burma, but the 
Karenni movement was not strong enough because of many factions. 
In the 1970s, the Karenni split into two groups -- one 
pro-communist and the other anti-communist. Fighting between 
the two groups erupted as recently as last year. 
  The government and another Karenni group -- the Karenni 
National Progressive Party, KNPP -- also held talks in Loikaw 
last January but at present, the talks seem to be aborted. 
  And, according to sources at the Thai-Burma border, the 
(?Mon 
National Liberation Army) and the New Mon State Party have 
agreed to hold further talks with the Burmese Government in the 
Mon State capital of Moulmein within the coming two weeks. 
However, according to Mon sources, more discussions are needed 
before a cease-fire agreement can be reached. 
  At present, the Karen ethnic group, the KNU [Karen National 
Union], is finalizing its policies by holding executive 
committee meetings at its headquarters in Manerplaw on holding 
peace talks with the Burmese Government. However, according to 
Karen sources, the KNU is still insisting that talks should be 
held with the Burmese Government outside of Burma. 

