Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Daniel Santoro] </F>
  [Text] Reliable Foreign Ministry sources told CLARIN 
yesterday that, during May, Argentina and Great Britain will 
resume negotiations on the possibility of some form of 
cooperation for oil exploration and exploitation in the Malvinas 
Island coastal waters. The Kelpers are scheduled to begin the 
process at the end of the year, with or without Argentina's 
approval. 
  The date for reopening the negotiations (which have been 
frozen since 1992) was agreed between Foreign Minister Guido Di 
Tella and his British counterpart Douglas Hurd during a meeting 
in London on 3 March. Negotiations will be carried out within 
the so-called Argentine-British High-Level Group which has been 
inactive since negotiations failed in 1992. 
  Di Tella was scheduled to make a private visit to London 
this 
coming weekend, but he brought the date forward to 10 March 
despite the fact that President Carlos Menem was still in Spain. 
His haste to meet with Hurd was reportedly due to the fact that 
the meeting was going to take place before this month, but he 
still did not have British approval, which was only granted on 3 
March. 
  Di Tella and Hurd also agreed to negotiate through 
diplomatic 
channels during the time remaining before the meeting -- which 
must be carried out in Buenos Aires -- in order to formulate a 
basis for a prior agreement to guarantee some positive results 
at the key meeting. 
  One of the hurdles -- beside the conflict over sovereignty 
that is being kept under the framework of the so-called 
protective "umbrella" -- is to define the reaches of the term 
cooperation. 
  -- So far, although it is not a definitive answer, Great 
Britain understands that the term only supposes the exchange of 
information and the willingness to act jointly to protect the 
environment. 
  -- Argentina, however, thinks that the term supposes 
participation in oil exploration and exploitation within the 
area controlled by the British. 
  During the London meeting Di Tella mentioned a topic that is 
indirectly related to the Malvinas Islands. He mentioned to 
Hurd "Argentina's concern" over Great Britain's increasing 
political and military relations with Chile. 
  The Argentine foreign minister mentioned the one-week visit 
future Chilean Defense Minister Perez Yoma is scheduled to make 
to London and former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's 
visit to Chile, among other things. 
  Hurd's answer was that Perez Yoma was invited before he was 
named minister and that Thatcher is no longer a member of the 
British Government. 
  Hurd affirmed that London does not want to drive any wedge 
between Argentina and Chile; on the contrary, it is interested 
in good relations between the two Latin American countries. 
  The Chilean question was only a side issue of the meeting's 
central topic: Oil. Di Tella knows that the issue will be 
essential for the success or failure of his Malvinas policy. 
  The Kelpers are ready to call for bids on the licenses to 
begin exploring and exploiting for oil by the end of the year, 
if negotiations in May fail. 
  This is why leading Foreign Ministry officials are thinking 
of discussing the issue with U.S. Vice President Al Gore when he 
visits Buenos Aires at the end of the month, as CLARIN announced 
on 2 March. 
  What diplomats seem not to have been taken into account is 
that Gore supports ecologist concepts which oppose all 
"off-shore" drilling, due to their negative effects on the 
environment. In any case, to play the North American game now 
seems premature, unless you believe that the May negotiation 
will not succeed due to the distance separating the two parties. 

