Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Phone-in interview with Reformed National Party leader Jaap </F>
Marais, chaired by SABC presenter Eon de Vos on the "Good 
Morning South Africa" program, italicized passages in English -- 
live] 
  [Text] [De Vos] Mr. Jaap Marais, good morning and welcome 
to Good Morning South Africa. We are holding discussions with 
several people across the political spectrum in South Africa and 
we are giving our viewers the opportunity of phoning in to air 
their views and maybe to ask a question. We have a first caller 
already and we have not even given a number yet. We will give 
it to you soon. If we talk about the HNP [Reformed National 
Party] -- we saw excerpts of your discussion in our 
advertisement, etcetera -- you put your views across very 
clearly, without any hidden messages, and you regard the 
Transitional Executive Council [TEC] as an undemocratic body 
which has no jurisdiction over you and your party, but at the 
same time you tell the government that there must be a white 
election. Would you then regard this as democratic if a large 
percentage of South Africans is excluded from such an election? 
  [Marais] Look, the government was voted into power by the 
white electorate. These are the people who gave the government 
a mandate. So if it wants to continue then it should get a 
mandate from those people, not from others. This is in 
accordance with the present constitution. It should act 
according to the terms of the current constitution and it does 
not have any mandate for what it is doing. In 1989 the 
government did not tell voters that it was going to embark on 
handing power over to an ANC [African National Congress] 
government. At that time it said white schools would remain 
white, the white residential areas would remain white. So it is 
not just acting without a mandate, it is also acting directly in 
contravention of the mandate it had asked for. For this reason 
it should come back to the white electorate. 
  [De Vos] Before it continues with the Transitional Executive 
Council? 
  [Marais] Yes. 
  [De Vos] Now what would the situation be like then -- you 
talk about a lost war, you talk about conflict -- is it HNP 
policy that if the HNP is not accommodated, or if people 
supporting your policy are not accommodated, then there will be 
conflict? 
  [Marais] Well, look the current negotiations are peace 
negotiations. The ANC was involved in a war against South 
Africa and the National Party [NP] government is making peace 
with the ANC. If these peace talks lead to the white man in 
South Africa becoming subjected to a communist government, then 
the future of the white man will be much worse than it would be 
if they instead stood up and prevented communist government from 
ruling them. For this reason the only choices we will have are 
either, virtual suicide under a communist government, or 
fighting to protect our people. 
  [De Vos] Now you are set on this idea that negotiations are 
out of the question -- that we cannot negotiate, etcetera, 
etcetera, but at the same time you are part of the Afrikaner 
Volksfront [Afrikaner National Front -- AVF] who are involved in 
negotiations. Now how do you explain that? 
  [Marais] You are mistaken when you say that we are part of 
the Volksfront. From the beginning we said that we will not 
participate because there are real differences in approach 
between the two organizations. We say that the first priority 
is for us to stop the De Klerk government. If we do not stop 
it, it will continue to systematically give away our rights, as 
it has, for example, been done at the SABC [South African 
Broadcasting Corporation]. The people in the National Front 
only want to negotiate. They do not want to wage an open 
struggle against the De Klerk government. This is the basic 
difference between us in our whole approach. 
  [De Vos] The interesting thing is that when you talk about 
us, then I take it you are talking about the HNP and not the 
whole right-wing movement, as such. Is it possible for the HNP 
to stop the government? Are your numbers sufficient? 
  [Marais] I have no doubt that if the government calls for a 
general election today, that it will be flattened. For this 
reason it did away with by-elections. It is the most 
undemocratic thing that can ever happen in a country and they 
did away with it for only one reason, because it knows that it 
will lose every by-election and this will be proof that it does 
not have a mandate for what it is doing, so we have no doubt 
that the government is more scared of a general election than 
the devil is of holy water. 
  [De Vos] You are talking now about a white general election? 
  [Marais] Yes, a white general election. That is the only 
valid ... 
  [De Vos, interrupting] But who will defeat it? It will not 
be the HNP. 
  [Marais] Well, it depends. If an election is held then the 
entire right-wing spectrum will obviously be consolidated to 
defeat the government. You do not need any other reason for 
consolidation than the following: the government must be 
defeated. This is how it was in '48 -- the Afrikaner Party, the 
Gryshemde [Gray Shirts], the New Order, and the National Party 
stood together to defeat Smuts. 
  [De Vos] But you are talking about the election which 
brought 
the government to power in '89, but there was a referendum since 
then which showed support for government policy with an 
overwhelming yes vote. 
  [Marais] Look, that question in the referendum only dealt 
with continuation of negotiations to bring about a new 
constitution, but there was no talk of drafting a constitution 
which would eventually lead to the handing over of power to a 
communist government. The ANC is a communistic front. You must 
remember that the National Party always said that it supports 
power sharing. Mr. de Klerk himself said in 1977 that power 
sharing in a federation is a blueprint for the destruction of 
the white man. Now, no one can tell me that any government 
would get a mandate from a nation, for a blueprint for that 
nation's destruction. So that referendum is the biggest 
political gimmick ever seen in South Africa. The results were 
so influenced by intimidation and false promises that it has no 
validity whatsoever. 
  You speak about an election. You say it would be an 
opportunity to defeat the government. Well, there will be an 
election on 27 April; that's a foregone conclusion. Why don't 
you take part in it, and get to put your views across? 
  [Marais] Look, I don't believe it is a foregone conclusion 
that that election will take place. If the black homelands -- 
Zululand, Bophuthatswana, Ciskei -- as well as the right-wing 
opposition refuse to take part in that election, it would have 
no legitimacy. We say that election is a complete distortion of 
democracy. Not only is it a means of denying the Afrikaner his 
rightful political power, but millions of blacks with no 
understanding of democracy and democratic methods are being 
saddled with a responsiblity for which they are not prepared. 
The holding of a one man, one vote election has only one goal, 
and that is to break the Afrikaner's political power in South 
Africa. We are not prepared to give it any validity. 
  [De Vos] We had our first caller earlier. I'm not sure 
whether the person is still holding on...Yes, it seems the 
caller has been holding on patiently while we were talking. Our 
first caller is ready. Good morning. Who's calling? 
  [Worrall]Good morning, Eon. This is Brenda Worrall 
calling from Sandown. 
  [De Vos]Brenda, good morning. Yes, go ahead, 
please. 
  [Worrall]Yes, now I do not know when your rude 
awakening is going to come, Jaap Marais... 
  [De Vos, interrupting]Can we just ask, before we go on, 
can we just jack up the volume for Mr. Marais, please. He can't 
hear the phone caller properly. We'll turn on the 
loudspeakers here in the studio as well. Please, Brenda, 
can you go ahead now? 
  [Worrall]Yes. Now, what I was saying is I do not know 
when your rude awakening will come, Jaap Marais. We are black 
people. We are South Africans. We were and still are oppressed, 
and our liberation has absolutely nothing to do with the NP 
giving in to the demands of the ANC. Black people can liberate 
themselves and will do so, because they have and still continue 
to fight for their liberation. Your pro-apartheid and 
anti-black attitude -- however well you might disguise and 
justify that -- is only self-destructive unto yourselves. 
Please just face up to the reality. We are here to stay; a 
monster of a nightmare, maybe, but a reality to be dealt with. 
And, finally, I think you are the last person who can have 
anything to say about democracy, because people in South Africa 
know absolutely nothing about what democracy is. Thank you very 
much. 
  [De Vos]Thank you, Brenda. 
  [Marais] The volume was very loud, and I could not hear 
everything. [as heard] Could you just tell me briefly what it 
was all about? 
  [De Vos] Yes. To sum it up, she said we cannot wish away the 
black majority. It is a fact we have to live with, that blacks 
would achieve their liberation on their own, it had nothing to 
do with party politics. That's about it -- we must face up to 
the reality. 
  [Marais]We must realize that by just saying black 
majority is not stating the real position. There are various 
black nations in South Africa, and they differ among themselves 
just as much as whites and black in South Africa might differ. 
You must realize that between the Zulus and the Xhosas there 
has been war since before Jan van Riebeeck came to South Africa. 
There are the two Xhosa nations in Ciskei and Transkei; they 
have been at each other's throats for all these years. So there 
isn't just a simple black majority. There are various black 
nations in South Africa who are all entitled to govern 
themselves, and not to be governed by an organization such as 
the ANC, whic is Xhosa-dominated. So I think we have no problem 
in saying that the blacks have a legitimate claim to govern 
themselves, but not at the cost of the whites in South Africa. 
The whites have been the kingpin in the development of South 
Africa, and in creating stability, and even in stopping the 
tribal wars between blacks in South Africa. So it's absolutely 
foolish to think that you can switch South Africa to a black 
majority government and think that progress and peace and 
prosperity will continue. The whole of Africa has been a lesson 
to us that this is just not possible. 
  [De Vos] Following on the question she asked, is it not true 
that one could argue that if you use the rest of Africa as an 
example, where you say the whites were the axle around which 
everything turned, all the development, and so on...Can we not 
argue that that may be so, but that the whites were the axle at 
the cost of the greater group, the nonwhites, if you wish, or 
the blacks who, given the same opportunities, could also have 
been part of that axle? 
  [Marais] Well, you know, I could show you many articles 
where blacks in Africa are now saying:Bring back the white 
manbecause they were much better off when whites ruled. It 
is true that blacks perhaps suffered injustices, but no system 
can ever guarantee absolute justice to all. There are certain 
things which have to be done, which may be detrimental to 
certain people, but which are beneficial to the general welfare 
of society, and I do not think we have any doubt that the blacks 
in South Africa are the best organized in all Africa, simply 
because the whites were here. 
  [De Vos] Our next caller is on the line. You surname is Van 
Eeden, I believe? 
  [Van Eeden] Yes, Mike van Eeden. 
  [De Vos] Mike, good morning, and go ahead. 
  [Van Eeden] Mr. Marais, I'm not sure whether I understand 
you 
correctly, but it seems you are not prepared to live under a 
black government, yet we as blacks have had to live for years 
under a black [as heard] government. Why were we expected to do 
it? Why can't you, the whites, now also do the same? 
  [De Vos] The question says it seems you are not prepared to 
live under a black government, yet blacks have had to live under 
a white government all these years. Why not? 
  [Marais] Look, our point of view is that the whole policy of 
separate development was to enable black people or black nations 
to govern themselves, and not be governed by whites. That is 
the basic philosophy of nationalism. So it is not true to say 
that we believe it is right for blacks to live under whites, and 
not vice versa. That is not the case at all. 
  [De Vos] The next caller is on the line. I did not catch the 
name. Good morning to you. Who's calling? Could you repeat 
your name? 
  [Unidentified caller] I am 12 years old. I want to say to 
Mr. Jaap Marais, thank you very, very much for being such a good 
person to the whole of South Africa. We appreciate it very 
much, and I just know that the blacks will never defeat us. 
  [De Vos] Could you give your name again? 
  [Zeelie] Madeline Zeelie, from Bloemfontein. 
  [Marais] What did she say? 
  [De Vos] She said thank you very much. She said blacks will 
not defeat them. 
  [Marais] Well, thank you very much. 
  [De Vos]Have we got our next caller yet? I don't think 
so.If we look at the HNP, its formation, policy, you are 
actually what one might call the curator of the Verwoerd policy. 
But looking at the last election, and the votes that the HNP won 
at the polls, it would seem that your support is growing 
smaller. What would you say the future holds for the HNP? Is 
there a future? 
  [Marais] Look, in the 1981 election the HNP won 33 percent 
of 
the votes in Transvaal, where we stood against the NP. In mamy 
constituencies we got over 40 percent of the votes. Then the 
Conservative Party [CP] people realized that if they remained in 
the NP, they would be defeated by the HNP in the next election. 
So they broke away with a group of members of Parliament, and 
that gave the impression that they would provide an easier way 
of defeating the NP. It has now been found that the CP was not 
in a position to do so. But it affected the HNP detrimentally. 
The HNP has been in existence for 25 years, and we have never 
held a constituency, except for a short while. But we have 
never changed our policy. That is unique in our history. It 
only goes to show the indestructiliby of the foundation on which 
we stand. We stand on the same principles on which the NP of 
Hertzog, Malan, Strydom, and Verwoerd stood, and which form the 
foundation on which all the development in South Africa took 
place -- the constitutional development, the economic 
development, the cultural development. In politics, as in daily 
life, one has ups and downs. We are quite prepared to accept 
what is happening now. But we have no doubt that the HNP stance 
is correct, and will be proven to be correct. 
  [De Vos] Our next caller is on the line. Good morning. 
  [Engelbrecht] Good morning, Mr. Marais. My name is 
Engelbrecht of Melkbosstrand. Eon, thank you very much for the 
opportunity. Mr. Marais, I want to ask you this: The NP made 
many promises, both during the referendum and thereafter. We 
have been sobered by the fact that these promises have not been 
honored. One of the major promises Mr. de Klerk recently made 
was that he would reintroduce the death penalty, as a deterrent 
for the unbelievable level of violence prevailing in the country 
at present. Since then he has not carried out his promise. The 
violence is continuing, innocent children and adults are being 
murdered countrywide. I would just like to know how the HNP 
feels about this? 
  [De Vos] About the death penalty? 
  [Engelbrecht] Yes, the death penalty, but I would also like 
to know how Mr. de Klerk manages to get away with such lies? 
Why do they not tackle him about it in Parliament? 
  [De Vos] I think we have the gist of the question. I would 
think half of it should be directed at Mr. de Klerk, but 
nevertheless... 
  [Marais] Well, it's not only on the death penalty what we 
have been given false promises. One of the NP placards in the 
referendum read:/Want Jobs? Vote Yes.And as you know, 
of all this year's matriculants, only 4 percent will be able to 
get jobs. As for the death penalty, it was a popular thing to 
say at the time, and the NP jumped on the bandwagon. But now 
that it's time, as they say in English, to deliver the 
goods, because there will no longer be a white election, 
the government pretends it is not responsible. And that is the 
evil of this kind of thing -- by-elections have been 
discontinued, and the government can now simply ignore its own 
promises. But yes, we believe the death penalty must be 
reintroduced. 
  [De Vos] There we have it. The HNP says that the death 
penalty must be reintroduced. 
  [De Vos] We are ready for our next call. It seems that many 
are eager to speak about the HNP and its views this morning. 
Good morning. Who are we speaking to now? 
  [Du Pokoy] This is Freddie du Pokoy from Keimoes. 
  [De Vos] Freddie, good morning. From Keimoes? 
  [Du Pokoy] Yes, the capital of Upington. 
  [De Vos] The capital of Upington, Keimoes. Before we 
continue -- we have a sound problem...continue. 
  [Du Pokoy] Mr. Marais, I would like to ask you what you mean 
when you speak about communists, because in the past it was we 
who experienced the same thing. If someone did not agree with 
the government's policy, then he was a communist. Now that the 
ANC and the PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress], etcetera, are 
unbanned, I have met some of them -- I am not an ANC or PAC 
supporter but they are religious people. Where is this leading 
to? 
  [De Vos] The question is: What is a communist? 
  [Marais] Well, a communist is, of course, someone who 
follows 
the communist ideology and method. You must realize that 
communism is not just an ideology but it is a method of 
revolution through which existing orders are overthrown to be 
replaced by a communist order and the communist ideology is, of 
course, equal status to all people with no regard for gender, 
race, nationality, language, or anything. In the second place 
they believe that the state should control all means of 
production. Private property and private ownership must be 
wiped out. Communists are also basically against family life, 
saying that family life is a threat to a nation's productivity 
and for this reason family life also has to be eliminated. For 
this reason the education system, all social aspects of life 
must be geared toward promoting these goals. 
  [De Vos] It is interesting that you mention this because if 
one looks at what other parties, usually labeled as communists, 
are actually promoting then there are very few of these elements 
evident in their official policies. One could actually say, and 
I have heard this argument, that the National Party, for 
example, with their labor and homeland policies, etcetera -- the 
breaking up of families, etcetera -- have pursued those goals 
and have actually succeeded, and that they could be regarded as 
being on both sides of the spectrum. 
  [Marais] Well, look the National Party pretends that it is a 
party favoring the free-market system but it actually favors 
socialism, communism. It negates virtually every positive thing 
it does by embarking on a contradictory course of action -- the 
one man, one vote system, the eradication of apartheid. I can 
show you how the communists were on the brink of destroying 
apartheid in the fifties and sixties, in favor of one man, one 
vote. These are the basic things favored by communists to 
promote its ideology -- equal status, one man one vote, and the 
establishment of a communist government as it did in Rhodesia 
and Namibia. 
  [De Vos] Let us hear what our next caller has to say. This 
is George from Bophuthatswana. Hello, is that George? 
  [George] Yes, Mr. Jaap Marais, my name is George from 
Bophuthatswana. My grandfather is very old. My mother and 
father are also very old. There have always been whites 
suppressing the inhabitants of Africa, since 1652 as you well 
know, yet you still continue with your hatred, promoting this 
kaffir-boss relationship. Why can't you get rid of this and 
adopt a logical system used throughout the world, that of one 
man one vote, then you can serve under a newly elected 
government? Why are you so insistent? Look, your time has 
passed. 
  [De Vos] Thank you George. The basic point he raised is that 
he is a black man living in Bophuthatswana, and that the policy 
you favor is an old, worn-out policy. He asked why you do not 
move from this policy and follow the rest of the world where the 
one, man one vote policy has been a success. 
  [Marais] Look, the policy of one man, one vote -- it has 
been 
proven all over Africa that it led to a single one man, one vote 
election, and thereafter a one-party state emerged, or 
dictatorship. We have had one violent coup after another. 
Government in Africa is now a continuous process of revolution 
and the overthrow of governments. It has brought nothing but 
misery. Do you realize that Africa's contribution to the world 
economy last year was less than 1 percent? Africa has become a 
continent which exports nothing. It lives on credit as a result 
of the political systems which have brought economic misery. 
Remember that, during Dr. Verwoerd's time, when we had 
apartheid in this country, the growth rate was 7 percent per 
annum, inflation was 3 percent, and the prime lending rate was 
3.5 percent. The RAND DAILY MAIL said:The nation is 
suffering from a surfeit of prosperity. And what is the 
situation today? We have a negative growth rate, inflation has 
come down slightly to under 10 percent, but for years it was 
almost 20 percent. Interest rates have caused havoc to our 
economy. So you see, these are the practical consequences of 
policy. 
  [De Vos] Our next caller is Johnny Boardman of Wesselsbron. 
Good morning. 
  [Boardman] Good morning, Eon. I would just like to thank you 
all there at the studio for the manner in which you handle these 
discussions. We all appreciate it. To Mr. Marais: All these 
years I have followed your career and your statements, and I do 
appreciate what you are doing for the whites in South Africa. 
Over the years we have come to regard you as the prophet of the 
right wing. All the predictions you have made have proven to 
be correct. So this morning I would like to ask you to predict, 
here on the television, to the people of South Africa what lies 
ahead for us on the path that the De Klerk government is 
following? Maybe it will open people's eyes. 
  [Marais] Well, should the process which the government and 
the ANC are busy with go acccording to schedule right up to the 
end, there will be no order. It is impossible to accommodate 
the diverse population groups in this country under the roof of 
a single parliament. Parliamentary democracy has a limited 
tolerance for religious and racial differences. The result will 
be that the strongest group will seize power and oppress the 
other groups with force. That will lead to revolt, as in the 
rest of Africa. There is no way this process will succeed. The 
only way to ensure order is for Mr. de Klerk to have the courage 
to go back to the electorate and seek a mandate for what he is 
doing; and he will be defeated in a peaceful, orderly, 
constitutional manner. Then we can begin anew to restore order 
here -- not to draw up a new constitution, but to restore law 
and order, even if it has to go hand in hand with emergency 
regulations. But it would restore economic justice and put a 
stop to foreign interference in South Africa's affairs, so that 
this country can once again govern itself. Those are the three 
prerequisites for restoring an acceptable way of life here. 
  [De Vos] I think that is a good point for us to end on. 
Thanks to our viewers for your participation, and thank you, 
Mr. Marais. 

