Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A DPRK Foreign Ministry spokesman issued a press 
statement [tamhwa] on 9 February denouncing and rejecting the 
U.S. State Department for recently babbling as if there were a 
so-called human right problem in our country. 
  The press statement of the DPRK Foreign Ministry: 
  In its Annual Report on the World Human Rights Situation 
published on 1 February, the U.S. State Department groundlessly 
slandered our country while denouncing various countries' human 
rights situation. The United States once against babbled as if 
there were a human rights problem in our country. This is a 
gross distortion of the reality in our country and a 
fabrication, which is not at all worthy of discussion. 
  Regarding human rights, it is sociopolitical, economic, and 
cultural rights -- including the right to have dignity, 
sovereignty, existence, equality, and development [palchongwon] 
-- which must be guaranteed to man in society. All these rights 
are fully ensured in our country. 
  Our people are genuine masters of the state and society and 
enjoy an independent and creative life equally without any 
social and political uncertainty [pulan] or any worry about 
their life under our socialist system centered on the popular 
masses. In our country there is not a single unemployed person, 
nor a beggar, nor a homeless person, nor an illiterate, nor a 
drug addict. Our country is a state where human rights are 
respected and surely guaranteed. This notwithstanding, the 
United States maliciously slandered our country. This is part 
of its brazen scheme to tarnish the image of our Republic with 
the nonsensical human rights problem as it does with our 
fictitious nuclear problem and to isolate and crush our 
socialist cause. 
  How on earth does the United States have the gall to 
criticize others on the human rights issue? At present, in the 
United States there are more than 1.4 million prisoners, over 9 
million unemployed people, millions of homeless people 
[pangnangja], and 35 million people living below the poverty 
line [pingungson]. It is plagued with murder, which claims the 
lives of more than 38,000 people a year; with drug consumption, 
which accounts for 65 percent of the world's drug use; and with 
narcotic-related crimes, which are very common. This is 
inevitable and is an incurable cancer under the present U.S. 
social system. The U.S. President himself could not but admit 
in his State of the Union address this year the grave phenomena 
threatening U.S. society, including violent crime. 
  We see almost every day that the United States not only 
harshly [hoksimhage] tramples upon the human rights of its 
people, but also perpetrates inhumane acts of high-handedly 
interfering in the internal affairs of other countries, openly 
overthrowing and destroying sovereign states with the 
mobilization of its state Armed Forces, and reeking havoc 
[hwangpyehwa] on their people's human rights. 
  All these facts prove that the United States is the 
universally recognized worst barren land [pulmoji] of human 
rights and the kingdom of human rights infringement. It is 
unreasonable for the United States to talk about other's human 
rights situation, while freely violating human rights within and 
without. 
  In its Report on the Human Rights Situation, the U.S. State 
Department tried to beautify South Korea in a farfetched way, 
claiming that the situation of human rights has been improved 
there. This is also the height of sarcasm [igot yoksi kagwani 
anilsuopta]. It is well-known that South Korea is the most 
barren land of human rights. 
  The South Korean authorities under the mask of civilian 
government are more frantically kicking up rackets of terrorism, 
arrest, torture, and murder while further adhering to the 
National Security Law and other fascist laws and repressive 
tools than the preceding military dictators. The cases of 
infringing upon human rights by the occupying U.S. forces in 
South Korea are countless. 
  Regarding the present South Korean situation in which human 
rights infringements have reached extremes, the United States 
dares argue that the human rights situation has improved there. 
This is really a brazen-faced deception. 
  We sternly denounce and reject the unreasonable activity of 
the United States, which slanders our Republic while talking 
about fictitious human rights problems, as the sovereign 
infringement activity proceeding from a political purpose to 
crush our system and as a hostile activity of intervening in 
internal affairs. Whatever ruckus the United States may raise 
over the human rights problem, it can never impair the essential 
advantages and invincible vitality of socialism of our style to 
which the chuche idea is applied. 
  The United States should mind its own business instead of 
criticizing at will other nations and instructing them, while 
acting as if it were a judge of human rights whom nobody 
recognizes. 

