BFN 

  [Text] The Hague, May 2 (CTK) -- Slovakia and Hungary today 
officially submitted their dispute over the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros 
hydroelectric works to the International Court of Justice. 
  Slovakia accuses Hungary of not honoring the commitments it 
took on in the Czechoslovak-Hungarian agreement concluded in 
September 1977. Budapest blames Bratislava for undertaking 
unilateral steps, causing damage through restricting the flow in 
the Danube's original bed and negatively affecting the 
environment, The court is also to evaluate whether or not the 
1977 agreement is valid. 
  Hungary and Slovakia decided to turn to the international 
court in April 1993, after their talks on the issue were 
stalemated. A commission of experts from the European Union 
(EU) worked out an objective analysis of the issue. 
  Documents containing the two sides' arguments were brought 
to 
the court in two fully-packed vans. 
  The agreement to present the dispute to the International 
Court of Justice was reached by the two countries quite 
smoothly. Today's behavior of both Hungarian and Slovak 
representatives indicated that the former tension between 
Bratislava and Budapest has dwindled for the time being. The 
two countries also express their willingness to respect the 
court's decision. 
  However, the dispute is expected to drag on for long due to 
the controversial issue itself and the rightfulness of most 
arguments. The International Court will not decide on the 
problem before 1997, as first it has to solve another six big 
disputes. 
  The idea of damming the Danube in its Slovak-Hungarian 
border 
section first appeared in 1910. It was reappeared in 1950, but 
the agreement on the construction of a giant project was signed 
between Czechoslovak and Hungarian communist regimes only on 
September 15, 1977. In 1989 the Hungarian Parliament and 
government began to distance themselves from the project and 
later decided to halt the construction of its Hungarian part in 
Nagymaros. Slovakia completed the hydroelectric waterworks in 
Gabcikovo in late 1992. 

