Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, January 31 (KCNA) -- A spokesman for the 
Foreign Ministry of the DRPK made public a statement today in 
connection with the fact that the United States is reversing the 
agreement between the DPRK and the United States for a peaceful 
solution to the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula. 
  The United States has gone the length of imposing a deadline 
and issued an ultimatum that it will not agree to hold a third 
round of the DPRK-USA talks, unless the DPRK accepts the IAEA 
demand, the statement said, and went on: 
  The United States plans to defiantly go ahead with its 
large- 
scale nuclear war exercises against the DPRK, including the 
"Team Spirit" joint military exercises and is pressing ahead on 
a full scale with the deployment of the "Patriot" missiles in 
South Korea. 
  All the facts clearly show that the United States has no 
intention at all to resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean 
peninsula peacefully but still remains unchanged as ever in its 
ulterior objectives to strangle the DPRK by force at any cost. 
  With regard to the current crisis due to the despicable and 
dangerous actions of perfidy on the part of the United States, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea solemnly declares its position as follows: 
  First, if the United States defiantly goes ahead and 
reverses 
the promise it has made to the DPRK, the DPRK will no longer be 
bound by the promise it has made to the United States. 
  The DPRK's promise to the United States includes all the 
goodwill measures and commitments it has taken so far 
unilaterally for the continued DPRK-USA talks and for a peaceful 
resolution of the nuclear issue, such as the suspension of the 
effectuation of its announced withdrawal from the treaty on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the freeze of all the 
nuclear activities, and the declared intention to renounce the 
graphite-moderated reactor system. 
  Second, if the United States has no intention to hold any 
further round of talks, the DPRK, too, will have no intention to 
do so. 
  It will be a gross miscalculation, if the United States 
considers the DPRK-USA talks as an offering to the DPRK. 
  The DPRK has consistently called for negotiations with the 
United States since the first days of the origination of the 
nuclear issue, in order to peacefully resolve the issue, not to 
seek any benefit from the United States. 
  We have so far lived on our own without any relations with 
the United States, we can live well on our own in the future, 
too, and we have become constitutionally adapted to such life. 
  Third, if the United States decides to take other options, 
we 
will also take our own counter measures. 
  In no way does the right of choice belong to big countries 
only. 
  The U.S. hardliners and conservatives must be held totally 
responsible for the catastrophic consequences arising therefrom, 
and the South Korean authorities, indiscreetly following their 
lead, can never extricate themselves from this responsibility. 

