BFN 

  [Excerpts] President Glavkos Kliridhis said that with his 
report to the Security Council, UN Secretary General Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali made it clear that continuing the talks on the 
confidence-building measures is not an option. Kliridhis 
stressed that Butrus-Ghali has made a serious determination: 
that resuming the talks, either based on the set of ideas or the 
confidence-building measures, will bring no result because of 
the lack of political will by the Turkish side. He said the UN 
secretary general lists other choices. 
  In an exclusive statement to the Cyprus Broadcasting 
Corporation [CyBC] on Butrus-Ghali's report, Kliridhis described 
the UN secretary general's reference to the lack of political 
will by the Turkish side as the basic point of his report. He 
mentioned that the National Council will confer the day after 
tomorrow, and he will make suggestions on the next steps 
regarding developments in the Cyprus issue. He added that he 
does not want to comment on the alternatives that the UN 
secretary general suggests in his report because these issues 
will be discussed at the National Council and in talks with the 
Greek Government. [passage omitted] 
  British High Commissioner David Madden said a negotiations 
plan must be held now to select the best combination of the five 
alternatives the UN secretary general suggests in his report. 
In an exclusive statement to CyBC, Madden said negotiations 
will be held in New York and various capitals, including Cyprus, 
to find the best way to continue procedures. He said he does 
not believe that the talks procedures on the confidence-building 
measures have reached a deadlock. Madden finally said the 
United Nations must be informed whether Turkish Cypriot leader 
Rauf Denktas had anything positive to say in his recent meetings 
with Gustave Feissel, the UN secretary general's alternate 
special representative in Cyprus. 
  In a telephone conversation with our station, U.S. 
Ambassador 
in Nicosia Richard Boucher simply said the report is complete 
and will be studied carefully. 
  Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev said the important 
thing about the Cyprus issue is whether Butrus-Ghali's report 
will make a new beginning for a correct solution to the Cyprus 
issue. The Russian minister referred to the Cyprus issue during 
a joint news conference in Moscow with Greek Foreign Minister 
Karolos Papoulias. 
  Kozyrev stressed that Russia and Greece have identical views 
on the Cyprus issue. Papoulias expressed the Greek Government's 
gratitude for Russian support on the Cyprus issue, which was 
among the issues discussed. 

