CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Olli Ainola: "Baltic Policy: Arms Sale </F>
Restrictions Being Rescinded"] 
  [Text] Finland has changed the principles of its arms sale 
policy. Prevention of exports has been converted to promotion of 
exports. As its domestic sales are drying up, the defense 
industry is attempting to assure its survival through export 
sales. 
  A promising market is seen in the former Warsaw Pact 
countries, especially the Baltics, after Cocom [Coordinating 
Committee for Multilateral Export Controls], the export control 
organization, makes changes in its structure this week. Finland 
is following other Western countries, including the United 
States, that have decided to rescind the arms export ban to 
those countries, even for combat aircraft. 
  The enthusiasm of Finnish arms plants for exporting to the 
Baltic countries has been held in check above all by the 
Paasikivi Doctrine [policy formulated by post-World War II 
President J.K. Paasikivi according to which Finland should 
refrain from actions displeasing to Moscow]. The foreign policy 
leadership has not wanted to provide export licenses for actual 
lethal weapons and equipment as long as there are Russian 
military units in the Baltic countries. 
  A couple of years ago, the Sako arms plant was denied a 
license to export 5,000 assault rifles to any of the three 
Baltic countries. According to officials, the application was 
purely a demonstration of intent, because the document lacked 
end-user information, among other things. Sako said it had 
provided end-user information, and that the export sale was 
prevented solely for political reasons. 
  If Russian forces withdraw from the Baltic countries and the 
situation becomes stable, authorities promise to free the export 
of arms and combat equipment. Even after these conditions are 
met, however, licenses are going to be carefully considered, 
especially if a deal were to involve a political commitment to 
provide spare parts or resupply in event of crisis or war. 
  The first preview of the new policy may soon be seen. Finns 
have under discussion deals for final assembly work, selling 
components and raw materials to ammunition plants in Estonia and 
Latvia. The licenses officials regard these deals favorably. 

