BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Tsekhanov, chief of the Federal </F>
Counterintelligence Service's Economic Counterintelligence 
Directorate, by Vladimir Klimov "only in ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA"; 
date and place not given: "The Country Is Being Sold Off. 
Wholesale and Retail. Directorate Chief Vladimir Tsekhanov 
Reflects on the Struggle on the Economic Front"] 
  [Text] 
  [Klimov] What is the main sphere of questions that the 
Economic Counterintelligence Directorate is working on? 
  [Tsekhanov] The might, stability, and prosperity of a state 
are determined by the condition of its economy. But at the same 
time this is a state's tenderest, most sensitive spot. It is no 
accident that the developed countries' special services are 
shifting the center of gravity in their activity to the economic 
sphere. 
  The Economic Counterintelligence Directorate, which was the 
result of the amalgamation of two Russian Security Ministry 
directorates (the directorate for combating contraband and 
corruption and, partly, the economic security directorate), 
endeavors to organize the protection of vitally important 
spheres most at risk from external and internal threats. 
  These are above all priority state programs, including 
privatization, investment projects with federal status and 
foreign investors, the credit and finance sphere, foreign 
economic activity, and the sphere of the circulation of precious 
stones and metals. Such forms of economic crime as the 
smuggling of strategic raw materials and centrally allocated 
resources, the illegal arms trade, banking crimes -- including 
the laundering of huge sums obtained through criminal means -- 
represent a serious threat. International narcotics syndicates 
are making a beeline for Russia. The theft and resale of 
cultural assets and unlawful enterprise in the sphere of culture 
are becoming profitable business. The expansion of organized 
crime and its capital in the Russian economy has taken on 
threatening proportions. Such trends are directly connected 
with the growth of corruption in the organs of power and 
administration and the law-enforcement system. 
  [Klimov] What sphere of our economy attracts the most 
interest from foreign intelligence agents, Vladimir Stepanovich? 
Tell me as far as possible about cases of economic blackmail. 
  [Tsekhanov] It will seem strange to some people, but it is a 
fact that, with the end of the Cold War, the intelligence 
activity of foreign services in relation to the Russian economy 
has been stepped up. Countries of the former socialist camp and 
the Baltic have gotten in on the act. There is a clear tendency 
for priorities to shift from military to economic confrontation, 
with the aim of making Russia a raw materials adjunct of the 
economically developed countries, to do everything to prevent 
its access to the world high technologies markets, and to 
exclude Russia from the list of potential economic rivals. 
  And it is not a question here of some kind of pathological 
noxiousness on the part of our foreign partners. Let us look at 
it soberly. In planning their strategy, the developed countries 
endeavor at least to preserve the level of prosperity that they 
have already achieved or, if they succeed, to raise it. This is 
impossible relying only on internal resources. It is therefore 
important to ensure a stable supply of external stimuli and, as 
far as possible, to increase it. But in the modern, 
extraordinarily complex world, with its dwindling raw material 
and energy resources, it is extremely difficult to carry out 
such a policy. The weak links in the chain must be searched out 
and probed energetically. Today Russia has, unfortunately, 
become just such a weak link. 
  The expansion of cooperation with other countries and the 
attraction of foreign capital and advanced technologies into the 
Russian economy is beneficial to our country. But at the same 
time it is important to observe our own interests as much as 
possible and not to be a "sheep in the wolves' den," if you will 
pardon the expression. Foreign partners, incidentally, are not 
such bad guys; it is quite possible to get on with them, but 
only if you don't act dumb. 
  For instance, the Soros Foundation and the American 
Mathematical Society applied through the Russian Academy of 
Sciences to our mathematicians, requesting them to send their 
scientific articles to the United States for U.S. academics to 
assess. Thousands of our best authors would be paid $50 each 
for an article. Just consider -- $50 for information that could 
bring in millions! 
  [Klimov] One area of the directorate's activity is 
corruption in the higher echelons of power. It is already known 
that instances of the criminal abuse of power have been 
uncovered. Is it possible for you to speak about this? 
  [Tsekhanov] Corruption in the state service system is 
reaching epidemic proportions, discrediting the economic reforms 
and exerting a destructive influence on our way of life, our 
sense of justice, legality, and the social protection of our 
citizens. 
  In St. Petersburg criminal proceedings have been instituted 
against L. Savenkov, the city's deputy mayor, for organized 
smuggling. In Moscow V. Danilenko, the first deputy prefect of 
Moscow's Western Administrative District, has been charged with 
corruption. 
  In Pskov Oblast A. Kabanov, deputy chairman of the Oblast 
Committee for the Management of State Property, has been 
detained for organizing the illicit export of metals and import 
of arms. Unfortunately there are many such examples. 
  It is extremely difficult for the law-enforcement organs to 
investigate and stamp out corruption among leading officials. 
All the advantages of office and influence and connections in 
the top-ranking executive echelons are brought into play in 
order to oppose our work. Often the mass media are exploited to 
distort the nature of events or exert pressure on the 
law-enforcement organs investigating cases of corruption. 
  Sometimes curbing corruption among judges, public 
prosecutors, and deputies is seriously hampered by the 
excessively inflated guarantees of immunity of these officials. 
  [Klimov] How did the directorate collaborate with the 
commissions -- first Rutskoy's, then the Makarov-Ilyushenko 
commission? 
  [Tsekhanov] Different interdepartmental organs dealing in 
one way or another with questions of combating corruption have 
been set up from time to time. After the Russian Federation 
president's well-known 4 April 1992 edict "On Combating 
Corruption in the State Service System," sessions of the 
standing Interdepartmental Conference for Protecting Private and 
Public Interests Against Organized Crime and Corruption" (the 
"G. Burbulis Commission") began to be held fairly regularly. 
  The Russian Federation Security Council Interdepartmental 
Commission for Combating Crime and Corruption, which you have 
called the "Rutskoy" or "Makarov-Ilyushenko Commission," is 
still operating, although from time to time reports of its 
cessation of activities do appear. 
  It coordinates activity in the sphere of combating crime and 
elaborates appropriate proposals, recommendations, and documents 
of a conceptual and program character. Thus it was under the 
auspices of the Interdepartmental Committee that the All-Russia 
Conference on Questions of Combating Crime and Corruption was 
organized and held last year. For this conference we prepared 
analytical and statistical materials and proposals for draft 
statutory acts on questions of combating organized crime, 
smuggling, illegal international trafficking in narcotics, and 
corruption, which were included in the conference's final 
documents. The Commission organized work to prepare the Federal 
Program for Combating Crime for 1994-1995. 
  We keep the Russian Federation president informed about 
instances of corruption in the organs of state power. 
  [Klimov] How extensively has economic crime affected the 
law-enforcement organs? 
  [Tsekhanov] For the militia it is most difficult of all. 
Organized crime today possesses huge financial and material 
resources, is excellently technically equipped, and has great 
experience of opposition to the state. Not everyone can 
withstand such pressure. There are cases of betrayal of 
official interests, official abuses, mergers with criminal 
structures, illegal participation in entrepreneurial activity, 
and assistance in getting criminal proceedings dropped in return 
for bribes. For example, one month ago the illegal activity of 
an extensive criminal community with the participation of 
officers of the central apparatus of the MVD [Ministry of 
Internal Affairs], the Moscow Oblast and City Internal Affairs 
Main Directorates, and other militia subdepartments was 
uncovered. Orders from professional criminal groupings of the 
Moscow region to drop charges against their members under 
investigation for muggings, robbery, smuggling, and illegal 
possession of arms, and also to change preventive restrictions 
and reduce sentences imposed by the courts, were carried out in 
return for huge bribes. Criminal proceedings have been 
instituted, and the case has been referred to the Russian 
General Prosecutor's Office. 
  In 1993 alone, according to the records of the former 
Russian 
Federation Security Ministry, criminal proceedings were 
instituted against 39 officers of MVD organs, one Prosecutor's 
Office employee, and one court official, and more than 1,000 
employees of the internal affairs organs were disciplined for 
various abuses of public office. In the first quarter of 1994, 
according to federal counterintelligence records, criminal 
charges have been brought in nine cases against 14 MVD officers. 
There are four cases against officials of the Public 
Prosecutor's Office. 
  There is information on extortion of bribes by individual 
officials of the tax police for reducing punitive sanctions. 
Some of these officials have links with criminal structures and 
carry out their orders, passing to them official information and 
helping individual entrepreneurs to tax exemptions, receiving 
huge sums in return. There are cases of threats and 
psychological pressure against taxpayers and cases of forcing 
them to give bribes. 
  [Klimov] The narcotics trade is growing drastically in 
Russia. What is being done to oppose it? 
  [Tsekhanov] According to official estimates the turnover of 
narcotics reached the level of $150 million in our country last 
year. More than half of the narcotics in illegal circulation in 
Russia originate from outside its borders. They come mainly 
from Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Lithuania, and the Central 
Asian states. 
  In recent times contraband deliveries of narcotics from 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran have grown markedly. Cocaine 
from South America and the United States and other narcotics, 
new to this country, are increasingly appearing in Russia. On 
the other hand the smuggling of narcotics from Russia to 
Finland, Sweden, France, Germany, Austria, and Greece is on the 
increase. 
  The international narcotics business has manifestly 
intensified its interest in Russia. This is to be explained by 
the peculiarities of Russia's geographic position on the 
crossroads of transport routes and the huge, though as yet 
exploited, market in the demand for narcotics. There is reason 
to believe that, in addition to the traditional Balkan and 
Caucasus routes, a new international drugs route is being 
established from Southwest, South, and Southeast Asia to the CIS 
countries and West Europe. 
  One means of increasing effectiveness in the battle against 
the illegal circulation of narcotics is cooperation with the 
special services of a number of countries of the world. Of 
course, collaboration within the CIS receives priority attention. 
  [Klimov] What crimes, apart from false promissory notes, 
have appeared in the banking sphere? 
  [Tsekhanov] The scale of crime is becoming menacing, and the 
character of the crimes increasingly refined. The 
law-enforcement organs have managed to uncover and prevent 
losses totaling hundreds of billions of rubles from the use of 
false payment documents. 
  Representatives of the criminal world have made efficient 
use 
of the absence of a properly thought-out program to transform 
the existing credit and finance system and Russia's monetary 
circulation in conditions of the transition to the market; they 
have undertaken a series of large-scale illegal actions in 
1992-1994. Today we can confidently talk about the emergence of 
organized crime in this sphere. 
  Such forms of crime as false bankruptcies and professedly 
mistaken payment of money into the accounts of outside 
organizations and so forth have emerged. In recent times we 
have encountered "computer" crime, whereby large-scale 
embezzlement of funds is carried out by "cracking" banking data 
protection systems with the aid of an IBM, illegally obtaining 
credit through the use of false credit cards ("electronic" 
money), and pumping convertible currency abroad. The new 
electronic payments banking system is also in the criminals' 
sights. One cause of the growth in the number of these frauds 
are the gaping holes in Russian legislation. 
  [Klimov] What danger awaits us from the commercialization of 
the entire country? 
  [Tsekhanov] A "flight" of the ruble, whereby foreign 
currency actively penetrates the sphere of circulation and the 
ruble is squeezed out of internal circulation. The second 
calamity is a leak of capital from Russia. This question can be 
resolved only by combining administrative measures with the 
creation of an attractive investment climate. Plus legislative 
support. 
  And there is one further highly complex problem -- the 
concentration of huge sums of money in the hands of individuals 
and organizations having direct links with the criminal world. 
There is an ongoing process of laundering "dirty" money, both 
from Russia and abroad, and the active assimilation of private 
funds into the Russian economy through the establishment of 
control over commercial banking structures. 
  Many confidence tricksters and fraudsters, both Russian and 
foreign, have now appeared in the Russian market. The 
successfully thwarted losses which could have been inflicted by 
these dishonest people are frequently measured in tens of 
billions of rubles. Major financial fraud cannot fail to affect 
the condition of the state credit and monetary system. 
  [Klimov] Vladimir Stepanovich, what prevents even more 
effective work by your directorate? 
  [Tsekhanov] Dissatisfaction with the level of social 
protection and the uncertainty of the status of a state Federal 
Counterintelligence Service employee, the unending process of 
reorganization -- all this substantially reduces our level of 
efficiency and drives away professional cadres. Many trained 
officers have gone into the tax police, where the level of 
monetary support is far higher than in our directorate, and into 
other state structures. Commercial firms happily take on our 
boys, sometimes offering pay several times in excess of what 
they were previously earning. Former state security employees 
are valued for their high efficiency, professionalism, and 
ability to perform the most diverse tasks, and, of course, for 
their honesty and reliability. 

