BFN 

  [Text] On 7 May, the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry [MITI] revealed its decision to introduce the security 
export control (know control) system as early as June -- under 
the system, companies will determine whether their exports could 
be used as materials for weapons of mass-destruction such as 
nuclear arms and at facilities for producing weapons. In 
response to the collapse of the Coordinating Committee for 
Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM) at the end of March, MITI 
has decided to introduce the system as part of the new export 
control system for arms-related materials. The decision aims at 
establishing a strict export control system by using the 
expertise of exporting companies which are familiar with the 
performance of export goods and the actual conditions of 
importing companies. Since the importance of the 
nonproliferation of nuclear and other weapons was pointed out at 
the Tokyo summit (meeting of leaders of the seven industrialized 
nations) last year, Japan has decided to internationally spell 
out its new policy on export control with the Naples summit set 
for July. 
  While exports of certain items are restricted under Japan's 
current export control system, other goods are free to be 
exported. On the other hand, the "know control" system, which 
will be introduced, will designate countries subject to export 
regulations, and will restrict exports of not only designated 
items but also general-purpose goods. 
  Based on the new system, exporting companies will check the 
possibility that even general-purpose goods may be transformed 
into weapons in importing countries. If there is such a 
possibility, companies will have to cancel the exports 
voluntarily. Even if companies fail to find the possibility, 
the government may take a view that exported products could be 
transformed into weapons. In this case, the government will 
urge companies to confirm the final purpose of use of export 
goods in importing countries. 
  The "know control" system has already been introduced in the 
United States, Germany, and Britain since 1991. The Japanese 
system will be basically the same. 
  However, it is feared that, through the introduction of 
these 
measures, "the government may force export companies to closely 
investigate the actual situation of importing companies" (as 
stated by the MITI's International Trade Administration Bureau). 
In order to minimize such a burden on exporting companies, 
unlike the U.S. and European systems, the Japanese system will 
set standards concerning the extent of companies' investigation 
so that they can prove that they fulfilled their obligation to 
study the possibility of their exported goods being transformed 
into weapons. 
  Moreover, MITI intends to take measures not to discourage 
companies' trade with countries subject to export regulations, 
by excluding items that have nothing to do with the production 
of weapons from the list for export control. 
  The United States and the other countries have introduced 
the 
"know control" system because regulations on items that could be 
used for nuclear arms, biological and chemical weapons, and 
missiles are insufficient in preventing arms proliferations. 
  Agricultural chemicals were used to make chemical weapons in 
the 1984 Iran-Iraq war. As regional conflicts have intensified 
with the years, it has become necessary to take measures to 
prevent general-purpose goods from being transformed into 
weapons. As a result, the "know control" system was worked out 
in the United States and Europe. In Japan as well, the Security 
Trade Control Panel of the Industrial Structure Council (an 
advisory council to the MITI minister) submitted to MITI in June 
of last year a report which recommended the establishment of an 
export control system like those in the United States and 
Europe. In response to this, MITI has been studying the idea. 
  While the United States is an advanced nation in the field 
of 
the "know control" system, there were demands in the U.S. 
Congress for abolishing the system to lighten the burden on 
companies. Therefore, MITI was watching the situation concerning 
the system in the United States. However, now that the United 
States is certain to continue the "know control" system, MITI 
has made the final decision to introduce the system in Japan. 

