Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Uncomprehensible Obstacles to American Troops"] </F>
  [Text] The entrance of American troops to Paraguay has 
unleashed an unnecessarily raucous controversy. A review of the 
opinions on the issue has allowed us to conclude that there is a 
constant argument being mentioned to avoid the presence of U.S. 
troops. As for the series of conditions imposed by the Foreign 
Ministry, they seem to be both confusing and contradictory. 
  The presence of U.S. troops is related to the "Unitas" 
operations carried out previously in our country jointly by 
Paraguayan and American troops. In this specific case, the 
nature of this operation will be different from the previous 
ones, which sought an exclusive military objective. This 
operation now seeks to improve secondary roads and build health 
centers in San Pedro. 
  The position the Paraguayan Government has recently adopted 
is incomprehensible. To mention sovereignty, understood as a 
rigid and exclusive doctrine, does not seem reasonable in times 
characterized by an increasing integration of countries. Times 
admit that there are problems that know no borders: the 
deterioration of the environment, extreme poverty, ignorance, 
and illnesses. 
  If the problems are common, it is easy to figure out that 
the 
struggle for a better world is a responsibility shared by all 
states and that this responsibility can no longer be considered 
the private affair of each state within its territory. In the 
Paraguayan case, we all know that external cooperation is vital 
if one hopes to successfully face the challenge of social and 
economic achievements. 
  San Pedro Department is precisely a kind of example of all 
the critical problems affecting the country, especially in the 
social area. Without any doubt this is the reason why growing 
marijuana is becoming the desperate option of the peasants in 
that region in their search for a better life. This is the ideal 
place to carry out a program for improving the population's 
standard of living; therefore, it should be welcomed instead of 
being rejected as is currently happening, although in a 
disguised manner. 
  Under these conditions it is possible that no advantage will 
be taken of this brilliant opportunity for cooperating with San 
Pedro Department, which is struggling in the midst of agonizing 
poverty. Therefore, this is the ideal place for implementing 
such a program, which should get the enthusiastic support of our 
government. And not as is happening now when it seems that 
efforts are being made to look for pretexts -- for reasons that 
do not seem very clear -- to delay and obstruct an action that 
from any point of view is beneficial to national interests. 

