BFN 

  [Text] On 5 May, GRANMA carries an article by Susana Lee 
regarding issues debated at a meeting of presidents of the 
provincial Administrative Councils and the Isle of Youth 
convened by the secretariat of the Council of Ministers. The 
issues discussed were the national budget, self-employment, 
local industries, and illegal sales of vehicles and houses. 
  It was announced that the budget showed generally positive 
signs in the first months and that if this were to continue, the 
deficit could diminish by 1 billion pesos in 1994 in relation to 
last year. 
  Regarding self-employment, it was decided to review all the 
licenses issued to artisans in order to detect any irregularity 
and act accordingly; to suspend licenses issued to artisans in 
plastic, and give these workers the option of rejoining local 
industries; and to leave in the hands of the Administrative 
Councils the option of extending or issuing the licenses deemed 
necessary. 
  The report on local industries showed that the drop in 
production this year is basically due to the reallocation of 
supplies to sectors with a higher popular demand, the fact that 
most local industry plastic product workers shifted to the 
self-employed sector, and a drop in basic resources. 
  An important discussion was held on measures implemented to 
confront the illegal sale and purchase of homes, as well as 
violations in the sale of vehicles given as incentives by owners 
who then disregard the state's first purchase option to buy 
them. The state has the legal and moral right to seize these 
goods given the fact that their owners, at the time of purchase, 
accepted a contract establishing the state's first purchase 
option for vehicles when the owner no longer wanted them. 
Regarding houses, on the basis of principles established in 
current law, under no circumstances can the personal house 
ownership right become a tool for profiting or exploitation. 
  It was stressed at the meeting that the law will be 
implemented vigorously and permanently and will continue to be 
modified to avoid recurrence in the future. 
  Politburo members Carlos Lage, Jose Ramon Machado Ventura, 
and Ricardo Alarcon chaired the meeting which included the 
participation of numerous ministers, other Communist Party of 
Cuba officials, cadres, and state and administration officials 
involved with the diverse issues discussed. 
  [Radio Rebelde at 1948 GMT on 5 May adds that Finance and 
Prices Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez also participated in the 
meeting.] 

