BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by David Makovsky and news agencies] </F>
  [Text] The Cairo talks on Palestinian self-rule ran into a 
crisis yesterday over the scope of Palestinian jurisdiction in 
Gaza and Jericho, chief PLO negotiator Nabil Sha'th said. 
  The talks in Cairo were also deadlocked on an amnesty for 
Palestinian prisoners and a map out-lining areas of Israeli 
control in the Gaza Strip, sources close to the talks said. 
  Sha'th, asked if there was a crisis over Palestinian 
jurisdiction, said: "Yes, there is. 
  "A major problem remains to be solved... it is the problem 
of 
jurisdiction... It must be solved if there is any seriousness to 
finish these negotiations on time," he told reporters. 
  Sha'th complained that Israel, in demanding legal authority 
over Israelis and foreigners inside future Palestinian areas, 
was ignoring the Declaration of Principles signed by the two 
sides last September. 
  "When we say that there is Palestinian jurisdiction in Gaza 
and Jericho, this means that Palestinian law is the one that 
prevails," he said. 
  Sha'th urged that the rules for law and courts in Gaza and 
Jericho should follow international practices. 
  "If a person commits a crime in London, even if he is 
Belgian 
or French, he is tried in London," he said. "Therefore, it has 
to be the same with us. 
  The PLO negotiator also complained about Israel's arrest 
yesterday of about 400 Palestinians opposed to the peace talks, 
saying the last days of negotiations should not be "used for 
more suffering and detaining and more torment of our people's 
sons." 
  Sha'th did not suggest pulling out of peace talks over the 
legal jurisdiction dispute. He noted agreements were reached 
yesterday in other areas such as broadcasting rights and 
cellular telephones, and said progress was made on water sharing. 
  Israeli delegates did not talk to reporters yesterday about 
the jurisdiction question. Delegation head Maj.-Gen. Amnon 
Shahaq returned to Israel last night to brief Foreign Minister 
Shim'on Peres on the talks. 
  Another PLO delegate, Muhammad Dahlan, said that the talks 
were also still stymied on the number of Palestinian prisoners 
that Israel would set free and when. 
  Israel has refused to release those who belong to Hamas and 
those convicted of violent crimes. 
  Dahlan maintained that with peace at hand, all those who 
took 
part in the Palestinian struggle should be freed. He pointed 
out that the PLO was negotiating with Hamas to overcome its 
opposition to the peace process and prevent internal battles 
once the Palestinians take over in Gaza and Jericho. 
  Meanwhile, senior Foreign Ministry officials are playing 
down 
expectations in advance of a meeting between Peres and PLO 
Chairman Yasir 'Arafat in Bucharest, to take place either 
tomorrow or Friday. 
  "There will be no Gaza-Jericho signing in Bucharest," a 
senior Foreign Ministry officials said. 
  It is expected, however, that Peres and 'Arafat will discuss 
the issues in dispute in Cairo. Peres is likely to reiterate 
Israel's opposition to PLO-Hamas coordination on issues related 
to violence. 
  In remarks at the Knesset foreign affairs and defense 
committee yesterday, Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin reiterated he 
viewed PLO- Hamas cooperation on violence against Israelis as a 
"red line" that would cause the dissolution of the Oslo accords. 
  At the same time, he indicated that he did not oppose 
cooperation between the two in other areas such as social 
welfare, sources present at the meeting said. 
  Foreign Ministry officials also insisted last night that a 
planned meeting between Peres and Jordan's Prime Minister 
'Abd-al- Salam al-Majali will not occur, since al-Majali has 
decided to remain in Amman. 
  On the issue of Jordan, Rabin told MKs [Knesset members] 
that 
the Jordanian decision to confiscate the passports of two Hamas 
militants in Amman demonstrated that King Husayn is "starting to 
take steps" to move against the group. 

