Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Earnestly Study Volume 3 of the Selected Works of </F>
Deng Xiaoping column by Cheng Weili (4453 0251 4409): 
"Three Major Issues Regarding the Building of Spiritual 
Civilization In the Context of Market Economy"] 
  [Text] The practice of reform aimed at establishing and 
perfecting the socialist market economic system has once again 
highlighted the issue of building socialist market economy as a 
major task facing us. The concept of "doing two types of work 
simultaneously with equal strength" requires us to think 
creatively about the ideological and cultural betterment in the 
spiritual civilization in the context of market economy and 
explore, through practice, a new mental approach to avoiding the 
mistake of giving unequal attention to the two types of work. 
In conjunction with studying Volume 3 of the Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping, I would like to share my personal 
understanding on three issues regarding the building of 
spiritual civilization in the context of market economy. 
<H3>  I. Reorientation of the Building of Spiritual Civilization 
in the Context of Market Economy </H3>
  In the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping 
(1975-1982), Comrade Xiaoping, in analyzing the building of 
spiritual civilization, suggested dividing it into two levels, 
namely, the level of ideological betterment and that of cultural 
betterment; he proposed that the objective of the building of 
spiritual civilization is to bring up a new generation of people 
with "four qualities," i.e., lofty ideals, moral integrity, 
education, and a sense of discipline; and he emphasized that 
ideological betterment is more important than cultural 
betterment. Among the "four qualities" to be cultivated, he set 
greater store by the education in ideals and discipline. From 
the point of view of historical materialism, he paid close 
attention to the material basis for the building of spiritual 
civilization. He emphasized that spiritual civilization 
originates from material civilization in the final analysis, 
while calling for due attention to the building of spiritual 
civilization when the productive forces are being emancipated 
and developed. Thereupon, he put forward the principle of 
"doing two types of work simultaneously with equal strength." 
  Since the 12th and 13th CPC National Congresses, we have 
looked upon the building of spiritual civilization as one of the 
basic features of socialism. With the constant deepening of the 
reform and opening up, while continuously broadening his mental 
approach to the relationship between socialism and the market 
economy and making it more specific, Comrade Xiaoping has also 
continuously increased the ideological strength of his 
expositions on the building of spiritual civilization and, in 
time, attained a new ideological realm. We should pay due 
attention to this point and conduct longitudinal study on it. 
  In his speech delivered at the national party conference on 
23 September 1985, he once again emphasized that the whole party 
should pay close attention to the building of spiritual 
civilization and clearly pointed out: "If the building of 
spiritual civilization is not strengthened, the building of 
material civilization will suffer and make a detour." 
  At the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau Standing 
Committee meeting on 17 January 1986, he pointed out in his 
speech that in conducting the building of spiritual civilization 
and striving to improve the party conduct and the general mood 
of society, it is imperative to make strenuous and consistent 
efforts on a daily basis and start from specific matters. He 
said emphatically: "If the general mood of society continues to 
deteriorate, what is the point of a successful economy? It will 
become degenerate in another way which will, in turn, cause the 
entire economy to go bad. If things are going this way, society 
will become a world of corruption, theft, and bribery." 
  In his talks made during his inspection tour in southern 
China in January 1992, Comrade Xiaoping elevated the building of 
spiritual civilization to an unprecedented theoretical level and 
tackled the issue in terms of a theoretical definition of the 
nature of socialism. In an earnest tone, he admonished us: 
"Whether or not the Chinese affairs can be handled well... in 
a sense, depends on men.... If anything goes wrong in China, it 
will be within the Communist Party." "It is necessary to combat 
corruption in the entire process of the reform and opening up... 
the building of a clean and honest administration should be 
taken care of as an important task." He specially emphasized 
the importance of doing two types of work simultaneously with 
equal strength. Not only should the economy be boosted, social 
order and the general mood of society should also be improved. 
The building of both civilizations should surpass that of 
capitalism. "Nothing but this is socialism with Chinese 
characteristics." 
  A different approach to this issue may lead us to the same 
conclusion. Comrade Xiaoping defined the nature of socialism as 
"emancipating the productive forces, developing the productive 
forces, eradicating exploitation, eliminating polarization, and 
eventually realizing common prosperity." In a conversation with 
a number of comrades in charge of the CPC Central Committee on 
24 December 1990, Comrade Xiaoping said: "We should not 
consider practicing a little bit of market economy as following 
the capitalist road. That is not true. We should have both 
planning and market." Then he immediately pointed out: "How 
the coastal regions may help the inland regions is a big issue. 
Reaching common prosperity will some day become the central 
topic." Obviously, common prosperity should be a "central 
topic" in the process of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics in the context of market economy. Without 
sustained efforts in the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization, there will be no desired objective of common 
prosperity to speak of and the nature of socialism will not be 
able to materialize either. Only by understanding the issue and 
reevaluating the theoretical positioning of the building of 
spiritual civilization in the theoretical structure of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics can we have an 
ideological premise and basis for understanding in our effort to 
overcome the stereotyped mentality of emphasizing one type of 
work at the expense of the other. Theoretically speaking, 
socialist spiritual civilization is not just one of the features 
of socialism. It is a fundamental manifestation and concrete 
requirement of the nature of socialism in the spirit of men. 
<H3>  II. Support Operations For the Spiritual Motive Force System 
in the Context of Market Economy </H3>
  Under the new situation whereby the reform and opening up 
are 
making overall advances and the pace of modernization is 
quickening, there has been a significant expansion in, and a 
major contribution to, Comrade Xiaoping's thinking on the 
building of spiritual civilization. That is, after summing up 
the past experience, he put forward the new concept of a 
"spiritual motive force for the development of China." 
  When meeting with Japanese friends on 30 June 1984, he made 
this synoptic remark: "If we were not Marxists, did not have 
full conviction in Marxism, or had not integrated Marxism with 
China's own reality and followed our own road, the Chinese 
Revolution would not have been successful and China would to 
this day still be rent by disunity. There would have been no 
independence or unity. Our conviction in Marxism is a spiritual 
motive force for the success of the Chinese Revolution." Here, 
he clearly put forward the concept of "spiritual motive force." 
  At the national party conference on 23 September 1985, he 
again said: "If we only had material conditions, our revolution 
and construction would not have succeeded. In the past, no 
matter how weak our party was and no matter what difficulties we 
came across, we always had a strong fighting capacity because we 
had conviction in Marxism and communism. The common aspiration 
resulted in iron discipline. This was, is, and will be our true 
superiority." He especially pointed out with emphasis: "Some 
comrades are no longer so clear about this truth, so it is hard 
for them to pay attention to the building of spiritual 
civilization." Here, Comrade Xiaoping was summing up 
history with reference to specific issues. He was trying to find 
the nucleus of the spiritual motive force from within the true 
superiority of our party, believing that the conviction in 
Marxism is a kind of spiritual motive force. 
  When meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Nakasone on 9 
November 1986, Comrade Xiaoping pointed out: "According to my 
long-term experience in political and military activity, I think 
the most important thing is the unity of people and unity 
entails common aspirations and firm conviction." Comrade 
Xiaoping set great store by the human factor but what he 
emphasized was not the awakening of those whose "innermost soul 
goes through an outbreak of revolution;" instead, he emphasized 
"those with firm conviction who recognize the people's own 
interests and fight for them." In his opinion, the only way is 
"to unite the people with a firm conviction and fight for the 
people's own interests. Without such a conviction, there would 
be no cohesiveness. Without such a conviction, there would be 
nothing." From Comrade Xiaoping's point of view, the firm 
conviction of fighting for the people's interests is a principle 
of the building of spiritual civilization in the new era and a 
cornerstone of the spiritual motive force system. "This is 
China's own characteristic" and also an example of his 
application of historical materialism. 
  It was for the purpose of creating a spiritual motive force 
system which conforms to the reform, opening up, and market 
economy that Comrade Xiaoping has been energetically advocating 
the patriotic spirit of invigorating the Chinese nation and 
increasing the cohesiveness of the nation. He said: "I am a 
Chinese and know the history of foreign aggression in China... 
...should know something about Chinese history. This is a 
spiritual motive force for the development of China." The 
reason Comrade Xiaoping included patriotism in spiritual 
civilization is because patriotism and socialism are 
intrinsically consistent with each other. When some people 
argued that not loving socialism does not mean not loving the 
country, Comrade Xiaoping sharply refuted such an argument and 
said: "Is the motherland an abstract concept? If you do not 
love the socialist New China led by the Communist Party, what do 
you love then?" In his opinion, promoting patriotic spirit is 
very necessary for the enhancement of national self-respect and 
national confidence under the circumstances of reform and 
opening up. "Or else we would not be able to build socialism 
and would be corroded and corrupted by all kinds of capitalist 
forces." Thus it can be seen that patriotism is another 
cornerstone for the establishment of a spiritual motive force 
system and is a brilliant example of Comrade Xiaoping's 
successful integration of socialist conviction with China's 
cultural tradition. 
  Besides, Comrade Xiaoping also pays close attention to the 
comprehensive development of the spiritual motive force system 
in the context of market economy. Market economy is by nature a 
legal economy. In view of the fact that people lack an adequate 
awareness of law in their actual everyday life, Comrade Xiaoping 
pointed out: "Legal awareness is connected to people's level of 
education. Today, so many young people commit crime... one of 
the reasons is that their level of education is too low." 
Therefore, he suggested "education in law should start from 
kids...." As to how spiritual civilization can materialize in 
material civilization, Comrade Xiaoping very much emphasized the 
building of civilization system as an intermediary link. On the 
one hand, he firmly believes that "only socialism can eliminate 
all phenomena of greed, corruption, and injustice which are 
natural products of capitalism and other systems of 
exploitation"; on the other hand, he sets great store by and 
emphasizes the need to "continue to make and improve various 
regimes and laws which conform with socialist principles." This 
way, Comrade Xiaoping linked up spiritual civilization with 
material civilization through a civilization system by 
discussing the awareness of law, level of education, and regimes 
and laws; he subsequently considered market economy, the 
building of legal system, and the building of spiritual 
civilization as a great social systems engineering project, 
presenting the strategic construct of integrating market economy 
with the building of spiritual civilization. 
<H3>  II. Results and Methods of Building Spiritual Civilization 
in the Context of Market Economy </H3>
  As early as the national party conference on 23 September 
1985, Comrade Xiaoping pointed out: "The formulation of 
building socialist spiritual civilization was set out a long 
time ago." "But in terms of the whole country, the results are 
less than ideal up to this day. The main problem is that the 
whole party has failed to pay earnest attention to it." 
  At the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau Standing 
Committee meeting on 17 January 1986, Comrade Xiaoping again 
pointed out: "Take hold of typical cases and handle them so that 
the effect will be significant and will indicate that we are 
determined to overcome all obstacles to conduct the building of 
legal system and spiritual civilization." He suggested the 
secretariat "make strenuous efforts for two years and score good 
results." He said: "If we make a good job of this matter, we 
will be able to truly promote reform and construction. We 
should be determined to do this and struggle for at least 10 
years... 10 years is the time needed to bring up a person!" 
  Comrade Xiaoping's idea of attaching importance to results 
in 
building spiritual civilization deserves our attention. It is 
because of this idea of attaching importance to actual results 
that he relatively values the experience of Singapore in 
building spiritual civilization and this is consistent with his 
approach of "boldly absorbing and assimilating all the fruits of 
civilization created by human society." In the talks he made 
during his tour of southern China in 1992, he said: "The social 
order in Singapore is rather good. They keep a tight control. 
We should draw upon their experience and exercise even better 
control than them." At the moment, there are two 
interpretations of the orientation of Singapore's experience, 
one tending toward absorbing Confucianist ethics and the other 
tending toward absorbing the Western style of rule of law. In 
fact, Singapore's Confucianist ethics have been analyzed and 
processed by the modern neo-Confucianist theory in the West, not 
a simplistic interpretation of the original Confucianism; and 
their rule of law is integrated with the spirit of "rule of 
ethics" found in the tradition of the Chinese. We need to 
digest and screen their experience instead of copying it in a 
simplistic way. Attention must be given to the results in the 
process of such assimilation. We should "choose and follow what 
is good" and aim at "exercising even better control than them." 
At the same time, we should boldly experiment and reform in the 
process of practice. 
  On 23 October 1985, when answering a question raised by the 
editor-in-chief of America's Time Company on the means to solve 
a handful of embezzlement, corruption, and power abuse cases, 
Comrade Xiaoping clearly said that we mainly resort to two 
means: "One is education, the other is law." Education and law, 
as two important means for the building of spiritual 
civilization, are mutually complementary and neither is 
dispensable. There are some problems concerning the building of 
spiritual civilization which cannot be solved overnight and 
results cannot possibly be achieved simply with a few words from 
somebody. It takes determination, stamina, and constancy of 
purpose to gradually overcome, and eventually eliminate, these 
negative phenomena. 
  On the specific methodology for building spiritual 
civilization, Comrade Xiaoping also has a series of unequivocal 
statements. Some comrades asked what the immediate significance 
of studying Marxist theory is. Comrade Xiaoping's reply showed 
an analytical attitude. On the one hand, he pointed out that 
this question shows a misunderstanding. Marxist theory has 
never been a dogma but is a guide to action. The main task for 
us is to hold on more to principles and be more systematic, 
farsighted, and creative; learn to explore and solve the new 
basic problems in politics, economics, social affairs, and 
culture in a dynamic way; and avoid losing our bearings in the 
complex struggles. On the other hand, he pointed out that 
Marxism is not abstruse. Marxism is a very simple and unadorned 
theory. The things we learn from Marxism-Leninism should be 
essential and practical. 
  As to some specific methods and policy orientation in the 
process of building spiritual civilization in the context of 
market economy, Comrade Xiaoping also has a series of clearly 
defined principles. For instance, he pointed out that the 
tendency to "put money before everything" and commercializing 
spiritual products has found expression in other aspects of 
spiritual production. "Some of those who are unworthy to occupy 
a place among artists, publishers, and relics researchers have 
simply turned into moneygrubbing merchants." He also pointed 
out: "Ideological, cultural, educational, and public health 
departments should take social benefit as the sole criterion for 
all their activities. The enterprises subordinate to them 
should also take social benefit as the highest criterion. The 
ideological and cultural circles should produce a larger 
quantity of good spiritual products and firmly stop the 
production, import, and spreading of bad products." The thrust 
of all these remarks does indeed provide food for thought. We 
should earnestly consider if it still suits the building of 
today's cultural market. 
  We believe that as long as we can keep developing our 
productive forces, maintain a certain economic growth rate, and 
consistently do two types of work simultaneously with equal 
strength, boldly and skillfully, then we will be able to 
overcome and redress the phenomenon of making unbalanced efforts 
in the two types of work. Under the guidance of Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, we 
are bound to be able to upgrade the building of socialist 
spiritual civilization. 

