Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] One person has been killed and two others 
wounded in an artillery attack by the Muslim army on Vitez and 
its vicinity. After the Muslim artillery had pounded Novi 
Travnik this morning, particularly the suburb of Donji Rastovci, 
Muslim artillery attacks spread in the course of the afternoon 
to other parts of the Lasva river valley. The centre of Vitez 
and all HVO [Croatian Defense Council] positions in that area 
are coming under particularly heavy fire. Shortly after 1300 
the parish church in Vitez was hit. After the Croatian 
artillery had retaliated, the shelling of this area subsided, 
although it has not completely stopped. At the same time Muslim 
infantry forces launched an attack from Sivrino Selo against the 
village of Dubravice east of Vitez and HVO positions east of 
Travnik. The HVO command in Vitez has reported that the HVO 
forces are firmly holding their positions. [passage omitted] 
  The political department of the Defense Ministry of the 
Croat 
Republic of Herceg-Bosna, expressing its regret over the tragic 
killing of the three members of an Italian RAI Uno television 
team from Trieste yesterday and extending condolences to their 
families, has issued an extraordinary communique explaining the 
circumstances surrounding the killing of the three journalists. 
  Shortly before 1600 yesterday Muslim forces fired four 
mortar 
rounds on a very busy street in the western [Croat-held] part of 
Mostar, the communique says. The shells were fired from Muslim 
positions situated near the Muslim army fourth corps command 
headquarters; three people in the western part of Mostar 
sustained injuries. In order to neutralize the attack the HVO 
retaliated, firing on the fourth corps command headquarters 
whence the shells had been fired against the western part of the 
city. That was when the three Italian journalists who were 
filming at that time in the vicinity of the command headquarters 
were killed. 
  After the Spanish UNPROFOR [UN Protection Force] battalion 
interpreter had called and stated that the three journalists had 
been killed and one woman wounded, HVO troops immediately 
ceased fire, the communique says. The bodies of the journalists 
are still in a hospital in the eastern part of Mostar, from 
where they are expected to be transported by a UNPROFOR vehicle 
to Split to be flown to Trieste this evening. 
  The Spanish UNPROFOR battalion had warned the journalists to 
postpone their visit by a few days, but, having joined the 
International Commitee of the Red Cross, they came at their own 
risk. At the same time two other teams of journalists, a group 
of German journalists, a group of Dutch journalists, and two 
Turkish journalists [as received] sought permission to visit 
Mostar. They had set off for Mostar, but having been warned by 
HVO soldiers at the last checkpoint before entering Mostar that 
to visit this town would be risky, they gave up their trip and 
waited for UNPROFOR to take them back to Medjugorje, Colonel 
Antonio Castro, UNPROFOR spokesman in Medjugorje, said. Col. 
Castro added that in his talks with the Italian journalists he 
had been asked whether it was risky to visit Mostar, and had 
replied that to visit either the eastern or the western part of 
Mostar was always risky. 

