BFN 

  [Text] The Army has denied that "foreign" troops killed and 
captured by Cambodian government forces during recent fighting 
with the Khmer Rouge [KR] were Thai soldiers. 
  It also denied providing any assistance to the Khmer Rouge 
and warned that it is running out of patience with Phnom Penh 
over repeated accusations of Thai military involvement with the 
guerrillas. 
  Army spokesman Col Phalangkun Klahan said that despite the 
Army's policy of non-interference in the Cambodian conflict it 
has often been accused of collaborating with the Khmer Rouge, in 
particular whenever Phnom Penh suffers a reversal on the 
battlefield. 
  He reiterated Army Commander-in-Chief Gen Wimon Wongwanit's 
insistence that no Thai paramilitary forces or troops were 
involved in the fighting in Cambodia. Thailand would gain no 
benefit by supporting the Khmer Rouge. 
  The spokesman questioned the efficiency of the Cambodian 
intelligence network. If it kept feeding wrong information to 
the government then victory would be extremely difficult for the 
Cambodian army. 
  Phalangkun said the Army is keeping a close watch on Agence 
France Presse, the French news agency which has been publishing 
allegations of Thai military involvement in Cambodia. 
  The agency most recently quoted the Cambodian Information 
Ministry spokesman Sieng Lapresse as saying that the government 
troops had killed and captured "several foreigners" dressed in 
black who were fighting on the side of the Khmer Rouge in the 
northwest. 
  While Sieng refused to say where they were being held, what 
languages they spoke or what kind of role they played in the 
fighting, he remarked: "I believe certain Thais wear black", a 
veiled reference to the Thai Ranger unit that patrols the border 
with Cambodia, said AFP. 
  Phalangkun said the AFP offices in Bangkok and Hong Kong 
were 
understanding when the Army tried to clarify Thailand's position 
on Cambodian affairs, but there had been no response from the 
AFP bureau in Phnom Penh. 
  He said the Cambodian conflict has placed the Army in a 
difficult position for over a decade and warned that Thai 
patience was running out. Thailand, he added, wants a national 
reconciliation and an end to the fighting in Cambodia. 
  Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri yesterday refused to 
comment 
on a statement by Cambodia's King Norodom Sihanouk that Phnom 
Penh might approach foreign countries for military assistance. 
  "You should ask the countries which were mentioned by King 
Sihanouk," the minister told reporters. 
  He also would not comment on the possible affect of foreign 
assistance on Thailand's border security. 
  "I do not want to talk about it," he replied vehemently. 
  King Sihanouk on Wednesday said he might be forced to seek 
military help from the United States, France or Australia if the 
Khmer Rouge continued its war to partition the country. 
  On Tuesday Prasong warned against outside interference in 
Cambodia. He said he had made his feelings clear during a 
meeting with US Deputy Chief of Staff Adm Williams Owens on 
Monday, and would also convey them to the Australian and French 
governments. 
  Gen Charan Kunlawanit, chief of the National Security 
Council, said both Laos and Vietnam had previously rejected 
Phnom Penh's requests for arms. 
  Thailand shared the ASEAN policy of not assisting any of the 
disputing parties in Cambodia and saw arms supplies as a 
"militant measure" which supported homicide. 
  Bangkok wanted to provide humanitarian assistance, which 
would improve the living conditions of the general populace. 
  He said he did not believe that King Sihanouk, as head of 
state and a "popular world leader", would ask foreigners to 
assist in the killing of his own people. 
  The Thai Embassy in Phnom Penh, meanwhile, has made 
preparations to evacuate Thais living in Battambang and Sisophon 
if the military situation in the area worsens, the Foreign 
Ministry announced. A representative of the embassy yesterday 
called on Cambodian Foreign Minister Prince Norodom Sirivut to 
express the government's concern for the safety of Thais there, 
and asked for cooperation in the event of an air evacuation. 
  The statement said there were believed to be 28 Thais still 
in Battambang. 

