BFN 

  [Text] As one should have expected, the 20 May decision by 
the Crimean parliament to restore the main provisions of the 
1992 Constitution provoked a quite negative and tough reaction 
on the part of official Kiev. It is not surprising that events 
on the peninsula have become the main story of news agencies 
over the past few days. My colleague, Anton Grishin, reports on 
the latest from the region: 
  [Begin Grishin recording] It looks as if an attempt on the 
part of the presidents of Ukraine and Russia to cool tempers has 
led nowhere. A statement by Ukrainian Defense Minister Vitaliy 
Radetskyy cast doubts on the verbal agreements reached on 
abstaining from the use of force to settle the Crimean conflict. 
According to Radetskyy, I quote, official Kiev will take no one 
and nothing into consideration in preserving the Crimea within 
Ukraine and will opt for the most decisive measures to do 
so--end of quote. It became known on Monday [23 May] that 29 
armored vehicles of the Ukrainian Armed Forces were moved into 
Simferopol. The strength of the military contingent was 
considerably increased. This prompted the Crimean law 
enforcement bodies to be confined to barracks and all vitally 
important facilities in the republic be placed under guard. [end 
recording] 
  Yevgeniy Novikov reports from Simferopol: 
  [Begin Novikov recording] During the afternoon, the Crimean 
president's administration began receiving information from 
Simferopol residents on the movement of Ukrainian military 
equipment through the town. Worrying reports were coming from 
the Crimean Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, by the end 
of the day on 23 May, no Ukrainian military equipment was found 
on the streets of Simferopol. Obviously, this equipment is on 
the territory of the military units in Simferopol. The Crimean 
president's administration reported that the officials of 
Simferopol are refraining from action and are awaiting the 
results of talks between the prime ministers of Ukraine and 
Russia on the Crimean problem. In the meantime, passengers of 
long-distance trains continue to supply contradictory 
information on the movement of Ukrainian military trains in the 
border regions of the northern Crimea. [end recording] 

