Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 10 KYODO -- A two-day international 
conference on the reconstruction of Cambodia opened in Tokyo on 
Thursday [10 March] with an appeal from King Norodom Sihanouk 
for a modern-day "Marshall Plan" to help put the war-ravaged 
country back on its feet. Sihanouk's message, sent from 
Beijing, where he has been undergoing medical treatment, was 
conveyed to the International Committee on the Reconstruction of 
Cambodia (ICORC) by the monarch's son, Cambodian First Prime 
Minister Norodom Ranariddh. 
  The meeting, chaired by Japan, is being attended by 
delegates 
from 32 countries, the European Union and 12 international 
organizations, including U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher. 
  "I would say that the gift of which my country has the 
greatest need, having suffered from so many years of turpitude 
and devastation, is none other than a new unconditional Marshall 
Plan gauged to specific needs," the message said. He was 
referring to a multibillion dollar plan drawn up by then U.S. 
Secretary of State George Marshall in the late 1940s to 
rehabilitate the shattered economies of post-World War II Europe. 
  The ailing monarch enumerated six priority areas for 
external 
assistance -- basic human needs in terms of sufficient access by 
the population to food and medical care, agricultural and rural 
development, infrastructure repair, environmental protection, 
education and technical training, and industrialization. 
  He placed most importance on improving conditions in rural 
communities, where about 80 percent of all Cambodians eke out a 
living, most of them "lacking even a roof over the head, 
sufficient resources, work or the prospect of finding any." 
  Ranariddh, who was accompanied to the conference by Second 
Prime Minister Hun Sen, said his government supports the "very 
just recommendations" of the king, who under the new Cambodian 
Constitution reigns but does not govern. 
  "Cambodia deserves your help because it helps itself," he 
said, adding that the government, in the five months since its 
formation after last May's U.N.-supervised general election, has 
set tough objectives for itself and accomplished a great deal in 
spite of meager resources. 
  Heeding international recommendations, he said, it has 
implemented administrative structural reforms, put its finances 
in order, stabilized the currency and worked out a satisfactory 
budget. 
  The government's next step is to present a new liberal 
investment code in line with the goal to develop a market 
economy with minimal state intervention, he said, apparently 
hinting at the unveiling of the code during the conference. 
  Japanese Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata told delegates that 
the convening of the conference "demonstrates the international 
community's continued support for the new government." 
  The last ICORC meeting, held at a working level in Paris in 
September, saw 119 million dollars in fresh commitments added to 
the 880 million dollars garnered at a previous ministerial 
conference on Cambodia held in Tokyo in June 1992. 
  While most of those funds were for short-term financial 
support, this week's meeting is expected to produce substantial 
new pledges to help Cambodia meet its mid- to long-term aid 
needs. Japanese sources estimate new pledges may reach 120 
million dollars. 
  Japan, Cambodia's chief aid benefactor, will pledge some 9 
billion yen in new grant assistance, sources said. Tokyo has 
already committed some 190 million dollars, thus fulfilling its 
June 1992 pledge of 150 million dollars to 200 million dollars 
over a three-year period ending this April. 
  But despite the inflow of aid, efforts to implement 
reconstruction programs continue to be undermined by the 
destabilizing activities of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group. 
  Ranariddh said the international community can help resolve 
the Khmer Rouge problem by ensuring that all countries 
"scrupulously" and "instantly" respect Cambodia's sovereignty, 
independence, neutrality, and territorial integrity and 
inviolability. 
  Cambodian Government officials have repeatedly accused 
neighboring Thailand of allowing the Khmer Rouge to take 
sanctuary across the border. 
  Ranariddh also made reference in his speech to the 
"agonizing 
and menacing problem" of millions of land mines strewn over vast 
tracts of territory, including potentially productive farmland. 
He said removing them will take a long time and be costly. 
  The conference is to consider additional interim funding for 
the Cambodian Mine Action Center (CMAC), which has appealed for 
10 million dollars annually for the next five years to remove 
mines. Mines kill or injure over 300 Cambodians a month, with 
the result being that Cambodia has the highest ratio of 
handicapped people in the world -- one in every 236 people. 

