Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague, Feb 27 (CTK) -- Loopholes in Czech 
legislation allow "comfortable and risk-free drug selling right 
in downtown Wenceslas Square," Josef Doucha, deputy director of 
the Criminal Police Center, has told CTK. 
  In this situation it is very difficult to take effective 
steps against "the fingertips of the drug mafia," Doucha said, 
pointing to the growing numbers of local consumers of drugs, 
including the "hard" ones such as heroin and cocaine. 
  Last year, the police seized 3.5 kilograms of cocaine, 
almost 
11 kilograms of heroin, 2 kilograms of ephedrine, 3 kilograms of 
morphine and 540 LSD doses. The anti-drug police discovered the 
existence of 18 laboratories equipped for the home production of 
drugs, particularly the "popular" Czech-invented pervitine, 
Doucha said. 
  The legislative loopholes do not allow the "operative drug 
purchase" as is possible in some states where the police can 
"arouse interest in drug sales, and detain the seller and 
confiscate the drug at the moment of the sale," Doucha pointed 
out. 
  He also spoke about organized crime, stressing that Czech 
criminal gangs have been ever better organized and ever more 
tightly integrated into international crime structures. This 
trend is expected to continue in the next years, Doucha added. 
  "Czech organized criminal groups target practically 
everything that is profitable, from thefts of expensive 
foreign-made cars, to financial frauds, to illicit trade in 
drugs, fission materials and weapons, to 
financially-advantageous people smuggling," Doucha said. 
  The Crime Police "disintegrated" in 30 operations last year 
16 crime gangs, all of which included foreigners. Out of the 93 
persons prosecuted, 21 were foreigners. The groups specialized 
in qualified criminal activity, such as bribery, people 
smuggling, murder, robbery and restraint of personal freedom. 
  The police seized in these operations 1.6 million crowns 
(about $54,000)--264 kilogram of Czech-made Semtex explosive, 
186 kilogram of perunit explosive, 1,532 electric fuses, 500 
detonators, 0.6 grams of radioactive californium 252, 33 
illegally possessed weapons, 10 short-wave transmitters, more 
than 1,000 forged or illegally possessed passports and various 
forging instruments, Doucha said. 
  The police also registered 17 cases of racketeering. 
  Foreign gangs are particularly Russian, Ukrainian, Chinese 
and Italian. "Excellent" among them are the Russian gangs which 
specialize in money laundering, racketeering, organized 
prostitution, murders of uncomfortable people and illicit trade 
in drugs, weapons and works of art. They bribe not only Russian 
and Ukrainian, but also Czech entrepreneurs. 
  The mafia-type Camorra from Naples focuses on trade in "fake 
goods", such as imitation leather and silver. 
  Chinese groups specializing in people smuggling combined 
with 
passport forging, money laundering and bribing Chinese 
businessmen is no longer any "novelty" in the Czech Republic, 
Doucha said. 

