Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Volodymyr Oliynyk: "The Ukrainian Emigrant. Who </F>
Is He?"] 
  [Text] "A conservative mentality and the fact that 
they are unaccustomed to travelling far from home will probably 
keep Ukrainians from leaving the country en masse as long as 
they are not forced to do so by extraordinary circumstances. 
This does not, however, exclude the possibility of a rise in 
mass migration in the future, if Ukraine's living standard 
remains lower than that of other countries." "The Emigration of 
the Population of Ukraine: Socioeconomic Aspects and Possible 
Consequences," scientific report by the National Institute for 
Strategic Studies, December 1993. 
<H3>  WHY ARE PEOPLE PACKING THEIR SUITCASES? BLAME THE CRISIS... 
AND JOURNALISTS </H3>
  The economic crisis is responsible for the fact that lately 
more and more Ukrainians are packing their suitcases in order to 
make a break for the West. Sociologists, however, also explain 
this as a reaction to the earlier ban on travel, as well as the 
effect of propaganda in the mass media, which has replaced the 
harsh criticism of "their way of life" with something 
approximating idealization, thereby creating new ideals in the 
consciousness of Ukrainians. 
  Yet the underlying reason for emigration is the fact that 
the 
living standard of our countrymen is significantly lower than of 
people in neighboring countries. Given that the average wage 
here is no more than 10 dollars per month, that the social 
guarantee of housing that existed in the period of "developed 
socialism" no longer exists, and that hyperinflation reigns, 
most potential emigrants are now giving thought not only to 
their prosperity but also to the prospects of having a job a 
year or two from now. 
  Last year, the number of unemployed people in Ukraine 
increased tenfold, and this takes into account only those who 
have registered officially. Both Ukrainian and foreign experts 
predict that there may be rom two to three million jobless in 
Ukraine by 1995. 
  Ecological problems also stimulate emigration; the Chernobyl 
catastrophe encompassed a territory populated by three million 
inhabitants. People who were forced to abandon their homes are 
quick to decide to leave the country forever. 
  When we compare the results of sociological studies 
conducted 
in 1990 with those conducted in 1992-93, we find that, 
unfortunately, the desire to emigrate is growing among the 
population of Ukraine. According to a survey conducted by the 
International Migration Organization, 83 percent of respondents 
in Ukraine cited worsening living conditions during the last 
three years (67 percent in Russia), and nearly the same 
proportion of respondents do not believe that the situation will 
improve in the near future. The most troubling aspect of these 
statistics is that one-third of those surveyed who are planning 
to emigrate is comprised of young people, who give as their 
reason for leaving their inability to realize their potential in 
Ukraine. This attitude is especially widespread among people 
under 20 years of age (41 percent), the intelligentsia (42 
percent), and students (40 percent). 
  As part of a wider study, researchers conducted short 
interviews with people who were leaving the country at railroad 
and airline ticket counters and outside the embassies of the 
United States, Germany, Israel, and Russia. Nearly 90 percent of 
those surveyed said they were prompted to emigrate or leave the 
country for a temporary period of time by dissatisfaction with 
the material conditions of their life. Sixty percent cited 
concern for their children's future. The conclusion is not a 
happy one. The results of the survey indicate that of the 29 
million working-age inhabitants of Ukraine, nearly half may 
become migrants and three million may permanently resettle. Add 
to this other members of their families... 
<H3>  NO ONE KNOWS HOW MANY HAVE ALREADY LEFT. PERHAPS IT IS 
BETTER THAT WAY... </H3>
  You will not find the number of emigrants at either the 
Ministry of Labor or the Ministry of Nationalities and 
Migration. The statistics kept by the offices of visas and 
registration of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are seriously 
flawed. To begin with, there is no information regarding how 
many citizens who received permission have actually left, and no 
data has been kept as of January 1993 on temporary travel abroad 
for personal reasons. The state has virtually stopped all forms 
of registration of those leaving the country -- a policy that 
can hardly be called far-sighted. After all, it is essential 
that information on how many citizens have left or are leaving 
and to what destinations be taken into account both in domestic 
socioeconomic policy and in international affairs. 
  At first glance, this does not seem to be a very serious 
problem. In reality, these things are much more complicated. If 
Ukraine is an European state, as our politicians are fond of 
stressing, then why is it not concerned about the image that is 
projected by the thousands of its people receiving assistance 
"over there" who ask for help when they find themselves in dire 
straits. According to data provided by the Polish press alone, 
close to 200,000 former residents of the USSR are working in 
Poland illegally, the majority of them Ukrainians. 
<H5>  LABOR MIGRATION, OR IN SEARCH OF EARNINGS </H5>
  Experts predict that the rate of temporary migration in 
search of work will rise rapidly and will attain a level of 
nearly two million annually. The breakdown of this process will 
look as follows: For the most part, those who leave will be 
highly qualified specialists, scientists, artists, sportsmen -- 
predominantly people with a higher education, who are 
established professionals, ranging in age from 30 to 40 years. 
In other words, the nation's scientific and production elite. 
  Most of the people who will remain abroad for several years 
will work there on the basis of legal contracts. The second 
group will consist of young people, mostly single men without 
sufficient education and professional training. They are now 
working and will continue to work abroad without the necessary 
permits at seasonal, temporary, low-prestige jobs. Even when 
qualified, they often settle for the most physically demanding 
labor. Unprepared, lacking professional and language training, 
lacking information about living conditions abroad, our 
countrymen most often find themselves on the lowest rung of the 
social and professional scale. Western employees do not see a 
big difference between exploiting a semiliterate Asian and a 
qualified but impoverished Ukrainian. So far, Ukraine has not 
joined the multilateral international legal instruments 
governing migrants that would improve her citizens' living 
conditions in the countries that have taken them in. 

