BFN 

<F P=106> [Patrick Wintour report: "Embattled Major Finds Enemies </F>
Lurking Among Would-Be Friends"] 
  [Text] On what had been optimistically intended as a week 
of celebration marking the 15th anniversary of the election of a 
Tory government, Conservatives wake up this morning to find 
their MPs again spitting blood at one another over the party 
leadership. 
  David Evans, the MP for Luton East, may have intended his 
call for six cabinet sackings a shake-up of John Major's kitchen 
cabinet and the dismissal of the party chairman Norman Fowler, 
as a piece of no-nonsense populist advice from a friendly 
backbench voice on the party right. But that was not its effect. 
  Instead, it underlines Mr Major's inability to enforce 
discipline in his ranks and the desperate remedies even his 
allies believe he must take if he is to survive defeats in the 
local and European elections. 
  Even one of his great friends, the Agriculture Secretary, 
Gillian Shephard, is inadvertently daily digging a hole for her 
patron. On Saturday [30 April] she said 80 per cent of Tory MPs 
wanted Mr Major to continue, failing to foresee that this 
implied a fifth of the party did not. 
  On Sunday she was again too frank, admitting that canvassing 
on behalf of Michael Heseltine and Michael Portillo was under 
way and complaining that there were two oppositions in the 
Commons, one of them Conservative. Party members were in 
despair, she added. 
  Yesterday Mrs Shephard told BBC Radio 4's Today programme 
that Cabinet ministers who did not feel 100 per cent loyalty to 
the Prime Minister should resign, inadvertently suggesting that 
some did not possess that undiluted allegiance. 
  Matters were hardly helped when one prominent Major loyalist 
in Parliament rang selected journalists with a publicly loyal 
statement yesterday, but then privately admitted that politics 
was beginning to look bleak for Mr Major. With friends such as 
these, who needs to worry about enemies? 
  The answer is Mr Major, for there is now no mistaking the 
determination of some Cabinet rightwingers, notably Mr Portillo, 
the Treasury Chief Secretary, to try their luck. In a clear 
breach of the painfully developed consensus on European policy, 
Mr Portillo expressed opposition at the weekend to any moves 
towards a single currency, saying it would mean "giving up the 
government of the UK." 
  The remarks do not incriminate him directly over the reports 
that some Tories want to go into the next election on a ticket 
of withdrawal from Europe, but they were hardly designed to pour 
cold water over the story. As the mammoth Conservative Campaign 
Guide, published yesterday, makes clear, the official policy is 
to assert that the Maastricht Treaty's timetable for monetary 
union is now hypothetical and that Parliament will only take a 
decision on a single currency at the appropriate time. 
  Yesterday Stephen Dorrell, the pro-European Economic 
Secretary to the Treasury, had to be wheeled out to rehearse 
this official line on the radio. He explained: "The only 
circumstances in which it could be come a real question is if 
the continental countries decided themselves to set (a single 
currency) up. That would obviously create a question for 
British government which we have decided we will answer at the 
time." 
  He added that it was silly to answer such hypothetical 
questions when there was no need to, a thought which might have 
crossed Mr Portillo's mind had he been less keen to send out 
messages to the backbench sceptics. 

