BFN 

  [Text] To urge foreign companies to join Japan's national 
projects in new energy development, including coal liquefaction 
and solar technology, the government will review the way it 
deals with intellectual property rights, such as patents. 
Currently, all intellectual property rights obtained through 
joint research in the same field belong to the Japanese 
Government. In the future, however, such intellectual property 
rights will be jointly owned by the government and the companies 
that take part in joint research and the companies will be able 
to utilize results of joint research for commercial purposes. 
By revising the way it deals with intellectual property rights, 
the government aims to avoid technological friction with Europe 
and the United States and plans to open the door to private 
companies to promote joint research. 
  Under the "system for research and development of industrial 
science and technology," the government has already approved 
joint ownership of intellectual property rights and is opening 
the door to foreign companies. However, it is the first time 
for the government to review its system in the new energy field. 
  Technological development projects regarding high-grade 
utilization of fossil fuels -- including development of 
alternatives to fossil fuel, such as solar power and geothermal 
energy generation and coal liquefaction -- will be the subject 
of the review. Currently, the government, with the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry [MITI] and the Ministry of 
Finance [MOF] as main figures, is reviewing its regulations on 
dealing with intellectual property rights based on alternative 
energy laws (laws regarding promotion of development and 
introduction of alternative energy to oil). MITI plans to use 
the "joint international research for hydrogen utilization 
technology," which will get into its stride this fiscal year, as 
the first case to be executed under a new system. 
  So far, the New Energy and Industrial Development 
Organization (NEDO), which is the main body in charge of 
executing national projects, has been subletting national energy 
projects to private companies and universities. However, all 
patent and new ideas for practical use of research results 
belong to the Japanese Government so that the companies and 
universities are unable to use them. Because of this, in many 
cases, foreign companies, even if the government proposed joint 
international research, hesitated to take part in such joint 
studies. 
  Therefore, when it reviews regulations, the government will 
adopt a new system in which intellectual property rights will be 
jointly owned by the government and private companies. In 
addition, the government is studying the possibility of lowering 
patent fees and charging less when foreign companies use the 
results of joint research. 
  Through the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), the government is also promoting discussions 
with the United States, Europe, and other countries to enable 
private companies to mutually join research projects of each 
country. Japan plans to make liberalization of projects related 
to energy as an eye-catcher at the discussions. 

