BFN 

  [Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro has said that 
tourism is a priority matter in the country's life at this 
historic moment. In a two-hour meeting with representatives, 
delegates, tour operators, and reporters attending the Cuba-94 
tourism convention, President Castro answered more than a dozen 
questions. 
  He said anything that has an impact on the economy is very 
important to the country, that tourism is one of the areas with 
the greatest impact, and that it is growing at a rate of almost 
30 percent yearly. He added that because Cuba has tourist 
potential, and especially because there is willingness to keep 
it growing, tourism is considered a priority. 
  The blockade was also among the issues discussed at the 
meeting with delegates, tour operators, and reporters from the 
tourism convention. On this matter, the commander in chief said 
President Clinton is maintaining his severity, but in a softer 
manner and with less threatening, less bellicose words. He said, 
however, that the severity of U.S. policy toward Cuba has not 
changed. It remains the same. 
  Concerning foreign investments in the country, Fidel Castro 
said the opening will be increasingly broader and that it is 
perfectly conceivable because the objective is to attain the 
means to develop the country. 
  When asked about how a socialist system can coexist with the 
flow of foreign capital, Castro said that Cuba neither will give 
up socialism nor defraud those who want to contribute to the 
development of this and other fields, such as petroleum 
exploration and exploitation. 
  Concerning the desired image for Cuba, Castro said he wants 
to convey the image of a beautiful country with natural 
conditions; a hospitable and sound nation; a well-organized, 
drug-free country with a warm climate and a high culture that 
protects the environment. 
  The 15th tourism convention gathered 971 delegates from 26 
European and American countries and representatives from Algiers 
and the Arab world. In this convention, Cuba has signed several 
contracts for the next winter and summer seasons. 

