BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 23 (CTK) -- Slovak Premier Jozef 
Moravcik considers the division of Czechoslovakia only 
temporary, because it is probable, in his opinion, that both new 
republics will become members of the European Union before the 
end of the century, and will resume very close contact. 
  The Premier told journalists today that apart from the 
Slovak 
National Party (SNP), no political organization in the last 
federal elections had as part of its platform the division of 
the country, and more than half the citizens of Slovakia were 
against it. 
  The former Czechoslovakia, however, was based on "Communist 
federalism," and relations between the two peoples did not 
develop on a healthy basis, in the opinion of the Slovak 
Premier. He said this was why the Slovak side tried in its 
mutual relations to use the model of the European Union, which 
"did not gain acceptance, but which certainly well, and on an 
historical scale." 
  The division, according to Moravcik, was a compromise aimed 
at resolving the dilemma of how to break out of a permanent 
situation of crisis, which was sinking ever deeper into 
discussions about the optimal form of shared existence. "We were 
unable to decide on any other variant," Moravcik said. For 
Slovakia, in his view, the acceptability of the split lay 
precisely in the fact that "from the standpoint of the future, 
nothing really would change." 
  "I was the first member of the federal government to foresee 
that Czechoslovakia would cease to exist at the end of 1992," 
Moravcik emphasized, and added that he had himself voted for the 
breakup of the state. Making no attempt to deny the importance 
of the "national identity" of the Slovaks, he said that from the 
position of his former post he had often discussed the 
preservation of the Czechoslovak state with international 
institutions, but with the condition that the Czech and Slovak 
Republics participate in European structures on an independent 
basis. 
  "National identity is a value which it is necessary to watch 
over, integration is something else," he said. The fact that 
"both republics will belong to the greater European society is 
not at odds with the principle of national identity. It is the 
resolution of relations between peoples in a European manner," 
Moravcik stated. 
  "We had to explain to the world why Czechoslovakia is 
splitting up," he said. He considers the fact that it succeeded 
a very important factor in the present acceptance of both 
republics, but especially of Slovakia. 

