BFN 

  [Text] The transfer of authorities to the Palestinians in 
Jericho has begun. Foreign correspondents report from the town 
that approximately two hours ago, Brigadier General Gadi Zohar, 
the head of the Civil Administration, turned the administration 
building over to 12 Palestinian policemen. The policemen were 
also given the police station. The Palestinians hastened to fly 
a Palestinian flag from the building. Correspondents report 
that local residents were surprised that the ceremony was held 
earlier than they had expected. In approximately one hour, the 
Palestinians will also receive control of the Hanan base, which 
was used until now by the IDF [Israel Defense Forces]. The 
Palestinian al-Aqsa brigade will now operate from the base. 
  According to reports from Amman, hundreds of soldiers from 
the brigade are currently making their way to the Allenby 
bridge. If everything goes according to plan, they will enter 
the Jericho area sometime today. The Palestinians are also 
slated to receive control over the area of the ancient Shalom 
'Al Yisra'el synagogue in Jericho today. 
  The transfer of authorities to the Palestinians also 
continued in the Gaza Strip. Our Army affairs correspondent 
Karmela Menashe reports that last night, the IDF turned over 
army, police, and Border Police installations to Palestinian 
policemen. A convoy of 300 Palestinian policemen is now making 
its way to the Gaza Strip after crossing the Allenby Bridge last 
night. The convoy is currently on its way to Rafah and it is 
accompanied by Israeli security forces. 
  Brigadier General Doron Almog, the commander of IDF forces 
in 
the Gaza Strip, said that the number of shooting incidents in 
the Gaza Strip had declined recently. Brig. Gen. Almog asserted 
that this was due to an agreement between Fatah and Hamas 
[Islamic Resistance Movement] designed to prevent any delays in 
the IDF's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. 
  [Tel Aviv IDF radio in Hebrew at 0500 GMT reports that "as 
of 
0400 [0100 GMT] this morning, Khan Yunus and all the rest of the 
southern part of the Gaza Strip are in Palestinian hands. 
During the night, the headquarters of the Khan Yunus brigade, 
the Khan Yunus Civil Administration offices, and the Border 
Police base were completely evacuated. A short time afterwards, 
at 0335 [0035 GMT] a vehicle carrying about 30 Palestinian 
policemen arrived, accompanied by Israeli security forces. The 
policemen, who arrived with weapons, were given ammunition and 
immediately toured the installations being turned over to them." 
The report goes on to note that "up till now, six installations 
have been turned over to the Palestinians. As of 0400 this 
morning, Khan Yunus and all the southern part of the Gaza Strip 
are controlled by the Palestinian police and approximately two 
thirds of the residents of the Gaza Strip are no longer under 
IDF control."] 
  [Tel Aviv DAVAR in Hebrew on 13 May in a page 1 report by On 
Levi and Mikhal Sela' states that "defense establishment sources 
have expressed fears that Palestinian fugitives and armed 
terrorists from Judaea and Samaria may flee to the Jericho area 
and use it as a refuge. At the General Staff, discussions were 
held on the need to increase the supervision of people entering 
and leaving the Jericho area along the main traffic axes and 
bypass roads, especially in light of the fact that contrary to 
the Gaza Strip, no fence will be established around Jericho." 
The report notes that "IDF sources have expressed the 
assessment that terrorist activity against soldiers and Israeli 
civilians will increase in the areas that are not under 
Palestinian control. The sources believe that these attacks 
will be carried out by the rejectionist groups, including Hamas 
and Islamic Jihad."] 

