BFN 

  [Text] Today in the afternoon hours representatives of the 
parliament factions of the opposition [the Democratic Convention 
of Romania -- CDR -- and the Democratic Party -- PD] held a 
meeting during which they elaborated the opposition's joint 
action strategy. 
  This is what PD Deputy Chairman Adrian Severin declared to 
our reporters after the conclusion of the meeting: 
  [Begin Severin recording] First I would like to counter all 
speculations and rumors about the so-called dissolution of the 
opposition or about the lessening of the opposition's ability to 
act. 
  The PD believes that the current opposition in Romania is 
able to and is actually acting in a united and unitary way, and 
that it represents a real alternative to the current state power. 
  Regarding the talks we held today, we tried, in concordance 
with certain traditions we have already developed, to correlate 
our actions, considering that both in the CDR, within that 
alliance, and in the relations between the CDR and the PD there 
are, obviously, certain varying nuances, discrepancies among the 
programs and ideologies. 
  We found that the dialogue between the administration, 
between the government and the population of the country by 
means of the parliament is deficient; we found that the 
interpellation instrument [of the executive], the 
question-answer method has become totally inefficient, so that 
practically speaking the government currently is not accountable 
to anyone in any way for the activity it exerts. This is why we 
are examining a draft motion by which we wish to compel the 
government to explain to us the policy it is implementing and 
whether it intends to go on making the same mistakes is has made 
until now, which led to the drop in the standard of living. 
  At the same time, this morning, parallel to the CDR, the PD 
issued a communique, in which it expresses its regrets over the 
fact that Ambassador Traian Chebeleu, the spokesman of the 
presidency, rejected -- in our opinion in a superficial way -- 
the dialogue requested by the opposition parliament faction 
between the president and the parliament on certain 
constitutional issues. 
  As far as we are concerned, we believe that after President 
Iliescu has sufficiently pondered our request, he could give us 
a favorable reply. If he fails to give us an answer, it is 
obvious that we will have to very carefully consider our next 
moves. [end Severin recording] 
  This is what University Professor Emil Constantinescu, the 
chairman of the CDR stated to our reporters: 
  [Begin Constantinescu recording] I believe that Mr. Adrian 
Severin has touched on a number of essential things that ought 
to be further detailed for your listeners. 
  Quite often mass media commentators, but also a large part 
of 
the population, expects the opposition to accomplish things that 
can only be achieved by the state power and the executive. The 
role of the opposition is a different one: First, in 
Parliament, it is to represent the interests of the citizens and 
to watch that their dialogue with the state power takes place in 
a democratic way, through their elected representatives. 
  Referring to the first issue we discussed, I believe that 
the 
letter addressed to President Iliescu [inviting him to 
Parliament] by the CDR and the PD is, above all, helping the 
president. And we do believe that he will answer Parliament 
seriously. Because after having dented the prestige of the 
juridical authority, I do not believe that the president will 
continue by showing contempt for the lawmakers' authority. 
Otherwise I wonder what sort of image President Iliescu has of 
the presidential institution. This is the essential issue and I 
do not understand why he should be afraid to present to 
Parliament the reasons he adopted the stance he expressed in 
Satu-Mare. 
  Regarding the censure motion, it is the only way of making 
the government, which has treated the citizens of the country in 
an arrogant way, come to Parliament and, through Parliament, 
actually present to the citizens a balance of its achievements. 
And, above all, present the way it has implemented its own 
program. Let us not forget that the first censure motion 
initiated by the CDR [in 1993] was intended to make clear who is 
responsible for the implementation of the government program. 
Following the rejection of our motion, the government assumed 
responsibility for it in the name of the majority in Parliament. 
Now we have to check which of the points they set for 
themselves as a goal have really been achieved and which have 
not. This is a right of the citizens of Romania, a right they 
must exert. [end recording] 

