Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Bratislava, March 18 (CTK) -- All Slovak dailies 
today comment on Thursday's [17 March] surprisingly unanimous 
passage of the law on shortening the electoral term and calling 
early elections for September 30 and October 1. 
  "The government of Jozef Moravcik was loudly referred to as 
a 
temporary one, but this became truth only yesterday," the 
left-leaning daily PRAVDA comments. 
  PRAVDA believes that the deputies from the former government 
coalition (now in the opposition after the fall of the cabinet 
of Vladimir Meciar a week ago) supported the autumn electoral 
date also because "after their attempt to push through a 
referendum they had no further means at their disposal to force 
an earlier electoral date. They accepted reality... and 
preferred the autumn certainty to the uncertainty of another 
referendum. This is also all right," PRAVDA's commentator 
writes. "Why should people be sent to ballot boxes if the same 
can be acquired comfortably and above all more cheaply by 
pressing a button?," he concludes. 
  SLOVENSKY DENNIK, the daily close to the government 
coalition 
Christian Democratic Movement (KDH), points out that it would be 
inconvenient for the opposition (which governed until March 11) 
if elections were put off by two years, until the end of the 
cabinet's regular electoral term, from two reasons. First -- 
their machinations with Slovakia's property would surface, of 
which, they hope, the public will learn nothing. Second -- 
their popularity would sink deeply below zero, because they do 
no longer control the state tools to make their propaganda. 
Therefore they agreed to early elections, SLOVENSKY DENNIK 
states. 
  The independent NARODNA OBRODA is convinced that the 
unambiguous decision on the electoral date was also due to a 
small number of valid signatures on petition lists, by which the 
former government coalition Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 
(HZDS) wanted to push through a referendum. If the HZDS wanted 
to keep its face and push for really immediate calling of 
elections, it had no other rational possibility than to vote for 
the autumn date. HZDS deputies did so despite Meciar's 
promising a four-question referendum and the dismissal of the 
president. 
  The tabloid NOVY CAS notes that the Thursday's vote also 
definitively decided on fate of the deputies elected to the 
Federal Assembly (defunct in late 1992, before Czechoslovakia's 
split into two independent states). Their mandate will end with 
the early elections. 
  Referring to the vote, the paper states that "the opposition 
(the HZDS and the Slovak National Party, SNS) faced the choice 
of either supporting stabilization or sharpening confrontation 
and tension among people. "At last common sense beat party and 
personal interests. The unanimous vote by coalition and 
opposition deputies indicates that the HZDS and the SNS are 
capable of accepting their political loss in a dignified manner. 
Although it was the second loss within a short period, it still 
does not imply any threat to Slovakia's stability or democracy," 
NOVY CAS comments. 
  By Thursday's decision of the parliament, the government 
coalition gained six months, in the course of which it will try 
to prove -- and persuade the voters -- that an alternative way 
of ruling is also possible in Slovakia, other than the 
incompetent and somewhat authoritative rule, writes the 
independent daily SME. 
  All political parties, mainly the newly emerging parties 
surrounding Ludovit Cernak (who left the SNS) and Roman Kovac 
(leader of the Slovak Democratic Union which split from the 
HZDS), now have enough time to consolidate and address potential 
voters. "Above all, the former opposition was given a chance to 
show to the former coalition that it was possible to rule 
better, and the former coalition can show to the former 
opposition what its idea of a constructive opposition used to 
be. Let us see it correctly -- the pre-election campaign 
started in Slovakia on Thursday," the paper concludes. [passage 
omitted] 

