Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 4 (XINHUA) -- Jiang Zemin, general 
secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist 
Party, said here this week that party committees and governments 
of all levels must attach importance to the issue of grain 
production. 
  At the closing session on Tuesday [1 March] of China's 
National Conference on Poverty Reduction, Jiang noted that grain 
is a special commodity which concerns people's life and the 
whole situation in the country. 
  He said that all places should stabilize crop growing areas, 
grain output and storage, and there should be a balance between 
places in total grain volume and grain production. 
  He said that last year, China's grain output was a record, 
which created favorable conditions for the development of 
China's national economy and social stability. 
  But, he noted, there are still new problems in grain 
production. 
  He said that since the beginning of the 1990s, the grain 
output in some provinces and areas in south China had declined 
due to decrease of the profits of grain production and the 
readjustment of crop cultivation. 
  He said that the provinces and areas have to purchase large 
portions of grain from other provinces. 
  He said that weather was one of the factors which affected 
grain output in south China, but the main factors were the 
decrease of crop growing area and decrease of investment in farm 
production. 
  Jiang pointed out that all party committees and governments 
should pay attention to these problems. 
  He said that effective measures should be taken to check the 
tendency of weakening grain production in some areas. 
  He said that if there was something wrong with "rice bags" 
and "vegetable baskets," the country's stability would be 
affected. 
  He stressed that the solution to China's grain problems must 
depend on self-reliance. 
  He called for policies of two basic balances -- a balance of 
total volume, China should achieve self-sufficiency, and a 
balance in grain imports and exports. 
  Talking about the balance between crop growing areas, he 
said 
that south China should be self-sufficient in rice. 
  He said that at present, the rural areas were seeing spring 
ploughing. He called for good management for the ploughing and 
for supplying the farm production materials. 
  Last month, State Councillor Chen Junsheng sent letters to 
the government leaders of seven provinces and regions, including 
Guangdong, Guangxi, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan, Hubei and Zhejiang, 
urging them to do the spring ploughing well to ensure a good 
harvest. 

