Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] After U.S. President Bill Clinton stressed the 
sincerity of the Syrian approach to achieve a just and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, Israel, through its 
prime minister, has resumed the campaign of casting doubts which 
it began right after the Geneva summit. It claimed that Syria 
has not announced its intentions toward peace frankly, and that 
in light of this ambiguous Syrian stand, Rabin has no choice but 
to hold a referendum on the Golan. Rabin's claims, as well as 
those of other Israeli officials, do not stand up to any test 
because the whole world has applauded Syria's sincere and 
positive stand. In fact, it has termed its stand a basic 
contribution to pushing forward the peace process and to saving 
it from its current stumblings. The truth is that what annoys 
Rabin is Syria's adherence to a just, honorable, and 
comprehensive peace which President al-Asad called the peace of 
the brave. Israel does not want to negotiate on equal footing, 
but wants others to negotiate from a position of weakness, 
submission, and capitulation. Neither does it want an honorable 
peace, but a humiliating peace which entrenches its control of 
the region's resources, and its military and economic hegemony 
on it. From this premise, it seeks to seize as much occupied 
territory as it can for purposes of expansion on the one hand, 
and for purposes of threat and blackmail on the other. Rabin's 
plan to hold referendum on the Golan falls within this 
framework, for the occupiers' referendum does not cancel the 
everlasting fact that Golan is Syrian territory. Neither does it 
abrogate the international law, which does not only recognize 
the Syrian identity of the territory, but also obligates Israel 
to withdraw its forces and to return all the Golan to its owners 
and people. 
  Had occupation been able to cancel the identity of 
territory, 
most of Europe would have turned into German territory, or 
Germany itself would have vanished as a state and nation and 
become part of another country. Instead of harping on doubts 
and intentions, Israel should move to real action for peace and 
implement the land for peace formula. Israel has thus far not 
complied with the implementation of the UN Security Council 
resolutions or with withdrawal from the occupied territories. 
It is talking about concessions, whose nature and dimensions 
are not known to anyone. Withdrawal from the Golan does not mean 
concessions, for the Golan is occupied Syrian territory. It 
means compliance with the UN Security Council resolutions, the 
principles of the international law, and the essence of the 
current peace process. Despite this, Syria offers peace in 
return for withdrawal. Peace is a great event that provides 
security, safety, and tranquility for all the region's states. 
  Since 1948, Israel's rulers have been crying and calling for 
peace with the Arabs. So, why are they trying to evade peace 
today if they are really sincere, and there cries are not simply 
a cover for their hostile and expansionist schemes? The kind of 
peace Syria is calling for is a just and comprehensive peace, 
the true peace which is accepted by peoples. Such peace 
necessitates Israel's full withdrawal from the occupied 
territories and its recognition of Arab rights. Israel's 
acceptance of this peace would provide security for all sides. 
However, separate deals and fragile agreements, which are full 
of arrogance, hegemony, and occupation, do not bring security or 
tranquility. Neither do they safeguard the present and the 
future. Regardless of the Israelis' attempts to cast doubts, 
the ball is in their court, and the world is waiting for them to 
take a stand that will live up to the aspirations and dimensions 
of a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. 

