Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Trofimov, doctor of legal sciences, </F>
under rubric "Position": "The Foreign-Policy Legacy of the 
Russian VS [Supreme Soviet]: The Deputies of the Federal 
Assembly Will Have To Study It for a Long Time"] 
  [Text] The election is over and now the new deputies have 
to decide in which committee of the Federation Council of the 
State Duma they intend to work. The overall direction of the 
deputies' wishes can probably be predicted. In the previous 
parliament several hundred people's choices wanted to link their 
fate with the Foreign Affairs Committee. True, fate smiled on 
only 20 of them. We will probably observe a similar situation 
now. 
  The future experts on foreign affairs will be met, however, 
by an unpleasant surprise: they will receive from the former 
Foreign Affairs Committee of the RF Supreme Soviet an 
inheritance that can considerably damage their political 
reputation. We are talking, in particular, about certain 
treaties that were submitted to the Supreme Soviet for 
ratification, but that have not yet passed through it. In all 
instances the reason for the postponements was approximately the 
same: doubts had arisen as to whether those treaties conform 
fully to the country's national interests. Therefore it would 
probably be beneficial to acquaint the broad public with a 
certain part of that inheritance. 
  For example, the Supreme Soviet did not have time to ratify 
the bilateral agreement with Ukraine about the reciprocal 
recognition of property rights, or a similar multilateral 
agreement with other CIS countries. The originator of both 
documents was RS Goskomimushchestvo [State Committee on the 
Administration of State Property]. The agreements stipulate that 
each of the states recognizes certain economic objects and rest 
homes on their territory as belonging to another state. Also, 
one of the chief criteria is that those objects were created 
prior to the collapse of the USSR at the expense of the republic 
budget of the appropriate independent state. Everything would 
seem to be all right -- Ukraine, Russia, and the other countries 
get back their sanitoriums and Young Pioneer camps and, at the 
same time, on a just basis exchange certain second-rate plants 
and factories. Especially since, at first glance, there are a 
lot of our sanitoriums in Crimea, and only a few Ukrainian ones 
on our territory. Definite doubts, however, have arisen in the 
experts' minds. The agreements were not accompanied by even a 
tentative list of what we will receive and what we will give 
back. Despite two requests from the Foreign Affairs Committee, 
that list has not yet been submitted. But the experts have noted 
the following situation. It is clear that Ukraine constructed a 
rather large number of objects outside the confines of its 
borders from its own budget. But Russia scarcely did so. Here, 
as a rule, everything was financed from the union budget. Thus 
it is completely possible that Russia will exchange one Young 
Pioneer camp for ten plants. Moreover, the agreements empowered 
specifically the Goskomimushchestvo officials to decide on an 
individual and final basis whose rights and whose property to 
recognize. The agreements were also not ideal with respect to 
resolving questions of military property, and also touch 
indirectly on certain potential territorial claims. 
  Despite all these doubts on the part of the deputies and 
experts, one of the Supreme Soviet committees submitted the 
multilateral agreement for ratification. Naturally, a discussion 
arose in the auditorium. The opposing sides began to appeal to 
Yevgeniy Ambartsumov, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee. 
To give him his due, he displayed firm adherence to principles 
and, essentially sharpening his relations with the structures of 
executive power, recommended postponing the ratification and 
clearing up all the vague areas. The consideration of the 
question was rescheduled, but Goskomimushchestvo did not provide 
any explanations. 
  The Supreme Soviet also did not have sufficient time to 
ratify the agreement among the CIS countries concerning through 
shipments of humanitarian aid. The text of that agreement also 
appeared at first glance to be rather good. According to the 
agreement, if a shipment of humanitarian aid is being made 
across the country's territory, it should be given the "green 
light" at customs and on transportation. It would seem that it 
is impossible to act in a more humane manner. But definite 
doubts did arise in the deputies' minds. 
  It turned out that the sender himself decided whether or not 
the shipment was a humanitarian one. Objective criteria -- for 
example, quantitative ones -- were absent. In this instance, 
wouldn't the sender be tempted to declare all his through 
shipments to be humanitarian aid, attempting individually to 
come to an understanding with customs and transportation 
workers? Once again the official's arbitrariness? 
  A rather confused situation developed with the Agreement on 
the Creation of an International Scientific-Technical Center. 
According to that document, a number of leading countries in the 
West allocate $70 million to construct that center in Russia. 
The center transfers those funds to our nuclear experts to 
develop the most interesting projects for peaceful purposes. The 
agreement evoked very sharp discussions in the Foreign Affairs 
Committee, and parliamentary hearings were held concerning it, 
but the matter never got to the point of ratification. There 
were a rather large number of objections. Here are a few of 
them. According to the agreement the Center is an international 
organization with the participation both of Russian specialists 
and of representatives of the Western countries. But the 
"Westerners" have the veto right -- no money will be expended 
without their consent. That means that the Center chooses 
certain of our individual nuclear specialists with their project 
and makes the proviso that either the funds are allocated only 
to them, or to no one. Taking into consideration our 
impoverished situation, there can scarcely be any doubt as to 
whether it will be possible to refuse for a long period of time. 
But in this instance there arises the following danger. It is 
clear that, in a large collective, the role of its various 
scientists differs very much. There are always clear heads, and 
frequently they are not among the managerial staff, and those 
clear heads generate an ideology of investigating. All you have 
to do is to "pull them out" and a collective of many thousand 
people will not be able to create anything beneficial for a long 
time thereafter. The veto right has obviously created this 
danger. 
  There were also objections concerning the fact that Russia 
has freed both the Center itself and the representatives of the 
Western countries from any responsibility for any undesirable 
consequences from their activities on our territory (for which, 
indeed, ratification was required). Meanwhile it is generally 
known that the compensations for the damages incurred by an 
individual in the West reach millions of dollars. So there is 
immediate discussion about nuclear technologies and about 
Chelyabinsk-70 and Arzamas-16. Consequently, there is no desire 
in the West to pay in any real manner, even in the presence of 
blame, for our people who have perished or been maimed. This is 
all very similar to the attitudes toward natives. So, for the 
time being, these agreements remain unratified. It is curious to 
note that a number of diplomats in Western countries have 
organized simply a pilgrimage to the Foreign Affairs Committee, 
proposing the discussion of what are by no means general 
problems of Russian foreign policy or, for example, arms 
reduction or regional security, but only the question of 
ratifying specifically this agreement. 
  Of course, the problem of ratifying the START-II [in 
Russian, 
SNV-2] Treaty continues to remain open. Here too there are 
several curious but little-known details. For example, unlike 
us, the leading Western countries take a somewhat different 
approach to the problem of international security. There little 
is said about collective security, but, instead, wide use is 
made of various modifications of force models of maintaining 
international security, which assume as the basic goal the 
guaranteeing of an order resting upon a balance of forces (which 
should not be confused with parity or equality of forces), upon 
the division of spheres of influence, and upon the concept of 
local wars as a method of eliminating that balance. Proceeding 
from that concept, they figure out various alternatives for 
behavior. If the regional balance has been violated or an armed 
conflict has arisen, then it is stopped specifically by means of 
the restoration of the balance. A clear example of this is the 
conflict in former Yugoslavia, where the Serbs obviously are 
enjoying the military advantage. If it proves possible to shift 
the global balance of forces to their advantage, then the 
attempt will be made to implement it, by demanding economic or 
political concessions. And it is important here that, in order 
to make a decision, it is first necessary to compute the entire 
chain of the possible escalation of the conflict. If the 
computations indicate that it will be possible to achieve 
victory at the key stages, then the politicians begin boldly to 
demand concessions. If the other side proves to be slow-witted 
or uncompromising, then the West, in response, frequently 
proceeds along the chain, building up the conflict. They begin 
dropping bombs on Tripoli or Baghdad, and the people there, 
seeing that they are losing, quickly yield. 
  It is possible to argue about the details of this scheme, 
but 
on the whole this is exactly what kind of scheme it is. However, 
if this is so, and the quantity and quality of weapons is 
necessary not only to be victorious in war, but also in politics 
and in economics, then there arises the question of how the 
START-II Treaty fits into this scheme. Because it is clear that, 
in the formation of the balance of forces a participating factor 
is not only nuclear weapons, but also super-accurate weapons, 
the latest stealth materials, and the quality of troop 
management. It is no secret that the United States and NATO as a 
whole are strong specifically with regard to these components. 
And all of them remain outside the confines of the START-II 
Treaty. Moreover, according to the Treaty, the United States 
retains its main striking force -- the navy -- while we reduce 
our most combat-ready means -- surface missiles. So do we 
ourselves, by violating the balance of military forces, want to 
provoke the West to an economic, political, or territorial 
repartition? 
  Experts have also expressed the following fear. As is 
generally known, the SDI [in Russian, SOI] program proved to be 
insolvent and incapable of guaranteeing the security of the 
United States in the event of the launching of thousands of 
missiles by an enemy. However, if the START-II Treaty is 
implemented, computations on EVM [electronic computers] indicate 
that, with the aid of super-accurate weapons and the use of 
other similar equipment, it will be possible to prevent the 
launching of only approximately 200 Russian missiles. But it is 
already possible to intercept that number with the aid of SDI. 
Is it necessary for us in this instance, by our own hands, to 
resurrect that program? 
  In general, questions with respect to that Treaty have 
arisen. It is natural that the Foreign Affairs Committee in this 
situation requested the MID [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] and 
Minoborony [Ministry of Defense] to send the committee the 
American and NATO concepts of the balance of forces, the 
maintenance of international order, and the making of 
foreign-policy decisions, so that, within their context, it 
could decide the fate of the Treaty. In half a year no replies 
at all have been received. But unofficially it was said: "You 
have the text of the Treaty, so go study it." 
  Of course, most of the necessary American documents and 
conceptual studies were on the bookshelf at the Foreign Affairs 
Committee. It was, however, necessary to receive an official 
answer in order later to ask subsequent questions. It can be 
assumed, however, that no reply was given to the Committee not 
so much because there was a strong desire to protect the Treaty, 
as because there was no complete understanding of exactly what 
those rather poor deputies wanted from them. In any case, one is 
led to this conclusion by the military doctrine that was 
recently adopted by the Russian Security Council. There nothing 
was stated seriously about the need to use force models, 
although it is clear that, as a result of that mention, there 
would be a rather considerable increase in the political role of 
armed forces. 
  It is also necessary to talk about the unratified open skies 
treaty. The essence of that treaty is: in exchange for good 
money, the Western countries have the right, approximately once 
every ten days, to fly across Russia along any flight path, 
carrying out aerial photo reconnaissance. Correspondingly we, in 
exchange for payment, have the same right with respect to those 
countries. It is understood that these aerial surveys are a 
means of carrying out a very detailed monitoring of the 
situation in the country. But is it necessary for us to monitor 
the territory of the United States in this way? Possibly the 
specialists are making a mistake, but, in the opinion of several 
of them, it is scarcely possible by this method to prevent an 
attack launched by a considerably stronger opponent. 
  One would also scarcely think that it will be possible to 
obtain any substantial economically beneficial information 
since, in an industrial country, all the basic secrets are 
located most probably in the laboratories and computers. But 
with respect to Russia one can speak only about the economic 
value of various territories, natural resources, trends in 
foreign investments, expected harvests, plantings of narcotics, 
and local conflicts. In general, to put it mildly, one can 
notice a definite asymmetry of interests. 
  Of course, Russia has not been hiding anything for a long 
time, so one could think a bit about at least earning money on 
these flights. There is, however, no guarantee that our military 
men will not demand the earned money to pay for the same kind of 
flights over the United States, which are, essentially speaking, 
completely useless. And they may even ask for more money. 
  The Convention on the Destruction of Chemical Weapons is 
also 
on the approach to consideration in the VS [Supreme Soviet]. As 
is generally known, American chemical ammunition is most 
frequently thin-walled, and our, conversely, is thick-walled, 
which our military men always considered to be a shortcoming. 
But with the Americans the service life date is shorter because 
of the thin walls. Ours, on the other hand, can be stockpiled 
for many additional years, and can be gradually destroyed or 
reprocessed for advantageous use by ourselves. The Americans, 
however, did not forget the concepts of the balance of forces, 
and quickly organized the signing of that convention. Naturally, 
Russian diplomats did not fail to place their signatures 
wherever necessary, without having, true, unlike our 
transatlantic colleagues, either the funds to destroy the 
chemical weapons or a corresponding state program. 
  An agreement with Kuwait about military cooperation will 
also 
be brought to the State Duma. A draft of that agreement arrived 
at the Foreign Affairs Committee in late August. In accordance 
with that draft, Russia will sell to Kuwait a large consignment 
of weapons. In exchange Russia will pledge to render military 
aid to Kuwait in the event of aggression. Yevgeniy Ambartsumov 
was completely justified in proposing to the originators that 
they give an explanation. As a result, certain measures were 
planned, and, it would seem, the principle of satiated wolves 
and intact sheep was observed. But an oral understanding is one 
thing, and the text of a treaty is another. Currently one can 
only guess about how this question will be resolved. It should 
be noted that, according to the new Constitution, authorization 
for the use of troops abroad will be given only by the 
Federation Council, half of which consists of persons belonging 
to the executive branch of power. So there is something to think 
about here. 
  It is also worthwhile to discuss the draft of the law 
governing the procedure for the conclusion and denouncement of 
international treaties. This draft, which on the whole is a 
beneficial and necessary document, made its way in the Supreme 
Soviet to the second reading. But it did not manage to get 
through it. What remained a fundamental problem that was not 
completely resolved in it were the attempts made by the deputies 
to insert the right of the Supreme Soviet to the independent 
denouncement of any international treaties that are in effect 
for Russia. Objections to this, and not without certain grounds, 
were expressed by representatives of Boris Yeltsin and Andrey 
Kozyrev. They pointed out that this practice exists only in a 
few countries, in particular the KNDR [Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea], and that the Russian parliament can, in the 
heat of the moment and indiscriminately, denounce treaties with 
which, in conformity with international law, such action cannot 
be taken. They also pointed out that foreign partners, in the 
face of a threat of sudden denouncement, will trust Russia less. 
It was also mentioned that such steps taken by the parliament 
place it in opposition to the president. 
  There were also arguments from the other side: it was 
mentioned that, from the purely formal point of view, there is 
nothing illegal in parliament's having this right. For another 
state it is of no concern which agency in Russia signs or 
denounces treaties, so long as it acts on behalf of the entire 
country. 
  What is more substantial, however, is not the formal 
possibility, but the actual requirement that the parliament has 
in its pocket this right to independent denouncement. The fact 
of the matter is that, in our country, it has become a good 
tradition when one of the branches of authority, proceeding from 
certain interests, does not want to observe any reasonable rules 
of the game. In practical life, in the area of international 
relations this leads to corresponding manifestations. For 
example, in the summer of 1992 Russia concluded with the United 
States an agreement concerning the safe shipment and destruction 
of weapons of mass destruction. At the 7th Congress the deputies 
caused a ruckus on this question and, it must be said, not 
completely without justification. The Foreign Affairs Committee, 
during the winter of 1992-1993, collected the findings of many 
experts, organizations, and even ministries, which practically 
unanimously mentioned the infringement on Russia's national 
interests. Of course, the agreement freed the Americans of any 
responsibility for any actions on our territory; granted to all 
of them, down to the vehicle drivers and enlisted men, an almost 
diplomatic status; factually speaking, allowed them to ship 
whatever they wanted out of the country; etc. In general, it is 
a treaty between a white colonizer and a black aborigine. It is 
clear that, even on the basis of purely formal features, that 
agreement should have been submitted for ratification. However, 
that agreement is in effect to this day, and none of its 
originators, despite all the force of the ruckus that was 
raised, even thought about stopping its action. In this kind of 
situation, what is parliament supposed to do? 
  Another good example is the agreement with the United States 
concerning annexation to the requirements governing the 
nonproliferation of missile technologies. Incidentally, it 
should be noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for a 
rather long period of time, opposed the concluding of this 
agreement and yielded only under the large amount of pressure 
exerted by both sides. Parliamentary hearings on this problem 
indicated, to put it very mildly, the existence of the following 
threats to our interests. The destruction of advantageous 
contracts with India (cryogenic engines), Brazil, and other 
countries. The doubtfulness of obtaining any income from 
possible commercial launches (we have been banned from 
attracting any customers by low prices). Becoming dependent on 
the United States as a result of fulfilling a production order 
for the Freedom station. The destruction, because of the loss of 
production orders, of an entire branch of rocket construction. 
This would make unemployed not the drunkards, but several tens 
of thousands of skilled workers. Naturally, in this situation 
the Supreme Soviet enacted a decree concerning the need to 
submit this agreement for ratification. The agreement, however, 
went into effect on 1 November without any ratification and, of 
course, no one is planning now to question the opinion of 
parliament in this regard. 
  In 1990 the USSR and the United States signed an agreement 
concerning the demarcation of sea spaces in the Bering Sea. In 
accordance with the opinion of experts and on the basis of the 
results of hearings that had already been held in the USSR 
Supreme Soviet, we gave the Americans, as a result of that 
agreement, no less than 30,000 square kilometers. It would still 
be possible to return to the initial situation, since the 
agreement has not yet been ratified. Nevertheless, by the will 
of the responsible statesmen, the agreement has been "applied 
provisionally" for more than three years. The Foreign Affairs 
Committee has repeatedly proposed to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs that it submit this agreement for ratification, but it 
has invariably received a polite refusal. It would seem that we 
are waiting while the United States becomes permanently 
established in the disputed sector and invests considerable 
amounts of money in it, and then the United States will demand 
unbelievable compensation from us. In the minds of the 
originators of the agreement, our parliament should not have any 
formal right to raise this question independently if the 
executive authority does not ask it to take such action. 
  One could give additional examples. The documents that 
parliament has never seen include, for example, agreements 
concerning the property owned by our troops in Germany. In 
accordance with the first of them, we were given several billion 
dollars. But soon another one was concluded, in accordance with 
which we ourselves, for some reason, rejected dollars and agreed 
to the zero version. 
  It is clear that the recommendations, appeals to the courts, 
etc., cannot help. The only thing that will help is the threat 
that the Federal Assembly will interact not with the other 
branches of authority, but directly with the foreign partner, 
that is, will be able to force us to take its own will into 
consideration. As soon as it becomes clear to other states that 
the signature at the bottom of a treaty was extorted from us and 
this is not yet everything, such attempts will end. 
  In practice, parliament will hardly enjoy the right of 
independent denouncement. We are speaking most probably about a 
threat, by referring to which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
will be able to prevent various feeble impulses. Essentially 
speaking, in recent time it was precisely this kind of silent 
understanding that existed between the Supreme Soviet and the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. From time to time the former raised 
a commotion concerning individual questions, and the latter 
threatened a brawl, and as a result it prevented actions that 
were not completely thought out. 
  It should also be mentioned that the committee has not gone 
halfway to meet the dynamic attempts of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to guarantee the enactment of legislative acts involving 
the use of our troops abroad in peacekeeping operations. There 
was basically one reason. The fact of the matter is that the 
rendering of military assistance is a very expensive service, in 
exchange for which it is possible to demand a lot. And it is 
that "in exchange for" that has not yet observed in our 
foreign-policy actions, and most of the deputies do not want to 
destroy our troops aimlessly. There has also been opposition to 
peacekeeping missions, and also, it would seem, for the reason 
that peacekeeping that stands above the conflict and outside of 
Russian national interests is a harmful myth that is calculated 
to appeal only to the man in the street. 
  Apparently the deputies of the future Foreign Affairs 
Committee will also encounter attempts by the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs to guarantee the taking of secret actions by the 
Administration for the Providing of Services to the Diplomatic 
Corps, which possesses automobile-service facilities, hunting 
land, bases, and thousands of apartments. In any case the former 
committee agonized about this question for an entire year, but 
did not receive even a single positive response from the 
interested organizations. 
  It is possible with a large share of confidence to assume 
that, from the very first work days of the State Duma's Foreign 
Affairs Committee it will feel a considerable amount of pressure 
to guarantee the rapid ratification of many of the treaties that 
were mentioned. For the time being, the deputies have not had 
sufficient time to come to their senses or acquire experience. 
Because they have to learn a very great deal in order to oppose 
such attempts effectively. 

