Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Labour Regulations for Foreign-Funded Enterprises"--KCNA </F>
headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, January 11 (KCNA) -- Labour regulations 
for foreign-funded enterprises were adopted as decision No. 80 
of the Administration Council of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea dated December 30, 1993. 
  The full text of the regulations reads: 
<H5>  Chapter 1 General Provisions </H5>
  Article 1. The purpose of these regulations is to supply 
workforce needed for foreign-funded enterprises according to the 
law related to the foreign-funded enterprises and to protect the 
rights and interests of the employees in their working life. 
  Article 2. The employment of the workforce by the 
foreign-funded enterprises and good offices in it, payment of 
wages and guarantee of conditions for working life shall be done 
according to these regulations. 
  Any provisions not covered in these regulations concerning 
labour shall be subject to the relevant labour law and 
regulations of the DPRK. 
  Article 3. These regulations shall be applied to 
foreign-funded enterprises in the territory of the DPRK. 
Foreign-funded enterprises shall include foreign-invested 
enterprises (equity and contractual joint ventures, wholly 
foreign-owned enterprises) and foreign enterprises. 
  Article 4. The foreign-funded enterprise shall employ 
workers of the DPRK for their business activities. 
  Should it wish to employ management personnel, technicians 
and skilled workers of special job classifications from other 
countries, a foreign-funded enterprise shall reach an agreement 
with the external economic organ of the Administration Council. 
  Article 5. Workers employed by a foreign-funded enterprise 
shall not be mobilised for other purposes than irresistible 
cases such as natural disaster. 
  Article 6. The amount of remuneration for an employee 
working for a foreign-funded enterprise shall be decided 
according to his job classification, level of technical 
qualification and productivity. 
  Remuneration shall include wage, additional wage, subsidy 
and 
bonus. 
  Article 7. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay its 
primary attention to the improvement of working conditions so 
that the employees can work under safe, cultural and hygienic 
conditions and to the protection and promotion of their lives 
and health. 
  Article 8. The foreign-funded enterprise shall see to it 
that the employees who are citizens of the DPRK benefit by 
social insurance and social security. 
  Article 9. A foreign-funded enterprise shall protect the 
rights and interests of the employees and conclude labour 
contract with the trade union which represents the employees. 
  The labour contract shall define duties of the employees, 
the 
amount of production and quality index, working hours and rest, 
remuneration, insurance and public welfare, labour protection 
and working conditions, labour discipline, prize and penalty, 
provision of retirement and so on. 
  The labour contract shall have legal effect from the day of 
its conclusion and its amendment shall be done on agreement 
between the two sides. 
  The foreign-funded enterprise shall submit the labour 
contract to the labour administration organ in the area of its 
location. 
  Article 10. The execution of these regulations shall be 
supervised and controlled by the labour administration organ. 
<H5>  Chapter 2 Employment and Dismissal of Workers </H5>
  Article 11. The foreign-funded enterprise shall decide for 
itself the number of the workers needed for its operation, 
conclude a contract on the employment of workforce with the 
labour service agency and employ workforce in accordance with 
the contract. 
  The contract shall define the number of workers by 
industrial 
classification and technical qualification, the duration of 
employment, payment, conditions for ensuring working life and 
the like. 
  Article 12. The labour service agency shall provide the 
workers needed for foreign-funded enterprise with the workforce 
of the area of its operation. The agency may provide some 
skilled workers from other areas in case it is impossible to 
provide them with those in the area of its operation. 
  In this case, the labour service agencies in other areas 
shall provide them. 
  Article 13. The contractual joint venture and equity joint 
venture which are established with an enterprise of the DPRK as 
their mother body shall employ the workers of that enterprise 
first. 
  Article 14. The foreign-funded enterprise shall employ 
workforce sent by the labour service agency in the area of its 
operation. 
  If it doesn't conform to the conditions of the employment 
contract, the foreign-funded enterprise can refuse to accept 
them. 
  Article 15. The foreign-funded enterprise can dismiss an 
employee before the termination of employment contract on 
agreement with the trade union and with relevant labour service 
agency in the following cases: 
  1. When the employee can not continue his or her work or 
other job even after the treatment of an illness or injury, 
provided that the illness or injury is not occupational or 
official one. 
  2. When there are extra employees due to the changes in 
production management and technical condition. 
  3. When it is compelled to reduce its workforce or declare 
its dissolution owing to bankruptcy. 
  4. When the employee has inflicted a big loss on the 
enterprise or seriously violated the labour discipline. 
  Article 16. The employee can apply for his resignation in 
the following cases: 
  1. When the employee has to stop his work or do other work 
owing to unavoidable personal circumstances. 
  2. When he or she can not fully display his or her technical 
capability in the given occupation because it is not his or her 
area of specialisation. 
  3. When he or she entered a school to study. 
  Article 17. The foreign-funded enterprise shall not dismiss 
its employee in the following cases: 
  1. When the employee is undergoing treatment for 
occupational disease or after being injured while working. 
  2. When he or she has been receiving treatment for illness 
for not more than 6 months. 
  3. When a woman employee is married or pregnant and when she 
is on maternity leave or is nursing her baby. 
  Article 18. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay 
subsidy to the employee whom it has dismissed according to 1.2.3 
of Article 15 and to the employee whose resignation it approved 
according to 2.3 of Article 16 of these regulations depending 
upon the period of his or her employment. If his or her period 
of employment is less than one year, the foreign-funded 
enterprise shall pay subsidy equivalent to the last monthly wage 
and if his or her period of employment is more than one year the 
enterprise shall pay subsidy calculated according to his or her 
average monthly wage for the last 3 months and the number of the 
years he or she has worked for the enterprise. 
  Article 19. When the foreign-funded enterprise is going to 
dismiss or allow resignation of an employee, it shall submit the 
list of their names to the labour service agency in the area of 
its operation one month in advance. 
<H5>  Chapter 3 Technical Training </H5>
  Article 20. The foreign-funded enterprise shall raise the 
level of technical qualification of its employees and assess 
their degrees of technical qualification according to labour law 
and regulations of the DPRK. 
  Article 21. The foreign-funded enterprise can, if necessary, 
organise and run a training center or course to train skilled 
workers. 
  Article 22. The free economic and trade zone authority can 
organise and run a training organ for technical training needed 
for foreign-funded enterprises. 
  Technical training shall be done in the form of training 
employees in service or pre-entry training for school leavers. 
<H5>  Chapter 4 Working Hours and Rest </H5>
  Article 23. The working hours of the employees shall be 6 
days a week and 8 hours a day. According to the difficulties 
and special conditions of work, the working hours can be fixed 
shorter. 
  In a sector of seasonal limitations, the working hours can 
be 
fixed differently within the range of the annual working hours. 
  Article 24. The foreign-funded enterprise shall not let its 
employees work over time. If it is inevitable, the enterprise 
can do so on agreement with the trade union. In this case, it 
can not exceed 48 hours a month. 
  Article 25. The foreign-funded enterprise shall grant to an 
employee a rest on fete days and off days, regular and 
supplementary leaves and maternity leave, according to the law 
of the DPRK. If the enterprise lets an employee work on a fete 
day or an off day, it shall give him a compensatory day off 
within one week. Every year the foreign-funded enterprise 
shall grant a special leave of 1 to 3 days for ceremonial 
occasions. This period shall not include the days of double 
journey. 
<H5>  Chapter 5 Remuneration </H5>
  Article 26. The standard monthly salary of an employee 
working at a foreign-funded enterprise shall not be lower than 
220 won (160 won in the free economic and trade zone). In 
arduous sectors salary standards shall be fixed higher. 
  The foreign-funded enterprise shall, according to the 
standard salary, decide for itself the standard salaries by the 
classification of occupation and service ranks, the forms and 
methods of payment, standards of additional wage, bounty and 
bonus. 
  Article 27. The foreign-funded enterprise shall gradually 
lift the level of salary according to the rise in production, 
the level of technical qualification and productivity. 
  Article 28. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay to an 
employee the allowance for the period of leave and additional 
rest before he or she is on leave. 
  The allowance for the leave shall be calculated by 
multiplying by the days of the leave the average daily payment 
obtained through the division of the payment for the latest 
three months up to the leave with the number of working days in 
this period. The allowance for the leave includes salary, 
additional wage and bounty. 
  Article 29. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay subsidy 
equivalent to 60 percent of the daily or hourly salary for the 
days or hours in which work is not done due to the mistakes of 
the enterprise, not of the employees, and also for the days or 
hours in which work is not done for training. 
  Article 30. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay to an 
employee who worked on days off and was not given compensatory 
days off or did overtime or night work an additional wage 
equivalent to 50 percent of the daily or hourly salary according 
to the days or hours in which he or she worked. 
  Night work means the work performed from 2200 to 0600 the 
next day. 
  Article 31. The foreign-funded enterprise shall pay 
additional wage equivalent to 100 percent of the amount of daily 
or hourly salary to an employee who worked on fete days and did 
overtime work or from 2200 to 0600 next day according to the 
days or hours of the work. 
  Article 32. The foreign-funded enterprise may raise a bonus 
fund with a portion of its profit which is left after the 
payment of tax and, on agreement with the trade union, give a 
bonus to an employee who has set an example in overfulfilling 
his or her production assignment. 
  Article 33. The foreign-funded enterprise shall fix the day 
of paying salary, additional wage and bounty and give them on 
that day. 
  The bonus shall be paid in the next month of the period of 
assessment. 
  In case an employee has resigned or retired or is dismissed 
before the day of payment he shall be paid the remuneration 
after going through the procedures. 
<H5>  Chapter 6 Labour Protection </H5>
  Article 34. The foreign-funded enterprise shall install, 
improve and perfect labour safety facilities to ensure the 
safety of operation and keep off super heat, gas and dust and 
provide industrial hygienic conditions such as lighting and 
ventilation so that the employees can work under cultural and 
hygienic conditions. 
  Article 35. The foreign-funded enterprise shall let an 
employee work after giving him labour safety technical education. 
  The period of education shall be 1 or 2 weeks according to 
the types of occupation and business. 
  Article 36. Foreign-funded enterprises shall provide 
hygienic facilities for labour protection to the women 
employees. It shall not impose difficult and hazardous work to 
a woman who is over 6 months of pregnancy. 
  The foreign-funded enterprises shall organize and operate 
nurseries and kindergartens. 
  Article 37. The foreign-funded enterprise shall supply in 
time to its employees labour protection materials such as labour 
protection tools, working necessities and nutritious food. 
  The standard of materials for labour protection issued to 
the 
employees shall be defined by the foreign-funded enterprises in 
accordance with the relevant labour regulations of the DPRK. 
  Article 38. In case of serious accidents such as injury, 
toxication or death of an employee in work, the foreign- funded 
enterprise shall report this in time to the labor protection 
supervisory organ and should be inspected for the accident by 
the competent organ. 
<H5>  Chapter 7 Social Insurance and Social Security </H5>
  Article 39. The employees of a foreign-funded enterprise who 
are citizens of the DPRK shall, in case of sickness, injury or 
old-age retirement, benefit by the social insurance and social 
security. 
  The benefits of the social insurance and social security 
includes subsidy, pension, rest at holiday home and sanatorium, 
and medical treatment. 
  An employee who wishes to be paid subsidy and pension shall 
submit a medical certificate issued by the health organ or 
document confirming the reason for requesting subsidy and 
pension to the foreign-funded enterprise. 
  The enterprise shall have the application for the payment of 
social insurance subsidy confirmed by the social insurance organ 
and thereafter draw the appropriate amount of subsidy from the 
bank and pay it to the applicant on the pay day. 
  The travel expense to and from the holiday home and 
sanatorium and the funeral subsidy shall be paid on the basis of 
the relevant document and be settled later. 
  As for the pension and subsidy under the social security, 
the 
foreign-funded enterprise shall submit the application to the 
social insurance organ for approval and, on completion of 
procedures, the pension payment organ shall pay to the person in 
question at the fixed date of each month. 
  Article 40. Subsidy and pension under social insurance and 
social security shall be calculated in accordance with the 
labour regulations of the DPRK. 
  Article 41. The benefits of social insurance and social 
security shall be provided from the social insurance fund. 
  The insurance fund shall be raised with social insurance 
fees 
collected from the employees. 
  Article 42. The foreign-funded enterprise can organize and 
operate a sanatorium and a holiday home for the promotion of the 
health of the employees. 
  The operation cost of the sanatorium and the holiday home 
shall be paid from the social insurance fund. 
  Article 43. The foreign-funded enterprise shall be subject 
to supervision by the social insurance organ in the area og its 
operation and the trade union regarding the payment of social 
insurance fees and expenditure of the insurance fund. 
  Article 44. The foreign-funded enterprise can create a 
cultural and welfare fund for the employees with part of its 
profits after paying the taxes. 
  The cultural and welfare fund shall be used for the 
enhancement of the cultural and technical levels of the 
employees, mass culture and sports, and the operation of the 
welfare facilities for them. 
  The use of the cultural and welfare fund shall be supervised 
by the trade union. 
<H5>  Chapter 8 Sanctions and the Settlement of Disputes </H5>
  Article 45. The labor administration organ shall impose a 
fine on the foreign-funded enterprise, if it employs and 
dismisses workforce of our country in violation of these 
regulations. 
  Article 46. In case a foreign-funded enterprise fails to 
provide labour security facilities and industrial hygienic 
conditions, the labour administration organ shall order it to 
rectify the fault within a set period of time. In case it does 
not rectify it thereafter, it can fine the enterprise or suspend 
its operation according to the extent of the failure. 
  Article 47. When the fine is considered unjust it can 
request the organ superior to the one that imposed the fine to 
return the money paid in the fine within 15 days from the day on 
which it has got the notice. 
  The superior organ shall settle the matter within 10 days 
from the day it receives the request. 
  Article 48. Any disagreement arising in the implementation 
of these regulations shall be settled through consultations 
between the parties concerned. 
  Any dispute shall be settled by a court of law or an 
arbitration body of the DPRK in accordance with the relevant 
procedures. 

