CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Delyagin, director of the applied </F>
analysis service under the Institute of the Economic Problems of 
the Transition Period: "The Share of the `Shadow Economy' has 
Doubled in the Past Year"] 
  [Text] Mikhail Delyagin, director of the applied 
analysis service under the Institute of the Economic Problems of 
the Transition Period, analyzes one of the reasons for the 
unfavorable changes in the structure of the money supply. 
  During practically all of 1993 the rate of the growth of 
cash 
substantially exceeded the rate of growth of the money supply as 
a whole. According to data from the Central Bank of Russia, the 
amount of cash in circulation (the monetary aggregate MO) 
increased 7.9 times (from 1.7 to 13.3 trillion rubles) during 
the past year whereas the money supply as a whole (the aggregate 
M2) grew only 5.1 times (from R7.1 to R36.7 trillion). 
  The indicated inequality in growth rates has led to a 
substantial increase in the share of cash in the money supply 
(see graphic)--from 23.5 percent as of 1 January 1993 to 36.2 
percent as of 1 January 1994. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-035-27A>      FIGURE </FIG>


  "All other things being equal," the growth of the share of 
cash is evidence by itself of an increase in the shortage of 
money and of the increasing severity of financial policy, since 
cash, which primarily services the needs of the population, is 
the most difficult to contract and the least elastic aggregate 
of the money supply. 
  Moreover, the growth of the share of cash in the money 
supply 
almost always means its involvement in the servicing of 
production turnover. This takes place, as a rule, again in 
periods of increasing severity of financial policy as a result 
of the squeezing out of working capital from non-cash turnover 
into cash turnover. 
  The growth of the share of cash in the money supply also is 
evidence of the reduction of the possibility of the state to 
influence actually occuring economic processes. The increasing 
severity of the state's financial policy thus leads to the 
accelerated liberalization of the economy from under state 
control (in the absolute majority of cases being replaced, as we 
can see, by criminal control). 
  The following comparison is important for evaluating the 
scale of the degree of involvement of cash in the servicing of 
production turnover: the Central Bank claims that R13.3 trillion 
in cash was in circulation in the territory of Russia as of 1 
January 1994. Practically simultaneously with this the State 
Committee for Statistics reports that only a total of R7.8 
trillion (not counting the money in commercial organizations) 
was in the hands of the population on the indicated date. 
  The difference--R5.5 trillion (41 percent of all 
cash)--represents the working capital of juridical bodies and 
constitutes almost two-thirds of the funds in the current 
accounts of enterprises and organizations (R8.5 trillion as of 1 
January 1994). We can be certain that only an insignificant 
portion of this money is being legally used as working 
capital--if only because nobody has abolished the enforceable 
enactments published in the 1992 "cash crisis" period and 
significantly restricting the legal use of cash as working 
capital. 
  Today's economic practice is evidence of the fact that the 
use of cash as working capital practically eliminates state 
control over the operations being carried out. Taking this into 
account the data derived indicate that 39.3 percent of the 
entire turnover of the economy of Russia is in essence not under 
the control of the state. One can easily disregard the 
uncertainty arising due to the presence of funds intended for 
wages in the cashier's offices of enterprises in the first place 
because, as of 1 January, all that one can pay the workers, as a 
rule, already has been paid and, secondly, because the magnitude 
cited can be considered only as the lower limit of the share of 
the turnover not under the control of the state. These are two 
reasons for this. 
  The calculations derived take into account only the ruble 
component of working capital whereas a significant portion of 
many of the most dynamically developing markets, for example 
motor vehicles and housing, are being serviced only by foreign 
currency. 
  The most efficient directions of economic activity, where 
money turns over more rapidly and, consequently, succeeds in 
servicing a greater volume of operations than on the average for 
the national economy, are escaping from under the control of the 
state first of all. 
  The fact that as of 1 January 1993 the lower limit of the 
sector of the economy not under the control of the state, 
calculated on the basis of an analogous method, was at the level 
of 20 percent of the turnover merits attention. Consequently, 
the relative share and, correspondingly, the significance of the 
"shadow" Russian economy has at least doubled during the past 
year. 

