Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with B. Shikhmuradov, deputy chairman of the </F>
Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan, by Eduard Zorinyants; 
place and date not given; published under the rubric "Nations 
and Foreign Countries": "We Have Our Path to Democracy. 
Turkmenistan: Post-Soviet Euphoria"] 
  [Text] Relations between the Center and the Union 
republics in the USSR have always been like those of a rider and 
a horse, thinks the deputy chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers 
of Turkmenistan, B. Shikhmuradov. In a conversation with an 
ARGUMENTY I FAKTY correspondent he discusses the foundations of 
the politics of the young sovereign state. 
  [Zorinyants] How do you explain the fact that in 
Turkmenistan, a multinational state, where one could expect 
internal conflicts, stability still remains? 
  [Shikhmuradov] Since the first days of our independence we 
have proceeded from the conviction that the polyethnic 
(multinational) principle for formation of the state was more 
promising, and better grounded than the monoethnic one. And we 
see in this no deprecation of the national dignity of Turkmens. 
  We do not shout about the supremacy of any ethnic groups 
over 
others and we do not take the liberty of accusing some and 
turning others into victims. Having taken a realistic look at 
the events of the recent and distant past, we said to ourselves: 
All that has happened has been both good and bad--that is our 
history. And how it will continue now depends on us. Such a 
sober view of our own history has now become a foundation for 
peace and harmony in the society. 
  Of course the republic leaders still have the right to 
correct, reasonable, and timely intervention. And they take 
advantage of this right. Look, for example, at the serious 
evolution in our legislation of the article on fanning 
intertribal and interethnic dissension. At one time this 
entailed a small fine. Now fanning dissension is regarded as one 
of the gravest criminal offenses and is punished accordingly. 
  [Zorinyants] And how is the personnel policy structured? As 
far as I know, there have been fewer and fewer non-Turkmens 
recently, both in the structures of power and among the leaders 
of enterprises. 
  [Shikhmuradov] We have no national or, more precisely, 
nationalistic preferences in personnel policy. A mechanism of 
appropriateness and occupational suitability is at work here. 
Look at the entire administrative hierarchy and you will see 
representatives of all peoples. And if Turkmens still prevail, 
that is not surprising; after all, they make up 80 percent of 
the population. 
  [Zorinyants] One gets the impression that the leaders of 
Turkmenistan have some kind of cautious attitude toward the CIS. 
  [Shikhmuradov] It seems to many people that the CIS is a new 
version of the former Union, where there is a single center to 
which one can turn on any occasion. This, as we see it, is an 
incorrect view of it. In the USSR relations between the Center 
and the Union republics were always like those of a rider and a 
horse. 
  Two years of experience with the CIS have convinced us that 
even the most difficult problems in relations among states can 
and should be resolved in bilateral negotiations. As we know, 
the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. And 
the creation under the label of the CIS of any center, a strict 
coordinating structure, is a third point, which, if it does not 
distort, at least lengthens this straight line. We want to 
reserve the right to choose what is advantageous and what is 
disadvantageous based on our own national interests. 
  [Zorinyants] Whose experience would you like to emulate in 
your reforms? 
  [Shikhmuradov] We have studied various models of 
socioeconomic development and familiarized ourselves with the 
experience of Turkey, the United States, France, China, India, 
and Pakistan. And still we have created our own purely Turkmen 
model of transition to the market. It takes into account our 
country's specific features, its customs and traditions, and 
even its behavioral stereotypes. Based on this we have published 
a program called "10 Years of Well-Being." We need 10 years of 
stability and interethnic harmony in order to conduct the 
reforms more quickly. 
  During this period we must solve two 
problems--simultaneously: building an independent state and 
changing from a centralized to a market economy. And at the same 
time we shall provide social guarantees for the people so that 
the difficulties of the transition will not be reflected 
painfully among the population, as is frequently the case. 
  [Zorinyants] Judging from what I have seen, you have not 
always succeeded at the latter. The stores are rather empty. The 
main food products are bought with ration cards and the prices 
went up again after the introduction of the national currency. 
Therefore let us move from the material sphere to questions of 
spiritual life. According to the Constitution, Turkmenistan is a 
secular state, but the highest representatives of the Muslim 
clergy participate in the work of all the most important 
conferences. The president of Turkmenistan has issued an edict 
on studying the fundamentals of religion in school. Is this not 
turning out that the revival of interest in Islam is moving and 
taking hold at the top? And is this not pandering to 
fundamentalist forces? 
  [Shikhmuradov] For many long years our people were 
physically 
separated from religion even though it is a part of their 
spiritual life. And if the return to Islam seems overly active 
now, one must allow for what you might call a thirst on the part 
of a people yearning for their own customs and traditions. The 
people generate their culture, and religion is a part of it. 
  As for threats of Muslim fundamentalism, I want to say that 
Turkmens have never been religious fanatics. And such a threat 
does not exist. 
  [Zorinyants] Does the return of Islam to the spiritual life 
of society mean that the traditions associated with it will also 
be revived: polygamy, bride money, etc.? 
  [Shikhmuradov] You are talking about things that are under 
church jurisdiction. But in our country it is separated from the 
state. Therefore these questions are neither discussed nor 
resolved at the state level. 
  [Zorinyants] That is, they are not encouraged and they are 
not condemned? 
  [Shikhmuradov] The main thing is for the activity of 
religious organizations to be in keeping with the Constitution, 
and the church has obeyed the laws of the country. This more or 
less insures us against any extremes, against religious 
extremism. 
  [Zorinyants] It is known that you have retained censorship 
and that there is only one party--the democratic, formerly 
Communist Party, and the opposition has been banned. Yet 
according to its Constitution Turkmenistan is not only a secular 
but also a democratic state. So whom should we believe--the 
Constitution or real life? 
  [Shikhmuradov] Our Constitution actually does contain such a 
stipulation. But I want to emphasize that we are now at the very 
beginning of the path to a democratic society. 
  We are convinced that it is impossible to create a democracy 
overnight. It requires a certain transition period, which we are 
now going through. It is impossible to jump from totalitarianism 
to a free society in a single hour. Whenever we begin to agitate 
the unpoliticized masses, where does it lead? The politicians 
remain sitting in their offices and the people on the streets 
shed blood. It is our duty to spare people from such things. 
Therefore the principle of moderation and weighed steps in 
conducting democratic transformation is fundamental for us. 
  We are now being accused of not having a multiparty system. 
No, we will not permit it just so that we can be called 
democrats because we are to responsive to our people's choice! 
  I want to emphasize that democracy is our ultimate goal. But 
the main thing we must do on the path to it is change the 
people's attitude toward property. We have already proclaimed 
the right to ownership of the land and we have adopted a whole 
package of laws, which shows the irreversibility of our movement 
toward the market. We think that only with the creation of a 
class of owners will there appear a basis for political reforms 
and democratization. 
  We are moving toward and will definitely arrive at a normal 
democratic society. But only on our own path. 

