Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "American designs in South Asia"] </F>
  [Text] A clue to the designs of American strategies can be 
found in the latest offer of two American companies to supply 
India with sophisticated modern electronic warfare systems. 
This is a significant change in American policy in this region. 
Earlier, the US Government had warned India to desist from 
developing its own indigenous warfare system, and if it did not 
heed this warning, the US would sell its advanced airborne 
warning system to Pakistan. It seems that India stopped the 
work on its own AWACS and started negotiations with the US for 
the supply of electronic equipment needed by the Indian Air 
Force. Now not only will India continue its research and 
development programme for its own AWACS but will also have the 
benefit of incorporating within its advance warning system that 
latest electronic equipment supplied by American firms. 
  This change in American policies will give to the Indian Air 
Force a huge advantage over all its neighbours. Now India will 
be able to develop its own Airborne Surveillance Platform and 
also that of obtaining the American AWACS. This will vastly 
improve India's air defence as well as increase its air attack 
capabilities. The Indian Air Force is already a formidable force 
and much too large for the comfort and security of India's 
neighbours, but with the additional electronic systems from the 
US it will acquire the status of a local or mini superpower, a 
dream that has obsessed many Indian leaders. 
  As long as America needed Pakistan to further American aims 
in the region, it had warned India to puruse its hegemonistic 
plans in the whole of South Asia, but should leave out Pakistan, 
because it was not within the South Asian region, but was part 
of the Middle East. Once the Soviet Union troops left 
Afghanistan and the USSR disintegrated, Pakistan's strategic 
importance, in the estimate of US policy makers, declined 
sharply. Pakistan was no longer needed to contain Russian 
communism, nor to prevent Islamic resurgence in what was once a 
part of the USSR. America now encourages India to look upon 
this region as its sphere of influence. 
  This development must be studied carefully by our policy 
makers and steps devised to counter these sinister developments 
in our region. Pakistan is not Nepal, Maldives or even Sri 
Lanka to accept tamely the Indian hegemony in this region. We 
can join with other countries in the region to devise plans 
which will be beneficial to all countries in South Asia, we can 
cooperate with our neighbours to make South Asia a region of 
peace and to ensure the sovereignty and security of all the 
countries, small and large in the region. Pakistan cannot under 
any circumstances accept the hegeony of India. Pakistan can sit 
down with all countries for the working out of arrangements that 
guarantee the security of the region and also safeguard the 
sovereignty of all countries. This can be done only when all 
countries sit down as equals and have a dialogue as sovereign 
states. 
  Pakistan must protest against this preferential treatment of 
India by the US and use all its diplomatic resources to persuade 
Americans not to pursue their one sided policies in South Asia. 
Pakistan can not be bullied into accepting so grossly unfair and 
humiliating an arrangement as seems to be in the making in 
Washington. Pakistan has no hegemonistic dreams and will not 
allow any country in its neighbourhood to nurse such dreams. 
The people of Pakistan and the defence forces of the country 
are fully determined and capable of defending their sovereignty 
and will defeat all attempts made to reduce this proud nation 
into a client state of any country no matter how large or 
powerful. 
  Indian leaders have started to threaten Pakistan with dire 
consequences if it does not stop its support of the Kashmiri 
mojahedin, and some even go so far as to claim that India is 
incomplete without Pakistan. We have no desire to strike a 
jingoistic stance and would advise Indian leaders to make a 
sober assessment of the situation and learn to live peacefully 
with its neighbours. India will have to give up its 
hegemonistic dreams and must accept the existence of smaller 
states. It has gigantic problems of its own which should 
receive all its attention. We have seen the performance of the 
Indian army in Sri Lanka and elsewhere. Any military adventure 
might act as a boomerang and give rise to civil turmoil and 
disintegration within the complex and divided Indian society. 
Instead of dreaming of setting up an Indian Empire, Indian 
leaders would do well to serve their own people by deverting 
their huge defence spending to socially useful projects which 
would save India's millions from starvation. 

