BFN 

<F P=106> [Julie Kirkbride and Philip Jonston report: "Major Calls </F>
For Tough Line on Beggars"] 
  [Text] The Prime Minister called last night for laws 
against beggars to be rigorously applied to remove their 
"offensive and unjustified" presence from the streets. Mr 
Major's remarks ignited a fierce political controversy -- 
fuelled by the approach of next month's European elections -- as 
Opposition MPs and charity groups accused him of shrugging off 
responsibility for dealing with the homeless. 
  But Conservatives said the Prime Minister had struck a 
populist chord that would be welcomed in cities where vagrancy 
and aggressive begging posed a threat to tourism and trade. 
  In an interview with the EVENING POST in Bristol -- where a 
petition was signed last year demanding action against beggars 
and down-and-outs -- Mr Major said: "The problem about begging 
is as old as the hills. It is very offensive to many people. 
In areas like the West Country where a good part of their 
prosperity depends on tourism, it is damaging to everybody if 
that sort of activity continues." 
  Mr Major -- who described beggars as an eyesore and urged 
people to report them to the police -- said the benefit system 
meant there was no need to resort to begging. But he did not 
believe new laws were needed. 
  "We have rigorous penalties against it and I think we should 
not shrink from using these penalties," he said. 
  Vagrancy laws date from after the Napoleonic Wars, when they 
were introduced to force off the streets former soldiers living 
rough. Under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act begging is not 
an arrestable offence, although someone can be taken into 
custody if they give a false name, cause an obstruction or fail 
to give an address. 
  However, there are tougher penalties, with fines of up to 
1,000 pounds and a three-year maximum jail term for violent 
behaviour. 
  Although Downing Street said the Prime Minister was merely 
restating Government policy and had been responding to questions 
put by the local paper, such comments in the middle of an 
election campaign inevitably generated a heated debate. 
  Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, accused Mr Major 
of "picking on the powerless" and the party's president, Mr 
Charles Kennedy, said: "It takes one political down-and-out to 
spot another." 
  Mr Gordon Brown, shadow Chancellor and a possible candidate 
for the Labour leadership, speaking at a European election 
meeting in Morecambe, said: "John Major blames everyone but 
himself. He attacks the poor instead of poverty. He simply 
does not understand what 15 years of Tory rule have done." 
  Mr John Battle, Labour's shadow housing minister said: "Many 
young people are forced to beg on the streets. John Major's 
Government must bear some responsibility for this, as they ended 
benefits for 16- and 17-year-olds." 
  However, Sir Rhodes Boyson, the Tory MP for Brent North, 
agreed with Mr Major. "We have a massive Welfare State costing 
80-90 billion pounds. There is no need for anyone to be 
begging." 
  Mr Peter Bottomley, Tory MP for Eltham, said that in central 
London yesterday he bought a meal for someone who was begging 
for food. 
  "His pockets were full of cash. I bought him a hamburger, a 
coke and chips but he had more money on him than I did. There 
are many reasons why people beg but there is no justification 
for it." 
  Mr Richard Lloyd of Shelter, the charity for the homeless, 
condemned the Prime Minister's strictures. "For the majority on 
the streets life is tough enough, never mind being harassed by 
the police as well, as Mr Major suggests," he said. 
  Mr Major's remarks follow an interview he gave to the German 
magazine DER SPIEGEL last month in which he said many of 
London's homeless "chose to live" in such circumstances. He 
pointed to the fact that there were empty places in 
accommodation units across London and in other areas where 
people could go "if they wished." 

