Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Tokyo NHK General Television Network in 
Japanese at 0000 GMT on 27 February in its weekly 75-minute 
"Discussion" program, carries a 25-minute live interview with 
Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary and leader of 
Sakigake, by NHK commentator Takashi Yamamoto and Tsukuba 
University Professor Ikuo Kawashima. 
  Asked by Yamamoto to explain his relations with Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, Takemura says recent media reports 
are distorted, exaggerated, and one-sided. He says he is 
maintaining close and friendly ties with the prime minister and 
"there is no discord between us." Takemura admits, however, 
that he has a slightly different view from that of the prime 
minister over the issue of a future merger between the Japan New 
Party [JNP] and Sakigake: "I cannot deny that there is a subtle 
difference of opinion between Mr. Hosokawa, who thinks seriously 
about the future of the political world, and myself, who is 
representative of the new party Sakigake." Takemura says he and 
Hosokawa agreed to have frank discussions in the near future on 
whether or not the two parties should become one, as previously 
announced publically. Asked to comment on the report that the 
aim of the planned cabinet reshuffle is to replace the chief 
cabinet secretary, Takemura says: "The prime minister told me 
the day before yesterday that he is still undecided. He has 
still not determined whether he will reshuffle the cabinet. He 
said he would consult with me first if he decides to do so." 
Takemura adds: "I am determined to resign from my post if the 
prime minister asks me to. I have no intention of clinging to 
the post of chief cabinet secretary." 
  Asked by Kawashima if he will accept an offer to remain in 
the cabinet, Takemura replies that he has still not made up his 
mind. On the possibility of seceding from the coalition, 
Takemura says: "It is unlikely. We will support Prime Minister 
Hosokawa by all means as long as he remains in power." 
  Citing remarks by Komeito's Yuichi Ichikawa on the cause of 
the discord between Takemura and the prime minister, Yamamoto 
asks if there were differences of opinion between them on 
important issues, such as rice and political reform. Takemura 
says he never expressed opposition to the prime minister's 
policies regarding these important issues. Takemura reiterates 
that he fully supports and will continue to support the prime 
minister, saying: "I have never voiced protest against the 
prime minister." 
  Yamamoto then returns to the cabinet reshuffle issue and 
asks 
Takemura if he is against it. Takemura says it is difficult for 
him to comment on this issue because people will think he is 
insisting on remaining in the post of chief cabinet secretary if 
he says he is against a reshuffle. He says he has "no intention 
of opposing the prime minister's final decision at all." 
  Asked to comment on the possible formation of a new 
political 
force involving the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ], 
Democratic Socialist Party [DSP], and Sakigake, Takemura says 
nothing concrete has been decided nor is there a blue print. 
He says: "Discussions on the formation of a new political 
force have not progressed as yet." He adds: "I merely said 
that it is desirable for political parties or political groups 
that are close to each other, to cooperate in the next 
elections." 
  On the issue of a future merger, Takemura says: "Members of 
the two parties have been maintaining friendly ties. I heard 
they have deepened their relations. There is no need to hurry, 
but I hope we move in a good direction." Asked if Sakigake will 
cooperate with the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] in upcoming 
elections, Takemura says: "We cannot work with the old LDP. I 
hope the LDP will become a new party soon." 
  Asked what he thinks of Ichiro Ozawa, Takemura says: "As far 
as political reform is concerned, Mr. Ozawa and I share similar 
views. Although our personalities or political styles are 
different, I am sure we can cooperate with each other within the 
framework of the Hosokawa administration." 
  The interview concludes at 0025 GMT. 

