Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz and Roberto Melendez] </F>
  [Text] Through special operations conducted in Campeche, 
Quintana Roo, and Yucatan States, Federal Judicial Police [PJF] 
agents captured 21 members of the Cali Cartel in the 
municipalities of Chetumal, Cancun, Escarcega, and Merida. This 
cartel is considered one of the world's most notorious criminal 
groups. Cocaine base worth over 3 billion new pesos was 
confiscated from those arrested. According to the Office of the 
Attorney General of the Republic [PGR], some of the drugs were 
found in special compartments of a bus, on the sides and front 
of which the mafiosi had affixed the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party [PRI] logo. 
  "The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic expects 
the (federal) judges to act according to law. The release of 
dangerous drug traffickers is detrimental to the country's 
interests," the department stressed. It noted that those now 
indicted, including one Spaniard and two Colombians, were 
members of the criminal organization headed by Antonio Bermudez, 
also a Colombian, residing in that country. The PGR added: 
"Bermudez was distributing large amounts of cocaine from 
southeastern Mexico, with the assistance of those now in 
custody." 
  The PGR categorically asserted that, with the arrest and 
remand of the 21 presumed drug dealers, "one of the leading drug 
trafficking organizations operating in the country" has been 
virtually disbanded. It also revealed that the investigation of 
the case is continuing, not only in the aforementioned 
federative states, but also in the northern part of the country. 
The mafiosi have been discovered to be connected with criminal 
groups operating in both Sinaloa and Baja California, as well as 
in the United States. 
  The department explained that, during the past few hours, in 
the city of Merida, Yucatan, federal agents, pursuing the 
investigation of the seizure of nearly 600 kg of pure cocaine in 
Campeche, succeeded in arresting nine presumed members of that 
criminal group. They had in their possession approximately 400 
kg more of the aforementioned alkaloid, which they had packed in 
199 "bricks." 
  According to the reports submitted by the PJF deputy 
representative in Yucatan, Dariela Zepeda Fuentes, to the 
force's general and operational directors, Adrian Carrera 
Fuentes and Victor Patino Esquivel, respectively, the drugs were 
concealed in special compartments of a bus to which the 
criminals had affixed the PRI emblems (to avoid being discovered 
and arrested). They add that it was a vehicle with Federal 
District registration, supposedly owned by the Autobuses de los 
Mochis Company, a firm that is now under investigation. 
  Those captured in Merida, Gustavo Adolfo Ayala Ramos, Jorge 
Alonso Uranga Paez, Manuel Olmeda Gutierrez, Luis Vega Rivas, 
Alberto Vega Rivas, Jorge Peraza Bernal, Jose Espinosa 
Dominguez, Cipriano Beltran Madueno, and Hernan Valdes Apodaca, 
made statements to the federal public prosecutor. They revealed 
that the shipment of cocaine, with a high degree of purity, was 
owned by the Cali Cartel, and was part of a larger consignment 
received several days earlier in the town of Chetumal, Quintana 
Roo. 
  They added that they had been instructed to take the drugs 
to 
the city of Culiacan, Sinaloa, for subsequent removal to 
Mexicali, Baja California. From that town, they were intended to 
be smuggled into the state of California, in the United States 
(to be "inserted in envelopes," sold, and consumed). This 
organization is presumed to have "contacts" there, as well as in 
other federative states of the country's northern region. 
  The federal agents also seized from the aforementioned 
subjects a pickup truck and a compact car, which were to be used 
to escort the bus. It was learned that there were no incidents 
nor confrontations between the police and the presumed drug 
traffickers during the operation, despite the sizable shipment 
intercepted. 
  Moreover, the department noted that, in another operation 
conducted during the special investigations, on 18 December, in 
the municipality of Escarcega, Campeche, Gilberto Eric Gomez 
Ortega, Felipe Corro Alcantara, Daniel Soto Vargas, and Antonio 
Reyes Cabanas were captured. They had concealed 600 kg of pure 
cocaine in 22 gas cylinders carried on a tank truck. The drugs 
were also presumed to be intended for shipment to the northern 
part of the country. 
  Based on these individuals' statements to the federal public 
prosecutor, those heading the investigations managed to capture 
Dionisio Reyes Cabanas, Gregorio Barradas Montero, and Antonio 
Ordonez Rodriguez in Chetumal, Quintana Roo. They had been 
assigned to receive the drug shipment worth many millions that 
was arriving from the island of San Andres, in Colombia. 
  Subsequently, in the town of Cancun, the authorities 
arrested 
the Mexicans, Benjamin Reyes Cabanas and Mario Fuentes Perez; as 
well as the Spaniard, Jose Luis Sierra Rodriguez, and the 
Colombians, Luis Carlos Pinto Camacho (alias "Ramiro Sierra 
Rodriguez") and Humberto Segundo Montenegro Freyre, who was also 
using the names Alberto Garcia Aleman or Alberto Rodriguez 
Garcia. The PGR confirmed the fact that "they are all members of 
the organization headed by Antonio Bermudez." 
  The department stressed: "In all cases, the agent from the 
Federal Public Prosecutor's Office completed the pertinent 
investigation and, within the constitutional period, both those 
implicated and the individuals using them to commit their crimes 
against health were placed at the disposal of the competent 
judge. The PGR is waiting for the judges to take action 
according to law." 

