BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary from the "Regional News Hookup" program: </F>
"Implement the Guidelines of the Two Sessions, Promote 
Development and Stability -- Congratulating the Successful 
Conclusion of the Second Session of the Sixth Regional People's 
Congress and the Second Session of the Sixth Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference Regional Committee"] 
  [Text] The second sessions of the sixth regional people's 
congress and the sixth Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC] regional committee, which have attracted the 
attention of the people of all nationalities in Tibet, 
successfully concluded after completing all items on their 
respective agendas. Guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and by the 
party's basic line, people's congress deputies and CPPCC members 
focused their attention on the overall situation of reform, 
development, and stability; displayed the spirit of democracy 
and awareness of participating in the discussion and 
administration of state affairs; diligently examined and 
deliberated the government work report and other reports with a 
profound sense of responsibility as masters of the region; and 
offered suggestions to jointly lay the general principles for 
Tibet's construction. As a result, these two sessions are 
congregations of democracy, realism, unity, and courageous 
advance. 
  The deputies and members highly evaluated Chairman Gyaincain 
Norbu's government work report. They said: The report 
realistically affirmed last year's achievements while 
identifying with a cool head difficulties and problems on the 
road of advance. The clearly defined fighting goal and 
arrangements, as well as effective measures for the work of this 
year, accord with the realities in Tibet, reflect the vital 
interests and aspirations of the people of all nationalities in 
the region, and will certainly inspire cadres and people of all 
nationalities to work hard and confidently and to strive to 
fulfill the various tasks laid by the sessions for Tibet. 
  The general principles and tasks for Tibet's work for this 
year have been set and clarified. What is important now is 
their implementation. All localities and departments should 
earnestly transmit and study the two sessions' guidelines; 
should familiarize themselves with the government work report 
and other relevant reports; and, in the light of reality, should 
summarize and check last year's work on the basis of the 
guidelines. We should recognize our achievements to strengthen 
our confidence and fighting spirit, as well as our shortcomings 
and defects to enhance the sense of urgency and try our utmost 
to catch up with other provinces and regions. We should judge 
the hour and size up the situation, correctly analyzing the 
situation and work conditions and broadening our vision to 
formulate fighting goals and tasks that can be achieved through 
hard work. We should work out practical and effective measures 
to translate the sessions' guidelines into concrete actions of 
the people of all nationalities. 
  Promoting a sustained, rapid, and healthy growth of the 
regional economy was one of the main topics discussed in the two 
sessions, as well as the central task to which we must pay close 
attention. Reform is the powerful motive force for development. 
In recent years, Tibet has seized the opportunity for deepening 
reform and opening up wider, thereby promoting economic and 
social development and maintaining political stability. This 
year is crucial for Tibet in carrying out comprehensive reform, 
to combine package reform programs with breakthroughs in key 
areas, and to accelerate the establishment of a socialist market 
economic system. In accordance with the unified arrangements 
made by the people's congress session, we should make reform the 
top priority of the overall situation, strengthen the intensity 
of reform, work out well-conceived plans for implementation, and 
instill new vitality into the reform programs aimed at 
establishing a new socialist market economic system and 
achieving a sustained development of the economy. 
  Changing the operating mechanisms, optimizing the structure, 
improving the management, popularizing technological advances, 
and increasing labor productivity are the starting points as 
well as the basis of our economic work. We should further 
strengthen the position of agriculture and animal husbandry as 
the foundation of the regional economy; develop village and 
township enterprises; increase incomes of peasants and herdsmen; 
step up energy, transportation, communications, and other 
infrastructure construction; and continue to implement the 
regulations [for changing the operating mechanisms of large and 
medium state enterprises] to reinvigorate enterprises to more 
successfully carry out this year's economic tasks through the 
efforts of all circles and to fulfill and overfulfill the 
fighting goal of an 8 percent increase in Tibet's gross regional 
product. 
  We should adhere to the principle of firmly grasping two 
links at the same time in further stabilizing the situation and 
creating favorable conditions and a healthy social environment 
for deepening reform and accelerating development. This is an 
important matter to which we must always pay close attention. 
The two sessions affirmed Tibet's achievements and successful 
experiences in promoting stability, and forwarded measures for 
promoting greater stability. To further promote stability, it 
is imperative to launch an in-depth struggle against separatism. 
The struggle between separatists and antiseparatists is a 
serious political struggle concerning the vital interests of the 
Chinese people of all nationalities, including the Tibetans. 
Under the new situation, separatist forces inside and outside 
the territory have stepped up collusion with hostile forces 
abroad, continuously readjusting their strategy and tactics and 
intensifying activities to split the motherland. Separatist 
activities remain the main factor undermining Tibet's stability. 
The struggle between separatists and antiseparatists will be a 
protracted, acute, and complex. We should keep a cool head 
without the slightest lowering of our guard, correctly analyze 
the situation, actively carry out work, ensure effective 
propaganda and education with clear objectives in mind, reply on 
grass-roots organizations, and mobilize and organize the masses 
to voluntarily take part in the struggle against separatism. 
Moreover, we should use the power of the people's democratic 
dictatorship to resolutely strike at separatist activities. 
Meanwhile, we should harshly punish criminal offenders and go 
all out to strengthen the comprehensive management of social 
security and to improve public order in Tibet. 
  The new situation, arduous tasks, and the people's 
expectations demand leading cadres at all levels to study 
conscientiously, to change their style, and to work hard. We 
must thoroughly study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics and the party's line, 
principles, and policies; we should study information regarding 
market economy and other fields; and we should further 
emancipate our minds and update our concepts. We should 
skillfully integrate theory with practice, be bold in practice 
and innovation, and carry out our work creatively. We should be 
sober minded and attach great importance to studying new 
circumstances and problems cropping up in the process of 
deepening reform, pay attention to problems that are latent and 
still in the embryonic stage, and take active measures to solve 
them. We should bring into play the spirit of hard work, go 
down to the grass roots regularly to mingle with the masses and 
to attentively listen to their voices and demands, carry out 
effective propaganda and education, and solve practical problems 
for the masses. We should popularize the masses' advanced 
experiences and examples in reform, opening up, developing the 
economy, and promoting stability; and should channel the 
enthusiasm of all circles to deepen reform, promote development, 
and maintain stability. 
  The realization of the comparatively well-off stage before 
the end of this century will present us with a more beautiful 
future. However, this stage will not arrive in Tibet 
automatically. Under the kind concern of the central 
authorities and the support of all fraternal nationalities, we 
should rely on the people of all nationalities in Tibet; bring 
into play the spirit of hard struggle; and work assiduously, 
creatively, and in a down-to-earth manner. Beginning today, we 
should further strengthen unity, heighten our spirits, and pool 
the efforts of all to realize the magnificent plan formulated by 
the two sessions so as to march toward and realize the 
comparatively well-off stage with expeditious and solid steps. 

