CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Salostiy and V. Androsov: "Siberian Bums A. </F>
Salostiy and V. Androsov Write"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Oh, Those Barabinsk Steppes! </H5>
  While waiting for an electric commuter train to pass through 
Kargat, the participants in our experiment were warmly greeted 
in the editorial offices of the newspaper ZA OBILIYE. By evening 
they had reached Barabinsk. 
  We did not do our act in the commuter train to 
Barabinsk--there were only four cars, and very few spectators, 
so we decided to take a nap as we were very tired. We looked at 
the schedule in the station. A man with a week's worth of gray 
beard who had not had a bath for a long time stood next to us 
studying train arrival times. He was carrying a small bundle. We 
went to the second floor where it was warmer and sat down on a 
bench. From our conversation we learned that he was going home 
to Voronezh. That was on our way for the time being. He had 
worked there as a crop farming brigade leader and then his wife 
had died. And, as frequently happens, the man fell on hard times 
and started roaming around the country. He had worked all his 
life as a tractor driver. Out of loneliness last year he took in 
a tramp. 
  "He lived with me for a half year, we ate from the same 
plate, but the son of a bitch deceived me," the man sighed. "He 
set me up to go to Altay to join a brigade of tractor operators. 
He promised mountains of gold. Fool that I am, I dropped 
everything and went. But when we got there he said: Wait just a 
minute, I will be right back. I waited for an hour, then another 
hour, but he had just taken off." 
  Now he was without money and trying to hitch a ride on the 
rails. He was not allowed on the train, you have to pay to get 
into the train station in Novosibirsk; he sat down on the 
bundle, but no--on your feet, old man! The militia made him 
stand up, you cannot sit on the floor. 
  "When you were in Novosibirsk, did you go to the emergency 
social aid center, where they will give you money and food, at 
19 Sverdlov Street?" 
  "I was there on Sverdlov, I could barely find it. I had not 
eaten for three days, and they did not help me at all..." 
  ...In the evening the trains pull in, but an order had been 
given not to take anyone. The guard and militia train brigades 
go through and check to make sure that no bums are on board. In 
the morning there will be an electric commuter train headed for 
Omsk. We will get there somehow--train hopping. A hungry night 
without water lies ahead.... 
<H5>  Is It Possible To Live in Chelyabinsk? </H5>
  After crossing the Siberian expanses we arrived in the 
capital of the Southern Urals--the city of Chelyabinsk. We had 
"heart-to-heart" conversations with the local residents and 
visited the oblast committee on ecology. 
  The first words we heard in response to a request to see the 
reports on the work of the ecology committee were: 
  "Our oblast is off-limits. Therefore we cannot show you the 
figures from the readings. There are newspapers for that and all 
the data are published there, go read them..." 
  We did not try to clarify why figures published in 
newspapers 
could not be shown in the office. In general terms, V.S. 
Smorodintsev, deputy chairman of the committee, characterized 
the situation in the oblast for us as follows: The Southern 
Urals area has been declared an ecological disaster zone. In 
1957 there was a radiation discharge (or more precisely: a 
nuclear explosion at a warehouse for radioactive wastes) at the 
Mayak Plant. 
  As we learned from the local residents, it was at this plant 
that Kurchatov made his bomb, and the plant had been built by 
Beriya on Stalin's personal orders. And then four years after 
the generalissimo's death his mustached shadow covered 
Chelyabinsk, Sverdlovsk, and Kurgan Oblasts with a radioactive 
cloud. 
  Now the situation has stabilized in the Mayak area. The 
plutonium reactors have been shut down and readings are normal. 
But the Techa river and VURS (Eastern Urals Radiation Trace) 
will be dangerous for another 300 years. This is really enough 
to last for our age--and for our children and our grandchildren! 
The area has been surrounded by barbed wire, and taking in 
water, swimming, and grazing livestock have been prohibited. 
  Then the electric locomotive engineer told us that not all 
of 
the villages next to the Techa river had been evacuated, and the 
remaining residents were forced to use the "gifts of the river" 
as usual--the cows drink there, people walk there, children 
swim, people wash clothes and they fish. To be sure, they cut 
the fish's head off in the belief that in fish most of the 
radiation is in the head because it digs into the radioactive 
sand, and the rest--goes into the soup! There is a joke from the 
area of black humor about the local fish soup: Three fishermen 
were cooking fish soup on the Techa river, they were eating the 
soup with their vodka. Two of them drank the vodka, but one of 
them did not drink any, and died. (As we know, alcohol helps 
eliminate certain radionuclides.) 
  The plant's reactors were shut down, but in the settling 
tanks were 300 million cubic meters of radioactive water. And 
what if the dam were to break? It would be worse than Chernobyl. 
But the most terrifying thing is the zone of the plant. One 
recalls the Strugatskiy brothers' "Stalker." True, there was no 
radiation in the "zone" in the novel, but in the sanitary 
exclusion zone of Mayak there are more than 500,000 tonnes of 
radioactive waste. Now they have begun to "bake" it into glass, 
to weld it shut in steel containers and pour concrete over it. 
The danger has diminished. 
  Besides, we learned from newspapers in Novosibirsk about 100 
tonnes of some kind of waste that were delivered to Chelyabinsk 
from abroad. It costs a lot to destroy waste there, and here it 
is almost free of charge, one-third of the cost, and so the 
waste is brought here. It turned out that the waste arrived in 
Russia in the form of...humanitarian assistance for deaf mutes! 
This is what happened. One resourceful trading company got word 
of some yarn waste--synthetic fiber, dust, short thread, down, 
and other filth from which even the thrifty Germans could not 
extract anything else--accumulating at a certain enterprise in 
Germany. Having collected Deutsche marks from the Germans for 
disposing of their waste, the crafty traders arranged for free 
delivery of the yarn waste to two cooperatives of deaf mutes in 
Orekhovo-Zuyevo and Chelyabinsk. They said that the deaf mutes 
could produce filaments and sweaters, without the need to pay 
for raw materials! They would buy Snickers bars and Barbie dolls 
for their children. The deaf mutes rejoiced; they received 
railcar-loads of such filth that even ropes could not be woven 
of it--even if one really wanted to hang oneself. In 
Orekhovo-Zuyevo they tried to burn this "cotton wool." However, 
it burns poorly, stinks, and gives off harmful gases into the 
bargain. It is now hard to figure out where to dump the 
"presents." 
<H5>  Panikovskiy Was Right! </H5>
  Anatoliy Nikolayevich! We tried to send information by fax: 
There are hardly any newspapers, and no faxes. We decided to 
write letters after all, following Father Fedor's example. 
  In Ufa the Bashkir mistook Aleksandr Salostiy for an insane 
mullah who had abandoned his mosque to work electric commuter 
trains. They yelled at him: Go to work, go back to your mosque! 
  We were travelling to the Volga area, to the parts M.S. 
Panikovskiy rejected when the country was being carved up into 
the protectorates of Lieutenant Shmidt's children. Panikovskiy 
was right! Money is extremely scarce, and the people are drunk. 
  There were no electric commuter trains. We traveled in a 
large-compartment car across the Ukrainian border at night. 
There was a drunken brawl in the car which ended with a bottle 
of vodka being smashed on someone's head. Gypsies stole our 
sugar and bread. At night, customs officers came and inspected 
the luggage. An accordion and an immersion heater were 
extracted. Everything was thrown back in. That was the end of 
the inspection. 
  In Kharkov we did not have Ukrobucks. The rate was 20-22 
karbovantsy to one ruble. Prices went into tens and hundreds of 
thousands of karbovantsy. 
  We began experiment No. 2. We traveled across Ukraine 
without 
money; we made Ukrobucks--stacks upon stacks of scrap paper, 
mounds of money! Ukrobucks are a distinguished currency (that 
is, distinguished from the others). The response to our shows 
was excellent, the applause was thunderous, far merrier than in 
Russia. 
  Finally we arrived in Odessa. We were there on 30 and 31 
March and 1 and 2 April. There is no humor in Odessa. The 
Festival of Humor was canceled. A ticket to a Zhvanetskiy show 
cost 500,000 karbovantsy (for comparison: The salary of an 
Odessa journalist from the newspaper PORTO-FRANKO was 300,000 
karbovantsy). The Festival of Humor occurred in the form of the 
drunken loafing of costumed citizens of Odessa along 
Deribasovskaya Street. They stole wallets and put a pioneer tie 
on the Duke. Following the "Festival of Humor," Salostiy went 
for a historic swim in the Black Sea, upon finding a relatively 
clean spot. In general the shore is stained with fuel oil; there 
is trash, dirt, and dumps. The decaying architectural monuments 
were all that remained of the erstwhile fame of Odessa.... 
  We were late! We were traveling the route of Venedikt 
Yereofeyev, Moscow-Petushki. Just like in the book, the people 
in the car were drunk. In Petushki everybody was drunk, even the 
militia! We headed for Nizhniy Novgorod to take part in the 
conference of the Social-Ecological Union. 
  ...To the sound of loud and prolonged applause, our 
association, Siberian Bums for Ecology and Survival, was 
admitted to the Social-Ecological Union. 
  Our future route: We will go to an accordion plant in Shuya. 

