BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ibrahim Humaydi: "Al-Shaqaqi: Our Cadres' </F>
Signing of Pledge Document in Return for Their Release Meant Use 
of `Legitimate License'"] 
  [Text] Damascus -- Dr. Fathi al-Shaqaqi, secretary general 
of the "Islamic Jihad Movement in Palestine" [IJMP] has stressed 
that the IJMP's cadres released by the occupation authorities 
did not sign a document promising to support the autonomy 
agreement, "although there was stipulation of a pledge not to 
use violence or terrorism." He said that the Palestinian 
security authorities released IJMP member Hani 'Abid "under the 
movement's pressure and prompt political action." 
  Al-Shaqaqi told AL-HAYAH that the Israeli occupation 
authorities "in fact released a very small number of IJMP 
members after dialogues and discussions in a mosque between 
leaders of the movement and after the detainees managed, through 
steadfastness, to change the text of the document, which now no 
longer stipulates support for the Declaration of Principles"; 
but he added that the document did include "a pledge not to 
resort to violence or terrorism." He said that the IJMP members 
"during interrogation and in court used to deny resorting to 
terrorism, on grounds of the interpretation of terminology and 
the use of violence, or because of interrogation procedures." 
  Last Thursday the Israeli authorities released 170 
Palestinian detainees including some leaders and members of the 
IJMP and the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas). Al-Shaqaqi 
said that "any pledge given was given in a personal and 
individual capacity and did not affect the movement's general 
policy or any of its principles which call for the continuation 
of jihad until the liberation of Palestine. Any personal pledge 
by any individual not to resort to violence or terrorism on a 
personal level would not affect the jihad's legitimacy." He 
added that a "limited number of brothers used what we call 
legitimate license after forcing the enemy to change a text 
which had included support for the Declaration of Principles." 
On why the Palestinian security forces released Hani 'Abid, Dr. 
al-Shaqaqi explained that 'Abid "had been arrested on the direct 
request of the Israeli authorities, as admitted by those who 
interrogated him. They got his name and photograph from Zionist 
intelligence." 
  He said that although the detainee was "a journalist and a 
politician, the interrogation mainly covered the IJMP's military 
operations in the autonomy areas. They wanted to keep him 
hostage until the movement signs an undertaking to stop military 
action against the occupation in those areas, but no one from 
the movement gave in to these terms. So, under the movement's 
prompt and active political pressure at home and abroad, they 
had to get rid of the problem by releasing 'Abid." The IJMP 
secretary general -- in reply to a question on the agenda of the 
central command of the alliance of Palestinian forces opposed to 
the Oslo agreement, which is scheduled to meet today -- said 
that the conferees would discuss "the latest developments after 
the Palestinian police's entry into Gaza and Jericho, affairs of 
the alliance which has been moving slowly in the face of 
fast-breaking changes, and our relations with some friendly 
states and forces." He spoke of the possibility of "discussing 
a political framework for the autonomy areas, which is the idea 
raised separately by more than one faction but opposed by 
others." He expressed the belief that "we need a high degree of 
frankness at that meeting, in order to be able to say clearly 
what we want and what we do not want in the autonomy region. 
Every faction should give a clear answer so that, if possible, 
we can come out with a common concept." 

