Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by King Husayn with Arab and international </F>
media representatives in Washington "at the conclusion of his 
visit to the United States" -- recorded; in English except where 
noted] 
  [Text] [Husayn] I welcome the brother representatives of 
the media to this meeting here in Washington. [preceding 
sentence in Arabic] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen. I'd like to say how pleased I am to 
have this opportunity to be with you here on this last day of 
our visit to Washington this time. It has been a very, very 
good visit all together, a private visit in a sense. I've had 
the chance to have the preplanned medical checkup and I'm told 
that I have a clean bill of health which will require me only to 
have another one later in the summer and then to revert to a 
normal annual check up. 
  Obviously, I came to Washington on this visit and at this 
very, very important time. I had the very great pleasure and 
privilege of meeting the president who was kind enough to see me 
despite his very heavy and demanding commitments and schedule. 
My admiration for him has grown ever since I have known him. 
We have been in constant touch. More than ever before, I feel 
that we are all fortunate in our region to have President 
Clinton, a man with a big heart, with the great knowledge that 
he has accumulated of every aspect of the problems we are trying 
to resolve and a clear determination to help see us through, and 
see with us hopefully the breaking of the dawn of peace in our 
entire region, a man of integrity and determination. 
  I've had several occasions to visit with friends. I've 
spoken on several occasions during this visit and I realize 
right now that we are beginning once again to negotiate on the 
Jordanian-Israeli track as well as on the other ones. There had 
been developments in the recent past including the important 
meeting between the president and my brother President Hafiz 
al-Asad. I believe it was a successful meeting and I hope that 
we will see progress on all tracks leading to our objective of 
achieving a comprehensive peace. As far as we are concerned in 
Jordan, we are now moving to address all the subjects that are 
listed in the agenda, the Jordanian-Israeli agenda, and I hope 
that we will see success in dealing with all of these problems 
in a satisfactory way. I hope we can achieve symmetry in terms 
of the interests of both sides. I hope that, if it is possible, 
we will see the implementation of some of the agreements as we 
go along which will help sensitize people to what peace really 
means and what the promise of peace really is. 
  Some may have questioned this approach. As far as we are 
concerned, we are confident that we are right in the sense that 
we are moving to address all the problems and to find solutions 
for them so that the crowning achievement of this whole process 
is the ratification of a peace treaty. Hopefully it will come 
within the context of peace between all the parties concerned in 
the region. But in any event, we have resisted the suggestion, 
that came up once in a while in the recent past, that we ratify 
a piece of paper and then begin to negotiate what it means. We 
believe that the right approach is to negotiate all the 
subjects. We are open-minded and determined and hopefully the 
result will be the kind of peace that people can live with and 
protect and enjoy. 
  Things are moving quite rapidly and I hope that before too 
long we will see some tangible results which will be the legacy 
that we can leave for future generations in our region and in 
the world. 
  So, I'd be more than happy now to answer any of your 
questions or to hear any of your comments. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, [words indistict] 
(?implementation) of the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of 
Principles, assuming they can reach final closure and begin to 
implement the agreement, will that have an impact on the pace at 
which Jordan signs a peace treaty or negotiates a peace treaty 
with Israel? 
  [Husayn] Well I certainly hope, sir, that they will make 
progress and that they will implement what they agreed upon and 
they will find solutions to clarify what they haven't agreed 
upon as yet. As far as we are concerned, we are going to help as 
much as we can, and our support for our Palestinian brethren in 
terms of Jordan will continue. And as far as the work ahead, 
there are obviously many areas where there will be bilateral, 
multilateral, trilateral negotiations. We have made it very, 
very clear to our Palestinian brethren that we are ready to help 
when we know what is needed and when we are approached and when 
we reach agreement with them over any subject of interest. But 
in terms of the background, I believe that we started together 
in Madrid, we went to Madrid, in Jordan's case, following a 
national meeting that was attended by all elected bodies in the 
country and representatives of our people and we decided that we 
have to move with conviction towards the establishment of peace. 
  We provided the umbrella for the joint delegation, we 
enabled 
our Palestinian brethren to speak for themselves and we went to 
Moscow and we have attended every meeting dealing with peace. 
And then we finally came to Washington and of course we started 
to work together until a very monumental event, a very historic 
event took place on the 13th of September, when the Israelis and 
the Palestinians recognized each other and met here in the city 
of Washington, outside the White House. We saw that handshake 
that will be remembered in the times ahead. 
  So the umbrella has been shut down and relegated to the 
closets of history but nonetheless, we immediately hailed what 
happened as a courageous step on both sides in terms of a vision 
of the future and a sense of responsibility towards generations 
to come. And we immediately, on the 14th of September, ratified 
the agenda that we had held up to that time to see some progress 
on the Palestinian track. 
  Now we are dealing with the agenda and all the items there 
and I hope we will see some rapid progress. In the meantime, 
all the other parties are involved and engaged and it certainly 
is my hope that what will come out is a comprehensive peace at 
the end. But now we are dealing with our own problem. And I 
think that they are complex and they will be demanding of time 
and effort and yet we are going at our own speed now. 
  [Reporter] Some of the Palestinian leadership would believe 
that one of the problems, which is security of Jericho and 
whether Palestinians alone will be able to police the border 
between Jericho and Jordan, there is some in the Palestinian 
leadership who suggest that Jordan has objected to the idea that 
Palestinians would be able to control the border by themselves 
and that Jordan made those objections known to the United State 
and to Israel. 
  [Husayn] I would like to categorically deny that, and 
suggest 
that it was very unfortunate that such a suggestion should even 
be made. Jordan is a state, sir, Jordan has its borders, Jordan 
has its positions on the bridges and Jordan continues to have 
the right to exercise looking after its borders and its 
territories. We were informed that the Oslo agreement 
stipulated that external security was Israel's domain for the 
initial phases. We did not comment in any form or way. We 
heard what you all heard and obviously if the Palestinians are 
able to look after the bridges on their side, that is most 
welcome by us. But that is something that Israel and the 
Palestinians have to decide upon. It is nothing that reflects 
on us or concerns us in any way except in the hope that whatever 
happens will help our brethren in the occupied territories and 
will make them feel that there is real progress towards a 
change, a change in the quality of life, a change in conditions 
that have persisted for 26 terrible years. 
  [Reporter] [words indistinct] Your Majesty, could you assess 
your relationship with the PLO leaders right now, particularly 
Chairman 'Arafat, and comment on whether you think it will be 
natural and inevitable for Jordan's large Palestinian population 
to look for leadership both to your majesty and to the PLO? 
  [Husayn] As far as we are concerned, sir, and facing all the 
realities of today as we have done in the past, we in Jordan, 
all Jordanians, regardless of their origins are members of one 
family that have and will continue to share equal rights until 
such time that any would wish otherwise or have the opportunity 
to exercise another option. Jordan is unique in the Arab world 
in that sense, which has been our approach throughout. We will 
continue to help our brethren to the best our ability in the 
occupied territories, we will continue to hope, as we have made 
it very, very clear that the leadership of the Palestinians will 
rise to the level of the challenges it faces right now. We hope 
and pray that the steps that will be taken will lead eventually 
to the fulfillment of Palestinian aspirations regarding 
Palestinian rights on Palestinian soil, in terms of democracy, 
pluralism, respect for human rights. We hope that all will have 
part in shaping the future, both inside and outside, and 
particularly those who have lived through the 26 years of 
occupation and endured them and hung to their land, and endured 
all the difficulties that are known to all. 
  I hope that the Palestinian institutions will come into 
being, I hope that there will be the potential for the very 
talented Palestinians within the region and throughout the world 
to put their resources and energies into the coming phase. So 
as far as we are concerned, we will continue to help in any way 
we can. If you are referring to our relations in terms of the 
future, I hope that they will be very clear. We will implement 
whatever we agree upon, we will always call for cooperation, 
coordination to the best of our abilities, but also we are going 
to be very, very clear. If we don't have the kind of 
coordination that is needed, we will make it public. We cannot 
assume responsibilities for something that we are not involved 
in. 
  Regarding the future relationship, I believe that this is 
something for people to decide, in time. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, it is obvious from what you just 
said, and in past pronouncements publicly and privately, that 
you felt on a number of occasions that [words indistinct] great 
frustration because of the lack of coordination between you and 
the PLO leadership, and particularly with Chairman 'Arafat. 
This is another question about the illusive coordination among 
the Arabs. You said that you advised Mr. 'Arafat, publicly and 
privately, to drop the word confederation or confederacy from 
his political lexicon. I would like you to expand a little bit 
on that, and would I be stretching it too much to say that, 
judging from what you just said, you do not believe that the PLO 
leadership has risen to the occasion, in other words? And if I 
add one thing, is it true also that you've reached an agreement 
with President al-Asad of Syria that Jordan and Syria and 
Lebanon also will sign peace treaties together? 
  [Husayn] Jordan is moving, Syria is moving, Lebanon is 
moving. I hope that our objective of a comprehensive peace will 
be achieved. The Palestinians are moving. I am not talking 
about the past. I am talking about a critical moment, I am 
talking about the future. And it is certainly my hope that all 
of us will rise to the level of their responsibilities, in terms 
of what is happening and the impact of all that is happening on 
the future of the region as a whole. 
  We hope relations are fine, sir, but as far as 
confederation, 
maybe the talk about it as a concept was warranted at a certain 
point in time to help Palestinians reach the point they have 
reached and enable them to speak for themselves, as they are 
doing and as they've done both in Oslo and leading on to 
Washington and on to whatever is happening right now. But as 
far as the future is concerned, sir, we have lived in the Arab 
world and we have tried our very best, and between the emotional 
feelings about Arab unity and between the setbacks that we have 
had, our position is the following: Jordan and Palestine are 
very, very close together. We're members of one family. But 
federations and confederations and whatever cannot be determined 
by individuals, and depending on their feelings at any point in 
time. They are the sum total of the conviction of people that 
this is the right approach. So we're happy to have been able to 
help our Palestinian brethren to get where they are and, 
hopefully, to achieve their objectives. But, as close as we are 
to them, we'll support them to the best of our abilities, and 
the future will have to take care of itself when, under 
conditions of freedom and democratic institutions are there, 
when people decide and they can have something that is 
meaningful, that will last. And I believe that will come 
inevitably, sooner of later. So for the time being, I've asked 
President 'Arafat to drop this word from his vocabulary, 
certainly in talking with me. Let's get on with it, let us work 
from the grassroots upwards. Let us dispel the false 
impressions that we had any objective other than helping our 
Palestinian brethren recover their rights on their soil, helping 
them through the very difficult times that they have endured so 
far. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, what are you going to do for the 
refugees' problem in the Arab world? Do you envisage peace and 
signature of a peace agreement without a solution to this 
problem? If your majesty will give me an answer in Arabic, 
please? 
  [Husayn, in Arabic] This is one of the important issues that 
must be addressed by everybody. As far as we are concerned in 
Jordan, as I have said a short while ago, we are highly 
sensitive to this issue regarding the needs of people. Peace 
should entail a radical change toward the better in terms of the 
people's life and the aspired-for peace. Naturally, there are 
resolutions on either return or compensation, or any other 
method, but this dimension must be addressed shortly so peace 
can have a meaning and there will be a lasting peace that gives 
everybody a good opportunity to live under this peace. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, we have seen another (?goal) 
handshake recently between King Fahd and and Mr. Yasir 'Arafat, 
though from what we have seen in photographs, mercifully it was 
without the traditional Arab kisses. When are we going to see 
your majesty shaking hands also with King Fahd, considering the 
fact that Jordan has a very important role to play in the peace 
process? 
  [Husayn] If you take it that way, I have been a follower of 
my grandfather and his late Majesty King 'Abd-al-'Aziz 
Bin-Sa'ud, who came together and settled their differences and 
left us the responsibility to work together as members of one 
family in the interest of our nation. Our relations have passed 
through a period, I think, that there are so many aspects that 
have to be addressed and could be addressed when we are able to 
meet face to face, as I have tried since the outset. As far as 
we are concerned, we are most anxious to see the relations 
return to their warmth and to be based on mutual confidence and 
trust and to be based on the desire to cooperate in the interest 
of the Arab nation as a whole. I hope the time will come, and I 
think we are moving in the right direction. And I believe when 
we have a chance to meet, we'll discover that it was a very 
serious storm in a teacup, and I hope that our brethren in Saudi 
Arabia will realize that we never meant them any harm, nor did 
we cause them any harm at all. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, [words indistinct] interview this 
weekend that you believe that [words indistinct] peace. Does 
this mean that a peace treaty [words indistinct] signed between 
Syria and Israel and Lebanon and Israel... 
  [Husayn, interrupting] I certainly hope that this will 
happen. I think there is indication of movement in that 
direction. I think very important steps are taking place. I 
think there are two camps. There is a peace camp that we can see 
and I think that it represents the hopes of the majority of 
people in the entire region. There are the skeptics who may be 
still living in the past or living in today in terms of not 
seeing that if this chance and opportunity is missed, the result 
is total disaster in the entire region. 
  I came to assume my constitutional responsibilities, based 
on the Hegira calender. In another few days, on the 17th of 
Sha'ban, I will be 60. What interests do I have? I have only 
the same interests that I have had in all the years that have 
passed, to do something for, to leave something for people to 
enjoy the kind of life that has been denied them, to know that 
they can wake up tomorrow, and know what hopefully it will 
bring, not to live in uncertainty, in tension, to have the 
opportunity to divert energies and resources towards what is 
worthwhile, building their future in the entire region. If we 
can achieve it, we will certainly do our very best. The 
timeframe, I think the way things are moving, in fact, so many 
surprises, most of them are pleasant in the recent past, 
hopefully, it may be the end of this year. It may be next year, 
but we are moving, determinedly, and I hope that it will be a 
comprehensive peace. As far as Jordan and Israel are concerned, 
we are dealing with our own problems right now. We still have a 
long way to go. We think that the other tracks will move, and I 
hope, eventually, we will be together. 
  [Reporter] I have a question for you on Iraq. Did you 
discuss the situation in Iraq with the Clinton Administration? 
And have you seen any change in the Clinton Administration's 
position towards Iraq and the embargo? 
  [Husayn] I haven't discussed it in any substantive way. I 
have always said that I hope that this nightmare will come to an 
end, sometime very soon, and particularly as it impacts on the 
Iraqi people, and their continued suffering under the prevailing 
conditions. Somehow, I hope we will get out of the area of Iraq 
not being an active, constructive part of the Arab world and the 
community of nations, as soon as possible. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, you met with a group of Jewish 
leaders this week. And it was very successful meeting. I heard 
you talk about a warm peace. Could you tell us what a warm 
peace would look like between Jordan and Israel, and what a warm 
peace in your view would look like in the region? 
  [Husayn] I didn't use the expression warm peace. I think, 
maybe, the description of the meeting was that what I implied. 
A warm peace may not be a very pleasant one. [laughter by 
reporters] But, I talked of peace, a real peace, the peace that 
gives everybody the opportunity to work together, and to achieve 
their hopes for the future. And I spoke in detail about some of 
the problems that we are to address: A) the problem of occupied 
territories. And I am talking about Jordanian occupied 
territories, without prejudice to what our Palestinian brothers 
are talking about right now. And I have stated categorically 
that in that regard, we feel very, very strongly that these 
areas, the small problem in the north of the Jordan Valley, but 
there is a considerable area in the southern Jordan Valley that 
needs to be looked at in the sense of the urgency of our demand 
that Jordanian territory be returned to us. So, there is the 
suggestion, and hopefully movement on creating a group that will 
look at delineation and demarcation of these borders. 
  And my hope is that the coming days will see some progress 
here. Then, people can move on the ground there. Once that is 
settled, and it has to mean the return of Jordanian territory to 
Jordanian sovereignty, then we can look at the entire rift 
valley and look at what can be done in the context of looking at 
it as a complete economic unit in terms of resources, in terms 
of all the potential that there is to develop to the best way 
possible to the benefit of all. So, the question of borders, 
and territories, and sovereignty over our territories is one of 
the aspects that has to be addressed. Another area is water. 
And there again, I believe that all the available resources 
might not be adequate for the needs of all concerned in the 
future. But certainly, we have got to work out the distribution 
of these waters in a satisfactory way, in terms of the 
percentages that are peoples' right. Beyond that, hopefully, in 
a context of peace, we can look at what can be done beyond that 
to secure needed water for all concerned. And obviously the 
third dimension--and this is not all, because I have many other 
items on the agenda--is the human dimension. There has to be a 
qualitative change of life. I would hope that the priority will 
be given to people in the occupied territories, but, beyond 
that, the region, for everybody to feel what peace is, to know 
what peace is, to realize what transformation there is as we 
progress along to its (?end). 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, for many years, you have fears in 
Jordan that the Israelis would do something that would lead to 
another massive influx of Palestinian refugees from the 
territories. Are you worried about that happening under 
Palestinian control in the territories for one reason or 
another, either civil war or economic breakdown? And have you 
done anything to....? 
  [Husayn, interrupting, laughing] [words indistinct] have you 
woken up on the wrong side of bed this morning [laughing] [words 
indistinct] excuse my being so personal. But, let's look at the 
positive side, let's not talk about disasters, and things that I 
hope will not.... 
  [Reporter, interrupting] Your Majesty, Jordan has survived 
for many years because you anticipated [words indistinct] 
disasters. [words indistinct]. 
  [Husayn, interrupting] I don't anticipate hopefully any 
more. 
I am really optimistic; and that is my tendency. Of course, one 
can never be absolutely certain that things would work the way 
we wish. But, I think that there is a general consensus amongst 
the overwhelming majority of people that we move towards 
resolving problems. I hope Palestinians on their soil will 
enjoy democracy, pluralism, respect for human rights, and the 
chance to live and work with us. And I hope that Jordan and 
Palestine eventually can be an example to others in the entire 
region. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, your expressed your hope for a 
comprehensive peace among all parties [words indistict] work 
together. But can you foresee circumstances under which Jordan 
would sign a peace treaty with Israel moving ahead of Syria and 
Lebanon? 
  [Husayn] I would certainly hope that it will be a 
comprehensive peace. I believe that we are working towards that 
end. We are coordinating with our Syrian brethren; we are 
coordinating with our Lebanese brethren; we are coordinating 
with our Palestinian brethren; we are coordinating with Egypt to 
the best of our abilities. There are many subjects that are 
being discussed. But, we slowed down until our Palestinian 
brethren made their move. It was very, very important to see 
the Palestinian dimension, the root cause of the bigger problem 
in the region and the world, was addressed. They've assumed the 
responsibilities as they wished since 1974, and we've recognized 
that was the way things should move and then that made their 
move. Now, we are trying to help them; we are trying to resolve 
our own problems. I believe that there are enough subjects that 
must be covered before we arrive at ratifying a peace treaty. 
My own impression is that the time element will bring 
everything together almost at the same time. So, that's how we 
are moving. We are not trying to have a race, we're trying to 
address problems so that we resolve them once and for all, so 
that people can enjoy peace in the region. We're not ... 
[pauses] We're masters of our own destiny; we're working in 
regard to our own sphere. We're trying to see at the same time 
that we encourage movement on all other tracks. And I believe 
that problems elsewhere are probably less than they are as they 
affect us, because Jordan has borne the brunt of every disaster 
that has occurred over the years and the heaviest of weights. 
So, we have a long way to go, but I hope, with good will on 
either side -- Israeli and Jordanian -- we'll see rapid progress 
[words indistinct]. 
  [Reporter] [word indistinct] Your Majesty, you've spoken 
optimistically about peace. Could you give us a more specific 
timetable of when Jordan and Israel could reach a peace 
agreement. Are we talking about months, are we talking about by 
the end of 1994? 
  [Husayn] I can't, sir. How can I give you a timetable. It 
does not depend on me, it depends also on the Israeli side. And 
I hope that, at least, as far as we are concerned right now, the 
Israeli partners in the negotiations will realize that instead 
of spending too much time on looking at how we can sign a piece 
of paper, and call it a peace treaty, and then negotiate it, let 
us get to negotiations. I believe that this is happening, and 
therefore, I hope that it won't take long before we discuss all 
the problems that need to be resolved, and then the peace treaty 
will come. We are committed to signing it and ratifying it when 
it is and when it will be the crowning achievement of resolving 
all the problems between us. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, in your opinion sir, did the 
statements made by President al-Asad at the summit represent a 
change or advance in Syria's position, or were they a 
restatement of Syria's traditional formula? 
  [Husayn] I don't believe they are merely a restatement of 
previous positions. I believe that they were statements that 
were welcomed by all. And I believe that there is a general 
consensus amongst all who know President al-Asad that he is a 
man of his word. I believe he went further than he went at 
anytime, and he is talking about comprehensive peace, in the 
term of obviously addressing of Syrian demands regarding Syria's 
territory and rights. So, I think that we are much more ahead 
of what we were, and we are very serious about it, too. 
  [Reporter] Your Majesty, if I can ask you another question 
about Jerusalem, I know that Jordan would like to attain 
Hashemite control over Jerusalem. Has Jerusalem and the future 
of Jerusalem entered into any of the talks you've been involved 
with Palestinians or with the Israelis? Could you enlighten me 
on what Jordan would like to see as far as Jerusalem is 
concerned? 
  [Husayn] Sir, if we are talking about Security Council 
Resolution 242 being the foundation of the ongoing process right 
now, then obviously, as far as the Palestinian-Israeli dimension 
of the problem, Jerusalem, in some form of way, must become the 
essence of peace and the symbol of the meeting between the two 
people in the future. [Resolution] 242 takes care of that, and 
the negotiations, I am sure, will deal with this problem and 
address it adequately. As far as the holy places are concerned, 
of the three great monotheistic religions, the three Abrahamic 
religions, we are assuming our responsibilities and we are proud 
to continue to do whatever we can regarding what has been left 
to us to look after since 1974 by the Arab summit. But, there 
is an idea that we've been trying to put across, and that is the 
need to consider, maybe for the first time in our history within 
the region, the possibility through something that is happening, 
and we have encouraged and been involved in for some period of 
time, interfaith dialogue, between the three great religions. 
But beyond that, possibly the sovereignty over all these holy 
places and the fact that in our view, we believe that we will 
not recognize any sovereignty over them except to God. I hope 
that, somehow in the context of peace, this problem can be 
addressed and maybe the followers of the three great religions 
can come to realize what the significance of Jerusalem is to all 
of them and move it outside the political equation, move the 
holy places outside that particular dimension. We refer to the 
Hashemites and their responsibilities who continue to shoulder 
them, we hope, and we are suggesting that a non- political 
Islamic representation can be found that would assume our 
responsibilities, or that we would support, representing all the 
different schools in the Islamic world, responsible, so that the 
Islamic holy places revert to Islamic sovereignty, in other 
words, or represent that. And hopefully a dialogue, eventually 
set between the three great religions will produce some 
situation in Jerusalem that will make us all meet there in 
worship of the one God. And I think that the area has had such 
an impact on the world in the past in terms of the spiritual 
dimension. I don't know if it might be too ambitious to think 
of, or consider, the possibility of realizing, all of us, that 
it wasn't God's will that that small area within that sacred 
city, important to all of us, by His will, should be the subject 
of wars and conflicts, but the means for all believers to come 
together and to enjoy those holy places. 
  [Reporter] When you talk about a small area, what area are 
you talking about, is that the old city or what? 
  [Husayn] I am talking about Jerusalem in terms of 242. That 
is something the Israelis and the Palestinians should resolve. 
I hope the holy places will find something that will make them 
important to all of us, and that sovereignty over them will be 
recognized by all and all, to be that of the Almighty God. 
  [Reporter] Talking about Jerusalem, Your Majesty, you said 
before that the only sovereignty over Jerusalem is to God. 
[reporter switches to Arabic] But the Palestinians say that 
Jerusalem should return to the Palestinian sovereignty. What is 
your majesty's opinion? 
  [Husayn, in Arabic] Concerning Jerusalem, we have spoken 
about 242 and the city, and we said that Jerusalem must be the 
symbol of peace between the Palestinians and Israelis as long as 
we are talking about the Palestinian entity which will be 
established, or on its way to be established. Regarding the 
holy places, we believe in the need to continue dialogue among 
religions. However, we do not consider any sovereignty over 
these places except that of Almighty God. We appeal to the 
Islamic world and we work to have a group representing all 
different schools which we will support as much as we can in 
order to achieve what we aspire for in terms of giving Jerusalem 
its spiritual dimension. This city is in our hearts and 
consciences, and so we must save it from this whirlpool 
concerning claiming it by this or that party, whether in the 
Arab world or elsewhere. Consequently, our Islamic holy places 
will return to us and will be safeguarded for the entire Islamic 
world. We believe that this is the most appropriate and the 
best. We hope that all sides will, through dialogue, reach a 
situation which puts Jerusalem in the position which Almighty 
God wanted for all of us; namely, the followers of the three 
Abrahamic religions. 
  Thank you very very much indeed. [preceding sentence in 
English] 

