Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nikolay Slatinski, chairman of the National </F>
Assembly Commission for National Security, by Valeriya Vaseva; 
place and date not given: "The Bomb of Destabilization, Likely 
to Destroy Us Every Moment, Ticks in Each of Our Countries"] 
  [Excerpts] [Vaseva] Mr. Slatinski, how would you comment 
on Suleyman Demirel's letter to Zhelyu Zhelev, urging him to 
support military intervention in Sarajevo as an outcome of the 
Yugo-crisis? 
  [Slatinski] I have heard about the letter in the media, but 
have not read it. Nevertheless, it is commendable that this 
time the National Security Commission did not have to wait two 
or three weeks before learning about it. I am rather inclined 
to regard the letter as an emotional outburst on the part of the 
Republic of Turkey expressing its wishful thinking about 
Bulgaria's reaction to the problem. I shall refrain from 
drastic definitions, such as interference in our country's 
domestic affairs. Suleyman Demirel is a great and highly 
experienced politician, and as president of Turkey, he perfectly 
well realizes that it is very difficult to influence Bulgaria at 
this very moment. He is aware that President Zhelev does not 
have the necessary prerogatives for changing our foreign policy. 
  Generally speaking, I am not very pleased about such 
letters, 
but I repeat that I am not acquainted with the text. I remember 
another similar letter from the former Turkish president, and 
this is the second case. I am convinced that Bulgaria, which by 
its behavior has demonstrated that it is conducting a pragmatic 
foreign policy, does not deserve to be treated in such a manner. 
  [Vaseva] It is strange that Demirel has not sent similar 
messages to other Balkan countries, such as Greece, for example. 
Could it be a sign that the world outside does not regard our 
"categorical" stand as "unmistakably categorical?" 
  [Slatinski] It is a fact that Bulgaria is maintaining a 
passive attitude, which almost borders on coolness. I cannot 
reproach those who are in charge of our foreign policy for this 
attitude, because they are acting according to the trends and 
framework set by our parliament regarding the Balkan crisis. 
First: Bulgaria categorically supports the peaceful settlement 
of the problem. Second: Bulgaria shall not get involved in the 
conflict under any form, or under any aegis whatsoever. Third: 
Bulgaria appeals to all the neighbor countries to imitate its 
example of non-interference. Fourth: Bulgaria is in favor of 
preserving Bosnia-Herzegovina's whole territory as one single 
state. Fifth: Bulgaria is against lifting the arms embargo. 
This is what the National Assembly has declared and it 
represents the framework of our government's foreign policy, to 
which the Bulgarian president should adhere as well. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Vaseva] If, God forbid, NATO should decide to attack Serb 
positions in Bosnia -- what is awaiting us? 
  [Slatinski] This is exactly my opinion. I always think that 
the political forces could have defined their stands a little 
more precisely. I have the feeling that Bulgaria's political 
elite does not seem to have noticed the danger. I doubt that 
the decision will come through, because of Russia's stand, which 
is decisive. If NATO should still decide to take this step, the 
world is likely to become even more unpredictable. Europe's 
greatest mistake was to say that the disintegration of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is caused by ethnic reasons, and we believed 
this version. No! The disintegration was allowed to occur 
according to religious principles instead! A process which is 
very difficult to control has started and it is not quite clear 
what negative results it might involve for Bulgaria. A bomb of 
destabilization likely to destroy us all is ticking in every 
country in the area. 
  Hence, the story of Bosnia-Herzegovina is an open book, 
which 
the Bulgarian political elite should learn to read between the 
lines. It contains lessons, warnings, and conclusions that are 
directly related to Bulgaria's near future. [passage omitted] 

