Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Source rocks for petroleum generation are present in 
the sub-surface of the Ragay Gulf Basin, about 200 kilometers 
southeast of Manila, Australian scientists reported. 
  The Australian Geological Survey Organization (AGSO) has 
released its first report on the petroleum potential of an 
offshore area in the Philippines. 
  The AGSO scientists' report includes 10 new maps, based on 
current and previously collected seismic data, and shows the 
structure of key horizons at a detailed scale, together with 
results of the offshore geochemical survey and analyses of 
samples taken from onshore oil seeps and exploration wells. 
  Findings on three other Philippine offshore basins would be 
due for release in March. 
  "In the Ragay Gulf Basin, the first of the four offshore 
basins, major fault systems controlling the distribution of 
hydrocarbon traps are now better understood and have been mapped 
more accurately than previously. An important limestone 
formation containing possible petroleum source and reservoir 
rocks is shown to be much more extensive than was thought 
previously, and includes reefal deposits which may provide 
attractive targets for future oil exploration. Large potential 
hydrocarbon traps in various parts of the basin were mapped with 
sufficient accuracy to estimate likely reserves," AGSO's project 
leader, Dr. Chao-Shing Lee said. 
  From March to May 1992, AGSO and the Philippine Department 
of 
Energy conducted a cooperative geophysical and geochemical 
survey to evaluate the petroleum potential of four offshore 
basins in the Philippines. 
  The $5 million project was funded by the Australian 
International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB). A total of 
nearly 3,000 line kilometers of seismic and 5,000 line 
kilometers of geochemical data was collected using AGSO's 
geoscientific research vessel, Rig Seismic. 
  "The new-seismic shooting achieved penetration to a greater 
depth than previously, allowing improved definition of key 
horizons and structural features," Lee said. 
  In geochemical surveying, a towed 'fish' measures the 
concentration of hydrocarbons dissolved in sea-water a few 
meters above the seabed. Analysis of the hydrocarbons will 
determine whether they are "fossil" hydrocarbons such as oil, 
gas, or condensate escaping from sub-surface rocks, or the 
product of recent biological activity in the water column or 
bottom oozes. 
  "Zones with anomalously high hydrocarbon concentration mark 
the sites where hydrocarbons are escaping from the seabed. By 
examining these zones in relation to the seismic data, it is 
possible to identify areas where hydrocarbons are likely to be 
accumulating," Lee said. 

