SUMMARY 
                              While publication of the final list of winners in the 12 December 
Russian legislative elections largely clarifies which individuals 
will be in the new Federal Assembly, it does not provide a firm 
delineation of party strength or a clear picture of the 
legislature's pro-/anti-reform or pro-/anti-Yeltsin orientation. 
The number of seats won by parties among the 225 State Duma seats 
awarded in party list voting is clear now, but the number of 
seats won by parties in the 225  districts is not, since 
relatively few district winners were identified with any party 
and many winners carry different party labels in this list of 
winners than they had in the pre-election list of candidates. 
Vagueness and even changes in party identifications in the list 
of winners underscore the fluidity of the parties and blocs that 
appeared on the ballot. 
                             END SUMMARY 
   Party List 
   The distribution of the 225 State Duma seats awarded on the basis 
of the party preference vote was announced by the Central 
Electoral Commission on 25 December (Interfax)--see box 1--and 
the final list of individual winners on party lists was published 
along with lists of district winners and Federation Council 
winners in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta.  The listing of 
party list winners contained some surprises since some names high 
on the lists had dropped off, usually because the candidates also 
won in a district election and chose to take the district seat, 
allowing candidates further down a party's list to take the party 
list seats.  For most parties, the distribution of seats won in 
the party preference voting was straightforward either because 
the parties had not broken down their party lists into separate 
national and regional sections (Zhirinovskiy's Liberal-Democratic 
Party (LDP), the Democratic Party of Russia (DPR), the Communist 
Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF), and Women of Russia) or 
because they did not win more seats than the number of candidates 
in the national section of their party lists (Agrarian Party, 
Yavlinskiy Bloc). 
   Distribution of party preference seats for Russia's Choice and 
the Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES) was more complicated 
because both had broken their lists into national and regional 
sections and won more seats than they had candidates in the 
national section of their party lists.  PRES had three seats left 
to distribute to its regional candidates after awarding seats to 
the 15 on its national party list.  Councillor to the president 
Sergey Stankevich, listed as No. 89 as a candidate from Moscow 
city, got the first of the three, while candidates from Rostov 
and Bashkortostan got the other two.  The distribution of the 40 
seats won by Russia's Choice was more complicated.  It had 19 
candidates listed in the national section of its party list, but 
Sergey Kovalev, Ella Pamfilova, Andrey Kozyrev, Boris Fedorov, 
and Andrey Makarov won seats in district races and dropped off 
the list, leaving Russia's Choice with 26 seats to distribute to 
candidates from the regional section of its party list.  The 
election rules indicate vaguely that regional seats should be 
distributed in accordance with the size of the vote in various 
regions, but the principles Russia's Choice used to allocate 
seats have not been explained.  Examination of its list shows 
that: 
   --Candidates from the biggest regions received seats--four from 
Moscow city, two each from St. Petersburg and Moscow Oblast, one 
each from Sverdlovsk, Krasnodar, Rostov, Nizhegorod, Kemerovo, 
and several other big oblasts. 
   --Prominent figures, such as ministers Viktor Danilov-Danilyan 
(No. 56), Yevgeniy Sidorov (No. 205), and Boris Saltykov (No. 
103), received seats.  However, no seat was awarded to Deputy 
Premier Yuriy Yarov (No. 63), listed from Chuvashia. 
   --Most of the leaders of Democratic Russia (one of the biggest 
and most vocal parties within the Russia's Choice bloc), Gleb 
Yakunin (No. 188), Anatoliy Shabad (No. 189), Vasiliy Selyunin 
(No. 173), and Nikolay Vorontsov (No. 174)--all of whom lost in 
district races--as well as Ilya Zaslavskiy (No. 88), who did not 
run in a district, received seats.  But Lev Ponomarev (No. 177), 
who lost a race for a district seat in Moscow city, did not 
receive a party seat. 
   There will be further adjustments to the party list winners since 
some on this list may decline their seats.  For example, 
presidential Administration Leader Sergey Filatov and some others 
already have. 

Box 1 
                  Final Official Count of Party List Seats* 
Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP)                 59 
Russia's Choice                                40 
Communist Party of Russian Federation (CPRF)   32 
Agrarian Party of Russia                       21 
Women of Russia                                21 
Yavlinskiy Bloc                                20 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord (PRES)       18 
Democratic Party of Russia (DPR)               14 
   *Central Electoral Commission results reported by ITAR-TASS on 25 
December. 


   District Seats 
   While the party list system provides clear and firm figures for 
party strength among the 225 seats elected by proportional 
representation, judging party strength among the 225 seats 
elected by district-is more difficult.  There are still 
conflicting counts (see box 2) and relatively few district 
winners were identified with parties.  The list of winners of 
district seats published in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
identified only 87 of the 219 winners (Six seats are vacant--5 
from Tatarstan and one from Chechnya) with parties, while the 
other 132 are listed as non-party. 
   Moreover, suggesting that party identification is weak and 
changeable, winners were often identified differently in the list 
of winners than they had been in the list of candidates.  In 
fact, of 111 winners identified with a party in either the list 
of candidates or the list of winners, most (64) were identified 
differently in the second list than in the first.  Thus 25 of the 
winners had been identified with Russia's Choice in the list of 
candidates, but only 18 were so identified in the list of 
winners; 16 were identified with the Agrarian Party in the first 
list, but only 12 in the final list; 7 were identified with the 
Yavlinskiy Bloc in the first list, but only 2 in the second list; 
6 were listed with the Civic Union in the first list, but only 1 
in the second.  Even well-known Russia's Choice officials such as 
ministers Ella Pamfilova and Boris Fedorov were listed as 
Russia's Choice in the list of candidates but as non-party in the 
list of winners, while Ambassador to the United States Vladimir 
Lukin, No. 3 on the Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin Bloc party list in 
the list of candidates, was listed as non-party in the list of 
district seat winners.  On the other hand, 7 winners were 
identified with the CPRF in the list of winners that had not been 
identified with the CPRF in the list of candidates. 

Box 2 
                  Conflicting Counts of District Seats 
   Only a few counts of seats by parties for district elections have 
been made public and they vary widely from the number of 
identifications in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta list.  The 
most significant variations are in the strength of Russia's 
Choice, while LDP's strength is fairly clear. 
                               District Seats by Party 
   Party            28 Dec*         15 Dec**  16 Dec***  20 Dec**** 
Russia's Choice  18       (29)  27         56    62 
CPRF             16       (17)  12         33    30 
Agrarian         12       (18)  16         26    28 
Yavlinskiy        2        (7)   6         12     9 
Civic Union       1        (7)             18 
LDP               5        (5)   3         11     6 
RDDR              4        (5)              8 
PRES              1        (4)   2          9    12 
Dignity           2        (3)              3 
Women             2        (3)              4     4 
DPR               1        (2)              7     3 
Future of Russia  0        (1)              3 
Other parties    23  (23)***** 


   *Counting the identifications in the list of winners for district 
seats in the 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta.  In parentheses is a 
combined count including the identifications of these winning 
candidates in the list of candidates in the 30 November 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta, thus including those who identified 
themselves with a party in the first list but not in the final 
list. 
   **Izvestiya, 16 December, based on 15 December data from 193 of 
224 districts. 
   ***Interfax, 16 December, data from "various sources." 
   ****ITAR-TASS, 20 December, based on data "from reliable 
government sources." 
   *****No one was identified with minor parties on the first list. 
   Often winners had identified themselves with blocs such as 
Russia's Choice, the Yavlinskiy Bloc, or Civic Union in the pre- 
election list of candidates, but in the list of winners they 
identified themselves with their real parties which were 
constituents of the bloc--for example, Democratic Russia.  Only 
64 of the 87 winners identified with parties were identified with 
the 13 parties and blocs on the ballot, while 23 identified 
themselves with minor parties, some of which had joined Russia's 
Choice, the Yavlinskiy Bloc, PRES, or Civic Union for the 
election.  Thus several Democratic Russia members identified 
themselves as Russia's Choice in the first list but as Democratic 
Russia candidates in the second list, and over a dozen winners 
from various blocs identified themselves with small parties in 
the second list.  Candidates of the Yavlinskiy Bloc in the list 
of candidates were identified with the Social-Democratic Party 
(district No. 72), Democratic Russia (No. 106), Russian 
Ecological Union (No. 132), and Republican Party (No. 135) in the 
list of winners. 
   More startlingly, however, some winners appeared to have switched 
to rival parties.  Yevgeniy Buchenkov in Vladimir district No. 68 
identified himself with the Agrarian Party in the list of 
candidates but with the CPRF in the list of winners, and Tamara 
Tokareva in Sverdlovsk district No. 160 identified herself with 
the Agrarian Party in the first list but with the archrival 
Peasant Party of Russia (a member-party of the Russia's Choice 
bloc) in the second list. 
   Undercounting Party Strength 
   Because many winners were listed as unaffiliated in one list and 
with a party in the other, it appears necessary to count party 
identifications from both the list of winners and the list of 
candidates.  However, even this count produces far fewer party 
seats than the 16 December Interfax or 20 December ITAR-TASS 
counts given in box 2.  The Central Electoral Commission and 
presidential Administration, which have been supplying the media 
with higher estimates of party strength are obviously using 
information from other sources.  And clearly some party totals 
should be higher, since some winners are not identified with a 
party in either list but are easily identified as party members 
or supporters.  Thus Aleksandr Dzasokhov, a former CPSU Politburo 
member running in North Ossetia, is presumably a CPRF member but 
was identified in both lists as unaffiliated. 
   The undercounting of party strength in the list of winners is 
clear from the Moscow city races.  In Moscow city's 15 districts, 
the list of winners identifies only 4 winners as Russia's Choice, 
but 3 others had been identified as Russia's Choice in the list 
of candidates, and a pre-election list of Moscow candidates 
distributed by Interfax identified 4 others who later won as 
being backed by Russia's Choice, indicating that Russia's Choice 
really won 11 of the 15 races.  Russia's Choice lost only four 
contests in Moscow--three to independents and one to Moscow 
Deputy Premier Aleksandr Braginskiy, a RDDR candidate (see box 
3). 

Box 3 
                     Winners in Moscow City 
   Russia's Choice did well in Moscow City, with seven winners 
labeled Russia's Choice in one list or another plus 2 Democratic 
Russia (part of Russia's Choice) candidates, and 2 others it 
backed.  Winning candidates were listed differently in the list 
of winners than the list of candidates in 6 of the 15 cases. 
                             Moscow City 
   District  Candidate          Identification               Pro- or 
Anti-RC 
                       List of     Backed      List of 
                       Candidates  by RC**     Winners 
191   Nisnevich        RC          RC          DemRussia     pro 
192   Kovalev          RC          RC          RC            pro 
193   Zadonskiy        RC          RC          DemRussia     pro 
194   Khakamada        no party*    backed as  Econ Freedom  pro 
                                    independent  Party 
195   Mironov          no party*   RC          no party      pro 
196   Volkov           no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
197   Osovtsov         no party*   RC          RC            pro 
198   Zhukov           Dignity      Dignity    Dignity       pro 
199   Gerber           no party*   RC          RC            pro 
200   Vlasov           no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
20l   Braginskiy       RDDR        not backed  RDDR          anti 
202   Tarasov          no party*   not backed  no party      anti 
203   Makarov          RC          RC          RC            pro 
204   Medvedev         no party*   RC          no party      pro 
205   Fedorov          RC          RC          no party      pro 


*Nominated by "group of electors" rather than a party or 
organization. 
   **According to an undated pre-election Interfax list. 
   Total State Duma Seats 
   Both media reports and claims by party leaders about overall 
party strength in the State Duma are considerably higher than 
those cited in the official 28 December Rossiyskaya Gazeta 
listing of party list and district winners.  Presidential 
Administration Leader Sergey Filatov claimed 91 for Russia's 
Choice on 16 December (Ostankino TV, 16 December), Deputy Premier 
Anatoliy Chubays claimed 103 for the "pro-Yeltsin bloc" versus 66 
for the LDP (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), PRES leader Konstantin 
Zatulin claimed 28-29 for PRES (ITAR-TASS, 21 December), and CPRF 
leader Gennadiy Zyuganov claimed 50 for the CPRF (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 28 December).  Sovetskaya Rossiya on 28 December 
published a list of 32 CPRF party list deputies and 18 district 
deputies.  When the Russia's Choice faction met on 27 December it 
listed 94 members--43 from Moscow and 51 from provinces- 
-according to Interfax and ITAR-TASS on 28 December. 

Box 4 
                         Total State Duma Seats 
   Party        Rossiyskaya     Filatov      ITAR-TASS 
             Gazeta, 28      16 December  20 December 
             December 
Russia's Choice  58         91            103 
LDP              64         62             66 
CPRF             48         61             62 
Agrarian         33         46             49 
Yavlinskiy       22         33             28 
PRES             19         24             29 
Women            23         22             25 
DPR              15                        17 
Civic Union       7 
RDDR              5 
Dignity           2 


Weakness of Blocs 
   In addition to the unclarity in the size of party factions, some 
blocs appear internally divided and may break up after the 
election.  Reformers in particular displayed disunity before the 
election, forming several rival parties that split the reformist 
vote.  In a bad omen for the fate of reformist legislation, this 
lack of cohesion showed up again in the list of winners--both on 
party lists and in districts.  Among the least cohesive factions, 
the Yavlinskiy Bloc's 27 winners virtually all identified 
themselves in the final list not with the Yavlinskiy Bloc but 
with other parties or no party (five with the Republican Party of 
the Russian Federation (including one identified both with this 
party and the Yavlinskiy Bloc), two with the Social Democratic 
Party of the Russian Federation, one each with Democratic Russia, 
the Russian Ecological Union, and the Russian Christian- 
Democratic Union, and 16 as nonparty.  Of Civic Union's 7 
identified winners, three called themselves nonparty and one each 
identified with the People's Party of Free Russia and the Renewal 
Union.  Of the 69 Russia's Choice winners (judging by 
identifications in either the 30 November or the 28 December 
Rossiyskaya Gazeta list), 14 are identified with Democratic 
Russia, two with the Republican Party of the Russian Federation, 
one each with the Russian Christian Democratic Union and 
Democratic Initiatives Party, and 12 as nonparty.  PRES held 
together better.  Of 22 identified PRES winners, most identified 
themselves with PRES in the final list, while only two linked 
themselves with minor parties (Entrepreneurs for a New Russia and 
a Bashkir party) and 5 as nonparty. 
   Additions and Alterations to List of Winners and Losers in State 
Duma* 
   *Additions and alterations to the list given in the 22 December 
Trends, pages 6-9, which was based on preliminary reports.  There 
will be further changes to the 28 December list of winners 
because some will not claim their seats.  ITAR-TASS on 28 
December reported that presidential Administration Leader Sergey 
Filatov and bank president Petr Aven (former chairman of State 
Committee for Foreign Economic Ties) have already announced they 
prefer their present jobs and will not take up their seats. 
Combining State Duma seats with another fulltime job is banned in 
most cases (see next article). 
   Winners: 
   Pro-Government: 
   Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, minister of environmental protection, 
    won on Russia's Choice list. 
Kirill Ignatyev, first deputy chairman of Ostankino TV, won on 
  Russia's Choice list. 
Andrey Nuykin, reform economist, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Boris Saltykov, minister of science, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Vasiliy Selyunin, reform economist, won on Russia's Choice list, 
  but lost in Moscow city district No. 199 election. 
Anatoliy Shabad, reformer, won on Russia's Choice list, but lost 
  in Moscow Oblast district No. 113 election. 
Yevgeniy Sidorov, culture minister, won on Russia's Choice list. 
Anatoliy Sliva, deputy head of president's State-Legal 
Directorate, 
  won on PRES list but lost in Moscow city district No. 195 
  election. 
Sergey Stankevich, presidential councillor, won on PRES list. 
Gleb Yakunin, Democratic Russia co-leader, won on Russia's Choice 
  list, but lost in Ryazan.district No. 149 election. 
Ilya Zaslavskiy, Democratic Russia co-leader, won on Russia's 
  Choice list. 
Konstantin Zatulin, head of Entrepreneurs for a New Russia, won 
  on PRES list, but lost in Krasnodar district No. 45 election. 
Aleksandr Zaveryukha, deputy premier, won on Agrarian Party list 
  but lost in Orenburg district No. 131 election. 
   delete:  Vladimir Shcherbak, first deputy agriculture minister, 
  was No. 6 on Agrarian Party list but dropped off at some point 
  and was not in the list of winners. 
   Centrists: 
   Yevgeniy Ambartsumov, former Supreme Soviet international affairs 
  committee chairman, won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He earlier 
  appeared to have lost because he was too far down the party 
  list.) 
Vladimir Lukin, ambassador to United States, won in Moscow Oblast 
  district No. 111 election where he was listed as nonparty, not 
  as a candidate from Yavlinskiy's party list. 
Vladimir Lysenko, leader of Republican Party, won on Yavlinskiy 
  list but lost in Moscow city district No. 199. 
Vyacheslav Shostakovskiy, leader of Republican Party, won on 
  Yavlinskiy list. 
   Anti-Yeltsin: 
   Valentin Chikin, editor of Sovetskaya Rossiya, won on CPRF list 
  but lost in Moscow Oblast district No. 110. 
Nikolay Lysenko, chairman of National Republican Party, won in 
  Saratov district No. 158 as unaffiliated. 
Vitaliy Sevastyanov, cosmonaut, won on CPRF list but lost in 
  Krasnodar district No. 45. 
   Delete: Aleksey Ponomarev, former Belgorod Oblast CP first 
  secretary, elected to Federation Council, not State Duma. 
  (Another CP candidate named Aleksey Ponomarev was elected to 
  State Duma from Tambov.) 
   Losers: 
Pro-Yeltsin: 
   Mikhail Maley, head of commission of Security Council, lost in 
  Moscow city district No. 198 as PRES candidate and was too far 
  down the PRES list. 
Lev Ponomarev, Democratic Russia co-leader, lost in Moscow city 
  district No. 196 as Russia's Choice candidate and was too far 
  down Russia's Choice list. 
Yuriy Yarov, deputy premier, was too far down Russia's Choice 
    list. 
   Centrists: 
   delete: 
Yevgeniy Ambartsumov won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He earlier 
  appeared to have lost.) 
Vyacheslav Shostakovskiy won on Yavlinskiy list.  (He 
  earlier appeared to have lost.) 
   Federation Council 
   Party strength appears even weaker in the Federation Council than 
in the State Duma, in part because many candidates won election 
to the Federation Council on the basis of high local office, 
rather than as party adherents.  Of the 171 candidates elected to 
the Federation Council, only 27 were identified with parties. (No 
one was elected from Tatarstan, Chechnya, or Chelyabinsk and only 
one from Yamalo-Nenets, so 7 of the 178 seats were not filled. 
Although the list of winners in the 28 December Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta carried party identifications for Federation Council 
winners, the list of candidates in the 27 November Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta had not done so.)  The CPRF led with 12, while Russia's 
Choice had 6 (plus l Democratic Russia and 1 Peasant Party- 
-parties belonging to Russia's Choice), and one each for the 
Agrarian Party, RDDR, and PRES.  The LDP won none.  The real 
totals are higher since some winners were clearly linked to a 
party, for example: 
   Former Belgorod CP First Secretary Aleksey Ponomarev was elected 
  in Belgorod as nonparty. 
First Deputy Premier Vladimir Shumeyko, one of Russia's Choice's 
  leaders, was elected in Kaliningrad as nonparty. 
Kirov Head of Administration Vasiliy Desyatnikov, identified as 
  Russia's Choice by ITAR-TASS on 13 December, was listed as 
  nonparty in the list of winners. 
Former CPSU Secretary Yegor Stroyev was elected in Orel as 
  nonparty. 
August 1991 putsch leader Vasiliy Starodubtsev, head of the 
  Agrarian Union, was elected in Tula as nonparty. 
Yaroslavl's two winners, Anatoliy Lisitsyn and Yelena Mizulina, 
  were identified as Russia's Choice by the 14 December Izvestiya 
  but listed as nonparty in the list of winners. 
   Most Federation Council winners are leading local officials, 
making the Federation Council largely a body of the top local 
leaders.  Those elected include 81 top leaders of their oblasts 
or okrugs--42 heads of administrations, 6 presidents, 1 governor, 
4 presidential representatives, 18 chairmen of Supreme Soviets or 
oblast or okrug soviets, and 10 premiers.  Only 36 such officials 
lost. 
   A substantial number of former people's deputies were elected, 
but will make up only one-quarter of the new body.  The batting 
average of former people's deputies--44 won, 27 lost--was not 
extremely high, considering that many were also prominent local 
- officials. 
   Additions or Alterations to Winners and Losers in Federation 
Council* 
   Winners: 
   Anti-Yeltsin: 
   Aleksey Ponomarev, former CP obkom secretary, elected in Belgorod 
    as nonparty. 
   Losers: 
   Pre-Yeltsin: 
   Nikolay Medvedev, chief of directorate in president's 
    Administration, lost in Mordovia. 
Vyacheslav Volkov, deputy chief of president's Administration, 
    lost in Murmansk. 
   *Preliminary list of Federation Council winners and losers was 
given-in the Trends of 22 December 1993, pages 10-11. 
   Outlook 
   Party strength is likely to remain unclear until the party 
factions organize formally, and it will take even longer before 
the strength of pro-Yeltsin or pro-reform party alliances becomes 
clear.  The apparent lack of cohesion within the electoral blocs- 
-especially the reformers and centrists--may make for shifting 
alliances, particularly in the early days of the legislative 
session.  In addition, the large number of independent 
legislators gives them the deciding edge and their positions will 
probably vary issue by issue. 
Example:  (AUTHOR:  HAHN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, RUSSIA ANALYSIS BRANCH, (703) 733-6070) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH  cka  05/1905z  jan 

