Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Ryabov under the rubric "NOVOYE VREMYA </F>
Investigation": "`Chemical War' Against an Invisible Enemy"] 
  [Text] Scientist-chemist Vladimir Uglev has 
threatened to make public the formula of a secret chemical 
weapon. Will he end up in jail like Vil Mirzayanov? 
  The fate of Vil Mirzayanov was decided not only in the room 
of the Moscow City Court. A familiar scenario of the 1930's: 
"The sun is shining in the sky, a nightingale chirps," while in 
the cell of the Sailors' Rest prison the intellectual face of a 
scientist-chemist rubs against the stubble of hardened criminals. 
  The court that issued the ruling sending Vil Mirzayanov to 
the Sailor's Rest investigative facility is considered 
independent. As Aleksandr Asnis, the attorney for the accused, 
said, neither public appeals, of which there were plenty 
throughout last year, nor the opinion of presidential advisers 
can influence it. 
  Vil Mirzayanov met with these advisers often. In the spring 
of 1993 he talked, for instance, to Viktor Ryurikov. The latter 
felt sorry for him, was perplexed, but could do nothing. 
  Aleksandr Asnis believes that the opinions of highly placed 
people can only influence the sentence. Only Russia's General 
Procurator Aleksey Kazannik can cancel the trial. If he finds 
proof of its illegality. 
  The entire world already is talking about the court's 
illegality. Only those who are trying to legitimize it remain 
silent and hide. 
<H5>  In Bed With a Criminal </H5>
  On Sunday 30 January only one problem tormented Nuriya 
Mirzayanova: How to get a parcel with personal items and food to 
her husband in prison. Sailor's Rest is famous not only for its 
horrible conditions, but also to get a parcel in one must spend 
many hours getting permission and wait equally long in line. 
Parcels are accepted only from members of the immediate family. 
Nuriya could not go to the prison--she had a serious case of flu 
which she caught from her six-year-old son. 
  During the arrest, Vil Mirzayanov did not take anything to 
prison with him except his regular clothes. And so he stood in 
the cell wearing a regular suit and shoes, unable to change or 
warm up. Yes--stood, since seven people were in the cell with 
four beds. They had to take turns to sleep. Vil Mirzayanov had 
not have a chance to lie down for 24 hours after he had been 
brought to this "four-bed suite." 
  The scientist was arrested at noon on 27 January. In the 
evening his attorney informed the press that his client was 
locked up in Sailor's Rest. At first Vil Mirzayanov was placed 
in a large cell with many criminals. Only later was he 
transferred to a smaller cell. 
  The putschists and organizers of the "red rebellion," who 
caused a massacre in Moscow, are "resting" in respectable 
Lefortovo--the triumph of democracy. While a scientist who told 
the world of secret violations of international agreements by 
the military ended up in the category of especially dangerous 
criminals. Only military orders are carried out with such zeal. 
  Attorney Aleksandr Asnis advised Vil Mirzayanov to petition 
the court to be released from prison on the pledge that he would 
unfailingly attend all court hearings. It was because of the 
scientist's failure to appear at the Moscow City Court that he 
was thrown into the harshest investigative facility as 
punishment. 
  Nuriya Mirzayanova was certain that her husband would hold 
on 
to the end. He never succumbed to the anticonstitutional court. 
From the very beginning Vil Mirzayanov said that the trial was a 
violation of the Constitution, since the latter prohibits the 
charging of citizens on the basis of unpublished legal acts. 
<H5>  A Rare Triumph for Sensible Arguments </H5>
  The Russian Federation Committee for Chemical and 
Petrochemical Industry--the official plaintiff--accuses Vil 
Mirzayanov of disclosing state secrets in an article and 
interview published at the end of 1992 in the MOSKOVSKIYE 
NOVOSTI and NOVOYE VREMYA weeklies. 
  The prosecution considered information about the secret 
development of a new chemical weapon in Russia a state secret. 
Vil Mirzayanov did not want to accept that violations of the 
international convention banning chemical warfare would remain a 
"state secret" in his country. 
  As is known, though, no such list of secrets exists, and the 
notion itself is very vague. According to Article 15, Point 3 of 
the Russian Constitution, these published materials cannot serve 
as grounds for initiating court proceedings against Vil 
Mirzayanov. So what is he "charged" with, and so energetically 
at that? 
  An episode that is characteristic of Mirzayanov's case 
occurred in his apartment on 25 January. That evening he was 
visited by two militiamen armed with Kalashnikov rifles. They 
asked the scientist to gather his belongings, referring to the 
order of the precinct officer. They were unable to take him with 
them, though. Nuriya Mirzayanova discovered that the summons to 
the court, which was the pretext for the visit, indicated the 
time as 1030 the next morning. 
  The more senior man at first threatened to use force, but 
was 
persuaded not to do so. He spent a long time arguing on the 
phone with the precinct chief--the latter insisted that the 
order be carried out... As they left, the servant of law and 
order who disobeyed his boss was almost apologizing to the 
apartment owners. When the militia left, Vil Mirzayanov went to 
stay overnight with his daughter. 
  This is how Vil Mirzayanov fought arbitrariness, hoping for 
common sense on the part of those who were carrying out the will 
of... Who? 
<H5>  A New Character </H5>
  On 15 January the government newspaper ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 
published an article signed by Igor Vlasov, member of the 
Committee on Convention-Related Problems of Chemical and 
Biological Weapons. Igor Vlasov dismissed the scientists' 
reports that chemical weapons were being developed in Russia. 
His statement was a good demonstration of the meaning of the 
word "dismissed," so categorical were Igor Vlasov's contentions. 
  The Committee on Convention-Related Problems was created by 
a 
directive of the president. It is headed by Anatoliy Kuntsevich, 
an academician and major general. Prior to this, Anatoliy 
Kuntsevich served as the commander of the chemical test site in 
Shikhany in Saratov Oblast where, as local public organizations 
maintain, chemical weapons are still being stored and tested. 
  Last year Boris Yeltsin issued a number of directives on 
procedures for carrying out the program of destruction of 
chemical weapons. In October, Anatoliy Kuntsevich and Colonel 
General Stanislav Petrov, chief of the radiation, chemical, and 
biological defense troops, visited Shikhany. Anatoliy Kuntsevich 
did not keep secret his opinion that there was no better place 
for such destruction than the Shikhany test site. 
  In December 1993 it was announced that Germany had given 
Saratov Oblast a gift of a mobile laboratory for monitoring the 
destruction of chemical weapons. 
  The incidence of eye cancer is higher in Shikhany than 
anywhere else. This indicates the strength of the effect of 
organic phosphorus accumulated there. 
  Incidences of various types of cancer are twice as high in 
this area than the all-Russia average. 
  Vladimir Uglev is a former senior researcher at an institute 
where chemical weapons were developed. The institute is located 
in Volsk, a few kilometers from Shikhany. NOVOYE VREMYA readers 
know this from an interview he gave at the beginning of 1993. 
Vladimir Uglev worked on the development and synthesis of 
chemical weapons for 15 years. He confirmed the allegations of 
Vil Mirzayanov and Lev Fedorov that Russia continues to work on 
the development of chemical weapons. 
  In February of last year the Saratov Oblast procuracy 
initiated criminal proceedings against him. For the same reason 
as the case against Vil Mirzayanov. At first, Vladimir Uglev was 
treated as a witness, but then investigator Nikolay Strilets 
decided that the chemist told too much to NOVOYE VREMYA. 
  By then the investigation in Mirzayanov's case had been 
completed and was ready to go to trial. Uglev was luckier: There 
had not been enough time to compile a dossier on him. 
  On 24 January of this year Vladimir Uglev warned that he 
would make public "formulae and names of toxic substances, the 
methods of their production and field applications" that Russia 
had not disclosed when it signed the Convention on Prohibition 
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling, and Use of Chemical 
Weapons and on Their Destruction. 
  Vladimir Uglev took this step in order to attract the 
president's attention to the situation in Shikhany. A new 
character had come on the scene in Moscow's "chemical war." 
<H5>  Instead, the Kerosene Was `Peddled' to Tractor Drivers </H5>
  In Vladimir Uglev's opinion, Igor Vlasov's assurances that 
"chemical conversion" is proceeding normally are a deception. 
"Before doing anything," says the member of the Committee on 
Convention-Related Problems, "we will make the public aware of 
the plans for destruction." Vladimir Uglev, however, maintains 
that the sites for chemical weapons destruction have already 
been selected. They are Shikhany and the Gornyy settlement. 
  "I am not against the destruction of toxic agents," said 
Vladimir Uglev during his meeting with the NOVOYE VREMYA 
correspondent. "But it should be done differently than is 
currently the case." 
  Vladimir Uglev is convinced that in Shikhany chemical waste 
is still being dumped into pits and chemical-weapon ammunition 
and is detonated without any measurements being performed. 
  "Three years ago they dumped a cistern of Yperite into a pit 
the same way. There was an order to burn it, but the soldiers 
decided to save kerosene. Such facts can only be proven by 
continuous monitoring. The military say that when measurements 
are done, instruments detect substances dating back quite a few 
years." 
  There are special sites for the destruction of regular 
munitions. In Shikhany, explosions are routine. As a specialist, 
Vladimir Uglev can see the actual the content of a charge: 
  "There is a thick cloud typical of toxic substances that 
floats after an explosion." 
<H5>  A-232 </H5>
  Vladimir Uglev promised to talk about the secret substance 
on 
4 February in the event his appeals to the president regarding 
the situation in Shikhany proved futile. He assured that he 
would only talk about a weapon he personally worked on, although 
he has knowledge of many secret substances. NOVOYE VREMYA was 
able to obtain brief information from Vladimir Uglev on the 
substance he worked on. 
  Specialists call it A-232. It was discovered about 20 years 
ago. Its effect is more powerful than that of the well-known VX 
nerve gas. Apparently, A-232 belongs to the class of paralyzing 
gases, since it is being compared to an agent of this class. 
  Had Vladimir Uglev revealed the A-232 formula, we would have 
learned about a hundred substances of this family. The most 
potent analogs were discovered immediately when the basic 
"skeleton" formula was invented. After that, scientists only did 
screening, trying various components to fit the basic structure. 
There are more than 10 ways of producing A-232. 
  It is easy for the military to shield A-232 from the 
convention's provisions. It consists only of combat toxic 
agents, but there is nothing to keep the Russian military from 
putting together such a classification that would make the part 
on "combat toxic agents" incomplete. 
  The command of the chemical defense troops has defined six 
types of "combat toxic agents": sarin, soman, VX, Yperite, 
lewisite, Yperite-lewisite mix, and CS. But the domestic 
classification also includes "special," "training," and 
"reserve" toxic agents. Many of them are studied as "weapons of 
foreign armies." Among them are, for instance, various toxins. 
  "Reserve" substances have special status. They are not 
classified as weapons, but may be used as such. One of 
them--phosgene--is used in the production of pesticides and dyes 
and is produced in large quantities in several Russian cities. 
In Dneprodzerzhinsk alone, 48.5 tonnes of phosgene are produced 
annually. 
  There is no guarantee that after the disclosures A-232 will 
not be classified as a "special," "training," or "reserve" toxic 
agent. 
<H5>  A Desperate Step </H5>
  On 29 January at 1100 Vladimir Uglev met with the 
president's 
national security adviser Yuriy Baturin. The keeper of the A-232 
secret was so satisfied with the conversation that he confessed 
immediately afterward that... he had not intended to make the 
secret formula public. 
  He forfeited this plan after Yuriy Baturin promised him he 
would do everything possible not only with respect to the 
Shikhany test site but also regarding Vil Mirzayanov, having 
informed him that the question of releasing the scientist from 
Sailor's Rest had been discussed "at the highest level." He 
expressed the hope that the latter would soon be leaving the 
preliminary detention facility. 
  As an afterthought, the "blackmailer" Vladimir Uglev told 
NOVOYE VREMYA a little later: 
  "I still reserve the right to name the formula if something 
happens to Vil Mirzayanov." 
  Mirzayanov himself does not share Vladimir Uglev's intent to 
threaten a disclosure of the secret substance's formula. Nuriya 
Mirzayanova also asked Vladimir Uglev to not connect his 
statement with her husband's trial under any circumstances. 
  In any case, the Moscow "chemical bomb" may not have 
exploded 
yet, but it is certainly already charged. It may explode in 
Vladimir Uglev's revelations, or in Sailor's Rest, or at the 
"highest level." Mind you, the destruction of already produced 
chemical weapons is a delicate and costly undertaking. 

