BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner by Juraj </F>
Handzo; place and date not given: "Peaceful Elections, Safe 
Streets"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Handzo] Organized crime has 
become a reality and is a very serious problem in Slovakia. How 
do you view the bill on investigation and punishment for 
engaging in various forms of organized crime, which was recently 
drafted by the prosecutor general? 
  [Pittner] I welcome the initiative of the prosecutor 
general. The fight against organized crime requires the 
utilization of adequate tools. The new bill would allow the 
police to use methods that have not been used in our country for 
several decades. I mean the protection of witnesses, for 
example, to avoid the danger of the Mafia exacting revenge. It 
seems to be necessary to establish a group of undercover agents 
to penetrate criminal organizations. This would not only secure 
their activity in the fight against organized crime but also 
protect them. Apart from these measures, which could be 
implemented after the law against organized law is passed, we 
would like to initiate additional changes in the legal system, 
which would help improve the quality of police activity. 
  [Handzo] What do you specifically have in mind? 
  [Pittner] We are facing the task of redrafting the Criminal 
Code and Law so as to make the police less burdened by 
bureaucracy and not obliged to document "trivial" cases as much 
as serious crimes. We must redraft the law because the Criminal 
Code and Law, which has undergone so many amendments, has become 
so muddled that it is very difficult for the police and other 
bodies to understand. 
  [Handzo] Economic crimes have become a serious problem, 
growing at an unprecedented pace.... 
  [Pittner] At the first regular meeting of the government, I 
provided information on economic crime. It has become obvious 
that, as a consequence of abusing the so-called old block on the 
clearing account between the Czech and the Slovak Republics, 
Slovakia incurred losses of more than 1 billion korunas [Sk]. 
Large transfers of finances to foreign countries through branch 
companies have gone on to a large extent and have caused damage 
to the Slovak Republic amounting to Sk1 billion. This is why we 
want to pay particular attention to economic crime. I expect 
that the passage of the law on the fight against organized crime 
will open more possibilities to us in that direction. 
  [Handzo] Many activities in Slovakia that have the character 
of organized crime are directly connected with the activity of 
foreign nationals, particularly from the countries of the former 
USSR and former Yugoslavia. Are you considering tightening up 
the conditions regulating the stay of foreigners on our 
territory or introducing measures that would make illegal 
immigration more difficult? 
  [Pittner] We have been watching the activity of foreign 
mafias on our territory for many years. They always penetrate 
here in waves. First, they usually establish a basis here that 
works legally, while creating room for the arrival of other 
people. They come here legally or illegally and are directly 
engaged in organized criminal activities. As a rule, they try 
to recruit our people, so that, if they are exposed, Slovak 
citizens are prosecuted and not the real organizers. 
  There is a widespread opinion among the public that 
introducing visa requirements would be the most efficient 
measure to counter the activity of foreign nationals. I 
believe, however, that such a measure is not needed at the 
moment. People who are committing said criminal acts would 
certainly find a way to circumvent the visa requirement. We are 
expecting a greater effect from the bill on the fight against 
organized crime, other laws, and the existing legal regulations, 
which allow us to adopt certain measures in cooperation with 
intelligence bodies. 

