BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "ZOL" and "J.K.K.": "Reward for Persistence; </F>
Economy After First Quarter"] 
  [Text] A decreased rate of inflation in the first 
quarter of this year, compared with the last months of 1993; a 
high increase in industrial output, compared with the same 
period last year; and an improved financial situation in 
enterprises--these are all signs that positive phenomena in the 
economy, which have been reported for several months now, are 
acquiring a permanent nature. At the same time, serious dangers 
are emerging that could constitute a barrier for further 
improvement of the economic situation in the nearest future. 
  Inflation was 1.8 percent in January of this year, 1.1 
percent in February, and 2 percent in March (in November and 
December of last year, prices increased by 4 and 5.6 percent, 
respectively). In this situation, reaching a yearly inflation 
rate of 23-26 percent, becomes realistic. 
  Output by industrial enterprises in the first quarter of 
this 
year increased by 10.6 percent compared with a year ago, and, 
when it comes to building-and-assembly enterprises, the increase 
was 7.3 percent. In the first two months of this year, the 
financial situation of enterprises was much better than last 
year. The net financial results of enterprises were positive and 
reached a figure of 4.5 trillion zlotys (0.3 trillion a year 
ago). Compared with the beginning of last year, the 
profitability of enterprises also increased. 
  "There is no doubt whatsoever that the improvement in the 
economic situation is a cumulated effect of the previous four 
years," said Waldemar Kuczynski, an economic expert for the 
Democratic Union. "It is a reward for persistence in the 
continuation of economic policies that have been subjected to 
total ridicule and criticism despite the fact that they were one 
of the best policies in postcommunist Europe. These growth 
trends have a chance of holding, provided the fundamental 
economic directions taht led to these results are maintained. 
That means a continuation of tight monetary policies, a 
reduction of the inflation level and the budget deficit, and the 
maintenance of a maximum scope of economic freedoms. 
  But there are still some dangers. One of them is undoubtedly 
the vacuum that exists with regard to controlling earnings in 
state-owned companies that enjoy the position of monopolists. 
This vacuum is the consequence of a very risky strategy by the 
government when it comes to popiwek [wage-control legislation]. 
Apart from that, measures justifying a fight with the `gray 
area' may become a major danger, under the assumption that the 
fight will not result in an imposition of restrictions on the 
freedom to conduct economic activities in Poland." [sentence as 
published] 
  According to Miroslaw Pietrewicz, chief of the Central 
Planning Administration, "the beneficial symptoms of a certain 
economic dynamism reported in the year's first quarter continue 
to be very weak. So one must approach them with great caution 
and concern. So one cannot talk about the economy in overly 
optimistic terms on the basis of these symptoms alone. Securing 
healthy demand and supply would be a condition for permanent 
growth. What is also necessary is the development of modern 
production processes because, in the final analysis, this would 
mean a chance to reduce the unemployment level and increase real 
earnings." 
  Tomasz Nalecz, a Sejm deputy for the Union of Labor, said 
that "the symptoms of a revival are so slight that it would be 
hard to speak of a growth trend in the economy. I would like it 
very much to really be the first sign of an economic revival. 
Right now, I think it would be disastrous if this were to be 
affected by the political conflict the country is witnessing, 
courtesy of the coalition and Lech Walesa. I think the conflict 
is gradually beginning to paralyze state structures, and this 
kind of situation surely does not help the Polish economy." 

