Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Carlos MacArthur: "PF Lacks Money for Monitoring </F>
Amazon Region"] 
  [Text] The Federal Police [PF] need $248 million with which 
to carry out protective actions and stimulate sustainable 
development in the Amazon Region. The program's objectives 
include combating conflicts with Indians, land conflicts, the 
drug traffic, smuggling, and illegal mining. Since repression of 
those crimes is the exclusive duty of the Federal Police, that 
force's leadership is seeking external funds. 
  The Amazon Region is currently a genuine open border, 
according to Superintendent Mauro Sposito, because the PF's 
activity in the region is totally impaired by the lack of a 
surveillance, inspection, and monitoring system. For that 
reason, the superintendent points out, agents are being trained 
to work with experts from the Ministry of Communications in 
operating mobile radio stations that can trace conversations 
taking place in the region's isolated locations between the 
Colombian and Bolivian drug cartels. 
  The Federal Police are aware that the Amazon Region is 
currently the gateway through which drugs enter Brazil. The fact 
is that since the U.S. invasion of Panama in 1990, Brazil has 
become the preferred route for traffickers who once used the 
"Caribbean route." The lack of suitable equipment puts the PF at 
a disadvantage, and seizures do not exceed 5 percent of the 
total volume moving through the country. Sposito points out that 
in a survey by Interpol, it is estimated that the drug 
traffickers have annual revenues of $500 billion just from the 
sale of cocaine all over the world. 
  Because of the high prices generated by cocaine, the product 
has created a real chain of crime all around it, the 
superintendent explains. It is money from drug trafficking that 
finances kidnappings, auto thefts, smuggling, and even bank 
holdups. On that subject, the Federal Police draw a parallel by 
emphasizing that when an operation to repress key points in the 
drug traffic is intensified, the response by the gangs is almost 
immediate in the form of an increased number of bank holdups. 
"All one need do is remember that case in Rio de Janeiro where a 
joint operation was mounted by the PF and the Army. News of 
those operations and two raids by the Army in one of the 
shantytowns harmed the drug traffic, and two banks were held up 
right after that." 
  Federal Police officials say that the PF now has a wealth of 
information and maps concerning the activity of drug traffickers 
in the Amazon Region and even of illegal gold mines and other 
mines. 
<H5>  Tracking Crime </H5>
  Mapping work has made it possible to identify operators of 
illegal mines who join with drug traffickers to invade Indian 
lands. Once the Indians are evicted, both sides profit from the 
mining of minerals and the construction of clandestine landing 
strips. Approximately 90 percent of the gold produced in Brazil 
is smuggled out. 
  Pro-Amazon Region: By implementing the project scheduled for 
the start of 1994, Federal Police hope to reduce those crime 
levels considerably. The project calls for opening 54 police 
stations in the region over the next four years, hiring new 
agents, and providing the units with suitable equipment, as well 
as cooperating with international scientific communities in the 
fields of chemistry, biochemistry, botany, and animal husbandry. 
Beginning in January, the Advanced Training, Study, and Research 
Center in Manaus will receive 160 agents for training. 
  To speed up and debureaucratize its activities, the PF is 
going to divide the Amazon Region into three sections. One of 
the operational centers--in Manaus--will cover the states of 
Amazonas and Roraima. The center in Belem will be responsible 
for the states of Amapa and Maranhao, and the third center, in 
Porto Velho, will take care of Acre, Mato Grosso, and Rondonia. 
The PF's operations will also involve Ibama [Brazilian Institute 
for the Environment], Funai [National Indian Foundation], and 
Incra [National Land Reform and Settlement Institute]. 

