BFN 

  [Text] A high-level DPRK delegation led by His Excellency 
[H.E.] Kang Song-san, premier of the Administrative Council, 
left Vientiane for home by special plane this morning after 
ending his four-day official, friendship visit to the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic [LPDR] with glorious success. A 
ceremony to bid farewell to H.E. Premier Kang Song-san and his 
delegation was held at the Government Guest Hall at Laksam in 
Vientiane at 0930. The ceremony was chaired by H.E. Prime 
Minister Khamtai Siphandon. Present at the ceremony were H.E. 
Khamphoui Keoboualapha, deputy prime minister and chairman of 
the Planning and Cooperation Committee; H.E. Somsavat Lengsavat, 
minister of foreign affairs; and ministers, deputy ministers, 
and many high-ranking cadres. Ponmek Dalaloi, Lao ambassador to 
the DPRK, also attended. 
  During the four-day visit to the LPDR, H.E. Premier of the 
DPRK Administrative Council and his delegation held talks with 
H.E. Prime Minister Khamtai Siphandon and our Lao delegation. 
In the talks, the two sides informed each other of the economic 
and cultural situation in their respective countries. They 
reached unanimity in assessing the comradely and fraternal 
relations and cooperation between the two countries in the past 
as well as under the new circumstances. The two countries 
pledged to improve increasingly the relations of mutual 
interests. In addition, the two sides signed an agreement on 
exchanges in the economic, cultural, technical, agricultural, 
and other fields. Signing the agreement for the Lao side was 
H.E. Khamphoui Keoboualapha, deputy prime minister and chairman 
of the Planning and Cooperation Committee, and signing for the 
Korean side was H.E. Yi Song-tae, chairman of the State External 
Economic Affairs Committee. 
  The high-level DPRK delegation also paid a courtesy call on 
H.E. Nouhak Phoumsavan, president of the LPDR, at the Hokham 
Presidential Office, and visited some production establishments 
in Vientiane Municipality and Vientiane Province. 
  At the farewell ceremony at the Government Guest Hall, H.E. 
Kang Song-san, premier of the DPRK Administrative Council, 
expressed thanks to H.E. Prime Minister Khamtai Siphandon and 
delegation for the warm welcome accorded him and his delegation 
in a friendly and comradely atmosphere filled with mutual 
understanding. 

