BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "r.r." report: "Progressive Forces Promote </F>
`Anti-Berlusconi Bill'"] 
  [Text] Rome -- It is called "Regulations on Conflicts of 
Interests," comprises a single article, and has been signed by 
more than half (41) the senators of the caucus so it can start 
to be examined within a month of its introduction to the 
committee stage. With this bill, the progressive forces brought 
into parliament the battle for observance of the principle of 
distinction between the vested interests of the owner of a 
company and the administration of public affairs. Several 
people have said that this principle has been violated or at 
least placed in jeopardy by the dual roles that Silvio 
Berlusconi adopted by becoming prime minister as well as owner 
of Fininvest. 
  The article of the bill (Pasquino's name is at the top of 
the 
list of signatories) states as follows: "A government post 
cannot be filled by someone who has a substantial share in 
either the ownership or the management of, or who in any case 
even indirectly controls, firms or companies that have reached, 
or are reaching, contracts with the state administration or with 
public agencies subject to state control, or who have received 
concessions or licenses from these same administrations or who 
acquire ownership of them." 
  This proposal does not proceed from any "punitive" 
intentions 
with respect to the government coalition, the report specifies, 
because if the government's action were to be approved, "it 
would be completely above the present justified suspicions." In 
his reply to Berlusconi [Democratic Party of the Left, PDS, 
Secretary] Achille Occhetto reaffirmed that he believes that 
this government "humiliates Italy because of the unfitness of 
the cabinet, the intrigues and maneuverings that accompanied its 
formation, and the violation of the promises made to the voters, 
as well as the stern warning issued by the president." "Our 
opposition," he continued, "will nevertheless be democratic and 
constitutional." 
  However, there are arguments on the Left about what to do in 
order to defeat the coalition led by Berlusconi in the future. 
Mayor of Venice Massimo Cacciari said in an interview with SETTE 
that he wants to "engage in politics more in earnest" and feels 
inclined to take up a possible challenge to become leader of the 
Left: "There are certain challenges that I cannot ignore. If I 
receive a challenge, I will rise to it." On the subject of the 
March elections, he said: "The defeat could very easily have 
been averted; a little expertise would have been enough." SETTE 
also recalled a remark made by Cacciari before the November 
elections, when he announced that he would withdraw from 
politics if he lost: "Failed leaders are failures." 
  After reading the press agency reports, which did not 
include 
this last remark, [PDS deputy] Fabio Mussi commented: "I 
consider it quite legitimate for him to put himself forward as a 
candidate for the PDS leadership, if not now, then perhaps `very 
soon.' If he does so, I assume he expects to receive somebody's 
votes, since only Berlusconi within Forza Italia is voteless. 
So, as an ordinary PDS member and deputy for Piombino, I will 
tell you now how I would vote: against. For the present I call 
for an end to this free-for- all, which is so debilitating for 
the PDS and the Left." There were further criticisms from 
Franco Bassanini (opposed to the idea of Luigi Spaventa as prime 
minister of a shadow cabinet) who advised Cacciari to 
concentrate on Venice, "and thus earn the qualifications on 
which to base other legitimate, but for the present untimely, 
aspirations." 

