Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Wuhan, March 5 (XINHUA) -- China has stepped up 
efforts to recycle used and waste materials so as to stem the 
worsening resources shortage and environmental pollution. 
  According to information from the Ministry of Internal 
Trade, 
a comprehensive waste-recycling system has taken shape across 
the country, generating considerable profit. 
  In certain departments, such as metallurgy and light 
industry, more than 70 percent of waste has been reused, say 
officials in charge of waste-recycling. 
  China, the most populated country in the world, is also a 
large waste producer. 
  It is estimated that each year, China discharges at least 
800 
million tons of industrial waste, ore tailings and garbage, most 
of which can be reclaimed. 
  Getting useful materials from waste has long been placed 
high 
on the government's agenda. 
  To date, some 4,700 large waste-recycling companies and over 
120,000 collection points spread across the country have been 
established, recovering annually 35 million tons of waste 
materials, saving up to 20 billion yuan (2.3 billion U.S. 
Dollars) a year. 
  The recycling rate has seen remarkable growth in big 
consumers of materials and energy. 
  In the country's major iron and steel companies in Beijing, 
Shanghai, Anshan and Tangshan, 90 percent of their effluents has 
been recycled. 
  The Chengdu Seamless Steel Tubing Mill in southwest China's 
Sichuan Province has recycled all its waste water, leaving 
virtually no harmful discharge. 
  Sixteen companies in the country have started to recycle 
coal 
gas and residues discharged from their boilers. 
  In addition, according to inspection of more than 130 firms 
in the trades of papermaking, consumer chemicals, sugar 
producing and so on, measures have been taken to reuse their 
waste. 
  The sugarcane chemical works in Jiangmen, Guangdong 
Province, 
has taken the lead in making paper from the residue of sugarcane 
while producing alcohol, yeast, aldehyde and fertilizer with 
waste generated during the process of papermaking. 
  Chinese scientists have also successfully recovered silver 
from used films. Techniques to recycle waste rubber and iron 
scrap have also been worked out. 

