Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] New Delhi has made it clear that Pakistan's 
withdrawal of its resolution in Geneva is unconditional, and 
there is no question of linking it with sending a fact-finding 
mission to Kashmir. The foreign secretary, Mr. Srinivasan, told 
a crowded press conference in New Delhi today that India sought 
an early vote on the resolution as it was confident that it will 
be defeated. While reaffirming India's readiness to continue 
dialogue with Pakistan, he said there is no scope for Iran or 
any other country to mediate on the issue. He said Pakistan has 
failed in its third attempt to raise the issue in the 
international fora. Mr. Srinivasan hoped that Islamabad will 
now embark on a more constructive path of a bilateral dialogue 
to settle the issue with India. 
  The Congress(I) has congratulated the government for 
effectively thwarting the attempts of Pakistan at the UN Human 
Rights Commission at Geneva to internationalize the Kashmir 
issue. In a press release issued in New Delhi today, the party 
spokesman, Mr. V.N. Gadgil, described the developments as a 
diplomatic success for India as Pakistan found itself totally 
isolated in the international community. He said the clear 
message to Pakistan from Geneva is that it must go back to the 
Sshimla pact. 
  The All India Minorities Front has hailed the diplomatic 
victory achieved by the government on Kashmir. In a statement in 
New Delhi, the Front president, Mr. S.M. Arif, said the outcome 
of the Geneva meeting proved that the so-called human rights 
violations in Kashmir are mere propaganda by Pakistan to defame 
India. 
  The Communist Party of India has expressed the hope that 
good 
sense will prevail on the Pakistan Government now that it has 
withdrawn its resolution at the UN Commission on Human Rights at 
Geneva. In a statement issued in New Delhi today, the National 
Executive of the party said that Pakistan should make an honest 
effort to solve it within the framework of the Shimla agreement. 
* 

