BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "A Fresh Start..."] </F>
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] "Time" is the only asset 
which, when correctly used, can regenerate other assets and can 
help mankind and society to grow and achieve material and 
spiritual well- being. But if man or society neglects to use 
this asset and does not give it the importance it deserves, not 
only will they waste "time" but all other assets too! 
  What most clearly characterizes the rapid and awesome 
developments of the past two centuries is the best and correct 
use of "time," so much so that in the last years of the 
twentieth century, fates are decided "in seconds" and it is by 
taking advantage of such seconds that rival countries try to 
defeat their enemies. Each second sees awesome progress in 
science and technology in the world today; and any country that 
is unable to adjust to this march of the seconds will fall 
behind in the process of historical evolution. Naturally if a 
country or a nation has been "backward" for the past two 
centuries, then it should accelerate its progress 100 fold in 
order to make up for lost time. [passage omitted] 
  Here it should be noted that some people regard the West and 
the speed of its developments with contempt and they condemn the 
Westerners for not being encumbered by ethics and consider them 
to be doomed. In this same context, they do not value as much 
as they should the "science and technology" that come from the 
West, even though in practice they enjoy the very fruits that 
this science and technology stemming from the West have yielded. 
And they even react negatively to science emanating from the 
West. As a result, they do not attach the necessary 
significance to society's scientific progress and they neglect 
the fundamental role that science plays in the material and 
moral progress of a society. Leaning on the fact that ideology 
and its moral and spiritual attractions are more correct, they 
try to justify the scientific and technical backwardness of a 
society and they consider the great extent to which our society 
depends on ethics as the reason for our society's superiority 
over the Western societies. But an equitable judgment is that 
if a society which leans on ethics and morals is unable to move 
side by side with the rest of the world and to use the science, 
technology, and experiences offered by this world, then it will 
not be long before all its moral and spiritual grounds too will 
be seriously harmed and it will surrender to the cultural 
onslaught of those who are more advanced in science and 
technology. 
  A righteous ideology is necessary in order to achieve 
happiness. But it is not sufficient. Mankind must strive to 
fulfill his ideology in all aspects by bearing in mind the 
present time and place. There is no doubt that science and 
technology are among the factors needed for success in today's 
world, and we can succeed only if we are good at these things. 
And this can be done only by multiplying our efforts to learn 
as much as we can. 
  Today we have a great responsibility, as time passes and the 
future approaches. The years that we are now living through are 
the most sensitive years in the history of our country. We 
should make up for lost opportunities and understand what time 
is worth. We should eschew striving for instant profits. We 
should forego mental idleness and the comforts of life. We 
should rise in gratitude for the blood that the best children of 
our country have shed so that Islam and our country can continue 
to exist, and show firm determination in our efforts for 
reconstruction. Let us not forget that in the first hours of 
the new year we went to pay homage to our martyrs and to vow to 
them that we will continue on their path. We should be faithful 
to this vow. Therefore, let us make "New Year's Day" a new day 
for the country and seize the opportunity for a "fresh start" in 
the history and life of our country. And as stated by the 
esteemed leader in his New Year message, let us make it our duty 
to become work-conscious and to display social discipline. So, 
let us advance toward the learning of science, work, 
production...[ellipsis as published] ethics and spirituality. 

