Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Azer Mursaliyev: "Bombs Dropped on Sarajevo </F>
Could Explode in the Kremlin"] 
  [Text] The NATO ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs expires on 
the night of 20-21 February. Unless the Serbian armed 
formations' siege of Sarajevo is lifted, NATO aircraft already 
assembled in the combat zone will deliver the first strikes 
against Serbian positions at 0100 on 21 February. 
  The paradox is that the Sarajevo events will affect Bosnia 
least of all. They will have repercussions far beyond the 
confines of the former Yugoslavia, like the shot that was fired 
in that same city 80 years ago, in fact. Air strikes on Bosnia 
are unlikely to lead to the swift establishment of peace or to a 
change in the military balance in the region. In fact, they are 
more likely to provoke a further escalation of the conflict and 
intensify the militarist mood in the Serbian community. 
  But irrespective of whether the bombing takes place or not, 
the ultimatum has already dealt a mighty blow to the authority 
of Yeltsin and the westernizing wing of the Russian 
establishment within the country. Bombs dropped in the vicinity 
of Sarajevo could well blow up the Kremlin. 
  In this connection it is curious that the chief opponent of 
Russian foreign policy at the moment, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, who 
probably stands to reap all the political benefits after 21 
February, is unexpectedly off to...Turkey on 18 February. At 
any rate, The Turkish Embassy in Moscow has issued him and 15 
members of his cohorts with visas. V. Zhirinovskiy intends to 
spend four days in the country, which figures strongly in his 
geopolitical designs. That is, V. Zhirinovskiy will be in the 
enemy's lair (Ankara is known to be a most consistent and active 
advocate of air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs' positions) 
when the ultimatum expires. 
  What is this: an attempt to gain more than the maximum 
number of points, or a tactical diversion to screen an imminent 
attack on Yeltsin? 

