BFN 

  [Text] In connection with the United States' decision to 
hold high-level talks with the DPRK, the Japanese Government 
intends to cautiously watch developments in the U.S.-DPRK talks 
for the time being. This Japanese stance is based on concerns 
that, following a possible solution of the nuclear issue between 
the United States and North Korea without Japan being consulted, 
the history of the operation of the DRPK's nuclear reactors will 
not be clarified and Japan will be asked to provide only 
economic aid to the DPRK. The government intends to seek close 
cooperation with both the United States and ROK in the future 
while trying to pave the way for resuming Japan-DPRK 
negotiations on normalizing diplomatic relations. 
  On the morning of 23 June, U.S. Secretary of State 
Christopher briefed Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa by phone on 
the U.S. decision to resume the high-level talks with the DPRK, 
before the U.S. Government's announcement of the decision. 
While Foreign Minister Kakizawa welcomed the U.S. decision, he 
made the following three requests: 1) that the "history" of the 
operation of the DPRK's nuclear facilities be thoroughly 
verified at the U.S.-DPRK talks; 2) that the United States give 
consideration to Japan's position of facing difficulties in 
assisting the DPRK's conversion of its nuclear facilities to 
light-water reactors; and 3) that the United States help Japan 
resume the Japan-DPRK negotiations on normalizing diplomatic 
relations. Secretary of State Christopher agreed to these 
requests. 
  The government's position is that "if the DPRK possesses 
nuclear weapons, if even only one, this will be a direct threat 
to Japan and that Japan cannot accept the situation," (as stated 
by a senior official at the Foreign Ministry). Meanwhile, the 
government is still doubtful as to whether United States is now 
shifting emphasis from the DPRK's "past" nuclear program to the 
prevention of "future" nuclear arms development. The government 
is eager to avoid a situation in which the nuclear issue nears a 
solution with Japan having no prospects for resuming Japan-DPRK 
negotiations, and as a result, Japan will be asked to provide 
only financial aid to the DPRK's efforts to develop its economy. 

