Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren] </F>
  [Text] Pro-Taiwan politicians in Hong Hong are joining 
forces with the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK) to form a 
new political party. The party calls itself the One Two Three 
Democratic Alliance and the founders say it will be dedicated to 
the unification of Chinese interests in the region. 
  A UDHK member, Sung King-fai, who is a preparatory committee 
member for the new party, explained its name. "One stands for 
one country, Two refers to both sides of the straits, and Three 
means tripartite communications (the mainland, Hong Kong and 
Taiwan)," Sung said. 
  The party will participate in the district board elections 
in 
autumn and municipal council and Legislative Council elections 
next year. It is scheduled to be launched on Sunday with about 
60 founding members. It is understood that more than 10 members 
of the United Democrats will join, since the UDHK allows 
crossparty membership. Most UDHK members are believed to have 
been educated in Taiwan. Several members of two other 
pro-democracy parties, Meeting Point and the Association for 
Democracy and People's Livelihood, are also expected to join the 
new party. 
  The preparatory committee chairman, Ren Shan-ning, was 
reported as saying the new party would be a strong advocate for 
democracy. It would be especially concerned about relations 
between Taiwan and the mainland and how to handle relations 
between Taiwan and Hong Kong after the 1997 handover. 
Pro-Taiwan political activities in Hong Kong are a sensitive 
issues in Beijing. 
  An official from the local office of the New China News 
Agency (Xinhua) warned that the organisation would be "illegal" 
if it was set up with the support and blessing of Taiwan's 
ruling party, the Kuomintang (KMT). He said the Hong Kong 
government had always pledged to prevent the KMT from engaging 
in any form of political activity in the territory. The 
managing director of Chung Hwa Travel Service, the KMT's 
representative office in Hong Kong, John Ni, denied there was 
any link between the KMT and the new party. 

