BFN 

  [Text] Following the conclusion of the Geneva negotiations 
today, Ejup Ganic, head of the Bosnia-Herzegovina delegation and 
vice president of the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, made the 
following statement for Bosnia-Herzegovina Radio and TV: 
  [Begin Ganic recording] The delegation acted in accordance 
with the Assembly guidelines. We fought in a diplomatic way for 
the principles laid down by the Assembly. A few days ago, 
Karadzic's troops withdrew from the 3-km zone around Gorazde -- 
these were soldiers, armed civilians, police, all his army in 
various shapes and forms. Having seen that this condition had 
been met, we began talks and a cease-fire agreement was reached 
which rules out any offensive operations for a one-month period. 
  I must say straight away that huge pressure was exerted on 
our delegation for days to sign a four-month cease-fire, or for 
an even longer period. However, we did not agree to free the 
Serbian side from the obligation to negotiate peace, while on 
the other hand we did not agree to sit and wait for winter. 
Huge pressure was exerted on us. We fought with arguments -- 
we only had foreign journalists on our side. 
  Every day we made public statements and we compared the 
situation: Our citizens know that several days ago Europe 
celebrated D-Day, when the allies landed in Normandy to have a 
showdown with Hitler, a showdown with fascism. I said that 
nowadays we, the unarmed Bosnians, are trying to have a showdown 
with a resurrected fascism. I called on the European public to 
unite as they united then against fascism. We cannot do that 
job unarmed. That virus of ethnic cleansing and genocide, which 
the international community has nurtured in Bosnia by ignoring 
the aggression of Serbian fascism, is now spreading throughout 
the world, causing real chaos. 
  In other words, a parallel was drawn between what happened 
during the Normandy landing and the final showdown with fascism, 
and these negotiations here. Many correspondents were in fact 
on our side, interpreting our stands, so an agreement on a 
four-week cease-fire was finally reached, as we proposed in the 
beginning. 
  A new stage in the negotiations -- a new kind of talks 
directed at reducing the military potential in Bosnia -- will be 
formulated soon. This primarily regards the removal of heavy 
weaponry, in the event the embargo on arms sales to Bosnia's 
Muslims is not lifted, then -- if the world believes that too 
many weapons cause too much war -- the formula less weapons, 
less war, should be applied, which means that the Serbian regime 
and its army should be disarmed. We shall be formulating a new 
[word indistinct] for such talks in a couple of days, and this 
has been agreed. [end recording] 

