BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Adriana Cortes] </F>
  [Text] Venezuela emerged as the sole exception to a 
Cartagena Agreement Board [JUNAC] report that adjustment 
programs applied by the five Andean countries over the past five 
years had positive macroeconomic results. In terms of the 
annual inflation index, Venezuela registered the highest price 
level and was the only country to maintain such a high index. 
Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador experienced a decrease in 
inflation. 
  According to the latest JUNAC figures, which were released 
prior to the commemoration of the 25th anniversary of the Andean 
Pact, Venezuela showed negative economic indicators last year, 
unlike the other four Andean countries. In 1991, the entire 
Andean Group registered an average inflation rate of 63 percent, 
with Peru and Ecuador showing the highest. At the end of 1993, 
the average rate was 33 percent, with Caracas showing the 
highest. 
  In 1993, Venezuela's inflation rate was 45.9 percent, 
followed by Lima with 39.5 percent, Quito with 34.8 percent, 
Santa Fe de Bogota with 23 percent, and La Paz with 8.5 percent. 
This situation represents a complete reversal from previous 
years. All the Andean countries except Venezuela showed 
decreasing inflation rates in 1992. 
  Venezuela's inflation rate eliminates one of the country's 
positive macroeconomic indices compared with the rest of the 
Andean Group, that is, per capita income. Given Venezuela's 
status as a petroleum producing country with a medium 
population, its per capita yearly income of $3,777 is the 
subregion's highest, followed by Colombia with $1,472. 
inflation negatively affects this indicator, however. 
  As for GNP, Venezuela is the only country in the subregion 
showing an economic decrease of one point against positive 
figures of seven points in Peru, 5.2 in Colombia, 3.2 in 
Bolivia, and 1.7 in Ecuador. 
  Regarding agricultural GNP, Venezuela is the only Andean 
country with a negative index of 5.9 percent, while Peru shows a 
positive 6.8 percent, Bolivia 5.4 percent, Colombia 2.7 percent, 
and Ecuador 1.3 percent. 
  Until 1993, Venezuela was the indisputable leader in net 
international reserves with $8.324 billion, followed by Colombia 
with $7.901 billion, Peru with $2.701 billion, Ecuador with 
$1.254 billion, and Bolivia with $371 million. That positive 
figure, however, will probably radically affect JUNAC's 
predictions because the financial crisis the country has been 
experiencing since January has greatly decreased international 
reserves. 
  Other aspects favorable to Venezuela are exports and the 
commercial balance, with the country registering the highest 
surplus in the subregion, $3.582 billion, as a result of its 
petroleum producing and exporting status. Only Ecuador, another 
oil country, shows a positive index of $439 million. Colombia 
shows a deficit in its commercial balance of $2.841 billion, 
Peru shows $626 million, and Bolivia $455 million. 
  According to a preliminary JUNAC economic analysis of the 
subregion in general, the Andean Pact member countries have 
grown at an average rate of 5.3 percent. This figure is higher 
than the Latin American average, which grew by more than 3 
percent, and even higher than that of developed countries, which 
grew at an average of 2 percent annually. 
  "By applying adjustment programs, the Andean Pact member 
countries have successfully controlled their inflation rates, 
which in the past few months have been close to 1.5 percent 
monthly, significantly lower than the 5.3 percent registered in 
1991. The member countries have solved foreign debt problems, 
restored foreign credit standing, and improved their social 
indicators," the document states. 
  The document also emphasizes the internal integration 
process. The establishment of a free trade zone in the past few 
years increased trade by more than 100 percent from 1989 to 
1993. In December 1993, trade amounted to $2.886 billion, a 30 
percent increase over the 1992 figure. 
  In addition, when the negotiations with Mexico conclude in 
the framework of the Group of Three, negotiations intended to 
include the other Andean countries, the potential market will be 
doubled, reaching 200 million consumers. The Andean countries 
will coordinate their positions at the Uruguay Round, 
particularly regarding the negotiation of goods and agricultural 
and institutional issues. 

