CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpts from article by RENMIN RIBAO reporters Xie Guoming </F>
[6200 0948 2494] and Liao Yu [1675 ?] and ZHONGGUO DIANLI BAO 
reporter Wang Yucai [3769 3768 2088]: "Lighting Up Southwest 
China--A Report from Ertan"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  I. The First Step in Opening the Hydropower Treasurehouse of </H5>
Southwest China 
  The developable and usable hydropower resources of Sichuan, 
Yunnan, and Guizhou provinces account for more than one-half of 
our national total, but the development and utilization rate at 
present is only 3.4 percent, less than one-half our national 
average. 
  These two "one-halves" have formed a powerful discrepancy: a 
hydropower resource kingdom has serious power shortages! 
Sichuan, called the "province of 1,000 rivers," has a power 
shortage that has resulted in over one-third of the province's 
production capacity lying idle, reducing the industrial value of 
output by more than 100 million yuan a day. It has no guaranteed 
supplies of electricity for residents' household use and 
nighttime lighting. 
  On the one hand, there is a serious power shortage, while on 
the other hand, hydropower resources are flowing away unused. 
  According to the present program, southwest China's Jinsha 
Jiang, Yalong Jiang, Dadu He, Lancang Jiang, Nu Jiang, and Wu 
Jiang have 29 large hydropower station sites with a developable 
installed generating capacity of more than 200MW, 31 extra-large 
hydropower station sites with more than 1,000MW, 14 enormous 
hydropower station sites with more than 3,000MW, and two 
gigantic hydropower station sites with more than 10,000MW. This 
is a total installed generating capacity of 161,500MW that could 
generate 807.14 billion kWh of electricity a year. 
  Construction of Ertan Hydropower Station is the first step 
in 
comprehensively opening up the hydropower resource treasurehouse 
of southwest China. Its design installed generating capacity is 
3,300MW with unit generator installed generating capacities of 
550MW and annual power output of 17 billion kWh. These three 
project indices all rank first in China's power stations now 
under construction and it is China's first huge hydropower 
station with an installed generating capacity greater than 
3,000MW. 
  The Ertan project has a huge scale, and it poses substantial 
technical challenges. 
  The power station will have a 240-meter-tall spillway-type 
dual-arch dam that can conserve concrete and reduce the amount 
of engineering. It is the first large dam in China taller than 
200 meters and the third tallest in the world among this type of 
dam. The maximum thickness of the dam is just 56 meters and its 
minimum thickness is 11 meters. Compared to the 5.8 billion 
cubic meters of water its reservoir will impound, this large dam 
is so thin as to resemble an eggshell. 
  Because of the deep mountain gorges, the plant building of 
the Ertan hydropower station will be entirely underground. The 
underground plant building will be 280 meters long and 64 meters 
tall, as tall as a 25-story building. Its scale will rank first 
among China's hydropower stations and it will rank fourth among 
the world's underground plant buildings in terms of its scale of 
installed generating capacity. 
  The 17.5-meter-wide and 23-meter-tall diversion tunnel 
excavated to ensure that the flow is impounded for the weir for 
the pouring of the dam is as high as an eight-story building and 
is the world's biggest diversion tunnel. During an inspection, 
General Secretary Jiang Zemin called this diversion tunnel a 
"tunnel to win credit." 
  Ertan hydropower station is now creating several hydropower 
engineering "mosts" in China and in the world and it is a 
project of milestone significance in the history of hydropower 
construction in China. 
<H5>  II. The Hope and Tribute of Generations of People </H5>
  The powerful electric energy from Ertan must penetrate the 
large and small frozen mountains at high elevations before it 
can be transmitted to the industrial center at Chengdu. To 
select a safe, reliable, and convenient power transmission line, 
19 scientific research personnel and employees in the Southwest 
China Electric Power Design Academy led by senior engineers 
Zhang Zhineng [1728 1807 5174] and Li Baqun [2621 6405 5028] 
arrived at Huangyageng mountain pass at an elevation of 2,840 
meters in Sichuan Province's Leibo County where they built a 
23-meter-tall tower and installed the conducting lines to 
observe the ice and snow freezing conditions on the conducting 
lines at different heights. They also built nine ice observation 
points along the 200 kilometer course. Each year in late 
November before the ice and snow sealed off the mountains, they 
climbed these, the world's highest man-made ice observation 
stations, and began their work, staying until the last part of 
March when the ice and snow began melting before coming down 
from the mountains. To date, this scientific research staff has 
spent 11 spring seasons in their simple home on the icy and 
snow-covered mountain and obtained a series of observational 
data that no one before them had obtained. 
  [passage omitted] 
<H5>  III. A New Attempt To Accelerate Development of Hydropower </H5>
Resources 
  Developing and building hydropower stations on the lower 
reaches of the Yalong Jiang can provide extremely large amounts 
of electric energy and only requires that a small amount of land 
be flooded for the reservoir. The amount of land flooded per kW 
is just one-twelfth the average amount for the hydropower 
stations under construction in China as a whole. It also 
requires a small amount of engineering, with only one-half as 
much concrete being poured per kW as the average amount in the 
large hydropower stations now under construction in China. Added 
to the fact that this hydropower station is located near a large 
industrial center and is itself in the middle of the Pan-Xi 
(Panzhihua-Xichang) Development Zone, its development conditions 
are superior. 
  Why have these hydropower resources with such superior 
conditions not been developed and utilized for such a long time? 
The answer is simple: no money! 
  Since reform and opening up, a new opportunity has been 
created for developing southwest China's hydropower resources. 
  The World Bank saw the major social and economic benefits 
that would be derived from construction of the Ertan hydropower 
station and made an exceptional decision to loan $766 million. 
This is the biggest loan allocated for a single project since 
the World Bank was established. 
  Leading comrades in the State Council decided to use Ertan 
as 
a breakthrough point in taking a new route in development and 
utilization of hydropower resources. For this reason, the State 
Planning Commission gave special approval for the establishment 
of the independent planning Ertan Hydropower Development Company 
to serve as the proprietor for the Ertan hydropower station and 
assume full responsibility for rolling development of Ertan and 
the Yalong Jiang's hydropower resources. 
  The Ertan model of having the responsibility of a 
proprietor, 
raising capital from many areas, soliciting bids for the 
project, supervising and managing the project, and implementing 
rolling development of the river basin's hydropower resources is 
now gradually revealing its advantages. 
  As the proprietor, Ertan Hydropower Development Company must 
be responsible for raising the capital and for operating, 
managing, and repaying the principal and interest for the power 
station. Thus, during project construction it must make careful 
calculations and try to conserve. In the diversion tunnel 
project alone it has conserved over 30 million yuan in 
expenditures. 
  Because the entire project is assigned to a project 
supervision and management unit outside the proprietor and 
businesses with contractual responsibility, involving 
supervision and management by the Ertan Project Consulting 
Company, the Ertan Hydropower Development Company with just 
100-plus people can also be involved in feasibility research and 
even initial preparations for other hydropower projects on the 
Yalong Jiang. Preparatory work has now been completed for 
Tongzilin Hydropower Station located more than 20 kilometers 
downstream from Ertan which will have an installed generating 
capacity of 400MW and the conditions are now ready for a formal 
start of construction. After the phased project at the Ertan 
hydropower station is completed, its machinery, equipment, and 
personnel can be transferred locally to build the Tongzilin 
hydropower station. The amount of time for initial preparations 
for it were shortened by more than two-thirds compared to 
conventional cases. 
  After Ertan Hydropower Station is fully completed in 2000, 
its annual income of more than 2 billion yuan from electricity 
sales will provide adequate financial support for rolling 
development of the Yalong Jiang's hydropower resources. Within 
30 years, the Ertan Hydropower Development Company will complete 
five huge cascade hydropower stations with a total installed 
generating capacity of 11,100MW on the lower reaches of the 
Yalong Jiang whose annual power output could reach 68.9 billion 
kWh. It will be able to pay the State several 10 billion yuan in 
profits and taxes and accumulate over 100 billion yuan in 
property for itself. 
  The debate over whether construction of large hydropower 
stations means losses that outweigh the gains of high efficiency 
and low consumption has continued for more than 30 years. The 
successful development of Ertan will put an end to this debate. 
<H5>  IV. Chinese People Must Do Chinese Things Well </H5>
  Ertan has imported a huge foreign investment and will 
implement comprehensive international solicitation of bids as 
required by the World Bank. 
  The result of the bidding is that huge hydropower 
engineering 
businesses in foreign countries have fought over the contractual 
rights for construction of the entire Ertan project. However, 
the foreign businesses with contractual responsibility have only 
sent some project management personnel and technical experts, so 
the primary force in its construction will still be us, the 
Chinese. 
  The foreign businesses with contractual responsibility will 
use their enormous financial strengths and experience in 
building huge hydropower projects, so once they begin they 
basically will not see our hydropower construction staff. 
  Employees of China's Eighth Hydropower Bureau do not believe 
this. They have boldly stood up and proposed that they be given 
independent contractual responsibility for one of the projects 
to display our strengths! 
  The foreign businesses with contractual responsibility have 
seized the opportunity to get rid of a difficult task--the 
project to excavate the slope for the shoulder of the dam on the 
right bank. The inclination of this slope is 40 to 50 degrees 
and even wild mountain goats would have considerable difficulty 
in climbing it. Its construction will be very difficult, as one 
can imagine. 
  The Eighth Hydropower Bureau has accepted the challenge. 
They 
have organized the employees at Ertan that were dismissed by the 
foreign businesses and established a right bank construction 
team. Based on observation and analysis of more than a year of 
cooperation, the construction team has effectively integrated 
the project method construction management model of the foreign 
businesses with their traditional ideological and political work 
advantages and technical intentions to create a construction 
management arrangement with Chinese characteristics. 
  Focusing on the qualities of the employees, the Eighth 
Bureau 
has clearly pointed out that Ertan is a key State project for 
which the State has raised the construction capital. We are not 
working for foreigners but are instead contributing our youth 
and our skills for our own motherland, which has motivated the 
sense of having the responsibility of masters and the initiative 
of the employees. The construction team has brought in 
competitive mechanisms and abandoned mechanisms, and the 
construction team director has the complete authority required 
to manage the construction from transferring machinery to 
rewarding and punishing personnel, which has in turn increased 
work efficiency. What has astonished the foreign management 
personnel is that not only did the Eighth Bureau's right bank 
construction team complete its tasks on schedule, it also 
created the best benefits at Ertan of a per capita annual value 
of output of 110,000 yuan, which is 3.3 times the per capita 
average annual value of output in the Eighth Bureau as a whole. 
Even more important is that the right bank construction team 
eliminated the atmosphere of contention between management 
personnel and employees at the construction site and created a 
harmonious construction environment that stimulated the 
initiative and creativity of the construction personnel. 
  The facts have convinced the foreign businesses with 
contractual responsibility. 
  One of the businesses with contractual responsibility for 
the 
Ertan project, Italy's (Impregilo) Company asked the proprietor, 
Ertan Hydropower Development Company, and even the Ministry of 
Electric Power Industry to employ the Eighth Hydropower Bureau's 
construction staff at the construction site. The (Impregilo) 
Company's deputy chief arbiter (Tuomei) even announced that in 
the management levels of the Ertan joint venture, he wanted to 
"use Chinese to replace foreigners." In the end, they still rely 
on Chinese to do Chinese things. 
  We can import foreign investments and imported advanced 
management models and technical equipment, but we cannot import 
modernization. 
  We must still rely on ourselves to develop China's 
hydropower 
resources and light up the southwest. 

