BFN 

<F P=106> [Place-names as published in Kurdish; OZGUR ULKE provides </F>
some Turkish equivalents in parentheses] 
  [Text] Diyarbakir -- State terrorism knows no bounds. 
State forces, on the pretext of cutting off logistics support 
to guerrillas, are evacuating villages, torching and pulling 
down houses, imposing food blockades on villages lasting months, 
and burning forests. And now they are torching crops. This 
operation aims to force the people, who face hunger, to 
emigrate. And it has intensified in the past week. Thirty 
villages in the Kulp-Hazro-Silvan triangle, some of which were 
torched before, were torched again in the past four days. Along 
with the villages, cultivated fields, orchards, and vegetable 
gardens are reportedly also being torched, and damage amounting 
to billions of Turkish lira is being caused, preventing 
villagers from returning. 
<H5>  The Kulp-Hazro-Silvan Triangle Is in Flames </H5>
  Thirty villages in the Kulp-Hazro-Silvan triangle in 
Diyarbakir have been in flames for the past four days. A few 
houses left standing after the last torching and villages 
evacuated by the state forces are also being torched. And crops 
are being torched to prevent the villagers from returning. As 
part of the crop-torching operation, nearly 2,000 donums [one 
donum equals 940 sq. meters or one-fourth of an acre] of fields 
were torched by the state forces in villages in Kulp District. 
  The villages of Temira, Goderne, Cews, Barin, Hedika, 
Savusa, 
Male Hake, Male Repin, and Male Cagle in Kulp District, 
inhabited by the Hevedan clan, were torched and all the 
cultivated fields destroyed. 
  The few houses and crops remaining in the villages of 
Uckuyu, 
Inkaya, Araska, Kanika, Giresor, and Kerka in Kulp District 
after the last torching were again torched to prevent the return 
of villagers. All the cultivated fields belonging to these 
villages were torched. 
  Nercik (Karabulak), Hinze, Grindis, Kocika (partially), 
Beyrok (Kuruagac), Hacuka, Delim, Hasanardik, Kegilbank, 
Zevgesor, Panak, Dikdir, Gomanek (Comlekci) hamlet of Dimilya 
(Baloglu), Fikre hamlet of Cumar (Uzunova), and Arketin have 
reportedly been torched. Woodland on the Serefka, Giresor, Pora, 
and Pirebi Mountains, between Kulp's Eylul Mountain and the 
gendarmerie station in Duzce, was also torched by the soldiers. 
<H5>  The Villages Have Been Placed Under Blockade </H5>
  The villages of Temira, Goderne, Cews, Barin, Hedika, 
Savusa, 
Male Hake, Male Rapin, Male Cagle, Uckuyu, Inkaya, Araska, 
Kanika, Giresor, Kerka, Mercik (Karabulak), Hinze, Girindis, 
Kocika, Beyrok (Kuruagac), Hacuka, Delim, Hasanardik, Kegilbank, 
Zevgesor, Panak, Dikdir, Dimilya (Baloglu) and its hamlet 
Gomanek (Comlekci), Cumar (Uzunova) and its hamlet Fikre, and 
Arketin located in the Kulp-Hazro-Silvan triangle have been 
placed under military blockade. Entrance and exit to these 
villages has been banned. 
<H5>  The Villagers Are Being Detained </H5>
  Many of the villagers whose houses and crops were torched by 
the state forces have been placed under detention. With the 
military blockade of the villages since Wednesday [15 June], no 
information on the detainees is available. Local sources say 
many villagers were detained. 
<H5>  Fields, Pastures, and Forests Were Torched in Hazro </H5>
  The state forces that raided the villages in Hazro District 
and torched houses also burned the villagers' fields to prevent 
them from returning. Since the start of the week, 8,000 donums 
of cultivated land, pasture, and forest have been torched in the 
villages of Hazro District. While pastures and vineyards near 
the town of Hazro were torched, the trees around the old police 
post in Hazro were cut down for security purposes. 
  The gendarmeries attached to Hazro Gendarmerie Command have 
been torching the cultivated fields of Bazmar (Bayirduzu), 
Cirnoki, Grie, Salate, and Pahnaz (Agirti) in Hazro District 
since 13 June. Villagers said the soldiers torched nearly 8,000 
donums of cultivated fields, causing damage amounting to 30 
billion Turkish lira. 
  The residents of the district said the vineyard near the 
newly built gendarmerie post outside Hazro and vineyards and 
pastures in Sinora Region were torched by soldiers for security 
reasons and that the woodland in Diburi Region in the 
mountainous part of Hazro was also torched. 
  Indicating that poplar and walnut trees around the old 
police 
station in Hazro were cut down by the gendarmerie, residents 
said they were under pressure to cut down the trees around the 
cemetery and added: "The soldiers demanded that we cut down the 
trees between the cemetery and the river. We did not accept 
this. The soldiers are responsible for the fires in the fields, 
pastures, and orchards in recent days. Some villages are empty 
but the crops in the fields are still being torched to prevent 
the villagers from returning to their homes. The soldiers were 
also responsible for torching the woodland near the town some 
days ago." 
  Village guards and soldiers torched the crops of villagers 
in 
Herbelus (Beybagi) in Batman's Kozluk District after they 
refused to serve as village guards. Soldiers and guards from 
the same village raided the village on 16 June and torched 
nearly 50 donums of lentil and wheat fields belonging to 
villagers who refused to serve as village guards. Some 25 
donums belonged to Sakir Adli. The lentils and wheat were 
reportedly ruined. Many villagers, whose crops were burned 
because they refused to serve as village guards, have reportedly 
started to leave the village. Over half of Herbelus' 50 
householders are refusing to serve as village guards. 
<H5>  Suspicious Fire in Diyarbakir </H5>
  Fire flared on 18,000 donums of barley and wheat fields 
belonging to Abdullah Ileri, a resident of Cebbar in Diyarbakir 
District, on 16 June. The fire, which started at 0900, spread 
quickly over a wide area. Despite villagers' efforts to put it 
out, the fire raged and was not put out until the evening. 
Firefighters arrived three hours after the fire started. The 
fire reportedly caused billions of lira of material damage and 
destroyed Abdullah Ileri's 18,000 donums of cultivated land. 
  Saying that six major fires raged in fields between 
Diyarbakir-Ergani and Diyarbakir-Siverek in the past week, 
destroying nearly 75,000 domuns of land, the villagers said it 
was no coincidence; the fires were set intentionally. 

