BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC President Nelson Mandela at the ANC </F>
media center in Johannesburg by SABC correspondents Lester 
Venter and Safako Nyako and REUTER correspondent (Rodney Pinda) 
-- live] 
  [Text] [Venter] Well, good morning from downtown 
Johannesburg. The election, of course, is still on in several 
parts of the country, but there is a mood abroad that South 
Africa's historic moment is nearly completed. We are here, of 
course, as you've just been told, talking now to the leader of 
the African National Congress, Mr. Nelson Mandela. Good 
morning, Mr. Mandela. Thank you for joining us. I am joined, of 
course, by SABC colleague Safako Nyako and (Rodney Pinda) of 
REUTER INTERNATIONAL NEWS AGENCY. Safako? 
  [Nyako] Good morning, Mr. Mandela. 
  [Mandela] Good morning. 
  [Nyako] Now that you are at the tail end of the elections, 
can you just tell us what are your impressions about the 
elections? 
  [Mandela] Well, my impressions are mixed. One of joy that 
our struggle, our dreams, are about to be realized. The dream 
of building a greater South Africa, in which South Africans of 
all racial groups can work together to promote a spirit of 
reconciliation and of nation-building. Sadness that some of the 
men and women who have made this day possible are no longer with 
us. I wish, as I have said before, I could arouse them and get 
them to rise from their graves to join us on this occasion. It 
is a momentous occasion, and I approach it with a feeling of 
satisfaction, of hope, of strength, because an opportunity has 
now been provided for all South Africans to roll up their 
sleeves, to take responsibility, and to ensure that this great 
country becomes really great. And I have no doubt that if we 
work together we will be able to build a very great country 
indeed. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela, you talk about the realization of the 
dream, and if I may, I'd like to narrow it down to one specific 
moment. Now, yesterday most of South Africa saw Archbishop 
Desmond Tutu casting his vote, and very solemnly he put his 
ballot into the ballot box, and once he had done so he was 
unable to restrain himself from bursting into a jig, dancing a 
jig of joy. Now perhaps people would have been surprised to see 
you do the same. However, it must have been an extraordinary 
moment for you, and people could only have imagined the thoughts 
and the emotions that must have been alive in you at that very 
moment. Would you tell us something about your feelings at that 
moment? 
  [Mandela] Well, as I say, they were mixed feelings. They 
were feelings of joy, of happiness, a sense of accomplishment. 
We have fought throughout for a South Africa where the merit of 
a person is the determining factor. I think that by casting 
this vote we were laying down the foundation for this spirit, as 
I say again, of working for reconciliation, healing the wounds 
of the past, giving security to all South Africans that they 
have nothing to fear from a government of national unity, which 
is a guarantee that we will be working for the interests of all 
South Africans, not just the majority, and it was a momentous 
occasion, and perhaps my feelings are beyond words. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela if I may just follow up on that issue 
of reconciliation. You know you chose as a title for the 
description of the part of your life up until now no easy walk 
to freedom. Looking at reconciliation, do you think that the 
next chapter might be entitled no easy walk to reconciliation? 
  [Mandela] Well, I do not think so. Every human being wants 
peace, wants security for himself, for his family, for his 
grandchildren. People love peace, and I believe that those who 
fear democracy in this country, who would like to derail the 
constructive purpose which many South Africans have made, are in 
a tiny minority. I don't think it's going go be so difficult to 
promote the spirit of reconciliation. 
  We, for example, have already said that those members of the 
security forces who committed political and related offenses 
before the 8th of October are entitled to indemnity, just as the 
freedom fighters who fought against apartheid were given an 
indemnity. The only issue which we have emphasized is that the 
freedom fighters were asked to disclose what offenses they have 
committed, we would like also the defenders of apartheid to 
disclose what offenses they have committed. Not because we want 
to punish them for those offenses, but because the indemnity is 
going to [word indistinct] on an individual basis. We are doing 
this because we are keen that the South African Police, the 
South African Defense Force, must be part of this 
transformation. Without their cooperation it will be difficult 
for us to get that stability whereby we can promote the spirit 
of reconciliation and nation-building. 
  [(Pinda)] Mr. Mandela, if we could look ahead now to the 
next 
steps, the world is watching South Africa's election and 
millions of black South Africans who have never before voted, 
are eagerly awaiting the result, and we must look, I think, at 
the validity of that result. You had some harsh words 
yesterday. You talked of sabotage of the process. Can you 
perhaps explain a little bit more about that, and whether you 
think that indeed the result will be valid, will be legitimate, 
whether we have had a free and fair election? 
  [Mandela] Well, firstly it must be clear that when I spoke 
about a massive sabotage, I was not at all referring to the 
Independent Elections Commission. That commission is composed 
of men and women of the highest integrity. Almost all of them 
are known to me personally, and I worked with them in other 
capacities, and I am convinced about their impartiality, their 
integrity in this exercise. But way down there something wrong 
has happened. You will have noticed that in white areas, 
Indian, and colored, there was no problem about ballot papers 
arriving in time, no problem about the elections taking place 
smoothly. It is only in African areas, especially areas which 
are the strongholds of the ANC that these problems have arisen. 
  I spoke yesterday to General Holomisa. He said to me that 
they were allocated 2 million ballot papers, they only received 
yesterday only 250.000. He said they had been promised that 
more ballot papers would come at 1 o'clock yesterday. They were 
told later that they will come at 6 o'clock. 
  We are having the same thing in the northern Transvaal. 
Later during the day we were told that these ballot papers had 
arrived in Pietersburg and in Thohoyandou. But in a big area 
like that, country areas where there are no communications, the 
arrival of ballot papers in Pietersburg means nothing, it's just 
the start of the process. The crunch is going to lie in 
distributing those ballot papers, it may take a day, and even 
two days before they reach some of these polling stations. So 
there is this unaccountable discrepancy between white, Indian, 
and colored areas and African areas. 
  Nevertheless, in spite of that, I think that this is a 
problem which is being addressed. I'm meeting Mr. de Klerk 
today at 2 o'clock to address these questions. The will is 
there to address these irregularities, and I think that is more 
important that concentrating on the mistakes that have been 
made. And I'm, therefore, confident that we'll be able to 
pronounce this elections has having being free and fair. 
  [Nyako] Mr. Mandela, I'd like to take you back a little. 
You spoke here about the willingness for reconciliation and 
prospects of a bright future, but only yesterday the right wing 
said it is declaring war; as from next week, everybody in the 
country must know that there is a war. What are your comments 
to the comments by the AWB [Afrikaner Resistance Movement]? 
  [Mandela] Well, we can't stop people from making any 
statement which pleases them. I don't think the AWB is in a 
position to conduct any war. The ease with which the police 
have made a breakthrough, arresting everyone of these bombers, I 
think already we have defused the situation in a matter of 
hours, and I don't regard the threats by the AWB as something we 
should worry about. We are building the country. We are 
promoting this spirit of national reconciliation. 
  Our slogan is -- and I have carried this to almost every 
meeting I've addressed -- let the past be the past, let bygones 
be bygones, let us promote this spirit of reconciliation, let 
every South African, irrespective of his color, know that this 
is his country, and be involved in the process of transformation. 
  I regard it as significant that a person like General 
Constand Viljoen should have made a statement more than once to 
say they have found more sincerity and made greater progress 
with the ANC than with the National Party. He is doing that 
because of the correctness of our policy. The impact it is 
making in the country -- and in saying so, I do not minimize the 
role that has been played by other political organizations 
generally, and the NP in particular -- what was originally the 
initiative of a particular organization, the result is that it 
is a collective one, that all of us have contributed to this 
outstanding breakthrough that we have achieved in this country. 
That is what is important, not the threats by the AWB. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela, you speak about the 31 arrests and 
that, of course, is an illustration of what is being done to 
deal with and tackle that particular problem that Safako raises 
right now. You also say that the belligerent statements are 
something that shouldn't necessarily be worried about. However, 
it is a matter that does worry South Africans -- what is the 
prospect, what lies down the road? Now, if you look down the 
road, particularly from the perspective that there's at least an 
excellent chance that you will be in the president's office in a 
matter of days, how do you weight this up, and when you look 
down the road, what do you see as the future of this problem of 
white resistance? 
  [Mandela] We must remember that the NP was once in exactly 
the same position today as the right wing, as the AWB. They 
used everything in their power to destroy the liberation 
movement. They shot and killed freedom fighters, right from 
1960. Before we ever thought of the conflict between Inkatha 
Freedom Party and the ANC, freedom fighters died in the hands of 
the South African Police. But through discussions we have been 
able to move the NP from that position to a position where now 
they are our friends, and with whom we are trying to promote the 
spirit of national reconciliation, and to build a greater 
country. 
  It is partly as a result of the discussions which we've had 
with the Afrikaner Volksfront [National Front] -- Gen. Constand 
Viljoen, Ferdi Hartzenberg, Dries Bruwer -- that Gen. Constand 
Viljoen has joined this process. We are going to continue with 
that process. I have had discussions with Ferdi Hartzenberg, 
formal and informal, on a one-on-one basis. I propose to 
continue with that. 
  Let me indicate to you that there is not a single 
organization, not a single opinion-maker, as an organization 
among the Afrikaners, that I have not seen. I have seen a wide 
range of such organizations -- the generals, all the generals 
that are responsible for policy in the South African Police, the 
full general staff of the SADF. I have seen twice the full 
leadership of the Dutch Reformed Church. I have seen the 
leadership of the Broederbond [secret Afrikaner brotherhood], 
the Vryheidstigting [Freedom Foundation] of Professor Carel 
Boshoff. I have traveled all the way to Bothaville to see the 
National Maize Producers' Organization, and all the various 
agricultural unions in this country. I have done so because it 
is absolutely necessary for us to speak with one voice on all 
the major national questions in this country, and we're 
succeeding. 
  The AWB has become a small, isolated organization, even 
among 
the Afrikaners. They are not in a position to carry out any 
threats. It can never be more than a simple police act, in which 
the government is not even involved. That is the extent to 
which we have neutralized that fringe of people who think 
through their blood instead of thinking through their brains. I 
think that we have succeeded in isolating them. I don't think 
it's an issue over which to worry, and if they are ready to 
speak to me, I will sit down and discuss with them. I have 
already had discussions with some of them, and those discussions 
have been fairly interesting and fruitful. If their leader 
wants to sit down and discuss with me, I'm available. I will 
discuss with him. But I think that the police will be quite 
sufficient in dealing with them. We don't even need the SADF to 
deal with the AWB. 
  [(Pinda)] Mr. Mandela, probably more important than even 
the problem of the white minority in that respect is the 
relationship, obviously, between the African National Congress 
and the Inkatha Freedom Party and the followers on the ground 
and the trouble that has arisen from that. Can you give us some 
idea how you will address that issue. Will the view, as 
everybody seems to expect from Pretoria, give you a fresh 
perspective or any fresh thinking on that issue? 
  [Mandela] Well, you will have noticed that there has been 
ongoing discussions between the African National Congress and 
the Inkatha Freedom Party. We proposed to continue with 
dialogue with everybody including the Inkatha Freedom Party. We 
proposed to continue that even after a government of national 
unity has been established. Dialogue is the most important 
weapon, and it is because we have used that weapon that we have 
made this progress. 
  You must remember that at one time we had no less than 26 
political parties pulling in different directions. Nevertheless 
we have made breakthroughs. We have established a Transitional 
Executive Council, we have adopted a nonracial constitution 
which however flawed because of the compromises which we had to 
make to accommodate the views of different political parties. 
It is flawed but nevertheless it reflects the hopes and 
aspirations of all South Africans. 
  Then we had today, a day of liberation, that was what is 
important, and we have made enormous progress, and I don't think 
we are going to have any difficulties in entrenching this spirit 
of reconciliation and nation-building in which all South 
Africans are working together. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela, if I can just follow up on that 
because 
the election has been remarkable for many things, but this [word 
indistinct] is sort of a subsidiary miracle -- namely, that 
there is, contrary to all expectations, an almost total absence 
of violence. 
  I was sitting on the news desk for the last two days and 
being inundated with reports saying there is no news, there's no 
violence here, the minor incidents of intimidation, reports 
saying that farmers are involved in right-wing activities, for 
example in the town of Viljoenskroon, assisting their workers to 
come to the polls to vote, ANC and IFP supporter standing in the 
same queues in East Rand townships. Now South Africans are 
almost all afraid to ask the question, is this the seed of that 
reconciliation, a permanent plant of that reconciliation that 
you're talking of? 
  [Mandela] I think the message has gone across, of 
reconciliation. Men and women in every country, they want 
peace, they want security, they want economic and political 
stability, they want to predict what is going to happen in the 
future. Unless you have peace, it is impossible for us to carry 
out our best programs of action, and I think the spirit has gone 
across, of reconciliation. That message has been corroding the 
support of those who fear democracy, who wanted to block this 
process. Some of them have come in because they realize that if 
they continue to stand out, they will be written out of history. 
  That message of reconciliation is already responsible for 
what is happening yesterday, the day before yesterday, in these 
elections. It is because the people can see that the major 
political organizations are committed to peace. 
  We have made it clear -- I made it clear in the Rivonia 
trial 
-- that I have fought against white domination, just as much as 
I have fought against black domination. I have stood for that 
idea. I have been firm in the belief that South Africa is one 
country, one nation, whether you're colored, white, Indian, or 
African. I think that message has gone across, and therefore 
what we see in these elections is already the result of this 
environment of reconciliation that we are promoting. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela, I'd just like to apologize to our 
viewers for the difficulties we are experiencing with lighting, 
and I hope the contents of our discussion doesn't leave our 
viewers in the dark. 
  [Nyako] Mr. Mandela, we have heard many stories of, you 
know, 
touching moments that people went through during the elections. 
I remember interviewing somebody just to find out how she felt 
by casting her vote. She was speechless, she couldn't say a 
word. You've heard how maid and madam embraced, crying, saying 
now you're part of one family. Can you just maybe tell us what 
has been the most touching moment in the whole election? 
  [Mandela] Well, I think it is very difficult to identify any 
single moment which I can regard as touching, but the very fact 
that our people, the injured, the disabled, have had the 
opportunity to exercise one of the most important rights which a 
citizen has, has been most touching, and the fact that, as you 
have said, this election proceeded without violence. All these 
have been touching moments, but within that context I don't 
think it is possible to say this single issue has touched me 
most. The whole development that has taken place has been very 
touching indeed. 
  [(Pinda)] Mr. Mandela, can I just ask you, how do you think 
you've done? You've spent your life fighting for this election. 
Have you won it? 
  [Mandela] Well, what is important is not the victory of any 
particular individual or organization. It is the victory by the 
people of South Africa. That is what should dominate all of us, 
and I think that everyone of us will agree that the people of 
South Africa have been victorious. They have won. 
  [Venter] Mr. Mandela, within a number of days the first 
cabinet meeting of the new government will take place, and 
you'll certainly be occupying one of the chairs at that table. 
What would you like to be the primary agenda points at that 
first, decisive executive meeting of the new government? 
  [Mandela] Well, first, every leader should take 
responsibility for building the mutual trust that should exist 
if we're going to be in a position to address the major national 
issues facing this country. During this election, when dealing 
with the disruption of political meetings of our opponents, I 
have urged my comrades that we must not open up wounds now which 
will be difficult for us to heal when we work as a government of 
national unity; that these same opponents are going to be our 
partners. 
  Whatever we do, we should be influenced by that 
consideration. So the task of building this mutual trust among 
ourselves is going to be one of the most important priorities, 
because unless we are able to speak with one voice, even though 
we may differ on specific issues -- which happens in any 
organization, in any family -- unless we promote this spirit of 
mutual trust, it is going to be difficult for us to face the 
problems of the country. I think that this will be one of our 
tasks. 
  But we have this Reconstruction and Development Program. We 
have been very careful in ensuring that it is circulated very 
widely among business, academics, state departments, state 
corporations, for comment. We have had no less than five 
different drafts in order to accommodate the views of all these 
interested groups. Our task is going to be ensuring that that 
plan is able to address the basic needs of our people. 
  Not only that. We are also concerned with addressing the 
concerns of the minorities in this country. One of the issues 
which we regard as a priority is to get the white community in 
this country, which has enjoyed better opportunities, acquired 
knowledge, skills, and expertise, they must be part of this 
transformation because they can play a vital, if not decisive, 
role in the promotion of this spirit of reconciliation, in the 
implementation of this program to address the basic needs of the 
masses of the people. This can be done without bringing down the 
standard of the whites in this country. 
  [Venter] Well, gentlemen, I'm afraid we must return to the 
Good Morning South Africa studio at Auckland Park. Mr. Mandela, 
thank you very much for joining us. 
  [Mandela] You're welcome. 

