BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 11 (XINHUA) -- Shanghai's population 
decreased by 10,015 last year, taking the lead among major 
Chinese cities of a population decrease. 
  Natural population growth rate was minus 0.78 per thousand 
in 
1993 as a total of 84,000 babies were born and 94,000 deaths 
were reported in Shanghai, China's most populous city. 
  Statistics from the Shanghai Municipal Family Planning 
Committee and the Shanghai Public Security Bureau show that 
population growth rate in all 20 counties and districts of the 
city all dropped greatly. 
  Officials in charge of the family planning committee 
attribute that to the family planning work during the past 40 
years and progress achieved in the city's social, economic and 
cultural fields. 
  Shanghai's population (the number of people with permanent 
residence permits) topped 13 million by 1992. 
  In the 1950s, annual natural population growth rate reached 
32 per thousand. There was virtually no family planning at that 
time. 
  Experts say that the natural population growth rate in 
Shanghai is expected to witness a continuous decrease in the 
coming few years as existing policy on family planning will 
continue and elderly people now make up 16 percent of the 
overall population. 
  An official from the Shanghai family planning committee said 
that a shrinking population is not the target of the family 
planning policy. Instead, a proper population suiting the 
social and economic development of Shanghai will be the final 
destination. 
  However, officials said existing policy on family planning 
will continue, as birth control pressure is still heavy. 
Prevention of unexpected pregnancies and health education to 
care for women's health will be stressed. 
  Recent surveys show that migrant laborers from other parts 
of 
China to Shanghai often do not carry out the family planning 
policy as required. The birth control policy still does not 
mean much to some unemployed people, among others. 
  In addition, officials said that many women of child-bearing 
age lack enough knowledge and ability on how to prevent 
unplanned pregnancy. 

