BFN 

<F P=106> [By Benjamin Yeh] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 15 (CNA) -- The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs has authorized the United States to board and inspect a 
Taiwan trawler carrying suspected illegal Mainland Chinese 
immigrants, a ministry official confirmed Friday [15 April]. 
  "The U.S. has our full support...to inspect the Jinn Yih," 
an 
official with the ministry's Department of North American 
Affairs told CNA on condition of anonymity. 
  The Kaohsiung-based Jinn Yih, according to foreign wire 
service reports, was first spotted by American surveillance 
planes Sunday, 360 kilometers southwest of San Diego and heading 
toward the California coast. The United States suspects the 
vessel is carrying about 200 mainland immigrants. 
  After the ship was contacted by U.S. Coast Guard cutters, 
however, it did an about-face and headed westward, with the 
cutters trailing. 
  The Foreign Affairs Ministry official said the information 
he 
had indicated that the Jinn Yih was still headed toward Hawaii, 
and would probably not turn back toward the continental United 
States. As of Friday, the ship was 800 kilometers southwest of 
San Diego. 
  The Jinn Yih had been a drift net fishing boat before it had 
its license revoked by the Council of Agriculture in March 1993. 
The Council said it has not kept tabs on the ship since that 
time. 
  The official said the ministry is trying to contact the 
owner 
of the ship so it can uncover information on the cargo. 
  The SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE carried a report on the boat 
Thursday, quoting Stanley Wang, the Information Office director 
of the Coordination Council for North American Affairs in San 
Francisco, which handles private Taiwan-U.S. exchanges in the 
absence of official diplomatic links. 
  Wang said in the report that the ROC is eager to combat the 
smuggling of illegal mainland immigrants into Taiwan, where more 
than 20,000 illegal mainland immigrants have been arrested over 
a four-year period. 
  International criminal syndicates generally charge residents 
of Fujian Province on the Chinese Mainland more than U.S.$25,000 
each to be smuggled into the United States. Once there, the 
immigrants typically work in harsh conditions to pay off their 
debts, the CHRONICLE said. 

