BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release from the UK Department of Trade and Industry: </F>
"Strategy To Make New &amp; Renewable Energy Competitive"] 
  [Text] The Government is to seek to stimulate a commercial 
market in new and renewable energy, with up to 3 billion pounds 
of private sector investment. 
  Energy Minister Tim Eggar [Title as received] today set out 
the Government's strategy to help key technologies such as 
energy from coppice and waste, wind, solar and fuel cells become 
competitive industries. The Non Fossil Fuel Obligation (NFFO) 
will be the prime mechanism in achieving this. A ten year 
Research, Development, Demonstration and Dissemination programme 
will also help the new and renewable energy industry develop and 
become internationally competitive. The programme budget for 
1994/5 is 19.78 million pounds. 
  In a written answer to a Parliamentary Question by Julian 
Brazier MP (Canterbury) Mr Eggar said: "I have today published a 
report outlining the future strategy for new and renewable 
energy in the UK, and placed a copy in the Libraries of both 
Houses. The report, Energy Paper 62, entitled "New and 
Renewable Energy; Future Prospects in the UK" - is in response 
to the findings of the Renewable Energy Advisory Group which 
were published in December 1992. 
  "Government policy is to stimulate the development of new 
and 
renewable energy sources wherever they have prospects of being 
economically attractive and environmentally acceptable in order 
to contribute to: 
  -- diverse, secure and sustainable energy supplies; 
  -- reduction in the emission of pollutants; 
  -- encouragement of internationally competitive industries. 
  "In doing this, it will take account of what influences 
business competitiveness; and it will work towards 1,500 MW 
Declared Net Capacity of new electricity generating capacity 
from renewable sources for the UK by 2000. 
  "Energy Paper 62 sets out a market enablement strategy 
where, 
following assessment and technical development, the promising 
electricity generating technologies are included in an initial 
protected market via the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation (NFFO) and 
the Scottish Renewables Obligation (SRO), to help them become 
competitive and establish an industry. Those which become 
viable can then compete equitably within the open market for 
electricity supply. That initial market under NFFO arrangements 
is crucial to the development of some of the key technologies, 
and NFFO is becoming the prime mechanism for support of those 
technologies. However, a purpose of NFFO is to stimulate a 
commercial market for renewable technologies, and it is 
anticipated that the resultant investment by industry could rise 
to 3 billion pounds within the time frame being considered. 
  "An outline of the ten year forward Research, Development, 
Demonstration and Dissemination (RDD&amp;D) programme is also 
presented. This work will assess and develop technologies, 
remove inappropriate barriers, ensure the market is fully 
informed and encourage internationally competitive industries to 
develop. 
  "Funding for RDD&amp;D, as provided by Government, industry 
and 
other sources is significant both in its size and in enabling 
technologies to enter the market. Resources will be 
concentrated on key technologies with good prospects of 
commercial application in the coming decades - such as solar, 
energy from coppice and waste, wind and fuel cells. Existing 
work on Passive Solar Design will be completed over the next few 
years and DTI involvement then reduced as the technology matures. 
  "The Government's geothermal R&amp;D and tidal programmes 
will be 
closed when current commitments end. The existing work on wave 
energy will be completed, but no further commitments undertaken, 
as this technology has limited potential to contribute 
commercially to energy supplies in the next few decades. The 
emphasis on technology transfer will be maintained, in line with 
the White Paper on Science, Engineering and Technology. The 
programme will also be closely integrated with complementary 
work supported by the European Community. The programme budget 
for new and renewable energy for FY1994/95 is 19.78 million 
pounds. 
  "Also published today is `An Assessment of Renewable Energy 
for the UK.' This report, (ETSU-R-82), which has been prepared 
by the Energy Technology Support Unit, provides a technical 
basis for the future strategy and summarises information 
gathered by the Government's programme since its inception. 
Copies of this report have also been placed in the libraries of 
both Houses.' 
<H5>  Notes for Editors: </H5>
  1. The Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation creates a premium market 
by 
awarding contracts to competing developers for the supply of 
electricity from renewable sources of energy. 
  2. Mr. Eggar announced details of the third NFFO order on 27 
July 1993 (DTI Press Notice P/93/424). The first two renewable 
orders were made in 1990 and 1991. It is intended to make two 
further orders, one in 1995 and one in 1997. 
  3. For media copies of Energy Paper 62 and ETSU-R-82 please 
contact Peter Braidwood on 071 215 6405. Other copies are 
available from HMSO. 
  Press Enquiries: 071 215 6403/7; (Out of Hours: 071 215 
4657/8); Public Enquiries: 071 215 5000. 

