BFN 

  [Text] The Greek Cypriot Administration has allowed the 
Kurdish Workers Party [PKK] and Armenian terrorists, who are 
trying to divide and fragment Turkey and who do not hesitate to 
shed the blood of their brethren in order to achieve their 
objectives, to establish a base in the Trodos Mountains in 
Paphos district. 
  It has been ascertained that the PKK terrorists and the 
ASALA 
[Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia] militants 
have been training in guerrilla warfare on the Trodos Mountains 
since 1988. The mountains are under Greek Cypriot sovereignty. 
Meanwhile, it has been reported that the PKK--which is trying to 
get support from Greece and the Greek Cypriot administration, 
who are hostile to Turkey--has established financial links with 
the Armenian terrorist organizations. Reliable sources say that 
the PKK has given material aid worth $1.2 million to the 
Armenian terrorist organizations in accordance with PKK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan's instructions. They also say that the PKK gave 
material aid to the Armenian terrorists because they are 
fighting for similar objectives. 
  It has been reported that the PKK and the Armenian terrorist 
organizations--who get the funds they need from drug trafficking 
and arms smuggling and from foreign underground organizations 
that believe they stand to gain from the attempt to fragment 
Turkey--are trying to establish a new base in Paphos district. 
In fact, the foundations of that base have already been laid. 
  Turkey and the TRNC [Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus] 
have been worried by the Greek Cypriot Administration's close 
relations with the PKK and the Armenian terrorist organizations. 
Meanwhile, several circles in Azerbaijan are also concerned. 
They too are worried over the open support Greece and the Greek 
Cypriot Administration have given to the Armenian terrorist 
organizations, which, together with the Armenian bands that have 
occupied Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, dream of creating a 
Greater Armenia. 
  The support Greece and the Greek Cypriot Administration have 
given to the PKK and the Armenian terrorist organizations has 
been assessed as a dangerous move that may further worsen the 
problems between the Azerbaijani and Armenian peoples, the Turks 
and Greeks, and the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. 

