Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 12 Mar (DPA) -- Pedro Ross, leader of the 
governmental Central Organization of Cuban Trade Unions, CTC, 
admitted today that the problem of economic inefficiency 
aggravates the island's critical situation. 
  "Economic efficiency is the solution to many of the Cuban 
problems that stand in the way of attaining a stable future and 
a more rapid way out of the island's difficult financial 
situation," Ross, also a member of the Communist Party of Cuba's 
Politburo, said. 
  Cuba is experiencing a serious economic situation, the most 
serious since 1959, due to the dismemberment of the Soviet Union 
and the Eastern European bloc. In addition, Cuba's standard of 
living has declined due to shortages ranging from fuel and 
energy to food and consumption goods. Speaking to the morning 
newspaper GRANMA, Ross reported on ideas and proposals that 
arose from the so-called Workers Parliaments, which are being 
held in almost 80,000 places of employment, on the country's 
economic crisis and how to cope with it. 
  According to government sources, the results of these 
meetings will be considered for a special session of the 
National Assembly (Parliament), the date of which has not yet 
been set, to discuss other economic reforms. 
  Ross confirmed both measures to improve efficiency in each 
labor center and the general economy have been discussed during 
these debates in plants and offices, debates which will end on 
16 March. 
  He admitted, however, efficiency must be closely linked to 
internal finances, on which a number of proposals, including 
tightening control on the country's resources, were presented. 
  He also said the nearly 3.5 million workers repudiated 
theft, 
carelessness, dilapidation, illegal acquisitions of wealth, and 
people who profit from the population's needs. 
  The government-run magazine BOHEMIA admitted recently the 
underground economy, or black market, whose operations reached 
incalculable levels last year, draws mainly from state supplies 
and enterprises. 
  Although Ross also admitted the existence of contradicting 
criteria on tax measures, he said there is a general consensus 
on the need to protect essential services such as health, 
education, and social security. 
  After reporting most of the workers regard it as necessary 
to 
eliminate certain free services and subsidize people rather than 
products, Ross said the latter measure inflicts yearly losses 
worth 4 billion pesos on the island economy. (The peso is 
equivalent officially to the U.S. dollar, although on the black 
market one dollar equals 100 pesos). 
  Ross mentioned certain probable measures that will be 
established in the immediate future, such as higher prices on 
nonessential articles, such as rum and cigars, but with 
controlled distribution to try to counter a monopoly. 
  Criticizing strongly union leaders and workers, Ross said he 
confirmed a general lack of information about how much the 
country must pay to buy specific products abroad. People are 
also unaware that the prices of certain products are still the 
same as 20 or 30 years ago, when the cost of raw materials was 
lower. 
  He said after concluding the Workers Parliaments, the 
proposals will start to be debated in the country's 14 provinces 
on Thursday and that on 29 March the CTC National Committee's 
plenary will devote its session to a debate on this subject. 
  The probable measures to be debated in the National 
Assembly's special session include cutting state subsidies, 
reducing the labor force, and introducing an income tax system. 

