CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Anpilov by Aleksandr Prokhanov; place </F>
and date not given: "`We Shall Not Submit!' Dialogue Between 
Aleksandr Prokhanov and Viktor Anpilov"] 
  [Text] [Prokhanov] Assessing today's real members of the 
opposition, politicians, and chiefs, one of our comrade men of 
letters called you the Russian Che Guevara. Because, most 
likely, your political behavior, your revolutionary romanticism, 
your self-sacrifice, predilection for demonstrations and 
marches, and orientation toward the elemental force of the human 
masses make you close in mentality, in practice, and even in 
fate, perhaps, to the revolutionaries of the 1960's, who were 
extolled by Marcuse and Sartre when they spoke about the inner, 
existential state of the soul of a people hurling them against 
the system and breaking down the most brutal barriers of this 
system. 
  I partially agree with this assessment of your personality. 
None of today's leaders, perhaps, has so earned through 
suffering the right to engage in politics as you. Your ideas, 
your popularity, and your loudspeaker appeals and speeches at 
demonstrations have been paid for by beatings and attended by 
violence and the fearful risk to which you have always subjected 
yourself. You have been beaten up after demonstrations on 
several occasions, on last year's tragic May Day holiday you 
were seized and tortured in a dungeon, and on 6 October you fell 
into the clutches of the secret police and were put in jail.... 
That is, all that you preach is not simply ideology, not simply 
a cri de coeur; it is, perhaps, a tortured fate. 
  I would like first to ask you to recount a few details of 
the 
May Day events--how it all happened, what you went through, what 
you felt there, and then your prison torments in Lefortovo. 
Readers know little of the details. They see a face and hear 
statements, but the details and actual particulars of what 
happens often elude them. 
  [Anpilov] All generalizations always suffer from 
superficiality somewhat. Yes, there are loudspeakers, an 
elemental force, demonstrations, but, in my view, this is only 
part of the truth, as is also the fact that I really do respect 
Ernesto Che Guevara. Not because I have been to Latin America or 
was fascinated, say, by Che Guevara's diary written in Bolivia, 
but simply because he was a remarkable, most honest individual. 
  I once visited in Havana a carbon black factory. On its 
grounds everyone, on account of its production process, was 
immediately changed from a white into a black because there was 
soot everywhere. Che Guevara had been dead for 15 years, but the 
workers of this factory still remembered that, considering the 
importance of this small enterprise for tire production, he 
would come here without fail once a quarter to put in an unpaid 
day's work. He worked together with everyone, unloading this 
carbon black. Che Guevara worked both in ships' holds and 
elsewhere. As minister of industry of Cuba and also president of 
the national bank, he still found time to work shoulder to 
shoulder with the ordinary people and to meet with them. There 
is for me something sacred in this: He did not become detached 
from the people, he was a part of them. 
  When I am compared to Che Guevara or some other figures, 
therefore, I permit myself to observe that I am first and 
foremost part of the people, I am a grain of their sand. And I 
cannot fail to express the cherished aspirations that are now 
arising at the very heart of my people. It is like this because 
I was born in an ordinary peasant family, and this was, if you 
like, the most treasured and purest aspect of my life. I was not 
only raised by my mama and father, who came back from the war 
missing an arm, an invalid, and whom, as soon as he was back on 
his feet, we all helped. He fired ceramics, pots, as we say. I 
had another education also. I remember many of our neighbors, I 
remember Mariya Stepanovna, an old woman, who said: "Do not pull 
down the green pears when they are ripening; I will give you 
them myself." And she would bring ripe and appetizing ones.... 
  I do not mean to say that I was raised by the people. But I 
have always felt myself to be a part of them and have imbibed 
the best that there is in humanity. This means Che Guevara and 
Copernicus, if you like, and Garcia Marquez and the all the 
immense possessions bequeathed by universal experience that our 
people have accumulated. All this can never be personified by 
just one personality, even an outstanding one; the people are 
always more important. 
  At some stages of history, the people push forward from 
among 
themselves persons expressing their aspirations, and I am happy 
that this has, possibly, been the case with me. But I repeat: 
Without that universal concept of goodness which our people has 
accumulated, Viktor Anpilov is impossible, please consider this. 
I myself am by no means an elemental force; no, this is a 
deep-seated thing, and there is behind each demonstration 
organization and hard painstaking work. But I am a part of a 
popular elemental force, whence the hatred of me to a large 
extent. Because were it possible to buy the people, say, they 
would have bought Anpilov also. Were it possible to intimidate 
them, they would have intimidated Anpilov too.... 
  We were acquainted with the violence of which you speak back 
in December 1991, when we gathered at the Spasskaya Tower, 
demanding the release of Parfenov. On an order from Dovzhuk, I 
was seized before the people's eyes by a Special Militia squad. 
I realized then for the first time that the system was changing, 
that everything customary and Soviet was changing. I was thrown 
to the floor of the bus, and hefty types piled in on top and 
jumped on me and worked me over. As a police backside crushed my 
chest, there occurred to me the comparison that it was this that 
was the society with "values common to all mankind," as they 
say, toward which I was being pulled by Gorbachev, Yeltsin, 
Margaret Thatcher, Reagan, and Kohl--no end of them. It was 
THEIR society, and I do not want such a society!... 
  Everything proves that the Moscow authorities, and not only 
they, violated on May Day a number of laws and the Constitution, 
primarily the freedom of street marches and demonstrations. In 
addition, the actions of the authorities were from the very 
outset of a provocative nature.... 
  Luzhkov delayed a response to our notice of a street 
procession. We should have been given an answer within five 
days' time, and not a refusal even, possibly, but an offer to us 
of another route.... But he gave it only on 29 April in the 
afternoon, when just one day remained until May Day. We appealed 
immediately to the Supreme Soviet, calling this a provocation. 
It was aimed, following the referendum in April, allegedly a 
"victory" for Yeltsin, at wiping out the opposition. 
  My entire line of conduct was structured with regard to this 
danger. When I said: "We are leaving the center!" many people 
shouted at me: "Anpilov is a stoolie, we are not leaving, we are 
going to the center!" People had to be persuaded; we had to 
encourage them to leave. We left, but we were overtaken, because 
they needed blood. They were thirsting for this blood!... 
  And after May Day came 9 May, and after such events, the 
people objectively had to take to the streets. And, to provoke 
unrest, Anpilov had to be snatched at that time. I thought a 
great deal about this incident in Lefortovo, and it was more 
frightening there, of course, because you are expecting to die 
at any moment. You have been blindfolded, you are helpless, and 
your hands have been cuffed behind your back. There is nothing 
worse for a man than the sense of his insignificance and 
impotence. You cannot resist, it is useless to shout 
anything--you have a gag in your mouth. And what is there to 
shout? The last things--the scents of the forest, my Russian 
forest--when I was dragged from the Rafik vehicle, were 
particularly heart-wrenching, perhaps. I was suddenly assailed 
by the thought that I was breathing this air for the last time. 
  Unfortunately, our society is moving toward such methods. 
And 
this is borne out once again by what happened on 3 October.... I 
was arrested on 7 October. I had contemplated our making our way 
toward a center of Working Russia in the heart of the country, 
where it was operating the most strongly. But I would have had 
for this to have altered my appearance, if only somewhat. I 
thought, well, my beard will grow a little, perhaps, and I could 
alter my ID somewhat in order to have shifted my base to the 
Rostov-na-Donu area, to Shakhty. I had a long-standing 
invitation from the miners. But I was not in time.... 
  I was in Tula recently, after my release. I was given a 
magnificent greeting. None of our people betrayed me, not one. 
All kinds of rumors were going around there.... Neither the 
owners of the dacha--ordinary Russian people--nor others in the 
community said anything. 
  I did, indeed, hide out at the dacha. I was lying down and 
resting on the second floor, and suddenly I heard the noise of a 
powerful engine. I looked out the window; right outside stood an 
armored transport vehicle, from which soldiers were jumping 
down. I had no weapon. Should I run? They would kill me as I 
tried to flee--and that would be that. I climbed into the loft 
and hid there. For a long time they could not find me, until a 
lieutenant colonel of the interior forces, I don't know his 
name, guessed. I did not for a long time tell anyone that he had 
struck me once when I was handcuffed. But I was told in Tula 
that he himself had bragged of this: "I gave Anpilov a good 
whack!" Well, may the Lord be his judge. I did not speak about 
this, I did not want to put the man to shame for having hit me. 
  They searched for two hours. They surrounded the entire 
community and posted men with assault rifles everywhere. These 
were the actions of members of punitive detachments, this, most 
likely, was how they caught the partisans. They said: Any 
suspicious vehicle--open fire. What does suspicious mean? It 
could have been a person who had nothing to do either with Reds 
or Whites or Yeltsin or Stalin. But this was the order--I heard 
it distinctly. They had set up radio communications right in 
this dacha, on the second floor, and I heard everything from the 
loft. 
  And then the lieutenant colonel, he was tall and fit, rapped 
with his fist on the ceiling, and the empty dishes--jars--began 
to rattle, and, as usual in a dacha, he realized that there was 
some space up above. They began to search. I would like to 
mention one person taking part in this search. We met eye to 
eye. He said nothing. It is hard to convey this: My mouth was 
completely dry, my whole body was tense because I realized full 
well that an order to do away with me could be given. This was a 
very convenient occasion for killing "while attempting to flee," 
but this man said nothing and subsequently said nothing 
throughout this whole trial. I realized that there are still 
honest people even in their ranks. 
  The lieutenant colonel, unfortunately, found the entrance, 
and there was a light switch there. When the light was switched 
on, I said: "I'm here, I am unarmed." They shouted: "Come out!" 
They were overjoyed to have found me. It was when the handcuffs 
had been put on that he struck me. In order, perhaps, to lift 
some guilt from his heart, perhaps he felt uncomfortable and, in 
order to suppress this pang of conscience, he was forced to lash 
out. 
  Then the television cameras, I know how they, these rogues, 
try to operate. They immediately trained the lens on my worker's 
boots, which had come from the dacha, unattractive, rough--the 
owner's working boots. The owner, apparently, had put on my good 
boots and said: "Anpilov has just left. I will show you the 
direction. He wanted to divert them from the dacha and went out 
in my boots. For a long time I could not understand where my 
boots were and had to put these on. The camera immediately 
focused attention on these boots: There is Anpilov for 
you--homeless, not a real man. 
  I was escorted under armed guard to Tula, then to Moscow. I 
was taken to the MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs]. Yerin's 
first deputy came out and looked me over: "Ah, Anpilov! Let him 
live, for the time being." I realized that the big guy was not 
joking. "For the time being"--this was a long time: just an 
hour, I would be of use to the people. I did not get into a 
fight with him: I was in handcuffs, he was at liberty. 
  I was taken to Lefortovo, accompanied by about 20 masked 
sharpshooters, what is more. Perhaps they were for deterrence 
purposes, but it was even ridiculous to me at that time, a kind 
of comedy. 
  The first day in prison was psychologically very difficult; 
each sound, each rustle would put the nerves in a state of 
numbness. But three days later I was transferred to a cell with 
another person. I had, understandably, to display caution, but 
we found a common language, nonetheless. He was a KGB officer 
who had been charged with having divulged a state secret, and he 
talked about suicide the whole time. 
  I did not consider it my duty to dissuade him or to impress 
upon him that he should live, but it is possible that I managed 
to somehow influence him by my behavior. Each day I did morning 
exercises, went on the outside walk, and learned by heart poems 
of Lorca and Marti and some pages of Jack London's "Call of the 
Wild." This is an old way of mine of keeping the mind busy. And 
then I became used to it and began to write, and the warders 
were now, I believe, giving me paper with pleasure. 
  Prison has its own little peculiarities, and it is only 
there 
that you sense them. If someone asks: "Give me some paper," they 
are required to provide it, but they immediately ask: "How many 
sheets, three, four, five?" No more. When I asked, however, they 
would give me 15, 20 sheets--this was a luxury. 
  My treatment in prison was proper, although my solitary was 
tough. But at the same time I believe that Solzhenitsyn and many 
others maliciously slandered the system of camps and prisons 
that existed in the USSR. Professionals work there. They are 
doing their duty, carrying out their official instructions. But 
not once did I have the feeling that there was a desire to 
humiliate me. Moreover, when we could not get something from the 
warders, sometimes the water in the shower was boiling, 
sometimes there was only cold water, for example, they were 
upset and would try to fix everything as quickly as possible. 
There are, then, small human pleasures, and they tried to ensure 
that the prisoners have these also. On the whole, they were, of 
course, jailers. Nonetheless, I stress once again: I agree with 
this treatment in the sense that the law is the law, nor should 
I have anything more, let me live and exist within the framework 
that is enshrined in law, so that neither you nor I violate it. 
  [Prokhanov] I did much thinking after those events--galling, 
bloody, frightening. I did not suffer your fate, thank God, 
although I also had to go into hiding for the first three days: 
I and my friends from the newspaper were forced to leave Moscow. 
We lived in the woods, and this also was a flight into the fall 
forests away from these appalling pogroms, from the blood, the 
roundups.... I saw on television in a peasant's hut how you were 
taken. 
  And this is what I was thinking with bitterness at that 
time: 
You are a politician, you are the leader of a party, of a 
popular movement, not only a Moscow, but Russian movement. The 
main thing in a movement is organization, but neither you nor we 
had a clandestine structure or reserves for a catastrophe 
situation. There were no secret addresses, no regime for a 
switch to underground activity, despite the fact that your party 
is in its practice, in its ideology, in its type of leaders the 
most radical, and it condemns itself to counterstrikes, to 
persecution, to terror on the part of these ruthless 
authorities. And I thought about this without any censure of 
you, because the Communists, whom you represent, had, truly, 
been kicked out into this post-communist, liberal, capitalist 
period by their recent party comrades themselves, by the party 
riff-raff, as you sometimes say. They kicked out not only the 
Communists, but the whole nation, the whole people. 
  I continue to ask myself in conversations with Emergency 
Committee people, with members of the last Soviet Government, 
with representatives of the former Soviet elite: How did a 
superpower, how did a very great communist empire, how did the 
second, perhaps even the first, economy of the world, how did 
this entire great organizational project fall to pieces so 
easily and so ineptly? Why did this organization, the greatest 
in the world, the Soviet Union, not have immune systems? Why did 
the party not have party political intelligence? 
  Back in the prewar period, even Stalin installed an 
underground organization on the territories that could have been 
occupied by the enemy and thought about the fact that it would 
be necessary, in the event of a fascist assault, to rebase the 
economy beyond the Urals, in Siberia. In recent decades the 
country essentially lived with a premonition of a third world 
war--weapons systems were prepared, plans for an offensive in 
the European theater were developed, there was a struggle of 
intelligence agencies, civil defenses were created.... Why did 
the party not make provision for forms of transition to an 
underground existence? Thought could have been given to this in 
the Gorbachev period, when it had become obvious that the party 
was being killed off, the state was being killed off. 
  Why were you, who spent two years forming a movement, unable 
to install secret underground structures within it? How do you 
explain this? 
  [Anpilov] First, I would mention that we are not political 
masochists. We do not want the authorities to be continually 
hounding us. Yes, truly, the Russian Communist Workers Party, 
which I represent, and the Working Russia movement are under 
daily, furious assault. And not only from the regime; fellow 
travelers sometimes prevent us from developing at full power. 
Attempts are continually being made to humiliate us and to make 
of us some insignificant, passing phenomenon, I would say, of 
Russian reality. 
  Yes, we have realized that we should prepare for underground 
work in earnest. But skills do not come without experience, 
without bitter experience, when, for example, your own life 
hangs by a thread. And what is most important here, what is 
more, is not to expose the lives of others, but one's own--this 
is a secondary consideration. 
  My main mistake, when I went to the dacha near Tula, was 
that 
I considered this land my land. The sun was shining, it was a 
beautiful fall, in which Lev Tolstoy exulted in these places. I 
went for walks, sawed wood.... The hell of it is that when an 
enemy has come to us openly, we have immediately understood 
this, but on this occasion we are harvesting the fruit of such 
quiet hidden work of global forces, not just Russian. 
  Just think, seven years have elapsed since Gorbachev's April 
Plenum of 1987, but can we say that there is no struggle? On the 
contrary, the intelligentsia is now rising up. Here is a letter 
I received: "Viktor Ivanovich, I can do everything--edit, print, 
I can talk to people, I am prepared to stand at the factory 
gate." Ah, so he has matured. So life itself and our struggle 
have given him a shove. 
  Our mission, overriding mission, rather, and my personal 
mission is to prevent this spirit of indomitability from 
perishing. To prevent the dying of hope, when all, seemingly, is 
over, when television and radio are antipopular, when the United 
States supports the regime, Germany, Japan.... Thatcher was 
overjoyed: What they had been dreaming of came to pass.... 
  We have discharged our function merely in the fact that we 
have not allowed the love of freedom of the people, the Russian 
people, as the pivot of the state, of the Soviet Union, to 
perish and have kept the hope of millions of people alive. I 
have just been in Novosibirsk, in Tula. In Novosibirsk--a packed 
hall, nowhere for an apple to fall, people give me a standing 
ovation. Why is this not shown on television? They are simply 
afraid that millions awaiting this would see this joy: For many 
are, after all, living as if in a dungeon. 
  [Prokhanov] The newspaper DEN and now ZAVTRA, which friends 
and enemies accuse of a certain eclecticism, has always had as 
its mission the unification of patriots, understanding here that 
with the spread of ideologies and political formulas and the 
wide spectrum of leaders we are condemning ourselves to 
eclecticism and a certain confusion. Although the idea of the 
combination of the scattered national field and the severed 
ideological body is in itself so far-reaching and important that 
all imperfections connected with this mission may be disregarded. 
  And we succeeded to some extent in the pre-October period in 
doing what was practically unprecedented. We succeeded, with 
reservations, in creating a formula of the combination of left 
and right patriots and Red and White statists and in persuading 
them for a while to halt the polemics, destructive for the 
opposition, devise the rules of a collective game, and impose a 
taboo on the desecration of objects of worship. There thus took 
shape a certain field of resistance, which was manifested so 
intensively in September-October, when anarchists and 
communists, atheists and clerics, radical nationalists and 
internationalists were on the same side of the barricades.... 
Misfortune and love brought us all together at that time in the 
White House. 
  Explain to me why, with the combination of red and white 
material, the red material has, nonetheless, been unable to 
unite in itself? Why do I, not being a communist, perceive as 
tragic these mutations in the communist milieu? 
  [Anpilov] Let us speak plainly. We could have made progress 
in the cohesion of the opposition while at least honesty was for 
us an immutable principle. But what is honesty? Everyone 
interprets it in his own way. Although we know precisely when we 
are behaving dishonestly. 
  When we say that there is no unity among the Reds, I recall 
the first demonstration under the leadership of Working Russia 
and the Russian Communist Workers Party in Moscow. It took place 
on 7 November 1991, when many people were literally in a state 
of shock from August. No one believed in the former leaders, and 
it was being said of some people at that time: "There is a 
national leader." I grabbed one by the arm on this long march 
from Marx Avenue to Red Square: "Go to the people, we are so 
much in need of a leader, go to the old people who are standing 
around the Lenin Museum, say that you are here, that you, damn 
it, are alive!" "No, my time has not come," I was told. "I am 
for later." But they were needed immediately. I did not lay 
claim to the role of leader, but if the people themselves push 
you forward, you cannot betray them or renounce the principles 
thanks to which the people put their faith in you. 
  We brought out no fewer than 150,000 people at one time on 7 
November. Remember that slush--we were forced to walk through 
these vile pools by the mayor, it was still Popov. There was not 
a single instance of anyone going too far. We walked on, 
inwardly incensed at not having been given elbow-room, whereas 
the democrats had been given Lubyanka and Marx Avenue, although 
they amounted to altogether nothing. 
  But then came May Day, and everyone saw that, apparently, 
the 
people could get up off their knees themselves and put forward 
their own leaders. That they could manage without the recognized 
leaders, who held the levers of power. And here the mortal 
struggle for the masses began. They came to be pulled apart and 
split on various pretexts, rumors were circulated: He is such 
and such. 
  I shall tell you an innermost thought: On account of a fear 
of losing, seemingly, a large detachment of supporters, I, 
Anpilov, having no experience, allowed the masses that we had 
immediately begun to lead after August 1991 to be pulled apart 
under various flags and led in different directions. And the 
more we shouted about unity, the more sparsely attended our 
meetings became. The time came when I said: Ideological 
omnivorousness will do nothing; it is better to define our 
principles more precisely, and then it will be easier to agree 
to an alliance with whomever we like. 
  What, in fact, do we want? Here I approach the key problem. 
I 
consider Red those who advocate a cardinal solution of two 
questions. The first is the power of the working people. The 
political power of the people formula is a fraud. The power of 
the working people, on the other hand, is a strict formula. 
Decoded, it means that we need to strive for a situation where 
the worker, from the engineer through the lathe hand, has an 
interest in the results of his labor and not genuflect either 
before the secretary of the party committee or before the 
director of the plant or before the trade union boss to obtain 
an apartment, a place in a kindergarten, or a pass to a 
sanatorium. It is he who should distribute everything, via his 
elective bodies, including the hiring of management and the 
determination of its pay--this is what is meant by power of the 
working people. 
  This is the very essence of the interests of our people. 
They 
supported Yeltsin, after all, because they thirsted for justice, 
they were sick and tired of putting up with the double standard. 
People would shout about socialist morals and would themselves 
be basking in luxury with these underground banquets, young 
women.... It was a corrupt party, and to tolerate it was to 
become a traitor oneself. And if we want Reds, this means, if 
you will excuse me, being so kind as not to walk away from the 
dictatorship of the working man. The question of power is 
fundamental. 
  The next is property. An excellent combination of the 
individual and the public was found under Stalin. There were 
handicraftsmen, and the workshops paid taxes. Heavens, for every 
Russian individual who can do something I would, you can be 
sure, ensure these conditions. 
  The dual form, on the other hand, multi-structural, as they 
say, is a fraud also. There is no coexistence between them. The 
private rapaciously swallows up the public. Once again the 
people are being urged: Never mind, this is normal. No, it is a 
fraud, I do not want it! And everyone can see these absolutely 
predatory endeavors, which are being supported from overseas. 
They have an interest, after all, in the predator feeling 
himself to be a little princeling, be it in Buryatia, in Komi, 
or wherever you like. They will buy such a princeling, the main 
thing being that they have the money. 
  The Private Property Act, the reforms.... What do these 
mean? 
Gennadiy Andreyevich Zyuganov says: "I also am for the reforms." 
I am categorically opposed! What reforms? I am for man having a 
better life. But they have hidden behind the word "reforms," 
Gorbachev and Yeltsin, and carried through a change of 
social and political system! Forgive me, they acted against 
the Constitution. What "reforms" are there here? And what kind 
of "reformers" are they? An entirely different word fits such 
activity; in my opinion, it is enshrined in the Criminal Code. 
  Give me an opportunity to say openly who I am. This is today 
both my tragedy and the tragedy of the Red movement. We have 
been cut off from people both by those who control television 
and the big press, and, unfortunately, the few tiny tots of 
information that remain on the other side, it would seem. The 
DEN-ZAVTRA newspaper has adopted the correct position, 
therefore. Let there be eclecticism, I agree.... 
  Artificial unity would burst at the seams at the first 
contact with reality. This was the case in the September-October 
days, say. The people came, but there was no strong political 
leadership, no strong idea. The tricolor Yeltsin flag fluttered 
there, at the House of Soviets. And however we begged that it be 
replaced by the red flag, it was not. And there was a tricolor 
flag in the office of Acting President Rutskoy also. He said 
that we should not annoy the democrats supporting legality. But 
it should have been remembered also that people are dying 
beneath this flag. Is this flag not a monstrous insult to those 
who died, defending the law? Both armored transport vehicles and 
the tanks carried a tricolor flag also.... We should be 
clutching just one. 
  [Prokhanov] You know that I am an apologist for the Soviet 
Union, the Soviet superpower, an apologist for Soviet military 
power, our super-industry, and huge organizational projects, 
which were possible only under the socialist management of the 
economy. Only socialism could have mastered the northern sea 
route and have created the industrial center in Siberia and 
space-based defenses. But I know that despite the colossal 
organizational building of the 1930's and the postwar boom, when 
we vanquished the strongest and most evil enemy of all mankind, 
we lost the battle for the peace, for the social ideal. 
  Listening to you say that the Reds mean dictatorship of the 
worker, I have to ask: So you come to power--I want you to come 
to power--what kind of revolutionary project would you be 
undertaking in this divided, shattered, worn-out society, which 
has gone through all the phases of socialist building? 
  [Anpilov] We did not lose the peace. There has been, is now, 
and always will be struggle for world domination. The question 
is who will control mankind, this planet: a handful of rogues, 
some country, a chosen people inappropriate for the "mankind" 
concept, or will Planet Earth live according to the laws of 
universal reason and simultaneously in the interests of 
man-the-toiler, who plows or invents. This is the whole cursed 
question. 
  I am for the second version, naturally. I believe that it is 
these two trends that condition modern development. And you will 
not escape this. But it would be wrong to say that the idea of a 
just society, a truly humane society, if you will, has been 
defeated. 
  Struggle is under way, and everyone knows for what he is 
fighting. There is people's fraternity, and there is 
self-interest and an endeavor to exploit others and oneself 
burst from being overfull. There are no other ideas in the 
world. We have not lost, therefore. I by no means consider that 
I have been brought to my knees; I will fight. 
  You ask what we would do were we to come to power. We have 
not done so yet, but even today I am attempting to hook up with 
Yuriy Maksimovich Slobodkin and present a brief, perhaps, but 
comprehensible bill charting clear, specific ways of ensuring 
the self-management of the workforce, be it of a research 
institute, kindergarten, plant, or shop. I received a call from 
Tver, and, according to the election results, precisely 51 
percent there are our people--Reds. So let us offer a basis 
uniting to some extent both the legislators of the Duma and the 
representative authority of the oblasts, cities, and rayons. 
  Were I personally to come to power, as president, say, I 
would abolish the very office of president, the presidency in 
Russia generally. It is getting in our way, it is alien to us. 
And this decree should clear the way for a revival of the power 
of the working people. 
  For such to be accomplished, the broadest movement of the 
masses is essential. I consider the most important task, 
therefore, that of raising the people, the working people, to 
the struggle for their vital rights. But I am not relinquishing 
the struggle at the top also. The field of struggle is enormous, 
and it may be conducted in each sector. And alliances can and 
should be concluded in each sector. But let us conclude them 
openly and honestly, that is, people must know what I have given 
up and what we will get in return. 
  We begin to support someone, say--we withdraw our own 
candidacy and we defend yours. But what will we get in this 
case? We cannot be continually bringing up the rear and begging 
alms from the victor. I remember the exclamations of the power 
ministers in the House of Soviets: "Where are Anpilov's people?" 
"Where is he with his people?" I did not consider all the people 
there mine, no, there were various people there. But this "Where 
is he?" was in the air. But since they were asking: "Where are 
the people?" allow me also some dignity, because I shall not 
otherwise deserve the trust of the people who follow me. 
  We have reached a point in the Red movement at which I do 
not 
have the moral right to enter into Tsipko's alliance. Everyone 
is free to choose for himself a class and goal, defend this 
class, and strive for this goal. I have not heard from Tsipko 
any statements contradicting the system of views that he 
defended in pushing through Gorbachev's reforms, demeaning my 
people and spitting in their face. I am a Christian by origin 
and am prepared to forgive. But, excuse me, are you ready to 
repent? You continually called on us to repent, you said the 
whole time that that was not where the temple was, go in the 
other direction. You shouted the whole time: "Repent!" Abuladze 
shouted: "Repent!" As far as removing his father from his grave 
and throwing him onto the garbage heap. This is what was foisted 
on us. I have no wish to unearth my father. More, I am prepared 
to fight for this grave, even if they kill me, tear me to 
pieces. There are sacred things, and stepping over them is more 
than I can do. It would be better to quit politics. 
  [Prokhanov] Our newspaper was, as you know, illegally and 
abominably closed down by Yeltsin, closed down by Luzhkov, 
because DEN was smashed up by Luzhkov's gang--30 men armed with 
assault rifles burst into our offices in camouflage, looted, 
burned, and desecrated our premises, rummaged around in my 
papers, dragged in a television camera and shot our world, our 
iconostasis, our emblems, our tattered flags. This whole gang 
came with a warrant signed by Luzhkov. The mayor had organized 
the pogrom against the newspaper. 
  And here we are once again being pulled into strife. Once 
again the mayor wants to wipe us out. Luzhkov has brought suit 
against the newspaper ZAVTRA. We said in one of our articles 
that he, Luzhkov, was responsible for the bloody events of May 
Day and 23 February. He latched onto these words and termed them 
insulting, although we all know that the mayor was responsible 
for the entire carnage wrought against us on 3-4 October also. 
Now we are faced with a lawsuit. 
  Luzhkov is now one of the most sullen and, for me, most 
dangerous and repulsive figures that have arisen on this burned 
ground called the motherland. He is moving toward brutal, 
ruthless, and bloody power, and competing with him is 
extraordinarily risky. I do not rule out the windows of my 
office being shelled by grenade launchers and our staff and 
correspondents being abducted, as you were abducted in May, I do 
not rule the entire might of the venal Luzhkov jurisprudence 
being heaped on us or our small office fighting against his 
billions. But we have accepted the fight and we will do battle 
with Luzhkov in the name of the people and hurl at him the 
accusation that he is not only responsible for the bloody events 
in May and February, he is responsible for the tragedy of 
Moscow, for the tragedy of Russia.... 
  [Anpilov] I take this opportunity to declare that I will 
call 
on my supporters to take part in the public proceedings. I hope 
that I can appear on your side as a witness. 
  Your newspaper once carried splendid material--the 
interrogation of Pankratov by the examining official Chuglazov. 
You only have to read it, and it all becomes clear. He says: 
Wherever Anpilov appears, there is unrest. This is all lies. 
Whatever obstacles have been put in our way, we have always 
found a common language with the regular militia officer, not 
only with the private and the sergeant, but with officers--the 
major, lieutenant colonel, and colonel--also. I can confirm this 
too. But Pankratov admitted, and attention needs to be called to 
this at the trial, that they had begun IN ADVANCE to practice 
operations for bringing enormous masses of armed people onto the 
streets of Moscow. To what end? And by what right? Who gave them 
this right? One is immediately drawn into a provocation. We have 
yet to threaten anyone, but you, with dogs, mounted officers, 
armed officers, posted these monsters--vehicles with concrete 
panels. We were threatened by force in advance. This was in 
itself a violation of human rights. International conventions, 
ratified under Yeltsin, proclaim that the administration is 
required to adopt all measures to prevent violence. But they, 
precisely the other way about, adopted all measures to ensure 
that violence did occur. This is their principal guilt. It was a 
deliberate use of violence against a peaceful demonstration. 
  The trial of the newspaper DEN is of enormous significance, 
also, because another provocation is brewing. They are once 
again inflaming tension in society. Some troop movement at 
Paveletskiy Station.... All this is being done to once again 
stage a bloody carnage on May Day. They want this. But our 
people will take to the streets just the same. 
  Luzhkov recently declared that he had purchased water cannon 
abroad and chemical agents for the noncontact dispersal of 
demonstrations. Once again the same thing! Have we already done 
something, or has Anpilov declared that he will go to Luzhkov's 
house or to his dacha to drag out his young wife by her hair? 
No, this is absurd. I am not a fascist, and if we go to this 
dacha, it will only be within the framework of the law. 
  But this is a national holiday! You have not canceled this 
holiday, the holiday of the working people! I know that Greek 
trade unions have sent our government a demand that we be 
allowed to march through the streets of Moscow unhindered. We 
want nothing more. We want to march in a demonstration, we want 
to set up a stage to sing our songs, the songs that we love. Why 
must you put obstacles in the way? 
  I have always said and will tell Luzhkov in court that if 
all 
militia officers are on this day of the working people's holiday 
cleared from the streets of Moscow, this will be the calmest day 
in Muscovites' lives. Let the militia go catch thieves and 
criminals, let them guard apartments.... 
  [Prokhanov] Tell me, Viktor Ivanovich, in prison, when there 
was this involuntary stillness and almost total solitude, or at 
night in your dreams, or at other moments has there, perhaps, 
come an instant of quietude, when your lonely, mortal, 
essentially defenseless soul, which at the start of the 
interview you called a grain of sand, reaches out after God, 
reaches out after the wonder, the mystery, the enigma? Have 
there been in your life states in which through all these 
barricades, loudspeakers, prisons, and beatings, some other, 
crystal, structure of the world has been revealed? 
  [Anpilov] It is revealed by the hour. Only I view these 
things not as romantically as you, perhaps, I do not, perhaps, 
give them the names that you give them. Yesterday I visited 
together with an Italian trade union delegation in drizzling 
rain--as though the skies were weeping--the places where our 
comrades fell. We told them how our brothers had been slain at 
the barricades around the House of Soviets. And then I took them 
to the Ukraina Hotel. We were all frozen and decided to have a 
coffee. The cafeteria assistant recognized me and said: "I will 
now make you the strongest, best coffee." And she then gave me 
back my money and treated us to some pastries in addition. I was 
happy at this moment. 
  Call this what you will, call it communion with God, but 
there was for me everything in this instant--the golden forest, 
the clear glade.... And I have very many such moments. This is 
people's recognition, and I consider that there is nothing in 
life, strictly speaking, higher than this.... 

