CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Denis Demkin and Viktor Ivanov: "Far East Ready </F>
To Declare Its Own Special Economic Interests"] 
  [Text] Today the Maritime Kray administration is conducting 
a discussion of the report "Prospects of Maritime Kray Under 
Conditions of the Transition to the Market in Light of the 
Geostrategic and Economic Interests of Russia," developed by the 
Institute of National Economic Forecasting of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, on the order of the Russian Federation 
State Committee for Industrial Policy and the Maritime Kray 
administration. In the opinion of the kray leadership, this work 
will enable the formulation of basic principles of mutual 
relations with the federal government. Following the discussion, 
the report will be sent to the Russian Government and, 
apparently, will be a significant step in recognition of the 
special economic interests of the Far East. 
<H5>  The Far East: Russia or the APR? </H5>
  The report that has been prepared for discussion is in 
essence one of the first really hard attempts by regional 
authorities to declare not simply the special significance of 
the Far East for Russia's economic and political interests, but 
the Far East's own economic interests in the Asia-Pacific Region 
(APR) as well. The significance of the Far East to Russia, in 
the view of the report's authors, is related to the obvious 
change in the geographic reference points of Russia's economic 
interests and to the necessity of strategically reorienting 
foreign trade on the voluminous and diversified APR market 
(insofar as increasing non-raw material exports to West European 
and United States markets is today practically ruled out) under 
conditions of Russia's loss of ports in the West. A special role 
is played by the concentration of basic raw material resources 
in Russia's east and their exhaustion in the western regions. 
  In this regard, the report emphasizes, the Maritime Kray 
authorities may well demand that the federal government effect 
priority resolution of their economic problems. Specific 
measures on the federal level which must be undertaken include: 
the immediate return of debts incurred by the federal 
government; regulation of mutual relations between the federal 
government and the regional budget; granting to the local 
administration of the right to set independent quotas and 
license exports, as well as to regulate the amounts of customs 
duties for exported production output and imported goods 
purchased by the kray to produce competitive export and 
import-substituting output. 
  The authors of the report stress that in the event these 
demands are not met, the region's economic problems may lead to 
an intensification of the already existing trend of "gradual 
economic alienation of Russia and the Far East, with gradual 
integration of the entire economy of the region into the APR 
economy and separation from the national economic complex of 
Russia." Although such declarations are at present clearly 
intended just to exert a certain pressure on the federal 
authorities, one cannot help but admit that the prospects of 
reorientation of the Far East away from "European Russia" and 
toward the APR are indeed entirely realistic. 
<H5>  The Far East-APR: Already Special Relations Exist </H5>
  In the view of experts, "openness" of the economy as well as 
a "special relationship"--at least between certain parts of the 
Far East and the APR--have essentially already developed. Nine 
nonfreezing ports, five border crossing points to the People's 
Republic of China, and six customs offices, for example, are 
presently situated in Maritime Kray. The volume of export and 
import shipments by road and transshipments through port and 
railroad border stations and ports of Maritime Kray exceeded 
27.5 million tonnes in 1993. Over the first nine months of 1993, 
the region's exports amounted to $315,405,000; 
imports--$167,910,000. Some 33.3 percent of the total trade 
volume is attributable to trade with China, 33.8 percent--with 
Japan, 7.9 percent--with Singapore. 
  The export trade structure (direct trade ties) of Maritime 
Kray is as follows: fish--42.8 percent, canned fish--11 percent, 
ferrous metals--20 percent, then lumber and fertilizers. Imports 
consist mainly of food products and consumer items. 
  As of today, 51 representations of foreign firms have opened 
in Maritime Kray, including 29 Japanese, six of the Republic of 
Korea, and others from China, Australia, and Vietnam. As of 1 
November 1993, 692 enterprises having foreign investments were 
registered in Maritime Kray, 272 of these being in the territory 
of the Nakhodka Free Economic Zone. Foreign investors 
participating in the organization of joint enterprises are 
represented by 37 countries, APR countries once again taking the 
lead here: People's Republic of China--198 enterprises, 
Japan--45, United States--44, Republic of Korea--22, Hong 
Kong--14, and Australia--11. 
  In the opinion of regional experts, the following represent 
extremely good prospects for the future: cooperation with Japan 
in the sphere of specialized coastal fishing utilizing Japan's 
experience; organization in Maritime Kray of the cultivation and 
processing of soybeans for export to Japan and third countries 
(there are already offers to the Japanese firm Mitsubishi Corp. 
for joint production of soybeans and the export of 3,000 tonnes 
per year of finished production to Japan). Naturally, special 
hopes are being placed in the development of raw material 
exports--specifically, plans exist for the joint exploitation of 
polymetallic ore deposits in Maritime Kray. 
<H5>  International Trade: Which Bloc To Join? </H5>
  Taking into account the traditional key role played by 
foreign trade in the economic development both of Russia in 
general and of its particular regions, modern trends in 
international trade may exert quite a significant influence on 
the destiny of the Far East economy. In recent times, experts 
have increasingly been leaning towards the view that world trade 
will break up more and more into regional trade blocs in the 
foreseeable future. In addition to the already functioning 
European bloc, the formation of an American trade bloc is 
expected (which will include countries of Central and South 
America as well as the United States and Canada). Finally, it is 
entirely likely that in the final analysis an Asian trade bloc 
will be formed in the APR. Such a regional division of trade is 
essentially already taking place--the share of intra-regional 
trade in the European trade bloc is 70 percent; in the American 
trade bloc it is 50 percent; and in the Asian bloc--40 percent. 
  Prospects for economic integration in the APR have been 
attracting the greatest attention in recent times. Despite the 
traditional political contradictions among APR countries, such 
prospects are entirely realistic when we take into account the 
fact that Japan has recently clearly reoriented its foreign 
trade away from the United States and towards the Asian 
countries (especially Malaysia, Taiwan, South Korea, and 
Singapore). As a result, according to prognoses, the proportion 
of intra-regional trade within the APR will exceed 50 percent by 
the year 2000. Moreover, United States and West European firms 
have recently ceased to comprise the main foreign investors in 
the region, being replaced by the "Asian Four" 
countries--Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong. 
  Division of the world market into regional trade blocs 
enables us to draw a somewhat unexpected conclusion. One Russian 
region or another will be able to dynamically develop its 
foreign trade only if it attaches itself to one bloc or another. 
Taking into account purely the geographic position of different 
regions, however, a clear divergence of interests emerges 
here--it is clearly more convenient for the European regions of 
Russia to join with the European bloc, and for the Far East--the 
Asian bloc. Paradoxical as this may seem, in the event it joins 
the Asian trade bloc, the Far East will become especially 
attractive for direct investments by American and European 
firms, which believe that under conditions of regional division 
of world trade, access to the markets of the Asian bloc can be 
obtained only through direct investments in the countries that 
comprise this bloc. It is clear in any case that entry--formal 
or even informal--into the regional trade and economic group as 
an independent economic entity will open up fairly significant 
economic prospects for the Far East. It is equally evident, 
however, that in the final analysis this may require not just 
appropriate economic changes, but political ones as well. 

