Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague/Kosice, east Slovakia, Dec 14 (CTK) -- A 
jaundice epidemic has broken out in Kosice, where currently 150 
patients with hepatitis symptoms are being treated in the town's 
clinic. A Ministry of Health specialist told CTK, however, that 
there was no risk of epidemic in the Czech Republic. 
  "The situation is ominous," Bartolomej Magyar, a senior 
consultant at the infection clinic of the Louis Pasteur Hospital 
in Kosice told the east Slovak daily SLOVENSKY VYCHOD today. 
  In the week from December 6-13, 98 people suffering from 
jaundice were recorded in the Kosice region and yesterday 150 
patients were being treated in the infection clinic, the daily 
reported. 
  "We experienced a similar jaundice epidemic in this town 
fourteen years ago," he said, adding that certain departments 
had to be closed to free beds for the treatment of hepatitis 
sufferers. 
  In Prague, the director of the Hygiene Department of the 
Ministry of Health, Jana Foltinova, moved to calm fears of a 
similar occurrence in this country. She said the number of 
hepatitis patients was not growing. This year 698 cases of 
hepatitis A have been recorded, compared to 626 last year and 
690 the year before. There have so far been 551 cases of 
hepatitis B, fewer than last year (673) and the year before 
(756). 
  Foltinova described the outbreak in Kosice as a local 
phenomenon and said that a Czech public health officer was 
studying the situation in Slovakia and would officially report 
to the press on Thursday [16 December]. 
  The precise cause of the Kosice epidemic has not been 
determined but it is assumed to be water. However, since a high 
proportion of entrepreneurs and the better-off figure among the 
patients, some speculate that the cause might be expensive 
foodstuffs, SLOVENSKY VYCHOD reports. 
  All primary and secondary schools in the Kosice region will 
be closed as from tomorrow, the Town Council decided today in 
response to the rapid spread of hepatitis A. According to local 
public health officials a total of 227 cases of jaundice had 
been recorded until this morning. Since the infections 
departments of the Louis Pasteur Faculty Hospital and at the 
Children's Hospital have no more beds to spare, light cases are 
now being treated in the dormitory of the secondary nursing 
school. 

