Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Peter Scherer report: "Network Of Russian Mafia Getting </F>
Tighter"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt -- The Russian Mafia has got large parts 
of Germany in its stranglehold. Beside Berlin -- the 
traditional center of East European criminal organizations -- 
Munich, Cologne, and Dusseldorf have become new centers of these 
criminal groups. Security authorities report that residents 
based in the Bavarian capital operate cartels in Berlin, 
receiving stolen goods, dealing in drugs, and smuggling antiques. 
  The key figure of the "Munich Russians" was for a long time 
a 
"businessman" whom police considered to be especially dangerous 
and brutal. His criminal life came to a mysterious end, with 30 
knife wounds in a parking lot. The man, who had numerous 
contacts with Russian immigrants in Berlin, the United States 
(Odessa Group, New York), Israel, Canada, and Poland, is said to 
have become a victim of the Italian Mafia in a dispute over drug 
supplies. 
  The authorities on the Rhine have been quite successful in 
their investigations. In a major investigation into exiled 
Russian suspects in the Cologne/Dusseldorf area, carried out 
under the code name "little flower," police could prove 
"business contacts" with 31 countries. But still, contact and 
information centers for organized Russian crime continue to 
exist in the area. The "governors" of the Russian Mafia are 
said to have excellent connections with politicians, business 
people, and various criminal groups in the CIS states. 
  German security authorities self-critically admit that the 
group of exiled Russian business people in particular has 
managed to establish "very complex networks of companies, 
irrespective of official institutions." They have close 
contacts with groups in the CIS, which operate on the "Italian 
example" there. According to Russian authorities, there are at 
least 5,000 groups on the territory of the former Soviet Union 
that are involved in organized crime. These groups have links 
to syndicates in the United States, Israel, Belgium, Poland, and 
Austria. 
  Police say that exiled Russian criminals operating from 
Germany use their international business structures and their 
"means of operating" -- joint-venture companies -- to commit 
"well-planned crimes of considerable impact." This includes 
drug dealing, the production and distribution of counterfeit 
money, the smuggling of gold and icons, fraud, and the forgery 
of documents. The production of evidence is, however, proving 
extremely difficult. 

