BFN 

  [Text] On the afternoon of 28 April, the Hubei Provincial 
Government sent six touring price inspection teams and a central 
inspection team to various localities to carry out price 
inspection and curb price increases in our province. 
  At a mobilization meeting for the general price inspection 
teams, Vice Governor Chen Shuiwen said: Considerable results 
have been obtained in the general price inspection, which 
started at the beginning of March. The illegal price-increasing 
activities of some enterprises, administrative and nongovernment 
institutions, and self-employed businessmen have been curbed to 
a certain extent, but the progress of the general price 
inspection has been uneven. Price increases in some localities 
have not yet been effectively controlled. The prices of a few 
commodities have even bounced up again. The phenomenon of 
raising prices and collecting fees at will has not been totally 
wiped out, so the provincial government has decided to organize 
touring teams consisting of comrades from the price, planning, 
supervision, finance, and taxation departments, as well as some 
representatives of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference, so as to carry out price inspections in various 
localities. It hopes to obtain good results in this period as 
soon as possible. 
  According to the provincial general price inspection office, 
the work of the current general price inspection is focused on 
important means of production, especially rolled steel, 
electricity, coal, oil, and chemical fertilizers; on activities 
of monopolizing a trade so as to increase prices and thereby 
reap staggering profits; on various commodity prices and 
service charges listed as daily requirements of residents which 
fall within the scope for supervision and examination; on all 
enterprises, plants, and shops that do not put goods on sale 
with prices clearly marked; and on administrative and 
nongovernment institutions that abuse their power to collect 
fees at will, that is, to see whether or not the first list of 
75 items and the second list of 68 items published and abolished 
by the Ministry of Finance and the State Planning Commission, 
and the first list of 220 items and the second list of 250 items 
published and abolished by the provincial government really have 
been abolished. 
  The provincial government demanded that the prices of key 
commodities and services be inspected one by one at all levels 
and that violations of the regulations concerned should be dealt 
with severely. In particular, a small number of enterprises and 
establishments that do not enforce orders or prohibitions and 
that continue to raise prices should be inspected and punished 
severely and should be made known to the public. 

