Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 17 Feb. 
  ARGENTINA 
  The Argentine Wildlife Foundation reported that 
approximately 
265 native flora species are being threatened by extinction 
because of the "inappropriate use of resources and the natural 
areas that are being exploited." Most of the threatened species 
are in Misiones, Chaco, and Pampa Provinces. The ecosystem is 
being affected by the cutting of precious wood, the substitution 
of natural forests with exotic crops, floods, expansion of 
agricultural borders, construction of huge hydroelectric plants, 
deforestation, desertification, and burnings, among others. 
(Buenos Aires LA PRENSA in Spanish 6 Feb 94 p 10) 
  BOLIVIA 
  The chimneys of the Vinto smelting plant in Oruro have 
spewed 
32,000 kg of arsenic and 312,000 kg of lead, causing 
irreversible damage to the local population. (La Paz HOY in 
Spanish 5 Feb 94 Economic Section p 1) 
  The Coordinating Board for Solidarity with Indigenous People 
issued a report on the rapid deforestation of the country's 
tropical forests by saw mills and settlers. The report charges 
that 30 or more trucks loaded with precious wood are circulating 
daily on the roads linking Rurrenabaque-Yucumo-La Paz, and 
Covendo-Sapecho-La Paz. It says that as a result of the 
indiscriminate deforestation "50 species are extinguished daily 
and forever." It adds that if current legal or illegal 
deforestation continues, the tropical forests will be extinct in 
40 years and cause major environmental problems. (La Paz LA 
RAZON in Spanish 8 Feb 94 Economic Section p 4) 
  BRAZIL 
  The Environment Ministry reported that 71 species of animals 
are threatened by extinction in the Amazon as a result of 
forestry, fires, animal skin smuggling, and river pollution. The 
ministry added that if no measures are taken, 35 percent of the 
animal species in the Amazon will be extinct in the next 50 
years. (Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in Portuguese 2100 GMT 11 
Feb 94) 
  Ten years after the construction of the Comandante Ferraz 
Antarctic base on King George Island, Brazilian research 
activities have not been fully consolidated. The Brazilian 
Antarctic Program as well as scientific investigations in Brazil 
face the same difficulties: the delay in supplying funds, 
bureaucracy, small disagreements among groups, the lack of 
ongoing action, and fishing vessels. Meteorologist Rubens 
Junqueira Villela says that despite the difficulties Brazil 
"already has carried out a valuable task in the region, 
including geological research on oil reserves in Elefante 
Island, and atmospheric and biological research, among others." 
(Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 13 Feb 94 pp D1-3) 
  About 250 residents from Cubatao, Sao Paulo State, who have 
been exposed to toxic waste dumped there until 1984, are at risk 
since they still are exposed to highly toxic products like 
benzine hexachloride and sodium pentachlorophenate. They have 
been monitored by physicians, who were greatly concerned by 
laboratory tests that showed that 60 residents who were examined 
are contaminated with benzine hexachloride and may develop 
cancer, immunity problems, liver conditions, or problems in the 
nervous system. (Rio de Janeiro Rede Globo Television in 
Portuguese 2200 GMT 15 Feb 94) 
  Mercury from power energy converters deactivated at the 
Federal Railway Network in Barra do Pirai may have contaminated 
the Paraiba do Sul River two days ago. Fifteen-year-old Julio 
Cesar Santiago Fernandes left the product 50 meters off the 
river bank, where at least 1 kg was reportedly spilled into the 
river by some youths. At least 800 people in the Cantao 
neighborhood might be contaminated by mercury. (Rio de Janeiro O 
GLOBO in Portuguese 17 Feb 94 p 16) 
  CHILE 
  The National Committee for the Preservation of Wildlife 
claimed that the recently approved environmental law does not 
have appropriate institutional support and hinders court action 
aimed at identifying those responsible for environmental damage. 
(Santiago Radio Cooperativa Network in Spanish 1000 GMT 3 Feb 
94) 
  The Chilean Air Force President Frei Antarctic Base has 
become the coordinating center in charge of preventing 
environmental disasters, especially oil spills in Antarctica. 
The Chilean Marine and the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz bases 
will cooperate in the task. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1458 GMT 13 
Feb 94) 
  URUGUAY 
  Carrasco Councilman Alberto Sanchez said serious pollution 
detected in the Carrasco stream is affecting more than 200,000 
people in the area. Approximately 60 industrial plants are 
dumping their waste in the stream. According to a study by the 
Humanities and Science College, the level of contamination is 
100,000 times higher than that permitted by the WHO. (Montevideo 
LA MANANA in Spanish 11 Feb 94 p 13) 

