CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Junhong (3769 6511 4767): "Various Aspects </F>
of the Marriage Crisis in the Rural Areas"] 
  [Excerpts] Serious trend toward pre-legal age 
marriages A common saying in the countryside is: "The 
earlier a boy is born to you, the earlier your happiness," and 
this is also the backward viewpoint on procreation held by many 
in the countryside. As a result of this viewpoint, illegal [i.e. 
pre-legal age] marriages are like a pestilence jeopardizing the 
psychological health of young boys and girls. Statistics show 
that in 1991, somewhat over 1,200 births borne in pre-legal age 
marriages occurred in 25 villages and townships of a certain 
county, where the girls had been between the ages of 16 to 22. 
  Rich bosses acquiring "mistresses." Nowadays, we 
see more and more people in the countryside who have lots of 
money, which some, however, spend in a most improper way. They 
often take enterprise business as a pretext, but start a 
deceptive game of love, buy or rent houses in town, use money as 
"bait," set up "mistresses," and live a polygamous life. 
  Adultery by both sexes, emboldened by backing from some 
parties. A small number of married men and women lead 
dissolute lives, in complete disregard of the interests of 
family and children, and defying party discipline as well as the 
laws of the land. They give cause to one tragedy after another 
of families being broken up and lives being lost, of wives 
abandoning their families and children being dispersed. When Lu 
[0712], the female chairperson of a certain village, took up 
illicit relations with a certain Lu [7120] in the township in 
question, [here follows a story of great tragedy for all persons 
involved]. 
  Sudden increase of marriage troubles among "persons 
wielding power." A certain Wang, a party branch secretary 
in a certain village, originally has had a perfectly happy 
family life, but as he was doing so well in recent years, he 
started an "affair" with F, a girl in the same village, and 
after that had been going on for five years, he pressured his 
wife to give him a divorce, To gain his objective of a divorce 
agreement with his wife, he had to give up to her a large 
portion of his possessions. 
  Increasing tendency toward "economic marriages." 
In recent years, a "commodity-economy" consciousness has 
motivated peasants in the selection of marriage partners, and 
all family members are increasingly bent upon getting rich 
relatives. It thus happened time and again that marriages are 
based on economic considerations and motivated by prospects of 
enjoying all amenities of life. As a consequence, crises in 
family life and social problems are increasing correspondingly 
almost daily. 
  According to investigations, the fact that peasant women 
have 
married into quite prosperous families has led to a year by year 
increasing number of divorce cases. Among the prostitutes 
investigated or brought in for reeducation, those from rural 
areas by far outnumbered those from urban areas. Furthermore, 
women in the countryside in increasing, certainly not 
diminishing numbers, resenting the poverty of their families, 
will fabricate all kinds of alleged conflicts and on their own 
initiative demand divorces. There are also many married women in 
poverty-stricken families who will leave home to fraudulently 
remarry elsewhere to get into money. 

