Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marcela Angulo from the "Good Morning" column] </F>
  [Text] President-elect Jose Maria Figueres has set his 
foreign trade priorities and consolidated his determination to 
renegotiate the Third Economic Adjustment Program (PAE III) with 
the World Bank. 
  Figueres plans to strengthen relations with the other 
nations 
on the isthmus and to continuously intensify regional trade -- 
with a potential market of 30 million -- with a view to having 
this bloc join NAFTA at some future date. 
  Judging from his statements to the press, Figueres plans to 
effect structural reforms through agreements and credits similar 
to those the current administration made with other cooperation 
organizations in financial and educational matters. 
  Nonetheless, and in spite of the interest that Figueres has 
indicated in attracting foreign investment and technology in 
order to increase the competitiveness of Costa Rican 
enterprises, the macroeconomic and commercial policies his 
administration will promote are still a little vague. 
  As Foreign Trade Minister Roberto Rojas explained recently, 
in order for Costa Rica to prepare for its probable 
incorporation into NAFTA -- this will take from eight to 10 
years -- the national strategy should necessarily include 
opening up the services industry. 
  The main reason for this would be that the United States is 
hoping to improve its position in global trade regarding the 
sale of services and intellectual property. These 
characteristics are already apparent in the bilateral treaty 
signed with Mexico and Canada. 
  The Calderon Administration's PAE III includes reforms that 
are headed in that direction. A change in these would represent 
a setback or impasse for the country; the cost might turn out to 
be too high in the long term. 
  It is not enough to establish a goal -- to become part of 
NAFTA -- one must also adopt changes required to reach it. In 
my opinion, this point is not clear to our economy's future 
strategists. 

