BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Moti Amir] </F>
  [Excerpts] The drama that started when the Palestinians 
learned that 286 prisoners -- including 128 people who had 
served life terms -- would be released and transferred to the 
autonomy ended at the entrance to Jericho at daybreak. We have 
learned once again that agreements reached between Israel and 
the Palestinians are not implemented automatically. The 
prisoner release followed an understanding reached between 
Brigadier General Yom-Tov Sami' and General Ziyad al-Atrash, the 
leaders of the supreme liaison committee, but the Palestinian 
leadership in Judaea and Samaria complained about it to 'Arafat, 
claiming it violates the Cairo agreement. In response, 'Arafat 
fired Gen. al-Atrash, who is based in Gaza, and replaced him 
with Gen. 'Abd-al-Razzaq Yihya. 
  At the same time, the Palestinians in Jericho were told to 
block the roads and prohibit any of the freed prisoners from 
entering. The outcome was an inevitable confrontation between 
Israeli and Palestinian representatives at the Vered Yeriho 
junction, at the entry to the autonomy. The first bus with 18 
prisoners entered Jericho despite the roadblock, and the 
prisoners alighted at the Hanan camp, but the Palestinian 
policemen loaded them onto police vehicles and returned them to 
the regional liaison office. 
  Faysal al-Husayni, Jamil al-Tarifi, Sa'ib 'Urayqat, Jibril 
al-Rujub, and General al-Hajj Isma'il arrived at the site and 
informed the Israeli representatives that there was no 
agreement. Only those who had served life terms would enter 
Jericho, and the others would be sent to their homes, they said. 
They negotiated for some five hours at the entry to the 
regional liaison office at the Vered Yeriho junction, while 
approximately 270 prisoners waited on buses near Jericho and 
another 20 waited near the negotiators at the liaison office. 
  During the negotiations, telephone consultations were held 
with Deputy Chief of Staff Amnon Shahaq and the prisoners' 
leader in Nabulus prison. At daybreak, the Palestinians 
proposed a compromise whereby all the released prisoners would 
enter Jericho except for 13, who would be sent to their homes in 
Judaea and Samaria, on condition that Prime Minister Yitzhaq 
Rabin's bureau would send a reply within 48 hours to their 
request to meet with Rabin on this issue. The proposal was 
later accepted in a discussion with Major General Shahaq. 
Thirteen prisoners who did not serve life terms were sent to 
their homes in Judaea and Samaria, and the remainder entered 
Jericho. 
  At the conclusion of the extended negotiations, Colonel 
Herzl, a member of the liaison committee, said that to him this 
was not a compromise but the implementation of the agreement 
reached with the Palestinians. [passage omitted] 
  During the negotiations, the released prisoners pressured 
their leaders to make sure that they are not returned to jail. 
Although their proposal was accepted, the Palestinian leaders 
were far from pleased. 
  [Begin recording] [Amir] Are you satisfied? 
  [Al-Tarifi] No, I am not satisfied. 
  [Amir] Why? 
  [Al-Tarifi] Because they are cheating us. [end recording] 
  On the other hand, Faysal la-Husayni said they would uphold 
the agreement reached: 
  [Begin recording] [al-Husayni] There is an agreement. We 
will make sure that something good comes out of it. 
  [Amir] Do you hope to receive an answer from the prime 
minister within 48 hours? 
  [Al-Husayni] I hope that something good will come of it. 
[end recording] 

