Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The growth in the consumption of natural gas in the 
state is three times that envisaged in the first development 
plan. 
  On the eve of commissioning several important gas projects 
in 
the northern cities of the country, as well a new unit becoming 
operational in the Cangan gas refinery, Petroleum Minister 
Aqazadeh-Kho'i, in an interview with the Central News Unit of 
the Voice and Vision, said: At the moment, 105 million cubic 
meters of gas per day are being refined and consumed throughout 
the country. With a new unit being commissioned in the Cangan 
gas refinery within the next few days, which will have a 
capacity of 10 million cubic meters, the state capacity for 
producing and refining gas will be increased to 115 million 
cubic meters per day. 
  The oil minister added: The extent of the daily consumption 
of gas in the current year [beginning 21 March 1993] compared to 
last year, increased by 20 million cubic meters on average. 
That is an increase of about 20 percent. 
  He said that the amount of gas that can be supplied to power 
stations is a maximum of 20-30 million cubic meters per day and 
the trend of supply has been better than in past years. He 
added: Gas consumption in state power stations is greater than 
supply, and the shortfall is made up by liquid fuels such as 
fuel oil and diesel oil. 
  The oil minister described the amount of liquid fuel stored 
at power stations to be satisfactory, and pointed out that with 
the cooperation of the Ministry of Power approximately 400 
million liters of fuel oil have been stored in power stations 
during spring and summer. However, this does not mean a uniform 
regulation of stored fuel in all the stations -- when there is a 
large temperature drop and fuel consumption in Tehran increases, 
gas production does not meet the total state consumption. 
Therefore, in some stations, diesel oil has to be used instead 
of gas. 
  Regarding gas supply projects in the country, the oil 
minister said: In the first development plan more than 100 
cities joined the gas network. Cities connected to the gas 
network total nearly 200. The consumption growth has reached 
over 21 percent instead of the envisaged 7.6 percent. The rate 
of growth is fast, and efforts to meet gas supply figures in the 
first plan have been extensive. 
  He announced the growth of investment in the gas sector to 
be 
three times that envisaged in the first state development plan, 
and said: In the second development plan the same attention 
must be paid to gas investment projects so that all or most 
areas of the country can be supplied with gas within a suitable 
period. 

