BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Victor Nunez] </F>
  [Text] Barranca, 10 May -- President Alberto Fujimori said 
here that the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement [MRTA] has been 
practically liquidated. This statement follows the recent 
capture of high-ranking leaders of this terrorist organization. 
  Regarding his possible reelection as president, Fujimori 
said 
he had not yet thought about the possibility, but would think 
the matter over carefully if the people asked him to run again. 
  The president arrived in this city at around 1500, 
accompanied by Transport Minister Dante Cordova Blanco, 
Inter-American Development Bank representative Rosa Watson, the 
South Korean ambassador, and a group of South Korean 
legislators. His arrival occurred after a three-hour delay in 
Chancay. The helicopter transporting him and his entourage had 
to land at a local stadium in this town due to bad weather in 
the area. 
  In Barranca, Fujimori and his entourage were received by 
Provincial Mayors Paulino Leon Soto and Carlos Mesa, General 
Pedro Moreano, head of the 8th Military Region Army Security 
Department, and other high-ranking provincial authorities. 
  After the protocol greetings, President Fujimori inaugurated 
a 50 km long stretch of the North Panamerican Highway linking 
Pativilca and Huacho. Here, the president made a short speech 
stressing that the MRTA had been practically liquidated 
following the hard blows against the movement's national 
leadership. 
  The president did not give details, but added that in the 
past few days the forces of order had captured important leaders 
of this terrorist organization. He did not mention the place or 
number of individuals captured. Fujimori also said the Shining 
Path will be eliminated before 1995, the year of the end of his 
mandate. 
  Answering a group of local inhabitants who asked him to run 
for president in the upcoming elections, Fujimori said he had 
not yet thought about the possibility, "but if the people ask me 
to run I will study the possibility." 

