BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  SUNDAY TIMES </H8>
  Election Seen as Cause for Celebration -- Johannesburg 
SUNDAY 
TIMES in English in an editorial entitled "Laying the Foundation 
for Our Future," on page 40 on 24 April says that the coming 
election is a time for celebration for South Africans. South 
Africans will vote, it says, because "this election, and this 
election alone, must lay the foundation of the future for them, 
for their children and their children's children." The 
editorial welcomes the followers of Chief Buthelezi and Constand 
Viljoen into the election, saying "no South African should stand 
aside in angry isolation." Referring to the atrocities of 
apartheid, the paper says: "To have come from such a past to our 
present condition is truly a miracle." It notes that some 
"foreign observers...notably the Sunday Times in London, lapsed 
into gleeful anticipation of disaster, attaching it first to the 
right wing and to the army or police, and later to Inkatha or to 
a wider Zulu nationalism. In the event, the armed forces have 
not mutinied, nor have the police rebelled, and Inkatha has led 
the Zulu people, dancing with joy, into the elections." 
Apartheid, the editorial points out, has created "mountainous 
problems" that must still be solved, such as poverty and 
illiteracy. Furthermore, "minorities, still flocking to the 
banner of the National Party," are trying "to cling to privilege 
or fondle fears of the future." Nevertheless, it concludes, 
South Africans over the past four years "have shown that we are 
able to find solutions. And that is reason enough to join the 
Zulus in celebration." 
<H8>  SUNDAY NATION </H8>
  Vote for ANC Urged -- Johannesburg SUNDAY NATION in English 
on 24 April carries beneath its masthead on page 1, a nearly 
full-page reproduction of the South African flag with a large 
"THE END!" stamped over it. In the lower right corner of the 
flag is the following editorial statement: "We have come to the 
eve of our liberation and stand ready to reclaim a right we have 
been denied for centuries -- the right to vote and take charge 
of our destiny. But as we prepare to excercise this right, we 
dare not take a retrogressive step and delay our freedom. There 
is simply no reason to prolong for one minute the poverty, 
unemployment, illiteracy, violence and racism that National 
Party rule has come to symbolise so powerfully. Nor is there 
any moral justification for extending the life of any of its 
partners in apartheid. Our destiny demands that we vote for 
democracy, peace and reconciliation. It demands that we vote 
for the ANC." 
<H8>  WEEKEND STAR </H8>
  Need for Multiparty Government Seen -- In an editorial 
entitled "Use Your Vote for South Africa's Salvation," 
Johannesburg WEEKEND STAR in English on page 10 of its 23 April 
edition, finds reasons to vote for several parties. After 
noting that "none of the competing parties deserves unqualified 
support," the editorial continues by stating: "Firstly, the 
Democratic Party [DP] most closely espouses the principles we 
cherish, and we consider its presence in government to be 
essential....Votes for the DP will not be wasted -- they will be 
votes for multi-party government." The ANC, the editorial 
continues, "has earned its place as the major party in a 
government of national unity." "Nelson Mandela...is the only 
man with the stature to hold us together and set us firmly on 
the new road." Looking to the future, however, the editorial 
cautions: "But in the second election the ANC should be judged 
according to its performance. While it boasts many men and 
women of outstanding quality, it also harbours some deeply 
irresponsible and dangerous elements." The editorial also notes 
a "compelling case for getting the talents of other parties -- 
including the National Party -- into the new Parliament." The 
editorial calls the ANC's Reconstruction and Development Program 
"the most substantial contribution to the policy debate during 
the election campaign." The paper says the plan has "many 
positive aspects," but argues that the ANC will have to be more 
convincing about its "cost implications" and about how 
productivity is to be increased. 
<H8>  RAPPORT </H8>
  Editorial Urges Vote Against ANC -- "South Africa stands on 
the threshold of one of the biggest, if not the biggest 
development in its existence," begins a page-24 editorial in the 
Johannesburg RAPPORT in Afrikaans on 24 April. "For true 
democratic freedom, the rights of the individual, the right to 
private ownership, the right to freedom of association, the 
right to protect your own language, the right to freedom of 
religion -- every South African should fulfill his basic 
democratic right -- he must vote." "Of course, many are 
hesitant." "Of course mistakes were made during the 
negotiations process. This newspaper has never hesitated to 
point out these faults. It also does not plan to be silenced in 
future." "Two real dangers exist. The first is the refusal to 
vote with the argument, among others, that one should not 
participate in a `godless' dispensation." "The second real 
danger is a party adopting plans which have failed miserably in 
other places -- a party prepared to maneuver its communist 
partner into parliament under its wing." "The real ANC has not 
stood up yet and if it does stand up in future, will it be with 
the face of a Lenin or a Stalin?" "RAPPORT urgently encourages 
its readers to go and vote -- against the ANC, which has still 
not found its true soul and which should not be allowed to apply 
communist principles." 

