CSO 

<F P=106> ["Rules of the Party of the Poor of Russia"] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Economic and Sociopolitical Situation in Russia </H5>
  The market reform being implemented has brought about the 
collapse of the economy and the impoverishment of the majority 
of the population. 
  The price of food, clothing, medicines, and transport, 
municipal, and ritual services is growing continuously. 
  Even basic necessities: bread, milk, sugar, vegetables, 
fruit, are now beyond the reach of many of our compatriots. 
  The chronic malnutrition of old people, mothers, children, 
and citizens without work is leading to an increase in Russians' 
mortality, the level of which is in Russia higher than the 
birthrate indicator. 
  Hundreds of thousands of people are standing in public 
places 
with outstretched hand in the hope of charity and are picking up 
the refuse at dumps and garbage heaps. 
  The number of suicides and other serious accidents is 
growing. 
  The moral degradation of society and the humiliation and 
disparagement of those who, on account of their age or illness, 
cannot fend for themselves continue. 
  Russia still lacks a scientifically substantiated, national 
program of a way out of the economic and sociopolitical crisis 
and of the extrication of our compatriots from destitution, 
hunger, and extinction. The endless political struggle, the 
rudeness and incompetence of the authorities, and the constant 
promises and deception of the people are creating an 
extraordinarily dangerous situation in our society, which is 
unstable as it is. 
  There can be only one way out of this situation--the 
awakening from their silence of the people's masses and the 
mobilization of their efforts for struggle for their vitally 
necessary rights and interests and for the elaboration, 
adoption, and unswerving compliance with the laws on social 
protection of the citizens of Russia and on this basis for the 
creation of a mass social movement which would undertake the 
accomplishment of this noble goal. 
  The people's masses can only be awakened from their silence 
by a truly fundamentally new people's party--the Party of the 
Poor of Russia. 
<H5>  1. General Provisions </H5>
  1.1. The Party of the Poor of Russia (PBR) is a political 
organization. It is being formed on the initiative of the 
participants in the mercy movement in Russia. 
  1.2. The party's motto: "Social justice and protection of 
the 
poor of Russia." 
  1.3. The Party of the Poor of Russia unites in its ranks: 
  the needy and socially unprotected strata of the populace, 
to 
which pertain today: retirees, the unemployed, the disabled, 
students, large families, the handicapped, and other categories 
of citizens eking out a wretched existence and in need of 
support and assistance; 
  other categories of people, regardless of their party 
affiliation, religious belief, or nationality, who recognize the 
program and rules of the Party of the Poor of Russia and who 
could by conviction render the party the utmost material and 
moral assistance in the accomplishment of its statutory tasks; 
  all those to whom such general concepts as "care," "mercy," 
"kindness," "philanthropy," and "compassion" are dear. 
  1.4. The Party of the Poor of Russia shall organize its work 
on the basis of the party's program and rules. 
  1.5. The party's entire activity shall be exercised on the 
basis of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, current 
legislation, and the party rules. 
<H5>  2. Purpose of the Party of the Poor of Russia </H5>
  2.1. The purpose of the Party of the Poor of Russia is to 
contribute to the building in our country of a society of social 
justice and social protection and the genuine equality and 
freedom of all its members. 
  The Party of the Poor does not aspire to the seizure of 
power. It is prepared to cooperate with any legitimately 
elected, strong, and authoritative power which defends the 
interests of all our compatriots. 
  The Party of the Poor will support in every possible way 
authorities and political parties and movements that devise and 
offer a scientifically substantiated program of the extrication 
of our powerful state and long-suffering people from the 
humiliating, shameful condition of the hunger, poverty, and 
destitution of the majority of the population. The Party of the 
Poor would actively support such a program and implement it as 
far as the forces and capabilities of its members allow. 
<H5>  3. Basic Tasks of the Party of the Poor of Russia </H5>
  3.1. The basic tasks of the Party of the Poor of Russia are: 
  unification of the efforts of all Russians for our society's 
speediest escape from the profound economic and sociopolitical 
crisis; 
  the creation of a mass social movement capable of 
championing 
the interests of the needy and socially unprotected strata of 
the populace--workers, peasants, and the intelligentsia who are 
living in poverty and who have become hostage to the totally 
unjustified reforms which are under way in the country, 
piratical commerce, and the collapse of production, everyday 
amenities, education, and health care; 
  imparting greater organization, plan-conformity, 
single-mindedness, and perseverance in the actions of the poor 
for the defense of their legitimate rights and liberties and in 
the aspiration to be heard and understood by the president and 
the government of Russia and the organs of state power both in 
the center and locally; 
  rendering members of the Party of the Poor in need of social 
support and care specific targeted moral and material assistance 
and other types of services; 
  active participation in the elaboration and realization of 
an 
official program of the social protection of the needy and 
unprotected strata of the population of Russia; 
  the aspiration to make each compatriot of ours who is 
experiencing acute material need and who is morally humiliated 
and insulted by current realities stronger in the defense of his 
own and the common interests of the people living in poverty. 
<H5>  4. Party Membership </H5>
  4.1. Any adult citizen who recognizes and supports its 
program and rules may be a member of the Party of the Poor of 
Russia. 
  4.2. Membership of the party is voluntary. 
  4.3. Admittance to the party is effected by way of an 
individual talk on the part of a representative of the local 
party organization with the specific individual who has declared 
a desire to be a party member, with the subsequent entry of his 
basic biographical data in the "List of Registration of Members 
of the Party of the Poor of Russia," which shall be kept in the 
primary organization with the status of double-check bookkeeping 
document. 
  4.4. A member of the Party of the Poor shall be issued a 
certificate signed by the chairman of the district (city) and 
equivalent structural organization. 
  4.5. Members of the Party of the Poor are exempt from the 
payment of dues. 
  4.6. Any member of the party may freely leave it, having 
submitted a statement to this effect to the primary party 
organization. 
  4.7. Members of the Party of the Poor of Russia are 
entitled: 
  to submit proposals and recommendations geared to an 
improvement in the life of all strata of the populace and the 
development of the economy, production, science, education, 
culture, health care, and other spheres of the activity of 
society (the state); 
  to freely express their opinion and discuss all questions of 
the activity of the party; 
  to participate in all actions mounted by the party in 
defense 
of the interests of their members; 
  to vote and to run for office in the party's directive 
bodies; 
  to avail themselves of the support and protection of the 
party organization. 
  4.8. All members of the Party of the Poor of Russia shall 
have equal rights. 
  4.9. Members of the Party of the Poor of Russia must strive 
persistently for: 
  the achievement of the program and statutory purposes and 
tasks of the party; 
  the state and social protection of their rights and 
interests 
and also the protection of their party associates against all 
manifestations of economic, social, national, and spiritual 
oppression; 
  a broadening of the influence of the party in society and an 
enhancement of its authority among the needy and other 
categories of the population. 
<H5>  5. Organizational Composition of the Party </H5>
  5.1. The Party of the Poor of Russia is a party of the unity 
of views, interests, and actions of its members. 
  5.2. The basis of its activity is composed of: 
  an ability to unite rapidly, promptly, and single-mindedly 
the efforts of its members for the accomplishment of the 
specific, tactical, and strategic tasks of the party program and 
rules; 
  the high conscious discipline and organization of its 
members 
in mounting political actions (meetings, demonstrations, 
marches, and so forth) in defense of the interests of the poor 
of Russia; 
  an ability to reach the impoverished masses of the populace, 
acquire a profound grasp of their life and everyday existence, 
be imbued with compassion and concern for each member of society 
and one's party, and render them human attention and moral and 
material support. 
  5.3. The Party of the Poor of Russia advocates the peaceful 
resolution of all social problems within the framework of the 
Constitution of the Russian Federation and is opposed to 
unconstitutional forcible actions. 
  5.4. The Party of the Poor of Russia shall constantly confer 
with the people and do their bidding. 
  5.5. The basis of the party is the primary party 
organization. 
  A primary party organization is created according to the 
territorial principle where no fewer than three members of the 
party are present by decision of their assembly. 
  The primary party organization shall be registered with the 
district (city) and equivalent committee of the Party of the 
Poor of Russia. 
  5.6. The primary party organization shall be guided in its 
activity by the party program and rules and the decisions of 
plenums of the PBR Central Council and PBR congresses and shall 
in their realization independently determine the forms and 
methods of its work. 
  5.7. The decisions of the primary party organization adopted 
within the framework of the party program and rules may not be 
canceled by superior party authorities. 
  5.8. The directive body of the primary party organization 
shall be the party meeting, which is competent to adopt all 
decisions if more than half the members of the party on record 
are present thereat. 
  5.9. For the performance of current business the meeting of 
the primary party organization shall elect an executive body 
(chairman of the board, bureau, party committee). 
  5.10. The primary party organization shall rely in its work 
on social commissions, which shall study specific issues of 
social protection of the populace (pensions, housing-amenity 
issues, legal matters, and so forth). 
  The commission chairmen shall be confirmed by the 
appropriate 
party authority. 
  5.11. The primary organizations of the Party of the Poor of 
Russia shall unite with regard to the administrative-territorial 
division of the Russian Federation in local (municipal, city, 
okrug) organizations of the party, and the latter, in turn, in 
regional (oblast, kray, republic) party organizations. 
  5.12. The directive body of the district, city, okrug, 
oblast, kray, and republic party organizations of the Party of 
the Poor of Russia shall be the general meeting, the conference, 
and the congress. 
  They are competent to decide questions if more than half the 
party members or delegates are present thereat. 
  The meeting, conference, and congress shall elect the 
executive bodies (board, bureau, committee, Central Council) of 
the Party of the Poor of Russia and their auditing commissions 
for a term of no more than three years, which will organize the 
work of the party in the period between party meetings, 
conferences, and congresses and regularly notify the party 
members and the superior bodies of their activity. 
  The procedure of the election of the executive and auditing 
authorities and the election of conference and congress 
delegates and the representation quota shall be determined by 
the corresponding party body. 
  5.13. The highest body of the Party of the Poor of Russia 
shall be the congress. 
  The congress shall convene not less than once every three 
years. A decision of the Central Council on the convening of a 
regular or special congress, the agenda, and the representation 
quota shall be announced no later than three months prior to the 
congress. 
  A special congress of the Party of the Poor of Russia shall 
be convened at the decision of the Central Council or on the 
initiative of no less than one-third of the total number of 
members of the party or at the demand of one-third of the 
delegates to the preceding party congress. In this case the 
congress shall assemble within a month's time and be deemed 
competent if a majority of representatives of the oblast, kray, 
and republic organizations of the Party of the Poor of Russia 
are represented thereat. 
  5.14. The chairman of the Party of the Poor of Russia, the 
Central Executive Council, and the secretary of the Central 
Council shall be elected at the congress. 
  5.15. In the period between congresses the leadership of 
party activity shall be exercised by the Party of the Poor of 
Russia Central Council, which shall at its plenum elect the 
board and secretariat of the social commissions and determine 
the numerical composition. 
  5.16. For the solution of political and organizational 
questions the party Central Council shall no less than once 
every six months assemble a plenum of the Party of the Poor of 
Russia Central Council. 
  5.17. The Central Auditing Commission of the Party of the 
Poor of Russia shall organize supervision of fulfillment of the 
rules and the financial and economic activity of the party 
authorities and report on the results of its work at party 
plenums and party congresses. 
  For the organization of its work it shall elect from its 
ranks a chairman and his deputy. 
  Members of the Party of the Poor of Russia Central Council 
may not simultaneously be members of the Central Auditing 
Commission. 
  Members of the Central Auditing Commission have the right to 
participate in the work of all party bodies both in the center 
and locally. 
<H5>  6. The Party, State Authorities, and Public Organizations </H5>
  6.1. When accomplishing program and statutory assignments 
the 
party may cooperate and interact with state authorities and 
other political parties and also public organizations which 
stand on guard of social justice and defend the interests of the 
poor and needy strata of the population. 
  It may to this end join various unions, blocs, and 
associations. 
  6.2. The Party of the Poor of Russia shall rely closely in 
its work on veterans' organizations and retirees' professional 
organizations. 
  6.3. Organizations of the Party of the Poor of Russia shall 
draw up and publish their election programs and platforms and 
nominate candidates for the organs of power and render them 
assistance and support in the election campaign. 
  6.4. Members of the Party of the Poor of Russia elected to 
organs of the power of the people may create party groups 
(factions) for the purpose of unification of efforts and 
coordination of their activity in the realization of the mandate 
of the electorate and the resolution of political tasks of the 
social protection of the poor. 
  The party groups (factions) shall interact with the 
corresponding party committees both in the center and locally 
and obtain from them qualified recommendations and support. 
  6.5. The leaders of the local and regional organizations of 
the Party of the Poor of Russia shall represent the party in 
relations with the corresponding legislative, executive, and 
judicial authorities. 
  6.6. The Party of the Poor of Russia Central Council shall 
represent the party in relations with the central legislative, 
executive, and judicial authorities. 
  6.7. The Party of the Poor of Russia Central Council shall 
represent the party in relations with state structures and party 
and public authorities of states of the near and far abroad and 
international organizations standing on guard of the social 
protection of the populace. 
<H5>  7. Monetary Resources and Assets of the Party </H5>
  7.1. The activity of the Party of the Poor of Russia and its 
organizations shall be supported by financial and material and 
technical resources from party income. 
  7.2. The monetary resources of the party shall be formed 
from: 
  voluntary donations and contributions of commercial and 
other 
public and philanthropic structures; 
  the assistance (donations) of the citizens, of other 
countries included; 
  income from production-economic, commercial, and publishing 
activity; 
  other receipts not conflicting with current legislation. 
  7.3. The budget of the Party of the Poor of Russia and its 
structures, the procedure of allocations to it from the income 
of local party organizations, and the report on administration 
of the party budget shall be confirmed by a plenum of the Party 
of the Poor of Russia Central Council and conveyed to the party 
members. 
  7.4. All party organizations shall be independent in the 
disposal of their budget and the solution of staffing, 
production-economic, and commercial questions. 
  The budget of a party organization shall be examined and 
confirmed by the party bureau or party committee. 
  7.5. Property of the Party of the Poor of Russia is property 
of the whole party. 
  Enterprises, buildings, installations, equipment, 
transportation, inventory, assets, and monetary resources and 
also other assets necessary for the accomplishment of the 
party's statutory tasks shall be objects of the right of 
ownership. 
  7.6. Party bureaus, committees, and auditing commissions 
shall notify the party members annually of the state of the 
party budget and the expenditure of funds. 
<H5>  8. Party Symbols and the Press Organ and the Location of the </H5>
Party's Central Authorities 
  8.1. The Party of the Poor of Russia shall have its own 
flag, 
anthem, motto, emblem, and lapel badge, which shall be approved 
by the congress. 
  8.2. The location of the Party of the Poor of Russia Central 
Council shall be the city of Moscow. 
<H5>  9. Procedure of Registration and Termination of the Activity </H5>
of the Party 
  9.1. In accordance with current legislation, the rules of 
the 
Party of the Poor of Russia are to be registered with the 
Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation. 
  9.2. The activity of the Party of the Poor of Russia shall 
be 
terminated in accordance with a decision of a congress 
(conference) of the party or a decision of a court of law. 
  9.3. In the event of the adoption of a decision on 
termination of the activity or the disbandment of the party, all 
questions connected with organization of the liquidation process 
shall be determined by a special party congress. It will decide 
questions of use of the assets and monetary resources of the 
party and form a public liquidation commission. 
  9.4. In the event of termination of the activity of the 
party 
in accordance with a ruling of the Supreme Court of the Russian 
Federation, all property, financial, and other questions shall 
be decided in accordance with current legislation and these 
rules. 

