Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Appeal by Malika, Myriem, Raouf, Maria-Inan, Soukaina, and </F>
Abdelatif Oufkir: "For Justice To Be Done"--first paragraph is 
LE MONDE introduction] 
  [Text] The children of Morocco's former interior minister, 
General Mohamed Oufkir, who is said to have committed suicide in 
August 1972, the day after the attack on the king's airplane, 
have now been set free. But they claim their right to lead a 
normal life and in particular the right to a passport enabling 
them to come and go. On the third anniversary of their release, 
they sent us this appeal. 
  For the second time, having exhausted all hope, we make this 
appeal to recover our full freedom and the right to a life as 
normal as possible, if that still means anything after 19 years 
of "disappearance" and detention for the only crime of bearing 
our father's name. 
  In 1987, having managed to dig a tunnel, it was to escape 
death among universal oblivion and to break the wall of silence 
that four of us got away from the Bir-Jdid camp, south of 
Casablanca, leaving behind the walls, watch towers, and barbed 
wires. After wandering for three days through our country, it 
was from Tangiers that we managed to send a "call for help" and 
express our most complete failure to understand what was 
happening to us. 
  In fact, in 1972, when we were "taken away," the oldest of 
us 
(a girl) was 18, and the youngest (a boy) two and a half. In a 
state of utter confusion, we wept, saying: "We are innocent.... 
Do you believe that children could be responsible for any such 
thing? We implore you to give us justice..." 
  Soon arrested again in Tangiers, we did not remain at the 
Bir-Jdid camp. We were put in a farm near Marrakech where, for 
four and a half years, we lived under strict house arrest, with 
all the comfort we needed, but without ever going out. Four 
years and a half, after 15 long years of suffering. Meanwhile, 
the whole world knew, and we kept saying in our despair, that 
our only wish was "to recover our freedom and our rights, and to 
be able to live under our name, something for which we paid with 
our tears, our blood, and the best years of our lives." 
<H5>  The Right To Exist </H5>
  It was only on 26 February 1991, three years ago, that we 
were taken to Rabat to be released. Strange freedom, that we had 
forgotten and that the youngest among us had never known. Always 
accompanied at first, we took hesitating steps to find life, or 
find it again: the bustle and glitter of the streets, the rich 
clamor of the markets, the odors and beautiful light of our 
magnificent country, and the smiles of the people. 
  From confinement to freedom, we were--and still are--in a 
situation with no precise status, with the impression that after 
19 years of detention they left us on the street, with no 
concern for our exhausted bodies, our wounded hearts, our 
devastated lives. 
  We kept silent, we believed in a solution with no new 
trauma, 
no confrontation, and no discredit to our country. We ardently 
wished for it and we undertook everything that was in our power: 
numerous and unceasing steps, officially, discreetly, through 
public officials whom we begged for help or through friends 
acting at our request, and even through their Royal Highnesses 
the princes and princesses who never rejected us or refused to 
listen to us, with simplicity and compassion. We wish to pay 
tribute to them here. 
  However, we are still in a strange, difficult situation: 
"free" but without the right to travel, to discover the world, 
unable to recover whatever remains of our property, without 
compensation also for the irreversible sequels of 19 years of 
captivity. Our only hope now is to finally get the right to 
live, without being unjustly equated any longer with past events 
that were a tragedy for everybody, but a tragedy in which we 
were only bystanders, not the authors. 
  We would like to take part, here or elsewhere according to 
the wishes of each of us, in our country's life and development 
in all fields, without restriction, or prerequisites, or 
prejudice, or segregation, or "special status." For we deeply 
love our country, and if our misfortune could have contributed, 
no matter how little, to its happiness, then we would not have 
the bitter feeling that we have suffered in vain. 
  We would like to be able to come and go in and out of 
Morocco, a right guaranteed to all citizens by our Constitution, 
and to be given the same opportunity to create and undertake as 
this entire dynamic generation who dreams only of making Morocco 
triumph in the concert of modern nations. 
<H5>  The Children's Innocence </H5>
  Today, with very few exceptions, which our officials say are 
about to be settled, all Moroccans have a passport. But an 
application was accepted for only one of us (a girl). That was 
15 months ago, although the normal time it takes to obtain a 
passport is 30 days; and we have had no answer yet. 
  Voltaire once said: "When innocence is persecuted, we are 
all 
concerned." What would the great man have written about 
children's innocence? It is not to go back over the past nor to 
dwell on our fate that we are making this appeal. It is out of 
despair and with humility that we do so, as we are fully aware 
of all the horrors that are tearing at the world and require 
absolute priority. 
  We aspire to one thing only: to put behind us once and for 
all this page of Morocco's history that has traumatized 
everybody. We merely hope that humanism, justice, morality, and 
right will eventually inspire a sincere gesture that might help 
us look forward to a serene future in spite of the implacable 
fate that struck us. 
  The question today is no longer about our survival, but 
about 
our lives. We beg to be given the freedom and means enabling 
each of us to take charge of their lives. Is it wrong to claim 
the right to live, to exist in one's own country or elsewhere? 
Is it wrong to aspire to equal opportunity and equal treatment? 
Is it wrong, after all that we were unjustly subjected to, to 
ask for the means to live with dignity? 
  Because of what curse should we go on living like shadows 
haunted by the past? When will we be given the right to exist as 
individuals rather than as "a case"? When will we be relieved 
from that terrible and unjust fate that overwhelmed us and left 
scars on our souls and our lives, a fate that nothing and nobody 
can justify? 
  We plead here that justice be at last done to us. 

