Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by LNS/CB: "Bonn and Paris See Dehaene as Delors </F>
Successor"] 
  [Text] Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene is the most 
likely candidate to succeed Jacques Delors as president of the 
European Commission on 1 January 1995, according to a report in 
yesterday's edition of the British newspaper THE GUARDIAN. He 
would apparently receive the backing of President Mitterrand of 
France and Chancellor Kohl of Germany, who prefer him to his 
Netherlands colleague Ruud Lubbers. The Parliament in Brussels 
takes this report very seriously. 
  A decision regarding a successor to Delors is expected to be 
made at the European summit of heads of state and government at 
the end of June in Corfu (Greece). 
  However, all that is certain for the moment is that the 
French Socialist Jacques Delors is to leave the Commission, the 
European Union's (EU) executive arm, after 10 years as its 
president. It is generally assumed that it is now the turn of a 
Christian Democrat from one of the EU's smaller member states. 
Until now, Netherlands Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers was the most 
widely circulated name. 
  According to John Palmer of THE GUARDIAN, who is well known 
in European circles, Kohl and Mitterrand are exerting pressure 
on Dehaene to succeed Delors. Bonn and Paris apparently believe 
that Lubbers would lean too much toward the British. Kohl has 
also apparently not forgotten Lubbers' less than enthusiastic 
response to German reunification. Dehaene on the other hand 
greatly impressed the European Council last year during his term 
as president. 
  The pro-European profile of Dehaene is also to the liking of 
Europe's southern countries, who are counting on European 
solidarity. But it is precisely this profile which the British 
fear, officially supporting the candidacy of the present 
European commissioner, Leon Brittan. But even if the British 
give Lubbers their backing, Palmer reports that this would not 
stop Dehaene, provided of course that he decides to be a 
candidate. 
  When asked to comment, a spokesman for the prime minister 
would say no more than that Dehaene "has resolved not to respond 
to such rumors." 
  In the corridors of the Parliament building, Christian 
Democrat politicians responded with the comment that the report 
"has come too early, but is probably not incorrect." The fact 
that Dehaene reacted with a "no comment" rather than simply 
laughing it off is being seen as some kind of confirmation. 
  The news has caused a stir in the political world. The main 
question was how the prime minister would be able to organize 
such a move without triggering a government crisis. If he did 
decide to make the change, the local elections would seem to be 
the most appropriate time. The parliamentary elections are then 
14 months away at the most. 
  The move would also not be without its consequences for 
Karel 
Van Miert, who can no longer remain a European commissioner 
after 1 January 1995. It would also block the way for a Belgian 
presidency of the WEU [Western European Union], for which Mark 
Eyskens is a candidate. 
  Other observers point out that it would be a remarkable step 
up for someone who has only stood for election on a single 
occasion. Eric Van Rompuy of the CVP [Christian People's Party] 
reacted jokingly to the report. "That's good news, then Herman 
can become prime minister," he said, referring to his brother. 
  In any event, the situation will have to be made clear very 
soon. Especially in the Netherlands, where after the rout 
suffered by the CDA [Christian Democrat Party] in the local 
elections it is thought possible that Lubbers may announce 
before the parliamentary elections that he is to retire from 
national politics. 

