Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arkadiy Solovyev, candidate of economic </F>
sciences: "Everything Is Better in Russia as Regards `Human 
Rights,' but There Are More and More Who Are Downtrodden"] 
  [Text] The latest anniversary of the Declaration of 
Human Rights passed almost unnoticed in Russia. By an irony of 
fate it coincided with the apogee of the election campaign. 
Perhaps it was for this reason that it was "noticed" only by a 
small circle of professionals--political scientists, 
sociologists, and employees of specific grassroots and civil 
rights organizations. Yet human rights and liberties are, it 
would seem, that sole purpose and overriding mission for the 
sake of which many of us in April 1985 or in August 1991 and 
subsequently also, perhaps, were prepared to renounce everything 
contained in the notorious period of stagnation. 
  But the "perestroyka era" has ended, smoothly passing into 
the "era of radical reform"--a great recasting of power, 
property, and life's foundations--and the euphoria of the 
triumphs in connection with the emancipation from the seven 
decades of slavery of the national spirit has evaporated like 
smoke, leaving the people in its wake merely the ashes of the 
charred ruins. And all that was in any way valuable, which had 
been accumulated by the generations... has vanished. 
  There has also, somehow imperceptibly, been a division of 
the 
monolith of fellow thinkers of perestroyka, once welded together 
by an inspired idea, into fighters "for the people's interests" 
and the people themselves, into the possessors of rights and the 
bearers of obligations, which have for some reason or other 
become for a large part of the populace even more onerous. And 
this can be traced graphically against the background of the 
struggle for human rights--in the strikes and prestrike actions 
of the workers of many sectors of the economy. Those working in 
health care and education and geology and communications, 
agrarian specialists and mechanical engineers, and coal miners 
have been or are now in this position.... More than you can 
count. 
  There is no doubt that our acquisition of the right to 
express a protest is a good thing. But it would be even better 
did we not have to avail ourselves of it. Particularly so often. 
For it is well known that in the period of the shock reforms 
some sectors have been almost permanently in a strike or 
prestrike condition. This is, I believe, far from the best 
achievement of democracy and not the right of the working people 
for the sake of which it was worth accomplishing perestroyka in 
its various substances. 
  It is time, evidently, to stop searching for the reasons for 
so unequivocal an attitude of the bulk of society toward the 
socioeconomic processes occurring in the country. These reasons 
have long been obvious to all. They are the catastrophic decline 
in the living standard, the menacing growth of unemployment, the 
narrowing of people's access to sociocultural benefits and 
services, the loss of their hard-earned savings, and the 
repulsion of the majority of citizens from privatization. And so 
forth.... How is this actual situation of the working people 
combined with the manifold increase in the number of rights and 
liberties of the citizens recorded in the new constitution? 
  While not a legal expert or political scientist, I venture 
to 
maintain that the rights and the number thereof even (and in 
just a cursory study of the new constitution I "discovered" more 
than three dozen rights and liberties) in themselves do nothing 
for a single one of the possessors of these rights if they are 
totally unsupported, guaranteed by no one, and subject to no 
precise control. 
  In other words, it is not the rights themselves but the 
guarantees of rights that are needed. And everyone should know 
who the exponent of the specific guarantees is. After all, what 
is the value of the right to housing (I would recall that in the 
constitution that previously was in effect the state guaranteed 
all citizens a roof over their heads) with the appalling 
shortage of housing and the uncontrolled formation of the 
housing market? What use is the right to education with the 
beggarly grant of the students, which is only enough for one 
meal a week? And of what sort of rights to recreation and health 
can we speak when the cost of a pass to a sanatorium is 10-15 
times the average monthly wage in the national economy?! 
  But, in addition, of what sort of freedom of movement can we 
speak if the cost of one's journey to a suburban "dacha" damages 
the family budget as much as a trip to the Riga shore once did? 
Of what sort of right to social security can we speak when the 
average pension is one-third below the physiological subsistence 
minimum, and the majority of retirees may with their pension buy 
only a loaf of bread and a liter of milk a day? And this is not 
counting the charges for housing, for other elementary services, 
for the use of mass transit. 
  I would question also freedom of thought and creativity 
since 
visiting an art gallery or museum, going to the movies or the 
theater, and buying books are now affordable only to the spoiled 
children of the liberalized economy. 
  I am afraid even to mention the right to property and 
inheritance. Inasmuch as there immediately arise here questions 
concerning the R70 trillion (in current computations) of 
hard-earned savings confiscated by the "reformers," the 
manifestly formal participation of the people in 
privatization.... 
  You could not count all the rights not backed by the 
corresponding guarantees. But I would like to recall one further 
right of ours--to dignity. Truly, it is this which both Soviet 
and, even more, Russian man have always lacked. But with what 
does our new statehood back this right now? With the fact that 
the holders of hard-earned Russian rubles, the quantity of which 
for the "workhorses" is strictly determined by a single wage 
rate-qualifications guide, feel themselves to be at every step 
in their own country "third-class" citizens? With the fact that 
millions of once perfectly respectable people on the books of 
enterprises now paralyzed by the monetarist idea, having taken 
in just a couple of pennies, have been forced to run to the 
street market to sell and exchange whatever comes to hand? 
  I am afraid that real backing for all the above-mentioned 
and 
a dozen unmentioned rights and liberties will require (and very 
soon) of the state the most specific and precise actions. The 
time of abstract deliberations by legal scholars, party chiefs, 
and supernumerary prattlers has passed. All the mechanisms of 
economic reform and social reform, which is manifestly in need 
of reform, should be geared to the realization of the rights and 
liberties of the citizens. And as long as the economic and 
social "ingredients" of the reform contradict the truths 
inscribed in international and our constitutional tablets, all 
the innumerable rights and liberties of Russians will be paper 
rights only. 
  All the more will the special "freedom department"--the 
Human 
Rights Committee formed in the Office of the President of the 
Russian Federation--fail to cope with these tasks. Granted all 
my respect for the personal composition of the said committee, I 
confess that I very much doubt whether it will be able to 
establish a balance between the quantity of rights and liberties 
and the real assurance of a normal life for the citizens of 
Russia. There remains hope of the Federal Assembly? But it has 
barely been elected, has not yet even been convened, and 
struggle has already begun. Not for our, the electorate's 
rights, unfortunately. 

