Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Summary" of speech by PRC Vice Premier Zhu Rongji to </F>
lecture gathering hosted by NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Tokyo on 24 
February] 
  [Text] The Chinese economy has grown about 13 percent over 
the past two years. It has developed greatly not only in major 
cities and coastal regions, but in rural and inland regions. 
  Concern is being expressed about China's economy 
overheating. 
Frankly speaking, signs of overheating were certainly seen in 
some parts of China and in some sectors from late 1992 to early 
1993. At the time, the volume of investment was too big and it 
was made in an unreasonable way. In particular, the boom in 
real estate development and the boom in economic development 
zones adversely affected agricultural development. One result 
was that the prices of production materials jumped, the steel 
price, for example, more than doubled. 
  The inflation increased by about one digit by 1991 and this 
situation continued with inflation rising 4-6 percent a year. 
Last year inflation grew at 13.4 percent, though in some major 
cities it was as much as 18.6 percent. But wages rose by 25 
percent in cities, and the lives of city residents were not as 
difficult as reported abroad. If the present situation 
continues, however, it will have an adverse impact on the entire 
Chinese economy. 
  Last June, the leadership of the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council (government) took steps to coordinate macro 
economic policy. The steps won support from across the nation 
and issues were resolved in less than two months. Coordination 
of macro economic policy this time was different from past 
administrative intervention. We have not issued any 
administrative orders at all. We have tightened the management 
of bank loans and increased savings by raising interest rates. 
We have kept the private sector from raising funds in a chaotic 
way and, to some extent, curbed the issue of currency. 
  I think foreign news media misunderstand China. China did 
not tighten its finance across the board last year. We 
coordinated the direction of investment and the way investment 
was made, but we did not adopt a tight fiscal policy. We simply 
prevented funds from flowing into real estate by taking measures 
to redirect the flow toward the construction of agricultural, 
traffic and transport infrastructure. 
  A series of financial measures curbed investment in plant 
and 
equipment, confusing some state-run corporations. Such 
corporations, though, will be unable to keep up with China's 
economic development if they fail to coordinate their production 
mechanisms. 
  It is said that China has relaxed its monetary policy since 
last August after bowing to pressure at home and abroad, but 
this assessment stems from a misunderstanding. Oriental 
civilization is based on taking the moderate path. 
  During the second half of 1993, our nation managed the 
economy while properly coordinating a tight fiscal policy with a 
relaxed fiscal policy. We held eight rounds of conferences and 
I toured 15 provinces, cities and autonomous regions across the 
nation. We decided on the extent to which we would tighten 
fiscal policy in response to circumstances in those places. 
  Looking back, our financial measures were successful. We 
succeeded in keeping China's economy growing at the level of 13 
percent without letting it suffer any major fluctuation. The 
economy might have grown by more than 15 percent if financial 
measures had not been taken. 
  The issue of currency in 1992 more than doubled over the 
year 
before. In 1993 it was originally projected to double, but was 
limited to an increase of 20 percent. In view of that, we can 
say the financial measures we took were successful. China's 
trade deficit last year exceeded more than $10 billion, but 
China's foreign currency reserve increased a little thanks to 
our proper foreign exchange policy. 
  Needless to say, coordination of macroeconomic policy has 
only treated China's surface diseases. If China is to treat its 
diseases fundamentally, it should push ahead with the shift to a 
socialist market economy. In January this year, China announced 
plans to reform the finance, the monetary, the external trade, 
and the business system. It goes without saying there are a lot 
of small problems, but there are no major problems. In China, 
the market and prices are stable and the people are at ease. 
Inspired by this, we are resolved to push ahead with reform. 
  A small number of foreign news media, especially those in 
Hong Kong and Taiwan, have reported that Chinese society is 
restless and that "Zhu Rongji's reforms" have failed. The 
reports are utterly groundless. The CPC and the State Council 
decided on the reforms after a long period of study. They have 
decided on the reforms, taking into full account the present 
state of the market economies in industrialized nations. I 
think that if reform progresses as planned this year, it will 
put China on the way to creating a market economy in two years. 
  What I want to particularly point out is that China's reform 
measures, including reform of the current tax system, give 
special consideration to foreign firms. China has introduced a 
value-added tax system as the centerpiece of a tax system for 
enterprises. According to results of a poll in major cities, 
taxes paid by foreign firms have not increased. Even if the tax 
burden on foreign companies increases, we will take financial 
steps to return the tax increase to them five years later. 
There will be no change in the preferential treatment given to 
foreign enterprises when it comes to income tax. 
  China's reforms aim to make the investment environment 
advantageous, not disadvantageous, to foreign companies. I hope 
that any of you apprehensive or unsatisfied on this point will 
come to Beijing to see me. If I am not in my office, you may 
phone me. If there is no one available to take your call, you 
may fax me. If you present your views to me, I will study them. 
  A television plant set up under the joint-venture 
arrangement 
between Fuzhou City (in Fujian Province) and Hitachi Ltd. has 
said: "Thanks to our high profits, we will not raise our prices 
even if our tax burden increases." This is a splendid attitude. 
  Trade between China and Japan in 1933 was worth $39 billion, 
an increase of 54 percent on a year earlier. Japan has become 
China's largest trade partner after pushing aside Hong Kong. 
Japan also has become China's largest technological cooperation 
partner. Japanese investment in China is high. But $39 billion 
in trade is not much compared with the size of the Chinese 
market and cooperative relations between the two countries. 
  Both China and Japan need to supplement each other and the 
development of trade between the two countries will serve to 
help the Japanese economy recover. It is important for Japan to 
boost the competitiveness of its manufactured goods in China 
while taking measures to stimulate the economy. The management 
of Japanese enterprises in China over the past two years has 
been good. The production of videotape recorders in China under 
the joint-venture arrangement between China and Matsushita 
Electric Industrial Company is a major project and the 
joint-venture arrangement is in the interests of China and the 
Japanese company's global business strategy. 

