BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vasyl Ganzha: "A Spike Should Ripen: Our </F>
Society Is Not Grown Up Enough To Have Its President"] 
  [Text] Much time has passed since the Republican Party of 
Ukraine [URP] issued its protest against the early presidential 
and local elections that endanger our statehood. The state 
lacks a legal basis for these political actions and they could 
only exacerbate the political situation in Ukraine which could 
also trigger irretrievable consequences. However, both power 
bodies and various political forces are pushing ahead with these 
elections to take advantage of the populist campaign at a time 
of mass impoverishment. Therefore, it is hardly possible that 
elections will be postponed until some later date. 
  Taking this situation into consideration, the URP convened 
its extraordinary congress on 23 April in Kiev. The key focus 
was on the issues of party tactics during the upcoming 
elections. Having analyzed the situation in the state and 
postelection realities, Mykhaylo Goryn harshly criticized the 
egoism of national democrats who cannot unite even at such a 
decisive moment for the Ukrainian nation. The URP chairman said 
that leaders of leftist political forces, who are especially 
dangerous because of their pro-imperial, pro-Russian 
orientation, wish to grab power. Former Prime Minister Kuchma 
-- whose wide powers in the industrial sector brought the 
Ukrainian economy to a ruinous state -- is not less dangerous 
than Symonenko or Moroz. All of a sudden, this person, who 
constantly sowed the seeds of disbelief in people's own strength 
and stated that we are nothing without Russia, decided to head 
the state which was always disregarded by him. 
  Levko Lukyanenko realistically assessed all possible 
candidates for president: Ivan Plyushch, Leonid Kravchuk, 
Leonid Kuchma, and Oleksandr Moroz. The Republicans have to 
elect the first two because only they are the Ukrainian 
statesmen. The honored head of the URP preferred the candidacy 
of Ivan Plyushch because our current president, in his opinion, 
lacks decisiveness in fighting for the interests of Ukraine. 
When it was necessary to use force and power, L. Kravchuk used 
continuous discussions and explanations. He is a talented 
propagandist but this is not enough for a president who heads 
the state at the beginning of its development. 
  The issue of nominating a URP candidate for president was 
also discussed. Mykola Porovskyy preferred this step because, 
in his opinion, a political force which does not participate in 
a presidential campaign, loses its prestige with the population. 
He proposed the candidacy of Mykhaylo Goryn, however, both the 
URP chairman and the majority of the URP delegates did not agree 
to this proposal. The recent elections demonstrated that our 
society is not grown up enough to elect national-democrats. As 
for the participation in the presidential elections to advocate 
party ideas and work out the party image, this action demands 
big money and their rivals have, to our regret, advantages in 
this sphere. Therefore, the URP will participate in the 
elections indirectly to fight against the leftist forces. 
  Congress discussed the political situation in the Crimean 
peninsula which, due to separatist actions by local leaders, 
threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. 
Crimean developments prompted the adoption of the resolution on 
the establishment of the Group for Elimination of Consequences 
of the Crimean Crisis, which will raise spiritual and material 
resources to promote peaceful democratic and economic reforms 
and the building of the Ukrainian statehood in the region. 
Congress proposes that other political parties and public 
organizations elect their representatives for this mission and 
act in close cooperation. The resolution demands that L. 
Kravchuk use his legal power to urgently restore Ukrainian laws 
on the Crimean territory and even to introduce a direct 
presidential administration on the peninsula. 

