Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel Josef Stetka, deputy chief of the Czech </F>
Republic Army Military Police: "The Transformation of the Army 
of the Czech Republic--The Number of Colonels and Lieutenant 
Colonels at the Ministry of Defense and Within the General Staff 
Has Not Declined"] 
  [Text] If we ask ourselves the question as to whether 
the Army of the Czech Republic should be transformed into an 
army of a democratic state that is unequivocally guided by the 
doctrine of securing the defense of its own territory, there can 
be no response other than yes. But then it is necessary to ask 
ourselves a second question: Whether this is to be accomplished 
by a method that is deemed applied by the present Army Command? 
The answer is equally unequivocal, but obverse: no! There are 
far too many and obvious reasons which prevent the Army from 
being transformed by the existing method: It is impossible not 
to believe that this is occurring deliberately and without 
regard to the efforts of all those who have the requisite 
knowledge and, primarily, the moral credibility. 
<H5>  There Are Sufficient Examples </H5>
  We have enough examples of transformation in other 
posttotalitarian armies out of the past; we only lack the 
appetite for being guided by them. The example of the 
denazification of the Wehrmacht after 1945 is worthy of note, as 
is mainly the method by which the Americans and their Western 
allies implemented the "exchange" of the Army Command that had 
been discredited on a worldwide scale. They were faced by the 
same problems that confront us today: to let the "irreplaceable 
military specialists" continue in the service and maintain the 
combat capability of the new Bundeswehr, or to remove actual 
Nazis from the Army and weaken combat capability for a certain 
period of time? Thousands of court verdicts involving Nazis and 
the appointment of those who were not corrupted or those who 
were the least corrupted bore fruit not only within the new 
German society, but also in terms of the international 
community's view of the new Bundeswehr. Even the position taken 
by the government of the Federal Republic of Germany in 
combining the Bundeswehr with the Army of the former GDR is 
worth mentioning; it is best documented by the words uttered by 
our new chief of the General Staff, Major General Nekvasil: "Not 
a single one of my fellow students from the advanced military 
schools of the former USSR is serving in the Bundeswehr." That 
is the end of the quotation--all that remains is reality! 
<H5>  The Indispensable Specialist </H5>
  A second example that should prompt our protagonists with 
regard to solving the democratization of the Army of the Czech 
Republic is the isolation of Austria following the election of 
Kurt Waldheim as president. The connection with the 
transformation of the Army in this case appears to be abstract, 
but only until the moment that we recall our experience. Colonel 
Divis, the author of a book (published in 1988) that is a 
festive ode to the superiority of socialist military equipment 
over capitalist military equipment, was promoted to general rank 
(like many others) immediately after November 1989 and became 
the chief of the Directorate of Foreign Relations. Of course, he 
became indispensable, both for the supreme commander and the 
minister of defense, as well as for the newly appointed chief of 
the General Staff, Pezl, and lest we happen to be deprived of 
such a "specialist" by having him retire, he was appointed to 
head the CSFR delegation for disarmament at the Vienna CSCE. A 
noteworthy utilization of an "indispensable specialist." 
  I do not believe that the intelligence services of the NATO 
countries were so paralyzed by euphoria over the velvet 
revolution that they failed to note such facts. It is, perhaps, 
only refined diplomatic conduct that prevents the other side 
from telling us about these facts directly and with frankness. 
  To recall the fact that as soon as they found out in Great 
Britain that their intelligence and counterespionage services 
were infiltrated by agents of the KGB, they preferred to 
disestablish the entire intelligence service and to rebuild it 
from the ground up is, perhaps, necessary only for the lay 
public, because, in specialized circles, this is well known. 
Clearly, the architects of the new Army of the Czech Republic 
are not specialists. 
<H5>  General Vacek's Attestations </H5>
  The first postrevolutionary minister of defense, General 
Vacek, issued Order No. 11, calling for attestations and the 
method for carrying them out in the spirit of Marxism-Leninism: 
They were to be handled in such a manner as to preserve the Army 
Command and the General Staff to the maximum possible extent, 
even at the cost of the departure of approximately 10,000 young 
officers who were least impacted by communist ideology. The 
declaration of the then political exponents (and actually even 
of today's exponents) regarding the indispensability of 
"specialists" and the absolute ignoring of the experiences from 
other countries that were compelled to experience similar 
torment permitted no movement of any kind in terms of 
democratizing the Army. 
  This "comrade" minister did only that which he was permitted 
to do. After publication of his share in the responsibility for 
"Operation Zasah" and "Operation Vlna" in November 1989, he was 
very positively evaluated by the supreme commander of the 
Federal Army and was replaced by Mr. Dobrovsky. 
<H5>  Minister Dobrovsky </H5>
  The sole qualification for this office held by L. Dobrovsky 
was his dissident past, membership in the Civic Forum [OF] 
movement, and being acquainted with Messrs. Dienstbier and 
Havel. Of course, his activities as an intelligence officer in 
Moscow and many other aspects, publication of which would have 
been ill-advised, were not taken into account. That is why, in 
less time than is required to tell the difference between rank 
and function, the situation compelled him to proclaim: "I cannot 
visualize my work as minister of defense without these 
generals." He selected a colleague from the OF movement to head 
the General Staff who was, of course, also a former Communist. 
What else? Following such appointments to the highest Army 
offices, there can be no surprise over the fact that the present 
chairman of the Defense Security Committee in parliament stated 
that rehabilitated Communists are not a whole lot different from 
the "normalizers." This is an interesting view provided that the 
chairman did something more than making only a populist 
statement. Not surprisingly, this will not tend to advance the 
transformation. 
  Without exaggeration, the period during which Mr. Dobrovsky 
was minister and Mr. Pezl was chief of the General Staff can be 
referred to as the latent period of the communist government by 
the generals and the highest-ranking officers at the Ministry of 
Defense and within the General Staff. This supremacy by the 
Communists can also be documented on the basis of the fact that 
since November 1989 not a single nonparty member has been 
promoted to the rank of general (always only a former 
Communist). However, the culmination of everything was the 
promotion list of new generals, signed by the prime minister and 
by the president of the Republic on 25 February 1993, clearly in 
celebration of the 45th anniversary of "victorious February." 
Compared with such an approach to Army questions, the 
"broiler-boiler" predecessors in the leadership of the state are 
only laughable. 
  This team remained in power in the Army until the elections 
in 1992, when Mr. Dobrovsky was replaced by Mr. Andrejcak, whose 
loyalty did not belong to the federal president, but to Mr. 
Meciar. 
<H5>  Minister Baudys </H5>
  The inaugural proclamation by Mr. Baudys was full of 
optimism 
indicating that a beginning from the ground up would actually be 
made within the Army. But it was only fiction! 
  The same colonels and generals who were in office during the 
single-party government period remained in all offices (all key 
offices!). This team worked out the plan for the transformation 
process and things within the Army continued to occur according 
to this plan. The singular exception confirming the rule is the 
fact that this process was participated in by a single graduate 
of a school other than the Soviet Military School, Lieutenant 
Colonel Luzny. 
  The generals who were appointed to their jobs as cadre 
reserves of the CPCZ [Communist Party of Czechoslovakia], as 
graduates of Soviet advanced military schools, who gathered 
their military experiences during the period of duration of the 
Warsaw Pact, are clearly the right stuff for building a 
democratic army. How can they build a new army in which the 
officer corps is supposed to be made up of one-third officers 
and two-thirds noncommissioned officers, as is customary in the 
armies of other democratic nations and as was also customary in 
our country during the First Republic? They would have to 
eliminate themselves primarily! So many colonels and lieutenant 
colonels could perhaps only exist in a socialist-type army. That 
is why the order issued by Mr. Baudys regarding the latest 
efficiency evaluations lacks a solution to this problem, sounds 
like a splash in the water, and it is surprising that it does 
not even bother our parliamentary delegates. But our delegates, 
and not only those in the Defense Security Committee, have other 
problems, such as, for example, the problem involving Paragraph 
102. 
<H5>  The Erroneous Implementation of Transformation </H5>
  Thus far, the carrying out of the transformation is 
absolutely aberrant and it is impossible to ignore the fact that 
the Ministry of Defense and the General Staff have virtually 
retained the same number of officers they had prior to the 
downsizing of the Army. According to the notions of the 
minister, these numbers were to decline as a result of the 
efficiency ratings that have been ordered. This did not occur 
because the efficiency ratings were only copied from the 
attestations ordered by Comrade Vacek, both as to form and 
results. According to a statement made by Mr. Pospisil, deputy 
minister of defense, in the press, the percentage of officers 
found to be unsuitable from the standpoint of moral credibility 
is so conspicuously small that the impression gained by the 
public that it is once more being duped is obviously correct. 
Once again, no consideration was given to the fact that the 
former members of the VKR [Military Counterintelligence Service] 
were members of the Third Directorate of the Ministry of the 
Interior and that the legalization of their service status 
should be subject to the lustration law or that they would have 
to obtain exemptions--something that no minister has hitherto 
found the courage to do. The same holds true of the former 
political apparatus. The political commissars and other 
political protagonists of the former regime continue in service. 
<H5>  General Nekvasil </H5>
  I have clearly kept the most important of reasons why it is 
not possible for the Army to be transformed into a desirable 
form until the end. This is the appointment of Maj. Gen. 
Nekvasil to be the new chief of the General Staff. He is a 
graduate of two Soviet advanced military schools and anyone who 
knows under what conditions a "foreigner" could be accepted 
there will understand that these fears have realistic roots. The 
repercussions to his appointment, which have recently been 
published in the daily press by people who served as his 
subordinates, are also not reflective of the high position that 
he occupies. After all, this is the highest Army office! Based 
on several encounters that I have had with Maj. Gen. Nekvasil, 
both prior to and after his appointment, it is impossible to 
formulate an objective viewpoint, but I acquired the impression 
that the problem lies not in his person, but in those who 
proposed and approved his nomination. 
  These anachronisms are of such dimensions that the Army and, 
specifically, the Ministry of Defense and the General Staff, are 
unable to find a final solution to the problem of the Army 
lobby, using their own forces, without participation by 
parliament. 

