BFN 

<F P=106> [Igor Andreyev article: "The Surprising Thing Is Not That </F>
Aircraft Are Falling Out of the Sky, but That They Are Not Doing 
So Every Day"] 
  [Text] The seemingly inconceivable twist in the story of 
the mysterious Mezhdurechensk disaster (aviation history will 
hardly have known a case where a brand new intercontinental 
airliner with 75 people aboard was crashed by an adolescent) has 
shaken passengers so much that it has diverted our attention 
from a far more major threat. That threat is the almost 
complete destruction of the flight security system which, 
maintained by an iron and sometimes ruthless hand, Soviet civil 
aviation once enjoyed. The collapse of its previous structures, 
the almost total lack of control by the state over the hundreds 
of new air companies, and the principle of "profit at any price" 
have all led, specialists are profoundly convinced, to the 
horrific upsurge in the number of major air disasters. 
<H5>  The `Eye of the State' Cannot See Properly; Hence It Is </H5>
Powerless 
  Something incredible happened recently in Siberia -- the 
general director of one of the largest air companies, an 
independent joint-stock company, refused to allow a government 
inspector aboard one of his aircraft to check the pilots' flying 
skills in accordance with regulations sanctioned by decades of 
procedure. This was a totally routine, everyday operation, but 
one that was absolutely essential to flight safety. In imposing 
the ban, the general director put forward just one argument, an 
economic one: Who would answer to the shareholders, that is to 
say the owners of the aircraft, for their property worth many 
billions if something were to happen to the aircraft during the 
inspection flight. Pigheadedness? Willfulness? To a certain 
extent, yes. But there is also a loophole in the current 
legislation governing civil aviation operations. Basically, at 
the present time there is no normative act which compels a 
company director to go back on his decision. This particular 
case is exceptional, and inspectors are nevertheless being 
allowed on board, but it demonstrates both graphically and 
absurdly that civil aviation and civil aviation safety are in 
dire need of new legislation at a time when a change in the form 
of ownership has actually occurred. 
  The long chain of events leading to a situation in which, 
say, a crew allows an unauthorized person behind the controls or 
ignores a red -- i.e. warning -- indicator on the instrument 
panel starts a long way away from a specific aircraft or the 
people who actually violate the regulations. In Moscow, to be 
precise, where the highest state civil aviation administration 
organs are and always have been based. Until recently this was 
the all-powerful Ministry of Civil Aviation, a bureaucratic 
monster that controlled absolutely everything. Nowadays it is 
the Air Transportation Department of the Russian Ministry of 
Transport, whose task is to keep an eye on air companies rather 
than actually manage them. In other words, with regard to the 
topic under discussion its task is to deprive air carriers of 
operating licenses on behalf of the state if they do not meet 
flight safety standards set by the state. 
  The chaos in the Russian aviation industry begins with the 
statutory legal basis of this function which is performed by the 
state -- or the lack of it in our country. Regardless of 
whether the former USSR Ministry of Civil Aviation was good or 
bad, the statute on the ministry was ratified by the country's 
Council of Ministers, i.e. the government on behalf of the state. 
  Document number two, the statute on the Air Transportation 
Department, has been ratified by the Russian Ministry of 
Transport -- just notice the difference! Its principal tasks 
include organizing and implementing state supervision of safety 
provisions.... Everything would seem to be in place, but take a 
closer look at this essentially unsubstantiated declaration. 
The paragraph beginning "the department is entitled" notes, for 
example, that the department has the right to monitor compliance 
with transportation legislation. A little later on it states 
that the department is entitled to suspend the operation of 
aircraft, airfields, and airports... when it discovers 
shortcomings that threaten their safety. 
  But what does "is entitled to" actually mean? "Obligated to" 
would be clear: A danger has been discovered, do not try to 
avoid taking appropriate measures! But what does "is entitled 
to" mean: The right to put violators in order or the right to do 
nothing? 
  Transportation legislation. It used to exist in the USSR in 
the form of the country's air code. Russia, however, is still 
without a fundamental aviation act of this kind. Which means 
that it lacks transportation legislation for regulating the 
activity of this extremely complex sector. The need for it is 
not a piece of chicanery divorced from real life. The story of 
the general director and the pilot inspector is graphic evidence 
of this fact. 
<H5>  The Price of Safety... in Dollars, Rubles, and Lives </H5>
  Last winter a Russian An-12 aircraft belonging to the 
domestic company "Avial" landed at Moscow's Sheremetyevo-1 
airport. It was flying the Baku-Moscow-Rostov route while 
temporarily under the flag of the United Arab Emirates. The 
company was asked to pay just over $8,000 in all, which 
astonished the company's economists: To land the same aircraft 
at the same airport but under the Russian flag would recently 
have cost the company...53 million rubles [R]. Nowadays 
probably everyone understands the difference between these sums. 
If it is not clear to absolutely everyone, let me explain: At 
another airport -- Vnukovo -- a Russian company must pay R1 
million to park an An-12 for 10 hours, whereas a 24-hour 
stopover at the same airport would cost a foreign company flying 
an equivalent aircraft just $77. 
  Having listened to a number of pilots, I am fairly skeptical 
when I hear their tales about the dire economic straits in which 
companies find themselves. Nevertheless it is a fact that any 
institution which is essential to an aircraft's getting airborne 
is fleecing the companies for all they are worth. Airports for 
takeoff and landing rights, servicing, and refueling. And Air 
Traffic Control Service for "airspace".... It is striking that 
"Rosaeronavigatsiya," which is formally part of the Ministry of 
Transport system and is therefore a state organization, has 
raised the air navigation levy to an unbelievable sum. 
Requisitions for "airspace" now amount to somewhere in the 
region of one-half the cost of an hour's flying time! 
  If so much money is needed every time an aircraft gets 
airborne, how are air companies supposed to comply with safety 
regulations? With what are they supposed to buy the new 
technology that is "piling up" at aircraft plants? Are spare 
parts and kerosene to be used for trial flights of recently 
repaired aircraft or for checking pilots' flying habits? 
  According to traditional procedure in this country, the 
on-board flight recorders of long-haul airliners must be decoded 
after practically every flight with a view to checking the 
actions of the crew and the operation of the systems. By no 
means every company has the necessary apparatus, especially the 
smaller ones. Which means you have to pay considerable sums to 
the people who do. And if you want your crews to train in 
flight simulators, you have to pay the few people in this 
country who own this apparatus. And if flight simulators are 
thought of as an expensive piece of equipment even in the West, 
what hope do we poor sinners have! 
  Having stopped financing companies altogether, the state 
seems to have forgotten that it is the guarantor of safety. 
Moreover, Doctor of Technical Sciences Boris Likhachev, general 
director of the ALAK air company, tells me that the state levies 
taxes even on the proportion of the profit spent purely on 
measures to combat accidents. Professionals, Likhachev says, 
are nevertheless still spending money to have the necessary work 
done by the correct personnel and equipment. But what about 
aviation illiterates, for example, how many of them are 
currently directors of independent firms? 
  When the Tu-154 Irkutsk disaster happened, the general 
director recalls, I rang the department and tried to find out 
what the problem was and what we would need to do with aircraft 
of this type. It was with some difficulty that I found out that 
the engine starter turbine which caused the loss of this 
airliner had already been playing up, and that there had even 
been fires, admittedly while the aircraft was still on the 
ground. But nobody at local level knew about this danger, and 
so the pilots interpreted the red alarm signaling dangerously 
high starter turbine revolutions as a false alarm. The former 
system of notifying enterprises about possible preconditions for 
accidents has broken down, and a new system has not replaced it. 
  Yuriy Tarshin, the country's top airman and chief of the Air 
Transportation Department's Flight Operation Desk, is not sorry 
to see the old system go since he considers it excessively 
centralized and impersonal. The current flight safety situation 
has been described as critical, and the recent accidents as 
normal in the circumstances. 
  However bad or dangerous our domestic aviation technology 
is, 
Tarshin says, by no means all these incidents happen as a result 
of mistakes committed by the crews. And even the Irkutsk 
incident might not have happened if the pilots had known that 
the red warning signal sometimes operates to indicate real 
emergencies. Information about eight similar incidents reached 
the Flight Operation Desk only after the disaster had occurred, 
and the actions taken by the crews in each of these cases were 
not taken into account. 
  The former Main Administration of the Flight Service of the 
USSR Ministry of Civil Aviation has now turned into a 
department, and this department employs just 8 people to inspect 
flight crews. Whereas before there was a leading pilot inspector 
for each one of the 40 types of aircraft in our civil aviation, 
these "super professionals" have now become extinct. The same 
problems have arisen in the regional administrations where 
inspectors are subordinated to the Ministry of Transport and 
where there are no aviation specialists. Ministry bigwigs can 
only learn about what is going on in the air by examining the 
coffins of the victims, according to Tarshin. The department, 
however, lacks bite and is impotent. 
  None of the department's inspectors has had any experience 
of 
an A-310, five of which were leased by Russian International 
Airlines. The paradox is that these airliners and their crews, 
which are flying under the national flag, are completely outside 
the control of the Russian department which supervises safety 
procedures. The pilots of the airliner which crashed, Tarshin 
says, were exceptionally well trained, but the presence of 
children in the cockpit is unfortunately an unalterable fact. 
<H5>  Does the Mafia Give the "OK" for Takeoff? </H5>
  Alfred Malinovskiy, president of the Russian Federation 
airline personnel trade union, told me this story. One evening 
the commander of an airliner which was due to fly out of Pulkovo 
[St. Petersburg] the following day was called at home. Without 
introduction, the voice on the other end of the line said: A 
car will drive up to your aircraft; accept the cargo that it 
delivers. The commander indignantly replied that he would do 
nothing of the sort. Whereupon he heard the following threat: 
Have you thought about your daughter? After all, she goes to 
such-and-such a school and walks there along such-and-such a 
street. We also know that your pilot's license needs extending 
in six months' time. You do want it extended, don't you? 
  The next morning, as if security procedures at the airport 
were nonexistent, a car drove up to the aircraft, and moreover 
not just one car but two. They apparently belonged to different 
"departments." The two groups started to arguing with one 
another and got out their pistols. They reached an 
understanding nevertheless and ordered the commander to accept a 
cargo from both cars. The pilot made a specious excuse and 
reported sick. But the aircraft left all the same -- with a 
reserve crew. 
  Every day, Malinovskiy says, crews are forced to cover for 
the moonlighting activities and unfinished work of other 
personnel by flying off with the problems and responsibilities 
of those remaining on the ground. Salary size is in direct 
proportion to the number of hours and kilometers flown. If a 
pilot decides not to take off because an aircraft is not ready, 
for example, he punishes himself financially, and if he sticks 
to his principles more than once, you have to feel even sorrier 
for him because the person in charge of the subdivision will 
give him the chance to "take a break" on the ground. The same 
services to which air personnel address their complaints about 
equipment and preparation at the airfield, the way aircraft are 
loaded, radio navigation backup, and air traffic control will do 
everything in their power to make the captious crew's life 
unbearable. 
  The number of breakdowns in our aircraft equipment on a 
normal flight, Malinovskiy says, cannot be compared to Western 
standards. The systems which give warning of dangers and 
breakdowns are dogged by false alarms, and the crews get 
accustomed to this state of affairs. Owing to a shortage of 
money, routine servicing technology is becoming oversimplified, 
personnel are simply resorting to reporting faults rather than 
eliminating the problem, and components and units which are 
faulty are being replaced with others which are nown to be 
substandard. 
  Airport boundaries have become so insecure that trucks 
belonging to criminal commercial organizations can drive right 
up to aircraft; the armed escorts, who are often in cahoots with 
workers at the airport and cargo warehouses, force the crews to 
take on board tonnes of unauthorized cargo. This could be 
anything, even munitions and weapons. In order to take off, 
pilots must squeeze through the net of extortioners and pay for 
service, fuel, deicing work, towing, takeoff and landing, and 
parking. And most of all they will do everything they can, even 
at the expense of safety, to land on the minimum quantity of 
fuel (which is expensive!) at their scheduled destination rather 
than a fallback airfield. At fallback airfields pilots are 
fleeced mercilessly or their aircraft are laid up forever. 
According to Malinovskiy, pilots are afraid of everything 
except incidents and disasters.... 
  This is frightening.... It is also shameful because we hear 
of no radical measures being taken to restore order in our civil 
aviation, despite 200 deaths in disasters during the past three 
months. And it also seems the authorities will only start 
sorting out our domestic air transportation under pressure from 
abroad. The anti-Aeroflot campaign is gathering strength all 
over the place, and at the same time a campaign is being 
launched against its large and small successors alike who are 
all keen to fly outside our national borders. Is the reborn 
Russian state really only capable of learning about what is 
going on in the air by examining the coffins of the victims when 
there is an outcry from Montreal, the headquarters of the 
International Civil Aviation Organization? 

