BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by Zhao Renfang: "AT&amp;T Urges U.S. To Renew </F>
China's MFN] 
  [Text] New York, April 4 (XINHUA) -- AT&amp;T, one of the 
giant 
telecommunications company in the world, today urged the United 
States to renew China's most favored nation (MFN) status 
unconditionally. 
  Addressing a corporate luncheon organized by the Asia 
Society, AT&amp;T Chairman Robert Allen said that it was his 
fervent 
hope that the U.S. and Chinese government will cooperate in the 
next two months to achieve unconditional MFN renewal so that "we 
can all redirect our energies from preventing disaster to 
creating opportunity." 
  "There are not many people who really believe either that 
MFN 
status is the right lever to improve human rights in China -- or 
that the failure to renew the MFN would significantly set back 
China's economic progress," the chairman noted. 
  In his speech entitled "Asia: New Horizons for New Century," 
Allen, who is chief executive officer (CEO) of AT&amp;T, said 
that 
he believed that the U.S. must continue to strengthen its 
relationship with China. "We won't be able to affect change if 
we close the trade doors and lock out American industry." 
  According to him, as each renewal date for the MFN status 
came near, the business community began collective 
"nail-chewing" as the stability of the relationship teetered. 
At the same time, the Chinese customers naturally began to 
wonder if the U.S. businessmen may be something less than long 
term supplies and reliable partners. 
  Allen, who suggested shifting the human rights debate away 
from the MFN to other avenues, added that the best way to 
promote progress was to support and encourage China's economic 
reforms, and integrate China more fully into the world economy. 
  The argument was not whether to promote human rights, but 
how 
to do so in ways that the Chinese themselves will embrace, said 
Allen, a strong supporter of China's MFN. 
  Speaking to about 150 participants at this afternnon's 
corporate program, which drew some big U.S. and Asian companies, 
the AT&amp;T chief deemed that nowhere was the opportunity 
greater 
than in the People's Republic of China as Asian countries were 
concerned. He said the most spectacular developments in the 
recent economic history of Asia were being written in China. 
  After citing impressive progress China has made during the 
past 15 years of reform and the massive size of its economy, 
Allen noted that China still remained the world's largest 
developing countries, with enormous institutional and 
infrastructural challenges to overcome. Therefore the chairman 
foresaw great opportunity in China's telecommunications 
industry, a multi-billion dollar job as he predicted. 
  Allen, while visiting China last August, was received by 
Chinese President Jiang Zemin. 
  During their meeting, the Chinese president spoke highly of 
AT&amp;T's long standing cooperation with China in 
telecommunications and said the cooperation was conducive to 
further development of relations between the United States and 
China in the fields of economy and technology. 
  Allen, commenting then on his first visit to China which had 
left a deep impression on him, said that his company and China 
should become cooperative partner forever. 
  AT&amp;T, which established an office in China in 1985, 
signed in 
February 1993 a memorandum of understanding with China's State 
Planning Commission creating a long term, comprehensive 
partnership to help modernize China's telecommunications network. 
  A global company that provides communications service and 
products, as well as network equipment and computer, AT&amp;T 
planned to work in China through joint ventures with Chinese 
partners to establish manufacturing facilities, Allen mentioned. 
  He disclosed his company will set up a "Chinese version of 
AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories". Half jokingly the AT&amp;T leader 
said 
Bell Laboratories were more famous in China than the AT&amp;T 
sign. 
  As the CEO put it, few industries in the United States, and 
even the rest of the world, could look at China and not see 
incredible opportunity. China was becoming the largest market 
in the world for almost any products you could name, said. 
  "AT&amp;T, along with thousands of other American 
companies, is 
excited by the opportunity to participate in the modernization 
of China," he said. 
  Despite the debate on China's MFN status, more than 2,000 
U.S. Firms invested in China last year, with nearly 6 billion 
U.S. dollars. And some 167,000 U.S. jobs depended on trade with 
China. 
  Warning the danger of removing China's MFN on U.S. business 
in China, America's third largest invest territory, Allen said 
only America's competitors, such as Japan and Europe, benefit if 
U.S. Trade options with China were diminished. 
  "Their exports are considerably greater than our 9 million 
dollars and their reliance on China's market is significantly 
greater than ours," the AT&amp;T leader commented. 
  Besides the business side of China's importance in the 
world, 
Allen also called for attention to the many areas where Chinese 
cooperation with the U.S. will be crucial to dealing with 
serious regional and global problems. 
  The AT&amp;T leader also discussed business prospects in 
Asia and 
Pacific region, one of the most powerful economic engines in the 
world as he described. However, the topic about China accounted 
nearly one third of his key note speech. 
  AT&amp;T, with a total revenue of 667.156 billion dollars in 
1993, does business in more than 120 countries. 

