Countries 

<F P=102>   94UM0237I Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE in 
Russian No 11, Nov 1993 (signed to press 3 Nov 93) pp 38-46--FOR </F>

OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0237I </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel V. Pogozhin, candidate of military </F>
sciences] 
  [Text] The first part of this article[.sup]1[/] is 
devoted to space research and development being conducted by 
France for military purposes. Presented below is a survey of 
military space projects of other West European countries and 
NATO. 
<H5>  Great Britain </H5>
  Great Britain has been conducting research in the field of 
military space systems since 1960. It was one of the first to 
successfully deploy a military communications system, launching 
the Skynet-1A satellite into a geostationary orbit in November 
1969. Since it was not economically feasible for Great Britain 
to create its own booster rocket, it directed its efforts toward 
launching satellites using American (Delta) and French (Ariane) 
booster rockets and also the Space Shuttle. 
  The Skynet space communications system is designed to 
support 
communications between Great Britain and states belong to the 
British Commonwealth and with British troops in the Middle and 
Far East, as well as for communications between ships of the 
Royal Navy and with shore bases. 
  Skynet was developed in close cooperation with the U.S. 
Department of Defense. The first satellites were created based 
on the American DSCS space communications system. Skynet-1A was 
put into a geostationary orbit over the Indian Ocean at a point 
of 53 degrees east longitude by an American Delta booster 
rocket. The launch of Skynet-1B was unsuccessful. 
  Skynet-1 had the shape of a cylinder 1.35 meters in 
diameter, 
was 0.8 meters tall, weighed 130 kg, and had a service life of 3 
years. The power sources (eight solar battery panels) had an 
output of 80 watts. The receiving operating band on the 
satellite was 7.976-8.005 GHz, and the transmitting operating 
band was 7.25-7.28 GHz. Signal relay was accomplished over two 
broadband with a bandwidth of 20 MHz (strategic communications) 
and 2 MHz (tactical communications with Navy ships). The traffic 
capacity of the repeaters was 22 duplex telephone communications 
channels. (They could be used in the multiple-station access 
mode with frequency-division multiplexing). The operating modes 
were telephone, telegraph, and secure communications. Signals 
were relayed via the satellite using an onboard horn-type 
antenna with a lens and flat reflector with a variable (by 90 
degrees) direction of its beam. An antenna with circular 
polarization was installed on a stabilized platform and had a 
gain factor of 18.5 dB. Almost all the electronic equipment was 
duplicated and switched by command from the earth. 
  In the second stage of development of the system, the 
British 
firm Marconi Space and the American firm Philco-Ford developed 
two Skynet-2 satellites (primary and back-up). 
  The launch of the Skynet-2A satellite, conducted in January 
1974 with the aid of a Delta booster rocket from the American 
space launch facility at Cape Canaveral, turned out to be 
unsuccessful due to a malfunction of the second stage of the 
booster rocket. 
  In November 1974, Skynet-2B was inserted close to a 
geostationary orbit (about 36,000 km) with an inclination of 2.2 
degrees and an orbital period of 1499 minutes. The satellite's 
reference point in orbit over the Indian Ocean was 48.5 degrees 
east longitude. The satellite had a diameter of 1.9 meters, a 
height of 1.98 meters, a launch weight of 430 kg, and a service 
life of 5 years. Stabilization was accomplished by rotation at a 
speed of 90 rpm. The electronic equipment and antenna system 
were situated on a stabilized platform. Two horn-type 
transceiver antennas were used for communications with ground 
stations. The transceiver equipment was the same as on previous 
satellites, but with improved characteristics. The following 
operating modes were possible: telephone, telegraph, facsimile, 
and data transmission in digital form at a rate of 2400 bps. The 
traffic handling capacity of the repeaters was 280 channels of 
telephone communications or 24 channels of data transmission. 
Multiple-station access with code- (over a wideband channel) and 
frequency-division (over a narrowband channel) multiplexing was 
supported. 
  Total costs for deployment of the Skynet-2 system, including 
the ground complex, reached $50 million. 
  On the whole, the Skynet-2 satellite was close in its basic 
specifications and performance characteristics to the DSCS-2 and 
NATO-3. This made it possible, if necessary, to relay via it 
signals from American ground stations and the NATO armed forces, 
and also to use it for communications between ground stations of 
Great Britain, the United States, and NATO. 
  By 1975, the firm Marconi Space had completed the majority 
of 
research directed at further improvement of the Skynet system 
and development of the Skynet-3 satellite. However, Great 
Britain's Ministry of Defense decided to close down this 
program, preferring to conclude an agreement with the United 
States and NATO on the use of their communications satellites. 
Further development of events showed that the capabilities of 
U.S. and NATO satellites do not satisfy Great Britain's needs. 
Therefore, in 1981, research was resumed under another program 
-- Skynet-4. British Aerospace became the chief contractor, and 
Marconi Space (later renamed Marconi Space Systems or MSS) 
became the subcontractor responsible for the onboard 
communications equipment, including the antenna system. 
  The Skynet-4 satellite (Figure 1 [not reproduced]) had a 
number of advantages compared to previous satellites: The 
capability to provide communications for ships in maritime 
theaters of military operations (including using communications 
between satellites) via communications stations (terminals) 
located primarily in Western Europe; a high degree of protection 
against electromagnetic pulse and jamming. The satellite was 
designed to provide the users services even in the event of a 
malfunction onboard the satellite. 
  Two UHF-band repeaters (primarily for communications with 
submarines), a four-channel SHF-band unit (for communications 
with ground complexes and surface ships), and one EHF-band 
channel (for conducting experiments with advanced communications 
systems at extremely high frequencies) were installed on the 
satellite. The operation of the transmitters was supported by a 
complex of antennas generating various directional patterns 
(circular, and also beams -- wide, narrow, needle-shaped). In 
addition, the satellite was equipped with equipment for 
transmitting command and telemetry data. 
  The reliability of the satellite's functioning increased due 
to stabilization along three axes and also due to the redundancy 
of most of the onboard equipment. However, this required an 
increase in the satellite's weight and an increase in power from 
the power supply. 
  In June 1986, the Skynet-4 satellite was ready for launch on 
the American Space Shuttle. However, the Challenger disaster in 
January 1986 delayed launching of the satellite 32 months, which 
was needed to decide the question of choosing a booster rocket 
and further work on the satellite itself for launch by various 
booster rockets. The first satellite of the new series, 
Skynet-4B, was put into orbit by an Ariane-4 booster rocket, and 
its operational use began on 22 February 1989. The Skynet-4A was 
launched nearly 1 year later in December 1989 from Cape 
Canaveral (USA), and the last satellite in this series, 
Skynet-4C, was launched in August 1990. 
  In the future, it is envisioned to develop two new 
satellites 
virtually the same as those presently in orbit. They are 
scheduled to be launched in 1997 and operate until the year 
2003. By this time it is planned to create a new generation of 
satellites. In February 1992, the government of Great Britain 
announced that it was allocating &pound;10 million for updating 
the 
Skynet-4 of the latest modification; details of the new program 
were not reported. It is quite likely that one of the problems 
which are planned to be resolved will be to ensure coordination 
of the next generation of Skynet satellites with the French 
Syracuse-2 system and NATO communications systems. 
  The basic specifications and performance characteristics of 
the Skynet satellites are given below. 


Basic Specifications and Performance Characteristics of Skynet Satellites 

                     Skynet-1A and B   Skynet-2A and B    Skynet-4A and B 


Type Platform        DSCS-1            DSCS-2             OTC/ECS 

Manufacturer         Philco-Ford       Philco-Ford        Marconi Space 
                     (USA)             (USA) and          (Great Britain) 
                                       Marconi Space 
                                       (Great Britain) 

Year operational     1969              1974               1989 
use began 

Type of              -                 rotation           three axes 
stabilization 

Satellite size       1.35x0.8          1.9x1.98           1.9x1.98 
(diameter x 
height), meters 

Weight, kg           130               232                790 

Power supply         80                80                 1200 
power, watts 

Number of            2                 1                  3 
satellites 

Period of            3                 5                  7 
operation, years 

Operating range: 

receive              7.976-8.005 GHz   7.975-8.025 GHz    UHF, SHF, EHF 


transmit             7.25-7.28 GHz     7.25-7.30 GHz      UHF, SHF, EHF 

Bandwidth, MHz: 

strategic            20                20                 135 
communications 

tactical             2                 2                  - 
communications 

Traffic handling     22 duplex         280 telephone      - 
capacity             channels in       channels or 24 
                     telephone mode    digital data 
                                       transmission 
                                       channels 

Type booster         Delta             Ariane and Delta   Ariane and Delta 
rocket for 
insertion of 
satellite 

Type of antenna      -                 horn-type          horn-type 
                                       transceiving       transceiving, 
                                                          spiral 

Operating mode       telephone,        telephone,         telephone, 
                     telegraph, and    telegraph,         telegraph, secure 
                     secure            secure and         and facsimile, 
                                       facsimile, data    data transmission 
                                       transmission 


  The Skynet-4 satellite consists of a service module and a 
communications equipment module. It is equipped with an SHF-band 
transceiving antenna and a spiral UHF-band antenna (deploys 
after satellite enters orbit). It main components are made 
primarily from honeycomb aluminum structures covered with 
plastic reinforced with carbon fiber. The communications 
equipment is powered by nickel-cadmium solar batteries. The 
temperature conditions are maintained basically by passive 
devices -- thermal-insulating materials and reflecting mirrors 
(located on the surface of the satellite) facing north to south. 
  The SHF-band communications equipment supports two-way 
communications between surface ships and shore stations. The 
UHF-band unit has two 40-watt repeaters that service one channel 
with a bandwidth of 25 kHz (for communications with submarines). 
An experimental EHF unit has also been installed for conducting 
experiments for creating advanced communications systems. 
  In 1987, British Aerospace received a contract to develop 
and 
manufacture NATO the NATO-4 satellite based on the Skynet-4. 
This is the first time satellites were developed for NATO by 
other than American firms. The technical characteristics of the 
Skynet-4 and its comparatively low cost played the main role in 
making this decision. 
  Commissioning of new satellites has expanded the 
capabilities 
for providing all branches of Great Britain's armed forces with 
communications on the strategic and tactical levels -- from 
major headquarters to individual units, ships, submarines, and 
aircraft. Communications was accomplished via transportable and 
mobile stations, including individual communications equipment 
for personnel, and also terminals on aircraft. This was achieved 
by using two UHF-band channels (space-to-earth) and four 
SHF-band channels for experimental communications. Ten countries 
participated in creating the Skynet-4 satellite. The cost of 
each satellite is &pound;70 million. 
  Control of the satellites in orbit and monitoring of their 
functioning are accomplished from the main center located at 
Oakhanger (Hampshire County). The center is capable of 
controlling several satellites. Its capabilities have been 
expanded recently by modernization of technical equipment. 
  Three types of ground stations have been developed in Great 
Britain for communications via Skynet satellites: fixed, 
transportable, and mobile ground stations. 
  The T-1 and T-2 fixed stations are equipped with antennas 
12.2 and 12.8 meters in diameter, respectively. The radiating 
power of the transmitting equipment is 20 kW. 
  The T-3 and T-4 transportable stations are located in a 
standard containing which can be transported on C-130 Hercules 
aircraft. The antenna is 6.4 meters in diameter, and the 
radiating power of the transmitting equipment is 5 kW. 
  The mobile stations are housed in a fan. There is also a 
version in the form of a module for installation in a transport 
vehicle or aircraft. The antenna diameter is 1.8 meters. All 
equipment fits in one C-130 and can also be transported in parts 
on helicopters. Deployment time for the station is 4 hours. 
  Special T-5 mobile stations are being developed for ships 
and 
aircraft with antennas 1.8 and 1.2 meters in diameter, 
respectively. They are installed on ships on a platform 
stabilized along three axes. Most ships are equipped with 
Type-50 Scot terminals, which support communications in the SHF 
band. Terminals in the SHF-band are being tested for aircraft 
(testing has been successfully completed for helicopters), and 
they are scheduled to be commissioned in the mid-1990's. 
  Terminals with antennas 1.7 meters in diameter and also with 
individual portable terminals are widely used in Great Britain's 
ground forces. 
  Most of the above-named ground stations appeared in the 
first 
phase of deployment of the Skynet space communications system. 
Later developments by Marconi Space include the Scot-1 (182 kg) 
and Scot-2 (680 kg) stations. Each has two parabolic antennas 
1.1 meters in diameter and can be installed on ship masts. By 
the start of operation of the Skynet system, nine ground 
stations were deployed, including fixed stations at Christchurch 
(Great Britain), one each in areas of the Middle and Far East, 
transportable stations on the island of Bahrain (Persian Gulf) 
and the island of Gan (Indian Ocean), and also terminals on 
ships of the Royal Navy. By the beginning of the second phase, a 
total of 17 ground stations were in operation, 8 of which are 
ship stations (Scot stations). 
  Within the framework of the extensive program for the 
development of future military communications systems, Great 
Britain's Ministry of Defense plans to create and launch using 
Ariane booster rockets small LISAT satellites (as an additional 
payload). A contract was concluded with Smith Associates to 
design this system. It is anticipated that advanced technical 
solutions will be implemented in designing the satellites. In 
particular, new materials will be used in the stabilization and 
power supply systems. 
  In the opinion of experts in Great Britain, small satellites 
can serve areas not covered by satellites in geostationary 
orbit. They are designed to accomplish tasks on the tactical 
level and are intended for 50-300 days. The capabilities of 
launching a group of small satellites by one rocket booster were 
demonstrated during the 35th launch of an Ariane, when seven 
satellites were put into orbit. 
  The Zircon Project for creating a space-based electronic 
intelligence-collection system for Great Britain appeared in the 
mid-1980's. The satellite was to have 30-meter umbrella-type 
antennas for conducting reconnaissance over the territory of the 
CIS, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East. The satellite was to 
be placed in a geostationary orbit. Its launch was to be 
accomplished under the guise of a Skynet-4 satellite. In August 
1987, the mass media reported that Great Britain had abandoned 
this project, although about &pound;70 million was spent on 
research and development in 4 years. However, there was no 
official confirmation of this either by the Ministry of Defense 
or the two proposed subcontractors. 
<H5>  Italy </H5>
  Italy ranks among the top in Western Europe in volume of 
work 
in the field of space research. The space equipment being 
created by its specialists are finding increasing application in 
the armed forces. The main efforts are directed at developing 
space systems for communications, geodesy, and navigation, 
interorbital tows for the Space Shuttle and Ariane booster 
rockets, and space-based cabling systems. 
  Space research in Italy was launched back in the early 
1960's 
when the government made the decision to develop and launch four 
satellites for study of the atmosphere jointly with NASA (United 
States). The satellites were put into orbit by an American Scout 
booster rocket. Other than the first, all were launched from the 
Italian launch platform San Marco (commissioned in 1966) in the 
Indian Ocean near the coast of Kenya. This platform became a 
convenient point of launch into equatorial orbits for Italy and 
other countries. 
  Based on this complex, the Italian firm SNIA-BPD is 
developing its own San Marco-1 booster rocket. The four-stage, 
solid-propellant Scout rocket has been chosen as the basis, in 
which existing solid-propellant boosters of the Ariane booster 
rocket and the Italian interorbital tow Iris will be used. Much 
attention is being given to creating interorbital tows. They are 
intended for inserting payloads into a stationary orbit as the 
fourth stage of an Ariane booster rocket and also in combination 
with the Shuttle. 
  Organizationally, Italy's space activities are accomplished 
within the framework of national programs, bilateral and 
multilateral agreements, and also the European Space Research 
Organization. The Italian Space Agency was formed in 1988, and 
in 1990 Italy's Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the Military 
Space Plan for the next 15 years. This plan calls for conducting 
research in the area of national space hardware for military 
use, validating requirements for such systems, creating small 
satellites, assessing the possibilities of developing a booster 
rocket for launching satellites in emergencies, and so forth. 
  Italy participates in programs of the European Space Agency 
(ESA), in particular, in the development of communications 
equipment for Intelsat-4 satellites, components for the Ariane 
booster rockets, and others. Presently, the country does not 
have its own space hardware for military use. It uses the 
NATO-3, DSCS-2, and DSCS-3 satellites to provide communications 
for its armed forces. 
  The national space program for creating the experimental 
communications satellite Italsat for supporting radio-telephone 
communications in the 20-30 GHz band and special types of 
communications and for studying wave propagation in the 40-50 
GHz band is the largest program. The Italsat satellite has six 
broadband channels (110 MHz bandwidth). The transmission speed 
over the communications channels is 147.5 megabits per second. 
Three additional broadband channels with a bandwidth of 40 MHz 
are used for commercial communications and have a transmission 
speed of 24.5 megabits per second. Access to space 
communications for the consumers is accomplished by switching 
the broadband channels. The transceiver antenna will generate 
six beams. It is planned to locate ground stations at more than 
230 regional telephone centers to increase flexibility and speed 
up the introduction of new types of services. A number of 
technical innovations (supporting digital telephone 
communications, using an antenna with a highly directional 
radiation pattern, and so forth) are being used in the system 
being created. The first Italsat satellite was put into orbit in 
1991 by an Ariane-4 booster rocket. 
  Italy is conducting intensive research in the field of space 
communications in the millimeter [EHF] waveband. The satellite 
being developed (2 x 2.2 x 2.6 meters) will be stabilized along 
three axes. The power of the onboard power supply will be 1370 
watts. The onboard repeater will support signal transmission in 
the telephone communications mode and data transmission in 
digital form at a speed of 1 gigabit per second. It provides for 
a mode of multiple-station access with time-division 
multiplexing and switching of signals onboard the satellite. The 
output power of each transmitter is 20 watts. The antenna system 
will include two transceiver antennas, each generating three 
narrow beams 0.5 degrees wide and with a maximum guidance error 
of -0.3 degrees. 
  In recent years, Italy has been expanding cooperation with 
NASA, the European Space Agency, and European and American firms 
under national and international space programs. The Italian 
firm Alenia Spazio is participating in development of the DRS 
satellite (data transmission equipment) and tethered (towed) 
satellite. The DRS is one of the most important ESA programs. 
Its approximate cost is about $1200 billion lira (5.3 billion 
francs). The system will provide integrated communications and 
data transmission in digital form. It will also help implement 
other European space programs for creating a space 
infrastructure which is to be formed by 1997 after launch (from 
1966) of jointly developed satellites. An Italian firm heads a 
group of 18 European industrial enterprises. The DRS system will 
include two satellites in a geostationary orbit. Its main users 
will be the spacecraft Hermes, the Spot-4 and Eureka satellites, 
and others. 
  The firm Selenia is developing the Sikral communications 
satellite and is also participating in other programs. 
  Within the framework of work under the Sikral (began in 
1979, 
Figure 2 [not reproduced]) it is planned to create military 
satellites to provide communications for Italy's armed forces, 
governmental agencies, and civil defense organizations. The 
system (two satellites in orbit and a back-up satellite on 
earth) is to support strategic, tactical, and emergency 
communications with the aid of fixed, transportable, and mobile 
ground stations. The space communications stations on ships, 
aircraft, and ground transport vehicle will be equipped with 
antennas 0.6-2.5 meters in diameter. It is envisioned to use the 
operating frequency of 7-8 GHz for military communications and 
12-14 GHz for communications by civil defense headquarters with 
field subunits. Europe, Africa, and the Atlantic and Indian 
oceans will be in the satellites' zone of visibility. The Sikral 
satellite (1050 kg) is stabilized along three axes. It is being 
developed based on the latest technologies and has protection 
against jamming, secure communications, and compatibility with 
NATO and U.S. (DSCS) systems and also with the Intelsat 
commercial international communications system. Control will be 
accomplished under the overall direction of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff of Italy's armed forces. The first satellite launch is 
scheduled for 1996.[.sup]2[/] 
  Three ground stations, two fixed and one transportable, have 
already been deployed today on the country's territory for 
communications via these satellites. 
  In addition, Italy is participating in creating the Euronav 
space navigation system for military users as part of a 
consortium of West European firms specially formed for this 
purpose. 
<H5>  Spain </H5>
  Research in the field of space has been conducted in the 
country for a fairly long time. Today, Spain is creating its own 
production base for independent space research and development, 
implementing space projects, and practical use. The firms KASA, 
KRISA, and Sener are participating in the space activities. In 
addition, Spain is cooperating with a number of West European 
firms. 
  The Hispasat system is the first national space 
communications project designed to support communications for 
both civilian and military consumers. It will include three 
satellites (two operating and one back-up) and a ground control 
and monitoring center, as well as communications stations 
(consumers). The contract for this program was signed with the 
firm Ariane back in 1990. 
  The first satellite was launched in late 1992, and the 
second 
one a year and a half later. Both satellites are in a 
geostationary orbit close to one another. 
  Each satellite is equipped with 18 communications repeaters 
developed by the firm Marconi Space Systems. Two repeaters 
support communications for military consumers, three support 
governmental consumers, three support radio and television 
broadcasting, and the rest support commercial telephone 
communications. The operating zone of the satellites encompasses 
the entire territory of Spain, a large part of the Atlantic 
Ocean and South America, and part of North America. 
  Spain has built its own control and monitoring center (near 
Madrid) for controlling satellites. Training of service 
personnel for controlling the Hispasat satellites was 
accomplished by a group from the National Space Center of France 
from Toulouse (July-August 1992). 
<H5>  Germany </H5>
  Germany is one of the leading countries in Europe in volume 
of space program financing. The main efforts of scientists are 
directed at using space for scientific and civilian purposes. 
Private and governmental firms are looking for and finding ways 
of cooperation on space programs both with the United States and 
with European countries. The main research is conducted in the 
field of space communications, observation of the earth's 
surface, microgravitation, x-ray radiation, and so forth. 
  Germany began creating a national space communications 
system 
later than other countries of Europe. The DFS/Kopernikus is such 
a system, designed for supporting telephone communications in 
the 11-14 GHz band and conducting experimental work in the 20-30 
GHz band. Three broadband channels with a bandwidth of 90 MHz 
have been allocated for this. Commercial communications stations 
operate in the multiple-station mode with time-division 
multiplexing with a transmission speed of 60 megabits per 
second. The satellites are equipped with 11 repeaters. The 
operating life of the satellite is 10 years. Ground stations are 
equipped with antennas 3.5-4.5 meters in diameter. 
  On 1 July 1990, Germany used a Delta booster rocket to make 
a 
successful launch of a Rosat satellite weighing 2442 kg into an 
elliptical orbit with an inclination of 53 degrees. The onboard 
equipment supports research for detection of x-ray radiation 
from approximately 100,000 sources. 
  Germany is actively involved in many European space projects 
on a bilateral and multilateral basis. These include the 
projects Columbus, Ariane-5, Hermes, and also several general 
ones for NATO countries. 
<H5>  NATO Military Space Programs </H5>
  Development of a NATO military space communications system 
project began in 1967. It was to use two repeater satellites in 
a geostationary orbit and space communications ground stations 
-- fixed, transportable, shipborne, and mobile. Such a system 
has already been created by the present time. It has been given 
the designation SATCOM. 
  The first phase called for studying the problems of creating 
a NATO space communications system, which would put into 
operation one of the satellites (DSCS-1) launched and two mobile 
ground stations with antennas 4.9 meters in diameter. The ground 
stations were developed by the American firm Philco-Ford. One 
was located in the vicinity of Casto (Belgium) and the other 
near Naples (Italy). 
  In the second phase (1968), the NATO Council concluded a 
contract with Philco-Ford to manufacture two repeater satellites 
for the system. The first of them (NATO-1) was launched in 1970 
into a geostationary orbit at a point over the Atlantic Ocean 
(18 degrees west longitude); the second (NATO-2) was launched in 
1971 also into a geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean (26 
degrees west longitude). 
  The NATO-1 and -2 satellites provided relay of secure 
telephone, telegraph, and phototelegraph transmissions, and also 
data transmission in digital form between headquarters of the 
NATO armed forces. 
  Relay of signals was accomplished over two broadband 
channels 
-- a wideband (20 MHz) and a narrowband (2 MHz) channel, which 
amounted to a total of 300 duplex telephone communications 
channels. The first broadband channel was used for 
communications with fixed ground stations; the second for 
communications with transportable ground stations having small 
antennas. Signals were received at the satellite in the 
7.975-8.025 GHz band and transmitted to the ground in the 
7.25-7.3 GHz band. A horn-type transceiver antenna, with a 
directional pattern of 22 degrees and a gain factor of 17.9 dB, 
served all ground stations. 
  Construction of the latter in the NATO bloc countries began 
simultaneously with the creation of the satellites themselves. 
Initially, the system called for deploying 12 stations with 
antennas 12.2 and 6.4 meters in diameter (traffic handling 
capacity of 12 and 3 telephone channels, respectively), as well 
as several stations on naval flagships. The ground stations were 
deployed during the period 1970-1971 at the following places: 
Oakhanger, Great Britain; Hyde, Belgium; Athens, Greece; 
Lundbakke, Denmark; Piana della Chavica, Italy; Ottawa, Canada; 
Schoonhoven, the Netherlands; Engeman, Norway; Lisbon, Portugal; 
Norfolk, USA; Ankara, Turkey; and Bonn, Germany. Of the NATO 
countries, only France, Luxembourg, and Spain did not plan do 
have such stations on their territory, but the first two 
countries will be able to use this system if necessary, having 
established cable or radio-relay communications with the closest 
ground station of another state. The control center of the NATO 
space communications system is located in the vicinity of 
Brussels, Belgium; the back-up is in Great Britain. 
  Today, 21 fixed stations and two transportable AN/TSC-54 
stations are functioning. 
  Total expenditures for deployment of the NATO space 
communications system in the second phase reached $50 million: 
$20 million for construction of ground stations; $10 million for 
manufacturing each satellite; and $10 million for putting the 
satellites in orbit. The United States assumed 30 percent of the 
total expenditures, and the other NATO countries (except France) 
assumed 70 percent. According to their technical parameters, the 
NATO-1 and -2 satellites could also be used in the Skynet and 
DSCS systems. 
  In the third phase of development of the SATCOM system, the 
task was set to provide communications for the tactical level of 
the NATO Armed Forces. In 1973, a contract was concluded with a 
division of Philco-Ford, in accordance with which it was to 
develop, manufacture, launch, and maintenance of two NATO-3 
satellites, and to prepare a third 1.5 years after launch of the 
first. It proposed using existing technologies and technical 
solutions. The DSCS satellite was taken as the basis (except for 
the antenna system, which was completely reworked). 
  The first NATO-3 satellite was launched in 1976 from Cape 
Canaveral using a Delta booster rocket. It was put into a 
geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at 18 degrees west 
longitude. The second satellite (NATO-3B) was launched in 1977 
of over the Pacific Ocean; the third (NATO-3C) was launched in 
1978. 
  The NATO-3 satellite had the shape of a cylinder 2.2 meters 
in diameter and 2.23 meters tall. The overall height with the 
antenna system was 3.1 meters. The launch weight was 720 kg (340 
kg in orbit). Its operating life is 7 years. The satellite had 
three horn-type antennas (one receiving and two transmitting) 
operating in the 7.975-8.162 GHz (receive) and 7.250-7.437 GHz 
(transmit) bands and in the multiple-station access mode with 
frequency-division multiplexing. The total traffic handling 
capacity of the onboard repeater when transmitting via the 
antenna with a narrow beam was 870 telephone channels: 550 for 
communications with fixed ground stations, 160 with mobile 
stations, and 160 with shipborne stations. When using an antenna 
with a wide directional pattern, the traffic handling capacity 
was 240 channels: 140 for communications with fixed ground 
stations, 20 with mobile stations, and 80 with shipborne 
stations. 
  The NATO-3 satellite supported relay of secure telephone, 
telegraph, and phototelegraph communications signals. 
Transmission of data in digital form was also possible. The 
total expenditures for creating the third-phase NATO space 
communications system is estimated at $340 million (in 1980 
prices). 
  In January 1991, a Delta booster rocket was used to put the 
fourth-generation NATO-4A satellite (to replace the NATO-3C) 
into orbit from Cape Canaveral. This was the first of two 
military satellites created by British Aerospace and Marconi 
Space Systems based on the Skynet-4 satellite. The program is 
under the direction of the Ministry of Defense of Great Britain. 
The new satellites are being linked to U.S. military 
communications satellites. They have onboard UHF and SHF 
communications equipment and jamming protection. Stabilization 
is along three axes. The next NATO-4B satellite is scheduled to 
be launched in 1993-1994. 
  The ERS space system is the predecessor of a future radar 
reconnaissance satellite system which is being developed on a 
multilateral basis to satisfy requirements of the countries of 
Europe (reconnaissance, monitoring observance of disarmament 
agreements, supporting emergency communications, observing the 
environment, and so forth). 
  The first ERS satellite, launched in July 1991, demonstrated 
capabilities in the area of microwave technology and receiving 
radar images. The platform from the Spot system was used in the 
design of the satellite. The payload included two basic modules: 
An active microwave module (AMI) operating with a 
multifunctional C-band (5.3 GHz) radar and an altitude-measuring 
radar. 
  The AMI module, created by the firm Alcatele Espas (France), 
includes an image recording device and a signal dispersion 
meter. It weighs 385 kg and has a maximum power consumption of 
1300 watts. The resolution of the equipment is 100x100 meters or 
30x30 meters (improvement to 30x10 meters is possible). The main 
transmitter of the AMI contains a travelling-wave amplifier and 
a directional antenna 10x1 meters. The antenna's emitter covers 
an area on earth 100 km wide. 
  The ERS system has a number of shortcomings: The AMI module 
can operate only for 10 minutes to prevent malfunctioning of the 
TWTA frequency amplifier; the view of the earth is limited by 
the number of ground stations receiving the image on a real-time 
basis; there is no image recording equipment onboard the 
satellite and data cannot be transmitted via another satellite; 
the zone of access to the satellite is not optimized, and the 
directional pattern of the antenna is fixed and does not change; 
the process of processing images at the ground stations is 
fairly lengthy. 
  Today, the joint efforts of West European countries are 
concentrated on research associated with creating a new 
generation of military satellites. The military departments of 
Great Britain and France concluded an agreement on developing 
the EUMILSAT European satellite, expenditures for which are 
estimated at $1.2-1.38 billion (not counting the cost of ground 
complex equipment, which each country will acquire 
independently). The FRG, Italy, Spain, and the Netherlands are 
also involved in the work. Four independent national space 
programs are the base for this system: Skynet-4, Syracuse-2, 
Sikral, and Hispasat. This will make it possible to unite the 
efforts of the leading countries of Europe in the area of space 
communications and also stimulate their further work. 
  The European Space Agency is participating in development of 
the Artemis satellite (previously called Sat-2), which is 
scheduled to be launched in 1994. It is planned to install on it 
three experimental platforms with laser communications 
equipment, equipment for communications with low-orbit 
satellites, and L- and S-band communications equipment. The main 
contractor is Alenia Sapiro (Italy). Research is also being 
conducted in the area of creating the small Hermes spacecraft, 
as well as low-orbit satellites, which will be launched from the 
Space Shuttle or with an Ariane-4 booster rocket. 
  The NATO consultative group is working to determine the 
composition of technical means for monitoring observance of the 
agreement on limiting conventional armed forces in Europe. 
According to the preliminary assessment, space systems for 
accomplishing such tasks could be developed under the aegis of 
the West European Union. It is proposed to use as the technical 
basis the beginning created under the Helios and Skynet-4 
programs. In addition, the optical devices of British Aerospace 
may find application, making it possible to receive pictures 
with a resolution of several meters. The microwave instruments 
and other equipment necessary for creating reconnaissance space 
systems already exist. As foreign experts believe, a resolution 
of 5 meters is required to obtain images of aircraft, missile 
launchers, artillery, and other combat systems in the interests 
of monitoring agreements. 
  The ESA is also developing a multipurpose space platform 
making it possible, with the appropriate payload, to accomplish 
up to 10 different tasks. The platform may be stabilized along 
three axes and is to have two multiple-beam antennas. 
  A new working group was formed in January 1992 under the 
scientific and technical consultative body of the NATO Military 
Committee, known as AGARD, to study the capabilities of small 
and medium satellites (460 kg and less) in combat support of 
troops. The specialists of the group devote main attention to 
technical problems, the solution of which is realistic in 10-15 
years. 
  The ESA is working on creating a platform in a polar orbit 
capable of carrying a 1-ton payload with a 4-kW powerplant. 
According to the designers concept, astronauts will be delivered 
to the platform every 1-2 years by the Space Shuttle to service 
it and install new equipment. After the first visit, it is 
planned to increase the payload to two tons and the output of 
the powerplant to 7 kW. Up to 40 percent of the payload may be 
replaced during each flight. The platform may include: An 
antenna for communications with the earth via a repeater 
satellite, a removable propulsion system, heat-regulating 
equipment, solar battery panels, a synthetic-aperture radar 
antenna, a payload unit, a tethering structure, a rectangular 
truss for installing the payload, an assembly compartment, and 
an omnidirectional antenna. It is planned to put the platform 
into a circular geostationary orbit 800-850 km high with an 
inclination of 98.5 degrees. It will descend to an altitude 
accessible by the Space Shuttle for servicing. 
  The laboratory module Columbus is being developed under the 
direction of the ESA for a future space station. The project was 
proposed by the FRG and Italy, who were later joined by France 
and Great Britain. The technical requirements were agreed upon 
by the NASA and ESA directors to ensure the possibility of its 
docking with the American space station. This made it possible 
to enlist the United States in the project, who will partially 
finance the work being performed. The Columbus is nearly 
identical to the American laboratory module, but will have a 
longer service life and capability for free flight. The project 
is estimated at $2.12 billion (development of the station costs 
about $1.4 billion and equipment for it about $0.7 billion). The 
percentage participation of the countries involved is as 
follows: The FRG--38 percent; Italy--25 percent; England and 
France--15 percent each; Denmark--0.5 percent. 
  In addition to the manned module, it is planned to include 
the autonomous space platform Eureka, located in a polar orbit, 
in the Columbus complex. The launch is planned for 1993-1994. 
Subsequently, the manned laboratory module Columbus will serve 
as the basis of an autonomous European space system serviced by 
the recovering spacecraft Hermes. 
  Thus, cooperation between West European countries in the 
area 
of creating and operating military space systems reduces the 
expenditures of individual countries thanks to joint research 
and development, and also saves resources by reducing the number 
of satellites and producing a series of identical satellites. 
The EUMILSATCOM and INMILSAT space systems are considered 
promising. According to West European experts, by the year 
2001-2003 it is possible to put the first truly international 
military satellite into orbit. 
  Work in the area of space surveillance and tracking is also 
of great interest. Whereas experience of cooperation in creating 
and using the Space Data Interpretation Center is expected to be 
successful, one can expect the creation of a multilateral 
European military space surveillance system under the aegis of 
the West European Union. 
  During the next few decades in Europe it is planned to 
develop practical and efficient collective military space 
systems. In this case, one can expect the creation of a European 
Military Space Agency, which will be the result of the 
resolution of organizational questions on military space. 
Footnotes 
  1. For the beginning of this article, see: ZARUBEZHNOYE 
VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE, No 9, 1993, pp 42-48. -- Ed. 
  2. Today, due to financial difficulties, the question of 
abandoning the creation of "purely military" satellites and 
placing 7/8 GHz band repeaters on commercial satellites has 
arisen. -- Ed. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1993 

