Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] It is necessary to make a decision concerning 
possible return of the Sakhalin Koreans to their historic 
homeland and provide compensation for moral and material damage 
inflicted on them, according to the results of an opinion poll. 
This is the conclusion drawn by members of a joint 
Japanese-South Korean delegation, on a visit in Sakhalin. 
  According to various information, 30,000-40,000 ethnic 
Koreans are living on the island now. 
  Deputy chief of the Japanese Foreign Ministry's Northeastern 
Asia Department Fudzi Arata and chief of the Korean Foreign 
Ministry's Northeastern Department Sin Gak-su were at the head 
of this joint delegation. Yevgeniy Lishakov, an official from 
the Russian Foreign Ministry's Asia Department, and 
representative of the State Federation Committee Gerasim Yugay 
attended the negotiations of the delegation with the Association 
of the Sakhalin Koreans as supervisors. 
  During the pre-war years the Japanese Government deported 
the 
Koreans to the island of Sakhalin by force to fulfill hard labor 
needs and after the defeat in WWII they left them there. For 
more than 40 years the Sakhalin Koreans have had no opportunity 
to write to their relatives and have had no information from 
their homeland because the former USSR recognized only the 
Korean People's Democratic Republic and pursued the policy of 
the Korean population's assimilation. 
  The Coordinating Council of the Association of the Sakhalin 
Koreans has formulated its demands in an address to the 
governments of Japan, South Korea, and Russia. These include: 
Re-settlement of old people (born before 1930) to South Korea 
for permanent residence, granting accommodation and benefits to 
them, granting of Russian pensions and benefits to the people 
under repatriation, and payment of compensation totalling 10 Mn 
yen for the inflicted moral and material damage to every 
Sakhalin Korean who preferred to stay in Russia. In addition, 
they are asking the governments of South Korea and the Russian 
Federation to sign an inter-governmental agreement on dual 
citizenship for the Sakhalin Koreans. 
  Participants of the consultations held in Sakhalin also 
agreed to transform bilateral talks on ethnic Koreans into 
tripartite ones, having included Russia into this process. 

