CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Virgilia de Rodriguez, president of the </F>
Institute for the Ecological Development of the Amazon Region; 
place and date not given] 
  [Text] The Institute for the Ecological Development of the 
Amazon Region of Ecuador (ECORAE) has been engaged in important 
activity in the promotion and development of the population in 
the Amazon region. The ECORAE is doing great work in the 
planning, coordinating, and supervising major projects designed 
to benefit the region. 
  In an exclusive interview, Virgilia de Rodriguez, president 
of the board of the institute, discussed various aspects of the 
work the ECORAE is doing with a view to benefiting the 
communities in the Province of Oriente. 
  EL COMERCIO: What goals is the ECORAE pursuing? 
  Rodriguez: The Institute for the Ecological 
Development of the Amazon Region is working to bring about the 
sustainable and sustained development of the region, with the 
participation of the social partners and action on the part of 
the public and private institutions. In addition, we are 
seeking, among other things, to improve the standard of living 
of the peasants and the Indians, while respecting their identity 
and their methods of production. We are trying to ensure a 
balance between conservation and development and to promote 
ecological tourism and research on and technological generation 
of the native species that contribute to agricultural and forest 
production. 
  EL COMERCIO: From what funds are your activities 
financed? 
  Rodriguez: The ECORAE is supported economically by 
funds obtained from the export of oil. Initially, the allocation 
was 0.01 cents on the dollar, but this sum has been increasing 
annually. We now have a much more modest budget that allows us 
to work on various development projects. The basic purpose of 
the fund is to protect the ecosystem, and we are working 
together with the governments of the sections to develop 
environmental conservation and cleanup projects. In addition, we 
are authorized to seek foreign funds to support our projects. 
  EL COMERCIO: On what projects are you working at 
present? 
  Rodriguez: The ECORAE has the responsibility for 
and is doing the work of promoting productive activity in the 
rural sector, but with full respect for nature. We are currently 
using a part of our budget to provide the farmers in Joya de los 
Sachas and Coca with incentives for the raising of 
nontraditional crops such as black pepper and palmetto. This is 
being done in view of the crisis created for the coffee growers 
by the drop in prices on the international market and the 
attacks made on their crops by infestations and plant diseases. 
  In addition, we have focused support on the craft and mining 
sectors, because we want to create new job opportunities for the 
region's residents. 
  EL COMERCIO: What are the prospects for ecological 
tourism in the Amazon region? 
  Rodriguez: The ECORAE has placed special emphasis 
on ecological tourism. The Amazon region is a favorable area for 
the development of ecological tourism and scientific research. 
One of the projects we are coordinating with the Foundation for 
the Sustained Development of the Amazon Region is the opening of 
the first ecological corridor in South America. This corridor, 
60 kilometers long, will cover and protect a very extensive area 
in the valley of the Sumaco Volcano. Plans call for the 
establishment of two scientific stations there to pursue studies 
of the zone. We now have the total support of the national 
government for the implementation of this project. 
  The ECORAE is working very closely with the Ministry of 
National Defense on some projects designed to strengthen 
national sovereignty in the Amazon region, Virgilia de Rodriguez 
said. 
  She noted that a guided-settlement program is under way in 
the area of the frontier with Colombia, where there is a need at 
present for a larger population of Ecuadorans. 
  The FFAA [Armed Forces] will take possession of the area 
needed to make the guided settlement of citizens possible within 
the Guepi trapezoid area lying between the San Miguel and 
Putumayo Rivers. There are plans to establish a base and a 
harbor-master's office in the port of El Carmen, in Putumayo, 
she emphasized. 
  The entire Amazon region of the country is the ECORAE's 
sphere of activity. It includes the Provinces of Sucumbios, 
Napo, Pastaza, Morona, and Zamora; the districts of Lago Agrio, 
Shushufindi, Gonzalo Pizarro, Cascales, Putumayo, and Sucumbios 
Alto, in Sucumbios; Tena, Archidona, Francisco de Orellana, La 
Joya de los Sachas, Aguarico, Loreto, Quijos, and Chaco, in 
Napo; Pastaza, Mera, and Santa Clara, in Pastaza; Morona, Sucua, 
Palora, Limon Indanza, Santiago, Gualaquiza, Huamboya, and San 
Juan Bosco, in Morona; and Zamora Yanzatza, Yacumbi, El Pangui, 
Chinchipe, and Nagaritza, in Zamora. 

