BFN 

<F P=106> [By Herold Jean-Francois] </F>
  [Text] Port-au-Prince, 27 May (EFE) -- The feared "Tontons 
Macoutes" reappeared in Haiti today and announced their 
intention to assist the Army in preventing a foreign military 
intervention. 
  Spokesman Gerard Dessaint said "reinforced vigilance" 
throughout the country is the new assignment of this 
paramilitary group, which is accused of killing thousands of 
people under the Duvalier regimes. 
  Dessaint said the group is ready, together with the Haitian 
Army, to combat a possible foreign military intervention. He 
said the group intends to once again establish its garrisons 
throughout the country and keep close watch over all Haitian 
territory. 
  According to Dessaint, within 15 days the "Tontons Macoutes" 
will be seen all across Haiti wearing their traditional blue 
uniform. 
  The "Tontons Macoutes," the name given to the paramilitary 
police created by dictator Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier in the 
1950's, was officially dissolved in February 1986, following the 
overthrow of his son's regime. Later, many of its members 
joined the Army and have served as volunteers in the police and 
Armed Forces. Most of them, however, became "attaches," who are 
used in attacks on citizens, especially followers of President 
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was ousted in September 1991 by the 
military under the command of Raoul Cedras. 
  The announcement of the reappearance of the "Tontons 
Macoute" 
takes place at a time when the United Nations is trying to 
enforce a total embargo against Haiti to force the military to 
abandon power. 
  A U.S. aircraft carrier, a helicopter carrier, and two 
special patrol boats, along with other vessels, are maneuvering 
near Haiti to reinforce the naval embargo against this Caribbean 
country. 
  In the neighboring Dominican Republic, the border has been 
militarized by the Dominican Government to avoid the smuggling 
of gasoline and other oil derivative fuels. 
  [Paris AFP in Spanish at 1737 GMT on 27 May transmits a 
similar 350-word report that quotes Dessaint saying that "more 
than 30,000 VSN (National Security Volunteers, better known as 
the `Tontons Macoutes') have already been recruited from around 
Port-au- Prince."] 

