Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Wang Rantong (3769 3544 1749) and Special </F>
Correspondent Bao Guojun (0545 0948 0193): "The Autonomous 
Regional Party Committee Holds Ceremonious Meeting To Discuss 
Military Affairs"] 
  [Excerpts] On the afternoon of 29 December, the autonomous 
regional party committee held a ceremonious meeting to discuss 
military affairs. Attending the meeting were leaders of the 
regional party, government, and military organizations, 
including Wang Qun, Wu Liji, Qian Fenyong, Bai Enpei, Wang Zhan, 
Geriletu, Yang Enbo, Wuyunqimuge, Diao Congzhou, and Zhou Weide. 
  Wang Qun, secretary of the regional party committee and 
first 
political commissar of the Inner Mongolia Military District, 
presided over the meeting. [passage omitted] 
  Wu Liji, deputy secretary of the regional party committee 
and 
chairman of the region, made a speech at the meeting. He 
stressed: To successfully make the party manage the armed forces 
work, we should foster the overall concept of not forgetting 
national defense while grasping the economy. We should also 
realistically help military units solve practical problems, give 
full play to the role of militia and reserve service forces, and 
actually build the people's armed forces departments into a 
strong first-line headquarters. 
  Comrade Wang Qun also made an important speech at the 
meeting. He first stressed the necessity of fully understanding 
the extremely great significance of making the party manage 
armed forces work under the new situation. Comrade Wang Qun 
demanded: In doing the armed forces work, we should 
conscientiously implement the guiding principle of "taking a 
two-handed approach and being tough with both hands." We should 
not only unfailingly grasp economic construction but also not 
forget to grasp national defense well. We should not only pay 
attention to implementing the tasks on armed forces work, but 
also give full play to the role of militia and reserve service 
in building the "two civilizations" in order to make the 
region's national defense reserve forces more submit to the 
overall situation and more suitable for national defense. 
Comrade Wang Qun pointed out the necessity of studying and 
solving the new circumstances and new problems facing the armed 
forces work. First, we should tackle the problem that the 
people's sense of national defense in peace time has been waned; 
second, we should correctly and appropriately handle the 
relations between inheritance and creation; and third, we should 
strengthen the idea of running armed forces departments 
according to laws. Comrade Wang Qun stressed at conclusion that 
we should truly attend to the implementation of various items of 
armed forces work. First, we should further straighten out the 
guiding ideology for the work and foster the good practice of 
seeking truth and doing concrete work. Second, we should 
overcome the idea of inertia, truly attend to work, and give 
full play to the functions and role of military organs. 
  Attending the meeting were Bayaertu and Feng Yuqiang, deputy 
commanders of the Inner Mongolia Military District; and 
Zhaorigetu and Guan Shuren, deputy political commissars of the 
district. Also attending were responsible comrades of party and 
government organizations of various leagues, cities, banners, 
and counties, and responsible comrades of pertinent departments 
of the region. 

