BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by K. Subrahmanyam: "A Time To Be Firm Yet </F>
Flexible"] 
  [Text] A sense of unease is shared by a large number of 
observers about the forthcoming visit by the prime minister to 
the US. This arises out of the asymmetric situation in which it 
is well known what the US demands are. But it is not clear to 
the Indian Parliament and the people what the Indian prime 
minister will demand from the US President or what his replies 
will be in respect of likely US demands. Indian leadership has 
a tradition of being defensive and adhocist. Consequently 
Parliament and the public are rarely taken into confidence what 
our bottom lines are on various issues. Parliament is usually 
reassured that the government will stand firm and will not yield 
to any pressure or even soothed that there are no pressures at 
all, only suggestions, preferred desires of other nations. 
  From the US side there are three demands. Firstly, on 
Kashmir they would like India to discuss the problem with 
Pakistanis and Kashmiris (without being precise about whom they 
are referring to) and bring to an end the violence in the 
valley. Secondly, to ask India to enter into some regime of 
nuclear restraint and not to deploy missiles. Thirdly, on the 
commercial side they would press India to shorten the transition 
periods in respect of various TRIPS [trade-related intellectual 
property rights] related items even as they try not to shorten 
the transition periods in respect of textile quotas. It is 
likely the US will take the offensive on these three issues. 
The Indian response could be just defensive: to indulge in 
stonewalling and then claim that the government of India had 
stood firm. An alternative could be to be evasive, vague in our 
responses and then drag on the issues over a period of time. 
This runs the risk of US side resorting to "Salami-slicing" 
tactics and try to extract small but meaningful concessions at a 
time from India. This is what the parliamentarians and media 
observers are worried about. 
  It will be generally uncharacteristic of our way of 
functioning if the prime minister is to take the initiative in 
respect of the three issues mentioned or even launch counter 
offensives in these areas. Though this is considered unlikely 
it is worthwhile examining. Let us take the Kashmir issue. 
Today Kashmir has to be viewed as part of a larger worldwide 
phenomenon of assertion of extremist ethno-nationalism by a 
section of the people in Kashmir valley, supported by Pakistan 
with men, money and materials. Kashmir in this respect is not an 
isolated issue. There are similar problems in Bosnia, Kosovo, 
Transylvania, Ukraine, Abkhazia, Nagorno Karabakh, Kurdistan, 
Baluchistan, Iranian Azerbaijan, Afghanistan, Sindh and various 
Central Asian Republics. Does US have a policy in respect of 
such ethno-nationalist demands? Have the US government thought 
through the issue of ethno-nationalist forces being unleashed in 
various parts of the world? In the light of some of the 
pronouncements of US officials on Kashmir, will Russia be 
justified in drawing the inference the Russian minorities in all 
former Soviet republics have the right of self-determination? 
  Secondly there was a recent article of the national security 
adviser to the US President Mr Anthony Lake, in the Foreign 
Affairs quarterly which advocated a policy of dual containment 
of Iran and Iraq. The article was conspicuous by the absence of 
any mention of Pakistan and it is obvious there can be no 
containment of Iran without Pakistan playing a role in it. Mr 
Lake has to be taken seriously because of his official position. 
Is the US policy towards Pakistan, including the efforts to 
give one time waiver from Pressler amendment related to its 
containment policy vis-a-vis Iran? India has considerable 
mutuality of interests with the United States in regard to the 
free flow of oil from the Gulf, the stability of the Gulf 
states, containment of Islamic fundamentalism, the drugs flow 
though the gulf countries and associated terrorism and 
narco-terrorism. If the US is developing a policy in this area 
which is linked up with Pakistan's role and consequently its 
interest in militarily strengthening Pakistan, India will be 
interested in knowing more about it. 
  What are the parameters of US policies in regard to drugs, 
international terrorism and nuclear proliferation in the region 
given the US interest in the containment of Iran? In the 
eighties the US according a higher priority to enabling the 
Afghan mujahideen fight the Soviets in Afghanistan gave a lower 
priority to these three factors in respect of Pakistan. For 
India it is highly relevant to know whether that could be 
repeated. It will be necessary to probe the US assessment of 
the future of Afghanistan. A break up of Afghanistan will have 
very serious adverse impact on the stability of Pakistan and is 
of serious concern to India. 
  On the nuclear issue the Indian prime minister must seek to 
ascertain the views of the US President on the perpetuation of 
the nuclear divide into five nuclear haves and the rest of the 
nations as have-nots. It must be explained to the US President 
that such a divide in perpetuity will strike at the very root of 
the non-proliferation treaty which both in its preamble and 
article VI has laid down "each of the parties to the Treaty 
undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective 
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an 
early date and to nuclear disarmament and on a treaty on general 
and complete disarmament under strict and effective 
international control". Therefore India cannot undertake any 
new commitment beyond what it has unilaterally been following 
without knowing how the nuclear weapon powers propose to fulfil 
their obligations under article VI of the NPT even as they 
extend the treaty. Clarification must be sought from the US: 
in view of the shared objectives of India and US in bringing 
about the comprehensive test ban treaty and the cut off of 
fissile materials, should not both countries intensify those 
efforts which in fact would be more effective non-proliferation 
measures than the NPT? 
  The US administration should be requested to increase its 
transparency in respect of the Presidential certification about 
Pakistan not possessing nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive 
devices in 1987, 1988 and 1989. General Aslam Beg and other 
politicians of Pakistan have tended to raise very serious doubts 
on the credibility of those certifications. If the US were to 
play any meaningful role in promoting non-proliferation in South 
Asia then its credibility should not be in doubt. Clinton 
administration has disclosed details about secret nuclear tests 
in the past, radio active experiments on human beings, etc. In 
line with such policy of transparency the opaqueness in respect 
of Presidential certifications of 1987, 1988 and 1989 needs to 
be cleared up. None of these questions can be deemed as not 
being of immediate security relevance to India. 
  Given the present unease in the country the prime minister 
can seize the opportunity to strengthen his own bargaining 
position. He can make a statement in Parliament in which he can 
define his bottom lines on the various issues and indicate the 
possible areas for negotiation. For example, he can state that 
India would not discuss any capping, reduction or elimination of 
its nuclear capability except in the context of a 
nondiscriminatory treaty on the model of convention to ban and 
eliminate all chemical weapons. India is prepared to discuss 
various measures of nuclear restraint on a mutual basis among 
all nuclear capable neighbours in Asia. That will be a 
combination of firm policy with appropriate negotiating 
flexibility. He can always blame Parliament for not being able 
to make concessions. 

