CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S. Viswam: "A Highly Successful Mission"] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi, March 17--"Mission accomplished"--could 
well be the sentiment governing the outcome of the Prime 
Minister, Mr Narasimha Rao's "highly successful" visit to the 
United Kingdom, from where he flew home on Thursday to continue 
the implementation of the "middle path" in India's economic 
reforms. 
  Mr Rao's visit to Britain was reciprocal in nature. He was 
returning the visit to India paid by his counterpart, Mr John 
Major in January 1993. Since it was made at a time when 
Indo-British relations are marked by an unexpected absence of 
rancour or recrimination, it was also in the nature of a 
goodwill visit. The current phase in bilateral relations is 
characterised by a new level in mutual understanding and 
cordiality. That by itself is noteworthy as an example of a free 
nation and its erstwhile colonial master working together in the 
global arena. 
  There were no political problems to be sorted out which 
necessitated a prime ministerial visit. Therefore, the mission 
to London had another objective, namely, to elevate and broaden 
the economic cooperation between the two countries. British 
media described the visit as a business-oriented one and talked 
in glowing terms about how London was taking or planned to take 
full advantage of the economic liberalisation programmes of 
India. 
  British big business looked at the visit with a kindly eye 
and good favour. Mr Rao's mission to do the spadework for 
attracting more and more British investment in India can be said 
to have been successfully achieved. In Mr Rao's own words, a 
positive and constructive thrust had been given by his visit to 
Indo-British political and economic cooperation. 
  One noticed that throughout his four-day stay in Britain, 
the 
contentious issues which normally form the subject of high-level 
discussions during any interaction between India and countries 
of the West were either absent or were touched upon only 
peripherally. Even the present-day controversial themes like 
human rights, Kashmir, Pakistan and nuclear non-proliferation, 
over which India is usually at the receiving end were raised and 
got out of the way quickly, without their impact being felt on 
bilateral relations. 
  Instead, the accent was more on investment and how the two 
countries would like to play the game, almost a new one for 
India, of investing and reaping profits. It is not without 
significance therefore that the Indian co-chairman of the 
Indo-British Partnership Initiative (IBPI), Mr J.J. Irani of 
TISCO [Tata Iron and Steel Company] described the current status 
of the initiative as "the wicket is full of runs" and the 
British co-chairman, Sir Robert Evans of British Gas responded 
by declaring that the IBPI had a good innings and "we intend to 
stay at the crease." 
  Symbolising this mutual desire to continue the partnership 
is 
the emergence of the unique document signed during Mr Rao's 
visit--Indo-UK bilateral agreement on promotion and protection 
of investments. It is unique because this is the first time in 
India's post-Independence history that it has entered into such 
an agreement with any country. It is also unique because the 
current size of Indian investment in Britain--a dozen or so 
joint ventures--would not have warranted the demand for 
protection. There is a certain measure of logic for Britain to 
seek such protection. India is a new entrant to the free market 
and its entry is not marked by across-the-board political 
endorsement in the country. Knowing that the outcome of the 
elections in India can never be predicted, and that there is 
always the possibility of the ballot returning to power a party 
which may not want to remain in the free market, Britain has 
good reason to seek protection for its investments in India. The 
agreement gives them that guarantee and assures them there is no 
danger of their investments being nationalised or their profits 
denied repatriation. The agreement itself is a comprehensive 
document covering a wide range of investments including 
Intellectual Property Rights. It would ensure that the foreign 
and domestic investors were treated at par in so far as 
compensations to investors in specific situations were concerned. 
  Though IBPI has had extraordinary success during the first 
year of its operation, the exchange of views between a 
delegation of Indian businessmen and British industrialists 
during Mr Rao's visit to London showed that the British continue 
to have reservations about the course of the economic reforms. 
For instance, the Indian labour laws generated considerable 
interest. Some British participants pointed out that India 
should not take its superior competitiveness in some areas for 
granted as over-manning led to increased costs which eroded 
competitiveness. Dr Irani said that labour relations in India is 
an extremely sensitive subject which had to be handled with 
care. In other words, while he appreciated the British concern, 
he could not guarantee an exit policy which would suit the 
investors. Similarly, British businessmen who were interested in 
the opening of the insurance sector in India wanted to know 
whether the Government of India would be open to suggestions 
from them with regard to further reform and whether the 
liquidity ratios would be favourable to foreign insurance 
companies. 
  Mr Narasimha Rao appears to have returned home convinced 
that 
Mr John Major would encourage and bless the private sector 
investor to go to India on a much larger scale than they are 
coming now. The implication of his prognosis of improved 
Indo-British economic cooperation, therefore, means that he 
found the climate favourable for attracting a greater volume of 
investment. A good beginning in this direction was made during 
his visit. The names of the companies involved in the MoUs 
signed speak for themselves. They are all stable and powerful 
industrial units like Rolls Royce, GEC, GPT and Peebles 
Electric. Their involvement in India would add prestige to 
Indo-British economic cooperation. When big companies come in on 
their own assured of a fair return, medium and small-sized 
companies are sure to follow. 
  Thus, it would seem that Mr Rao's visit generated among 
British businessmen the necessary confidence in the direction of 
the economic reforms and the soundness of the current policies. 
This is a major gain from the visit. It is not everyday that a 
British Premier hosts a lunch in honour of a visiting Prime 
Minister and the guest list shows a preponderance of both Indian 
and British businessmen. The very fact that the two Prime 
Ministers jointly received the progress report of the IBPI from 
the two co-chairmen automatically gave the venture full official 
backing. This was reassuring to Indian and British businessmen 
alike. 
  On the political front too, there were gains. Terrorism 
needs 
to be deplored, wherever it occurs. But the mortar attacks by 
the Irish Republican Army (IRA) terrorists on Heathrow, 
necessitating the diversion of the Prime Minister's aircraft to 
Gatwick for his arrival, and the choice of a Royal Air Force 
(RAF) air base for his departure, underlined a point India has 
been making for the last several years. Terrorism's targets, 
whether they are Indians or British, are equal sufferers. As the 
Prime Minister pointed out, being themselves the victims of 
terrorism, the British were in a better position now to 
appreciate India's concerns. The implications of Pakistan's 
abetment of terrorism in the Kashmir Valley, therefore, did not 
have to be explained by Mr Rao to his hosts nor did he need to 
be apologetic about the pressures he is under in Kashmir. 
  The British position on Kashmir has been well known to 
India. 
Three points constitute this position: (I) resumption of a 
substantive Indo-Pakistan dialogue on the basis of the Shimla 
Agreement; (II) initiation of the political process in Kashmir; 
and (III) cessation of external support to militants. This 
position, first outlined by Mr Douglas Hurd in October 1992 has 
since been reiterated several times both at the official and 
political levels. 
  The Kashmir issue was not on the agenda of the summit 
meeting 
this time in London: it came up in passing, by way of 
information-sharing on the current situation. And the British 
were satisfied by Mr Rao's confirmation that preliminary 
measures are already on hand to initiate the political process 
in Kashmir. Mr Rao has returned home reasonably assured that 
the British are unlikely to make a song and dance about Kashmir 
and Indo-Pakistan relations in the near future. 
  The British role in Geneva at the time of the voting on 
Pakistan's resolution was particularly helpful to India. Britain 
and Germany were able to prevail upon the other members of the 
European Union not to support Pakistan. Even on the human rights 
issue, the British position is mild compared to the strident one 
of the United States. Thus, on the whole, the stage has been set 
by Mr Rao's visit to Britain for not only enhanced cooperation 
between the two countries but also for better mutual 
understanding. Frequent high-level contacts always result in 
this, and Mr Rao's just-concluded visit has been no exception. 



