Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Federal Counterintelligence Service [FCS] will 
be a central body of the federal state authority engaged in 
identifying, preventing and defeating the intelligence and 
subversive activities by foreign special services and 
organizations and of maintaining the constitutional order, 
sovereignty, territorial integrity and defense capability of the 
country. These are the main points of guidelines on the FCS 
that were approved by President Boris Yeltsin. 
  The counterintelligence service will hire 75,000 personnel. 
This figure does not include research, military, medical and 
logistics staff. The FCS management staff will include 1500 men 
and women. Its collegium will consist of 11 members. 
  The FCS will report directly to the Russian president. 
  Its functions will include: 
  -- detecting, preventing and thwarting the intelligence and 
subversive activities of special services and organizations 
against the Russian Federation: 
  -- collection of intelligence on threats to the security of 
the Russian Federation; 
  -- providing information to the Russian president on threats 
to Russian security; 
  -- combatting terrorism, illicit trafficking of weapons and 
narcotic drugs, illegal militias and illegally set up or banned 
organizations that threaten the constitutional order of the 
country; 
  -- maintaining, within its sphere of competence, the Russian 
Federation's official secrets; 
  -- counterintelligence support for the protection of the 
Russian Federation's state border. 
  In matters concerning the search for criminals Russian 
border 
guards will follow the orders of the FCS. 
  The FCS collegium will consider and make decisions on most 
important issues in the activities of counterintelligence. The 
collegium decisions will be taken by a majority of votes. In 
the case of differences between the FCS director and the 
collegium the director's decision will be carried and he will 
let the president know about the differences. The collegium 
members will also be able to let the head of state know their 
opinion. 
  The Russian Federation's president will supervise the 
activities of the FCS and counterintelligence bodies. 

