Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, March 18 (YONHAP) -- The North Korean nuclear 
issue is almost certain to be referred to the U.N. Security 
Council at the International Atomic Energy Agency's [IAEA] 
special board meeting on March 21, a high-level government 
official said Friday. "If the international community decides to 
impose sanctions (on North Korea), our government cannot block 
it, will not try to block it, and is not in a position to block 
it," the official said. 
  Inspections conducted by the IAEA were 80 to 90 percent 
complete and satisfactory on the whole, he said. There was no 
sign that North Korea diverted nuclear fuel or reprocessed the 
spent fuel from its 5-megawatt nuclear reactor. "But the core of 
the problem is that North Korea did not stick to the agreement 
with the IAEA made last Feb. 15," said the official. 
  The consensus at agency headquarters in Vienna is that North 
Korea's refusal to allow full checks at its radiochemical 
laboratory was a clear breach of the Feb. 15 agreement, he said. 
  Seoul's policy on the issue is inclined toward sanctions 
while simultaneously trying to engage in dialogue, he noted. 
  IAEA experts have just concluded a two-week inspection but 
came back disappointed, reporting they were denied access to 
certain critical sites. As a result, the IAEA announced it 
could not verify whether North Korea had or had not diverted 
nuclear material for non-peaceful uses. 
  China opposes taking the matter to the Security Council "but 
it will accept the situation as inevitable," the official 
predicted. "China no longer has the justification to oppose. It 
is now in a position to be angry at North Korea." 
  South Korean President Kim Yong-sam embarks on a trip to 
Japan and China next week. His meetings with Chinese leaders 
are certain to focus on mobilizing Beijing's tacit approval in 
case the matter is put to a vote at the Security Council. 
  The official admitted Seoul's past policy had failed to 
achieve the ultimate objective -- ensuring transparency in North 
Korea's covert nuclear development program. "But everything was 
part of a necessary process. China can no longer oppose, and 
the international community will fully condone our decision that 
all diplomatic efforts have been exhausted," he said. 

