CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Liu Fang (2692 5302): "Developmental Trends of </F>
Taiwan-Mainland Trade"] 
  [Text] This year, it is estimated that Taiwan will 
implement more flexible trading policies in its economic and 
commercial policies, while continuing to be more restrictive on 
investment. But due to the working of the "profit principle," it 
will be difficult to halt the trend of Taiwan businessmen 
investing on the mainland of China. 
<H5>  Will Taiwan implement more flexible economic and commercial </H5>
policies regarding Mainland China? 
  At the beginning of the new year, word spread out from the 
island of Taiwan that more flexible economic and commercial 
policies would be implemented; but at the same time, it was said 
that the Taiwan government was vigorously implementing a "going 
to Southeast Asia policy," encouraging manufacturers and 
businessmen to develop the Southeast Asia market. Indeed, what 
changes in economic and commercial policies regarding Mainland 
China will the Taiwan government implement? What economic and 
commercial developments will the next year bring? 
  First of all, let us look at this news of "flexible 
restriction." Not long after the new year, the International 
Trade Bureau of the Taiwan Economic Department leaked the news 
that "Means of Permitting Trade Between Taiwan and the People's 
Republic of China" was completed. What most inspired economic 
circles on both sides of the straits was the permission planned 
to open the Taiwan market completely to mainland goods within 
two years at the outside. At that time, the methods for "listing 
negative factors and forbidding exceptions" for mainland goods 
will go into effect. 
  This will change the current method of importing mainland 
goods which requires an import license examined and issued by 
the National Trade Bureau. In the initial stage, there will be a 
change to a visa issued by an authorized; in the second stage, 
there will be a change to "listing negative factors," then 
gradually moving into free trade. 
  These revisions were acclaimed by Taiwan trade officers, for 
this way Taiwan can treat Mainland China as a general trade 
region, and implement administrative measures similar to those 
of other general regions. The government's role will change from 
administering, examining, and issuing licenses to helping 
manufacturers and businessmen develop markets. 
  Before this, the Taiwan Economic Minister Chiang Ping-k'un 
[3068 0014 0981] made public a proposal to "ship across the 
strait at fixed ports," a plan that would have "Kaohsiung 
correspond to Hsiamen," and "Fuzhou correspond to Keelung," with 
the goods in Taiwan's cross-strait trade shipped directly to cut 
costs. 
  These proposals and the manner of the Taiwan Economic 
Ministry have attracted considerable attention, not just on the 
island, but also across the strait, and throughout the entire 
worldwide Chinese community as well. It is believed that 
implementation of these measures would definitely go a long way 
toward promoting cross-strait economic and commercial ties, and 
even develop cross-strait relationships. 
<H5>  Encourage Mainland China's economy and commerce "going to </H5>
Southeast Asia" 
  In fact, these proposals were made as early as last 
November. 
At that time, when the Taiwan Economic Ministry held informal 
discussions with representatives of the enterprise community, 19 
countermeasures were raised to promote cross-strait economic and 
commercial communication: 1) Resolve "economic problems" by 
"economic means," to help entrepreneurs "cut costs" and "develop 
markets" through use of a market operations system. 2) Allow 
manufacturing and commercial units fix plans, allow 
entrepreneurs master the plans by themselves with government 
assisting by furnishing essential capital and information. 3) 
Reduce the number of "forbidden items" in Mainland China 
investment, and expand the scope of the "types of investment 
requiring special examination." 4) Let "trade associates" help 
entrepreneurs expand their businesses. 5) Give total support to 
entrepreneurs who have achievements in industrial promotion. 6) 
Encourage relevant government officials to conduct on-site 
inspections of the mainland market. 7) Open up mainland bank 
business operations by financial organizations. 8) Open up, as 
early as possible, the policy of allowing mainland economic and 
commercial businessmen to come to Taiwan. 9) Widen the door for 
importing mainland semi-finished products to Taiwan. 10) 
Appropriately open up the allowance for Mainland China 
investment projects and technical cooperation. 11) Let the 
General Industry Association organize a general Taiwan 
commercial association for investing on the mainland. 12) 
Promote the rights and interests of Taiwan business through 
people-to-people industrial and commercial groups. 13) Suggest 
that both sides negotiate intellectual property protection 
agreements. 14) As early as possible, enact legislation 
protecting the investment rights and interests of Taiwan 
businessmen, and list Taiwan businessmen's life and property 
insurance in cross-strait investment protection agreements. 15) 
Work towards allowing the mainland government to set up as soon 
as possible a mediation agreement system for cross-strait 
economic and commercial disputes. 16) Allow Taiwan businessmen 
to establish people-to-people economic and commercial 
organizations on the mainland. 17) Relax restrictions on Taiwan 
business's capital investment on the mainland. 18) Permit Taiwan 
businesses to fund schools on the mainland. 19) Completely open 
up Taiwan business' operational rights in the mainland market. 
  Summing up these 19 proposals, Chiang Ping-k'un said that 
the 
greatest policy change in the future would be government's 
change from neither encouraging nor interfering to vigorously 
assisting and leading overall Taiwan investment on the mainland. 
In addition, it will readjust the current measure of "listing 
the positive factors" of mainland investment to one of "listing 
the negative factors," that is, "allowance in principle, with 
only exceptional prohibitions." 
  But just a few days later, Yang Shi-chien [2799 0013 4873], 
vice minister of the Economic Ministry, corrected this to 
"maintaining the current status" of economic and commercial 
policies regarding the mainland. He went on to explain that 
whether mainland investment was "listing the positive factors" 
or "listing the negative factors" was a technical problem, not a 
policy problem; while the positive list was sufficient, there 
could be a change to a negative listing. 
  But Kao K'unglien [7559 1313 1670], vice chairman of the 
Cross-Strait Trade Committee was very clear in his view that the 
change from listing positive factors to listing negative factors 
was a policy issue, and should be sent to the Committee for 
discussion. In addition, he demanded that in the future the 
Ministry of Economics inform the Committee in advance of major 
and significant new measures concerning cross-strait trade. 
Entrepreneurs believe this demonstrates that the Cross-Strait 
Trade Committee is still in control of economic and commercial 
policy regarding Mainland China. 
  Obviously, the new proposals put forth by the Ministry of 
Economics after the New Year are a reversal of the "19 items" 
proposed last November. At that time, Chiang Ping-k'un proposed 
"listing negative factors" in both investment and trade, but the 
new proposal only mentioned the single trade issue, saying 
nothing about the investment issue, and it was still uncertain 
whether it would pass through the Cross-Strait Committee. 
Moreover, it is obvious that by its "going Southeast Asia" 
policy, the Taiwan government is encouraging entrepreneurs to 
invest in Southeast Asia instead of in China. 
  So, we can conclude that in the coming year, in its 
cross-strait economic and commercial policies, the Taiwan 
government will have a more flexible trade policy, while still 
retaining many of its restrictions on investment. 
<H5>  The reasons for Taiwan's more flexible cross-strait trade </H5>
policy 
  In reality, it is propelled by the condition that first 
caused Taiwan to take greater steps towards free trade. 
  First of all, it is a requirement for joining GATT. It would 
run counter to joining GATT for Taiwan to carry out a policy of 
prohibiting and restricting the importation of goods from 
Mainland China out of political considerations; Taiwan cannot 
join GATT if it does not change this policy, so it has to 
abolish it gradually. 
  Second, the demands of developing foreign trade. In January, 
the Taiwan Ministry of Finance announced that for the entire 
year, Taiwan had a $7.88 billion foreign trade surplus, which 
was $10.59 billion less than the year before last, with an 
annual negative growth rate of 0.166 percent, the lowest in four 
years. 
  But there was a $16.72 billion surplus with Hong Kong, an 
increase of 22.7 percent over the year before. It is common 
knowledge that Taiwan goods actually enter the mainland through 
Hong Kong, and the current surplus in Taiwan's foreign trade is 
chiefly due to having the mainland market there. If exports to 
the mainland were subtracted, Taiwan's foreign trade might have 
shown a deficit last year. 
  Third, a more flexible policy toward importing goods from 
the 
mainland holds more benefits for Taiwan than shortcomings. 
Although giving mainland commodities a more open market will 
reduce its trade surplus with the mainland, Taiwan can obtain 
more cheap raw materials and semi-finished products from the 
mainland, which will improve the international competitiveness 
of Taiwan's own products help to increase exports. In addition, 
it means that more of Taiwan's semi-finished products can be 
processed on the mainland, which will reduce costs and further 
increase competitiveness. 
  Therefore, we believe there will be more development in the 
next year or two, and there especially will be a great increase 
in the amount of mainland goods going to Taiwan. 
  But the Taiwan government always has two concerns when it 
comes to investment. One, that Taiwan industry will become a 
"vacuum"; and two, an increasing "degree of dependence" on 
Mainland China, just like the situation in Hong Kong. Although 
everyone in the Taiwan government, no matter whether in charge 
of politics economics, understands that direct investment on the 
mainland can not only exploit cheap land, labor, and resources 
but can also take direct advantage of the huge mainland market. 
But they always worry that it could lead to an "industrial 
vacuum" and an increasing "degree of dependence" on the 
mainland, which will put them at a disadvantage in negotiations 
with the mainland government, which the mainland would then 
control; this is hard for the Taiwan government to accept. 
  In addition, due to the many political barriers raised by 
the 
so-called "three stages" policy of developing the relationship 
with the mainland over the near term, medium term, and long 
term, plus the former "three `no' policy" and the "guiding 
principles for unifying the nation," breakthroughs have not been 
easy. For example, "cross-strait shipping between fixed ports" 
proposed by Chiang Ping-k'un is really just wishful thinking by 
the Economic Ministry, and with no response by higher ranking 
Taiwan officials, it might be hard to accomplish within a short 
term. 
  In summary, we believe that in the next year, the Taiwan 
government will continue to encourage manufacturers and 
businessmen to "go to Southeast Asia," and there will still be 
many restrictions on investing in Mainland China. 
  However, due to the working of the "profit principle," it 
will be difficult to halt the trend of Taiwan business investing 
on the mainland. 
  Mainland statistics show that, up to last November, over 
15,100 enterprises with Taiwan investment had been approved, 
with agreed capital of $13.6 billion. Regardless of investment 
site, scale, or project, investment by Taiwan show an expanding 
trend. At present, Taiwan enterprises are even in Qinghai and 
Tibet, and Taiwan business on the mainland has shifted from the 
short-term processing industry of the past to developing 
long-term investment projects such as finance, real estate, 
energy, etc., and has cross-trade, large-scale investment 
projects have started to appear. Overall, Taiwan business 
investment on the Chinese mainland will steadily increase. 

