Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [M. Abizanda report: "Vargas Acknowledges Operational </F>
Problems in Armed Forces Owing to Budgetary and Management 
Reasons"] 
  [Excerpt] Madrid -- The defense minister acknowledged 
yesterday that the existence of operational problems in the 
Armed Forces is a result of the budget cuts and management of 
resources. Garcia Vargas appeared at a secret session before the 
Congress [of Deputies] Defense Committee to report on the Armed 
Forces' effectiveness and stated that the greatest danger for 
Spain stems from local centers of tension in a very specific 
area -- the Mediterranean. 
  The defense minister's remarks centered on two matters -- 
the 
units' effectiveness and the new Spanish strategic approach 
resulting from the profound international changes of the past 
few years. On the latter point, the minister explained that our 
country does not have to face up to situations of global danger, 
stemming from the former Cold War atmosphere between blocs. 
However, he did acknowledge that Spain must assess hypothetical 
situations in a very specific area -- the Mediterranean -- that 
have a certain degree of probability of occurring. These 
dangers concern the rise of Islamic fundamentalism in the 
southern Mediterranean countries and the current conflict in the 
Balkans. However, he took the view that these dangers can in no 
way be imminent threats. 
  The minister explained that although the new Joint Strategic 
Plan is pending, the lack of it has been covered by two 
documents -- the National Defense Directive and the Military 
Defense Directive -- and that the planning cycle will be 
restored over the next few months. 
<H5>  Differentiate Between Units </H5>
  The minister also referred, as he explained to journalists, 
to the Armed Forces' operational situation. In this connection, 
he emphasized the need to differentiate between the various 
units comprising the Armed Forces -- especially the Army -- and 
said that those comprising the Rapid Action Forces, the Reaction 
Forces, and the Territorial Defense Forces are not the same 
thing. 
  In this connection, he stated that the first two are 
equipped 
and have "acceptable effectiveness," whereas he acknowledged 
grave shortfalls in equipment and human resources in the 
Territorial Defense Forces. In fact, these units will be the 
basis on which the mobile reserve will be formed when the 
redeployment plans currently under consideration are set in 
motion. 
  Garcia Vargas stressed that the process of concentrating 
units envisaged in the redeployment plans (the Army will pass 
from the current 20 brigades, including the garrisons outside 
the peninsula, to 15) will cause the units to be better provided 
with equipment and human resources. "The quantity will be less, 
but the quality will be better," he asserted, and asked for the 
current situation to be compared with that of 10 years ago. He 
also asserted that the Armed Forces' problems are not only 
budgetary but also those of personnel, management, and 
organization. 
  With respect to the Navy and Air Force, the minister 
acknowledged shortfalls in some of the main combat forces. In 
the case of the former, these shortfalls mainly affect those 
units that are not among the Navy's current priorities, which 
are the escort and transport ships. Those most affected by the 
cuts are the submarines, in which the delays in major refits of 
some of them -- the latest being the S-64, Narval -- have caused 
a lag in the Submarine Force's operational cycle. 
  As far as the Air Force is concerned, the main problems 
center on the Mirage F1's. As People's Party Defense Committee 
spokesman Santiago Lopez Valdivielso pointed out at a previous 
appearance, these aircraft had been barred from flying for more 
than two hours on safety grounds, and it has also been advised 
that they do not exceed 1,100 km per hour (650 knots). Part of 
the F-18 fleet is currently undergoing a "retrofit" (later 
modifications without going through the assembly line) at the 
Zaragoza base, in order to update all the aircraft to the F-18A 
"plus" model. 
  The Air Force also faces problems of lack of fuel and 
ammunition. On this point, the defense minister explained that 
a major effort has been made over the past few months to correct 
these shortfalls, and right now the situation is beginning to be 
acceptable. 
  The fuel shortage has also caused the Armed Forces to fall 
short of the standard set by NATO as far as proper training on 
maneuvers is concerned. In this connection, maneuvers have been 
substantially reduced, and in some cases have had to be made up 
for by real-life exercises, such as the participation in the UN 
mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina or the presence of ships in the 
NATO fleets in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. [passage 
omitted] 

