CSO 

  [Excerpts] It seems inoffensive but it isn't. It seems to 
be a toy plane, but surely it isn't that either. It could be 
everything but a component of the modern warfare arsenal, and, 
still, the robot plane SOJKA-III TV, a recent 
Czech-Slovak-Hungarian joint development, is partly just that. 
It is not inoffensive because, in fact, this aircraft represents 
a fighting technology of mainly offensive characteristics. 
[passage omitted] It could (if needed) carry 20 kg of 
explosives. [passage omitted] 
  The Czech-Slovak-Hungarian robot plane can be used for 
peaceful applications also. Thus, SOJKA-III TV will be capable 
of performing aerial mapping, harvest status evaluation, damage 
assessment following natural disasters, radiation measurement 
over nuclear power stations and chemical detection over polluted 
industrial areas. [passage omitted] 
  Designing the craft began in 1988. The prototype performed 
its maiden flight in 1990. Experimentation with it continued in 
1991. This robot plane is only one of the elements belonging to 
the reconnaissance/hit (battle) group. The other elements are: 
mobile control and information processing station, launching 
installation, meteorological field unit, special auto-support 
and recovery vehicles. 
  The group's navigation and guidance system is installed 
partly on the aircraft and partly on the mobile control and 
information processing station. The aircraft is provided with an 
automatic pilot, which ensures the plane's navigation and 
"piloting" on the prescribed course. On the plane's board are 
also: a transmission/reception station, a telemeter (distance 
measuring device) and a video camera. 
  The mobile control and information processing station 
displays flight parameters and the craft's course on the 
electronic terrain map, updated through information relayed by 
the video camera and the craft's other sensors. All information 
may be recorded as well. 
  The reconnaissance, as well as all the robot-plane's other 
sensors may be replaced as adapted to mission specifics. To 
this end, the builders had provided the craft with a wide range 
of devices to be accommodated within the 64 cubic decimeter 
space on board for this purpose. 
  SOJKA-III TV may fly on a preprogrammed course or it may be 
remote-controlled from the ground. The craft, according to its 
main performance characteristics--shown below--can be considered 
superior when compared to a relatively large variety of this 
type found in modern military arsenals. Other characteristics, 
qualities, performance or even "weaknesses" have not been 
published. With this type of technology these could be very 
important. Whatever else it might be said, the five Czech-Slovak 
and the eight Hungarian firms that collaborated in developing 
the group, under the guidance of military specialists, produced 
a military technology indispensable to modern 
warfare. 
  Wingspan - 4.1 m 
  Length - 4.125 m 
  Weight - 130 kg 
  Engine power - 31 kW 
  Flight autonomy - 3h 
  Range - 50 km at 600 m, and 100 km at 2,000 m 
  Cruising speed - 120-180 km/h 
  Maximum speed - 230 km/h 
  Flight altitude - 50-2,000 m 
  Useful load - 20 kg. 

