BFN 

  [Excerpts] Beijing, 31 Mar (XINHUA) -- According to the 
spokesman of the Ministry of State Security, since the "State 
Security Law" was promulgated, the broad masses have become more 
conscious of state security and have actively supported and 
cooperated with state security organs in carrying out their 
work. He said: However, some lawless elements, posing as workers 
of state security organs, have swindled and bluffed the public, 
tarnishing the image and reputation of state security organs. 
Recently, more than 10 criminal cases of this nature have been 
investigated in a certain city alone, and a number of lawless 
elements have been brought to justice. 
  Judging from the investigated cases, the main purpose of 
these lawless elements posing as state security personnel was to 
swindle money without being brought to justice. [passage omitted] 
  The spokesman pointed out: This kind of case of posing as 
state security personnel for swindling purposes recently has 
been uncovered in various localities, and all of them were made 
known to the public and handled in a timely manner. These 
lawless elements were not skillful swindlers; they could have 
easily been identified if we stayed alert and were familiar with 
relevant laws and regulations. Although state security 
personnel are authorized to exercise necessary authority 
pertaining to their jobs while performing their duties, they are 
required to do things strictly according to law, and use their 
authority correctly under any circumstances; under no 
circumstances are they allowed to overstep their authority or 
abuse their powers. The Ministry of State Security recently 
unveiled its standardized "investigation badge," which is 
applicable across the country. One of the purposes of using 
this investigation badge is to enable the public to distinguish 
real state security personnel from phony ones, and to enable the 
public to more effectively exercise supervision over state 
security personnel using their authority. 
  The spokesman stressed: If anyone is found to have committed 
illegal or criminal acts using the name of a state security 
organ or personnel, the public should promptly report this to a 
local state security organ. State security organs, together 
with concerned departments, will punish strictly according to 
law criminal elements using the name of a state security organ 
to swindle. Every case will be properly handled as soon as it 
is uncovered -- we will not show mercy. State security 
personnel themselves also will be seriously dealt with if they 
are found to have committed illegal acts or acts in violation of 
discipline. 

