BFN 

<F P=106> [By Graham Brown] </F>
  [Text] Brussels, April 11 (AFP) -- Belgium's controversial 
policy of neutrality towards Rwanda, its former colony, has left 
fearful Belgians there exposed to a propaganda hate campaign, 
Belgian African specialists said here Monday [11 April]. 
  The Belgian media has said Belgians are being singled out 
among the hundreds of foreigners being evacuated from Rwanda and 
subjected to harassment, theft and sometimes beatings. 
  At least three Belgian civilians have been murdered in the 
orgy of ethnic bloodletting which has left thousands dead since 
Thursday, as well as 10 Belgian members of the UN Assistance 
Force in Rwanda. 
  Former Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens said: "The 10 
soldiers and the murdered Belgian civilians were victims of the 
hatred created intentionally by certain Rwandan media." 
  Radio stations and groups supporting the government in 
Rwanda 
have accused Belgian troops of shooting down the aircraft which 
crashed over Kigali on Wednesday, killing presidents Juvenal 
Habyarimana of Rwanda and Cyprien Ntaryamira of Burundi. 
  The crash sent the country sliding towards civil war between 
the majority Hutus, who hold political power, and the minority 
Tutsis, and torpedoed last August's Arusha agreement to 
reconcile the two groups in a new government. 
  The Belgian government was allowed to land aircraft at 
Kigali 
airport on Sunday to begin evacuating its 1,500 to 2,000 
nationals in Rwanda only after protracted negotiations with the 
Rwandan authorities. 
  Filip Reyntjens, a specialist on Rwanda at the University of 
Antwerp, said hard line elements of the majority Hutu Rwandan 
army were accusing Belgium of supporting the rebel Tutsi Rwandan 
Patriotic Front (RPF). 
  Belgian Defence Minister Leo Delcroix acknowledged that 
France was the first country to begin an evacuation effort from 
Rwanda because it had better relations than the Belgians with 
the Rwandan military. 
  But while Belgium has been vilified by the Hutu hardliners 
for wanting to bring the minority Tutsis into a coalition 
government, France has been criticised for backing the Hutu 
power structure in place. 
  One Rwandan civil rights group accused France during the 
weekend of backing the Rwandan government with massive supplies 
of arms, logistical support and training of the Rwandan army and 
the hardline presidential guard. 
  It was the presidential guard which killed the 10 Belgian UN 
soldiers as they unsuccessfully tried to stop the murder of 
Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingyamana. 
  The Brussels-based Committee for the Respect of Human Rights 
and Democracy in Rwanda said it was fearful of the "negative 
consequences" of a new French military presence in Rwanda. 
  Reyntjens said Belgium was paying the price of pulling out 
its troops from Rwanda in 1990 at the start of the Rwandan civil 
war when rebels of the Tutsi RPF began their struggle for power. 
  He said Belgium was accused of not supporting "a reliable 
friend," of not delivering arms already paid for, and of 
insisting on respect for human rights. 
  The Belgian newspaper LIBRE BELGIQUE said: "While Paris 
continued to support the regime of President Habyarimana, as 
French leaders have done in other African states with a strong 
regime, Belgium showed more neutrality, opting resolutely for 
the democratisation of the Kigali regime and Tutsi participation 
in government." 
  The French have been pressured from the other side. RPF 
spokesmen warned at the weekend that the French military would 
be attacked by the rebels if it tried to play any role in Rwanda 
beyond the evacuation of foreigners. 
  By contrast, the French are having a much easier time than 
the Belgians in Kigali. "You are French? That's OK then, you 
can pass," a Rwandan soldier said at one roadblock. 

