Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Jaime Crombet, head of the Cuban delegation to the 
91st Inter-Parliamentary Union [IPU] conference and vice 
president of the National Assembly of the People's Government, 
returned to Cuba on 28 March. Upon arriving at Havana's 
international airport, Crombet evaluated that important 
international event. 
  [Begin Crombet recording] The 91st IPU conference held in 
Paris from 21 to 26 March was a big success. There were more 
than 120 foreign parliamentary delegations from all over the 
world and more than 1,000 participants counting both senators 
and deputies, including a U.S. delegation. They arrived a little 
late but they did attend. 
  We can say that a complete consensus was reached regarding 
the environment and the dumping of toxic and dangerous wastes. 
Obviously, following the Rio de Janeiro summit where a universal 
consensus, an international awareness of the need to protect the 
environment was achieved, the whole world is engaged in adopting 
preventive measures against natural disasters and especially 
against the dumping of the most dangerous and toxic wastes. 
  A consensus was also reached regarding the control of 
nuclear 
weapons and the obligations of all countries, those that have 
signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. This subject was 
added to the agenda; this was a subject that was added at the 
last minute to the initially prepared agenda, and a good 
document was issued on this matter. 
  The political situation throughout the world was also 
discussed, allowing each country to explain its domestic 
situation. Of course, Cuba also explained the situation in the 
country, the measures being adopted and the development of 
events, pointing out the main positions of other countries and 
stressing the main world events, such as the denunciations of 
the criminal U.S. blockade against our country. Also discussed 
was the role of the United Nations -- as one of the main 
subjects of the conference -- and regional organizations, the 
treatment of regional conflicts, and maintaining peace. Our 
delegation played a very active role in this connection. 
  Of course there were some contradictory positions. While 
certain delegations defended the limited sovereignty theory, 
others accepted the theory of humanitarian action without the 
previous consent of the parties. For us, this is a [word 
indistinct] principle, that is, the primary principle is that of 
nonintervention in the domestic affairs of other countries; 
therefore, the two parties' willingness to accept the 
intervention of UN forces is imperative, even though such 
intervention might fall under the veil of humanitarian action. 
  After strong confrontations, Cuba established its position, 
a 
position that was very clear, and also the need to democratize 
the United Nations and reform the UN Security Council based on 
the agreement of all the chiefs of state from the Americas and 
on the last summit, which was held in Salvador, Bahia [Brazil]. 
[end recording] 

