Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division. The 
Majles held an open session yesterday and the deputies from 
Tabriz, Karaj, Tehran, and Torbat Heydariyyeh made speeches. 
Then Hojjat ol-Eslam Nateq-Nuri made a speech on the occasion of 
the martyrdom of the revered daughter of his holiness 'Ali, 
Zeynab Kobra, and the Majles went into session. 
  We call to the attention of our dear readers the details of 
the discussions. 
<H5>  Selections From the Majles </H5>
<H5>  Speeches </H5>
  Ms. Amirshaqaqi, the deputy from Tabriz, said: Privatization 
in our country is not realistic. 
  Continuing, she said: The Majles must follow the statements 
of the grand leader concerning social justice and not allow high 
prices to break the back of the weak. 
  Dr. Sadr, the deputy from Tehran, spoke on the role of 
students and, commenting on revising and paying deep attention 
to the educational system in the universities, added: Students 
must be actively present in political issues. 
  Tavassolizadeh, the deputy from Torbat Heydariyyeh, said: 
Why 
do we not devise a clear policy for agricultural products? 
  Dr. Zali, the deputy from Karaj, focused on fully observing 
priorities in the examinations of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995] budget and the Second Plan and said: The directives 
of the grand leader concerning social justice, attention to 
agriculture, the growth of exports, and a foreign policy based 
on dignity, wisdom, and our interests must be followed. 
<H5>  Ratifications </H5>
  The amount of 5 billion tomans from the unused funds in the 
1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994] budget will be spent on 
repairing the damages due to unexpected incidents and ground 
preparation to relocate the people. City Halls governing a 
population of more than 50,000 are responsible to take 
appropriate steps to create passenger terminals outside the 
cities. 
  The Majles ratified a clarification concerning the 
coordinated system of payment of government employees. 
<H5>  Statements of the Speaker of the Majles </H5>
  Hojjat ol-Eslam Nateq-Nuri, the speaker of the Majles, in a 
speech in the open session of the Majles yesterday, said: I 
offer my condolences on the death of the brave daughter of his 
holiness 'Ali, Zeynab Kobra, to his holiness Mahdi and the 
Islamic nation, particularly the women in our Islamic society, 
those ladies who in the course of the war and the revolution 
carried out their mission well, continued the path of the 
revered lady on the field of battle, and today follow that great 
lady. May God grant us all success in gaining inspiration from 
the school of these great human beings in history to defend 
Islam, the Koran, and the ideology. 
<H5>  Farrokhtaj Amirshaqaqi, Deputy From Tabriz </H5>
  Privatization in our country is not realistic. 
  The first pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was Ms. Amirshaqaqi, from Tabriz, who offered 
her congratulations on the birthday of his holiness 'Ali and, 
referring to the Second Five-Year Plan, said: The Majles intends 
by a careful and overall examination to increase its strength. 
Of course, this is not possible except through criticizing the 
weaknesses of the First Plan and also verifying its strengths. 
The First Plan, despite its strong points, suffers from two 
important weaknesses. (A) The length of the schedule. As I said 
before, the time schedule of the Plan at the present does not 
conform to the scientific model of mid-term plans, especially 
for a country undergoing a period of reconstruction. 
  She added: At the present time, what must be given priority 
on the agenda of economic planning and developmental projects is 
the medium-term plan, because in countries that have been able 
to find an appropriate model in this area, the length of time of 
the program is calculated in days. Shortening the time in cases 
when the economic balance is subjected to fluctuations can make 
the program conform to it, especially in our country, in which 
at the present the economy is dependent on oil revenues. 
  Stating that (B) privatization is not realistic in our 
country, Ms. Amirshaqaqi said: Our country does not follow an 
open capitalist economy in order for privatization to be able to 
expedite its movement by creating competition. In fact, the 
basis of our economy is a set of beliefs that must end in social 
equity and justice. 
  While the capitalist economy does not conform to the spirit 
of social justice, and in a society such as ours with the 
supervisory power and government control system, privatization 
follows a deviant path, service businesses with high profits 
develop and stop the process of production. 
  She called the special attention of the government and the 
Majles to the problems of the Basijis, the self-sacrificers, and 
their families, who should be given priority, and said: I ask 
the government and the Majles to follow the statements of the 
grand leader concerning social justice and no longer allow high 
prices to break the backs of the weak and the vulnerable stratum 
of the society and main owners of the revolution to be 
eliminated under the pressure of inflation. 
  She also added: I ask the government and the Majles to find 
a 
solution to the problems of government employees, particularly 
the educators and teachers throughout the country. Special civil 
courts face problems in practice. I seriously ask the 
government, the Majles, and the Judicial Branch to revise the 
laws of the special civil courts in order to revive the rights 
of women and devise laws that protect and guarantee full rights 
for women. 
  The deputy from Tabriz made it explicit: Whereas in the 
Islamic government, everyone's living must be provided for, 
unfortunately, in regards to retired people, what did not get 
anywhere are the cries. Truly this stratum is facing serious 
problems. I request the president to issue emphatic instructions 
concerning the sending of the bill on the coordinated system of 
salaries of retired people to the Majles. 
  She asked the minister of economic affairs and finance that 
instead of adding to the number of floors in their building and 
their decor, the banks reduce banking interest so that at least 
government employees will be able to have some kind of a 
shelter. With the existing backbreaking interest, government 
employees, particularly the educators, who make up a high 
percentage of this stratum, will be renters all their lives. 
  Ms. Amirshaqaqi invited the president and the speaker of the 
Majles to visit the city of Tabriz and asked the related 
ministers for assistance in regards to attending to the youth 
unemployment, the foreign currency problems of Tabriz 
Petrochemical, the expansion of the Zanjan-Tabriz expressway, 
and the problems of the factories and the ghetto-dwellers of 
Tabriz. 
<H5>  'Abbas 'Ali Zali, Deputy From Karaj </H5>
  The second pre-agenda speaker of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was Zali, the deputy from Karaj, who expressed 
his congratulations on the birthday of his holiness 'Ali and 
said: Considering the limitations of foreign currency and rial 
resources and the large volume of programs under way, the 
examination of the Five-Year Plan and the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995] budget requires the special attention and 
cooperation of the deputies to fully observe the priorities on 
the national level and prepare the desirable grounds to use the 
potential resources of the country. It is necessary, by spending 
time and care and with all of our power, that we take steps in 
devising and ratifying the Five-Year Plan and the 1373 budget in 
such a way that they will be able to provide the grounds to 
eliminate the existing problems, coordinated development, 
economic and cultural prosperity, and the strengthening and 
perpetuation of the political positions of the regime vis-a-vis 
the foreigners on the basis of reality. 
  He continued: In examining the 1373 budget and the Second 
Five-Year Plan, the directives of the grand leader in connection 
with observing social justice, serious support for the oppressed 
strata, attention to the problems of the people, attention to 
agriculture, creating essential change in the administrative 
system, the growth of exports, careful attention to the 
priorities, and finally strengthening the defense capability, as 
well as continuation of a foreign policy based on dignity, 
government, and interests, must be considered. 
  The speaker continued: Considering the special conditions of 
the country after the imposed war, it was necessary to preserve 
the spirit governing the war and, by creating law and order and 
strengthening the spirit of hard work and conservation, to 
prepare the grounds for reconstruction and prevent the society 
from being entrapped in consumerism and overlooking the 
continuation of the interests of the enemies. Now, too, it is 
necessary for the spirit of conservation and simple living to be 
manifested in the private lives of all the members of the 
country, especially their deputies and officials, and for them 
to regard any sort of waste, deviation from moderation, and 
distancing one's life from those of the low-income classes to be 
against our values. With such a policy, our patient and 
resistant people, who seriously consider the fact that the 
officials are not separate from the people as a great gift of 
the revolution, will accept the burden of any sort of hardship 
for the construction of the country and preservation of the 
gains of the revolution. 
  The deputy from Karaj also pointed out: The people expect 
their deputies, who with ultimate conservation and attention to 
the spending and distribution of the Treasury and supervision 
over the way it is spent, as trustees and treasurers of the 
people, to avoid proposals that are related to districts and 
regions vis-a-vis the present priorities of the country. 
  Stating that the people are the greatest investment of the 
revolution, he said: In any planning and allocation of funds, 
preparing grounds for their united presence on the scene of 
construction and economic activities must be taken into 
consideration and, by examining the opinions of the people, 
strengthening their trust and belief in the planners and policy 
makers of the country. 
  The deputy from Karaj mentioned one of the problems of the 
country to be the high cost of administrative organizations and 
pointed out: The spending of Treasury funds to publish journals 
and magazines and congratulations and condolence cards at the 
expense of the government have been increasing and many of the 
ministers have imposed higher expenditures on the Treasury more 
freely, with payment of high salaries and benefits. Such charges 
need to be examined by the Administrative and Employment 
Committee. 
  The important issue of the country in reducing economic 
problems is increasing production. In the First Five-Year Plan, 
no significant change occurred in the level of investments and 
expansion of people's activities in production. In the Second 
Plan and the next year's budget, it is necessary, by legislating 
the needed regulations, controlling imports, and eliminating the 
existing obstacles and restrictions and by eliminating the 
grounds for gaining windfall income, to prepare better grounds 
for increasing activities and investments by the people in 
production and services, and more attention must be paid to 
agriculture. 
  The weak points must be identified and, by strengthening 
control over imports and by research, the quality of goods 
improved. The production units must be obliged to plan for 
increasing exports. 
  In conclusion, the speaker thanked the Revolutionary 
Prosecutor General's office of Karaj, Ayatollah Yazdi, and 
Ayatollah Moqtada'i for their decisive action and the arrest of 
a number of the outlaws of the cities of Karaj and Shahriar. 
<H5>  Seyyed Shahabeddin Sadr, Deputy From Tehran </H5>
  The next speaker was Dr. Sadr, the deputy from Tehran, who 
emphasized the importance of universities in the regime and, 
referring to the statements of the late Imam and the grand 
leader in this connection, he said: Considering the importance 
of the issue, I suggest that all the cultural and university 
centers, especially the academics and particularly the committed 
and concerned students, take appropriate steps to clarify the 
dimensions of this grave and essential matter. Certainly our 
Islamic regime gives a special value and place to training a 
competent, expert, committed, and concerned manpower, because 
the academics and researchers of the universities today are the 
officials and administrators of the future of the country. 
  He added: The axis of all the activities and planning in 
this 
vital and destiny-making center is the eyes of the students, and 
all the effective factors in the universities, the professors, 
employees, and equipment, work round-the-clock to impart to this 
determining element the necessary knowledge. What is sensed 
today and must be noted more seriously by the cultural and 
higher education policy makers of the country is a revision of 
and deeper attention to the educational system in the 
universities. The problem solver in this course is the statement 
of the late Imam that universities must become factories to 
produce human beings. Among the necessities of such a university 
is to achieve several goals. 1) Religion and a spiritual 
atmosphere must govern the universities, because the university 
environment must conform to science and knowledge. 
Unfortunately, the enemies of Islam in the course of many years 
tried to create disunity between the universities and religious 
ideas. 
  The deputy from Tehran explained: On the other hand, we must 
note that the young, future-building generation of the country 
in the universities is one of the targets of the cultural 
invasion by the enemy of the universities and centers of higher 
education. 
  2) Students in the universities must be actively present in 
political issues. In other words, the university must be a 
living and dynamic center in all political, social, and economic 
issues of the country and should have a sound life. With this 
characteristic, the student must move shoulder to shoulder and 
in step with the nation to follow the leadership and religious 
guardianship. A student must have a deep-rooted understanding of 
political issues. He must understand the political events of the 
country and the world and make an effort in this area. 
  Dr. Sadr continued: One of the necessities to do this 
correctly and to safeguard it against transgression and 
deviation is that in all his actions and decisions he be 
obedient to the absolute guardianship of the religious jurist 
and follow his Imam. Second, he must always preserve his unity 
with the seminaries and authentic clerics, because, according to 
the Imam, one of the most important factions that induced the 
victory of the Islamic revolution was the unity of the 
seminaries and universities. It must be noted that this factor 
plays a very important role in the continuation of the life of 
the revolution and the Islamic regime. 
  In the continuation of his speech, the deputy from Tehran 
emphasized: It is a mere mistake and absolute superficial 
perception for us to see the political activities of the 
students in the framework of demonstrations by a few hundred 
students separate from the nation. We ask the students and 
Islamic student organizations that, regardless of their tastes, 
they pay attention to several issues seriously. First, with 
unity and solidarity, religion and religious thinking must be 
established in the universities. Second, all students and 
universities must have an active and effective presence in all 
the problems of society and know that any action by them that 
disrupts these two important goals will certainly be to the 
detriment of the university, and for the universities to become 
arenas of uncalled-for and superficial conflicts between the 
Muslim forces must not be allowed. Rather, by tolerating the 
concerned opinions and ideas of others, they must effect the 
political growth of the universities. 
  Dr. Sadr mentioned the problems of medicine and treatment 
throughout the country and said: I request the honorable 
government to deal with this important issue more seriously and 
in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget exactly 
determine the situation of the implementation of the general 
insurance bill and make the necessary calculations. The present 
conditions of the country and the situation of the people are 
not suitable to implement the hospital self-sufficiency plan in 
this widespread form, because if all the expenditures of the 
hospitals, including the salaries of doctors, nurses, and the 
service and logistics cadre as well as the equipment, are 
collected from the clients, it will impose excessive pressure on 
the people, which is not in the interest of the country. This 
issue requires further examination. On the other hand, the sale 
of nonteaching hospitals to the private sector will disrupt the 
securing of health and treatment in the society, which is a 
primary right of the people, and the first strata that will be 
harmed by the implementation of this plan are the deprived 
regions and the downtrodden. 
  Dr. Sadr, referring the economic issues, then said: As the 
leader of the revolution said, giving hope to the people is holy 
struggle in the arena of propaganda, and creating a spirit of 
despair and hopelessness is treason. He asked all the officials 
of the country to use the behavior of the president as a model 
and then said: Today, in the whole world, attention to the issue 
of the mental health of the society is of special importance and 
plays a serious role alongside the effects of economic issues 
and calculations related to this issue in the various changes of 
economic affairs. Today, we witness the effects of propaganda 
and psychological issues in the world and how they change the 
fate of the issues or how they cause the increase in rates, 
inflation, and other problems. Second, care must be taken in 
describing the issues. The affairs of the country must not be 
discussed in a deadlock so that it would cause despair in the 
people. Third, we must speak to the people and raise the issues 
correctly and ask for their help. We must not forget that one of 
the important factors of the victory and survival of the 
revolution is the presence of the people on the scene. In all 
problems, they pave the way themselves with generosity and 
self-sacrifice. 
  It is necessary to pay more attention to pricing and price 
controls. Some might regularly speak of the role of the market 
in setting the prices. But we must note that neither this nor 
any other mechanism can negate the government and supervision by 
the Islamic regime. If it is said that people in all cases have 
the power of choice, it must be pointed out what will happen to 
the necessities of the people and goods such as medicine and 
their vital needs. The price of goods must be determined and 
precise supervision imposed and the violators who disregard the 
conditions of the country and only concern themselves with 
increasing their capital and accumulating wealth by sucking the 
blood of the people must be dealt with most severely. 
<H5>  Mohammad Naser Tavassolizadeh, Deputy From Torbat Heydariyyeh </H5>
  The last pre-agenda speaker was Tavassolizadeh from Torbat 
Heydariyyeh, who expressed his sympathy with the Bosnian Muslims 
and, offering condolences on the anniversary of the martyrdom of 
her holiness Zeynab, said: One of the tools used by the 
colonialists in the course of the past years to strike blows on 
our nation is oil, and those concerned are seriously suffering 
because the economy of our country is dependent on oil. 
  Now that the United States has resorted once again to oil to 
weaken us economically, some experts consider this an 
opportunity to make use of other capabilities and potential in 
order to be able to shape our economy, like our neighboring 
large and populated countries, without dependence on oil. 
  He added: The honorable government has taken long strides 
toward agricultural self-sufficiency. Now that we are coming 
upon Agriculture Week, it is time to critically examine why we 
do not make clear policies about our agricultural products. Why, 
when the farmers in the city of Torbat Heydariyyeh brought their 
surplus wheat after the revolution up to 100,000 tons, do we not 
see any practical support and encouragement for saffron, cotton, 
sugar beets, silk, and animal husbandry? 
  Why do not the related ministries, through coordination with 
the Ministry of Agriculture, save these simple laborers from 
confusion and losses? Even though the officials have made an 
effort to preserve the culture of the revolution, unfortunately, 
we are weak in the broadening and development of this valuable 
resource, which the Islamic revolution has brought. The deputy 
of Torbat Heydariyyeh then continued: In the arena of the 
consumer model and living, we have not acted decisively. For 
this reason, some of the people in the country suffer from a 
life of consumerism and have been influenced in various ways by 
foreigners, and consequently blows are inflicted on cultural 
independence. 
  Continuing, the speaker said: Now, the budget bill is to be 
discussed, but unfortunately, we still write the budget without 
attention to the characteristics of the region, and this causes 
us not to understand the potential of the region. 
  In pricing, if with regard to some items we have still not 
reached the level of saturation and creation of competition, 
what is preventing us, despite the existence of inflation, from 
presenting clear prices for goods, so that our noble people will 
not to be worried about the gross difference in prices. 
  In conclusion, he made a reminder to the Ministry of 
Industries in connection with the loan stated in Note 52 for the 
sugar, oxygen, silk and cotton weaving, and cotton spinning 
factories of Torbat Heydariyyeh. 
<H5>  Ratifications </H5>
  The first item on the agenda of the open session of the 
Majles yesterday was the report of the Planning and Budget 
Committee concerning the urgent proposal to amend Paragraph 4, 
Part A, Note 6, of the 1372 [21 March 993-20 March 1994] 
national budget law. After examination and discussions by the 
deputies, the general points of the proposal were ratified. Then 
the Majles started the details of the proposal and its single 
article was ratified by the deputies. 
  Single article. The amount of 50 billion rials from the 
unused funds of Note 18 shall be added to Paragraph 4 of Part A 
of Note 6 to be spent on repairing the destruction due to 
unexpected incidents and land preparation for the relocation of 
the people of damaged provinces of the country. 
  The second item on the agenda was the report by the Internal 
Affairs Committee concerning the bill to amend the bill of the 
law for creating passenger terminals and prohibiting intercity 
passenger cars in the city of Tehran, the details of which were 
ratified. 
  Based on Article 2 of this bill, city halls will transfer 
the 
pavilions of the city terminals to the passenger companies 
established as agencies in accordance with the regulations of 
the Ministry of Roads and Transport with regard to appropriate 
rental fees. Cooperative passenger companies shall be given 
priority. 
  Note. The conditions for the transfer of a pavilion shall be 
based on bylaws to be prepared by the Ministries of Interior and 
Roads and Transport and ratified by the City Council. In the 
absence of the City Council, they will be ratified by the 
Cabinet. This transfer shall not be subject to the legal 
regulations of the relations between landlords and tenants and 
will not create rental rights, business, or trade for the 
controlers or those in charge of them, and any time that the 
city hall finds it necessary, with the agreement of the Ministry 
of Roads and Transport, it may take possession of the location, 
with consideration for the conditions of transfer or at least 
prior warning. 
  Article 3. The management of operations, planning, policy 
making, and pricing concerning intercity passenger service and 
supervision over the quality of services offered shall be the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Roads and Transport. The 
ownership and management of the facilities of city hall 
terminals and the responsibility of the related services shall 
belong to city halls, and the city halls shall collect all 
applicable legal taxes and fees. 
  Note. City halls throughout the country are responsible for 
offering appropriate resources at the location of the terminals 
to the Ministry of Roads and Transport. 
  Article 5. City halls of cities throughout the country with 
more than 50,000 people are responsible for creating passenger 
terminals outside the cities in suitable places on the basis of 
the content of this law, with consideration for the resources. 
  Note. Creating passenger services by the city hall shall not 
prevent the creation of terminals by the cooperative or private 
sector, based on legal rules and regulations. 
  Article 6. With the ratification of this law, all contrary 
laws and regulations are rescinded and its implemental bylaws 
shall be prepared by the Ministries of Roads and Transport and 
Interior within three months from ratification and approved by 
the Cabinet. 
  The last item on the agenda was the clarification proposal 
concerning Note 3 of Article 1 of the law of coordinated payment 
of the government employees. The clarification proposal was 
ratified by the deputies. 
<H5>  The Subject of Clarification </H5>
  Is the content of Note 3 of Article 1 of the law of 
coordinated payment of government employees applicable to 
officials who after their tenure are employed as faculty members 
of the universities and higher education establishments or in 
the judicial cadre or military and law enforcement forces? The 
opinion of the committee: 
  Single article. Regarding official members of the faculty of 
universities and higher education establishments, judges, and 
military and law enforcement personnel who are employed in the 
positions in Note 2 of Article 1 of the law of coordinated 
payment of government employees, ratified on 13/06/1370 [4 
Sepember 1991], if after completing their service at the end of 
their tenure they serve in the above-mentioned positions, they 
are subject to the related employment laws and regulations. 
However, if, in implementing the above-mentioned laws and 
regulations, their salaries are less than the salary stated in 
Note 3 of Article 1 of the coordinated payment system of 
government employees, their salaries stated in the 
above-mentioned note shall be paid to them. 

