BFN 

  [Excerpt] Oslo, May 18 (AFP) -- PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat 
said here Wednesday [18 May] that his recent call for a Moslem 
holy war should not be construed as hostile to Israel but rather 
an appeal to strive for complete Middle East peace. 
  Israeli Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres, who had said he 
would 
query 'Arafat on the remark, walked into an 'Arafat press 
conference as the PLO leader was giving his explanation. The 
two men shook hands and Peres took a seat at 'Arafat's side. 
  They were here for ceremonies honoring Norway's role in 
brokering the Israeli-PLO peace agreement. 
  Controversy flared Tuesday when Israeli Radio broadcast what 
it said was a speech given by 'Arafat May 10 in a Johannesburg 
mosque in which the Palestinian leader called on Moslems to 
"take part in a jihad (holy war) to liberate Jerusalem." 
'Arafat was in South Africa for Nelson Mandela's inauguration 
as president. 
  'Arafat said here Wednesday that his comments had been 
misunderstood. 
  Speaking in English, he said, "it seems that they are trying 
to squeeze me with false means." 
  He said that after praying at the Johannesburg mosque, "the 
worshippers asked me to make a religious speech" and he insisted 
that his use of "jihad" was a religious phraseology. 
  "For your information," he told reporters, "we can say, `I 
will continue my jihad to achieve peace' in an Islamic, in a 
religious way. We can say `I will continue my jihad to do my 
work well, til I will be able to bring Christians, Moslems and 
Jews to play together in Jerusalem.'" 
  He insisted: "Some extremists have changed the religious 
terminology into a political terminology. It is not my fault." 
  Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin had warned earlier 
Tuesday in Israel that if 'Arafat's remarks were confirmed, it 
"calls into question the peace process." 
  Rabin warned at a press conference with visiting U.S. 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher that Israel would "not 
accept such violations and continue the process." Christopher 
said he endorsed Rabin's statement. 
  Wednesday's official agenda said 'Arafat and Peres would 
take 
part in the inauguration of a sculpture offered to the Norwegian 
people for their contribution to the Middle East peace process. 
[passage omitted] 

