CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rainer Althaus: "Gentle Recycling"] </F>
  [Text] Each year some three million tons of plastic 
waste material are generated in Germany. Barely one-sixth of 
that amount is recycled. Commencing in 1996, in accordance with 
the second stage of the packaging ordinance, one million tons of 
plastic containers will be directed to the already overloaded 
recycler. Some practical solutions for waste recycling were 
discussed at the ENTSORGA Trade Fair in Cologne in mid May. 
  The chemical industry, the manufacturers of plastic 
articles, 
waste managers, the uncertain public, environmentalists, and the 
various politicians are engaged in a highly controversial 
"religious war" involving the recycling of plastic materials, 
the environment, and money--lots of money. Only one thing is 
certain in this war. As Professor Doctor Helmut Kaeufer, the 
nestor of the German plastic products recycling effort, puts it: 
"We are in the initial stages of building an entirely new 
industrial field." 
  Just what form this new industry will take remains 
uncertain. 
Summing up the present state-of-the-art, Kaeufer says: "The 
chemical industry is giving me a real fight, and if I were in 
their position I would too." 
  The difference between the plastics specialist from Berlin 
and the multinational chemical industries and waste managers 
lies in one small, but very important detail. The chemistry 
professor insists on gentle, product-oriented, material-specific 
recycling, while the industrialists want chemical and 
raw-materials recycling. The difference is that the Kaeufer 
approach calls for the old plastics to be reformed directly into 
new plastic products. However, the professor's approach is still 
by no means entirely satisfactory. The chemical industry favors 
reconverting the waste products into petrochemical raw materials 
(naphtha, olefins, aromatics, synthesis gas). Commencing in 
1996, some 300,000 tons of used plastics a year are to be 
recycled in this way in Ludwigshafen. Already 5% of this 
target 
amount is being so converted in a pilot plant, costing DM40 
million, that went into operation in April. The final plant 
design is expected to cost several hundred million German marks. 
  BASF AG and OTTO Plastics Service praise their process as a 
milestone in recycling and describe it as "an ecological and 
economic recycling alternative for mixed and impure old 
plastics." As a counterstrategy, they are publicizing "the 
permanent availability of plastics within the framework of a 
dual system" and "a definite plus for recycling." The reason for 
this is simply that neither raw-materials recycling, nor any 
other recycling or disposal method, is as yet economically 
profitable. 
  Moreover, Kaeufer considers reconversion back into a raw 
material to be efficient only for the 20% of the old 
plastic 
products which cannot be recycled any other way. New products 
can only be produced from raw materials through labor- and 
power-intensive processes. On the other hand, used single-type 
materials can be remelted through the use of a fraction of the 
power requirements. In addition, raw materials recycling 
destroys the innovative-promoting incentive to produce products 
that can be easily recycled. 
  The collection and sorting of the different pure-type 
plastics that Kaeufer's technology requires is expensive and 
time-consuming. And despite all the propaganda concerning the 
recycling "boom industry," the available industrial capacity to 
accomplish it is inadequate. As a result, the recycling industry 
is replete with scandals. Just recently 61 shipboard containers 
turned up in Vietnam with over 1,000 tons of filthy plastic 
bags, which must now be returned to Germany whence they came. 
  Against this background, the advocates of 
environment-friendly recycling fear that waste incineration, 
charitably called thermal recycling, will be increasingly used 
as the solution for recycling problems. In the face of the 
pressing waste problems throughout the country, the resistance 
of the State environmental ministers and the Federal 
Environmental Agency is rapidly melting. 
  A change in the packaging ordinance, which currently 
prescribes materials recycling, can be anticipated. Product 
recycling does more harm to the environment than product 
removal. Unfortunately, convincing evidence of this is only 
available in individual cases. Researchers and developers who 
have prescribed material-specific recycling are disappointed. 
For example, Dr. Norbert Eisenreich, a Fraunhofer scientist in 
Pfinztal Fraunhofer, complains: "We have been proposing a 
type-sorting technology for plastic waste since 1992, but 
industry remains skeptical. That's the way it is with Toepfer's 
environmental protection laws. First, things are hurried into 
being, but then they are not really followed through." 
  Dr. Hartmut Lucht, the head of Laser Laboratory Adlershof 
(LLA) in Berlin, is also dejected: "The DSD (Dual System 
Germany) does not focus on type-sorting. The disposal managers 
get their money simply by separating out the plastic waste and 
pressing it." 
  But there are encouraging signs: 

  -  Europe's most modern, 
DM30 million recycling plant--the VEKA Environmental Technology 
GMBH for windows, shutters, plates, and profiles made of PVC has 
been in operation in Behringen, Thueringen, for months. Because 
of PVC's chlorine content (comprising 10 to 15% of its 
total 
mass, this controversial plastic is especially advantageous for 
long-service-life products in the construction industry and, 
according to the latest eco-reports, is more desirable than 
aluminum or wood. Old PVC can now be recycled into new window 
profile sections. These frames consist of 80% recyclates 
and 
20% new PVC for the outer layer. Even the old GDR plastic 
windows made of wood and plastic casing can be recycled in 
Behringen. 
  -  After two and a half years of developmental work, the 
Poschmann Company of Luedenscheid, a producer of precision parts 
made from expensive thermoplastics like polyamides and 
polycarbonate (DM6 to DM10 per kg), succeeded in processing old 
parts into a recyclate that substantially duplicates the primary 
material. 
  -  Triumph-Adler AG (TA) recently solved the essential 
problem of having its product returned for recycling by selling 
their typewriter ribbon cassettes in eco-boxes. The customer 
sends the cassettes containing the used ribbon back to the 
company which then, using the regranules, produces casing parts. 
In 1991, the TA recycling center took in about 94,000 returned 
cassettes, one year later the number was 160,000, and in 1993 a 
total of 212,000 had been received. 
  -  In its production of 
semifinished products and equipment parts made from polyamides, 
Huettig GmbH in Camburg, Thueringen, avoids waste and the need 
for recycling. Form casting, spray casting, and special extruded 
profiles keep the amount of waste to a minimum. Rather than 
returning left overs to the production cycle, they are 
depolymerized into lactam, the raw material for nylon 
fiber. 
  -  Since the beginning of the year, Regra GmbH in 
Primasens-Gerbach has also been practicing chemical recycling 
that is very close to material-specific recycling. The company 
has invested DM1.7 million in Germany's first ever plant for the 
recycling of PUR shoe sole waste. The 70 tons of the company's 
own production wastes, valued at DM400,000, no longer land in a 
waste dump. Moreover, the high capacity of the plant opens up 
recycling jobs to other PUR workers. In the recycling process, 
the waste plus polyalcohol is restructured into a dispersion at 
200 Celsius. Naturally, a specific PUR formulation is 
required. 
  -  BASF Schwarzheide GmbH has successfully tested a 
glycolysis for recycling mixed PUR foams as, for example, those 
from automobile seats. For some time now, the production left 
overs of an automobile supplier have been processed using this 
technique. 

  Recycling can become the driving force in 
economic development. With a market share of 19.8%, as 
against 
the United States' 16.7% and Japan's 13.0%, 
Germany leads the 
world market in products protecting the environment. 


