CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Svetlana Sukhova: "Visit of the U.S. Secretary </F>
of Commerce: There Are Four Disasters in Russia: Roads, Fools, 
Taxes, and Tariffs"] 
  [Text] Yesterday Boris Yeltsin received U.S. 
Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown, who has come to Russia for a 
week. The president's press service, as always, was niggardly 
with its words: Yeltsin, they said, expressed interest in "an 
expansion of mutually beneficial ties in all spheres of trade." 
In addition, he assured his interlocutor that the American mass 
media are incorrect in discussing a certain cooling in 
Russian-U.S. relations. Although the situation is still far from 
salutary. 
  After Brown's arrival in Moscow, the parties, exchanging 
white-toothed smiles, switched to claims. To the number of major 
Russian disasters, besides the roads and fools noted by Gogol, 
two more, in the opinion of the Americans, should be added: 
Russian taxes and import tariffs. As KOMMERSANT-DAILY 
correspondents learned from sources in the U.S. delegation of 
businessmen accompanying Brown, many of them consider 1994 to be 
a pivotal year: Either there will be a turning point in Russian 
tax and tariff legislation or they will curtail their activity 
here. But if the problems are resolved, U.S. experts predict a 
level of American investments in 1995 on the order of $10 
billion. Ron Brown also joined the Russian chorus of opponents 
of protectionism. Yeltsin also expressed himself in this regard 
the other day, and Chernomyrdin declared that a number of 
tariffs will be revised. It will really be necessary to hurry 
with this: At the "Group of 7" summit in Naples in the summer, 
Russia intends to raise the question of opening the markets of 
the West to its products, and here reciprocity is necessary. The 
first step has been taken in this direction in relations with 
the United States: A statement on mutual access to markets was 
signed yesterday at a meeting of the committee on business 
cooperation. If the memorandum on establishing business centers 
in Russia (talk about them has been going on a long time) and 
the statement on cooperation in the sphere of medicine are not 
taken into account, Brown's visit was not abundant in documents. 
  Of the major practical achievements, mention should be made 
of continuation of work in expert groups on plans for the 
development of the Sakhalin shelf (Sakhalin-1) and the joint 
exploitation with TEXACO of the Timano-Pechora (Komi) oil and 
gas region: Work will begin in the summer. Today, Brown is 
departing for St. Petersburg. On 5 April, KOMMERSANT-DAILY will 
return to the elucidation of his visit. 

