BFN 

  [Text] At the Lianyun Guesthouse in Kunming yesterday 
afternoon and this morning, the Yunnan Provincial CPC Committee 
held a meeting of the CPC Committee secretaries of prefectures, 
autonomous prefectures, cities, and counties to discuss how to 
deepen reform and accelerate economic development. Pu Chaozhu, 
secretary of the Yunnan Provincial CPC Committee, chaired the 
meeting. To deepen reform and develop the economy, he stressed, 
are our central tasks at present. All our work should focus on 
and serve this work. 
  After listening to experience-exchange speeches by Li 
Zhenghuang, secretary of the Yiliang County CPC Committee, on 
gearing the use of barren hills to the market and on the 
compensated transfer of land use rights; Zhu Peifu, secretary of 
Yuxi City CPC Committee, on implementing the share-holding 
system in town and township enterprises; Liu Yiping, secretary 
of Luxi County CPC Committee, on making great efforts to develop 
the individual and private economy; and Hou Chengming, secretary 
of Chengjiang County CPC Committee, on small state-owned 
commercial enterprises run by local people; Pu Chaozhu made a 
comprehensive and systematic speech, mainly on what issues 
should be grasped in deepening reform at and below the county 
level. The focus of deepening reform below the county level, he 
stressed, is to accurately discover where lies the potential of 
the productive forces and where such potential can be released. 
It is necessary to concentrate efforts on three aspects of 
work. The first is to readjust the single-product economic 
structure and the ownership structure. The second is to change 
ways of production and operation in rural areas and to develop 
socialized large-scale production. The third is to change the 
management structure in rural areas and spread the experience of 
the three combination-one system. 
  Pu Chaozhu elaborated primarily on readjusting the 
single-product economic structure and the ownership structure. 
Major measures to be taken are: First, to turn small 
state-owned enterprises into private or collective enterprises 
through auctioning, leasing, or other ways, and to invigorate 
small enterprises; second, to energetically develop individual 
economy and private enterprises; third, to carry out the auction 
or compensated transfer to individuals or collectives the 
management and use rights of barren hills and land in a bid to 
develop and make use of barren hills; fourth, to energetically 
spread the share-holding cooperation system and go all-out to 
develop town and township enterprises. 
  Pu Chaozhu urged various localities to further emancipate 
their minds; update concepts; adhere to the principle of putting 
practice first; take part in practice; in light of local 
realities to seriously use as reference the good experiences of 
Yiliang, Yuxi, Luxi, Chengjiang, and other localities; 
accelerate the pace of reform; and promote comprehensive 
economic development. 
  Zhao Shumin, member of the Standing Committee of the Yunnan 
Provincial CPC Committee; Bao Yongkang, vice chairman of the 
Standing Committee of the Yunnan Provincial People's Congress; 
and Vice Governor Yang Jianqiang also spoke at the meeting. 
  Liang Jinquan, deputy secretary of the Yunnan Provincial CPC 
Committee, and Zhang Baosan, Meng Jiyao, and Wang Tianxi, 
members of the Standing Committee of the Yunnan Provincial CPC 
Committee, also attended. 

