BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter An Tiejun (1344 6993 6511) and Correspondent </F>
Zhong He (6988 7729): "To Accelerate Reform, We Should Rely on 
the Brave Practice of the Masses"] 
  [Text] To accelerate reform of the economic structure, 
leaders at all levels should further emancipate their minds, 
trust and rely on the masses, and have the courage to practice 
and advance. This is the key to whether reform can be deepened 
and whether it can succeed. The above-mentioned opinion was 
given by Comrade Wang Qun during his investigation and study 
activities in Hohhot city. 
  Wang Qun, secretary of the autonomous regional party 
committee and chairman of the regional people's congress 
standing committee, and Zhou Weide, vice chairman of the 
autonomous region, led the responsible comrades of relevant 
departments and committees to conduct investigation and study in 
Hohhot city on the morning of 3 March. After hearing reports by 
the city leading comrades on Hohhot's implementation of the "10 
billion yuan project" and transformation of the enterprise 
operating mechanism, Comrade Wang Qun said happily: After 
putting forward the target of increasing the industrial output 
value to 10 billion yuan this year, Hohhot city has done a great 
amount of painstaking and meticulous work. Its development rate 
exceeded 47 percent in January and February this year, which 
marked a good beginning. This was an extraordinary high-speed 
development, which has laid a good foundation for accomplishing 
the "10 billion yuan project" this year. This achievement was 
attributed to the efforts of the Hohhot city party committee and 
government to implement the guidelines of the third plenary 
session of the 14th party congress and to seize the opportunity 
to carry out reform and opening up. Hohhot's experiences have 
given us many enlightenments, of which the most prominent one is 
to emancipate the mind, rely on the masses, and have the courage 
in practice. He pointed out: Inner Mongolia has a weak 
foundation and low base figure for economic development, but it 
has great potential. In line with this reality, it not only 
should but also can accelerate economic development. The key 
lies in the degree of our emancipation of the mind. With ideas 
unchanged, and the mind not emancipated, we will have difficulty 
in finding the method and the way out. 
  Speaking on how to deepen reform, Comrade Wang Qun 
emphasized: The current nationwide and regionwide climate for 
reform is very good, and we should not miss this opportunity. 
Leading organs and leading bodies at all levels should take the 
lead in reform, have the courage in practice, and exert earnest 
efforts to carry out practical work. This year will be one when 
the largest number of reform policies will be implemented. Our 
reform has entered the new stage for promoting package reform 
while making breakthroughs in key areas. The opportunity is 
very good, and the situation is spurring us on. Leaders at all 
levels should have a clear understanding of the situation and 
have the awareness of opportunity and sense of urgency. Party 
and government leaders should take the lead in conducting 
investigation and study, conscientiously organize personnel to 
give specific guidance to enterprises one by one, and be 
determined to address all the knotty problems we encounter in 
reform. As has been proven in practice, the mindset of party 
and government leaders is very important to the promotion of 
reform. 
  Comrade Wang Qun said: Reform is a revolution and the 
cause of the masses, not the behavior of a few people. Without 
the full understanding and active participation of the masses, 
reform will have difficulty to go on. In conducting reform, 
therefore, we should always adhere to the mass line and trust 
and rely on the masses in doing everything. We should have the 
ability to look for ideas and methods and gain courage and 
confidence from the masses. Propaganda and education should be 
conducted successfully on the issues which the masses do not 
understand. We should fully develop the spirit of staff members 
and workers as masters and boost their enthusiasm and initiative 
in participating in reform. We should also show concern for the 
masses and help them resolve some specific difficulties to rid 
them of their misgivings. With the understanding, 
participation, and support of the masses, we will be able to 
surmount all difficulties. 
  Comrade Wang Qun emphasized: As the major principles for 
reform have been defined and the road of reform has become 
increasingly clearer, the key is to proceed from reality and 
have the courage in practice. We should bravely conduct 
experiment, blaze new trails, and carry out work. With a 
wait-and-see attitude and hesitation, we will miss the 
opportunity. Leaders at all levels should face up to 
difficulties and have the courage to hold responsibility, to 
make decisions, and to experiment with the work that can help 
promote productive forces. Only in this way, can they gain more 
initiative. 
  Comrade Wang Qun pointed out: We have encountered some 
difficulties and problems in the current process of deepening 
reform. How to treat and understand these problems is an 
extremely important matter to cadres and the masses. The 
correct attitude toward the problems is to despise them 
strategically and to take them seriously tactically. We should 
first note that the difficulties and problems are temporary ones 
emerging in the process of advancement, which can be resolved. 
In the process of addressing them, however, we should be 
prudent. We should conduct in-depth and meticulous 
investigation and study on all problems, such as those on 
historical burdens, distribution, benefits to retired personnel, 
and placement of redundant personnel, and solve them one by one. 
If we fail to address specific problems, the enthusiasm of the 
masses, the progress of reform, and even the overall situation 
of an enterprise or a locality, will be affected. 
  Comrade Wang Qun pointed out: In the current process of 
deepening reform, we should closely coordinate reform with the 
endeavors of opening up, imports, and cooperation and the 
current production. Based on their specific conditions, all 
localities should formulate a package of policies compatible 
with their specific local conditions and the needs of the market 
economy system and lead the reform to develop continuously 
through the policies. The "three advantages" should be the 
criterion for formulating the policies. According to our 
practice, importing and transplanting enterprises with the funds 
and technology from abroad, cooperation, and merge are very 
effective methods. They yield quick results and are very 
applicable to the area like Inner Mongolia. All localities 
should actively popularize this experience to accelerate the 
process of deepening reform. 
  In conclusion, Comrade Wang Qun also gave opinions on the 
current shortages of funds. 
  Zhou Weide, vice chairman of the autonomous region, also 
delivered a speech. 

