Media      Developments: Russia and Ukraine No. 6 
   This Special Memorandum, "Media Developments:  Russia and 
Ukraine," is a periodic series aimed at reporting and analyzing 
changes to and events affecting the Russian and Ukrainian media. 
Comments and queries regarding this series may be directed to 
Chief Analyst, ENEAG at (703) 733-6072. 
   In this issue... 
   Spotlight on... 
Russia:  RTV's Shakhov--One Vision, Many Voices 
Russia:  Pravda Toes Orthodox Line 
   Features 
Russia:  Media Organizations Respond to Coup Scenario 
Publication 
Russia:  Media React to 'Cheleken' Incident 
Russia:  Independent TV-6 Expands Audience, Erodes State 
Monopoly 
Ukraine: Radio, TV Censorship Charged 
   Other Publications of Interest 
Russia:  RTV Increasingly Cynical of U.S. Motives 
   Spotlight on... 
Russia:  RTV's Shakhov--One Vision, Many Voices 
   Summary:  Russian Television's (RTV) "Vesti" news program has 
recently run a series of commentaries on foreign affairs 
assailing the West,  defending Russian interests, and promoting a 
positive vision of Russia's role in world politics.  The 
commentaries, attributed to a G. Shakhov, have been read by as 
many as five different newsmen--other commentaries appear to be 
read consistently by one individual--and may be a variation on 
the Soviet-era print media practice of publishing particularly 
important editorial statements under a pseudonym. 
   The Shakhov commentaries appear designed to simultaneously 
assuage wounded national pride as Russia struggles with its 
diminished role and influence on the world stage, and to defend 
the notion that, in spite of all its current domestic travails, 
Russia remains a superpower.  The commentaries have: 
   -- questioned U.S. motives in unilateral foreign policy 
initiatives toward Ukraine and Georgia which it claimed have 
undercut Russian-brokered understandings with those countries (9 
March); 
   -- assailed NATO's Partnership for Peace initiative, calling it 
an attempt to place "arsenals of American weapons" along Russia's 
periphery and cut Russia out of the Eastern European arms market 
(24 March); 
   -- decried as "provocative acts" Ukrainian attempts to remove 
hydrographical equipment from onboard a Black Sea Fleet vessel 
harbored in Odessa and the "raid" on a detachment of Russian 
servicemen stationed there, and other "anti-Russian" actions in 
various regions in Ukraine (14 April); 
   -- condemned NATO's "wager on force" in Bosnia as ineffective and 
asserted that the NATO airstrikes raised questions about NATO's 
suitability as a partner in Partnership for Peace (18 April); 
   -- questioned the government's decision to extend an agreement 
between Russia and Hungary, allowing Hungary to continue to 
export its nuclear waste to Russia; and asserted that the 
destruction of Russia's "gigantic stocks" of chemical weapons 
under the terms of a treaty signed with the United States "could 
threaten the lives of people in our fatherland" (21 April); 
   -- praised Russia's role in helping restart the Middle-East peace 
talks between Israel and the PLO (25 April); 
   -- and praised Russia's "decisive role" in bringing about a 
settlement in Moldova between the Moldovan government and 
predominantly ethnic Russian separatists in the Transdniestr 
region (29 April). 
   Who is Shakhov? 
   The recent spate of Shakhov commentaries have been read on the 
air by as many as five different newsmen, a practice that appears 
unprecedented and suggests the possibility that "Shakhov" is a 
pseudonym used for representing the views of more than one person 
and perhaps those of an influential collective of "Vesti" 
personnel.  Other evidence suggests, however, that Shakhov is a 
flesh-and-blood commentator who has been working as a television 
and radio journalist since at least 1992.  The earliest observed 
"Vesti" commentary attributed to G. Shakhov, scoffing at the 
terms and implications of a deal to import grain from the West, 
appeared on 31 July 1992.  A 2 May 1992 Radio Rossii commentary 
attributed to a Geliy Shakhov, possibly "Vesti's" G. Shakhov, 
discussed Russian President Boris Yeltsin's rejection of tough 
IMF conditions for loans.  Both items appear to have the same 
pro-Russian tone as more recent Shakhov commentaries. 
   Russia:  Pravda Toes Orthodox Line 
   Summary:  Pravda appears to speak for the more orthodox, non- 
nationalist Marxist-Leninist tendency in Russia's communist 
movement, supporting an ideological line which tends to stress 
economic and class-oriented themes and, in its coverage of the 
activities of communist groups, lends support and encouragement 
to a traditional communist approach to political and economic 
problems.  Its criticism of the Russian Government is couched in 
Marxist terms, and the newspaper has been highly critical of 
Communist Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF) Chairman 
Gennadiy Zyuganov and his national communist ideology.  The 
orthodox Marxist line pronounced in Pravda stands in sharp 
contrast to the "patriotic" ideology of Zyuganov and Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, which supports Zyuganov's nationalist-communist fusion. 
   Party Conference Coverage 
   Pravda's 26 April coverage of the second All-Russian Conference 
of the CPRF was typical in its wariness of Zyuganov's line. 
Pravda stressed the importance of the "class positions"; 
highlighted calls made by some delegates for a rejection of 
parliamentarism"; and also noted criticism directed at the party 
leadership for neglecting the "workers' movement."  Another 
article in the same issue ("Political Theatre and the Realities 
of Life"), while not explicitly reporting the conference, 
attacked "centrists" for backing the aspirations of "indigenous 
capital" which desired only to maintain its own "privatized" 
property and merely "slow down" the "collapse" of the country. 
The article excoriated the CPRF for its "social democratic" line, 
one which merely pledged to "defend hired labor," and called on 
the party to once again become the "avant-garde and leader of the 
working people."  The article also attacked Zyuganov by name for 
his pledges to work in a coalition government, which the article 
called a government "of the new bourgeoisie."  Such cooperation, 
the article maintained, would further distance the CPRF from 
"workers" and would lead the party to follow Zyuganov's 
"national-patriotic" ideology, an ideology attractive to 
"national capital." 
   In contrast to the editorializing in Pravda's coverage, 
Sovetskaya Rossiya published Zyuganov's report to the conference, 
which was, in part, a defense of his leadership of the party and 
the turn to a more nationalist line (26 April).  The paper also 
carried a front-page article on the conference's acceptance of 
"important documents, which give the party the basis and right to 
become the leading consolidating force in society." 
   Diverging Politics 
   The orthodox/nationalist divergence between Pravda and Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, which together represent the communist viewpoint in the 
central press, has been evident for some time.  In August 1992, 
both papers marked the first anniversary of the failed anti- 
Gorbachev coup by mounting scathing attacks on the Yeltsin 
administration, with Pravda lamenting the collapse of socialism, 
while Sovetskaya Rossiya stressed the loss of great power status 
and the humiliation of the Russian people: 
   -- Pravda longed for "a civilized.society, which one could call 
communist," and predicted a "new putsch," which "General Winter" 
and "Czar Hunger" were preparing.  Pravda predicted that Gen. 
Winter "will bring an army into the streets. . . .  In attack 
columns behind him will follow all those who have been robbed- 
-the hungry, the unemployed, and the homeless" (18 August 1992). 
   -- Sovetskaya Rossiya maintained that the collapse of the Soviet 
Union following the failure of the August coup was part of a 
grand design by "agents of influence" carrying out a plan "worked 
out in Washington."  Political observer Eduard Volodin called the 
August 1991 events a "liberation," but not a liberation from 
stagnation . . . [and] dogmatism" so much as a "liberation from 
national honor . . . and national dignity."  The democrats, he 
claimed, had "liberated themselves from the USSR in order to 
freely dismember Russia."  Volodin lamented the "destruction of 
Russia's international authority" and the possible "trading of 
her territory" (20 August 1992). 
   Slavin Sets Pravda's Tone 
   Boris Slavin, a member of Pravda's editorial board and the 
paper's political observer, has set the tone for its orthodox 
line and disdain for nationalist themes.  Upholding the 
internationalist theme of communist ideology while reporting on 
the May Day holiday, Slavin wrote that he was "confident" that 
"May Day in the capital will be . . . truly a festival of working 
people's international solidarity" (8 April). 
   Unlike the CPRF, which has lent its support to limited private 
ownership, Pravda and Slavin maintain the traditional communist 
hostility to private property.  Commenting on private ownership 
of land, Slavin has claimed that the buying and selling of land 
may lead not only to the redistribution of land, but to civil 
war, when the private owners assert their claim to collective and 
state farm workers' land" (15 June 1993).  During last summer's 
constitutional conference, Slavin blasted Yeltsin, saying that 
"the president wants speculators and stockbrokers to be able to 
calmly continue plundering the people's assets, and the 
conference is proclaiming private ownership, including land 
ownership, to be a natural right" (18 June 1993). 
   Slavin began his assaults on the Yeltsin reforms soon after the 
failure of the August 1991 coup and the concomitant collapse of 
the Soviet Union.  According to Slavin, a "revolution" began "on 
19 August on the wave of public anti-putsch emotions" and is 
directed against "socialist tendencies dating all the way back to 
the October Revolution."  This "bourgeois" revolution "had 
intensified the [economic] crisis" and was "eliminating" economic 
and social support institutions which were, according to Slavin, 
of "vital importance to the people."  The immediate task of the 
communist movement, in Slavin's view, was to "unite and mobilize 
all democratic forces against. . . [a] new round of anti- 
communist actions," leaning in particular on the "working class," 
which Slavin called the "largest social force that can lead the 
country out of the present impasse" (28 December 1991). 
   Features 
   Russia:  Media Organizations Respond to Coup Scenario Publication 
   Summary:  Official reaction to Obshchaya Gazeta's controversial 
publication of "Versiya no. 1," the purported blueprint for a 
planned coup against Russian President Boris Yeltsin, raises 
questions about the objectivity of the Russian Federation 
Committee for the Press and its chairman, Boris Mironov.  The 
affair has also provided an opportunity for the Judicial Chamber 
for Information Disputes to assert authority over the Press 
Committee in regulating the activities of the print media. 
   Obshchaya Gazeta's Sensational Publication 
   The incident began during Yeltsin's March working vacation in 
Sochi on the Black Sea coast when, amidst coup rumors and 
allegations that he was seriously ill, Obshchaya Gazeta published 
an article containing the somewhat abridged text of "Versiya No. 
1," which it termed an "analytical memo" purporting to describe a 
conspiracy of leading officials aiming to "depose" Yeltsin and 
install Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin in his place until new 
presidential elections could be held (No. 11, 18-24 March). 
Among the conspirators, the "memo" named such prominent figures 
as First Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Soskovets, General Staff 
Chief Colonel General Mikhail Kolesnikov, Moscow Mayor Yuriy 
Luzhkov, Federation Council Chairman Vladimir Shumeyko, and 
Chairman of the Duma's Information Policy and Communications 
Committee Mikhail Poltoranin.  The group of conspirators also 
included a "B. Mikhaylov," incorrectly listed as the chairman of 
the "Russian Federation Committee for the Press." (See Note 1) 
The "memo" asserted that the group had "managed to obtain [the] 
agreement" of Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, Interior Minister 
Viktor Yerin, and Director of the Federal Counterintelligence 
Service Sergey Stepashin "not to take countermeasures," and that 
"B. Mikhaylov" was attempting to "establish contacts with 
[Foreign Intelligence Chief] Ye. Primakov's inner circle," 
presumably for the same purpose.  It asserted that an initial 
attempt to put the plan into action had failed but that the group 
had not given up on its plans to depose Yeltsin. 
   (Note 1) Obshchaya Gazeta's editors noted parenthetically, that 
"B. Mikhaylov" was "apparently B. Mironov," the actual chairman 
of the State Committee for the Press. 
   Together with "Versiya No. 1," Obshchaya Gazeta published an 
editorial commentary calling the "memo" a "clear mystification, 
an anonymous letter, nothing more," which it asserted was aimed 
at compromising Yeltsin's closest allies.  The commentary added, 
however, that the "memo" should not simply be dismissed as an 
"innocuous joke," calling such a "memo" one of the "technologies 
in the struggle for power" and asserting that a "coup d'etat" 
could be organized in just such a way, by "pitting influential 
politicians against each other, ratcheting up the psychosis of 
universal suspiciousness, and provoking the authorities into 
taking inadequate 'security measures.'" 
   "Versiya" Author Comes Forward 
   Two weeks after publishing 'Versiya,' Obshchaya Gazeta reported 
that Gleb Pavlovskiy, a member of its own editorial council, 
former dissident, and current chief editor of the journal, 20th 
Century and Peace, was one of the authors of the document (No. 
12, 25-31 March).  According to the report, Pavlovskiy claimed 
that the document was an analytical report drafted for official 
use and that it had "found its way into the hands of high-ranking 
officials and to newspaper editorial boards without his 
knowledge."  The newspaper questioned Pavlovskiy's explanation, 
saying it was "scarcely more convincing than the scandalous 
'Versiya No. 1'."  The report did not, however, mention that any 
measures had been taken by the paper to discipline Pavlovskiy 
and, as of early May, he was still listed as a member of the 
paper's editorial council. 
   Official Reaction 
   The Russian prosecutor's office was the first official body to 
react to the publication.  On 28 March it instituted a criminal 
investigation into the matter (Ostankino TV, 28 March).  Results 
of the investigation have not yet been announced. 
   The State Committee for the Press issued a harsh warning to the 
paper, seemingly acting out of pique at slights to its chief, 
Mironov, (and perhaps his ally Poltoranin) (See Note 2) rather 
than out of concern for ascertaining the facts of the case. 
Ignoring the paper's disclaimers about the document's 
authenticity, seemingly forgetting that only a court can legally 
determine whether the publication was slanderous, and refusing to 
wait for the criminal investigation to conclude, the committee 
issued an official warning to Obshchaya Gazeta, taking it to task 
for "disseminating deliberately false and slanderous 
fabrications" and for allegedly seeking to "undermin[e] the 
constitutional order and destabiliz[e] the situation in society" 
(Obshchaya Gazeta, No. 13, 1-7 April).  The warning charged the 
paper with violating articles 4 and 51 of the Law on the Mass 
Media.  Article 4 prohibits media from "performing criminally 
punishable acts" (e.g. undermining the constitutional order) 
while article 51 prohibits "spreading rumors under the guise of 
reliable information" and spreading "information for the purpose 
of defaming a citizen . . . exclusively on the basis of sex, age, 
racial or national affiliation, language, attitude toward 
religion, profession, place of residence and work, or in 
connection with their political convictions" (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 
8 February 1992). 
   (Note 2)  According to previous reporting from Obshchaya Gazeta, 
Poltoranin is a close friend and former associate of Russian 
Federation Press Committee Chairman Boris Mironov.  For his part, 
Mironov may have perceived Obshchaya Gazeta's editorial comment 
noting that he, not the "B. Mikhaylov" named in "Versiya", is 
head of the Press Committee, as an attempt to defame. 
   In an apparent rebuke to Mironov and the press committee, the 
Judicial Chamber for Information Disputes challenged its official 
warning, saying that Obshchaya Gazeta had "sufficiently weighty 
grounds" for publishing "Versiya No. 1," and that the publication 
had defused tension in society, not destabilized it (Obshchaya 
Gazeta, No. 14, 8-14 April).  The chamber further asserted that, 
had there in fact been a plot as described in the "memo," the 
publication would have to some degree "prevented" the actions. 
The chamber's announcement judged that the publication "did not 
violate" the Law on the Mass Media as the paper had the right to 
inform the public about the events in preparation or about 
"insinuations" about such events.  In its announcement, the 
chamber noted that Obshchaya Gazeta had issued disclaimers as to 
the authenticity of the "memo," demonstrating that the paper had 
taken a "balanced" approach to the publication and was not merely 
"chasing after sensationalism."  The announcement concluded by 
asserting that, in light of the fact that a criminal 
investigation into the matter had not yet been completed, the 
administrative actions taken against the paper by the press 
committee were "premature."  The press committee has not been 
observed to officially respond to the judicial chamber's 
statement. 
   Obshchaya Gazeta Adds Fuel to the Fire 
   Under circumstances where the hierarchical relationship between 
the chamber and the press committee is unclear (see box), 
Obshchaya Gazeta, not satisfied with a favorable ruling from the 
judicial chamber, has upped the ante in what may turn into a long 
and bitter struggle with the press committee.  The paper's 
editors published an editorial statement, together with the 
judicial chamber's ruling, which called the press committee's 
warning a "typical libel," demanded a formal retraction published 
in the papers which published the warning, and asserted the right 
to pursue their claims against the committee in court if 
necessary.  In the same statement, the editors attacked Mironov 
on an unrelated matter as a "slanderer" for allegedly asserting 
publicly that Obshchaya Gazeta had received 300 million rubles 
from the Ostankino State Television and Radio Broadcasting 
Company.  Four weeks later, the paper published a very 
unflattering profile of Mironov questioning his ability to carry 
out his duties fairly and depicting him as an anti-semite, an 
authoritarian anti-democrat, and an unscrupulous businessman in 
his previous position as head of the Russkaya Kniga publishing 
house (No. 18, 6-12 May). 
   Box 
   Sorting Out Jurisdictions 
   According to the various presidential edicts, government 
resolutions, and organizational statutes that regulate their 
activities, the judicial chamber appears to have the authority to 
pass final judgement on press committee actions.  The press 
committee does have statutory authority to issue "written 
warnings" to press sources when they violate the law (Sobraniye 
Aktov Prezidenta i Pravitelstva Rossiyskoy Federatsii, No. 10, 7 
March).  The judicial chamber, however, though not given any 
explicit authority to review decisions of the press committee, 
has the broadly defined authority to "resolve disputes and other 
matters" relating to the media which are not reserved by law "to 
the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation courts" (Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta, 3 February).  The case of "Versiya No. 1" appears to be 
just such a matter.  The situation is muddied by the fact that 
the hierarchical relationship of the two organizations is not 
clear.  Both bodies exist within the executive branch, with the 
press committee residing among the government structures 
subordinate to Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, while the 
judicial chamber is part of the presidential apparatus 
subordinate to Yeltsin.  The language of the edict creating the 
judicial chamber does suggest, however, a higher spot in the 
media hierarchy for the chamber, stating that the body was 
created to assist the president, the constitutionally established 
guarantor of media freedoms, in "upholding rights and freedoms in 
the mass information sphere" while the responsibilities of the 
press committee are mostly administrative in nature (Rossiyskaya 
Gazeta, 10 January).  Moreover, the chamber's statute states that 
chamber decisions taken within its jurisdiction are "final." 
   End Box 
   Implications 
   The 'Versiya No. 1' incident is an inauspicious beginning for the 
media structures established in Yeltsin's recent media 
reorganization.  The contentiousness of the press committee's 
warning and its apparent rush to judge Obshchaya Gazeta's actions 
bode poorly for its capacity to play the role of even-handed 
mediator between the state and the media.  While the Judicial 
Chamber for Information Disputes appears to have played its 
intended role in this instance, its decision overruling the press 
committee's warning to Obshchaya Gazeta is likely to leave a 
legacy of rivalry between the two bodies. 
   Russia:  Media React to Cheleken Incident 
   Summary:  Opposition media appear to have passed up an 
opportunity to whip up nationalist and anti-Ukrainian sentiments 
over a series of Russian-Ukrainian confrontations over elements 
of the Black Sea Fleet which occurred on 8-9 April.  The most 
alarmist reaction to the incidents among the media appears to 
have come from the two state television companies, the Defense 
Ministry newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda, and one of two government 
dailies. 
   Opposition Press 
   Sovetskaya Rossiya, reappearing on 15 April following an extended 
publishing hiatus caused by financial difficulties, devoted only 
a brief front page article to the incidents.  The article 
characterized them as "provocational" and said they "evoked sharp 
responses in both Russia and Ukraine."  The article then provided 
an apparently straightforward account of the incidents from 
Valeriy Volodin, the chairman of the Officers' Assembly of the 
Black Sea Fleet.  It concluded by reporting that a meeting of 
Black Sea Fleet servicemen had expressed "perplexity" that 
neither Russian President Boris Yeltsin nor Ukrainian President 
Leonid Kravchuk had reacted officially to the incidents.  The 
servicemen at the meeting also declared their "complete lack of 
trust" in the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense and "demanded" a 
"harsh" response to those responsible for the "provocation." 
Brief excerpted comments from First Deputy Commander in Chief of 
the Russian Navy Admiral Igor Kasatonov and Crimean President 
Yuriy Meshkov, the latter seeing the incidents as a prologue to 
the "introduction of [Ukrainian] presidential rule in Crimea," 
followed.  The next issue of the paper, published on 19 April, 
did not mention the incidents. 
   On 12 April Pravda carried a straightforward front-page account 
which used the incidents to bash Yeltsin administration policy on 
the Black Sea Fleet issue.  On 15 April the paper published a 
page-two assessment of the incidents by Nikolay Musiyenko, in 
which he asserted that the incidents "would be reminiscent of a 
low quality action film" if not for the fact that peoples' lives 
and the "mutual relations of two Slavic peoples" were at stake. 
Musiyenko claimed that while previously the Russian leadership 
had "pretended" that nothing special had been happening regarding 
the Black Sea Fleet, it was "impossible" to shut one's eyes to 
the Odessa incidents. 
   Krasnaya Zvezda 
   Not surprisingly, it was the Defense Ministry's official 
newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda, that gave the most extensive coverage 
to the incidents and suggested the most dire consequences from 
them.  On 12 April Krasnaya Zvezda carried a front page article 
titled "If It Is Impossible To Agree Peacefully, It Is Necessary 
To Take by Storm."  Referring ironically to the anniversary of 
the liberation of Odessa, the article charged that Ukrainian 
spetsnaz troops had "in their own way achieved the liberation of 
Odessa."  In a more serious vein, the article charged that the 
presence in Odessa during the events of Commander of the 
Ukrainian Navy, Vice Admiral Vladimir Bezkorovayniy could be 
"unambiguously interpreted as the rebirth of attempts by 
Ukrainian officials to resolve the issue of the status of the 
Black Sea Fleet by forceful methods."  According to the article, 
the use of force in the incidents, combined with anonymous 
letters threatening physical harm that had been received by "a 
majority" of Black Sea Fleet unit commanders, demonstrates that 
"Ukraine has made a wager on forceful methods, including 
terrorist acts" to resolve the Black Sea Fleet issue. 
   On 13 April the newspaper devoted its lead article, by Oleg 
Odnokolenko, to the incident.  Odnokolenko began by asserting 
that the events in Odessa were "nearly fateful for Russian- 
Ukrainian relations."  Although Odnokolenko ruefully noted that 
"for the first time in such an open fashion . . . Ukrainians and 
Russians found themselves face to face with weapons in their 
hands," he ended his commentary optimistically, noting that 
official Russian Government and State Duma reactions to the 
incidents emphasized that Russia's course in relations with 
Ukraine remains a course of "friendship and cooperation."  This 
optimism was somewhat tempered by a post script to the article 
which cited pessimistic remarks by Kasatonov (see section on 
Rossiyskiye Vesti's reaction). 
   On 14 April Krasnaya Zvezda moved coverage of the incident to 
page three but focused on what it depicted as continuing tensions 
and provocative behavior by the Ukrainian side.  The article 
cited an official statement by the Black Sea Fleet Military 
Council asserting that the incidents had occurred "with the 
connivance" of the Ukrainian military.  While the article 
exhorted both sides to put the incident behind them for the sake 
of "peace and accord," it called for an investigation into the 
matter and "calling to account" the guilty, and noted that "the 
Ukrainian side opposes this."  It concluded by warning that 
"sources close to the staff of the Ukrainian Navy" had alleged 
that a repeat of the Odessa incidents was being prepared for a 
brigade of river vessels at Izmail in Ukraine, and that the 
spetsnaz troops who had acted in Odessa had been "placed on 
combat alert." 
   State Television Responds 
   The two state television companies, Ostankino and Russian 
Television (RTV), also raised the specter of armed conflict 
between Russia and Ukraine as a result of the incidents, with 
Ostankino's "Novosti" news program taking a more alarmist view 
than RTV's "Vesti": 
   "Novosti" responded to the incidents with alarm and perplexity. 
On 11 April Odessa correspondent Yuriy Selivanov said that the 
incident was the closest his "native Odessa" had been to war 
since World War II.  Noting that Ukrainian servicemen had seized 
Black Sea Fleet objectives in the recent past, he asserted that 
these had only been "semi-military" "shore units" such as 
hospitals, while in the current incident they had seized a 
"combat detachment" whose personnel are armed.  "Only by a lucky 
chance," he asserted, had "fateful shots" been avoided. 
   On 14 April a new "Novosti" rubric, "50 Years of Victory," linked 
the incidents to the liberation of Odessa, on the anniversary of 
which the incidents took place and during which "thousands" of 
Russian soldiers lost their lives daily.  The feature's narrator 
questioned whether the liberators of Odessa could have imagined, 
"even in a terrible dream," that 50 years later Ukrainian 
servicemen would handcuff their "brother Slavs" and "humiliate 
and degrade" their "compatriots" merely because someone in the 
political leadership wanted to "demonstrate his power."  The 
feature ended with the ominous warning that history will "take 
vengeance cruelly" against Russians and Ukrainians "and their 
descendents" if they are unable to overcome their differences 
"even during these sacred days" commemorating the victories of 
World War II. 
   RTV's "Vesti" looked more calmly on the incidents, attributing 
their occurrence to Ukrainian domestic problems.  On 14 April a 
'Vesti' news broadcast carried a commentary by G. Shakhov on 
Russian-Ukrainian relations which asserted that the confrontation 
on the Cheleken and the "raid" on the detachment of Russian 
servicemen in Odessa had contributed to a "sharp increase in 
tensions" between the two countries, which he characterized as a 
"political crisis."  According to Shakhov, unspecified Ukrainian 
political actors provoked the incidents to "distract attention" 
from Ukraine's "economic collapse" and the "strengthening of 
authoritarian power" in Ukraine in the runup to scheduled 
presidential elections in which the success of Ukrainian 
President Leonid Kravchuk is "manifestly not guaranteed." 
Shakhov concluded his commentary with the optimistic assertion 
that "many in Kiev suppose" that the meeting between Yeltsin and 
Kravchuk scheduled to take place at the CIS summit in April would 
"relieve the crisis situation." 
   State Press 
   Rossiyskaya Gazeta and Rossiyskiye Vesti, both dailies sponsored 
by the Council of Ministers, were more cautious in their 
reactions, although Rossiyskiye Vesti turned mostly to Russian 
military sources in its reporting. 
   On 12 April--its first publication day after the incidents- 
-Rossiyskiye Vesti carried a brief front-page item citing Chief 
of the Black Sea Fleet Press Service, Captain Second Rank Andrey 
Grachev denying Ukrainian claims that the Cheleken was 
transporting "radioactive subs-tances."  Grachev alleged that the 
incident was "provoked by the Ukrainian side with the aim of 
seizing" the Cheleken.  On 14 April Rossiyskiye Vesti carried a 
page-two interview with Kasatonov in which he characterized the 
incidents as unprecedented "state hooliganism" which attested to 
an "extremely uncivilized approach" on the part of the Ukrainians 
towards the Black Sea Fleet.  Kasatonov also asserted that 
"someone is directing all of this" and that the actions were 
"aimed exclusively at destabilizing the situation in the region." 
He warned that the matter was an "international affair, going 
beyond the bounds of Russian-Ukrainian relations" and was "very 
dangerous for the security of international shipping."  When 
asked if it would be possible to avoid bloodshed if 
"provocations" against the Black Sea Fleet continue, Kasatonov 
responded that he was "surprised" that the Russian sailors 
involved showed such "patience" and avoided firing a single shot, 
adding that "such shots were clearly awaited." 
   In contrast, Rossiyskaya Gazeta's coverage of the incidents 
appeared to play down their significance.  Initial coverage in a 
page-six article provided a detailed account of the events and 
Russia's official response to them.  The piece concluded by 
citing the official statement's emphasis that "Russia's course 
regarding Ukraine remains a course of friendship and cooperation" 
(12 April).  The following day the paper limited its coverage of 
the incidents to a front-page statement by Federation Council 
Chairman Vladimir Shumeyko, who asserted that the incident was 
"first and foremost" a phenomenon of "internal Ukrainian 
politics" and that it was necessary to respond "calmly" and 
refrain from "exacerbating" the situation.  Shumeyko stated 
confidently that "a way out of the situation would be found."  On 
14 April the paper published a front-page report on official 
discussions between Russia and Ukraine to resolve the conflict 
and cited a statement by Russian State Duma Chairman Ivan Rybkin 
that "forces" attempting to "break off" the scheduled 15 April 
meeting of CIS heads of state had provoked the incidents. 
   Izvestiya 
   Coverage of the incidents in the pro-Yeltsin Izvestiya expressed 
relief that the danger of conflict had passed but also concern 
that the potential for armed conflict remains.  A 13 April report 
by Teymuraz Mamaladze noted that the struggle for control of the 
fleet is "accompanied by an exhausting war of nerves, largely 
provoked by the sides' press centers and the mass media" and 
warned that the speed with which "disinformation" can be verified 
"may not coincide with the firing speed of multiple rocket 
launchers."  He concluded ominously by quoting former U.S. 
President Richard Nixon as saying that "a conflict between Russia 
and Ukraine could make events in Bosnia look like a Sunday-school 
picnic." 
   Nezavisimaya Gazeta 
   The independent Nezavisimaya Gazeta's coverage of the incident 
appeared to provide a uniquely balanced assessment of the 
incidents with details that appeared nowhere else, implying that 
some of the blame for the incident should be placed on the 
Russian side.  On 12 April Aleksandr Sivashov reported that the 
incident began when Russian sailors on board the Cheleken 
arrested a Ukrainian naval captain who had boarded the Cheleken 
for an "inspection," on grounds that the Russian vessel was 
"Russian territory."  The incident escalated when armed Black Sea 
Fleet marines boarded the Cheleken with orders to open fire if 
necessary and were confronted by Ukrainian marines who were given 
orders to open fire in the event the Cheleken attempted to leave 
shore.  According to Sivashov, the Ukrainians then demanded and 
achieved the release of the Ukrainian officer and then "allowed" 
the ship to leave port.  Ukrainian coast guard cutters followed 
the Cheleken to sea, however, and demanded it return to port, 
firing signal rockets at the ship when it refused.  After the 
ship arrived in Sevastopol, Ukrainian Navy Chief of Staff Rear 
Admiral Aleksey Ryzhenko boarded to meet with representatives of 
the Black Sea Fleet command after which he charged that the 
"tense situation" had been "created" by Black Sea Fleet Chief of 
Staff Rear Admiral Petr Svyatashov.  Sivashov concluded by 
reporting an exchange of diplomatic demarches in which Moscow 
accused Kiev of "still another provocation--a piratical action" 
and Kiev accused Moscow of a "terrorist act." 
   Russia:  Independent TV-6 Expands Audience, Erodes State Monopoly 
   Summary:  According to Russian media reports, the Moscow 
Independent Broadcasting Corporation (TV-6) has signed a deal 
with Ted Turner's TBS television company that, if implemented, 
will allow the entertainment-oriented TV-6 to become the first 
national television company whose broadcasting capabilities are 
based on commercial contract rather than governmental rulings. 
Successful realization of the deal would erode the state's 
control over national-level broadcasting beyond what has occurred 
with the establishment of NTV in December of 1993 and could 
demonstrate the viability of independent television on a national 
scale, putting pressure on the Russian Government to move further 
toward denationalization of its financially burdensome television 
assets. 
   According to press reports, TV-6 has already, as a result of the 
agreement, expanded its broadcasting beyond Moscow to 20 cities 
across Russia and the former Soviet Union.  It plans to reach 
more than 30--with more than 30 million potential viewers--by the 
end of the year (Obshchaya Gazeta No. 14, 8-14 April; Kommersant- 
Daily, 8 April).  As reported by Kommersant-Daily, the deal will 
allow the Russian participants to "establish program policy" and 
Eduard Sagalayev, one-time deputy chairman of the Soviet-era 
Gosteleradio and founder of the independent TV-6, to "head the 
board of directors" and have "the last word" in "all debatable 
issues." 
   TV-6 began broadcasting to Moscow viewers on 1 January 1993.  The 
company has focused its programming on domestic and foreign 
motion pictures and also offers CNN news programming.  It has 
borne out Sagalayev's initial conception of a "channel standing 
outside politics and ideology" (Izvestiya, 6 January), though it 
has made an occasional foray into politics, as when it broadcast 
a live program on voting results from the April 1993 referendum. 
Under the recent agreement, TV-6 will reportedly lease capacity 
on the Ministry of Communications' "Gorizont" communications 
satellite system, which covers the entire territory of the former 
Soviet Union, and negotiate contracts with "regional non-state" 
companies to organize a "network of ground-based receiving 
stations" to broadcast in the regions. 
   The deal will make TV-6 the first independent television company 
to achieve nationwide broadcasting capabilities on a contractual 
basis.  In December 1993 the establishment of NTV, a news- 
oriented independent television company that broadcasts to a 
potential audience of about 40 million viewers, broke state 
television's monopoly on supra-regional broadcasting.  However, 
NTV was given access to state broadcasting facilities on an 
"experimental" basis by presidential edict while TV-6's access 
will be contractually based. 
   Ukraine: Radio, TV Censorship Charged 
   Summary:  During the recent Ukrainian parliamentary election 
campaign, the independent media ran a series of articles charging 
that state radio and television were subject to increased 
political censorship aimed at eliminating criticism of the 
governing institutions and keeping election coverage to a 
minimum.  An official rebuttal did not address the specific 
charges, but attacked the independent press as provincial and 
opportunistic. 
   The Hart Controversy 
   The first signs of controversy revolved around Hart [Type], one 
of the most popular public affairs programs on Ukrainian 
Television.  A December 16, 1993 broadcast where people addressed 
critical New Year's messages to President Kravchuk was reportedly 
kept off the air.  In response, almost the entire studio 
collective broadcast a statement condemning the heads of the 
Ukrainian State Television and Radio Company for censorship, 
claiming that the Ukrainian public's right to free and full 
information was being curtailed and demanding that conditions be 
provided for the free exercise of journalistic rights.  The 
statement also warned that the heads of the company intended by 
every means possible to deny airtime to the forces supporting 
reform in the upcoming elections (Nezavisimost, 22 December 
1993). 
   The television and radio company leadership threatened to fire 
Hart's editor-in-chief, Viktor Pavlyuk, and cancel the program. 
The threats were not carried out, but according to Pavlyuk, the 
program is now subject to close control.  It is reportedly not 
allowed to broadcast live and there is no assurance that the 
material it prepares will actually go on the air (Molod Ukrayiny, 
25 March).  Pavlyuk countered by suing the heads of the State 
Radio and Television Company for damages resulting from the ban 
on live broadcasts.  However, the case was postponed because 
Mykola Okhmakevych, the head of the Radio and Television Company, 
did not show up in court (Vechirniy Kyyiv, 15 March).  In later 
court testimony, the television and radio company leadership 
reportedly justified their actions by claiming that criticism of 
the president exceeded all reasonable bounds, and that state 
television has a duty to support the president's policies 
(Vechirniy Kyyiv, 12 May).  Reportedly no verdict has yet been 
reached in the suit. 
   In a further attack on government interference in the broadcast 
media, Vitaliy Karpenko, editor-in-chief of the independent Kiev 
daily Vechirniy Kyyiv, cited in the newspaper a long list of 
television journalists and technical people who, he reported, 
were either dismissed or quit after being harassed by their 
superiors for their independent views, asserting that the 
authorities were trying to hush up the Hart affair.  Karpenko 
claimed that the leadership of state television regards loyalty 
to the government as the most important criterion for employees, 
and that officials responsible for overseeing Okhmakevych are 
willing to tolerate ineptness as long as the mass media are 
obedient.  He charged that state-run media leadership is aware of 
conditions prevailing in Ukrainian Television but has no 
incentive to change as long as it remains fully funded by the 
government and Okhmakevych retains his powerful protectors in the 
Ukrainian Supreme Council (Vechirniy Kyyiv, 26 February). 
   Election Coverage 
   In addition to these charges, there have been numerous complaints 
from candidates running for parliament about the lack of 
television coverage of the campaign.  A commentator writing a 
month into the campaign noted the total lack of mention of the 
campaign on Ukrainian television.  The blackout of campaign 
reporting was reportedly so complete that a well-known 
politician's comments on world events, in this case the Clinton 
visit to Ukraine, were aired, but the fact that he was officially 
registered as a candidate in the upcoming parliamentary elections 
was not mentioned (Ukrayina Moloda, 18 January). 
   Vechirniy Kyyiv's Vitaliy Karpenko, a candidate for the new 
parliament, charged that not only were candidates barred from the 
first television channel, but independent candidates were denied 
airtime and the time allotted for candidates on the local channel 
was restricted to the 4-6 PM slot, the time with one of the 
lowest possible viewing audiences.  He also questioned the 
objectivity of the coverage, maintaining that not only were state 
radio and television used to attack him and those other 
candidates opposed to government policies, but that there was 
also disproportionate coverage of the Vinnytsya election district 
where Okhmakevych was running for a Supreme Council seat 
(Vechirniy Kyyiv, 16, 26 February). 
   State Radio Muzzled 
   In a more general complaint about pressures on radio 
broadcasting, columnist Myroslav Lyvytskyy cited a marked 
deterioration in the quality of programming in 1994 on the first 
program of Ukrainian Radio.  He complained that informational 
programming on the first channel has been reduced to three hours 
a day, the rest of the day being devoted mainly to classical 
music and folk singing--mirroring similar changes in Ukrainian 
Television programming.  The popular political program 
"Nezalezhnist" was nearly cancelled, according to Lyvytskyy, with 
its staffers given the choice of either following the government 
line more closely or resigning.  As a result, program head Mykola 
Kyzmych and part of the staff resigned. 
   Lyvytskyy attributed the deterioration in radio programming to 
the appointment of Zynoviy Kylyk as first vice president of the 
State Radio and Television Company and Viktor Pasak as head of 
the First Program of Ukrainian Radio.  Distinguished mainly as 
Okhmakevych loyalists, according to Lyvytskyy, they both are 
likely to enforce the government line.  As a result, Lyvytskyy 
concluded, listeners will turn to other sources, either to the 
International Program of Ukrainian Radio--as yet unaffected by 
these changes, but available only in a limited number of oblasts- 
-or to Russian media (Za Vilnu Ukrayinu, 4 February; Vechirniy 
Kyyiv, 16 February). 
   Official Attempts Rebuttal 
   Vitaliy Ablitsov, a programming director for Ukrainian 
Television, attempted to rebut these charges in the Supreme 
Council newspaper Holos Ukrayiny, but did not address the 
specific charges of censorship and provincialism in Ukrainian 
Television.  He denied that there is any political censorship, 
attributing any controversies to inexperienced or unreasonable 
journalists, and confined himself to stating the general goals of 
raising Ukrainian Television to European standards without 
specifying how that is to be done.  He attacked the independent 
press by questioning its professionalism and journalistic 
competence, suggesting that the independent press has taken up 
the censorship issue because it lacks the knowledge to deal with 
more substantive issues.  Ablitsov cited the small circulation of 
the independent newspapers as evidence of their own 
provincialism, implying that, in the case of the former Komsomol- 
sponsored Nezavisimost and Molod Ukrayiny, their post-coup 
independent line was the result of political opportunism (Holos 
Ukrayiny, 5 February). 
   Other Publications of Interest 
   Russia:  RTV Increasingly Cynical of U.S. Motives 
   Recent commentaries on state-owned Russian Television's "Vesti" 
news broadcasts suggest growing disillusionment with U.S. 
policies towards the nations of the former Soviet bloc, 
portraying the United States as a self-interested meddler along 
Russia's periphery, willing to undermine Russian national 
interests in areas which Russia has traditionally viewed as its 
exclusive sphere of influence.  The cynical view of U.S. motives 
exhibited in these commentaries contrasts sharply with previous 
commentary from "Vesti," a staunchly proreform news program. 
(AUTHORS:  ALLENSWROTH, CRIMMINS, VILLHAUER.  QUESTIONS AND/OR 
COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION 
(703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH  cka 25/2003z may 

