Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The foreign minister, Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali, now on 
a visit to the Central Asian countries, has held wide-ranging 
talks in Tashkent with the Uzbek president, Mr. Islam Karimov. 
During the 90-minute meeting, they exchanged views on regional 
situation and bilateral relations. Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali 
briefed President Karimov on the explosive situation in Kashmir 
and drew his attention to the massive human right violations 
being committed by Indian security forces in occupied Kashmir, 
especially the custodial deaths. He emphasized that the 
liberation movement in the Indian- held Kashmir cannot be 
characterized as terrorism. He also apprised the Uzbek 
president about the recent Pakistan-India foreign 
secretary-level talks which were unproductive due to Indian 
intransigence. 
  On the Afghanistan situation, Pakistan and Uzbekistan shared 
the view that the situation there is volatile. Sardar Asif 
Ahmad Ali briefed the Uzbek leader about Pakistan's continuing 
efforts to revive the process of conciliation for a lasting 
political settlement. They agreed that the continuing turmoil 
in Afghanistan poses a serious threat to regional peace and 
stability. 
  President Karimov expressed his country's keen interest in 
the development of road links between Pakistan and Uzbekistan 
via Afghanistan. The two countries are expected to reinvigorate 
the process of consultation within the framework of the 
Pakistan-Afghan-Uzbek memorandum of understanding. On bilateral 
matters, the Uzbek president conveyed his full support to 
strengthen bilateral cooperation with Pakistan in every field. 
  Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali also held talks with his Uzbek 
counterpart, Mr. Saidmukhtar Saidqasymov. The two sides had a 
detailed review of bilateral issues and mutual cooperation in 
diverse areas of bilateral interest, including cooperation in 
the field of antiterrorism and antinarcotics. Uzbekistan also 
indicated its desire to open its embassy in Islamabad. Mr. 
Saidqasymov will be visiting Pakistan shortly at the invitation 
of Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali. Today the foreign minister is holding 
substantive talks with the Uzbek deputy prime minister and 
minister for foreign economic relations. 

