Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr Med Sci Vitaliy Ivanovich Yefremenko, </F>
professor, director, Stavropol Plague Scientific Research 
Institute, by correspondent Aleksandr Bykov; place and date of 
interview not given: ``Cholera on the Doorstep: It Had to 
Appear, Because Conditions for These and Other No Less 
Frightening Diseases Are Being Created''] 
  [Text] An unexpected phone call from Nalchik brought bad 
news. Anthrax was discovered in a certain rayon of 
Kabardino-Balkaria, and several persons had been hospitalized. 
Interrupting his interview, right then and there Vitaliy 
Ivanovich Yefremenko began organizing an immediate trip by a 
team of specialists to the place. All I could do was wait, 
pondering how quickly and simply life sometimes dispels all 
doubts. Just a minute ago I hadn't been fully certain whether we 
really had to discuss unpleasant things like plague, cholera and 
anthrax before readers who are already troubled enough as it is. 
The incident convinced me: Yes, we had to! All the more so 
because Doctor of Medical Sciences V. I. Yefremenko, a professor 
and director of the Stavropol Plague Scientific Research 
Institute, consented to even answer questions that journalists 
were not allowed to ask of such a scientific research institute 
just recently. 
[Bykov]Vitaliy Ivanovich, I must admit that I had 
wanted to begin our conversation with the recent cholera 
outbreak in Kazakhstan. But it seems that we need not go so far 
for examples. 
[Yefremenko]Unfortunately, that's true. The epidemic 
situation is extremely unstable today in the south of Russia, 
and especially in the Northern Caucasian region. A little over 2 
years ago cholera visited Stavropol, and quite recently, 
Krasnodar, Rostov, Makhachkala. We had to fight anthrax in 
Karachayevo-Cherkesia, and now in Kabardino-Balkaria. The 
incidence of leptospirosis has increased in the Kuban region. 
There is a very complex situation regarding brucellosis and 
tularemia--highly dangerous diseases, though sometimes they 
aren't perceived to be so by the layman. Finally, six of 
Russia's natural plague foci are located in the Northern 
Caucasus. Take a look at the map--they're all marked. In the 
Elbrus vicinity in particular, over there, can you see? 
[Bykov]Yes, I see. And honestly I feel extremely 
uneasy. Isn't it like we're living on a volcano? 
[Yefremenko]When epidemiological observation and 
reconnaissance are constantly maintained, when monitoring is 
organized, when disease-carrying rodents are destroyed and 
preventive work is carried out within the population, the danger 
of a plague outbreak is relatively low. In any case God has been 
kind to us for over 40 years. But we shouldn't of course become 
complacent. It is the objective of our institute, and of the 
state sanitary-epidemiological service as well, to take the most 
decisive steps in response to the slightest suspicion. Recently 
for example, specialists had to make an urgent trip to a certain 
eastern rayon of Stavropol Kray, where the body of a man was 
discovered in the steppes on territory that is epizootic in 
relation to plague. As it turns out, the person had been 
wandering, and simply froze. But this doesn't mean that the trip 
and the inspection were unnecessary. 
[Bykov]But this is improbably difficult--monitoring 
the situation on a territory commensurate with the territories 
of certain European states! 
[Yefremenko]Difficult it may be, but our scientific 
research institute, which is one of five Russian regional 
institutes of this profile, exists precisely for the purpose of 
ensuring epidemic safety. That's first. And second, you mustn't 
think that all of the work is done from here, out of Stavropol. 
Plague stations are operating in Novorossiysk, Nalchik and 
Makhachkala, there is a branched network of plague departments, 
and special detachments are working locally. 
[Bykov] By the way, Vitaliy Ivanovich, why are all of 
these subdivisions, including the head institute, called plague 
institutions? Don't you deal with other dangerous diseases as 
well? 
[Yefremenko]This is probably done out of tradition. 
In the past, plague was the most menacing danger, and in 
addition, our institute developed out of a plague station 
established back in 1933. Today we are in fact dealing with 
cholera, anthrax and brucellosis. Moreover life is forcing us to 
join the fight against viral diseases such as influenza, 
hepatitis and others. It was for this purpose that the institute 
organized a virological laboratory. We provide what help we can 
to AIDS prevention centers as well. 
[Bykov]In other words you are widening the front of 
the struggle against diseases, so to speak. But not only are 
they not intending to retreat--on the contrary they are 
gathering strength. What's it worth talking about influenza if 
even newspaper reports about cholera or anthrax have ceased to 
be sensational! 
[Yefremenko]That's all true. But let's think about 
why this is happening. On one hand there are an enormous number 
of people today who are not getting complete, balanced 
nutrition, while some simply don't get enough to eat. Add to 
this the present commonly known woes of our public health, and 
the best possible conditions for growth of disease become 
obvious. But there is another side as well. I am referring to 
the atmosphere of anarchy, all-permissiveness and lack of 
control reigning in the country, sharply intensifying the risk. 
[Bykov]Can you please give an example? 
[Yefremenko]I can give you as many as you want! The 
danger of contracting anthrax has always existed. Its agent can 
survive for a very long time in what is known as its spore form, 
and all you need is to have a rainstorm or a mud flow expose a 
livestock burial site. Before, a sufficiently dependable barrier 
was maintained first by vaccinating farm animals and second by 
inspecting meat brought in for sale and processing. But now, not 
only private owners but commercial farmers are ``economizing'' 
on immunizations, and meat could be sold right on the street, 
without having undergone laboratory inspection. This was 
approximately the scenario of the recent infection of a couple 
of dozen people by anthrax in Karachayevo-Cherkesia's 
Adyg-Khablskiy Rayon. 
[Bykov]So what about cholera? As far as I know it is 
brought to us from far away. Imported, so to speak. 
[Yefremenko]Yes, chiefly from Asian 
countries--Pakistan, Syria, India. But even here we can observe 
disregard for elementary requirements, shortcuts and other 
efforts at ``economization.'' Going abroad, our homemade 
businessmen, whose numbers are now impossible to count, deprive 
themselves of normal life, food and drink in their race for 
profit. Just one swallow of infected water is all it takes to 
bring cholera back to the homeland. By the way, despite their 
large numbers, Muslim pilgrims, for whom normal living 
conditions are created in Saudi Arabia, have never brought us 
any trouble. 
[Bykov]I heard a tragicomic story in your institute 
about two businessmen who had picked up cholera vibrio in 
foreign lands escaping from the hospital in Krasnodar after 
changing their identities. They didn't feel like lying around, 
and so they left to make more money. Do people really not 
understand that we are talking about a serious threat to both 
health and life itself? 
[Yefremenko]Some don't understand. Others follow the 
old Russian ``It'll never happen to me'' philosophy. But there 
are also those who are forced to risk their health and life due 
to circumstances beyond their control. I am referring to 
refugees, who have flooded our region. Poor, deprived of all 
basic necessities, and at the same time actively moving from 
place to place, they are a source of special danger. I'm not 
talking just about the diseases named above in this case. Can we 
exclude, for example, outbreaks of typhus if pediculosis has 
become a common thing? Unfortunately, no. 
[Bykov]Are you saying that what we have here is a 
``risk group'' in the flesh?! And what about the relatively 
better-off strata and categories of the population, who among 
them suffers more, those living in the cities or in the 
countryside? Or can you put the question this way? 
[Yefremenko]In general, disease doesn't ask you where 
you come from. All the more so if you consider the density of 
the migration flows, the high mobility of the entire population, 
and the transparency of the borders. But if we consider the 
personal or domestic level, then a herder working within a 
natural plague focus risks more than an urban dweller. Though 
less than a careless, poorly equipped tourist. Country dwellers 
probably also have a greater risk of anthrax infection because 
they work with farm animals. However, infected meat could be 
sold in the city as well. Perhaps the only uncontested ``rural'' 
disease is brucellosis. Rural inhabitants should protect 
themselves from it especially carefully, and not treat it as 
something harmless. A frightening disease! 
[Bykov]Does your warning mean that saving the 
drowning is a task primarily of the drowning themselves? 
[Yefremenko]There's nothing wrong with being extra 
cautious. Or with listening to the advice of specialists. Though 
of course they may also label immunizations as a bad thing. But 
then there's no reason to be amazed that the number of cases of, 
let us say, diphtheria is growing. However, despite all of this, 
prevention of dangerous diseases, efficient detection of sources 
and foci, treatment of patients and prevention of epidemics are 
naturally national tasks. And it is no accident that we are now 
developing a regional program against especially dangerous 
infections encompassing all of the south of Russia. We are also 
raising the question of organizationally unifying the plague 
service with the sanitary-epidemiological service. But we, like 
everyone else, have many problems. 
[Bykov]Money? 
[Yefremenko]Not just that, although financing is one 
of the most painful issues. Consider what seems like a simple 
thing--an on-site visit by our specialists. This has become 
simply dangerous to life when it comes to Chechen, Ingushetia or 
Northern Ossetia. Nonetheless, believe me, we aren't sitting 
idle. The institute does have a rather considerable potential. 
[Bykov]Can we talk a little about something else? Our 
interview has taken such a morose turn. 
[Yefremenko]Well, there isn't much to be happy about. 
But as far as the institute is concerned, it would be hard of 
course to describe its work in just a few words. You would 
probably be interested for example that an international 
reference center of the World Health Organization works in the 
institute. It has an extensive data bank on plague covering 
Asian and a number of European countries. There are also three 
other centers--a detection center, a center for zoonoses of the 
south of Russia, and a training center that prepares personnel 
for the CIS. Our collection of fleas--plague vectors--is second 
in importance in the world, the first being in England. Without 
going into the names of all of the divisions and laboratories, 
let me note that research is being conducted at a respectable 
level. In particular, we are working on pharmaceuticals of a new 
generation that surmount the cellular barrier; we have started 
production of diagnostic material based on magnosorbents making 
it possible to detect an infection source efficiently and 
precisely. In short, no matter how dangerous diseases might be, 
we are in no way defenseless against them. 
[Bykov]Well, let's end on this note, wishing success 
to the people whose work is discussed in the papers far more 
rarely than the outbreaks of the frightening diseases they 
fight. And health to all in our unfortunately dangerous times. 


