Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Rolf Ekeus, the chairman of the United Nation 
Special Commission [UNSCOM] in charge of scrapping Iraq's 
weapons of mass destruction, said that the international embargo 
imposed on the Iraqi regime for invading the State of Kuwait 
would not be lifted now. 
  In a news conference he held this evening before leaving the 
country, Ekeus added that there was nothing to this effect on 
the UN agenda at present. 
  The UN commission chairman expressed his full conviction 
that 
most of the Baghdad regime's military capabilities had been 
identified and destroyed. 
  He added that the commission was confident that all 
long-range missiles, which remained in the possession of the 
Iraqi regime after the Kuwait liberation war, had been 
destroyed. The special plants for producing those weapons had 
also been identified and destroyed. 
  Ekeus pointed out that UN inspectors found large quantities 
of chemical weapons that were, in reality, rendered inactive. 
He added that the commission still had before it the mission of 
completing the destruction of the chemical weapons in Iraq. 
  Concerning the Iraqi regime's biological weapons arsenal, 
Ekeus said in the news conference that the commission was 
relatively confident that all the essential elements had been 
treated, but was not fully satisfied, and that the commission 
was slightly worried about chemical weapons. 
  Ekeus pointed out that, according to the cease-fire in the 
State of Kuwait liberation war, the UN commission faced two 
aims. These were: Installing a long-term surveillance system on 
the Iraqi regime's armament program, and making sure that that 
regime would not attempt to obtain forbidden weapons. [passage 
omitted] 
  Ekeus went on to say that he briefed the country's officials 
on the progress that the commission achieved, and also listened 
to remarks in this respect. 
  He added that the senior officials in Kuwait also briefed 
him 
on their evaluation of the situation in the region. He said 
that that would help the commission to a great extent in its 
work. 

