BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report; from the "Evening Network Okinawa" </F>
program] 
  [Text] Regarding today's helicopter crash on Futenma Air 
Station, Policy Coordinator Choko Takayama of the prefectural 
government held a news conference and issued the following 
statement: 
  It is a matter of sincere regret that such accidents should 
happen so frequently, as U.S. Forces just caused an F-15 crash 
on 4 April. We cannot help feeling great anger against repeated 
accidents. Since Okinawa's reversion to Japan in 1972, CH-46 
[Chinook-46] helicopters have already caused accidents 18 times, 
and the latest helicopter crash on Futenma Air Station was 
caused by a CH-46 in October 1992. In addition, U.S. Forces 
have not yet reported to us on what the cause of the 1992 
accident was. We must say that CH-46 is a helicopter with a 
structural defect. The prefectural government would like to 
urge U.S. Forces to suspend all operations involving CH-46's 
until all of them undergo mechanical rechecks. 
  Governor Masahide Ota is scheduled to visit Tokyo tomorrow. 
Taking into account today's accident, he will call at the 
Foreign Ministry, the Defense Agency, and the Defense Facilities 
Administration Agency to urge definite action by the Japanese 
Government to prevent the recurrence of accidents by U.S. Forces. 
  In response to the report on the accident, Ginowan Mayor 
Seiken Tobaru stated the following: 
  I am shocked by the helicopter crash in the wake of the 4 
April accident on Kadena Air Base. I was struck with horror 
when I heard of the recurrence of accidents which endanger the 
safety of local residents. I want the national government to 
draw up remedies for such abnormal circumstances. I will file 
complaints tomorrow to both the national government and the U.S. 
Forces. 
  In protest against the F-15 crash on 4 April, the Okinawa 
Prefectural Assembly's Special Committee on U.S. Base-Related 
Problems has decided to call for an emergency plenary session on 
8 April to adopt a resolution calling for all trainings of 
fighter planes to stop. In addition, today's accident provoked 
strong reactions among prefectural assembly members. They are 
contacting members of the U.S. Base Special Committee to 
incorporate their protest against the helicopter crash into the 
8 April resolution. 

