Avocado-Syndrome: The Radical Right Is Entering the Super 
Election Year With Ecological Themes"] 
<F P=103> 94EN0203A </F>
<F P=104>  Munich FOCUS </F>
 Language: <F P=105>German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The tactic came too late. "We rightists," wrote the 
BRANDENBURGER BEOBACHTER, militant newspaper of the extreme 
right-wing German Alternative (DA), "must learn to establish our 
own profile in other themes." The time will come when the 
population will be overwrought by the complex of foreigners, 
leftists, and asylum-seekers. 
  So, in a strategy paper, the neo-Nazis listed alternatives 
from current ecological themes, from the demand for alternative 
energy sources to the limitation of domestic aviation. The DA no 
longer benefited from the cloak of green camouflage. The 
interior minister has since forbidden the organization. 
  But the other radical rightist parties and groups also want 
to utilize environmental protection for themselves--just in time 
for the super election year. Ecological slogans and green themes 
are supposed to make their nationalistic and xenophobic 
objectives presentable. The diagnosis of the Berlin ecologists 
Albrecht Lorenz and Ludwig Trepl: "Avocado-syndrome: green 
shell, brown core." 
  Environmental protection as a cause for the radical 
rightists. "We are the national protectors of the environment," 
states Franz Schoenhuber, chief of the Republikaner, "because 
anyone who loves his fatherland will not permit the landscape to 
be ruined." The German League for Nation and Homeland "is 
calling for consistent protection of nature and species--as an 
expression of love for the people and homeland." The same tenor 
prevails in the DVU [German People's Union]: "Love for the 
homeland, people, and fatherland" are "the best weapons against 
environmental pollution." 
  In the case of the NPD [National Democratic Party of 
Germany], it is clear what is behind the commitment of 
extremists "to an organically grown and clean environment." 
"Living space for us Germans." Consequently: "no further space 
taken up for housing for non-Germans." It is the old 
blood-and-soil ideology in a new package. 
  It is precisely the original ecologists who are coming in 
the 
sights of the guardians of the homeland. The German League roars 
about the "so-called Greens, who want to put an additional 
ecological burden on our homeland already overpopulated with 
more and more foreigners." 
  Nevertheless the "rightist rat catchers" (Greenpeace chief 
Thilo Bode) are availing themselves of the Greens and 
associations for environmental protection. The League for Nation 
and Homeland is now also calling for "state action" against 
"chloric substances that damage the ozone," for example, which 
for years has been a militant theme of Greenpeace. They have no 
ideas of their own in this connection. 
  The Republikaner are the number one ecological populists. 
The 
party program rewritten for the super election year is full of 
confessions on protection of the air, ground, and water to 
secure the "vital foundations of the German people." They offer 
mainstream themes, from the "reduction of agricultural 
chemicals" to "avoidance of refuse prior to utilization of 
refuse." 
  "Quite simply plagiarized," says Joschka Fischer, green 
environmental minister in Hesse, with annoyance. "But the 
decisive thing," according to the top strategist of the 
Alliance, "is not what is in the program but what comes across 
as messages. And with the Republikaner that is `clean nature for 
Germans, and foreigners go home.'" 
  To be sure, Republikaner chief Franz Schoenhuber asserts 
that 
there is "no relationship" between environmental protection and 
foreigners. The postal service does not see it this way. Thus it 
refused to deliver bulk mail from Otmar Wallner, vice chairman 
of the Republikaner in Bavaria. The charge: instigation of the 
populace. Bavaria's protectors of the constitution and the 
postal directorate in Regensburg agree that the slogan 
"environmental protection is incompatible with the arrival of 
more foreigners" produces "a hostile attitude toward foreigners 
that is supposed to be justified through the idea of 
environmental protection." 
  The ecological course of the radical rightists is "reason 
for 
extreme concern," according to the Nature Protection Alliance of 
Germany (NABU). President Jochen Flasbarth now wants to check 
"all program statements to determine the extent to which they 
can be misused by radical rightists." 
  The voters, Flasbarth hopes, would know "that environmental 
problems are so demanding and so complex that they cannot be 
resolved through the hollow logic of radical rightists." 
  It is a dramatic fact, however, that the turning of the 
radical rightist parties toward the environment coincides with a 
phase "in which the environmental commitment of the established 
parties is declining." 
  Radical rightist theoreticians are providing their camp with 
the heaviest caliber weapons for the fight against the 
ecological collapse. Thus, Wolfgang Venohr, historian and member 
of the Independent Ecologists of Germany, is yearning for the 
"ecological dictatorship." "Times of martial law in which 
democracy no longer plays any role" will come. Then "Poles, 
Hungarians, Czechs, Austrians, Swiss, and Slovaks" would have to 
"comply with" the German ecological state. 
  The Germans derive their ecological leadership from their 
holy groves and trees. The conclusion: the peoples of the Nordic 
race are the best protectors of the environment. 
  The germ cell of the fashionable brown theme of the 
environment is considered to be the World Alliance for the 
Protection of Life (WSL) with a veteran president Werner 
Haverbeck, once an official of the NSDAP [National Socialist 
German Workers Party], a confidant of Hess, and head of the 
Imperial League Nationhood and Homeland. In the 1960's, the WSL 
organized the first resistance against nuclear power plants out 
of concern for German genes. The WSL memorandum, "The Question 
of Foreigners as an Ecological Problem," pointed the way. 
  Besides the foreigners, radical rightist ecologists make the 
antifascist reeducation after 1945 and the resulting materialism 
and liberalism responsible for the destruction of the 
environment. This mode of explanation, write Thomas Jahn and 
Peter Wehling from the Frankfurt Institute for Socioecological 
Research in their book "Oekologie von rechts" [Ecology from the 
Right], appears frequently in the radical rightist camp, "even 
among the Republikaner." 
  The environmental organization, Robin Wood, unmasks the 
brown 
notion with a simple counterquestion: "If all the foreigners 
were thought away, would `we' then have empty autobahns, 
manageable garbage heaps, reasonable rates of energy 
consumption, healthy forests and rivers, and sufficiently pure 
drinking water?" It is scarcely likely. 
<H5>  [Box, p 41] </H5>
<H5>  Abused Nature </H5>
  DVU [German People's Union]: "The best weapon against 
environmental pollution is love for the fatherland." 
  UOeD [Independent Ecologists of Germany]: "Satellite towns 
for Immigrants: the end for nature and the homeland." 
  NPD [National Democratic Party]: "No to further sealing of 
the land for living space for non-Germans." 
  DL [German League for People and Homeland]: "Protection of 
nature and species as an expression of love for the fatherland 
and homeland." 
<H5>  [Box, p 42] </H5>
<H5>  Republikaner--a Coat of Green </H5>
  In the 1987 party program of the Republikaner, the Frankfurt 
social scientists Thomas Jahn and Peter Wehling see "vestiges of 
the Nazi jargon" in the party's ecological themes. There 
environmental protection serves only to "preserve the German 
nation, its health, and its ecological living space." 
  In 1990, the Republikaner declared environmental protection 
to be a "patriotic responsibility." In 1993, the party linked 
specific demands for environmental protection with xenophobic 
themes. To preserve an environment worth living in, it is 
necessary "to end further immigration of foreigners to Germany." 
<H5>  [Box, p 41] </H5>
<H5>  "The German People Are Not Stupid" </H5>
  Interview with Joschka Fischer, chief strategic of the 
Alliance, on the radical competitors in ecology: 
  [FOCUS] The radical rightist parties have discovered the 
"green" subject of environmental protection. Do you fear the new 
competition? 
  [Fischer] No, not at all. The so-called envirnonmental 
commitment of the radical rightists amounts to this: a clean 
environment for the Germans, and foreigners get out. Neither Mr. 
Frey nor Mr. Schoenhuber will get far with this. The German 
people are not stupid. But I heard this aggressive thesis for 
the first time not from a radical rightist party but from Mr. 
Gauweiler. He has been bugging us for two years in the 
conference of environmental ministers with a combination of 
ideas on protecting nature and warding off immigration. 
  [FOCUS] The radicals declare ecology to be a "right" cause. 
The basic prerequisite is supposed to be love of the homeland. 
Is environmental protection becoming a cause of people living in 
the past? 
  [Fischer] No. Environmental protection is a theme of the new 
and young middle strata. They, including employees, are our 
voters. Today the worker in the automotive industry also knows 
that an environmentally sound product planning is a prerequisite 
for a secure job. The bellowing stag on the wall and nonsense in 
the back of the heads of rightists will not be enough to get 
control of the ecological crisis. That is clear to most voters, 
even if the radical rightist parties keep on trying through 
national blood and soil themes to stir up fear of excessive 
foreign influence. 
  [FOCUS] The radical rightists are using ecological arguments 
in an anti-Europe course. Is Europe ecologically precarious? 
  [Fischer] We are definitely in favor of the European Union 
[EU]. But the decisive shortcoming is the lack of democracy. For 
us Maastricht is the end point of the European unification from 
above. But: it would be the worst possible folly in history to 
lose Europe, a step backward to the centuries-old tradition of 
this continent, which is rather dreadful. The fact that after 
power trivialities, hegemonic conflicts, and wars we are now 
betting on integration as one of the greatest achievements since 
the end of World War II. 
  [FOCUS] But Europe is moving backwards in environmental 
protection. For example, the EU is reducing the recycling quotas. 
  [Fischer] But there are also many decisions of the EU that 
go 
further than our national decisions. Germany is being sued on 
many points by the European Court, because we are not adhering 
to environmental guidelines. In the issue of refuse, Germany is 
the dirtiest country in Europe. We are one of the largest 
exporters of wastes in the world. We are the country without a 
general speed limit, with the very highest motorization density, 
the greatest industrial concentration, and the largest area used 
in road construction. Not everything that the EU does is golden 
but there is no alternative to a joint environmental policy. 

