CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mouloud Benmohamed: "The Lambese Prison: The </F>
Mystery of a Breakout" -- first paragraph is EL MOUDJAHID 
introduction; final two paragraphs are from APS] 
  [Text] For one hour and 15 minutes, armed groups 
beleaguered the village of Tazoult and the Lambese prison so as 
to allow a great number of prisoners to escape and to steal 
firearms. This happened last Thursday, at the time of the call 
to prayer. Everything had been prepared in great detail. A 
commission of inquiry made up of members from the ministries of 
justice, the interior, and defense, has been on site since 
yesterday. 
  How could the prisoners at Lambese-Tazoult escape? 
  The question has been plaguing the minds of all Algerians 
who 
never believed such an escape could happen in the most feared 
prison in Algeria. Its reputation has just fallen like a house 
of cards. Anything is possible when a or some prison guards 
(their number makes no difference; all it takes is a single 
accomplice for internal security measures to be useless) join 
with the attackers. 
  When you have gotten to know this prison in connection with 
a 
report on prison conditions, when you have spoken at length with 
prisoners in their cells, when you have met death row inmates 
who have been waiting to be pardoned or executed for years in 
this grim corridor of death, when you have moved about in these 
detention areas with their walls as thick as a 400-year-old oak 
tree, when you have observed that it takes a fairly long time to 
walk the distance separating the cells from the main gate, when 
you have counted more than 15 reinforced metal gates between the 
first cell and the first area where you regain your freedom, you 
can only be puzzled, flabbergasted, you can only be stupefied 
and speechless when you learn that an escape of..."900" 
prisoners took place in the harshest prison in Algeria. 
  This figure, which is neither confirmed nor denied, and the 
news could make a mute talk. You're aghast. You don't believe 
your ears and your eyes. 
  In that place, they don't lock up just any prisoner, just 
any 
small-time criminal or pickpocket. In that place they keep only 
the most hard core, the most difficult, the most recalcitrant, 
the most undisciplined, the ones who have lost everything 
(sentenced to die, to a life sentence, to long terms) but one 
tiny hope of regaining their freedom by whatever means possible. 
<H5>  At the Breaking of the Fast </H5>
  The Lambese-Tazoult prison, located 12 km from Batna, below 
the village of Tazoult, is not a simple annex or a preventive 
agency or a primary reeducation institution. It is a 
readaptation prison just as are those at El Asnem or Berrouaghia. 
  In accordance with Article 26 of Order 72-2 dated 10 
February 
1972 codifying the prison and reeducation system, this prison is 
charged with "receiving prisoners serving prison sentences of or 
greater than one year, prisoners sentenced to solitary 
confinement with hard labor, and habitual lawbreakers, 
regardless of the length of their term." 
  You don't leave this prison (nor do you enter it) the way 
you 
leave your own home. That is to say, with complete freedom, 
without informing someone beforehand. 
  From the individual or common cell, from the detention room 
to the main entrance gate, a minimum of 15 keys is required. 
Every time you enter or leave one place to go to another, from 
one corridor to another, you have to open and reclose a heavy 
metal gate or a metal grill behind you. This action--a 
rite--must be repeated each time by the director, the guard, or 
the head of detention until he is back on the street. 
  To reach the street, you cross several long corridors, 
courtyards, very extensive spaces, and the detention area; 
everywhere you walk along very high walls and barred windows. 
The smallest door, even the one to the broom closet, is 
triple-locked. There is a stout lock plus two dead bolts that 
are kept shut with a padlock. 
  Guards everywhere. Reeducation agents. Of every age but 
especially young men. Those walking the enclosure walls are 
armed, and so are the others, though less heavily, but their 
most important weapon is the bunch of keys by which the gates 
open and close, get pushed and pulled, get unlocked and locked 
as they groan, as they slide, and as they almost creak. Nothing 
is done without a noise. Nothing is done that does not attract 
attention. Everything is known or at least should be known when 
the guards are doing their duty, are on the lookout, when the 
guards have their eyes open, their ears to the ground, and their 
minds alert. Most, if not the majority, of these reeducation 
agents, called guards, live or reside in the village of Tazoult, 
which overlooks the prison. This is not a detail, it is 
extremely important to understand what happened, what took place 
last Thursday. 
  The first information received makes it possible to state 
that this was not a mere escape just put together by some 
prisoners or planned with a little outside support. No. This was 
very much a premeditated, prepared operation; a "strike" that 
was conceived and refined in every way; it was a plan that was 
thought through in its execution, calculated as to its phases, 
and drawn up in its organization. It was an operation, a 
"strike," a plan that left nothing to the imponderable, to the 
unexpected, to chance. It was planned. Everything was planned 
with respect to the sites, the prisoners, and the number of 
policemen and gendarmes in the area! 
  Even the nails were planned. 
  Before providing some details, still unofficial, a word 
about 
the director of the prison who is the top man responsible for 
security in the prison. 
  First, he is a native of Tazoult but he lives in the prison. 
In a company house, obviously. He is known to most of the 
residents of the area. Next, he is a man who enjoys a good 
reputation in the prison community, where he has been an 
employee for 22 years. He is too young to have been sentenced to 
death or sent to prison during the colonial period like most of 
the heads of prisons. Just the same, he is well acquainted with 
the premises and his "inmates." 
<H5>  One Prisoner With Four BAs! </H5>
  Who are the prisoners at Lambese-Tazoult? 
  There are minors in a special ward. They are kept quite 
apart 
from the areas where those who are more than 18 years old are 
kept. 
  There are the common criminals. Most are criminals (the 
others have been sentenced for having committed punishable 
crimes). One murdered a member of his family over a will; one 
thought it useful to kill a wife he thought had bad habits and, 
10 years after the crime, is sorry about it; there is one who 
killed his neighbor and yet another who took part in gang 
rapes.... Among them some try to improve themselves. For 
example, there is one student. Here a parenthesis: four former 
death row prisoners sat for their BA exams, and they passed! One 
of them took up the challenge of doing his BA four times: in 
literature, science, mathematics, and sciences cum laude. "I 
wanted to prove I could do it. I promised myself I would get the 
BA cum laude. I did," he told us. Since then, these former death 
row inmates have seen their sentences commuted and been 
pardoned. They are studying tax law! Let's close this 
parenthesis. 
  Last there are those who were sentenced by the special 
courts 
under the law on terrorism. There is everyone from the death row 
inmate to the prisoner sentenced to three years in solitary 
confinement and including those serving life sentences, 20-year 
sentences, 15-year sentences, etc. Most of them are young. 
  The eldest is 77. He is in prison for the rest of his life 
for the voluntary homicide of a cousin who had cut him out of 
his will. 
  After all of that, there are some questions: 
  How could such a large number of prisoners escape? 
  Did they have accomplices? If they did, at what level? What 
preventive security measures were taken? 
  What security conditions existed before the breakout? 
Internal but also external security, i.e., around and in the 
immediate environs of the prison. 
  How did the guards in charge of the prison's internal 
security react? 
  Did they have adequate arms and munitions? 
  Were the prisoners forewarned? Had they prepared themselves 
for the escape? 
  There are a thousand and one questions to which the 
commission of inquiry that has been set up--and has been at the 
scene of the scape since yesterday afternoon--will try to find 
answers so as to assign responsibility. But, as of now, we can 
report these words by the director of the prison who told us 
that "no one could have done anything whatsoever about it." 
  By that it should be understood that it was unavoidable, 
given the circumstances and the methods. 
  How was this possible? 
  What exactly had taken place? 
  How could the escape have happened? 
  For the moment there is very little official information. 
Except bits and pieces gathered from trustworthy sources. 
<H5>  The "Strike" Was Prepared </H5>
  Several hours before the escape, residents of Tazoult 
noticed 
a certain amount of frenetic activity, a lot of strangers in the 
village. Most were young people. 
  "It's residents of Batna doing their errands before the 
breakfast hour," some thought. 
  "It's the feast of the Aid. Things are normal. They think 
it's less expensive to buy clothing for their children from the 
stores in Tazoult. How naive," others said. 
  No one suspected that trucks covered with tarpaulins 
carrying 
armed men were waiting for the call to prayer to begin the 
operation. Some among this latter group would wait for the end 
of the call to prayer and the practicing's return home--almost 
all of them prison management employees--to move about in 
Tazoult. There were several dozen armed men who blocked all the 
roads leading out of the surrounded village who took possession 
of the streets and alleys. In this way prison guards were 
prevented from leaving their homes to help defend the besieged 
prison. Some of these men waited for the gendarmerie brigade and 
the Tazoult district police. Given their small numbers, security 
agents were impotent. It was impossible for them to contain the 
attack. Even less possible to repulse it. There was a greater 
number of attackers. A very great number. There were several 
armed groups who came from different areas. On trucks and on 
light vehicles. Judging from appearances, the "strike" had been 
in preparation for several weeks. The possibility cannot be 
excluded that the terrorist acts and attacks in the Algiers and 
Oran areas were supposed to create a diversion. 
  Several moments before armed groups beleaguered Tazoult and 
attacked the two security posts--at the very moment of the call 
to prayer (the call to prayer was supposed to have acted as a 
signal)--one of the prison guards who was on duty at the main 
gate--an accomplice--ordered his colleague to hand him his keys 
to open the gate. The latter refused. There was an outburst of 
voices. The director who was at prayers was notified. He thought 
there was an altercation between colleagues and he spoke to two 
of them from his window. At that moment the accomplice fired a 
round of shots and the guard dropped dead. The weapon was aimed 
at the window and there were one, then two rounds of shots. The 
director went looking for his gun to shoot back; the prison 
guard who was the accomplice took advantage to open the main 
gate. Three trucks covered with tarpaulins entered the prison at 
the same time as a Golf and two white vehicles. The attackers 
jumped off and shot. Prison staff fired back. There were rounds 
of fire, exchanges of bullets, then the greater number of 
attackers dispersed in three groups. 
  The first group went to the administrative block and the 
isolation cells. The second destroyed the alarm signal and set 
about looking for the weapons room in the hope of stealing some 
Kalashnikovs and light modern arms from it. A few moments later, 
using guns, the locks on the weapons storage room were "blown 
off." There were in fact sophisticated weapons, or they were the 
latest model, for the attackers took possession of automatic 
Belgian pistols, Chicoms, Mat-49's dating from the war of 
independence, and munitions. 
  They stole 133 weapons, all of which would be recovered in 
the first hours of the search operation. Ditto for the 
munitions. During this time, the third group of attackers fanned 
out through the detention areas. The locks and dead bolts of the 
cells and cell blocks were blown away with gunfire. The first to 
escape were the death row inmates whose death row cells are off 
the common rooms. These were prisoners sentenced to die by the 
three special courts and common criminals. Next the prisoners 
serving life sentences and long terms escaped. Some common 
criminals did as well. Some prisoners--common criminals and 
special courts [prisoners]--refused to follow the attackers. 
Others--a large number that has not been officially 
announced--did not hesitate. Freedom was so close. But it would 
not last long for 79 of them who would be arrested whereas 
others would be gunned down during the search, which grew more 
intense hour by hour. The region was cut off. Even local 
residents took part. 
  After about one hour and 15 minutes, the three groups got 
back together and withdrew leaving dead and wounded behind them. 
As they fled, for the second time they strewed nails on the 
pavement, which prevented police from reaching the prison. The 
tires on their vehicles blow out. 
  This would be the second time, since security forces had 
already been blocked when they arrived by blocks of stone, 
nails, and even a bulldozer placed on the main access road 
leading to the prison. The road was blocked! 
  The trucks made escape in every direction easier. 
Particularly towards the nearby mountains. With them were seven 
prison guards. 
  Were they accomplices? The inquiry will show that. They were 
shields, some think. 
  The search was started a few moments later. A security team 
was set up. The security services combined their forces. The 
search is carried out even at night. 
  Thirty-nine people among the escapees and the attackers are 
arrested several hours later, and (towards 1600) the number 
rises to 79 arrested and 24 others shot. Those searches continue 
as we go to press. 
  In the wake of escapes from the reeducation centers at Sidi 
Ghiles (Tipaza), Blida, and the Serkadji van (which was headed 
towards Tazoult), last Thursday's [escape] urgently poses the 
question of security in prisons. If we can say that inside the 
prison security was not ensured as the most ordinary of citizens 
might believe, i.e., with a large number of security guards 
having modern weapons and armed to the teeth, we might note that 
no team was set up on the outside. 
  That is to say, around the prison. Last January, a few 
hundred meters away from the Lambese prison, the bodies of three 
murder victims were discovered: the father, father-in-law, and 
cousin of one staff member who had been receiving threats. An 
external security force was more than indispensable. It was 
vital. Both for the prison and for the reputation of the forces 
of law and order which seems to be picking up again as they 
pursue the attackers and escapees. 
  What happened last April at the Berroughia prison led the 
concerned authorities to set up reinforced surveillance posts 
and implement an appropriate security team all around these 
prisons, whose running brings honor or dishonor to the state's 
authority. 
<H5>  Seventy-Nine Escapees Arrested, 24 Shot </H5>
  Seventy-nine individuals who escaped from the Tazoult prison 
have been arrested and 24 others shot by police who recovered a 
large number of weapons, a communique issued by security forces 
yesterday announced. 
  The search and surround operations are still being pursued, 
it went on to say. 


<FIG ID=JPRS-NEA-022-03A>      From this enclosure wall </FIG>




