CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Ashot Aramyan: "Not Subject to Devaluation...: </F>
The First General Meeting of Yerevan Stock Exchange Stockholders 
Held"] 
  [Text] The first general meeting of Yerevan Stock Exchange 
[YeSE] stockholders began its proceedings last Saturday by 
reading out congratulations received on the occasion of this 
event from such powerful Russian commercial structures as the 
First Voucher Fund, Alfa-Kapital, the Moscow Central Stock 
Exchange, MMM-Invest, the Moscow Interbank Foreign Currency 
Exchange, and so on. 
  Next, the YeSE president, Sedrak Sedrakyan, had the floor; 
he 
reminded the stockholders of the difficult history of setting up 
the exchange, its first steps, and outlined its near-term 
prospects. He noted with regret that of the 12 categories of 
activities, for a number of reasons the YeSE currently conducts 
only two. In addition, already for a month and a half the 
exchange has not been conducting open auctions but only 
interbank ones, whose impact on the foreign exchange market is 
not that substantial. The YeSE president noted among positive 
factors the help and understanding the exchange's activities get 
from the government and the republic's Central Bank, as well as 
from foreign embassies. 
  The YeSE ended last year with a loss of only 600 drams, that 
is, as S. Sedrakyan pointed out, "for each share we lost only 15 
dum." Let us note here that one of the important indicators of 
effectiveness of the activities of any AO [joint-stock society] 
is the ratio of expenses to the value of net assets. For 
instance, if it approaches 65-75 percent, a joint-stock society 
is near collapse. The ratio of 45-55 percent indicates that 
things are in reasonably good shape, and 30 percent indicate 
good prospects for the company. Well, this figure with respect 
to AO YeSE is.... 14.48 percent. In short, the creation of one 
of the most important market structures in the republic is 
proceeding with minimal expenditures. 
  Most importantly, over a relatively short period of time, 
the 
exchange's charter capital has been capitalized--now the money 
invested by its depositor-stockholders is not subject to 
devaluation. As to the YeSE dividend policy, unlike commercial 
structures, which immediately pay income to stockholders, it is 
aimed during this initial period at reinvesting the money into 
developing the exchange. The YeSE stock now is valued at 8,200 
drams per share, and there are more than 4,000 of them sold. 
  An interesting dialog took place recently during the YeSE 
president's trip to the United States between him and the head 
of the New York Stock Exchange. Mr. Sedrakyan, relating the 
dramatic start-up time of his offspring, said: "We are counting 
on your help; you no longer remember your past. We are your 
past." To which the head of one of the largest stock exchanges 
in the world remarked: "You are a lucky man, Mr. Sedrakyan. We 
do not know what our tomorrow is, but you do." 
  The YeSE's near-term prospects are indeed enticing. With the 
beginning of voucherization and privatization in Armenia, 3.5 
million vouchers (privatization certificates) will enter the 
republic's securities market. In accordance with the government 
list, another 100 enterprises and organizations are due to be 
converted to joint-stock holding this year, which means as a 
minimum another 100 million shares of stock. Where will it all 
flow if not to the YeSE? 
  The general meeting of stockholders approved the charter of 
the publicly held joint-stock society YeSE (by the way, by the 
year 2000 the AO will become a closely held society, as is the 
practice in the entire world). 
  Then the meeting of the exchange board elected the governing 
body of the YeSE board and reappointed Sedrak Sedrakyan as the 
exchange president. 

