Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "About Arms and Views"] </F>
  [Text]We have received a letter from former National 
Defense Minister Audrius Butkevicius commenting on the series of 
articles in RESPUBLIKA entitled: "Who Armed National Defense?" 
  "All arms, ships, and helicopters," writes A. Butkevicius, 
"were bought by the National Defense Ministry following relevant 
Lithuanian Government decisions and resolutions, which identify 
definite mediators, prices, and terms of settlement." 
  "The purchase of ships described in the aforementioned 
articles was conducted in line with agreements signed by leaders 
of the Republic of Lithuania and Russian military institutions, 
the 1992 agreement signed by me as defense minister and my 
Russian counterpart, and Lithuanian Government resolutions. The 
aforementioned agreements envisioned that the money received by 
the Russian Baltic Fleet for its facilities sold to Lithuania 
had to be used for the construction of housing for Russian 
servicemen withdrawn from Lithuania. Since Lithuania refused to 
assume responsibility for the construction of this housing due 
to political considerations, the Russian Baltic Fleet chose the 
Lithuanian association `Selma' as a contractor, indicating that 
the money received for the sold facilities had to be transferred 
to this firm. 
  "Having analyzed the documentation submitted by the firm 
`Selma,' the National Defense Ministry leadership assessed it as 
being in line with Lithuanian law and concluded the necessary 
agreements. I did not and do not have any information about the 
past crimes of the firm's leaders. If a private organization or 
a person in Lithuania has violated the law or is suspected of 
such actions, the Interior Ministry and the Prosecutor's Office 
have enough measures to suspend the activities of such 
organizations and isolate such people. Until this is 
established, both firms and private persons are equal before the 
law, and no one, not even a journalist, has the right to insult 
them, no matter who they are. 
  "The firm `Selma' implemented the contract with the Baltic 
Fleet for the construction of military housing successfully, 
and, as far as I know, this firm is the current executor of 
Russia's state order for the construction of housing in 
Kaliningrad. It supplies Lithuanian builders with jobs. 
  "Military facilities acquired by the National Defense 
Ministry are assessed by the experts' commission and the one set 
up to determine prices. Their conclusions on the suitability 
and prices of these facilities were approved by the Lithuanian 
Government. I would like to add that both coastal defense 
ships, which, by the way, were acquired for the minimum price, 
participated in the NATO exercise 'Baltops-93,' along with other 
ships from Baltic countries and the United States, as well as in 
the exercise 'Barjeras-93' held by the National Defense 
Ministry. They have all necessary components, combat 
facilities, and spare parts. 
  "According to expert and inspection documents, the 
helicopters were acquired legally by the Air Force and they meet 
the requirements for combat aircraft, which can also be used for 
civilian purposes. 
  "I deem RESPUBLIKA's articles about the National Defense 
Ministry irresponsible, biased, nonobjective, and seeking 
sensation at any cost. I regret that this series coincided with 
Lithuania's statements on its integration with West European 
defense structures, as well as with a clear attack against 
Russia's democratic forces and former partners in negotiations 
with Lithuania. 
  "While creating the national defense system, I and other 
national defense officials had to work under extreme conditions: 
We experienced pressure from the former Soviet Union, our own 
intrigues, and the withdrawal of the foreign Army. The leaders 
had to choose one of two options -- either pursue a cautious 
policy of doing nothing, or adopt decisions and assume all 
responsibility for the development of national defense. My 
colleagues and I opted for the second alternative, and today our 
national defense has the minimum forces of space control, 
coastal defense, and land troops. We have also established the 
necessary relations to execute European programs of integration 
for these types of forces. In the opinion of foreign experts 
who took part in national defense exercises and conferences, all 
this was achieved over a very short period of time and with 
minimum expense. Let those who can, do any better," ends the 
letter from Audrius Butkevicius. 

