Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin, PRESS ASSOCIATION] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister John Major and his Irish counterpart 
Albert Reynolds pledged today to continue the search for peace 
and political progress in Northern Ireland. 
  In 75 minutes of talks in Downing Street -- the first since 
they signed their historic Ulster peace declaration two months 
ago -- they took stock of developments on their joint initiative 
to end the spiral of violence. 
  Hours before their discussions began they were given a grim 
reminder of the continuing terrorism. 
  A series of firebomb attacks in seven London stores bore all 
the hallmarks of the Provisonal IRA, said Scotland Yard. 
  As they left Downing Street, Mr Major and Mr Reynolds united 
in condemning the incidents and recent terrorist attacks in 
Northern Ireland 
  Mr Major said: "Our response to that is entirely identical. 
There is absolutely no justification for those firebombs 
overnight any more than there is justification for the killing 
of a community police officer in Belfast last week or the other 
atrocities that have taken place in Northern Ireland." 
  The prime ministers agreed to initiate a new round of 
negotiations on the future of Northern Ireland with or without a 
response from the IRA and their Sinn Fein allies to the December 
15 peace declaration. 
  Mr Reynolds said officials from the two governments would 
agree later today on a date for a meeting of their liaison 
committee to advance the next stage of the talks process. 
  Mr Major insisted: "There is a route now open for Sinn Fein 
to join the constitutional process -- they know what they have 
to do. All they have to do is give up violence and then they 
will have a proper route to express their views 
constitutionally." 
  Mr Reynolds again stressed his view that the road to peace 
was going to be a long one and that there would be difficulties 
along the way. 
  "We knew there would always be people on both sides on the 
paramilitaries who would be trying to stop our best efforts. 
  "But regardless of this violence and destruction that takes 
place we will continue along that difficult road, recognising 
that people will be trying to frustrate our efforts but that 
they will not succeed." 
  Today's meeting went ahead before the two prime ministers 
join the crowd at Twickenham for the Ireland-England rugby 
international. Mr Major referred to the match as he and Mr 
Reynolds began a brief news conference outside 10 Downing Street 
by saying he had brought along his second row. 
  "We are wholly united in our approach to try to find a 
solution to the problems of Northern Ireland," he added. 
  "We regard our joint declaration as a foundation stone for 
the future approach of the two governments. We are committed to 
it and its lasting value. We see it as a balanced statement of 
lasting principles, and it is our view that its value has 
already been clearly shown in the way it has been received both 
in Ireland and internationally." 
  Mr Major said it was impossible for either he or Mr Reynolds 
to say whether the IRA would give up its campaign of violence in 
the near future. 
  "What we are utterly agreed about is that there is no 
justification for the continuation of violence by the 
Provisionals or by anybody else. What must be fully understood 
is that we are not waiting for the Provisionals or anybody else. 
  "We have taken further steps in the talks process and we 
have 
this morning reaffirmed our joint commitment to that process. 
No one should be able to veto progress on the talks. We have 
made clear what Sinn Fein needs to do to join the process. 
  "They are free to come in or they are free to stay out -- if 
that is what they choose. But what they can't do is hold up our 
determination to continue with the talks process and endeavour 
to find a solution." 
  The two premiers agreed to maintain the current high level 
of 
cooperation on security and do all they could to oppose 
terrorism. 
  Mr Major said he believed improved security cooperation was 
of immense help in recent years, and that was going to continue. 
  "The intention that we both have is peace. We'd like it soon 
but however long it takes our determination is to continue a 
search for that peace." 

