Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Pu Chaozhu, secretary of the Yunnan </F>
Provincial CPC Committee, by TA KUNG PAO staff reporter; date 
and place not given: "Pu Chaozhu Answers Questions Raised by TA 
KUNG PAO Reporter"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] 
  [TA KUNG PAO] There is a rumor circulating abroad that 
Yunnan Province is beset with the problems of drug cultivation 
and trafficking. What is actually the true situation? 
  [Pu] Yunnan Province has a long border. Intermarriage is 
common among people living in the frontiers which are not 
separated by big rivers, and it is impossible to surround them 
with barbed wire. These people are relatives of each other. 
For a long time, people living inside and outside the frontiers 
have lived together in peace and have been law-abiding on the 
whole. However, there are also difficulties. Outside our 
borders, people grow 1 million mu of opium poppies. So long as 
they have a bumper harvest of opium poppies, we will have bad 
luck. For our part, the Yunnan provincial government firmly 
bans the cultivation, trafficking, and selling of drugs. Even 
dozens of mu or a piece of land sown to opium poppies will be 
promptly weeded out as soon as they are discovered. Last year 
over 100 mu of opium poppies were rooted out. However, banning 
cultivation of opium poppies does not solve the problem. As 
long as you gaze at the places across the frontier line you 
stand on, a sea of red opium poppies will meet your eyes. 
Making use of Yunnan as a thoroughfare for drug trafficking, 
drug trading groups ship drugs to Guangzhou and Hong Kong via 
Kunming. We also firmly ban and crack down on such activities. 
Last year, we arrested more than 3,000 people and dealt with 
some of the cases based on solid evidence according to law. Drug 
traffickers who are arrested will certainly be dealt with 
according to law, be they from other provinces or outside the 
borders. While strengthening border customs inspection, we rely 
mainly on the joint defense of the people, the Army, and the 
police and form a gigantic net so that there is no escape for 
drug traffickers. Last year, we seized and confiscated drugs 
totaling some five tonnes, or 3.5 tonnes of heroin and 1.5 
tonnes of opium. However, according to our calculation, this was 
only the tip of the iceberg. The traffickers succeeded in 
smuggling out most of their drugs. As long as there are drug 
markets abroad, it is difficult to solve the problem. Last 
year, the number of drug cases dropped but that of major cases 
increased, and there were even cases of armed smuggling and 
escorting of drugs. This is a complicated international 
problem. Now we are seeking cooperation with international 
anti-drug organizations to jointly crack down on drug trading 
activities. In a word, on no account does Yunnan grow and 
traffic drugs. The province firmly bans drugs. [passage omitted] 

