Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The third ordinary session of the Third National 
Assembly was closed with glorious success on the afternoon of 14 
March after six days of energetic work. A closing ceremony was 
held at the National Assembly Hall in Vientiane under the 
chairmanship of National Assembly Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket. 
Attending the closing ceremony were Khamtai Siphandon, chairman 
of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party [LPRP] Central Committee 
and prime minister; Oudom Khatthi-gna, Political Bureau member 
of the LPRP Central Committee and personnel in charge of guiding 
mass organizations; Khambou Sounisai, member of the party 
Central Committee and vice chairman of the National Assembly; 
Vongphet Saikeu-yachongtoua, member of the party Central 
Committee and vice chairman of the National Assembly; and 
Souphanouvong, adviser to the party Central Committee; along 
with ministers, deputy ministers, chairmen of mass organizations 
at the central level, and representatives of businessmen in 
Vientiane municipality. 
  Members of the National Assembly endorsed a resolution of 
the 
third session of the Third National Assembly. After thoroughly 
and scrupulously studying various issues, they unanimously 
agreed to the following: 
  1. Endorsed the amendment of the Labor Law and the Law on 
the Promotion and Management of Foreign Investments in the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic [LPDR]. 
  2. Endorsed the result of the votes to elect Ounneua 
Phimmason as new general public prosecutor and Ket Kiattisak as 
new chairman of the Supreme People's Court. 
  3. Discussed and contributed views to all seven copies of 
draft internal regulations of the National Assembly. 
  4. Discussed and contributed views to the overall review 
report on activities and achievements of the National Assembly 
in performing duties since the second ordinary session and the 
action program to be fulfilled in the immediate future. 
  5. The session agreed that it is necessary to convene an 
extraordinary session of the National Assembly to discuss and 
endorse amendments of a number of certain laws considered 
imperative and significant, such as the Law on the Formation of 
Government, the Law on Taxation System, the Law on National 
Defense Obligations, the Law on State Budget, and the Law on 
People's Courts and Public Prosecution Organizations. Regarding 
the duration of the extraordinary session, the session agreed to 
assign the National Assembly Standing Committee to study and 
decide on the convening of the sesion at an appropriate time. 
  6. The session praised and hailed cadres, state 
employees, combatants, and fraternal people of all strata and 
tribes, businessmen of both state and private sectors, 
foreigners having resided and earned their living in the LPDR, 
who have always respected the laws and maintained the spirit of 
being owners of the country, the patriotic spirit, and the 
spirit of cherishing the popular democratic system, and always 
fulfilled their rights and obligations in accordance with the 
laws and regulations of the LPDR. 
  The session expressed gratitude to various friendly 
countries, near and far, as well as various international 
organizations, for their precious support and assistance given 
to our people in carrying out the national construction and 
development cause. The session expressed the hope that the 
various friendly countries and international organizations will 
continue to sympathetically render more support, assistance, and 
cooperation to the LPDR. The session called on cadres, state 
employees, combatants, and compatriots of all strata and tribes, 
including overseas Lao residents, and all businessmen in 
economic sectors, both state and private sectors, as well as 
foreigners who have resided and earned their living in the LPDR, 
to strengthen the solidarity and unite as one, enhance the sense 
of respecting the constitution and laws, and together defend and 
build the country. 
  The session expressed the determination to continue to do 
everything possible to fulfill all duties and responsibilities 
of the National Assembly as stipulated in the Constitution and 
the Law on the National Assembly to be worthy of being the 
organization which represents and works in the interest of the 
rights to mastery of the people of all strata and all tribes and 
to be worthy of being the state organization which genuinely 
comes from the people, is elected by the people, and works for 
the benefit of the people. The session also expressed the 
determination to positively make worthy contributions to 
international activities for the cause of peace, national 
independence, democracy, friendship, and cooperation in the 
region and the world. 

