BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 30 (AFP)--China's forestry ministry 
denied Wednesday claims by a British organization that it was 
allowing the illegal trade of tiger bones despite promises to 
stamp it out. 
  "The position of the Chinese government is very clear and 
very firm: since May 29, 1993, the law prohibits the 
possession, trading and use of tiger bones and rhinoceros 
horns," said ministry spokesman Su Yan by telephone. 
  Both substances are used in traditional Asian medicine and 
are often thought to be aphrodisiacs. They sell at prices 
comparable to gold in Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
  The British group Tiger Trust has presented a film it made 
during a four-month investigation of the tiger bone trade, which 
it says shows a flourishing black market in China, threatening 
with extinction the 150 Siberian tigers left in northeastern 
China. 
  "The rumours peddled abroad are false," said Su. "It is 
possible that a small group of criminals is trading in tiger 
bones, but you cannot mix the government up in that. The United 
States has strict narcotics laws and yet drug trafficking and 
consumption there are widespread," he said. 
  Tiger Trust also accused the Chinese authorities of lying in 
January after a widely publicized burning of what it said was 
500 kilograms (1100 pounds) of tiger bones in the northeastern 
city of Harbin. Quoting a "very senior official," Tiger Trust 
said the burning "was a fake." The group said the bones were 
almost entirely from cattle. 
  Su also said the Harbin bone burning consisted of 50 
kilograms, not 500. 
  "There were in fact fake and genuine tiger bones that had 
been seized from the black market, as traffickers also deal in 
fake bones." 
  A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman confirmed that under a 
Chinese law passed last year even fake banned wildlife products 
must be destroyed. 
  Su said "there are actually 624.4 kilograms of tiger bones 
stored at eight locations under the control of the Bureau for 
the Protection of Endangered Species ... all medicine containing 
tiger bone and rhinoceros horn has been withdrawn from the 
market." 
  In January the People's Daily reported the trade in 
endangered species was worth some 2 million yuan (230 million 
dollars) [as received]. 
  The United States has threatened China with economic 
sanctions if it did not put an end to the trade in tiger bones 
and rhinoceros horns. 
  Last week the UN-sponsored Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species gave China's policy a clean bill of 
health, saying it had made significant progress in protecting 
endangered animals. 

