Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Vladimir Gondusov] </F>
  [Text] Dushanbe 24 March, TASS -- CIS joint peacekeeping 
forces, with air and artillery units from Russia, Tajikistan and 
Uzbekistan attached to them, demonstrated high combat skills in 
well-coordinated actions within the framework of military 
exercises held in southern Tajikistan on Thursday. 
  Taking part in the manoeuvres were some 2,000 servicemen, 
backed by dozens of armoured vehicles and gun mounts, combat 
planes and helicopters of the latest models. The exercises were 
supervised by Russian Defence minister Pavel Grachev. Also 
present at the command post were Tajik Prime Minister 
Abdudzhalil Samadov, Tajik Defence Minister Aleksandr 
Shishlyannikov and Uzbek Defence Minister Rustam Akhmedov. 
  The manoeuvres simulated a situation at the Tajik-Afghan 
border, commander of peacekeeping troops in Tajikistan Boris 
Pyankov, who headed the exercises, told TASS. Their plot was as 
follows: A simulated enemy suddenly breaks through the CIS 
external border on the segment guarded by the Pyandzh border 
unit and tries to penetrate deep into Tajik territory, which 
makes CIS joint peacekeeping forces and units attached to them 
to enter a fierce battle. The simulated enemy is subjected to 
mass artillery shelling and air strikes, then motorized infantry 
units and tanks join the battle. The enemy is thrown back, and 
the state border is restored. 
  The manoeuvre commander and the Russian defence minister 
especially praised well-coordinated joint actions by the 
Russian, Tajik and Uzbek battalions. 
  After the manoeuvres, Grachev noted that the exercise site 
had been well organized from the engineering point of view. He 
also stressed that all troops participating in the manoeuvres 
had successfully coped with the task set before them. 
  According to the Russian defence minister, the main specific 
feature about this large-scale action was that it simulated a 
real situation. 
  All in all, CIS joint peacekeeping forces are scheduled to 
hold 12 military exercises this year. 

