Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Du Peng (2629 7720), Chen Gong (7115 0501), Liu </F>
Chengming (0491 2052 2494), Zhang Hanmo (1728 3466 1075), and 
Yang Huaquan (2799 5478 2938), Demography Department, Chinese 
People's University: "Hard Work; Solid 
Accomplishments--Analytical Report on the Chengde Population 
Control Model"] 
  [Excerpts] Chengde Prefecture is a classic mountainous 
region made up of old, young, and impoverished people, but 
thanks to the close attention of CPC committees and governments 
at all levels in the prefecture, as well as the efforts of the 
broad masses of planned parenthood cadres, it has worked out a 
coordinated development plan for planned parenthood methods and 
for curing poverty, curing ignorance and becoming wealthy. It 
has also established a whole body of corresponding control 
mechanisms. Since 1989, the total birth rate of childbearing age 
women in Chengde Prefecture has been consistently maintained at 
below 1.63, and the planned parenthood rate has been maintained 
at better than 98 percent. In 1992, the peak year of the third 
birth peak, the birthrate for the entire prefecture was only 
11.72 per 1,000, and the natural rate of population increase was 
only 6.29 per 1,000. Chengde Prefecture's planned parenthood 
achievements have attracted attention, and the Chengde 
population control model has also attracted the interest of 
government departments and academicians concerned. It was 
against this background that 90th form classmates from the 
Chinese People's University Demographics Department went to 
Chengde Prefecture to conduct an on-site social survey for the 
purpose of more fully critiquing Chengde's population control 
model. The following analytical report has been written on the 
basis of a collation and analysis of the survey data. [passage 
omitted] 
<H5>  1. Analysis of Parenthood Desires </H5>
  During this survey, we canvassed the parenthood desires of 
childbearing age married women in Chengde Prefecture. Analysis 
shows that even in the absence of the limitations of planned 
parenthood policy, 16.3 percent of those surveyed felt that a 
single child was enough; 68.7 percent felt two children were 
enough; and 12.8 percent felt three or more children were 
better. Another 2.2 percent had no opinion. Clearly, the desire 
for a single child was greater than for multiple births [as 
published]. This shows that even in the absence of the 
limitations of planned parenthood policy, 85 percent of the 
people's parenthood desires were consistent with the prevailing 
parenthood policy. Actually, it also tells us that the 
prevailing planned parenthood policy really restricts the 
parenthood desires of only approximately 13 percent of the 
people. As society and the economy develop, and with the 
intensification of planned parenthood propaganda, the 
coerciveness of the prevailing policy is no longer its main 
function. The parenthood requirements of the prevailing policy 
have become the codification of people's behavior. This change 
in parenthood desires shows that planned parenthood propaganda 
work in Chengde prefecture has truly wrought outstanding results. 
  The reasons given in the survey for the number of children 
desired show that 43.6 percent of those surveyed who want only a 
single child feel that many children mean heavy burdens and high 
expenses in rearing them; 35.6 percent feel that they cannot 
afford to rear many children; and 33.7 percent feel that they 
can do a better job of rearing fewer children. Among those 
surveyed who want two children, 59.1 percent gave as their 
reasons the economic one that "many children mean heavy 
burdens"; 35 percent felt that "one is two few, three are too 
many, but two are just right." Those wanting only one or two 
children accounted for 85 percent of the total population 
surveyed. Those giving economic reasons for fewer children were 
in the majority. This shows that they have already begun to 
think seriously about the effects of childbearing on family 
economic life and their own development. In addition, despite 
the decrease in the number of people giving "continuation of the 
family line by producing a male heir" as their childbearing 
goal; nevertheless, 49 percent wanted to have three children. 
  Results of the above analysis show that although traditional 
agriculture holds a dominant position in Chengde prefecture, and 
although peasant income remains very low, the phenomenon of the 
poorer the more children has not appeared here. During the 
course of the survey, we had a marked sense that childbearing 
ideas today have basically changed from having many children to 
having fewer but better cared for children. Below, we will try 
to analyze the influences that have changed the parenthood ideas 
of the local populace. 
<H5>  Atmosphere Surrounding Population Control in Chengde </H5>
  The change in the public outlook on having children is 
attributable to the understanding of the importance of planned 
parenthood work at every local government level. A distinctive 
atmosphere about population control exists in Chengde 
Prefecture. We will try to analyze it below in the following 
several regards. 
  1. Leaders' close attention to ideology. Close attention to 
ideology is an intangible part of planned parenthood work. Only 
when sufficiently close ideological attention is paid to planned 
parenthood work can cadres at all levels devote themselves to 
doing real deeds in planned parenthood work. Chengde 
prefecture's planned parenthood cadres diligently carried out 
the regulations pertaining to planned parenthood, setting up 
multi-purpose education schools to provide training and study. 
Party and government leaders at all levels personally took 
command to ensure good planned parenthood performance. They also 
established a planned parenthood day for the specific purpose of 
hearing reports, and for the prompt discovery and solving of 
problems. Government units at all levels gave first place to 
planned parenthood work. They gave priority to ensuring that 
funds and other material needs of planned parenthood work were 
provided, and they did all possible to provide conditions 
favorable to the conduct of planned parenthood work. 
Consequently, cadres were able to devote themselves to the work 
at hand without concern for extraneous matters. Administrative 
cadres in the prefecture frequently went into the countryside to 
check on the work of selected units and to listen to the views 
and complaints of grassroots level cadres and the public. They 
prescribed remedies as needed for timely solution to problems. 
Leading cadres at all levels showed deep affection for planned 
parenthood cadres and held them in high esteem. They provided 
them great respect and support. This stirred the initiative and 
the zeal of the planned parenthood cadres, stimulating them to 
clarify their personal responsibilities. It also made the public 
feel that the government was serious about planned parenthood 
work. 
  A survey of grassroots level planned parenthood cadres found 
that 10.5 percent of them felt that the motivation for their 
work came from the support that leaders provided. The public 
also said that this prefecture took firm action on planned 
parenthood work; 77.7 percent of the public saying that cadres 
visited them regularly. Clearly the cadres were concentrating on 
their work. 
  2. Scientific population control methods. The planned 
parenthood control organizations and various systems in being in 
Chengde prefecture provided the indispensable prerequisites for 
planned parenthood work. They emphasized propaganda first, 
providing the services required, and "working along many lines 
at the same time." Consequently, all aspects of planned 
parenthood work were performed level by level. 
  Standardization, systematization, and legislation are 
prerequisites for smooth conduct of planned parenthood work. 
All the areas we surveyed practiced a two-track leadership 
system (CPC committees directing CPC branches, CPC branches 
directing party members, and party members maintaining contact 
with individual households; government directing village 
committees, village committees directing the heads of key 
households, and the heads of key households maintaining contact 
with childbearing age women). It also practiced a four lines and 
one point control system (the "four lines" being the government 
administration line, the party administration line, the planned 
parenthood cadre line, and the association line; and the "one 
point" being childbearing age women). They established 
level-by-level control in which forces were concentrated and 
responsibilities spelled out, and they also instituted complete 
contract system control. Clear regulations were provided on 
marriage, childbearing, and the floating population, and these 
regulations had to be followed. A system was instituted for 
childbearing age women of a family visit once every 20 days, 
filing of a report every 30 days, a pregnancy inspection once 
every two months, a ring insertion once every three months, and 
a general check once every six months. Specific punishments were 
prescribed for violations of regulations, and these were linked 
to economic returns. 
  3. Propaganda and education that truly influences people. 
This is closely linked to the hard work of the grassroots 
planned parenthood cadres who go from door-to-door to work with 
childbearing age women, providing publicity and briefings about 
pertinent information. It is only because of this work that the 
survey results showed that it was through the propagandizing of 
planned parenthood cadres that 97.1 percent of people learned 
about the planned parenthood policy. We also found the same 
thing from a number of people surveyed who did not have much 
education, but who were rather well acquainted with the planned 
parenthood policy. 
  The main approach to planned parenthood in the prefecture 
surveyed was to "use poverty to cure poverty, the main sense of 
which was to use poverty as a means of convincing the public 
about planned parenthood. Every county and town emphasized 
investment in propaganda equipment. The survey found 
eye-catching slogans everywhere one looked in Chengde 
Prefecture. Everytime the public address system sounded in each 
village, everyone thought that a planned parenthood announcement 
was to be made. Propaganda teams roamed the villages showing 
movies and video cassettes that publicized the basics of planned 
parenthood and popularized basic knowledge. They used plain and 
easy to understand slogans like "if mountain region people want 
to get rich, they should have fewer children and plant more 
trees," which linked poverty to realities so that the peasants 
themselves could grasp the connotations of planned parenthood. 
  Survey results showed that 59.6 percent of the public had 
learned about planned parenthood from meetings and the 
organization of study, 31.0 percent learned about it from news 
media (radio broadcasts, television, and posters, 13.7 percent 
had learned about it from the above two means, 7.0 percent 
learned through events around them and their own experiences, 
and 2.9 percent learned about it from all of the above. 
  The survey found that cadres believed they devoted 64.9 
percent of their time to childbearing age women; 24.6 percent 
felt they devoted their time to both husbands and wives, 3.5 
percent spent their time on husbands and old people in the 
household, and 7.0 percent spent their time with all members of 
the family. 
  The above statistics show the difficulty of planned 
parenthood work, but one heartening matter is that the gains are 
equal to the effort made. Planned parenthood work has truly 
produced results. Virtually everyone has heard propaganda about 
the planned parenthood policy, and they understand planned 
parenthood work. As a public opinion tool, propaganda has 
played a mouthpiece role. Once the public understands this 
propaganda and internalizes it, very good results can be 
obtained. Once planned parenthood takes root in people's minds, 
the change in outlook on parenthood is not difficult to 
understand. 
  4. The effective work of cadres. The survey found cadres 
engaged in planned parenthood work to be conscientious, 
hardworking, highly responsible, and having a rather high 
professional caliber. Cooperation with them made us feel that 
the achievements made in planned parenthood work in Chengde 
prefecture are attributable to the high caliber of the planned 
parenthood corps. It is their hard work at the grassroots level 
that has translated scientific control methods into reality, and 
won outstanding results. 
  This survey of planned parenthood cadres shows 97 percent of 
them to be between 20 and 49 years of age; 72 percent of them 
have a junior middle school education or higher; and 28 percent 
have a primary school education. They also expressed delight 
about doing planned parenthood work. 
  Although planned parenthood cadre pay is low (better than 
the 
pay of nonplanned parenthood cadres, but affected by the level 
of overall economic development, and thus still fairly low), and 
though annual bonuses amount to only between 100 and 200 yuan, 
and cadres bear planned parenthood contract risks; nevertheless, 
the survey showed that despite the lack of inducements and care, 
100 percent of them still want to do planned parenthood work. 
Eighty percent of planned parenthood cadres said that their work 
motivation stems from a personal sense of responsibility and the 
country's need; 10.5 percent said it came from the support that 
leaders provide; and 3.5 percent said it came from the power the 
job conferred. (In the statistical tabulation, the three answers 
of national need, sense of responsibility, and benefit to the 
public overlapped). The family members of all planned parenthood 
cadres understood and support their relatives involvement in 
this sacred and arduous work. 
  The above survey results show a large cadre corps in the 
prime of life, having a high educational level (for the local 
area) a sense of responsibility, that takes the initiative in 
work, that is ideologically well-prepared, and that has strong 
backing. 
  The survey results show that 56.3 percent of the public 
feels 
that relations between the cadres and the public are very close, 
39.3 percent feel that relationships are all right or ordinary, 
and only 3.4 percent feel that relations are not good. This 
shows that the planned parenthood corps here has gained the 
respect and support of the public. The cadres may say proudly to 
everyone: "I do planned parenthood work." 
  5. Natural conditions and other. Chengde Prefecture is a 
mountainous prefecture of old, young, and poor people. One 
senses the warmth and honesty of the public here from their 
attitude in the public survey. If one presents the facts and 
reasons things out, they readily accept, displaying a very high 
ideological awareness. 
  The peasants in this area have lived in poverty for a long 
time. Their desire for and interest in escaping from poverty is 
extremely urgent. One can see from their hopes for their 
children that 95 percent of the peasants feel rural income is 
low and their social position is low. They urgently desire to 
change their own miserable fate. The people hope to be able to 
escape from poverty by having fewer children but rearing them 
well and by concentrating their energies. Thus, the lightening 
of family burdens is bound to be on their daily agenda of 
important things to do. Consequently, propaganda about using 
poverty to cure poverty, decreasing childbearing, and improving 
the economy strikes a very responsive chord with the public. A 
market and a climate for this propaganda exists. 
  Eighty-five percent of the public realize from their own 
personal experiences and reality of numerous children around 
them, heavy burdens, and many years of hardship that having many 
children holds back one's own development. They know that the 
lightening of the burden of rearing children, and saving 
opportunity costs has a very great influence on young husbands 
and wives. 
  This study found that 77.6 percent of the families in this 
prefecture are of the nuclear type, 20.3 percent are directly 
related families, and only 2.1 percent are joint families. 
Family parents who are in good health generally do not live with 
their sons and daughters but rather depend on the income that 
their own labor provides to live alone, unless one parent is 
dead and the other is feeble and thus has no choice but to live 
with the children. Children's main economic obligations to their 
parents are: to help the old ones by doing some farm work during 
the busy season, being responsible for some medical expenses, 
and being responsible for the old one's funeral expenses. There 
is little difference whether one has reared a son or a daughter. 
Social advances have improved the status of children, but the 
value of children to a family has declined greatly. The peasants 
are personally aware of the too high cost of rearing children; 
consequently, their feelings about expecting the children to 
look after them in their old age are not pressing. Only 2.8 
percent of the peasants wanted to rear children as a defense 
against old age, while 10.2 percent wanted to raise fewer 
children well. Another 4.2 percent linked their personal welfare 
and the state's welfare out of consideration for the needs of 
the country. Better rearing of a smaller number of children has 
increasingly become a trend in rural childbearing behavior. 
  The elderly bear historical witness to the changes in local 
social life. The rich experience of the aged provide us data for 
a comparison of changes in the past and present standard of 
living. A survey of the elderly shows that 77.5 percent feel 
that the present standard of living has risen greatly, and 19.6 
percent feel it has improved and is more affluent that formerly. 
At the same time, in the process of understanding the substance 
of planned parenthood, 47.6 percent of the public obtained 
information through the media (radio broadcasts and television). 
This also shows that durable consumer goods such as television 
sets have entered peasant families. This shows that the rural 
standard of living has improved generally enabling the peasants 
to advance to improve their living standards. Seeing the clash 
of urban cultural and urban ways of life and value concepts, 
people have begun to wise up. They have begun to open their eyes 
and look at the world with the result that their thinking has 
changed. The huge difference between the development of cities 
and the poverty of this area has made the urban cultural impact 
more poignant. The peasants have begun to be dissatisfied with a 
subsistence standard of living. They hope to get out from under 
the limitations of their miserable peasant status. They want to 
throw down their "mud rice bowls" and stride with a brand new 
outlook toward a truly cultured life. 
  A survey of future expectations for their children shows 
that 
95 percent of peasants feel that "so long as they do not farm, 
it will be all right." Of these, 53.8 percent hoped that their 
children would go to college. The peasants know that lack of 
education hampers them. They hope that their children will be 
able to escape from farming, that they will have high income and 
a corresponding status, and that they will become the cultured 
persons that they now envy. 
  Although the survey showed that 12.8 percent wanted to have 
many children, even they expressed approval of the prevailing 
planned parenthood policy. Granted that many of them were 
deterred by the strict systematic control and severe penalties, 
they also revealed awareness of the rural contradiction between 
a large population and little land, and worried about their own 
ability to provide support. At the same time, among those 
supporting the policy, most had a psychology of vying with each 
other and going along with the flow, a psychology of "fish must 
swim, birds must fly and people must breathe till they finally 
die," and a psychology of whatever others may do, they will make 
no criticism. Understanding and guiding the direction of the 
main stream is extremely crucial in planned parenthood work, but 
one cannot neglect to apply the spur in time to those who go 
along with the flow. [passage omitted) 

