BFN 

<F P=106> [Address to the nation by President Hastings Kamuzu Banda in </F>
Blantyre on 16 May -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Bwanas and donas [Gentlemen and ladies], good 
evening. 
  It has been necessary for me to appeal once again for peace 
and calm because I have just heard that in certain areas in 
Nsanje there has been some shooting. There are also reports that 
certain people are intimidating others so that they should be 
scared to go to vote. 
  Tomorrow, 17th May, is the election day we have all been 
waiting for. Malawians will be going to vote for members of 
Parliament and for the president who shall govern this country 
for the next five years. Once again, let me remind all of you 
that voting in any election is not an acquired privilege but a 
valuable and an essential human right. I urge you all to 
exercise that right. You must therefore come out in large 
numbers to vote. Your vote is very important because it can 
make a difference on how this country will be governed in the 
next five years. 
  We have eight different political parties that are 
contesting 
in this election. Leaders of four of these parties are 
contesting the presidency. No doubt most of you have already 
decided on the parliamentary and presidential candidate that you 
are going to vote for. In a democratic process of this nature, 
there have to be both losers and winners in the end. You must 
remember that regardless of the outcome of the polling for your 
party we are all Malawians and must work together for a better 
Malawi after the elections. It will be a matter of great pride 
for us all if we can emerge from this election with that spirit. 
In fact, we can all be considered winners if we can achieve 
such a peaceful and constructive objective after 17th May, 
because many such elections everywhere have ended up in 
disasters. 
  I therefore want to thank you for having maintained peace 
and 
calm during the campaign period. I want to ask you to remain 
peaceful and calm during the voting process tomorrow. No one 
should intimidate members of other political parties; everyone 
who registered should be left free to vote for parliamentary and 
presidential candidates of their choice. 
  The police and the Army will ensure that there is no 
breakdown of law and order to allow free and fair voting 
tomorrow. Please make sure that everyone, especially women, are 
protected and not intimidated by anyone. 
  I appeal to all Malawians to prove to the world through this 
election that we are politically mature and that we can behave 
like civilized ladies and gentlemen. We have already been 
commended for the (?peace) and efficient management of our 
(?transition) processes. Let the same international community 
now respect us for a completely nonviolent election day and for 
continuing political stability thereafter. 
  Let me thank the National Consultative Council for having 
guided this country during the transitional period. They did a 
good job under sometimes very difficult circumstances. Let me 
also thank the Electoral Commission for having taken this 
country through the necessary preparatory steps for this 
election. It was a difficult task. Finally, let me thank the 
international community for their material and technical support 
which will enable us to hold this election tomorrow. Some of 
the achievements we have made during our recent political 
development would have been difficult if not impossible without 
their support. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, this is all I have to say to you this 
evening. I wish you all a happy and memorable voting day 
tomorrow. Thank you very much. 

