CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA correspondent Vitaliy Denisov </F>
under the "Events and Comments" rubric: "Peace Arrives; 
Continuation of War Deemed Impossible"] 
  [Text] The end of March was marked by further escalation of 
the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict. According to Abkhazian sources, 
the Abkhazians' offensive was crowned by their taking certain 
populated localities and establishing complete control of the 
Kodorskiy Pass. At the same time, the Ministry of Defense Press 
Center of the Georgian Republic is not entirely clear in its 
statement regarding the skirmishes occurring there. 
  Georgian state head Eduard Shevardnadze, refuting to some 
extent the reports of his own Ministry of Defense, stated in a 
parliamentary session that in the last several days there has 
been a definite stabilization of the situation in Abkhazian 
Svanetia. He stressed that "Georgian authorities have not 
exhibited any military initiative." The republic intends to 
maintain a peaceful course until it exhausts all possibilities 
of a peaceful settlement. 
  In this connection, it pays to keep in mind that Tbilisi at 
first awaited an "historic resolution by the U.N." However, 
hopes for active intercession by this organization in the 
settlement process have not been realized. The U.N. 
secretary-general closed his report to the Security Council with 
the conclusion that conditions do not presently exist for the 
deployment of U.N. peacekeeping forces in Abkhazia. 
  Tbilisi's attempt to resolve the Abkhazian problem with as 
little bloodshed as possible and, essentially, by the use of 
outside forces, is understandable, since Georgia is simply 
incapable of waging a war due to political, economic, and a 
number of other factors. 
  It is presently difficult to say what further actions the 
Georgian authorities will take. However, it is obvious that they 
have no appetite for reinstituting large-scale combat 
activities. Hence the insistent petitioning of the Russian 
leadership, which will react, as Tbilisi expects, in a more 
positive manner compared to that of the world community. Hence 
the quite open discussion of the possible outcome: Abkhazia's 
becoming a Russian protectorate, one in which a military 
presence will be virtually legitimized. 
  It is true that experts do not exclude another possibility. 
The insertion of Russian peacekeeping forces into Abkhazia will 
not be detrimental to the Georgian Republic's sovereignty and 
its territorial integrity. This may also cool the ardor of the 
Gudauta leaders and force them to seek compromises at the 
conference table, since the last rounds of talks produced 
virtually nothing positive. In any event, the essential 
consideration is that Georgia is willing to sacrifice quite a 
bit to avoid waging a new large-scale and bloody war. 

