Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Salonika, Greece, Feb 15 (AFP)--Eggs were hurled at 
the U.S. consulate here whose shutters stayed closed as tens of 
thousands of demonstrators protested Tuesday [15 February] 
against Washington's recognition of Macedonia. 
  Led by Greek Orthodox priests, they gathered at the church 
of 
Ayia Sofia to march to the consulate behind Greek flags and 
crosses. Orthodox Metropolitan Pandeleimon read a statement 
attacking President Bill Clinton's "criminal act" and the 
"indecent behaviour" of the United States. 
  Athens is fighting a losing battle against the international 
recognition of the former Yugoslav republic, which it claims has 
expansionist aims. It says only Greece's northern province can 
bear the name of Macedonia. 
  Most European Community countries decided to have diplomatic 
links with Skopje in December, the United States followed suit 
last week, while the latest was Australia Tuesday. Russia has 
also taken a similar step. 
  Many students who had been bussed into Thessaloniki while 
their schools were closed took part in Tuesday's march. Similar 
but smaller protests were staged in other towns of northern 
Greece, like Drama, east of here, where mayor Maiyaritis Tsimas 
personally removed the name of Franklin Roosevelt Street. 
  "I have no idea of the size of the demonstration but many 
people braved an intense cold with great national fervour," 
Thessaloniki police chief Ioannis Karakondinis said. 
  Pandeleimon, a strong nationalist and religious 
fundamentalist, prayed at a religious ceremony for "God in his 
infinite wisdom to enlighten Clinton so that he changes his 
anti-Greek policy." 
  The ceremony was attended by the minister for the Greek 
provinces of Macedonia and Thrace, Kostas Triaridhis, who was 
present in a non-official capacity, and many politicians sent 
supportive messages, including government spokesman Evangelos 
Venizelos, a member of parliament for Macedonia. 

