BFN 

  [Excerpts] Hanoi, June 17 (AFP) -- Vietnam on Friday 
hardened its stance against China in the war of words over the 
South China Sea, saying Beijing had illegally given a US firm 
oil prospecting rights in a Vietnamese area that was not even 
part of the disputed Spratly Islands. 
  In response to Chinese accusations that Vietnam had been 
harassing its oil survey vessels, a Foreign Ministry statement 
said the area in question was entirely within Vietnam's 
exclusive economic zone and had been never been part of the 
Spratly Islands. 
  The statement implicitly denied any harassment of Chinese 
vessels, saying that Vietnam had only been carrying out 
legitimate survey work completely within its rights. 
  "China should not make declarations or carry out acts that 
violate Vietnam's incontestable sovereignty over this area," the 
statement said, adding that this would not help efforts to 
improve relations or secure peace in the region. 
  Vietnam has accused China of acting illegally by granting 
Crestone Energy Corp. a concession to explore in a huge swathe 
of the South China Sea that includes what the Vietnamese call 
the Tu Chinh area. 
  "Declarations that the Tu Chinh area lies within the 
maritime 
zone of the Spratly Islands and China's signature of an oil 
exploration contract with Crestone run contrary to legal 
principles and international conventions, in particular the 1982 
Law of the Sea," the statement said. 
  Vietnam's parliament is expected to ratify the UN maritime 
law during its session this month in a move seen as boosting 
Hanoi's legal arsenal in the dispute. [passage omitted covered 
by referent item] 
  Both sides have repeatedly pledged to resolve the dispute 
over the Spratly and Paracel islands through negotiations and 
avoid a repetition of the brief naval clash they fought in 1988. 
  But stepped up oil exploration across the area and new 
technology that enables oil firms to drill cheaper wells in deep 
waters is threatening to complicate the problem. 
  Oil firms here have downplayed the risk of confrontation, 
saying that they are more concerned over whether the promising 
geology under the South China Sea will actually yield commercial 
quantities of oil and gas. 
  "You're not going to see gunboats out there firing at each 
other," said one oil executive who insisted on anonymity, adding 
that he thought the dispute was mostly "shadow playing." 

