BFN 

<F P=106> [By Suphaphon Kanwirayothin] </F>
  [Text] Hanoi -- Vietnam is preparing a draft law on 
narcotics which it hopes can be passed by Parliament next year 
with a view to coping with the rise in drug abuse and 
international drug trafficking, according to a senior official. 
  In the meantime, the Government is stepping up efforts to 
deal with the unprecedented surge in drug abuse in major cities 
as well as the cross-border opium trade with Laos and China. 
  Minister Hoang Duc Nghi, who chairs the National Committee 
for Ethnic Minorities and Mountainous Areas recently visited 
Thailand, Burma and Indonesia to discuss "measures of 
cooperation" with neighboring countries to fight illicit drugs. 
  Vietnam has no laws on narcotics to date. Drug abuse is 
currently classified as a form of "social ill" and users are 
"rehabilitated" rather than punished. Only drug trafficking is 
considered a "crime". 
  There is widespread drug abuse in major cities such as Hanoi 
and Ho Chi Minh City, and authorities are worried that Vietnam 
has become a favored transit point for drug shipments to the 
United States and western Europe. 
  "International drug traffickers abuse the loose controls in 
Vietnam. We were informed by Interpol that money laundering has 
taken place in Vietnam, and we have in fact discovered some 
cases," said Deputy Minister Xuan of the National Committee for 
Ethnic Minorities and Mountainous Areas. 
  While opium growing and addiction are prevalent among ethnic 
minorities in northern border provinces, police have detected 
larger quantities of heroin in circulation. Cocaine has also 
already appeared in Vietnam. 
  Deputy Minister Xuan said authorities in one case arrested a 
cocaine trafficker in Ho Chi Minh City, and in another 
intercepted the drug which originated from Latin America as it 
arrived at Qui Nhon port in Binh Dinh province. 
  Police reports from Germany, Russia and Canada indicate some 
narcotics that showed up in their countries transmitted in 
Vietnam, he said. [sentence as published] 
  As requested by Interpol, Vietnam has recently helped 
extradite an ethnic Vietnamese with American nationality wanted 
by US authorities on drug trafficking charges. He was hiding 
and suspected of laundering money in Vietnam. "In 1993 we also 
extradited many others through cooperation with Interpol." 
  Vietnam has sentenced one foreigner to death, the first such 
sentence last year, and so far capital punishment has been 
handed down on three drug traffickers. 
  Closer to home, Vietnam has seen more frequent and larger 
amounts of opium moving through the country from Laos. The 
drugs either remain in Vietnam or are being directed to China. 
  Deputy Minister Xuan said Vietnam only recently became aware 
of the "serious extent of the problem" when Hanoi tightened 
police and customs checks at three official crossings with 
Laos--in Tay Trang in Lai Chau province opposite Phong Saly, 
Song Ma in Son La province across from Houa Phan and Ky Son in 
Nghe An province opposite Xieng Khouang. 
  "It's very difficult to monitor what's going on in countless 
other unofficial border crossings," he said. 
  Vietnamese authorities suspect some drugs from the Golden 
Triangle, seeking to avoid tight controls in China at that part 
of the border, have eventually gone to China anyway through 
Vietnam. 
  He said the route spans from Laos into Lai Chau province, 
then to Hanoi and on to Lang Son which borders China's Yunnan 
province. 
  In Vietnam itself, Mr Xuan said there were currently 3,770 
hectares of opium growing area, as against 12,878 hectares in 
1992-1993 due to government suppression and "tactics of 
persuasion" among ethnic minorities, especially the Hmong, to 
plant cash crops. 
  The anti-drug draft law in the making will unify all matters 
related to illicit drugs including those absent or scattered in 
different orders, decrees, criminal codes. 
  Experts from the United Nations Drug Control Program are due 
in Hanoi soon to help the Vietnamese draft a master plan to 
combat narcotics abuse and trafficking, the subject of a 
national program, according to Mr Xuan. 
  Vietnam is also studying the possibility of acceding to the 
1961 Convention on Illicit Drugs. The Government has appointed 
an interagency committee to study the issue. 
  "My opinion is that Vietnam should join this convention as 
soon as possible. We hesitated in the past because we did not 
have much knowledge of the issue," he said. 

