BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] A spokesperson for the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry 
says that Thanh Long Sea area lies entirely under Vietnam's 
sovereignty. On this issue, our radio editor has this to say: 
  In recent days, many activities have been taken by a number 
of countries which have complicated the situation in the Truong 
Sa [Spratly] Archipelago and on Vietnam's continental shelf. 
  Despite the Vietnamese Government's statements on its 
continental shelf and special economic zone, the Creston Company 
of the United States on 8 May 1992 signed an agreement on oil 
and gas exploration with a Chinese company in an area they 
called Wananbei-21, which is in fact the Tu Chinh area of 
Vietnam. The Vietnamese Government immediately voiced its 
protest, considering the move a violation of Vietnam's 
sovereignty, but it ignored Vietnam's statement. On 18 April 
1994, Creston again announced a seismic survey in the area. 
Foreign reports on 10 May quoted a spokesman for the Chinese 
Foreign Ministry saying that the Thanh Long Sea area belongs to 
the adjacent waters of Nansha Island, which is in fact Vietnam's 
Truong Sa Archipelago. He even said that the exploration 
contract signed between Vietnam and the Mobil Oil Company was 
illegal. 
  On the question of Truong Sa and Tu Chinh, the Vietnamese 
Government has many times affirmed that they are under Vietnam's 
sovereignty. At a press conference in Hanoi on 5 May, a 
spokesperson of the Vietnam Foreign Ministry said: Vietnam has 
enough historical and legal documents proving its sovereignty 
over Truong Sa Archipelago. Therefore, foreign activities of 
exploration and exploitation of natural resources of Truong Sa 
area without the permit of Vietnam are acts of violation of its 
sovereignty. 
  On the settlement of disputes, Vietnam has on many occasions 
stated that disputes should be settled in the spirit of 
equality, mutual understanding, and mutual respect in accordance 
with international law and the Convention on the Maritime Law of 
1982, and in respect of the sovereignty of all countries over 
exclusive economic zones and continental shelves. All parties 
concerned should restrain themselves not to further complicate 
the situation, use violence, or threat to use violence. Vietnam 
is persistent on this line. As for Tu Chinh, Vietnam affirms 
that it lies within Vietnam's exclusive economic zone and 
continental shelf, entirely under Vietnam's sovereignty. 
Vietnam has the sovereign right to explore for and exploit 
natural resources in this area by itself or in cooperation with 
other foreign countries, the right which no other country may 
interfere. Tu Chinh and Thanh Long are in no way related to the 
Truong Sa Archipelago or the adjacent waters. Any statement or 
any contrary act to these principles is illegal and runs counter 
to the international law. 

