BFN 

  [Text] President Fidel V. Ramos on Monday night invited 
communist party leader Wilma Austria-Tiamzon to help the 
government in its efforts to build lasting peace in the country 
by joining the peace process. The president personally conveyed 
this message to Tiamzon at the Philippine Heart Center in Quezon 
City, 11:30 PM. 
  Tiamzon who was captured by the Philippine National Police 
last 4 May was ordered transferred to the Heart Center by 
President Ramos last Thursday for humanitarian reasons. The 
Chief Executive went to the hospital to visit Environment and 
Natural Resources Secretary Angel Alcala who underwent a bypass 
operation last 10 May. He stayed at Secretary Alcala's room for 
15 minutes. 
  While in the hospital, President Ramos decided to drop by 
Tiamzon's room to inform her that he had earlier instructed 
Justice Secretary Franklin Drilon to order the provincial 
prosecutor in Quezon province to file the appropriate motion 
with the Regional Trial Court [RTC] there for her release. The 
president told Tiamzon and I quote, I have already instructed 
Secretary Drilon to order the provincial prosecutor in Quezon 
province to take the necessary steps so that you can be freed. 
Please, join the peace process, unquote. 
  Tiamzon is reportedly suffering from hypertension and 
asthma. 
Tiamzon is facing two cases of kidnapping and serious illegal 
detention before the RTC Lucena City. President Ramos explained 
to her that it will be the court that will order her release, 
adding that the government will not object to it, provided that 
she will be turned over to a responsible citizens' group. The 
president said Tiamzon and her lawyers will have to meet with 
Ambassador Howard Dee, chairman of the government panel for 
talks with the CPP-NPA-NDF [Communist Party of the 
Philippines-New People's Army-National Democratic Front] to 
choose the organization that will take care of her. He also 
informed Tiamzon that the Catholic Bishops Conference of the 
Philippines and the National Council of Churches in the 
Philippines have expressed their willingness to take her into 
their custody. The president also clarified that since she is 
being released on recognizance, she will post no bail. Mr. Ramos 
pointed out and I quote, you can still stay here in the hospital 
after you are released to an institution that you have already 
been their responsibility, unquote. [sentence as heard] 
  On the appeal of Mrs. Tiamzon to dismiss all the charges 
against her, Secretary Drilon said the release on recognizance 
is only the first act. The dismissal of the case will have to 
be discussed. The president assured Tiamzon of due process in 
the disposition of her cases. The president talked with CPP 
leader for about five minutes. 

