BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Ernesto Samper, presidential candidate for the </F>
Liberal Party of Colombia, on 5 May; place not given -- live 
with recorded video presentation] 
  [Text] Good evening, Colombians. Colombia is experiencing 
one of those times in history when our dreams can come true. 
During President Cesar Gaviria's Liberal government, we 
adopted a new constitution, we began internationalizing our 
economy, and we began to dismantle narco-terrorism, thus 
demonstrating to the world that we are not the perpetrator but 
the main victim of this worldwide plague. Our destiny cannot be 
condemned to backwardness. We can succeed if we make a 
faithful, courageous commitment. But we still have a long way 
to go. Colombians continue to demand change. I will work 
unceasingly to make those changes. I hope to do so with the 
support of a modern, dynamic liberalism, free of the influence 
peddling and patronage of the past; a liberalism that is 
socially committed to a young, dynamic, and moral government, 
which is, above all, pledged to the social development of the 
Colombian people. 
  During my administration, we will begin the social phase of 
economic openness. We will put our heart and soul into this 
opening process and work to create jobs, social investment, and 
projects that will bring progress. That is why I chose Humberto 
de la Calle as my running mate for this great task of renewal. 
His experience during the Constituent Assembly, his management 
of the matters of state, and his unblemished career as an honest 
man are the guarantees I offer all Colombians. You have the 
opportunity to vote for a ticket that is not the result of 
improvisation but of serious reflection about who his truly 
capable of blazing a sure path to the future for all Colombians. 
  Other important members of the community will accompany us 
in 
this endeavor. Their support has been confirmed and 
consolidated in what we call the Alliance for Colombia. 
Progressive conservatives, the National Popular Alliance, 
Christians, Indians, Negroes, peasants, representatives of the 
left-wing democratic movements, and people with no party 
affiliation have enthusiastically answered our call to forge 
this great alliance and bring about profound social change. 
They who have never been given enough space to make their 
demands heard are the true spokespersons of that new Colombia. 
Their voices shall be heard for the first time, and they will 
feel a part of this country that had turned its back on them for 
so many years. 
  With your support, fellow Colombians, we will move together 
to take that giant social leap through the creation of more and 
better productive jobs. Employment is a requirement for peace. 
To decrease insecurity in our cities we must provide our youth 
with jobs. To prevent the countryside from being a fertile 
ground for criminals, we must support our peasants. Therefore, 
I pledge to generate 1.5 million new productive jobs. All of 
the efforts we have made over the past few years to modernize 
the economy will be futile if we fail to ensure that the 
benefits of openness reach the people -- the people of Colombia. 
Thus, I pledge to invest in education, health and housing, and 
especially to invest in women -- those with the greatest needs 
and greatest burdens. I will pay the social debt that Colombian 
society has owed its women for too many years. 
  My fellow Colombians, I am optimistic about Colombia's 
future. Colombia is the best place in the world to be born, to 
grow up, and to live with our children. I invite you to share 
this optimism with me. As you well know, thanks to God's mercy, 
I was given a second chance in life. I want to dedicate that 
second chance to work. With your support, I want to work so 
many more Colombians can have at least a single chance to 
progress in peace and justice. 
  Now I would like to show you a documentary that I have 
presented at more than 45 universities across the country. It 
explains some of my campaign's main proposals. 
  [Begin recording] [First unidentified speaker] We need to 
work. 
  [Second unidentified speaker] I haven't heard anything. 
  [Third unidentified speaker] There is no work in the field 
of 
mathematics. 
  [Second speaker] I haven't heard anything. 
  [Fourth unidentified speaker] Opportunities are sometimes 
rather scarce, aren't they? 
  [Second speaker] There is plenty of unemployment. 
  [Fifth unidentified speaker] Well, the job did not work out. 
  [Sixth unidentified speaker] Work? Selling strawberries and 
peaches. 
  [Seventh unidentified speaker] It is impossible to get a job 
these days. 
  [Eighth unidentified speaker] They have too many 
requirements. 
  [Ninth unidentified speaker] It is not easy to get a job in 
this field, so I am doing something very different now. 
  [Unidentified announcer] Unemployment will be the most 
pressing problem of the next century. In addition to the 
unemployed, there are also so-called informal workers in 
Colombia. They do have work, but under very difficult 
conditions. This phenomenon affects the young in particular. 
The unemployment rate among young adults is twice the national 
rate. 
  [Samper] Among the problems we face today, none is as 
important as unemployment. The solution to unemployment is the 
same solution to many other problems. The lack of public safety 
is related to unemployment. Problems on Colombian farmlands 
have plenty to do with unemployment. That is why I have 
promised to create 1.5 million jobs. I will do it with the 
following plans: 
  The difference between peace and war is at stake in the 
Colombian countryside. By giving subsidies back to farmers, I 
hope to create 120,000 new jobs in the agricultural sector in 
the next four years. 
  Colombia has extensive experience in the development of 
small 
enterprises. We have 1.2 million small enterprises, and we are 
going to make the most significant effort that any government 
has ever made to create 350,000 small businesses in the next 
four years. 
  We are going to help major businesses improve product 
quality, update technology, and reach the international market 
under truly competitive conditions. 
  Where there is no infrastructure, there can be no opening. 
Economic openness without ports, railroads, or highways is no 
openness at all. That is why we must make an enormous effort to 
develop our infrastructure with an investment of over $3 billion 
and by creating 100,000 jobs. 
  Economic openness has to be a two-way street. We buy from 
those countries that buy from us. It must be based on 
reciprocity. We will double our exports, which will allow us to 
create about 250,000 more jobs, within the same four-year period. 
  [First unidentified student] The technology at my university 
is about 20 years old. 
  [Second unidentified student] There is no place for 
scientific research. 
  [Third unidentified student] We need financial support to do 
things at the same level as the more developed countries. 
  [Fourth unidentified student] It is easier to make a 
satellite connection with some other country in the south than 
it is to make a microwave call to Monteria. 
  [Fifth unidentified student] I do not think the universities 
are producing professionals that meet the needs of the job 
market. 
  [Announcer] Whether a country is more or less advanced than 
others does not depend solely on how much money it has in its 
reserves or how rich it is in natural resources. It also 
depends on the degree of development of its educational and 
technological system. 
  [Samper] Today's world is no longer divided into the haves 
and the have-nots but among those who are educated and those who 
are not. We do not have education here. I intend to increase 
spending on science and technology from the current 0.6 percent 
to 2 percent by the end of my administration. Technology must 
be included in the education system. 
  I am going to create 200,000 apprenticeships so those high 
school graduates who are unable to enroll at a university can 
have practical training in the workplace, with a theoretical 
complement offered by the state through a new SENA [National 
Apprenticeship Service]. The investment we are going to make to 
better train people in Colombia will translate into better jobs 
for many Colombians, particularly young people. 
  [First unidentified speaker] Nobody takes care of or cares 
about our resources and the environment. 
  [Second unidentified speaker] Large industries are 
polluting. 
  [Third unidentified speaker] The environment is being 
destroyed. 
  [Fourth unidentified speaker] Most people are destroying the 
trees, animals, and everything. 
  [Fifth unidentified speaker] People have destroyed part of 
life. 
  [Sixth unidentified speaker] The peso sign is what is 
destroying the environment. 
  [Seventh unidentified speaker] Forests are being destroyed 
every day, and nobody says anything. 
  [Announcer] It is time to realize the damage we are doing to 
our environment. By destroying the woods, polluting rivers, and 
destroying life in natural reserves, we are also destroying the 
quality of life for Colombians of the 21st century. Those 
Colombians will be our children and our grandchildren. 
  [Samper] Do you know how many hectares of woods are 
destroyed 
in Colombia every minute? One hectare. That means 600,000 
hectares annually, and we only plant 14,000 hectares annually. 
That is why the environmental policy must be aimed first at 
creating an environmental awareness among children. Our defense 
of the environment must come from a commitment to solve what I 
consider the great ecological catastrophes of Colombia: the 
pollution of the Bay of Cartagena, the destruction of the Sierra 
Nevada de Santa Marta, the renewal of the Madgalena River as a 
vital artery in our ecosystem, the defense of the Sierra La 
Macarena, and the protection of the forests in Choco and 
Amazonia Departments. 
  In my government, all companies that pollute will have to 
pay 
for the damage they have done to society so we can improve and 
restore the environment. 
  [Unidentified speaker] There is corruption in every aspect 
of 
society. 
  [Second unidentified speaker] Corruption is an everyday 
thing 
here. 
  [Third unidentified speaker] We need more honesty. 
  [Fourth unidentified speaker] Corruption hides behind some 
neckties. 
  [Announcer] The great problem of our democracy is 
corruption. 
To enable the state to assume its great responsibilities, we 
need to eradicate corruption, illegal enrichment, and the 
immorality that has permeated public administration. 
  [Samper] Corruption eats at night what a society achieves 
during the day. That is why I have presented an anticorruption 
statute which, unlike other statutes, commits citizens to the 
struggle against corruption, because it is a challenge and a 
problem that belongs to everyone. We have issued a code of 
ethics for my campaign. It is being executed by an ethics 
administrator. This code of ethics begins by establishing 
ethical limitations on myself and on my campaign. If we give 
jobs to youths, they will not have to join the People's 
Militias. If we give jobs to peasants, they will not join the 
ranks of subversion, nor will they have to smuggle drugs 
overseas. For me, employment is the new word for peace. [end 
recording] 

