BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of an interview with Prime Minister Sitiveni </F>
Rabuka by senior writer Vasiti Waqa; place, date not given] 
  [Text] On Fiji being a leading nation in the 
region: 
  A lot of people think we are the leading nation in the 
Pacific. It has not been by design, it has been by the 
unalterable facts of geography, our own geography, our own 
position as being in the hub of the Pacific. We are in a 
position where we can play a vital role in these communication 
links. Therefore it will be in our interests to promote cordial 
relationships between our neighboring territories and our 
neighboring continents, so that they conduct their business 
amicably and we therefore benefit by the fact of our position. 
  On claims that Fiji's presence at regional gatherings has 
been Maybe we have just reassessed our participation. I 
believe our efforts are still the same, whether they may not be 
as high profile as they used to be. Probably there's 
personality differences. Whereas when Ratu Sir Kamisese (Mara) 
was there he was always the focus of attention. But now we are 
all there, more as equals. During his time, people sort of kept 
away from him. Now we gather and we find that we are able to 
conduct ourselves comfortably with each other. There is no 
generation gap, there is no cultural gap. 
  On what Fiji can do to boost trade with and between 
smaller island states: 
  At the Honiara Forum I mentioned that we were in a position 
to be able to help and right now we are in the process of 
finalizing a memorandum of understanding on fisheries and also 
on handicrafts with Tuvalu. I have also offered the Kiribati 
government a six to 12-month rent free accommodation if they 
wish to set up an embassy here. We had promised that we would 
help with the Kanak education fund. We are ready to help 
smaller Pacific Islands neighbors. We have done away with the 
visa fees for students, and those are the little things that we 
can do but they mean a lot. 
  On why Fiji is taking time to join the Melanesian 
Spearhead Group: 
  Because we do not want to join something that might break up 
the bigger community of the Pacific, particularly the Forum. 
They, the Melanesian group, might feel that they have common 
problems, Fiji might identify with some of those problems. But 
we also have problems that are felt by the Micronesian and the 
Polynesian people. So we feel that if there is nothing concrete 
that we can get out of it then we should not jump into it. Our 
manufacturers are saying it is now very difficult to go into the 
PNG [Papua New Guinea] market because they have special deals 
with the Melanesian Spearhead Groupings and different ones for 
us who are not in that group. Those are things that we will have 
to consider. 
  On whether Fiji is likely to pursue a "look north" 
policy similar to that of PNG: 
  I said that in 1987. Where else can we look? They (PNG) 
look north because north is where the market is, the sources 
are, and we will have to look that way also. We know that we 
have been looking west, towards Australia. And towards New 
Zealand. Our horizon is now getting broader and broader. The 
world is getting smaller. We have non-stop flights to Asia and 
it is only natural that we should also look north. 
  On frequent accusations that Fiji is trying to 
control the regional University of the South Pacific [USP]: 
  Our government contributes most financially to the USP. We 
also have the largest number of students. Perhaps it is because 
of that reality that the smaller island nations who do not have 
as many students there as we do, perhaps do not contribute as 
much as we do, feel that Fiji has got a heavy handed attitude 
towards the Pacific and that we want to control it. I wish we 
could control it. But we can't. We have tried to be sensitive 
to the perception of our regional neighbors and we have always 
conducted our business with the USP with the utmost discretion 
so that we do not offend or do not fan this flame of this 
perception that we feel that USP is a household item of the 
nation of Fiji. We want the University to continue to be a 
regional institution of higher learning and we want it to 
continue to contribute. 
  On relations with New Zealand: 
  New Zealand will never have the same understanding that we 
would like to have foreign governments have about our situation 
in Fiji. And it is wrong for us to expect them to have the same 
understanding because they belong to a different culture. For 
someone like Mr (Don) MacKinnon (New Zealand foreign minister) 
to get up and say what he said, he would have said it in good 
faith, he would have said it because that is what is acceptable 
in New Zealand to say, acceptable internationally to say, but 
for Fiji it is a very sensitive issue, that he does not see as a 
sensitive issue in Fiji, the way we see it. And that is why we 
had that minor exchange where we said: 'Well, don't try and 
come and tell us what to do when you can't even do what you're 
supposed to be doing to your own people.' And he will probably 
feel, 'Oh what do you know about what is happening here in New 
Zealand?' I feel that our relations, between Fiji and New 
Zealand, are so strong that differences in views like that will 
not affect them. 
  On inviting India to reopen its embassy in Fiji: 
  We must realize that there has not been any severance of 
diplomatic relations, just the closing down of the embassy and 
it was because of the personalities involved... (The) ambassador 
here, was conducting some activities that were seen to be 
outside the scope of his duties, as far as the international 
protocols are concerned, the conduct of diplomatic relations and 
duties, therefore he had to be asked to leave. They went a step 
further and closed down. 
  On renewing ties with the Commonwealth: 
  You will probably recall that in 1987, after the coup, the 
Bose Levu Vakaturaga (Great Council of Chiefs) passed a 
six-point resolution, one of them was the production of a new 
constitution, and among those other five was that attempts be 
made to reestablish our links with the Commonwealth. And this 
was brought out in his excellency's address (Ratu Sir Kamisese 
Mara's speech at the opening session of parliament). We were 
hoping that we might have some of our friends talking in our 
favor at the last Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference in 
Kuala Lumpur. Nothing really came out of that. Now we are 
looking to next year in New Zealand. Our expectations were 
knocked back a few steps by Don MacKinnon's statement, so I am 
not very optimistic that we are going to gain very much ground 
between now and 1995. It is not fair for us to expect these 
governments who have been talking about our constitution to 
suddenly say 'O.K, come in' while now we are in the process of 
reviewing our constitution. 
  On whether Fiji has been lobbying to get back into the 
Commonwealth: 
  We are not lobbying. I personally believe that we should 
leave it. By our very own actions sort out our own internal 
problems, show the international community, particularly the 
Commonwealth community that we are responsible enough to address 
our own problems which they perceive to be one that is against 
humanity and one that is against a race. Let us solve that and 
show to them that we are a responsible nation. 
  On the future of Fiji's peacekeeping troops in the 
Sinai and Lebanon: 
  The peacekeeping situation in Sinai and Lebanon we might be 
able to call an expenditure neutral activity because we are 
reimbursed the amount of money we spend to mount those two 
battalions. They are serving a very useful purpose, not only in 
keeping our young men occupied and employed but we are showing 
to the world that we are serious about the UN's attempt to 
maintain a peaceful globe. We will continue to do so as long as 
we are welcome and I think that the reputation that we have 
established and maintained is such a very high standard that we 
will continue to be welcome. 
  On whether the United States has done enough to start 
the Joint Commercial Commission: 
  Nothing has really happened since the last time we spoke 
about it, and these things take time perhaps. Because of the 
big machinery of the United States, it probably takes longer 
than for us smaller economies, smaller governments to get things 
going. No I cannot say that because it might be taken as 
criticizing the United States because they have not done enough. 
Maybe they are waiting for us in the Pacific to come out and 
say, look do it this way, we want it this way, rather than be 
seen as the big brother handing out sweets that you don't need. 
They have taken a step back and sort of waited for us to come 
forward and say this is the way we want it because this is the 
way it will work for us. 
  On his views on the movement for the freedom of Irian 
Jaya (West Papua) from Indonesia: 
  We have to be very careful about what we say about all these 
so-called indigenous movements within internationally recognized 
boundaries and borders. If we went ahead and said `OK, we 
sympathies with the people of Irian Jaya. We think they should 
be known as a separate state or they should join this state,' 
how would we deal with the question of the independence of 
Rotuma, as being espoused by Gibson, out there in Auckland 
somewhere? It is more than just indigenous groups struggling 
for their own recognition. They are a part of a nation. So it 
would be wrong for us to go and try and say to them we wish you 
well in what you are doing, because it would appear that we are 
treading into an area that we are not supposed to because we are 
interfering with the sovereign decision of a sovereign state. 
  What is Irian Jaya at the moment? It is part of Indonesia. 
It is not a colony of Indonesia, it is part of Indonesia, it is 
up to them, if they can get a voice heard in the committee of 24 
of the United Nations, the decolonization committee then perhaps 
that is the way for them to go. It would be wrong for us to 
unilaterally say anything about them, but if we were part of the 
committee of 24 decolonization committee then we could 
contribute that way. But it is up to them to try and get a 
hearing out there in the General Assembly or one of its 
committees. 
  [The following two answers appeared in separate boxes within 
the text of the item] 
  On Bougainville and the South Pacific Forum: 
  There have been lobby groups who have tried to bring the 
issue to be discussed on the agenda of the Forum. There has 
been some mention in the past but only casual mention because 
we, each of us, realize that the Bougainville issue is an 
internal problem that Papua New Guinea is trying very hard to 
resolve. Whenever we have this problem we will always get a lot 
of exaggeration, one way or the other, particularly on the 
suffering side. One picture could be reproduced so many times 
during the week and we could be looking at one picture, seven 
days a week, and you think that it is happening every day. I am 
not saying that there is no problem, no suffering, there is 
suffering, I believe. But it is something that I have been 
assured by the PNG officials that... that they are trying to do 
their best to resolve. 
  On protests about French nuclear tests: 
  Perhaps you have noticed that there has been no condemnation 
of nuclear testing because there has been no nuclear testing. 
It has been suspended and Fiji has been right up there with all 
those who are asking the French government not to resume testing 
of nuclear armaments and nuclear devices here in the Pacific, 
particularly on Mururoa and if there had been any perceived 
softening of opposition that is not the case. Our friendship 
with France is still there and when people conduct their 
international relationships, things like this do not normally 
affect them, particularly when it is between a big nation like 
France and a small like Fiji. 

