BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Kuznechevskiy report under the "Visit" rubric: </F>
"Economic Pragmatism Proves Stronger"] 
  [Text] The UN secretary general's almost week-long stay in 
Moscow ended with certain political wishes of the Russian 
leadership being met, but it did not settle a question which was 
one of the main ones as far as the hosts were concerned: 
Butrus-Ghali refused to back Moscow in its endeavor to gain the 
status of UN peacemaking forces for the Russian Armed Forces on 
the territory of the former USSR. 
  About two months ago, the heads of the Russian Federation 
foreign policy and military departments, who had hitherto more 
often been competitors and rivals in determining the state's 
foreign policy priorities, expressed a joint position on an 
important question, and were also able to sway the president, 
who is more used to them arguing with each other, to their side. 
The issue concerned the desire to give the status of UN 
peacemaking forces to the Russian military units stationed on 
the territory of the former Union republics of the USSR. 
  You might think: Why is this celebrated status, which in 
principle changes nothing, so needed, given the essence of the 
matter? Even without the approval of the United Nations, 
Russian troops have defused the bloody strife between Kishinev 
[Chisinau] and Tiraspol, prevented marauding groups from 
destroying the population of South Ossetia, are restraining 
Afghan aggression in Tajikistan, are ready to stop the shooting 
between Tbilisi and Gudauta, and so on. Especially since both 
the United Nations and the U.S. Administration are in theory 
already inclined toward recognizing the greater part of the 
expanse of the former USSR as a sphere of Russia's vital 
interests. 
  Meanwhile, a problem does exist, and indeed a fairly 
substantial one. 
  First of all, of course, there are the political dividends. 
It is one thing to recognize the geographic area around Russia 
as a sphere of its vital interests de facto, and entirely 
another to do the same thing de jure. In practical terms, this 
would mean to actually revive Russia's great power status with 
all the ensuing consequences (I will not get involved in 
decoding this thesis now). 
  Second, there is another reason, a purely economic one. 
Operations in the former USSR republics cost the Ministry of 
Defense rather a lot. And the military department's budget is 
already being cut by the government and the Federal Assembly 
from one year to the next. Announcing UN status for the Russian 
peacemaking forces would in many regards remove this problem, as 
payment for these operations would be subsidized to a 
significant extent by the UN budget. Thus Pavel Grachev's 
department has an obvious interest in settling the question. 
  But the Russian Federation foreign policy department is 
equally interested in settling this question. During 1994 
Russia has run up a debt of $68 million to the basic UN budget. 
Apart from that, debts for previous years run to 442 million, 
and there is also the 49 million owed to the budget for 
peacemaking operations for 1994. In all, according to 
Butrus-Ghali, Russia's total debt runs to $628 million, which 
makes it the second largest debtor after the United States. 
  All the indications are that Andrey Kozyrev's department has 
assumed that if it proved possible to put into practice the idea 
of giving Russian peacemaking forces in the former USSR 
republics the status of UN forces, then part, and indeed a 
significant part, of the Russian Federation's debt to the United 
Nations would be paid off in this way. 
  Judging by everything, Butrus-Ghali is also perfectly well 
aware of this, and so all he decided to do during the talks in 
Moscow was to recognize the fact that Moscow may participate in 
peacemaking operations in the aforementioned regions without 
special coordination with the United Nations and in parallel 
with UN actions, and even to link its troops with UN forces in 
hot spots; but no more than that. 
  Thus, for the time being, Moscow has failed to improve its 
financial affairs at the United Nations' expense. It can only 
be hoped that the last word has nevertheless not yet been said 
in the discussion on this subject, and that the Russian Foreign 
Ministry and Ministry of Defense will nevertheless find 
additional arguments in favor of a solution to the 
aforementioned problem which may satisfy both sides. 

