Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Hebei University Trainee Song Hong (1345 4767) and </F>
Reporter Wang Chunhai (3769 2504 3189): "To Build a Province 
Strong in the Economy, We Must First Build a Province Strong in 
Opening Up"] 
  [Text] On the afternoon of 21 December, at the auditorium 
of the Shijiazhuang City Workers' Cultural Palace, the 
provincial party committee and the provincial government held a 
provincial mobilization and report rally on opening up with a 
subject of strengthening reform, expanding the scale of opening 
up, accelerating development, and building an economically 
strong province. Participating in the rally were the 
secretaries of various city and prefectural party committees, 
the mayors of various cities, and the commissioners of various 
prefectures who were participating in the seventh plenary 
session of the fourth provincial party committee. Also 
participating in the rally were cadres of the organs directly 
under the provincial authorities and cadres at or above the 
section level in Shijiazhuang city. The total attendance was 
more than 2,000 people. Leading comrades of the provincial 
party committee, the provincial people's congress standing 
committee, the provincial government, and the provincial 
committee of Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, 
attended the rally. 
  As suggested by Cheng Weigao, secretary of the provincial 
party committee, as decided by the provincial party committee 
and the provincial government, and heading responsible comrades 
of the general office of the provincial government, the 
provincial planning commission, the provincial foreign economic 
relations and trade commission, the provincial office for 
opening up, the provincial foreign trade department, and 
governments of Shijiazhuang, Qinhuangdao, Tangshan, and Cangzhou 
cities, Chen Liyou went to Shandong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang 
provinces to specially observe these provinces' situation in 
economic development and opening up. After hearing the 
investigatory report made by the observation team, the 
provincial government considered that this report was great 
guiding significance in effecting a strategic change in the 
province's opening up and in accelerating the pace of opening 
up. Then, the provincial government decided to hold this 
mobilization and report rally with the aim of further 
strengthening, by introducing the experiences of Shandong, 
Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces, the sense of urgency, the sense 
of crisis, the sense of being enterprising, and the sense of 
responsibility in implementing the guidelines of the third 
plenary session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and in making 
arrangements for the work of the next year, with the aim of 
emancipating the mind, fully understanding the important 
position and role of opening up in building an economically 
strong province, and with the aim of mobilizing all the people 
in the province to implement the strategy of "using 
export-oriented economy to bring along the entire economy," to 
energetically develop the export-oriented economy, and to 
develop the provincial economy in a sustained, rapid, and sound 
manner. 
  Ye Liansong, governor of the province, presided over the 
rally. Chen Liyou, vice executive governor of the province, made 
a investigatory report on the opening up situation of Shandong, 
Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces. After comparing Hebei 
province's major economic development targets with those of 
Shandong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces over the past two 
years, Chen Liyou said: The reasons for the rapid economic 
development of Shandong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces are as 
follows: First, they have persistently regarded development as 
an unchanging principle and have promoted opening up by 
continuously emancipating the mind. Second, in approaching the 
relations of opening up and export-oriented economic development 
with the overall situation of economic development, they have 
all defined the new economic guiding ideology, regarded the 
development of export-oriented economy as the dragon head of the 
economic development of the whole province, and implemented the 
strategy of "using export-oriented economy to bring along the 
entire economy." Third, they have persisted in the 
export-oriented economic development road of developing the 
economy under the guidance of foreign trade, making a 
breakthrough in utilizing foreign funds, and developing 
high-level foreign economic relations and have grasped foreign 
trade, foreign funds, and foreign economic relations 
simultaneously. Fourth, they have made higher and lower levels 
join hands in improving investment environment, concentrated 
financial and material resources on accelerating the building of 
tangible environment, and paid attention to power delegation 
with one hand and service with the other hand to improve 
intangible environment. Fifth, they have expanded the scale of 
external propaganda, positively and voluntarily sponsored 
various forms of activities to absorb foreign investment, and 
vigorously conducted trade talks with good results. Sixth, they 
have paid attention to building development zones and made them 
new growing points of the economy. Seventh, they have 
vigorously trained competent persons suitable for the 
development of export-oriented economy. Eighth, they have been 
diligent to do concrete work in coordination with others. They 
have put in practical endeavor in opening up, strived for 
practical results, wholeheartedly attended to work, gone all out 
to anticipate others, and found shortcomings in front of 
achievements. 
  Cheng Weigao made a speech at the rally. He said: Although 
Shandong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces have effected a rapid 
progress in economic construction and a rapid increase in 
economic strength, they still pay attention to emancipating the 
mind continuously and repeatedly, use the large-scale 
emancipation of the mind to promote the large-scale opening up, 
and use the large-scale opening up to promote the large-scale 
economic development. When the environment is relaxed, they 
fear no difficulties and dare to compete with others; when 
results are achieved in their work, they continuously find out 
shortcomings and problems; and when there are difficulties in 
their work, they do not blame others but stress on objective 
reasons. Such an enterprising spirit of regarding development 
as unchanging principle and always advancing bravely, pioneering 
the road of advance, and accelerating development under any 
circumstance much merits our studying. 
  Over the past two years, our province has achieved results 
in opening up. Not only the degree, scale, channels but also 
the scope, quantity, and quality of opening up have improved and 
developed continuously. Particularly since the issuance of 
Comrade Xiaoping's important speeches made during his south 
China trip and since the convocation of the 14th CPC Congress, 
we have effected doubled increases in utilizing foreign funds, 
in developing the three types of foreign-invested enterprises, 
and in importing funds, technology, and talents. This has 
played an important role in developing the province's economy. 
However, we still lag behind if compared to coastal provinces, 
to the situation of whole country, and even to some inland 
provinces with good performance. About two years have passed 
since the 14th CPC Congress demanded to accelerate the opening 
up of Bohai Bay. However, the Qinhuangdao, Tangshan, Cangzhou, 
and Shijiazhuang open zones in the province have not yet made 
great breakthroughs in opening up. Although relatively big 
headway has been made in opening the areas around Beijing and 
Tianjin to other domestic areas, it has just confined to a part 
of counties, cities, and prefectures. Considerably more 
counties, cities, and prefectures have not yet established 
cooperative relations with Beijing and Tianjin. Now, the 
province's work concerning foreign economic relations is just at 
the beginning stage, the foreign trade work has stagnated over 
the past few years, and the work concerning foreign economic 
relations has fallen to the bottom. 
  Cheng Weigao pointed out: Although there are many reasons 
for the little progress and the poor results in the province's 
opening up, a most important reason, when viewed from the 
results of the current observation to Shandong, Jiangsu, and 
Zhejiang provinces, is that our province has regarded the 
opening up and the development of export-oriented economy as the 
matters of some foreign economic departments instead of 
regarding them as the strategic matters that have a bearing on 
the overall situation of the economy and bring along the 
development of the entire economy, and that the province is 
still affected by "left" ideas and tied by many outmoded 
concepts, has not done enough in emancipating the mind, and has 
lacked courage and vigor in opening to the outside world, in 
utilizing foreign funds and technology, and in developing 
export- oriented economy. In addition, opening to the outside 
world, actively utilizing foreign funds and technology, and 
developing export-oriented economy have not yet become the 
identical action of all localities, all professions and trades, 
and all fields. Economic construction departments and the 
overwhelming majority of enterprises have not yet readjusted 
their structures, improved their quality, and linked their 
products with the world markets in line with the demands of the 
world markets and with the demand of participating in the 
competition on the world markets. 
  All levels of governments and all departments have not done 
enough in consciously rendering economic service to utilization 
of foreign funds and to development of foreign economic 
relations and trade. Foreign trade departments have not yet 
truly set forth the correct idea of organizing domestic 
production in line with the demand of the world market to bring 
along the development of domestic economy. Such a situation 
must be changed rapidly. Cheng Weigao stressed: Building an 
economically strong province, we must first build a province 
strong in opening up. Therefore, through this rally, all 
localities and all departments should, by discussing the report 
of Chen Liyou, examine and analyze their opening up situation 
over the past two years, summarize experiences and lessons, 
strengthen their respective planning, and strive to emancipate 
the mind and accelerate the pace of opening up and the 
development of export-oriented economy in this year and in the 
next two years. Qinhuangdao, Tangshan, Cangzhou, and 
Shijiazhuang, that are around Bohai Bay, should conduct a 
conscientious study and make best possible use of their 
advantages to make a big breakthrough in opening up. The 
province should effect a rapid progress in utilizing foreign 
funds and in developing foreign trade and foreign economic 
relations. All prefectures and cities and all professions and 
trades should strive to achieve new results in opening up. 
  At the conclusion of the rally, Ye Liansong dwelt on the 
opinions on the work of opening up. 

