Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague, Jan 10 (CTK) -- Latvian Ambassador to the 
Czech Republic Valdis Krastins expressed skepticism Sunday [9 
January] about the Czech Republic's foreign policy as he urged 
the nations of Central and Eastern Europe to take a common stand 
toward NATO membership and European integration. He also joined 
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech and Slovak Republics in calling 
for NATO to offer security guarantees to formerly communist 
countries and a timetable for future membership in the alliance. 
  Krastins emphasized that Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia 
desired to join NATO as their best defense against recent 
Russian imperialist stirrings. Yet he admitted that at the 
moment Latvia could not contribute much to the alliance, and 
consequently accepted the idea of the American "Partnership for 
Peace," which is expected to be approved at the Brussels summit. 
"If the NATO summit does not give us a satisfactory answer, the 
nations of Eastern and Central Europe will have to think of 
their own security arrangements. I think (Polish President) 
Lech Walesa is right. If there is a power vacuum, it will be 
filled, and we know by whom." 
  The countries of Eastern Europe "will be forced to take some 
action by themselves, to establish a sort of regional security 
and economic arrangement, simply for survival." 
  Reflecting this view, the prime ministers of Latvia, 
Lithuania, and Estonia met a few days after the Russian 
elections to discuss a defensive alliance in view of the 
apparent lack of forthcoming security guarantees from NATO. 
Their parliaments also ratified in recent weeks a free trade 
zone agreement among the three countries. 
  The ambassador compared the Baltic defensive alliance to the 
informal Visegrad Group. "History reminds us that we can survive 
economically and politically only by taking a common stand. 
Institutionalizing or not institutionalizing does not play such 
an important role." 
  Krastins added that the current American and West European 
back pedalling since the December 12 Russian elections resembled 
the Western policy of appeasement toward Hitler. "And we all 
know the cost, the tremendous cost that nations had to pay," he 
said. 
  "We are taking (Russian Premier Vladimir) Zhirinovskiy's 
[title as received] threats very seriously because we have been 
reading the history books a very long time," he said, pointing 
out that in the 1920's and '30s no one took Hitler seriously. 
"We are still on the front line because the recent developments 
in Moscow have shown that the dream of a Great Russian empire is 
not dead." 
  The Latvian ambassador praised the Czech Republic's broad 
European outlook, saying this was why Latvia had supported the 
Czech bid last year to become a non-permanent member of the U.N. 
Security Council. Yet he sees the Czech Republic painting 
itself into a corner by attempting to seek its own path to NATO 
and other Western structures. "I see the Czech Republic and the 
Czech Government wanting to go it alone," he said, "not wanting 
to associate itself even with the Visegrad Group, standing a 
little bit aloof and trying to squeeze into Western Europe and 
into NATO alone. It's understandable. But if it does not 
happen, the Czech Republic will be forced to look around (for 
support). As we see it from the Baltics, the Czechs are as 
vulnerable as we, because they have two big neighbors. We have 
only one." 

