Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bujumbura, March 30 (AFP) -- Leaders of Burundi 
distanced themselves Wednesday [30 March] from Interior Minister 
Leonard Nyangoma, who appealed for an international buffer force 
to help end ethnic violence. 
  In an official statement, the government and the offices of 
the president and prime minister said they were "shocked" by 
Nyangoma's declarations, made Tuesday during a trip to the 
former colonial power Belgium. 
  The Burundi authorities were "informing national and 
international opinion that this proposal involves only (the 
minister) and in no way reflects the government's point of 
view," the statement said. 
  Nyangoma, speaking at a press conference in Brussels, asked 
for a 5,000-strong force to end the fighting that has claimed 
tens of thousands of lives. 
  "Western countries intervened in Somalia, Rwanda and 
Sarajevo, let them do the same for us," he said. 
  Burundi appealed for an international buffer force in 
November 1993. 
  An estimated 100,000 people have been killed in Burundi in 
clashes between the majority Hutu tribe and the minority Tutsis, 
which control the army, and another 700,000 have fled the 
country since October's failed army coup in which Burundi's 
first Hutu president, Melchior Ndadaye, was killed. 
  Last week at least 400 people were killed in Bujumbura in 
clashes between the army and civilians. 
  Nyangoma, from the ruling Burundi Democratic Front (FRODEBU) 
of President Cyprien Ntaryamira, accused the army of disarming 
only the majority Hutus and of ignoring orders from the 
Hutu-dominated government. 
  He also criticised the UN envoy for Burundi, Ahmedou Ould 
Abdallah, saying he sided openly with the army. 
  In Wednesday's statement, the government said it had "faith 
in the declarations of loyalty repeated several times by the 
Burundi armed forces, but remains worried by cases of fighting 
and indiscipline on the part of certain elements in the army and 
police." 
  Prime Minister Anatole Kanyenkiko, member of the opposition 
Tutsi-dominated Unity for National Progress party (UPRONA), told 
AFP his government had asked the Organisation of African Unity 
to send an "observer mission" but Nyangoma "has no mandate to 
speak on the subject." 

