BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Victor Torres] </F>
  [Text] Campeche, 21 Jun -- President Carlos Salinas de 
Gortari announced that nearly 1.2 billion new pesos will be 
allocated to the states. The president also indicated that in 
the past five years, revenues other than those derived from 
crude oil have increased 34 percent in real terms and the number 
of taxpayers that are not salaried workers has more than 
tripled. In addition, he urged all taxpayers not to avoid 
paying their taxes so that those most in need may enjoy the 
benefits resulting from an increase in social expenditures. 
  During the closing of the 26th National Tax Revenue Officers 
Conference, the president explained that fiscal collection for 
social expenditures has increased, and that federal taxes have 
been cut by half. In addition, individual and commercial tax 
burdens have been lowered and tax limits have also been reduced. 
He added that seven out of every 10 new taxpayers have been 
included during the current administration. 
  During the event, which took place at the Francisco de Paula 
Toro Theater, the president pointed out that federal government 
allocations to the states have increased more than 25 percent 
since 1989. He also reported that there would be a 55 percent 
increase in transfers to the eight states with the most pressing 
needs. 
  The president explained that a more balanced state-federal 
government relationship has been sought through the signing of 
clear-cut agreements with each state government. In this 
respect, he mentioned agreements involving such subjects as 
joint value added tax supervision, election list verification 
and obligations fulfillment, full supervision of the vehicle 
ownership and use tax, and even municipal participation as it 
relates to toll bridges operated by the federal government. 
  Salinas de Gortari, who arrived from Puebla and is scheduled 
to leave for Aguascalientes, commented that "we have supported 
the local fiscal administrations in order to reverse falling 
trends in local traditional sources of revenue, especially the 
real estate tax. 
  With respect to additional resources to be distributed among 
the states, the president of the republic stated that the 
Finance and Public Credit Secretariat had estimated the annual 
adjustment of the resources corresponding to 1993, as well as 
that corresponding to the first quarter of 1994. According to 
the president, "fortunately, just as in the case of last year, 
the difference is in favor of the states of the Federation." 
  He explained that adding the concepts of the 1993 adjustment 
and that of the first quarter of 1994 means that the states as a 
whole will have additional resources totalling approximately 1.2 
billion new pesos. He stressed that, in order not to create any 
uncertainties, every state without exception has balances in its 
favor. 
  The chief executive, who arrived in this city during a heavy 
downpour, listened as Finance Secretary Pedro Aspe explained the 
progress made in fiscal issues and State Finance Secretary Maria 
Teresa Patron, representing fellow her colleagues, made an 
assessment of the issues discussed during the meeting. 
  Salinas de Gortari stated that progress had been made in 
modernizing the state's tax and allotment system. He said: "We 
have done it on the basis of more justice and efficiency to 
benefit more Mexicans." 
  It has been possible to collect more in order to have more 
real revenues to meet the demands of expenditures for social 
progress in Mexico. If not, how will we build more schools? 
How will we provide more potable water and electrical services 
to the millions of Mexicans who have started to receive 
benefits? How will we be able to start building a hospital 
every three weeks, construct the largest number of housing units 
in the country's history, or increase spending in education to 
its highest level this year, or during this century, as it 
relates to GNP? 
  The president explained that, at the beginning of his 
administration, there were 19 or 20 federal taxes and that the 
number has now been cut in half. In addition, the rate of those 
taxes still in effect has also been cut. 
  Salinas told the country's tax officers that the specific 
point at which individuals begin to pay their tax obligations 
has been cut and that "at the same time, rates have been cut and 
base rates have been widened, which has always been the main 
concern of everyone committed to tax fairness." He pointed out 
that seven out of every 10 taxpayers were incorporated during 
this administration. 
  The president provided more details: As relates to the real 
estate tax, 0.3 percent of GDP was being collected two decades 
ago and the ratio has fallen to 0.02 percent. In this respect, 
a trend reversal has taken place, which means that some 
municipalities have been able to increase revenue collection by 
100, 200, and even 400 percent. Today, real estate tax revenues 
have increased to nearly 0.3 percent of GDP. 
  "Let us not forget that countries with development levels 
that are similar to ours have collected about 2 percent of GNP 
in property taxes each year. In other words, we have a lot of 
ground to cover, especially with regard to the local effort, and 
at the federal government level we are ready to support you in 
all those efforts that will allow you to obtain greater 
resources through this traditional source of local revenue," 
Salinas added. 
  Finally, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari reaffirmed the 
goal of maintaining an equitable relationship between the 
federation and the states, attaining more equity and efficiency, 
and, above all, keeping alive the possibility of improving ways 
of meeting the valid demands of fellow citizens. 

