BFN 

  [Excerpts] The devaluation of the dinar came into effect 
yesterday in implementation of the conditional agreement signed 
by Algerian financial authorities and the International Monetary 
Fund. This measure, which was adopted by the Algerian 
Government, as the economy minister said, on the basis of an 
objective analysis of our economic, financial and monetary 
realities, raised several questions among the public and 
citizens with regard to its direct repercussions on prices, 
salaries and other things. Mourad Benachenhou, the economy 
minister tried to answer these questions in an interview granted 
to today's AL KHABAR. [passage omitted]. 
  The economy minister said that the official devaluation of 
the dinar would have an influence on internal prices only in one 
case, which is an increase in distributed income without an 
equivalent at the level of production. Benachenchou said that 
even if citizens notice an increase in prices they have to know 
that this increase has no link with the economic reality, but 
stems from maneuvers of profiteers who exploit the lack of 
information of citizens about the mechanisms of the economy for 
personal interests. 
  The economy minister said that the devaluation of the dinar 
constitutes an element in any policy aiming at returning to 
sound management of the economy. 
  The value of the dinar is linked to the economic, financial, 
and monetary policy which we will follow. Benachenhou added: If 
we control this policy properly, the value of the dinar will not 
decrease, but if we do not reach a budget in which the income of 
the country and our expenditures are at the same level, we will 
return once more to the devaluation of the dinar. 
  With regard to possible amendments at the level of salaries 
this year, Benachenhou stressed that that matter was linked to a 
change in the revenues of the country. If there is a growth in 
the gross domestic product, there will naturally be a wage 
increase but, as Mourad Benachenhou added, if the opposite takes 
place, any wage increase will lead to inflation and a 
deterioration of the purchasing power of wage earners. 

