Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Mirko Marjanovic, Serbian prime </F>
minister-designate, to the Serbian Assembly in Belgrade -- live] 
  [Text] Esteemed deputies, Mr. Milosevic, president of the 
Republic of Serbia, has entrusted me with the mandate to create 
the government of the Republic of Serbia. After holding 
comprehensive consultations, I am going to propose the 
government members to you today. At the same time, before the 
government is elected I want to put forward its program. 
  The political (?pressures) from abroad and grave economic 
and 
social problems that we have been confronted with in the country 
require clear answers and resolute steps from us. The basic 
thing is to create an economic and political atmosphere in which 
the creativity, hard work, and entrepreneurship of our citizens 
will have more free scope, despite the economic sanctions, and 
the significant potential of our economy can be activated. 
Instead of adapting passively to difficult business conditions 
and to survival, the government of the Republic of Serbia that 
this prominent house should elect today will do everything with 
a view to marking 1994 with permanent positive changes and above 
all to having the policy of peace, which we shall persistently 
advocate, contribute to a just solution for the Serbian people 
in the Srpska republic and the republic of Serbian Krajina. By 
defending peace, we shall also be maintaining our economic 
recovery in the best way. We should show determination in 
implementing the program for reconstruction of the monetary 
system and the strategy of economic recovery of the country in 
order, now that inflation has been checked, to be able to 
quickly increase production, improve the standard of living, and 
provide prospects for the young generation. The operation of 
the rule of law should be clearly felt and affirmed, and the 
principles of democratic rule should be affirmed. 
  The past year has shown more than clearly that the economy 
and society simply cannot function under hyperinflation. 
Hyperinflation has had a destructive and devastating effect on 
all spheres of life. It has blocked production, contributed to 
many an injustice in distribution, and brought the standard of 
living of the majority of population below the level of bare 
subsistence. The program for reconstruction of the monetary 
system and the strategy of economic recovery that we have 
started to implement has proved to be the only response to the 
great difficulties the Yugoslav economy has been experiencing 
under the sanctions, the war around us, and the large number of 
refugees from war-affected regions. 
  The program is a highly professional one, and the new 
government unanimously accepts it as the basis of its policy, 
determined to consistently implement it together with the 
Federal Government. Not only the federal and republican 
governments, but also a great majority of experts and 
businessmen have assessed that there is no alternative to this 
program. In particular, it has been wholeheartedly accepted by 
the citizens, who justifiably feel threatened by the economic 
chaos. The return to a healthy dinar, a balanced budget, and 
financial discipline, these being essential elements of monetary 
reform and the most important means of curbing inflation, are 
only the initial, albeit inevitable, steps in the attempt to 
stabilize the economy and bring an increase in production, 
employment, and the standard of living. An examination has 
shown that our foreign exchange and other reserves are greater 
than had been assumed and in any case sufficient if the whole 
program is consistently implemented. 
  The program must be regarded not only as a package of 
measures to curb hyperinflation and bring a short-term 
improvement of the economic situation, but also as a fundamental 
turnabout in the way we conduct economic operations. There has 
long been such an intention in the projections of our economic 
system, but it has never been consistently applied. What was 
lacking was a healthy currency as the objective criterion for 
business or any other kind of decisionmaking in economic life. 
And that we now have. 
  The reform of the monetary system puts strong pressure on 
the 
economy in the direction of rational behavior, which is not only 
in one's own interest, but also in the general social interest. 
With increased independence, the responsibility of an 
enterprise for its survival and prosperity, as well as for the 
existence of the workers it employs increases. By doing away 
with primary emission, wages must be earned and in order to earn 
them, one must produce and in fact produce the goods the market 
wants. 
  One of the basic aims of economic policy will be to support 
the restructuring of big enterprises -- where economically 
justifiable -- and to stimulate the more rapid development of 
small and medium-sized enterprises. Of course, the state cannot 
take upon itself the the enterprises' job of increasing 
production and improving efficiency. However, it can give its 
support to stimulating entrepreneurship and market-oriented 
production and will do so, proceeding from the fact that a 
healthy dinar is above all the main motive and at the same time 
an economic imperative for achieving better results. 
  We shall try to expand the domestic market for the 
reconstructed and the new production. The government shall be 
particularly active in encouraging the export orientation of our 
economy, although we are aware of all the limits that have been 
imposed by the sanctions. However, export possibilities exist 
even now. We particularly need to prepare for the period after 
the sanctions are lifted. The Serbian economy has always had 
its place in the world, it had, and still has, something to 
offer to the world market. We shall also create favorable 
conditions for foreign capital investments. Serbia cannot 
achieve its economic independence within a closed economy, but 
only through a decisive and wise opening up toward the world 
based on our developmental advantages, primarily our expert and 
qualified people -- particularly the young ones -- significant 
industrial capacities, agriculture, natural resources, and the 
favorable economic position of our country. With the successful 
monetary reconstruction of our monetary system, we have, in this 
phase, stabilized the economy and helped the existentially most 
threatened level of society. This must now be accompanied by an 
increase in production and real wages, and must coincide with 
the initiation of new investments. Our policy is aimed at 
increasing the national revenue and measures to make its 
distribution economically stimulating and, in social terms, as 
fair as possible. I appeal to you to help us realize these 
tasks, in spite of the party differences, which we will respect. 
  The difficult task of rebalancing the republic's budget lies 
before us. The increase of any source of budget revenue causes 
resistance and skepticism among the public, while, on the other 
hand, the termination and reduction of any achieved right to 
budgetary funds elicits anger and protest. Because of this, we 
are faced with the question of how to balance the budget without 
again reaching for primary emission and avoiding the chaos of 
last year's hyperinflation. The government shall -- decisively 
and persistently -- decrease budgetary expenditure. However, we 
also intend to undertake the necessary reforms of the taxation 
system, which would have a stimulating effect on our economy and 
lead to larger tax revenue without increasing tax rates. We 
shall also strive to encompass the gray economy with the tax 
[word indistinct]. We shall strive to promote state bonds on 
the capital market as soon as possible, which would contribute 
to the reduction of our budget deficit without a supplemental 
emission of money and a new tax burden. On the other hand, the 
legal and other obligations that our republic services from the 
budget are great, particularly obligations toward the level of 
social and medical protection, security of our citizens and 
state, pensioners and the unemployed, education, science, and 
culture, our compatriots in the Srpska republic and the republic 
of Serbian Krajina, and refugees who sought refuge in our 
republic. The established framework for public expenditure, as 
set out in the program, must under no circumstances be 
interfered with. This means that the government must under no 
circumstances give in to any requests and principles for 
increasing the budgetary expenditure. However, the Assembly 
also bears its part of the responsibility for this. We should 
not insist on legislation that would impose new obligations on 
the republic, and for which funds have not been earmarked in the 
budget. The same type of restriction should also apply to tax 
exemption. No tax relief can be approved unless its scope is 
established, and the lost budget revenue is made up for in other 
ways. There is room for decreasing public expenditure. The 
Constitution has transferred to the republic many of the 
functions that used to be in domain of municipalities or various 
self-management associations, alliances, organizations, 
institutes, and chambers. Thanks to inertia, much of this 
unnecessary load has been maintained until today. 
  Many of these unnecessary expenses stem from irrational 
behavior in the system of the health and education institutions, 
in the governmental apparatus, and elsewhere. The government is 
determined to remove these. Concrete programs will be 
introduced to rationalize and reduce all that cannot be accepted 
in the sphere of public expenditure with our current low 
national income. The same is envisaged for public enterprises. 
Their role is to ensure on an economically sound basis the 
working of the economy and the life of the citizens, and not to 
conceal the multitude of irrationalities and weaknesses behind 
their frequently monopolistic behavior. 
  A policy of balancing the budget must be implemented in 
order 
to increase public income. I believe that every tax measure of 
the government will come under a critical gaze, and the 
government will treat such criticism responsibly. However, the 
government will stand firm when it comes to everyone having to 
pay tax, provided of course that taxes are in line with the 
economic ability of the taxpayer. 
  On the other hand, citizens have to know where their money 
is 
going, and how even the last dinar is spent. The government 
will abide by the proposals and programs suggesting that tax 
rates should not be increased, but rather that the tax base and 
the number of taxpayers be extended. 
  In implementing the policy of balancing the budget, the 
government is determined to establish the strictest of budgetary 
disciplines, and will cooperate closely with the Federal 
Government and the Montenegrin Government. That is why we call 
on you deputies in this Assembly, and the public in general, to 
extend your full support to this policy. 
  The policy of healthy currency will represent the main 
impetus to all the economic activities and the realistic 
increase of the social product in stable conditions. Without 
much involvement or sponsorship by the state and its bodies, 
room will be made for free entrepreneurs and economic 
initiative. The places where realistic economic calculation is 
possible are places where solid production and successful trade 
will also be possible. In other words, the aim of the 
government is to create an atmosphere in which the market 
motivation for production will strengthen. 
  I beg you for your attention. You will have a chance, 
colleagues deputies, to participate as much as you like later on. 
  Instead of having illusions about production and new 
investment based on the currency issue, a market system will be 
created in which everyone will be motivated and economically 
forced to produce and sell as much as he can. The bitter 
experiences of the last few years have taught us that motivating 
production from the primary issue inflicts the most damage on 
that very production. Another chance should not be given to 
those who still do not believe this. Such lessons have already 
cost too much. For that reason all companies will have to 
establish themselves on the grounds of realistic economic 
criteria. None of them should expect any more state subsidies 
from the budget or the currency issue. They should themselves 
become an important source of budgetary income and new 
investment. I suggest to companies that expect this, rather 
than through their own production, that they will find a 
solution in state subsidies and [word indistinct] directly or 
through the trade union, that they should immediately change 
their managers, since the government will not accept any 
financing without backing or any other form of deviation from 
the program. 
  A healthy economy, even if it is temporarily poor, still has 
great possibilities to exploit the resources available and 
become rich, while an unhealthy economy that is financed without 
backing can never become that. That is why there is no 
alternative to the policy of a healthy and stable currency, and 
that is why the government will not give up on this policy at 
any cost. 
  The government's agricultural policy will also be in line 
with the spirit of the fundamental commitments in the program. 
This means that the agriculture and the food industry will be 
placed in the same conditions of production as other fields, 
there will be full equality of all property relations, and 
stimulative measures will be introduced that will motivate the 
merging of agricultural property and the development of farms, 
by giving full freedom to the development of co-operatives, by 
securing protection prices for the basic agricultural products, 
and by introducing other forms of development motivation. Here, 
too, there can be no return to financing without backing. 
Agricultural production will be supported only from realistic 
resources and with firm guarantees. 
  With the aim of stimulating production, better supply, and 
strengthening the position of the new dinar, the most important 
issue now is the increase of traffic, both by accessing reserves 
and by exchanging companies' foreign currency for new dinars. 
The government shall insist that the process of exchanging 
companies and banks' foreign currency is expedited without any 
administrative restrictions in order to make it possible for 
production and trade to -- on the basis of their financial 
potential -- acquire fresh funds necessary for carrying out 
business functions. [sentence as heard] Those companies that 
already have good programs should be given immediate support. 
They should immediately begin realizing these programs, 
including production for export. However, the impression is 
that some of the banks have still not adapted to these 
conditions. The measures of the monetary policy should 
establish conditions for banks to respect the need for 
reasonable real interest rates, and as soon as possible. That 
is one of the key prerequisites for increasing production on 
market principles. The settlement of debts and the 
reinstatement of trust in banks and other financial institutions 
is to a significant degree linked to solving the problem of old 
foreign currency savings. Serbia will not allow a single one of 
its foreign currency savers to be deprived of his or her foreign 
currency investment or its value in dinars. Concrete solutions 
for this problem will be proposed in a relatively short while. 
The moving of social policy outside the domain of the company 
and, based on this, the strengthening of their competitive edge 
is a very important aim of the entire program. It is known that 
a great number of temporarily unemployed workers objectively are 
not participating in the production process and that this has 
been so for some time. They are now essentially receiving 
welfare from their companies. The state, and not the company, 
must secure welfare and security for the citizens and the 
unemployed. The state must primarily help the workers who have 
been laid off by helping them to change their professions and 
through alternative employment. Moreover, paying out the income 
of unemployed workers in the form of welfare taken from the 
state budget rather than the companies would represent a more 
rational solution, if nothing else because it would eliminate 
the costs that arise from keeping in business unprofitable 
companies and fictitious employment. However, we are not 
focusing on laying off the surplus of employees. We are talking 
about a gradual process of structural changes with a stress on 
an active policy of new, real rather than fictitious employment 
of people, along with respecting the fact that there are people 
among the employment who have their own capital -- land or other 
sources of income -- and who are taking up the places of those 
for whom their jobs are the only source of income. The 
government will be actively involved in the process of 
collective negotiating about salaries that goes on between labor 
unions and the chamber of commerce. However, we wish to have the 
smallest possible amount of administrating and regulating. 
[sentence as heard] Salaries within the economy as a whole 
should be freely formed, and it is up to the government to -- in 
accordance with the budget restrictions -- regulate salaries in 
businesses that do not produce anything in and public companies. 
  The initial phase of the program primarily focuses on the 
revival of the national currency. However, at the same time, it 
marks the beginning of a lasting revival of the economy. Once a 
market ambience is established -- its basic outlines -- the 
state will have its real role in regulating economic life. The 
state will devote itself to organizing and protecting the 
economic and civil organization and the basic market 
institutions, which -- along with conducting economic policy -- 
is its basic, but in our society neglected, role. What we have 
in mind here is primarily the protection of contracts and 
property, and the protection of the monetary and fiscal systems, 
institutions of the goods, labor, and capital markets. 
  In connection with this, I call on the Federal Parliament to 
pass, as soon as possible, crucial economic and systemic laws 
that will put into operation the market economic conditions. 
[sentence as heard] These are primarily laws on companies, 
employment, the capital market, and the transformation of 
property. We shall propose a new law [words indistinct] which 
we believe will be democratic, publicly controlled, and socially 
acceptable. 
  The basic principles on which this law will be based are 
the autonomy of the companies in making decisions on the 
transformation of property, the realistic value of the capital, 
the openness of the model, and the stimulative quality and 
justness. 
  As for the regional development policy, the government -- in 
accordance with the program -- will implement it in such a way 
that it will primarily insist on the activation of the number of 
already built but unexploited capacities. At the same time the 
government will concentrate resources for the development of the 
infrastructure primarily in the underdeveloped regions in order 
to create favorable conditions for potential investors. In the 
context of such a development policy, the particular advantages 
will be given to Kosovo and Metohija, but we have to stress that 
the program does not allow exceptions so the failure to use the 
existing capacities cannot be replaced by constant demands for 
new investments. 
  The control functions of the state are of a particular 
importance for the implementation of the program. The 
government will prepare a special program for the organizational 
and the personnel strengthening of the inspections and the 
finance police. Control of the monetary and the criminal sphere 
will be conducted together with the Federal Government, which 
will hamper the illegal transactions and trade. 
  As for the judiciary, which is to provide the necessary 
protection for citizens-entrepreneurs and therefore the program, 
the changes in the Federal and Serbian legislature will provide 
for the radical sanctioning of economic and financial offenses. 
  The safety of the citizens and the security of their 
property 
will be in future, too, a priority of the government. The 
previous activities of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in the 
extremely complex conditions of neighboring war, have secured a 
stable security situation in the republic. Further 
modernization and the constant adjustments of this service to 
the changes in the country and around is a task the government 
will deal with regularly. 
  Esteemed peoples' deputies, by devoting itself to the tasks 
that the executive authorities have in a legal state, the 
Serbian Government will make every effort -- in accordance with 
the law and the Constitution -- to carry out the responsibility 
it has taken on at this difficult moment to implement the 
program of monetary reconstruction and the economic recovery of 
our country together with the Federal Government and the 
Montenegrin Government. The program, which has been built on 
the basis of a market economy, has drawn a line between the 
competences, treating all sectors of economy equally. The 
success of the reform demands from everyone to respond to the 
duties in their line of work. This means that the economy will 
have to turn to the production and to rely fully on its own 
initiatives and entrepreneurship. The social services will have 
to show a greater degree of responsibility and efficiency. The 
state administration will have to work more expertly and react 
more quickly in eliminating the obstacles in the consistent 
implementation of the program, and a higher degree of readiness 
in fighting crimes of all kinds, and in eliminating war 
profiteering. 
  The citizens are given a particularly important role. 
Without their full confidence, their acceptance of the program, 
and their understanding for the inevitable teething 
difficulties, without their response to their tax and other 
duties, the implementation of the program would undoubtedly 
encounter further difficulties. Because of the serious changes 
it brings with it, the program has -- in my opinion -- 
historical importance. It has such importance particularly as a 
means for the defense of the sovereignty of the country. It has 
taken great courage for us to commit ourselves to a convertible 
dinar at times of an economic blockade, and succeed in defending 
it. 
  For its part, the Serbian Government stresses its firm 
resoluteness in persevering in the consistent implementation of 
the program of monetary reform and economic recovery. The 
government is aware that the organization of the governmental 
bodies has to be improved, and they have to be made responsible 
for carrying out tasks. In line with that, the government will 
undertake a series of operational measures and will organize a 
system to observe the implementation of the program in order to 
react promptly to transgressions as they occur. 
  I am convinced that we are all aware of the difficulties 
connected with this task, and of the significance of the period 
before us. None of us has any illusion that differing views and 
attitudes can be avoided in a democratic assembly between 
political parties, and in accordance with that, that this 
program and the policy based on it will easily get the necessary 
support here. I have to stress, however, that economic life 
itself has almost imposed such a program as an alternative to 
the chaos of hyperinflation and complete collapse with 
unpredictable economic, social, and political consequences. 
That is why I call on all the parties and the deputies on the 
behalf of the government to cooperate on this program, whose 
main orientation must not be questioned at any time. 
  The serious efforts that the government has to put in in the 
next few months and years to achieve economic revitalization are 
indeed necessary in order to alleviate the effects of the 
sanctions. These efforts will continue to be necessary even 
after the sanctions are lifted in order to avoid economic and 
political chaos, to protect domestic production from 
unprincipled rivalry from outside, and to provide all those 
market, production, and financial rules that are necessary for 
an economy to become more successful. 
  However, these great and imperative efforts concerning the 
economy that the government must undertake should also be 
accompanied by similarly great and imperative efforts in other 
spheres of social life -- health, education, science, culture, 
and information. 
  The international blockade undermined not only the economic 
life in Serbia but the social life as well, and for this reason, 
related efforts are needed. The international blockade 
definitely brought about a stagnation in the development of 
science, the provicialization of culture, education that is 
excessively turned exclusively toward the national and the past, 
and subjectivity and defeatism in the dissemination of 
information. These are the occurrences that more or less cannot 
be avoided under the conditions of a major international 
blockade. Other countries in a similar situation would have 
behaved in a similar manner. 
  Under the current circumstances, it is not our task to 
contribute toward the sanctions with our own behavior and, while 
the sanctions last -- even though justly infuriated by the world 
-- not to turn our back to the world and remain isolated and 
lonely for longer than the sanctions have been imposed. In 
education, for example, we must make an effort at every level -- 
from schools to universities -- to link ourselves to the 
greatest achievements and best experiences in the developed 
world. The aim of this linkage would be to prepare the young 
generation for professional and intellectual activity and for 
work and life in the third millennium. 
  Education must rid itself as quickly and as seriously as 
possible of the pathetic orientation toward the national, 
especially toward the national past. Isolationism in education 
is more dangerous than economic isolationism. Its consequences 
are reflected in the ideas of the youngest generations and last 
long after the ideas and practice of isolationism have passed. 
Through education, the young generation must be made capable of 
working and living in the coming era. It must be capable of 
criticizing this era, but also of critically promoting it and 
loving it. 
  At this moment, science has been entirely exposed to the 
danger of stagnation. Despite the lack of material and 
financial resources and the interruption of numerous 
institutional and personal links abroad, and despite the 
confusion, disillusionment, and even opportunism that can be 
encountered in the humanistic sciences, the government will make 
every effort to secure greater material and financial resources 
for the development of science in faculties and institutes, to 
restore scientific links with Europe and the world that can be 
restored, despite the sanctions, especially once the sanctions 
are lifted, and to encourage scientific work in the sphere of 
natural and social sciences with a policy of grants, the 
publishing of scientific publications, and the creation of an 
overall atmosphere that science to a great degree holds the 
answer on how to lead a richer and more humane life today and in 
the future. 
  Culture as a whole is also a victim of the sanctions, the 
war 
encirclement, and all the consequences brought on by the 
country's disintegration. The creation of artwork has been 
endangered, as well as their interpretation and conveyance to 
other people. The conditions for artistic creativity, as well 
making artistic and cultural heritage accessible to as many 
people as possible, especially young, must be radically changed 
in a positive sense. Just like education, the arts and sciences 
must turn to the present and the future, to the world, and to 
other cultures. They must free themselves from the domination 
of the past, which threatens to make the cultural life 
provincial and autarkic. 
  Radical changes must especially be implemented in the sphere 
of information dissemination. This is often dominated by the 
air of pessimism and defeatism, bourgeois, and superficial 
attitude toward society and its problems, especially toward 
solutions for these problems. The dissemination of information 
is partially responsible for the impression that everyone in the 
world is against the Serbs and that for these and other reasons 
we do not need anyone. This impression is naturally unfounded. 
It is not true that everyone is against the Serbs, as it 
equally not true that the Serbs can exist by themselves as an 
economical, political, and cultural Robinson Crusoe, at least 
not if they want to be successful and happy. 
  Information dissemination must be made more objective, 
versatile, and cultured regarding our country and foreign 
countries. It must bring back optimism to the public, at least 
to an extent to which it has lessened it. Despite all our 
problems, there is no reason why this optimism could not be 
realistic. This country and these people have preserved energy, 
dignity, and hope under the conditions of sanctions, while this 
government, knowing and respecting this energy, dignity, and 
hope, will do everything to free us from the sanctions, and 
[word indistinct] to live humanely as much as we can under the 
sanctions. The government has a duty to do this because of the 
Serbian citizens and especially because of the young generation, 
which wants to live in peace, freedom, and prosperity and which 
is willing to make its contribution toward this peace, freedom, 
and prosperity. However, it must make its contribution through 
education, work, and creativeness. 
  Such a determination of the young generation is our biggest 
asset. I end my expose in a desire to preserve this wealth and 
increase it further. [applause] 

