Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [English-language table of contents and summary included in </F>
the book "Problemy Ekologii Rossii" (Russia in Environmental 
Crisis) by K.S. Losev, V.G. Gorshkov, K.Ya. Kondratyev, V.M. 
Kotlyakov, M.Ch. Zalikhanov, V.I. Danilov-Danilyan, I.T. 
Gavrilov, G.N. Golubev, V.S. Revyakin, V.F. Grakovich, edited by 
V.I. Danilov-Danilyan and V.M. Kotlyakov, 2,000 copies, 348 
pages] 
  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
  Forward3 
  Introduction6 
  Part one 
  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPERATIVE9 
  Chapter 1. Distresses of the progress- 
  1.1. Environmental problems today and in the 
past- 
  1.2. The progress and the forests15 
  1.3. Deplorable results of the XXth century 
progress20 
  1.4. Environmental consequences of the 
progress29 
  1.5. The world on the brink of severe crisis34 
  Chapter 2. In search of the way out37 
  2.1. Simulation of an active work- 
  2.2. Europe: Socio-economic scenarios39 
  2.3. Europe: Environmental scenarios46 
  2.4. Global modelling51 
  2.5. First generation global models. 
Forecasting54 
  2.6. Second generation global models. Normative 
approach61 
  2.7. Third generation global models. Problem-oriented 
forecasting approach65 
  2.8. Results of the global and regional 
modelling67 
  2.9. "Comprehensive cleaning" or "Back to the 
caves?"68 
  Chapter 3. Biosphere as a guarantor of life on the 
Earth75 
  3.1. The principal question- 
  3.2. Biologic control of the environment76 
  3.3. Mechanisms of the biologic cnotrol77 
  3.4. Le Chatelier Principle in biosphere80 
  3.5. Perturbation of the Le Chatelier Principle in the 
present-day biosphere83 
  3.6. Biosphere as a "free market"87 
  3.7. Communities of the biosphere89 
  3.8. Ecological stability and local adaptation94 
  3.9. The evolution95 
  3.10. The progress97 
  3.11. Conservation of the biosphere99 
  3.12. Translation of noosphere?103 
  Chapter 4. Ecology of man104 
  4.1. Genetic and cultural heritage- 
  4.2. Ecological niches of man108 
  4.3. Disturbances of the Le Chatelier Principle in the 
industrial era114 
  4.4. Limits to growth of the energy consumption of the 
mankind118 
  4.5. Strategy of survival121 
  Chapter 5. Global Environment monitoring123 
  5.1. Key directions of the environmental monitoring 
system- 
  5.2. The system of the Earth watch142 
  5.3. Research for the global environmental monitoring 
system155 
  Part two 
  ENVIRONMENTAL CRISIS IN RUSSIA160 
  Chapter 5. Natural resources161 
  6.1. Area, population and resources of 
photosynthesis- 
  6.2. Water and the other renewable resources165 
  6.3. Nonrenewable resources168 
  Chapter 7. Consumption of resources170 
  7.1. Consumption of the area and of the resources of 
photosynthesis- 
  7.2. Consumption of the water and of the other 
renewable resources175 
  7.3. Consumption of the nonrenewable 
resources182 
  7.4. Change of stereotypes186 
  Chapter 8. Pollution of the environment189 
  8.1. General overview- 
  8.2. Air pollution191 
  8.3. Water pollution198 
  8.4. Soil and biota pollution204 
  8.5. Pollution with solid wastes211 
  8.6. Dangerous wastes214 
  8.7. Pollutants dynamics215 
  Chapter 9. Disturbances of the 
lithosphere220 
  9.1. Disturbances at the surface- 
  9.2. Disturbances of the lithospheric fluids and in 
the depth222 
  9.3. Technogenic disturbances of the lithosphere and 
the changes of the Caspian Sea level225 
  Chapter 10. Accidents228 
  10.1. Impossibility of the zero risk- 
  10.2. Increase of the accidents risks and associated 
damage230 
  10.3. Circumstances favourable to accidents235 
  10.4. Accidents in cities237 
  10.5. Creeping probability of accidents239 
  Chapter 11. Radioactive environment241 
  11.1. A new menace- 
  11.2. Sources of potential danger244 
  11.3. Nuclear tests247 
  11.4. Nuclear accidents250 
  11.5. Radioactive wastes255 
  Chapter 12. Health of the population258 
  12.1. Genome of man- 
  12.2. Decay of the genome261 
  12.3. Living conditions266 
  12.4. Chemical load271 
  l2.5. Urbanization: Quiet revolution of the XXth 
century280 
  Chapter 13. Losses and costs282 
  13.1. Actual losses in the resources- 
  13.2. Environmental losses: Attempts to 
Assess288 
  13.3. Expenditures for environment protection291 
  13.4. Specially protected areas295 
  Chapter 14. Perspectives of survival297 
  14.1. Global environmental change- 
  14.2. Local environmental problems300 
  14.3. The turning point302 
  14.4. Environmental programmes304 
  CONCLUSION. A look into the XXI century310 
  LITERATURE314 
<H5>  RUSSIA IN ENVIRONMENTAL CRISIS </H5>
<H5>  Introduction </H5>
  This book is a concern and a challenge. The concern is on 
the 
future of the environment of our planet and Russia on it. The 
challenge is to the environmental stereotypes dominating in the 
world. 
  The idea to prepare this book came in 1989. Enormous changes 
going on in both Russia and on the whole territory of the former 
Soviet Union have triggered it. Old stereotypes were collapsing, 
paradigmes were changing, and the authors of the book could more 
easily renounce some environmental and economic concepts 
dominated and still dominating the world. 
  An important incentive to create this book has been the fact 
that the assessment of consumption and preemption of the primary 
biological production by mankind at the global level had been 
evaluated and published in Russia (word in Russian, 1980) well 
before the widely cited paper of P. Vitousek et al. (1986) with 
very similar conclusions appeared. Though the significance of 
the Gorshkov's publication has not been properly appreciated by 
the community of experts in the issues of global environment 
even in Russia, its conclusions have influenced the 
environmental thinking in our country. That could not but make 
the authors to think over the eternal question: Where do we go? 
  An important event without which this book could not have 
been created was the crucial step from rather general statements 
on the theorical existence of limits for economical activity 
within the biosphere to the quantitative estimation of it along 
within the indication of when mankind stepped over this most 
important bound (Russian word, 1987; Russian words, 1990). It 
will be shown in this book that crossing this ecological 
borderline has occurred time ego [as published] and that the 
global environmental change observed the last decades 
worrisomely confirms it. 
  The competition between the two main economic systems in the 
world is over-signifying the defeat of the centrally planned 
economy. The latter requires higher management expenditures but 
it is quickly out of order as soon as the tight central control 
is loosened. Its functioning does not correspond to the main 
principle of sustainable functioning of both the biosphere and 
the human society which is the self- controlled and finely tuned 
balance of matter and energy fluxes within the system, that is 
the sustenance of a homeostasis. 
  It turned out also that the centrally planned economic 
system 
is more wasteful in terms of the natural resources use. However, 
the market economy is not able to solve the global environmental 
problems either. To fulfil the needs of predominantly 
poverty-striken planet's growing population, both systems 
strived for quick and massive production lavishly depleting 
natural resources. 
  A reality of today is that we face a collapsing world being 
in a state of severe environmental crisis and converting into an 
overall crisis of our civilisation. The strategy of sustainable 
development (Our Common Future, 1987; and many other 
publications) is an attempt to handle the crisis. It is the main 
stereotype of our time based in fact on expectation of a 
miracle: sustainable development is an endeavour to minimize 
man's impact on the environment in an expectation that the 
life-supporting system would maintain its main functions until 
the population of the Earth stabilizes at the level exceeding 
two or more times the present one and would keep on after that. 
It is doubtful whether the miracle would ever happen. 
  A political foundation of the sustainable development 
strategy is a desire to preserve the status quo in the world 
correcting and mending the present world system and postponing 
the moment of the unpleasant truth. The truth is that the 
sustainable development strategy is certainly progressive for 
some transitional period but in the long run it all the same 
drives mankind to the ecological impasse, that is to the 
extinction of man as a biological species. 
  The authors are far away from the point that the economic 
growth or the technological revolution are the culprits of the 
emerging global environmental catastrophe. Renouncing that 
civilisation can be compared with jumping out of a speeding 
train, that is perishing. The main reason of the crisis is in 
the excessively grown population of the planet. It has increased 
to such an extent that its stabilization even at the present 
level would not bring the biosphere back to the pre-crisis 
sustainable state. This statement is also a challenge of a kind 
because this approach does not correspond to the deep-rooted 
ideologies, religions and ethical norms based on the usual 
personal anthropocentrism. The issues of the population growth 
and control are, of course, very sensitive political problems 
and the interrelation of the planet's overpopulation and the 
global environmental crisis often are not put on the foreground. 
  Uprecedented complexity and the world-wide scale of the 
problem of mankind's survival under the environmental crisis 
predetermine a crucial need of the international cooperation. It 
is the objective of the United Conference on Environment and 
Development. The UNCED has become one of the reason to publish 
this book now. 
  The structure of the book is determined by the concept 
expressed above. It consists of two parts. The first one is 
devoted to an analysis of the world's development, particularly 
during the last forty years. Social and environmental 
implications of the development are discussed. An original 
concept of environmental security is suggested. Basing on this 
concept the present state of the world environment is 
characterized as an acute ecological crisis. 
  In the second part the state of the environment in Russia is 
discussed keeping in mind that it is a large part of the world 
system. State of the environment in Russia is regarded in the 
framework of the concept of environmental security suggested in 
the first part. To describe the ecological situation in Russia, 
the Reports of the Environment of the former USSR as well as the 
Statistical Reference Book have been used. They contain for the 
first time many data unpublished earlier. The main assessments 
are for 1989, as the text of the book was being prepared in 1990. 
<H5>  Part 1. Environmental Imperative </H5>
  The end of the XXth century can be characterised by the 
drastic changes in the relations between the two principal state 
and economic system. It is the result of historic development 
which has stimulated the human society as a whole and every 
individual human being on Earth to work out a new mentality. The 
basic effect of the new mentality is the fact that, due to the 
efforts of both East and West, the world has been brought to a 
considerable relaxation of its former ideological, political and 
military confrontation. This has made it possible to solve the 
most important ecological problem: a strong decrease of the 
probability, and hopefully the elimination of potential 
large-scale nuclear conflict and its catastrophic consequences 
for the biosphere and humanity. This opens up possibilities not 
only for the transition from narrow-minded national or group 
mentality to global-scale human thinking, but also for stable 
peaceful development instead of former confrontation. In these 
conditions, the global environment security becomes imperative. 
  The radical relaxation of global military threat puts 
forward 
the basic problem of mankind: its survival under the progressive 
environmental crisis. Beginning 1960s, the scientific, and later 
also political language became characteristic of frequent 
expressions of the type of "ecological calamity," "environmental 
catastrophe," "ecological problem," "environmental safety." They 
have become part of every day language of newspapers, 
periodicals and television. Scientists and politicians who are 
concerned about the state of the biosphere constantly speak in 
these terms. These are not expressions "just in fashion" or a 
product of propagandistic verbal drive; they are indicators of 
general anxiety of people who already suffer from the pressure 
of environmental problems. The subject of ecology often sets 
aside other problems, occupying the leading position both on 
national, and the international scale. Areas of the globe, 
environmental problems have become predominant. 
  Environmental problems have arisen as a result of the 
evolution of our civilization. The patterns of human behaviour 
within the society and in the interaction with the environment 
have been worked out in earlier times when [they] were capable 
of ensuring environmental sustainability. Recently, they have 
come into conflict with the new conditions caused by the 
technological revolution. In the new conditions, in response to 
the challenge on the part of environmental change, it becomes 
necessary to form a new pattern of behaviour and new moral 
preferences, and to revise former objectives of socio- economic 
development. 
<H5>  Problems of Socio-Economic Development </H5>
  After the Second World War was over, the world seemed to 
have 
entered a phase of constant by advancing economical progress. 
The world production increased by a factor of 5 during the 
postwar period: the additional economical increase for each 
decade was equal to the production output obtained over the 
entire period from the start of our civilization to the 1950s. 
For the period mentioned, the agricultural production increased 
by a factor of 2.6, and the population grew from 2.5 to 5.3 
billion. The population growth rate increase from 50 to 84 
million per year. During the same time period, the production of 
food per capita increased by a factor of 1.25, whereas the 
industrial production output increased by a factor of 3 or 4 
[19]. 
  A great number of new technologies have been developed. Such 
new technological systems as electronic and space ones have been 
worked out; efficient medical aids against many widespread 
diseases have been obtained; a new way of life has been formed 
in the society which can be called "an information society." 
  However, not every part of the world could be characterised 
as that of rapid economic development. In many developing 
countries tragic social consequences took place in the course of 
the technological revolution. Seven hundred fifty million people 
on this planet are starving today, while another 1,225 million 
suffer from real poverty. In developing countries, 95% of 
children are born, live and die in poverty, being deprived of 
the benefits of the scientific and technological achievements. 
About 2 billion people suffer from water shortage and have to 
use unhealthy water; the low quality of water is the cause of 
various diseases [7]. The outbreaks of the diseases which had 
been declared as eliminated (cholera, malaria), have been 
registered again. New diseases have appeared, the most dangerous 
of which, so far, is AIDS. The number of the poor and homeless 
in developed countries is growing as well. Drugs addiction, 
violence and terrorism are spreading there. The number of 
technological scientists has increased sharply; the number of 
genetic and blood diseases grows, as well as that of malignant 
tumours. 
  Differences between the North and the South with regard to 
population growth have become more pronounced. In 1950 about 
22% of the global population lived in North America and 
Europe, 
and only about 9% in Africa. Now the proportion is 
reversed. 
The Southern developing countries comprise the major part of the 
world population. The debt of this part of the world amounts to 
1,200 billion US dollars, which constitutes about one half of 
the gross national product of the debtor countries. Poverty and 
starvation, diseases and general frustration are doubtless 
fraught with unpredictable conflicts and violence. There 
appeared numerous environmental refugees. The shortage of land 
and water resources is obvious, and this can cause conflicts and 
provoke wars. Worrisome features of development have appeared in 
the late 1980s. This has become the first time since 1950 when 
the crop yield has stopped increasing the grain production 
output has dropped, and the areas of arable and irrigated land 
per capita have decreased. If, according to Adam Smith, "an 
invisible hand" appears to regulate the population growth this 
hand is most likely to bring about the destruction of the 
biosphere followed by starvation and diseases. 
  The 40 years of technological progress has entailed an 
enormous impact on the environment, since this progress had been 
based on ruthless exploitation of natural resources. Economic 
estimations have practically never taken into account the 
depletion and damage to natural resources, or their direct 
consequence which is the harmful effect on human health. 
Moreover, the future generations will be deprived of their share 
of natural resources. And as a result, the biosphere has been 
considerably disturbed. 
  The resources depleting technologies have proved to be the 
most competitive both under the conditions of a free market and 
in the centrally planned systems. 
  The economic progress of the last 40 years has provided to 
be 
catastrophic for the state of the biosphere. Twenty percent of 
the fertile topsoil of cultivated land have been lost 
completely; 20% of tropical forests have been cleared; the 
process of desertification continues at the rate of 6 million 
hectares annually, and deforestation amounts to 11 million 
hectares a year. The CO[.sup]2[/] concentration in the 
atmosphere increased by 13% during the last 40 years; the 
protective ozone layer is reduced annually by 2%, and 
every 
spring there appears the so-called ozone hole over the 
Antarctic, in fact a sharp drop in the ozone content. Dead lakes 
and damaged forests have now become inevitable components of the 
landscape in industrial countries. Most rivers and brooks in 
Europe and North America remain polluted during the entire year. 
In many cases, pollutants are mostly brought to water bodies not 
so much the local sources, but due to dry and wet deposition 
from the atmosphere. The other source is the runoff from 
cropland where from 50% of fertilizers and pesticides are 
washed out. Dangerous toxics, such as heavy metals, pesticide 
decomposition products, plastics, radionuclides, etc., are 
accumulated in soil, in bottom sediments, as well as in plants 
and animals. Every day over a hundred species disappear 
altogether, the process being particularly intensive in tropical 
forests. On the whole the humans consume up to 40% of the 
biological primary production created by photosynthesis, thus 
depriving of food a great number of living organisms [2,20]. 
  Due to the differences in their socio-economic development, 
the developing and developed countries affect the environment in 
a different way, but always negatively. Less developed 
countries, due to the poverty, rapid population growth and 
technological inadequacy, cause the degradation of land, forest 
and non-renewable resources. Developed countries possess the 
bulk of industrial and energy potential of the world; they are 
the main consumers of resources (particularly, the energy 
resources) and the main suppliers of pollutants. For example, in 
1988 in North America the CO[.sup]2[/] emissions to the 
atmosphere exceeded those in Africa by a factor of 6, in Latin 
America, by 2.5 times and in South-East Asia, by a factor of 9. 
  The tendencies described above call to the reassessment of 
the socio- economic development during the last 40 years; these 
decades should be seen as the period of considerable social 
degradation and strong aggravation of the global environmental 
crisis. A thorough analysis of this situation is necessary on 
the eve of the UN Conference on Environment and Development to 
be held in Brazil, 1-12 June, 1992. 
<H5>  Seeking for Problem-Solving Strategies </H5>
  Leaders of many states often raise ecological problems; a 
great deal of top-level meetings have produced declarations on 
the environment. The greatest attention was probably attracted 
to the Bruntland report and to the outcome of the Second World 
Climate Conference. Quite many scientific conferences were held, 
a good deal of programmes worked out, and specific agreements 
signed. However, just as before, rhetorics mostly prevail over 
actions. Uncertainty is generally felt as to the ways of solving 
ecological problems, developing strategies for environmental 
safety and means to guarantee sustainable development. 
  Assessments of the current global environmental situation 
vary from optimistic ones ("It is necessary to prevent a 
possible environmental crisis") to moderately pessimistic ones 
("The planet is on the threshold of crisis"). At regional 
levels, however, the most pessimistic assessments have been 
given, such as "a severe environmental crisis," etc. Many 
experts concerned with the ecological problems discuss the 
issues of permissible loads on ecosystems, but they do not give 
any unambiguous answer to the question what are the limits of 
the loads on the ecosystems or on the biosphere as a whole. 
There are declarations claiming that it is possible "to feed a 
population of 10 billion people and more." But the estimations 
are not based on accurate analysis of the environmental 
conditions in which the 10 billion people are supposed to live, 
if they are able to survive at all. 
  These questions should be answered, and the answers 
formulated within the concept of environmental safety. However, 
the concept of environmental safety has not been adequately 
formulated so far, nor have the answers been given to the 
above-posed questions, except a few suggestions [2-5, 15]. There 
are two concepts of environmental safety that are being 
considered at the present. The first, more popular one is based 
on the idea that ecological problems and environmental changes 
are related to wrong management of the economy. Therefore, the 
economy should be modified to make it "ecologically safe" and 
not harmful for the environment that is the technology should be 
wasteless and "ecologically clean" energy sources should be used. 
  The other concept of environmental safety proceeds from an 
intuitive belief that it is necessary to conserve a certain part 
of biosphere and keep it free from any economic activity. It is 
assumed that this part of biosphere is necessary to keep in 
order to sustain the environment. But no assessments are given 
as to the threshold areas of the preserved territories for 
sustained biosphere. 
  The first concept actually admits the possibility of 
complete 
destruction of the natural biosphere, since it assumes an 
unlimited economic activity which would not result in the 
degradation of the environment. A solution of any environmental 
problem is assumed to be possible through using adequate methods 
of economic development and the utilisation of efficient 
environmental management systems. 
  The second concept proposes the solution of the problem 
through preservation of parts of the biosphere against its 
possible destruction. The final objective of both concepts is 
provision of equilibrium and wasteless management. To accomplish 
the task, however, an enormous control system of unprecedented 
complexity and scale would be needed, which could ensure a 
sustainable development in the absence of unperturbed biota 
functioning according to the Le Chatelier principle [2,5]. Thus, 
there is no essential difference between both concepts. Systems 
of this type are often referred to as the noosphere. Estimations 
of the information flows to be processed by such a control 
system, and of expenditures required for its operation shows us 
that such a system cannot be practically realised. If the system 
had been created, however, the maintaining of its stability 
would have required over 99% of the total energy and 
labour 
produced by mankind. 
  Recently, a new concept has been proposed which attributes 
the appearance of environmental problems to excessive 
consumption. Today, the output of matters per capita resulted 
from mining, industry, agriculture and forest catting amounts to 
20 tons annually. Subsequent processing of these 20 tons of raw 
materials requires 2.5X03 of energy power and 800 tons of water. 
The final products intended for direct consumption are about 2 
tons. The remaining part is direct (technological) wastes, 
whereas the 2 tons of final products are delayed wastes. The 
concept assumes that the problem might be solved by reducing 
individual consumption. In reality, however, the optimal 
individual consumption value in a modern industrial society does 
not exceed the basic needs of a human being, which are necessary 
to maintain an adequate standard of living. For example, it is 
obvious that it is impossible to live in a multistorey apartment 
house without elevators, water supplies or sewage facilities. 
Therefore, to call for the individual reduction of consumption 
would be similar to the call for the refusal from civilisation. 
  It is unlikely that such a strategy of survival would be 
supported by the public opinion, and that the propaganda of this 
principle would receive a positive response, since these ideas 
do not comply with the natural needs and aspirations of a human 
being. In all times, various religions and ideologies used to 
take account of these aspirations, while calling for temporary 
absence and promising in the end "a Golden Age," "Heaven," 
"Liberty, equality and fraternity" or even "to everyone 
according to his needs." The strategy of reduced consumption 
promises nothing but (at first sight) a gloomy future. 
  Each of concepts described above has a rational core: the 
first one relates environmental problems to the economic 
activity; the second one proceeds from the assumption that the 
sustainability of the severely perturbed but controlled 
biosphere is the basic for survival; the third concept states 
that [it] is consumption that causes environmental degradation 
rather than its final stage which is population. Besides, this 
last concept shifts the center of gravity in solving 
environmental problems from the spheres of technology and 
economy to that of human behaviour. Not a single one of these 
concepts, however, offers an unambiguous solution of the problem 
outlined. Nevertheless, the solution concepts of environmental 
safety, refusal from the outdated "ecological" stereotypes, 
alteration of the environmental paradigm. 
<H5>  Biosphere: The Guarantor of Life Conservation </H5>
  The objective, the environmental research is a guedt [as 
printed] for sustainable conditions of life for humans of the 
present and future generations. To determine what these 
conditions are, the genetic and cultural heredity of man should 
be investigated. Humans exist in the environment, and have been 
able to establish empirically long ago that environmental 
degradation deprives man of normal living conditions. This puts 
forward an essentially new problem: whether the communities of 
natural species in the biosphere determine the state of the 
environment in which human beings exist and whether carbon and 
nutrients concentrations in the environment are occasional 
factors for the biota, or they are formed by the biota itself 
and maintained at a level optimal for the life [2, 17]. If the 
biologically controlled sustainability of the environment 
exists, there arises a need for conservation of the communities 
of natural species in the biosphere and of determination of the 
threshold values for non-sustained perturbations of the 
biosphere. If this [is] not the case, then the environmental 
problem is reduced entirely to that of management of the economy. 
  It is a known fact that the carbon and nutrients 
concentrations in the environment can change by 100% due 
to 
geophysical processes taking place during of about 100,000 
years. Therefore, during the Phanerozoic era, for example, the 
concentrations could have varied by hundreds of times, thus 
making impossible the existence of any form of life. The fact 
that this has never happened points out to the controlling role 
of the biosphere. The thin "film" of life on the Earth's surface 
becomes a filter which regulates concentrations of the carbon 
and nutrients providing a biogeochemical equilibrium with an 
exceedingly high accuracy up to hundredths of one percent 
(10[.sup]- 4[/]). The mechanism of this regulation is ensured 
under natural biodiversity conditions due to the synthesis of 
organic matter from inorganic one and decomposition of organic 
matter into inorganic components. It is worth mentioning here 
that, according to the existing predictions, about a million 
species of plants and animals are under the danger of extinction 
over the next 2-3 decades. 
  The characteristic time of cycles for the basic elements in 
the environment due to biologic production and destruction is of 
the order of 10 years, i.e., it is 10[.sup]4[/] times shorter 
than that of geophysical processes. Therefore, the biota can 
compensate the external perturbations or occasional fluctuations 
of the environmental properties over a short time period. The 
conclusion is supported by the sustainability of the environment 
observed over long time periods of about a thousand years. 
  The biota compensates the growth of inorganic matter 
concentration in the environment by transforming this matter 
into low active organic forms, but, if necessary, the biota 
increases inorganic concentrations by decomposing organic matter 
to restore the closed nature of the biogeochemical cycles. This 
property of the natural biota is similar to the functioning of 
the Le Chatelier principle which provides physically and 
chemically sustained equilibrium states [2, 18]. It is obvious 
that, in order to provide this control, the reserves of carbon 
and nutrients in organic and inorganic compounds of the 
environment should be of the same order of magnitude, which is 
actually the case for most elements. 
  Continuous processes of the biological synthesis and 
decomposition sustain the environment in non-equilibrium 
physical and chemical states which are easily disturbed in case 
of severe perturbations or destruction of the biota. For 
instance, the chemical composition of the atmosphere is in a 
state of non-equilibrium. The low CO[.sup]2[/] concentration 
in the atmosphere is sustained due to the functioning of the 
oceanic biota. It forms the vertical gradient of the 
CO[.sup]2[/] concentration and decreases the near-surface 
(and consequently atmosphere) CO[.sup]2[/] concentrations in 
the ocean by approximately a factor of 3 in comparison with that 
at greater debts. Should biota be destructed in the upper layer 
of the ocean, the CO[.sup]2[/] concentration in the 
atmosphere would have increased by about a factor of 3. This is 
a spectacular example of revealing the role of the biota in the 
control of environmental conditions. 
  Thus, the existing body of knowledge tells us, that by using 
solar radiation as an energy source, the biota sustains the 
environment under the conditions optimal for life by 
compensating occasional fluctuations, external geophysical 
perturbation and non-biological changes in the environment. 
  The concept of the biological controlled environmental 
sustainability is in conflict with the fundamental concept of 
Biology that is the ability of species to adapt themselves to 
any environmental changes caused by geophysical factors. The 
adaptation means a change in the biota due to environmental 
impacts, whereas the impacts of biota on the environment are 
assumed to be accidental and not compensate geophysical changes. 
Therefore, environmental conditions are optimal for the biota 
adapted to such conditions, and there are no other specific 
conditions that would be optimal for the biota. Finally, the 
continuous adaptation of biota to environmental changes 
determines its evolution, in the course of which a programme for 
the adaptation of every species in optimized. Only the best 
adapted species survive, and useful genetic information consists 
in the adaptation to the environment. 
  This concept contains a number of contradictions: 1) if 
environmental changes are determined by geophysical processes, 
it is not clear why these changes had not ever surpassed the 
thresholds where life is not possible; 2) if adaptation follows 
continually the changing environmental conditions, it is not 
clear why there are no transient forms between any two species 
either in space, i.e., among species existing simultaneously, or 
in time, i.e., according to the paleontological data. It is 
known, however, that species preserve morphological constancy 
and strict discretion. 
  To remove these contradictions, it is necessary to alter the 
earlier paradigm and assume that, although the information on 
the adaptation of species to environmental changes is necessary, 
much more important is the information on the functioning of 
species (feeding, behaviour, population density, etc.) which is 
required to stabilize the environment and is carried out by 
species within a specific community. This viewpoint provides a 
consistent explanation of biologically controlled environmental 
sustainability, which removes the first contradiction of the 
earlier paradigm. 
  The ideas proposed do not deny evolution which, within the 
framework of a new paradigm, turns out to be a supplementary 
process, arising spontaneously in the existing information 
molecular structures of biota due to double-, treble-, and more 
simultaneous mutations. It creates a barrier which is difficult 
to overcome for the transition from an old to a new species. 
This explains the sustainability and the discrete nature of each 
species thus removing the second contradiction. A possible 
mechanism can be a horizontal transfer of the gemon fragments 
formed by single-cell procariots which alone can create 
combinations of double-, treble-, and more simultaneous 
mutations due to their abundance and high frequency of their 
generations. 
  Thus, a new concept of the environmental safety is proposed, 
which is based on the assumption that the environment is 
geophysically unstale and that it is the biota that is the 
stabilizing factor sustaining the rnvironment within the limits 
providing the conditions for life. This concept makes it 
possible to give answers to questions which remained unanswered 
within earlier concepts of the environmental safety. 
<H5>  Sustainability Limits </H5>
  It is obvious that the compensation of the perturbations of 
the biota and the environment, i.e., the accomplishment of the 
Le Chatelier principle, is only possible up to a certain 
threshold of perturbations. 
  The high accuracy of the balance between synthesis and 
decomposition in ecosystems is ensured by a great number of 
competitively interesting species or their parts (for example, 
plant roots or leaves, fungi and microbes in soil). In this 
case, the relative fluctuation is proportional to I/N, where N 
is a number of noncorrelated parts of the system. Ecosystem 
always comprise large animals whose number is subject to 
considerable variations, but nevertheless they do not contribute 
significantly to changes in the biogeochemical equilibrium, 
since it has been established empirically that their portion of 
consumption (their participation in the destruction of organic 
matter) does not exceed l%. 
  Analysis of the behaviour of the atmospheric carbon has 
revealed that prior to the past century the land biota followed 
the La Chatelier because it was perturbed only slightly by 
mankind. The biota had compensated man's impact on the 
biosphere. The problem of environmental conservation did not 
arise, and the biomass of the continental biota increased in 
response to the growth of the atmospheric carbon concentrations. 
  However, in the past century (possibly from the beginning of 
the XIXth century), the land biota ceased to absorb the excess 
of CO[.sup]2[/] from the atmosphere. On the contrary, biota 
started to emit carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, thus 
increasing, instead of decreasing, environmental pollution 
resulting from the industrial emission. Therefore, it is 
necessary to determine the threshold at which the Le Chatelier 
principle ceased to function. 
  In the preindustrial times, the area of man-exploited land 
was less than 5% of the entire land territory. The humans 
utilized there about 20% of the biotic production, i.e., 
the 
part of the biotic production consumed did not exceed one 
percent on a global scale. That was within the quota "allowed" 
for big vertebrates. Overgrazing of pastures by domestic animals 
is a convincing demonstration of the existence of such a 
threshold. 
  If local anthropogenic impacts exceed the sustainability 
threshold, local perturbations appear, and pollution gradually 
is accumulated in the environment, with the fluxes of it toward 
the adjacent areas. The area of environmental perturbation is 
determined by a certain characteristic radius of the zone, 
outside which the impact of pollutants on the biota is at the 
sustainability threshold for unperturbed biota. The pollution 
can be reduced at a local spot by using a closed technological 
cycle, or by increasing diffusion, or, finally, by removing the 
pollutants from the locality. Today the environmental management 
is based on permissible concentration limits or permissible 
emission limits. These limits are not related to the 
sustainability threshold and represent, strictly speaking, only 
the extent of social or public concern in environmental problems. 
  The zone where the sustainability threshold has been 
surpassed is extended as perturbation grows. The sustainable 
state of the global biosphere can exist until the unperturbed 
part of the biosphere is able to compensate all the man-made 
perturbation, i.e., until the sustainability threshold is 
exceeded on a global scale. The environmental changes observed 
at the present time definitely show that the sustainability 
threshold has indeed been exceeded on a global scale. The 
estimates available reveal that presently the human consumption 
of the primary biological production on the land amounts to 
40%, while various kinds of economic activity cover 63 
million 
km[.sup]2[/] of land. 
  As has been mentioned above, at the beginning of the 19th 
century, the terrestrial biota absorbed less carbon dioxide than 
it released to the atmosphere as a result of economic activity. 
The direction of the net carbon dioxidflx [as printed] changed. 
Since then, the biosphere has become an additional source of 
carbon dioxide, increasing its emission to the atmosphere in 
addition to industrial emissions. Besides almost 6 Gt of 
CO[.sup]2[/] released to the atmosphere from fossil fuel 
burning, a similar amount of CO[.sup]2[/] is emitted by 
degrading terrestrial biota. The ocean biota has so far been 
disturbed only slightly and therefore it absorbs G St of 
CO[.sup]2[/] annually, in accordance with the Le Chatelier 
principle. About 2 Gt of CO[.sup]2[/] is absorbed by the 
aquatic biota in inorganic form due to physicochemical 
processes, whereas approximately 4 GT of CO[.sup]2[/] is 
added annually to 700 Gt of carbon dioxide which is present in 
the atmosphere. These figures characterize the global carbon 
cycle. 
  A considerable man-made impact has been observed in the 
inland part of the global hydrological cycle. The global river 
runoff from the continents is equal to the water influx by the 
atmosphere from the oceans. In the absence of terrestrial biota, 
the amount of precipitation on the land should be determined 
mainly by the volume of water transported from the oceans and by 
the evaporation from inland water bodies because bare rocks 
would either suck water or let it run off. Biota with a high 
leaf area index drastically increases the return of water to the 
atmosphere due to transpiration, thus sustaining a closed water 
cycle and providing two-thirds of the precipitation on land. So 
biota is responsible for 70% of precipitation on land. In 
an 
unperturbed forest, up to 90% of solar energy is absorbed 
by 
the foliage surface and is used for transpiration, while less 
than 40% of solar radiation is absorbed by agroecosystems. 
Therefore, during the whole history of human race, the clearing 
and replacement of forestlands by pastures, cropland, 
settlements, roads, etc., could have reduced transpiration by 
almost one half. 
  For natural plant communities and agroecosystems over the 
USSR territory, a water-transfer index has been determined. It 
is a ratio between a variability of precipitation and a 
variability of total evaporation during the vegetation period. 
This ratio for forests and wetlands is 2.5-3.0, for meadows and 
steppes is 1.5-2.0 for agroecosystems in the area of Volga river 
and in the Northern Caucasus this ratio drops down to 0.8-1.1, 
i.e., the water control capacity of the agroecosystems is low. 
Over the whole period of human history, this ratio has been 
reduced on the average for land by a factor of 1.6. A result of 
perturbation of the land biota is desertification which went on 
during the entire period of human history. 
  In summary, one can conclude that the human activity 
including the consumption of energy, 90% of which is 
obtained 
from nonrenewable resources, has resulted in such a severe 
impact on the biosphere that the latter has lost its capability 
to sustain balanced biogemical [as printed] cycles within the 
necessary degree of accuracy. 
  The biosphere has lost its potential to restore the 
properties of environment and to sustain its optimal state 
required for the sustenance of life. The degrading biosphere has 
itself become a source of pollution and destabilization of the 
global environment. 
  We believe that the proposed concept of global environmental 
safety provides answers to fundamental problems which remained 
unsolved within the scopes of the previous concepts. 
<H5>  Perspectives for Survival </H5>
  As has been suggested above, one has every reason to believe 
that only the biosphere which consists of the biota and the 
environment interacting with it, is capable to sustain the 
environment, provided that external perturbations do not exceed 
a permissible threshold, that is the biosphere functions 
according to the Le Chatelier principle. That is why, the 
conservation of natural communities and the existing species in 
amounts reassuring the functioning of the le Chatelier principle 
with regard to perturbations is the basic condition for the 
continuation of life on the Earth and the survival of the human 
race. The modern civilization does not ensure this. It has also 
brought about a discrepancy between the genetic programme of a 
human being and his present ecological niche, which should lead 
to the degradation of the gemone of man. This last problem means 
an extreme importance of the population genetics. 
  Research efforts should be directed towards seeking for new 
data and obtaining more precise information in support of the 
concept of the biological control to sustain the environment. 
For this purpose, global monitoring of biological cycles should 
be improved (first of all, that of the carbon cycle); more 
reliable assessment of the biologic primary production should be 
made both on the global and regional scales; parts of the land 
and ocean which are subject to exceptionally strong 
anthropogenic impacts should be identified; carbon dioxide 
emissions by the land biota should be calculated on the basis of 
observations, and regions of the most intensive emissions should 
be singled out. To solve these and other problems, it is 
necessary to correct the relevant national and international 
research programmes. All systems of environmental monitoring and 
modelling should be reoriented with due attention to the 
priority aspects of the global environmental safety. 
  The first and foremost objective to be achieved is to reduce 
the man- made perturbations of the biosphere thus guaranteeing 
recovery of the adequate functioning of the Le Chatelier 
principle in the biosphere. One has stopped the expansion of 
economic activity on a global scale in order to save those 
biospheric regions which have not degraded due to civilization. 
They might become the sources for recovery of the entire 
biosphere, since the biota possesses a powerful mechanism of 
self-control. It is particularly essential to conserve forests 
and wetlands as the most productive systems of the biosphere. 
Among these communities, the tropical forests are of 
particularly vital importance because they are "concentrators" 
of the biodiversity, and their productivity exceeds that of the 
temperate forests by a factor of 4. It is also extremely 
important to make a thorough inventory of the preserved parts of 
the biosphere making use of all available observation means, 
including satellite remote sensing. Some regions should be 
singled out as particularly protected natural reserves. It is 
connection, of special interest are polar zones, high mountain 
areas and deserts. It would be very reasonable to begin with 
proclaiming the entire continent as a reserve. Among other major 
actions are the following: further transition to the 
resource-and- energy-saving technologies; creation of the waste 
treatment facilities to reduce the zones of pollution load on 
the biota due to local man- made effects. These, are the tasks 
for the transition period, and their accomplishment would lessen 
the antropogenic stress on the biosphere. 
  A perspective objective which would make it possible to 
solve 
the biosphere preservation problem radically, is the reduction 
of energy consumption by approximately a factor of 10. This 
would decrease the man-made perturbation of the terrestrial 
biota by an order of magnitude and enable it to restore 
completely its functioning on the basis of the Le Chatelier 
principle. 
  This process would be long enough to make possible the 
transition to a decrease of the global population by 
approximately a factor of 10. The latter problem is certainly 
the most painful because mental stereotypes formed in the past 
were based on the fear of depopulation and on the stimulation of 
high birth rates and formation of large families which was then 
so important to increase the competitiveness of a family, a 
tribe, a nation, a state. At present, the ethical principles 
favouring a refusal from the population control cannot ensure 
anymore the ecological and socio-economic sustainability of 
mankind. 
  A transition from the present two percent population growth 
rate to the equal population drop rate apparently would not 
bring economic problems. In the former case, the extent of the 
demographic stress is caused by children while in the latter the 
stress of an equal value is caused by elderly people, but the 
difference is that the latter requires less expenses. If 
depopulation takes place, it is necessary to ensure the 
preservation of ethnic minorities. Thus, it seems that from the 
economic, demographic, ecological and ethical points of view, 
the possibility of depopulation appears to the realistic. 
  A key point in forming environmental awareness, harmonic 
development of society and nature, elaboration of new ecological 
mentality would be provision of adequate environmental 
information for both the broad public, and experts. Since most 
people have been deprived of proper environmental education, the 
public opinion is often formed under the influence of mass 
media. Therefore, such mass media system must be developed that 
would ensure the transition to the environment-oriented 
mentality. This may prove to be a complicated task on the road 
of overcoming the global environmental crisis. 
<H5>  Part 2. Russia in Environmental Crisis </H5>
  In view of the discussion presented above, the environmental 
situation in Russia is an important topic to consider. Russia 
has a total area of 17 million sq.km and embraces a great 
variata of landscapes. Wilderness natural systems, however, are 
preserved mostly in Siberia, the Arctic regions and high 
mountain areas. 
  The population of Russia, according to the census of 1989 is 
147,386,000; of this total 108,419,000 live in town, 38,967,000 
in rural regions; 95,000,000 live in the European part, 
20,000,000 in the Ural region, the rest in Siberia and the Far 
East. The areas of these regions are 3470, 1865, 11740 thousand 
sq.km respectively. 
  A primary biologic production by net weight over the 
territory of Russia averages to 20 ton/ha annually, being about 
25 ton/ha in the European part, 20 ton/ha in the Ural region, 
nearly 15 ton/ha in Siberia and the Far East. 
  One person accounts for 11.6 ha or in terms of potential 
primary production-232 ton/year, only 2.32 ton/year (1%) 
of 
which can be consumed without any ecological consequences. An 
actual value of the primary production consumption can be 
estimated on the basis of land use balance. Land use includes: 
agricultural lands are 223 million ha; lands occupied by mine 
waste rock, waste dumps and mixed tailings are 15 million ha; 
lands used for towns, villages, roads, etc., are 3.5 million ha; 
lands subjected to yearly man-produced fires are 1 million ha. 
The primary production obtained from these lands is preempted 
practically completely by man. One person is accounted 1.6 ha of 
these lands. In addition, as a result of antropogenic impacts 
(acid rains, etc.) 62 million ha supply half as much of primary 
production which adds up 0.2 ha per capita. Thus, an average per 
capita consumption of the biologic primary production over the 
territory of Russia amounts to nearly 36 tons per person per 
year (without taking into account other kinds of consumption). 
It exceeds the limit set by the nature 16 times. This means that 
over the territory of Russia the biota does not follow the Le 
Chatelier principle, the ecosystems have lost their ability to 
be sustainable, the balance of nutrients has been disturbed and 
the biota itself has become a source of pollution because it has 
started emitting carbon dioxide. The ecological niches are being 
degraded, genomes of organisms are deformed, ecosystems are 
deteriorating. All these processes and many others, indicate 
that a severe ecological crisis has been occurring. 
  To this critical ecological background a great number of 
pollutance is added which are the final production of the 
non-renewable resources consumption. One person accounts for up 
to 53 tons of mineral resources mined per year. A part of this 
amount is exported, the rest is processed to obtain a final 
product. The processing technology requires 800 tons of water 
per capita per year mostly taken from surface sources. Taking 
into account an efficiency the yearly water consumption per 
capita amounts to 200 tons. The final product is accounted for 
about 2 tons per capita. All the rest 95 percent are waste 
products polluting the environment. As to the final product it 
may also be regarded as wastes, but delayed wastes. 
  Economic activity on the territory of Russia to a large 
extent is based on wet technologies resulting in a great amount 
of polluted water and much greater solid wastes. One hundred 
eighty four tons of polluted water per capita is discharged to 
water bodies. Water quality is controlled by measuring just few 
parameters which is insufficient to maintain the water quality 
standards. The actual water quality standards are inadequate. 
They consider an irrigation returned water as being of quality 
while in fact it is heavily polluted. In the estimation of a 
volume of polluted water many sources are not taken into account 
such as emergency discharges, river vessels pollution, 
inefficient operation of water treatment system, non-point 
source of pollution, dry and wet deposition from the atmosphere, 
run-off of pesticides and fertilizers, wash off from railways 
and highways, etc. 
  To maintain the water quality standards, 8-8 [as printed] 
thousand tons of clean water per capita per year would be 
required to dilute polluted water. This means that exception 
[of] a high water period the main rivers of Russia are polluted. 
Ground waters are polluted, particularly in the European part. 
There are about 1,000 polluted areas, 224 being very extended. 
  Soil contamination by pesticides is spreading out of 5,000 
samples taken over the territory of Russia during a year, traces 
of pesticides have been found in 25%; 1.5% 
contained the 
quantities exceeding the acceptable limit. Out of 5,000 samples 
of vegetation traces of pesticides were found in 17%; 
5% of 
samples contained the quantities exceeding the acceptable limit. 
The content of nitrates exceeds the limit in one-sixth of the 
vegetation samples. 
  There are 15 disposal grounds for radioactive wastes. The 
most spacious are situated in the Urals region. The total 
radioactivity of wastes buried in this area exceeds that 
resulted from the Chernobyl accident by at least one order of 
magnitude. As a result of the Chernobyl accident, a large part 
of European Russia, particularly Briansk, Tula, Orel and 
Belgorod regions have become polluted. 
  Low efficiency of resources use and obsolete technologies 
leading to great losses of resources are essential addition 
factors of the environment pollution. 
  During the mining process considerable amounts of mineral 
resources are not extracted and therefore lost. The 
corresponding figures for coal is 14%, chromium ore is 
29%, 
potassium chloride is 61%. Extraction of oil is no more 
than 
30-33%. Wastes from forest felling amounts to 40%. 
Wastes in 
agriculture have not been accounted, but by the existing 
estimations they are no less than 30%. On agricultural 
lands 
the gumus [as printed] losses amount to 0.64 ton/ha annually. 
  In Russia, about 100 cities have a very high level of air 
pollution. The situation with drinking water is also very 
serious. It contains heavy metals, pesticides, and their 
derivatives nitrates, etc. Drinking water quality measurements 
in some cities, St. Petersburg included, have shown even the 
traces of dioxine. 
  The consequences of these environmental disturbances, the 
loss of the biosphere ability for regeneration enormous amounts 
of pollutants have deteriorated the living and health conditions 
of population. For the last 20 years in Russia the mortality 
rate has increased by 25%. Mortality caused by 
cardiovascular 
diseases has increased from 381.2 to 551.9 per thousand of death 
cases; caused by malignant tumors, from 130.6 to 182.5, cancer 
diseases becoming "youger." [as printed] Increase in genetic 
degradation has been observed. Every tenth person inherits such 
diseases as a therosclerosis, ischemic diseases, diabetes, etc. 
In cities with disturbed ecological situation functional 
disorders in blood forming organs, intracellularenzime and 
immune systems are observed. In rural areas with a high level of 
pesticide use (over 10 kg) of active substance per hectare per 
year, the deterioration of the immune system in human organism 
as well as respiratory diseases are observed. Children suffer 
from anomalies in cardiovascular system, mental disorders, iron 
deficiency anemia, etc. Correct methods for accounting the 
losses resulted from the environmental disturbance and damage do 
not exist. The estimations for Russia show that the losses 
amount to 10-12% of the total national product annually, 
while 
the budget allocated for the solution of environmental problems 
is about 1%. In 1989 the allocation for the environmental 
protection and the provision of adequate ecological conditions 
for the population amounted to 7.5 billion roubles or only 50 
roubles per capita. One quarter of this sum was capital 
investments while three-fourths were spent for operational 
management including salary payments to government officials. 
About 0.4 billion has not been used at all. The plan for putting 
in operation environment control facilities was fulfilled in the 
area of water management by 43% and for pir by 
53%. [as 
published] 
  An analysis of existing air and water treatment 
installations 
has shown that the waste water purification systems are 
inefficient. Dust collecting and air purification systems have 
become physically and morally obsolete. The conclusion is quite 
definite: the funds allocated for environmental problems are not 
enough and even they have been used ineffectively. It is proved 
by statistical data on extremely high level of pollution over 
the territory of Russia. Basing on regular publications about 
such cases in the newspaper GREEN WORLD one can conclude that 
over 100 cases of high level air pollution are recorded every 
month and not less than 100 cases are also for water bodies. In 
about 10 percent of these cases the level of pollution is 
extremely high. 
  This very brief analysis of the ecological situation in 
Russia leads to the following conclusion. Over a greater part of 
the Russian Federation territory the consumption of primary 
biological production by man is 10-40 times more than "allowed" 
quota. As a result, the environment is degrading, the biota has 
become a source of pollutants emission instead of being their 
sink. The emission of carbon dioxide CO[.sup]2[/] and methane 
has increased. Vast territories are desertified. A great number 
of river basins have been polluted, water flows have lost their 
self-purification ability. Soil fertility is decreasing. Food 
quality is deteriorating. All these factors make the living 
conditions and the health of people ever worse. Thus, it is 
evident that there is a severe environmental crisis and a human 
ecology crisis in Russia. 
  The main cause of the crisis is the excessively high level 
of 
consumption of primary biological production and of 
non-renewable resources. Low efficiency puts, however, low 
actual level of food production and consumption, as well as a 
low level of consumer goods consumption. It results from the 
following factors: on the one hand, it is an overall 
inefficiency of the economy due to its militarization; the use 
of resources-depletion technologies; the export consisting 
mainly of raw materials; enormous losses and wastes of all 
stages of raw materials because of out-dated and ineffective 
technologies. On the other hand, there is no policy to control 
the demographic processes. The family planning is nonexistent 
still the stereotype calling for the growth of population and a 
large is widespread, though it has been evident that the 
population growth and large families do not provide a stable 
development of a country, society and family. [sentence as 
published] 
  In the area of science the environmental crisis in Russia 
calls for the revision of the objectives and concept of the 
future monitoring system, for the change in the approach to 
ecological modelling, as well as in the research of the 
biosphere-geosphere system, for the development of environmental 
management for particular areas and regions and for 
environmental cartography. 
  A fundamental solution of the crisis can be only by means of 
reduction of human consumption of primary biological production 
down to the level providing a biochemically balanced biosphere 
obeying the Le Chatelier principle (1.5). In the process of 
addressing this basic strategic objective the problems of human 
ecology should be solved by revising the objectives, structure 
and efficiency of the present economy. It should be a different 
kind of economy to be based on the use of energy-and-resource 
saving technologies. A proper infrastructure must be created as 
a foundation for the solution of the environmental crisis. 
Therefore, any environmental programme for Russia must be 
preceded by the programme oriented specifically towards the 
creation of infrastructure containing legislative, economic, 
monitoring, information, education, social international 
cooperation and technological components. 
<H5>  Conclusion, A Look Into the XXI Century </H5>
  Analysis of the state of the environment in the world 
reflected in many publications of the last years (in 
Russian...1984; in Russian, 1989; Our...1987; State..., 1989, 
1990; World..., 1988-89, 1990-91; Climate..., 1990; Climate 
in..., 1990; Environmentally..., 1991; Caring..., 1991) 
undoubtedly demonstrates that the main trends in environmental 
destabilization keep on growing. National and international 
environmental programmes, national laws and international 
conventions, implementation of more effective resource- and 
energy-saving technologies, multibillion dollar investments into 
the waste treatment facilities, and many other attempts have not 
been able to revert the trends or considerably slow them down at 
global level, though some problems of the environmental cleaning 
have been successfully solved at the local and national levels. 
  Many profound disturbances of the environment have emerged 
as 
a result of nature's unwarranted widening of the ecological 
niche reserved for Homo sapiens. They cannot be corrected by 
engineering or technological means. In many cases, particularly 
in Russia, environmental problems are considered in the light of 
pollution or its consequences which are in fact a tip of the 
iceberg or else, a derivative from the main causes of the 
current ecological crisis. High expectations are held in 
transferring environmentally benign technologies to the 
developing countries. However, if the technology transfer is 
successful and held on a cardinal recovery of the Earth's 
life-supporting system would not occur. 
  Even greater, perhaps, the main expectations are connected 
with a sharp increase in funding for global environmental 
problems if governments and the private sector would at last 
become aware where their real priorities should be. Indeed, a 
sharp increase in financing of the environmental programmes and 
the creation of special international funds are necessary. But 
even if funding for the restoration of the biosphere increased 
by one or two orders of magnitude, the growing population of the 
world would keep on destroying it. One has to accept that money 
in this area does not solve everything. 
  Expectations are also held in solving the environmental 
problems with the strong, presently non-existing integration of 
economy and ecology in agricultural and industrial production. 
Indeed, this is very important for the present stage of the 
history of mankind since it would ease the load on the biosphere 
thus slowing down the development of the crisis. However, the 
world development in the XXth century is still considered in 
terms of the production growth though for a very large part of 
mankind the benefits of the technological revolution are 
inaccessible and the number of such people in increasing. 
Besides, one has to remember that growth and development are not 
only two different words but also two different concepts, and 
economic and social development are not necessarily accompanied 
by the growth of production. If we look into the environmental 
consequences of world development in this century that is into 
the implications of the growth of production we would see that 
it was a way to the catastrophe. It is very clearly seen on the 
territory of Russia but one can also sense an abyss behind an 
environmental prosperity seen on a surface in some other 
countries. 
  In the middle of 1980s symptoms of another catastrophe 
connected with the global environmental crisis have appeared. 
The per capita amount of the world grain production, as well as 
the arable and irrigated areas have begun to decline while the 
price of grain is going up. It is particularly true for Africa 
where hunger has become a constant factor but the population is 
increasing. It is an unstable continent by many parameters and 
it confirms the point that population growth is a destabilizing 
factor at all levels from continents to families. 
  More frequent outbreaks of infectious diseases, widening of 
the areals of epidemics, spreading of the AIDS cases are the 
signs of the environmental crisis and of the deterioration of 
the standard of living. Morbidity rate due to environmental 
conditions is increasing, as is the number of cases of genetic 
diseases indicating a decay of the human genome. 
  Once again, all these facts indicate a progressive 
development of the environmental crisis and the question of the 
very existence of man as a biological species. When entering the 
XXI century mankind should either accept the challenge or in 
fact give up the struggle by not solving the main problem of the 
biosphere restoration. 
  All the authoritative international documents on the 
ecological future of the mankind which appeared during the last 
few years (State..., 1990; Our..., 1987; Caring..., 1991; and 
others) agree that man's existence is not possible without 
preserving natural communities of organisms, that the biosphere 
has certain limits for an economic intervention, that it is 
necessary to stop the population growth on the planet. However, 
behind these statements there are unanswered questions. But 
without the answers the suggested strategy called a sustainable 
development cannot but call the questions, particularly if under 
the term of a sustainable development one means improvement of 
"the quality of human life while living within the carrying 
capacity of supporting ecosystems" (Caring..., 1991, p.10). 
  The main questions which are necessary to answer before any 
strategy can be elaborated are as follows: 
  If one accepts that the survival and sustainable development 
of mankind is impossible without preserving natural communities 
of organisms (ecosystems, landscapes, etc.), then it is 
necessary to understand the functioning mechanisms which ensure 
the life on the Earth, including the life of humans. 
  If it is accepted that the biosphere has a limited carrying 
capacity, then it is necessary to determine the limits of the 
capacity. 
  If the above questions are answered, then one has to define 
whether mankind is within the caring capacity or already outside 
it and if so, when the threshold has been crossed. 
  The strategies for the future of mankind would depend on the 
answers to the above questions. 
  This book has made an attempt to answer these questions. To 
define the strategy for the XXI century, most important is the 
conclusions that mankind in its development has already some 
time ago exceeded the carrying capacity of the biosphere. 
Natural communities are being destroyed and under these 
conditions social development cannot be sustainable. 
  Having exceeded the limit of consumption "permitted" by 
nature by one order of magnitude mankind has disturbed the 
stability of the biosphere. This led to the deformation of the 
environment the sustainability of which cannot be maintained by 
the deteriorating biota. That is why one has to raise the 
problem of mankind's survival as its main goal for the long term 
historical perspective. The sustainable development strategy can 
be accepted for the present transitional stage. 
  The problem of human survival is connected to the need to 
decrease energy consumption by one order of magnitude and, 
therefore, with the corresponding reduction of the number of 
people living on the Earth. The objective is not in slowing down 
the increment and not in the stabilization of population in the 
future but in its considerable diminution as compared with the 
current number. We talk about a very peaceful, well accepted and 
understood process as opposed to the chaos and suffering of very 
many people which are inevitable while passively expecting the 
stabilization at the level of 10-12 billion. 
  The goal of considerable reduction of the world population 
as 
compared with its present rapid growth is incredibly complex to 
achieve and very difficult to comprehend. However, either 
mankind must find the strength to solve the problem or else the 
Nature deteriorating thanks to man would get rid of the species 
of Homo sapiens which plays the role of a geological force and 
has introduced such disturbance into the biosphere that no other 
species has ever introduced during the whole history of life on 
the planet. 
  Demographic processes are characteristic of inertia, and the 
population of eight billion in the world unfortunately is 
practically inevitable. But if to begin to act now the 
subsequent stabilization would come followed by the reduction in 
population. No one country alone is able to solve the problem, 
neither continent nor region. The problem is unprecedented by 
its complexity and requires a level of an international 
understanding and cooperation unknown before. The people of the 
Earth including the most poor and uneducated should become aware 
of the need to make the transition to a one child family. One 
can either say that it is impossible to fulfil and go on towards 
the end of mankind or to make a very strong, unprecedented 
effort to renounce the stereotypes and to start going along in 
the interests of the whole of mankind. 
  The ideas and considerations suggested in this book 
definitely require further development, elaboration and 
discussion. Their acceptance or denial on the basis of 
scientific arguments may considerably influence on the strategy 
of development of the world and Russia in the XXI century. 

