Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz and Roberto Melendez S.] </F>
  [Excerpts] The Office of the Attorney General of the 
Republic [PGR] described the fact that Federal Judicial Branch 
officials are releasing individuals linked with the drug trade 
as "very serious for society," because it "negates, to a large 
extent, the PGR's great efforts in the battle against the drug 
trade." It held two district judges of criminal proceedings and 
two magistrates of the National Supreme Court responsible for 
releasing Jose Adolfo de la Garza, alias "El Borrado," on bail 
of 100,000 new pesos. The latter is considered a "very important 
member" of the Matamoros cartel. 
  The Attorney General's Office confirmed that, during the 
past 
five years, thanks to our country's effort to eradicate the 
serious, increasing drug trafficking problem, approximately 
60,000 persons associated with crimes against health have been 
arrested and placed at the disposal of federal judges. Through 
inquiries made in courts and among prison authorities, it was 
learned that between 60 and 70 percent of them have regained 
their freedom, either through bail or bond, or have even been 
acquitted. 
  It was specified that the first secretary of Mexico City's 
seventh district court of criminal proceedings, Guadalupe 
Jimenez Nunez, who was serving last July as judge by operation 
of law; the head of the sixth district court, also in the 
nation's capital, Teresa Irma Fragoso Perez; and the 
magistrates, Vicente Salazar Vera and Juan Silva Meza, decided 
to release the drug trafficker, and this occurred on 2 December. 
The PGR noted that they did so despite the appeals filed by the 
Federal Public Prosecutor's Office [MPF]. 
  Through a communique released yesterday afternoon, the PGR 
explained that, based on an arrest warrant issued by the fourth 
district court of criminal proceedings in Tamaulipas State, 
located in Matamoros, De la Garza was captured by Federal 
Judicial Police agents on 25 June of this year in Ciudad Juarez, 
Chihuahua. Since he was regarded as extremely dangerous, he was 
taken to Mexico City. 
  The PGR added that Jose Adolfo was identified by the 
authorities as a person presumed guilty of the crimes of cocaine 
possession, trafficking, and illegal export, as well as criminal 
association. Therefore, Jimenez Nunez, then serving as judge by 
operation of law in the seventh district court, took a 
preliminary statement from him based on letters requisitorial 
from his counterpart in Matamoros. 
  Later, on 14 July, according to the institution, Jimenez 
Nunez himself ordered the release of the person then indicted, 
arguing that there was no evidence for trying him. It stressed 
that this verdict was appealed by the Federal Public 
Prosecutor's Office, and that the final decision was to be made 
by the third unified court of Matamoros. 
  The PGR explained that, as stated in criminal proceedings 
No. 
62/93, "El Borrado" also has been accused of the crimes of 
possession, manufacture, packing, transport, purchase and sale, 
trafficking, and the illegal entry of drugs into the country. He 
was further charged with contributing funds to finance the 
trading of the "narcotic designated cocaine," carrying firearms 
intended for exclusive use by the Army, Navy, and Air Force, and 
criminal association. 
  It added that the sixth district judge of criminal 
proceedings, Teresa Irma Fragoso Perez, after hearing the case, 
issued an order for his formal imprisonment solely on the count 
of criminal association, ordering his release on the other 
counts. The document goes on to say that, in view of this 
situation, the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office filed an 
appeal, which happened to be heard in the fourth unified court 
of the Federal District. The head of that court, Vicente Salazar 
Vera, confirmed the decision challenged by the public prosecutor. 
  Pursuant to the court's verdict, on 23 July Judge Fragoso 
Perez ordered a provisional release on bail for Jose Adolfo de 
la Garza, to which the MPF also objected. Nevertheless, despite 
the prosecutor's express dissent concerning the release of the 
accused, the second unified court of the first circuit, headed 
by Magistrate Juan Silva Meza, confirmed the judge's order. On 2 
December of this year, the presumed drug trafficker's release 
became effective, after he had posted bail of 100,000 new pesos. 
  Referring to De la Garza's release, the PGR emphasized that 
"this situation is very serious for society, and negates, to a 
large extent, the great efforts of the Office of the Attorney 
General of the Republic in the battle against the drug traffic." 
It described that individual as "a very important member of the 
cartel headed by the `capo,' Juan Garcia Abrego," chief of the 
Matamoros criminal group. [passage omitted] 
  Similarly, from inquiries made among prison authorities and 
public servants in the Federation's Judicial Branch, it was 
determined that at least some 60,000 persons remanded for crimes 
against health have regained their freedom during the past five 
years. Moreover, approximately 30,000 others are currently 
subject to trial, or already serving prison sentences for those 
illicit acts. 
  It should be noted that this is not the first time that the 
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has made public 
its dissent with judges and magistrates who have released 
presumed Mafia "capos" linked to the drug traffic. 

