BFN 

  [Text] Cordoba, 22 April (NA) -- Defense Ministry officials 
and Military Airplane Factory authorities in this city have 
confirmed the theft of computer material on the Pampa 2000 plane 
project. They stressed, however, that the stolen material "does 
not include confidential information" on the plane. 
  Aeronautics Engineer Francisco Luciano, chairman of the 
Cordoba Materiel Area Administration Council, said that the 
stolen hard disks contained information on "the cost of 
different plane components, information that was being prepared 
for the bidding that the U.S. Air Force is organizing for 12 
May." 
  The United States will decide, through this bidding, on the 
purchase of 700 training planes. The total cost of the deal is 
estimated to be worth between $5 billion and $7 billion. 
  Luciano stressed that the stolen material "does not have any 
other value than the possibility of determining how many hours 
you can invest in manufacturing different plane components" and 
other similar data. 
  He estimated that the materials stolen are only worth around 
$10,000, and included a Hewlett Packard laser printer, software 
material, a mouse, a CD-ROM, a scanner, diskettes, and office 
paper. 
  Despite the explanation, however, officials here suspect 
that 
we are confronted with a case of industrial espionage. The 
stolen material is not strategic, but could have had no other 
destination than that of some company specifically interested in 
the plane bidding. 
  The case is being investigated by Judge Gustavo Becerra 
Ferrer, of the Second Federal Court, who took the precaution of 
informing President Carlos Menem about the incident. 
  So far there is no information on court-ordered legal steps, 
but it is understood that he has heard the testimony of various 
Military Factory officials and employees working in the area of 
computers. 
  It is presumed that the theft occurred on the night between 
31 January and 1 February, when factory personnel were on 
vacation. The materials were stolen from the office of the 
department called Joint Primary Aircraft Training System 
(JPATS), which was working on a U.S. Air Force and Navy joint 
training program. 

