BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, June 06, BNS -- The problems in the field 
of textiles connected with a free-trade agreement between 
Estonia and the European Union remain unsettled, Foreign 
Ministry Chancellor Priit Kolbre, who led the Estonian 
delegation at the latest round of talks in Brussels June 2-3, 
said at a press conference in Tallinn today. 
  Kolbre said the talks proceeded in the fishing, farming, 
customs and textile groups, and that the plenary session 
discussed the basic text of the free-trade agreement and 
problems concerning the working groups. "We took a long step 
forward, but failed to wind up the negotiations," he said, 
adding that big problems persisted in textile issues. 
  Signe Ratso, the deputy head of the Economics Ministry 
foreign trade department, told reporters Estonia's opposition to 
a double control system was the stumbling block. The European 
Union wants Estonia to introduce a license system to establish 
control over the export of clothing and textiles, whereas the 
Baltic nation claims licenses are inconsistent with its 
principles of liberalization of trade and cause considerable 
expense to both the state and enterprises. 
  The fishing group, on the other hand, made good progress, 
Director General Lauri Vaarja of the Fishing Administration 
reported. Estonia was able to justify the need for bigger 
import quotas than those offered by the European Union. 
  Agriculture Ministry Deputy Chancellor Ruve Sank said the 
rules for applying farming produce quotas exclude Estonian 
enterprises from the European Union market and they can market 
their produce in Europe only through local companies. The 
meeting reached agreement on increasing the quotas for some 
goods, including cheese and alcohol. 
  The customs group focused on rules of origin. Here, too, 
some problems remained open. Estonia proposed changes in rules 
applied to coffee, cigarettes, and handpainted porcelain and 
silk. Agreement was reached on coffee but not on cigarettes. 
The reply on rules of origin for handicrafts will be 
forthcoming in the next few weeks. 
  The working groups of the two sides coordinated the general 
principles of a bilateral free-trade agreement in February. It 
has been agreed in principle that the agreement steps into force 
at the beginning of the next year. Unlike Latvia and Lithuania, 
Estonia's agreement with the European Union is not going to 
provide for a transition period. 

