Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Ibrahimi Mosque's Massacre Emphasizes That </F>
Coexistence Between Arabs and Settlers Is Impossible"] 
  [Text] The heinous crime the Jews committed in the Ibrahimi 
Mosque against Muslims while prostrating in their prayers 
recalls to the mind the Jews' treachery, black hatred, and ugly 
crimes throughout ancient and modern history against our Arab 
nation. 
  The massacre, in which scores of Arab citizens were martyred 
and hundreds were injured, was certainly carried out at the 
instructions, or at least with the knowledge, of Rabin's 
government. 
  How can an extremist settler, carrying a machine gun, enter 
a 
mosque while scores of soldiers are there to watch those who 
enter or leave the mosque? 
  This heinous crime, which reflects the treachery of Jews and 
proves their hidden hatred, will certainly influence the course 
of peace process Israel tried, and is trying, to abort. 
  This ugly massacre, which is considered a blatant violation 
of international laws and charters and human rights, and which 
conflicts with religious and moral values, should not pass 
without punishment for all those who were behind it and who 
paved the way for its implementation. 
  Palestinians and Arabs should not be satisfied with issuing 
statements of condemnation and denunciation, and with weeping 
and wailing about the martyrs. They should seriously and 
responsibly reassess this situation and this tragedy and 
disaster. 
  Palestinians and Arabs -- peoples and leaders -- should 
reconsider their calculations and their position on the peace 
process as a whole. 
  It has been proven that there will be no coexistence between 
the Jews and Arabs as long as the Jewish settlements remain in 
the heart of Gaza and the West Bank. It has been proven that 
the region will not enjoy real, lasting, just, and comprehensive 
peace without israel's full withdrawal from all occupied 
Palestinian and Arab territories, immediately and without any 
delay. 
  This massacre, which is a shame for humanity, and for which 
the whole international community is responsible, should drive 
the big and influential powers in the Security Council, led by 
the United States, and before them all the Arab countries, to 
take a firm position toward Israel and its aggressive and 
expansionist policy that threatens security, stability, and 
peace in the whole region. 
  It should urge the big and influential powers of the 
Security 
Council to send international forces to protect the Islamic and 
Christian shrines and Arab citizens in occupied Palestinian and 
Arab territories. They should force Israel to immediately 
withdraw from these territories. Short of this, the peace 
process will be destined to complete failure. 
  We in steadfast Jordan urge all Arab leaders to overcome 
their differences, revive Arab solidarity, and close and unify 
ranks to defend the Arab and Islamic shrines and our kinsfolk in 
the occupied territories. 

