BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 31 Mar (PL) -- President Fidel Castro has 
announced the possibility that on 1 May the Cuban parliament may 
analyze a package of economic measures designed to improve the 
country's economy. 
  The announcement was made by Castro when closing the Cuban 
Workers Federation (CTC) plenum on Tuesday, according to a 
version of the speech published today by the newspaper GRANMA. 
  He said that on 1 May, as the best greeting for 
International 
Workers Day, the National Assembly of the People's Government 
[ANPP] (parliament) might hold an extraordinary session, which 
was originally slated for the early part of the month, to 
consider proposals for improving the nation's internal finances. 
  The CTC plenum -- known here as the workers parliament -- 
studied the progress made in the island's parliaments in the 
workplace in which participants explained their views and 
possible solutions to the country's principal economic problems. 
These solutions will be considered during a debate to be held 
by the deputies. 
  Fidel Castro noted that other countries usually adopt 
economic and financial measures with the participation of very 
few government officials and do not even present them to the 
legislature but, rather, decide on their approval and issue a 
respective decree. The people then learn of their approval 
through the newspapers, he said. 
  We felt that this method should not be applied in our case, 
he said, noting: "In fact, we were not satisfied with simply 
taking them before the ANPP, because they involved very 
sensitive issues. This is why we believed it was important to 
present them to the people." 
  He stressed the need to face intelligently and with 
political 
tact "decisions that must necessarily be adopted, knowing that 
any restrictive measure will not be popular and that it will 
always be easier to agree on general issues rather than on 
specific issues." 
  Regarding the country's current stage, he explained that 
some 
progress is being achieved. This includes producing hundreds of 
thousands of more tons of sugar; a better tobacco harvest; 
greater production in vegetables and oil; and increased income 
from tourism biotechnology, and the pharmaceutical industry. 
  "We have had to work miracles to keep the country standing 
in 
the face of this complex situation and the most rigorous 
blockade which has sought to make us incapable of resisting," he 
added in his nearly two-hour speech, GRANMA reported. 

