Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] New York, Feb. 24 (YONHAP) -- Sounding an 
unprecedentedly optimistic note, South Korean President Kim 
Yong-sam said on Wednesday he was "very sure that in the end 
North Korea will accept the nuclear inspections" demanded by the 
international community in an interview with THE NEW YORK TIMES 
[NYT]. Kim told TIMES reporter David Sanger at the Chongwadae 
presidential mansion in Seoul that he had received a mountain of 
information about the nuclear issue over the last few weeks. 
Based on this information, Korea's chief executive has concluded 
there is no clear evidence yet that North Korea possesses 
nuclear weapons. 
  He observed that it was a "wise opinion" for Washington to 
delay the deployment of Patriot missiles in South Korea, 
referring to testimony in Congress on Tuesday by Gen. John 
Shalikashvili, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who 
said the deployment was likely to be held up because it would 
provide the North Koreans with an excuse to derail the process 
of resolving the nuclear problem. 
  He defended Seoul's alleged frequent shifts from sounding 
hawkish to dovish on the North and corrected the description of 
"inconsistency" on its policy to "tactical flexibility". The 
basic strategy being pursued by Seoul and Washington -- 
convincing the North that there are economic and political 
advantages to abandoning its nuclear weapons program -- "is 
proving quite effective," Kim noted. "This is only the beginning 
of the solution to the problem," he said, adding that 
inter-Korean dialogue and completion of nuclear inspections, 
including the North's two undeclared sites, would be necessary 
before Pyongyang could begin to receive aid and investment. 
  The U.S. daily labeled Kim's comments as the most optimistic 
assessment yet of the nuclear issue and a sharp turnaround from 
just eight months ago, when he warned the United States against 
being "led" by North Korea and declared that "time is running 
out" as the Stalinist regime would be able to produce plutonium 
by early 1994 in large enough quantities to make nuclear weapons. 
  Kim appeared to be betting that his best strategy is to 
reward the North for the first glimmerings of flexibility, 
rather than immediately pressing for better access to its 
nuclear sites now that the communist country has started to 
finally come around on allowing the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) to conduct inspections, the newspaper said. THE 
TIMES reported that Kim spoke expansively about the reforms his 
government has initiated to cure what he called "the Korean 
disease" since his inauguration a year ago. The military was "a 
club that only rewarded its own members," Kim said, explaining 
his removal of all generals involved in coups from the 1960s and 
1980s. Using the legitimacy gained from having garnered 42 
percent of the vote in a three-way election, Kim said he has 
steered the military back to its defense mission and away from 
politics, adding that military morale is high now. 
  The paper reported that Kim's critics, whose numbers are 
few, 
say his biggest failing is that his reform efforts have yet to 
trickle down through most layers of Korean society. 

