Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] During the period between January and November of 
last year, the country's trade balance showed a deficit of 
$1.4906 billion, according to the figures published by the 
Central Bank. 
  In the most recent issue of the bulletin PRINCIPALES 
INDICADORES ECONOMICOS published by that institution, Dominican 
exports came to $501.1 million during that period, while 
cumulative imports came to $1.9917 billion. 
  The absolute lowest export figure in the course of the last 
five years was seen in 1992, when goods worth $566.1 million 
were exported, according to other bank publications. 
  If the monthly average accumulated for exports in the year 
just past is maintained, we will break the record for the lowest 
export total since 1988. 
  The figure of $501.1 million quoted for cumulative exports 
last November included $151.1 million for sugar and sugar 
products, $23.9 million for coffee and processed coffee 
products, $34.6 million for cacao and its processed products; 
$29.3 million for tobacco and its processed products, $119.1 
million for minerals, and $143.1 million for other products, the 
bulletin indicated. 
  One of the components that showed the greatest decline was 
the mineral category, which includes ferronickel, gilt, gold, 
and silver. The total declined from $160.8 million in the 
comparable period in 1992 to $119.1 million in 1993. 
  The Dominican economic products traditionally exported are 
sugar and its derivatives, coffee, cacao, tobacco, and minerals. 
They have accounted for more than 90 percent of the export 
totals. The rest of the goods exported are principally 
nontraditional products. 
  In recent years, nontraditional products have gained in 
importance. 
  The "Other Products" category, made up basically of 
nontraditional products, showed a cumulative export total of 
$143.1 million pesos. This figure covers 11 months of last year, 
and it exceeded the total for the exports in this category made 
throughout the whole of 1992--$139.5 million, according to the 
Central Bank publication. 
  Various business organizations have been issuing public 
warnings about the increasing deficit in the Dominican trade 
balance and its consequences. 
  In the view of many economists, the gradual decline in goods 
has been offset by the export of services, in the tourism and 
free zone sectors in particular. 
  There are various interpretations of the exports from the 
free zones. Some are based on the figures provided by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, while others take the figures provided 
by the Dominican Government as the point of departure.. 
  The foreign-exchange income of the Central Bank obtained as 
a 
result of free-zone operations came to $5.9 million pesos in the 
period between January and June, according to the figures shown 
in the foreign-exchange balance table published in the quarterly 
bulletin of the banking institution. 
  That publication carried the figures on the gross domestic 
product (GDP) up to the month of September 1993. 
  They show growth of 1.5 percent, at constant 1970 prices, 
including the mining sector. 
  It is notable that this publication carried a calculation of 
the additional product without including the mining sector, 
since viewed separately, that showed a decline of 42.1 percent, 
the publication indicated. 
  In answer to questions posed by our editor recently, the 
governor of the Central Bank estimated that the GDP might show 
an increase of 3-4 percent. However, this official noted, by way 
of reservation, that the final figures have not yet been made 
available. 
  The commitment made by the Dominican Republic to the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for the year just past was to 
achieve product growth of about five percent. 
  Certain foundations that make estimates in this connection 
predicted that growth would come to less than 1 percent. 
  The foreign-exchange balance came to $643.4 million pesos in 
gross reserves in the January-November period, down from the 
figure reported in the month of August, which was $714.2 million 
pesos. 
  The document in question revealed that the foreign income 
included in this balance actually obtained from the export of 
goods came to $300.5 million pesos, the lowest figure in recent 
years. 
  However, the figure for the service category (which includes 
tourism) was $630 million pesos. 
  The sector in service exports that is most effectively 
integrated in the economy is tourism. However, it accounted 
directly for the generation of only 40,000 jobs throughout the 
country. On the contrary, the declining goods-export sector 
directly generated more than 200,000 jobs, thus revealing the 
level of its integration into the economy. 
  An economy that has an unemployment rate of 28 percent, with 
more than 600,000 idle workers, requires economic activities 
that generate as many jobs as possible, the development 
theoreticians say. 
  Currency issues as of the end of last November showed a 
balance of 13.5088 billion pesos, exceeding the currency issues 
for the comparable period in 1992 by 31 percent, this 
publication reported. 
  The inflation reported for the period between November of 
1992 and November of 1993 was 2.54 percent, with each month 
being compared with its counterpart of the preceding year. 
  In this instance, no proportionality between the one and the 
other can be seen as one of the factors explaining the expansion 
of currency issues. 
  This is an indication that the increase of 31 percent during 
a 12-month period, when inflation was only 2.54 percent, was due 
to other reasons. 
  The expanded supply of currency came to a total of 31.3574 
billion pesos, revealing an increase of 24 percent in the period 
of 12 months between November of 1992 to November of 1993. 
  The bulletin also shows that savings and term deposits came 
to 17.010 billion pesos, with a large part of the currency 
issued remaining in the vaults of the commercial banks, in their 
current accounts in the Central Bank, and in the cash reserve 
funds of that bank. 
  The potential inflationary effect of an increase of 31 
percent in currency issues in 12 months was totally canceled out 
by the liquidity reserves of the banks and the cash funds. 

