Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: The Israeli Government has endorsed the 
agriculture minister's plan to expand two settlements in 
occupied Syrian Golan by adding new housing complexes to sites 
in these two settlements on the pretext that this is necessary 
in order to promote Israeli security. The Israeli measure was 
taken as the Washington bilateral talks were under way at the 
chief delegates' level to make progress in the peace process, 
and as the international community was waiting for an Israeli 
response that would promote the cause of peace, one that would 
be commensurate with the hopes and aspirations created by the 
Geneva summit, to end the vicious cycle of wars and strife in 
the Middle East. 
  As a matter of fact, since the end of the Geneva summit, 
Israeli officials have been questioning the possible achievement 
of peace with Syria. They have been casting dark shadows on the 
outcome of the summit between Presidents Hafiz al-Asad and Bill 
Clinton, particularly since the summit has consecrated Syria's 
basic and key role in the peace process and underscored the need 
to implement the relevant UN Security Council resolutions to 
achieve just and comprehensive peace in the region. 
  Israeli officials have admitted that the Washington talks 
produced satisfactory answers to their security concerns. 
Nonetheless, the Israeli negotiating team has failed to declare 
an Israeli commitment to complete withdrawal from the Golan. 
Instead, they suspended the negotiations for 10 days for 
consultations with their government. Meanwhile, the Arab 
delegations remained in Washington, awaiting the return of the 
Israeli teams with the required answers. 
  Could the decision to expand the two settlements in the 
occupied Golan be an indirect response to Syria's true and 
honest endeavors to establish a durable, just, and true peace in 
the Middle East? Observers are bound to say that the answer to 
this question is in the affirmative, especially since Israeli 
officials have, for some time, been attempting to belittle 
Syria's role in the peace process. They have cast doubts on the 
usefulness of the Geneva summit and Syria's intentions, as well. 
Worse still, they have also floated the idea of holding a 
referendum on the future of the Golan--something which has taken 
international quarters by surprise. Since its inception, Israel 
has never held referendums. Its laws do not authorize 
referendums. The Knesset has to pass a new law authorizing 
referendums. Moreover, the Golan is occupied Syrian territory. 
All relevant UN Security Council resolutions acknowledge its 
Syrian identity and the need for it to be returned to Syrian 
sovereignty. Consequently, any referendum that could be held on 
the future of the Golan is worthless, because it would be a 
serious violation of international law. Moreover, it would be a 
serious precedent in international relations. The Golan is at 
the heart of the Syrian-Israeli negotiations. Without Syria, 
there is no hope for peace in the Middle East. 
  All these indicators, coupled with settlement activities in 
the Golan, clearly show that Israel is opposed to peace, that it 
has continued to pursue a policy based on evasion and 
procrastination in the Washington talks, and that its previous 
discourse on the kind of peace Syria is offering in exchange for 
withdrawal was part of a scheme of maneuvering and deception. 
  The Geneva summit delineated the kind of peace we are 
offering. But, this move on our part has resulted in an Israeli 
decision to expand settlements in the Golan, aggravated 
suspicion, and the failure on Israel's part to commit itself to 
complete withdrawal. Worse still, Israel has continued to drag 
its feet and renewed its talk about the strategic value of the 
occupied Golan and Israel's security concerns. If Israel had 
actually been seeking peace, it would have deemed the Arab 
negotiators' presence in Washington and the talks they held with 
its negotiators there sufficient proof of their peaceful 
intentions as well as a strong motivation for peacemaking. 
  After all, Arabs have been engaged in negotiations for the 
past two years. Syria submitted a working paper to the Israeli 
negotiators during the sixth round of the bilateral talks. This 
paper enjoyed the appreciation of the international community 
and captured its attention. Syria has also helped salvage the 
peace process from several impasses created by Israel. 
  In the face of these sincere intentions and these 
unmistakable efforts to establish a just and comprehensive peace 
in the Middle East, Israel has chosen to persist with its 
maneuvering and provocation. Settlement expansion is a clear 
provocation to Syria. The failure on Israel's part to declare a 
commitment to withdrawal from the Golan is a flagrant and 
blatant evasion. However, all this will not undermine Syria's 
position in the least, nor will it shake its commitment to just 
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East--the peace that will 
result in the dismantlement of the occupation and the return of 
all the Golan, as well as the other occupied Arab territories. 
Israel alone will be responsible for scuttling a unique 
opportunity to reach a just and honorable solution that could 
crown with success U.S. and international peace efforts. 

