Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Gennadiy Kulagin and Yuriy </F>
Sidorov] 
  [Text] London March 22 TASS--Kazakh President Nursultan 
Nazarbayev, currently on an official visit to Great Britain, met 
with representatives of British business circles on Monday. 
  The Kazakh president said that the sides displayed mutual 
interest in expanding bilateral cooperation. "I believe that a 
mutual interest in exchange of opinions will help us to know 
each other better and determine prospects for and forms of 
development of mutually advantageous contacts," the Kazakh 
president said, addressing the Confederation of the British 
Industry, uniting prominent businessmen of the country. 
  The basis for Kazakh-British relations was laid in October, 
1991, when during Nazarbayev's first visit a joint statement was 
signed, determining principles and prospects for bilateral 
cooperation. Nowadays, Great Britain ranks fifth in the Kazakh 
trade turnover with foreign countries. 
  "Today, we can discuss concrete directions of our 
cooperation 
in the oil and gas industries, ferrous and non-ferrous metal 
industry and banking business," the Kazakh president told 
British businessmen. Nazarbayev mentioned the Lonrho, British 
Gas, AGIP, British Petroleum, the Bank of England and some other 
companies and banks successfully cooperating with Kazakhstan. 
  "At the same time, we realise that this is only the start, 
opening a broader road for the development of large-scale and 
perspective projects. The course of transformations and reforms 
carried out by Kazakhstan will receive the support of the world 
community. At the beginning of 1994, international financial 
organisations and 15 countries,including Britain, decided to 
allocate to Kazakhstan over one billion dollars in credits and 
loans. 
  "We are optimistic about Kazakhstan's projects," Nazarbayev 
said. However, complex problems, connected with hardships of a 
transitional period, remain. We hope that state-owned and 
private companies and business circles of Great Britain will 
display an interest and find spheres and facilities in 
Kazakhstan worthy to be invested and actively participate in 
unique transformations underway in our country," Nazarbayev said. 

