Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Seventh article in a series by Virginijus Gaivenis: "Who </F>
Armed National Defense? (7)"] 
  [Excerpts] Russian law enforcement officials are 
interested in the contracts signed between the Lithuanian 
National Defense Ministry [KAM] and the Baltic Fleet leadership. 
It is becoming increasingly obvious that the actual sum paid by 
the KAM to the Kaunas association "Selma" for 5,000 machine guns 
is three times smaller than that taken from the bank and handed 
over to "Selma's" three-time convicted president V. 
Laurinavicius. To the safes of which officials, the military, 
or Mafia groups did more than 100 million rubles [R] go? 
  Last year, the shortage of thousands of field glasses, guns, 
and other arms was established at Baltic Fleet storehouses in 
Kaliningrad Oblast. Stolen arms were shipped to Russia and sold 
to anyone who wanted them. This uncontrolled process had 
continued over all of last year until finally one day law 
enforcement officials detained five military and civilian 
Russian residents in a successful operation. The detained 
persons were asked why and for whom they were stealing arms. 
However, the men became hoarse from trying to find excuses for 
stealing between 50 and 100 machine guns each, while the Baltic 
Fleet leadership was illegally selling thousands of such arms to 
Lithuanian Mafia structures. Millions [currency unspecified] 
were allegedly flowing to the pockets of military leaders of 
both countries. The strangest thing was, however, that no one 
noticed or did not want to notice this. This situation was 
immediately reported to the management of the service for 
investigating organized crime at the St. Petersburg Interior 
Administration, which became quite concerned with investigating 
this story. At that time, officials dealing with this case 
received news from Lithuania that the newspaper RESPUBLIKA had 
begun to publish a scandalous story about the arming of KAM, 
arms prices, and relations between the military and organized 
criminal groups, which attracted their attention. 
Representatives of the St. Petersburg militia officially 
appealed to the Lithuanian Prosecutor General's Office for 
assistance, requesting that the latter interrogate V. 
Laurinavicius and former KAM leaders. Our officials agreed to 
help. A group of Russian law enforcement officials already has 
plans to come to Lithuania next week. 
  As we wrote earlier, the government resolution issued on 19 
August 1992 authorized [former] National Defense Minister A. 
Butkevicius to conclude an agreement with the Kaunas association 
"Selma" on the supply of light firearms for the KAM. The 
ministry planned to acquire 5,000 AKM-74 machine guns for 
R198,770,000. [passage omitted] For some reason, A. Butkevicius 
pledged to pay the total sum to V. Laurinavicius in cash, even 
though the Lithuanian law forbids this. As a RESPUBLIKA 
reporter managed to find out, between 20 August and 7 September 
1992, KAM officials withdrew R198,770,000 from an account in the 
Vilnius branch of the Lithuanian Bank and shortly thereafter 
handed over the entire sum to "Selma's" three-time convicted 
president V. Laurinavicius. V. Drupas, chief of the KAM Arms 
Department, received the arms from "Selma" on 15 August 1992. 
True, these were not the same arms as indicated in the 
government resolution: The KAM received AK-74 machine guns 
instead of the AKM-74 model. The arms were supplied without 
ministry authorization. The consignment notes were written the 
same day. However, there was not a single word uttered about 
the price of firearms and the total sum paid. "How much did the 
ministry actually pay for the machine guns?" we questioned in 
RESPUBLIKA's very first publication on the arming of the 
National Defense forces. 
  Officials and employees from the service for investigating 
organized crime at the St. Petersburg Interior Administration 
have already interrogated the Baltic Fleet command and retrieved 
the documents where the actual price of Kalashnikov machine guns 
sold to Lithuania's National Defense forces is written in black 
and white. It is evident that one machine gun was sold for 
R11,000, while the agreement concluded between Minister A. 
Butkevicius and "Selma" President V. Laurinavicius indicated 
that it would cost the ministry $220 ($1 equaling R180.70). It 
is not difficult to establish by performing simple calculations 
that the KAM pledged to pay R39,754 for each machine gun, and it 
delivered this sum to "Selma." The paid price exceeded the 
actual cost by more than 300 percent. Thus, it seems that over 
R100 million disappeared SOMEWHERE. Officials from both the 
service for investigating organized crime at the St. Petersburg 
Interior Administration and the Lithuanian Prosecutor General's 
Office working on this case cannot yet answer who received these 
millions. [passage omitted] "We do not doubt that corrupt 
officials, and not only them, profited considerably from this 
arms deal. To be more exact, they stuffed millions into their 
pockets. Therefore, our duty is to make everything clear with 
the assistance of the Lithuanian Prosecutor General's Office, 
establish the offenders, and name Russian officials who ignore 
the law," said Andrey Safanovskiy, chief of the Eighth 
Department at the St. Petersburg Regional Administration for 
Investigating Organized Crime, in a telephone interview with a 
RESPUBLIKA reporter the day before yesterday. 
  Gennadiy Tselovalnikov, investigator for particularly 
important cases from St. Petersburg, who has been charged with 
supervising this case, told a reporter that the heads of several 
officials might roll due to the disorder in the Baltic Fleet. 
True, Russian law enforcement officials are interested not only 
in the agreement on arms sales, but also in those on the 
purchase of ships and helicopters. According to G. 
Tselovalnikov, the investigation may be slow, because they must 
interrogate many people linked with this story. [passage 
omitted] 

