BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with A.V. Ivanchenko, first deputy chairman of </F>
the Central Electoral Commission, by Valentin Maslennikov; place 
and date not given: "Under the Burden of Political Assessments"] 
  [Text] The latest wave of election battles in the region -- 
the largest recently -- has swept Russia. In all since the new 
Constitution was adopted elections have already taken place in 
67 krays, oblasts, national okrugs, and large cities, which are 
independent components of the Federation. The first results of 
the first regional democratic elections in our history are 
described by A.V. Ivanchenko, first deputy chairman of the 
Central Electoral Commission. 
  [Ivanchenko] The main result is obvious -- in the absolute 
majority of regions fully empowered organs of representative 
power have been formed by democratic means. Only in a few 
oblasts, in particular Bryansk, Magadan, and Samara Oblasts, 
will by-elections have to be held. 
  [Maslennikov] On familiarizing yourself with our 
correspondents' reports from on the spot and with the items in 
other mass media you cannot help concluding that this wave has 
been particularly scandalous and revealed a mass of 
violations.... 
  [Ivanchenko] An utterly wrong opinion. It is a pity that 
the printed and broadcast media are focusing on scandals and 
"snags." Of course, there were violations -- quite a lot of 
them. And it would have been strange if we had completely 
avoided them, after all, it is all being done for the first 
time. There is nothing to be surprised about here. While there 
are only political assessments of the very important 
sociopolitical campaign that the elections represent, this bias 
at the initial stage is even natural. The "blunders" of all 
kinds are obvious and that is why they are making a din about 
them. But in the majority of regions everything proceeded 
normally. We shall become fully aware of the importance of this 
fact when we start to assess the legal aspect of the work that 
has been done. 
  [Maslennikov] In what does it consist? 
  [Ivanchenko] In the fact that we have for the first time 
actually had real elections in the regions. No one dragged 
anyone to these elections by force. No one tried to turn them 
into a political show. The candidate deputies were nominated 
not "from labor collectives," as used to be the case, but from 
electoral associations and directly from voters through the 
collection of signatures. No one impeded the citizens' free 
expression of their will. 
  The elections are not yet completed but one can already 
boldly say today that a major stage has been traveled on the 
path of the establishment of Russian statehood. Representative 
organs have been created locally and by relying on them the 
components of the Federation will be able to build mutual 
relations in the field of the budget and taxes. 
  [Maslennikov] But are you not idealizing the results of the 
elections? After all, in many regions they were only barely 
valid because of voters' low level of activity. 
  [Ivanchenko] Let's be realists. Is it conceivable at the 
first attempt to do everything at once without hitches or 
glitches? And the representative organs we have acquired 
locally are also far from perfect. But they do exist, and that 
is the main thing. The experience we have accumulated will 
enable us to create for the next elections a base which 
guarantees even more precisely the observance of electoral 
rights at all levels, and we will correspondingly get better 
results. 
  As for the voters' passivity.... An unpleasant but 
entirely explicable element. People's tiredness and 
disillusionment and some people's distrust of the organs it was 
planned to form had an effect. But I think that a far greater 
influence was the inability and in some places the reluctance of 
local administrators to hold the elections in an organized 
manner. This can be seen particularly clearly in the example of 
those oblasts where the deputies' corps has been found to 
include mostly the administrators themselves. These 
shortsighted politicians are clipping their own wings. It will 
be no easier for them to work (yet that is precisely what they 
are counting on) but far harder because in the future they will 
have no one on whom to rely. 
  We have examples of some local administration 
representatives 
making inept use of the mass media and achieving results which 
are the opposite to those intended. Nizhniy Novgorod Governor 
V. Nemtsov was so absurd in supporting his nominee for the post 
of mayor of the oblast center that eventually this nominee was 
obliged to withdraw his candidacy and the elections to the post 
of head of the city administration were not held at all. In 
other words, we are learning democracy. And, unfortunately, we 
are learning from our own mistakes. Hence all our "snags." 
  [Maslennikov] But criminal charges are being brought, in 
Ulyanovsk or Orenburg, for instance. Passions are erupting at 
meetings, as was the case in St. Petersburg.... 
  [Ivanchenko] And I see nothing terrible in that. Since a 
competitive struggle is under way there will be losers. But 
many of us do not know how to lose and start to brandish our 
fists after the fight. We should have thought about it before 
and prepared for the elections in good time. For instance, in 
Orenburg, if the local statute on elections had clearly 
prescribed the procedure for counting votes there would have 
been no conflict with the losing candidates from the "Democratic 
Russia" electoral association. 
  [Maslennikov] So will we continue to learn from bumps and 
bruises? 
  [Ivanchenko] Not only that way. The Central Electoral 
Commission in conjunction with several State Duma committees, 
the Federation Council, the Ministry of Justice, and the 
Ministry Nationalities Affairs and Regional Policy, have 
prepared a draft law on the fundamental guarantees of Russian 
Federation citizens' electoral rights. The negative elements 
which appeared during the elections may have been possible 
because we did not have this law. This legal act will make it 
possible not only to guarantee the rights of citizens at 
elections of all levels but will also make it possible to unify 
voting technology and set up the compilation of electoral lists 
and will provide for the procedure for appealing against illegal 
actions by all participants in elections both to higher-level 
electoral commissions and in court. The new law will give 
freedom to express their will to citizens and parties, for after 
all we still cannot speak seriously of a real multiparty system 
at regional level. 
  [Maslennikov] Where else are elections to be held in the 
immediate future? 
  [Ivanchenko] In April it is planned to hold elections in 
Sverdlovsk Oblast, Chukotsk Autonomous Okrug, and Karelia. let 
us hope that here some lessons of previous rounds will be 
considered and a number of errors will not be repeated. As for 
the definitive assessments, let us not be in a hurry and be too 
categorical. Who will venture now to judge whether good or bad 
representative organs have been elected locally? Life itself 
will show how the reforms will proceed further, what results 
they will bring, and how mutual relations between the federal 
center and the regions will take shape. If these relations are 
not formed then we shall get an opposition force even from 
ideally selected representative organs. And I should like 
primarily to warn against haste in making political assessments 
and to remind you that the transition to democracy is an 
evolutionary rather than a revolutionary process and it cannot 
take place in an instant. 

