BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mario Jovel from the "Up-to-Date" newscast] </F>
  [Text] President Alfredo Cristiani today criticized death 
threats by a clandestine group against leftist leaders after 
noting that this attitude shows the lack of ability of certain 
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front [FMLN] sectors to join 
the democratic system. Cristiani said the self-styled 
Salvadoran Revolutionary Front will be investigated and those 
responsible for the threats will be brought to justice. 
  According to President Cristiani, the FMLN's internal 
problems do not have to adversely affect the country's stability 
because it is a matter of differences within a political party. 
According to the president, the FMLN should divide itself once 
and for all into two parties to end the problem. 
  [Begin Cristiani recording] If there really are people 
within 
the FMLN that are solving these types of problems with violence, 
they are demonstrating their lack of ability to join a 
democratic process and their lack of tolerance for differences 
of opinion. [end recording] 
  In addition, the head of state said labor code reforms 
created a tripartite commission that will work as an entity to 
advise the Labor Ministry. According to Cristiani, what remains 
to be done is to decide if the Forum for Economic and Social 
Consensus will continue as it is or if discussions will be 
incorporated at the Labor Council, which has been given a 
permanent mandate. 
  [Begin Cristiani recording] Now that this council has been 
reactivated, we hope it can become a permanent council so that 
talks can be held here. I believe, however, that the decision 
will have to be made at the Forum for Concerted Effort. [end 
recording] 
  Cristiani also confirmed that an energy plan has been 
proposed to the Honduran Government, which is currently facing 
an electricity crisis. The president said this will not 
adversely affect the country and there will be no rationing. 
The proposal consists of an interconnection with Honduras 
because Honduras is the only country in the region that does not 
have an energy interconnection with El Salvador. It also 
includes the construction by both countries of El Tigre 
Hydroelectric Dam. The El Tigre Dam, with the waters of the 
Torola and Lempa Rivers, would increase the production of 
electricity by 150 megawatts for each country. El Salvador's 
three dams together produce 500 megawatts. 

