BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Rafael Caldera from the Ayacucho Room </F>
at Miraflores Presidential Palace in Caracas; broadcast in 
progress--live relay] 
  [Text] ...the promulgation of this law [not further 
specified] fills the national government with great optimism. We 
hope it will be the same for the whole country. The country is 
aware of the difficult economic situation we are confronting. 
This economic situation demands immediate action to reduce the 
fiscal deficit. We are well aware of the fact a reasonable 
reduction of the fiscal deficit to manageable levels is 
unpostponable, even though this will entail a policy of 
austerity that will necessarily produce scarcity in many aspects 
and difficulties and differences for practically every sector of 
the country. All anti-inflation policies are unpopular. We know 
this, but we have no other choice but to confront this situation. 
  We have made an effort to reduce public spending. We had to 
make quick changes to a big and complex budget we did not draft. 
The reductions in public spending have resulted in the 
impossibility of immediately carrying out big works that are 
necessary and indispensable for the country's development. This 
law opens doors; it offers national and foreign investors the 
possibility of carrying out works the country needs. The 
experiences sister countries have had in this regard are very 
encouraging. Even though users must pay the costs of these 
works, it has been proven they do this willingly if they are 
given the facilities to attain their goals satisfactorily, 
saving them time, fuel, worry, and wear and tear of the 
instruments and vehicles that must be used. 
  Some of these works can be undertaken immediately in 
Venezuela. These works could be profitably attractive for 
investors. For example, completing the initial stretch of the 
Romulo Bethancourt Highway to Caucagua; the new bridge over the 
Orinoco River, plans for which were drafted a long time ago; the 
possibility of a freeway from Caracas to Los Teques, which is 
very necessary because of the heavy growth of the population; 
and other very necessary works that could be resolved through 
concession contracts. This could also be the case for the 
Caracas water supply, which is a priority and urgent need for 
the metropolitan area. 
  We believe the promulgation of this law is a message we are 
sending to national and foreign investors. We need them, and we 
are offering them the opportunity to carry out works that can be 
profitable for them and benefit our country. We plan to 
immediately appoint a very honest, very responsible, and very 
serious technical commission that will serve as an adviser and 
overseer of the terms of the offers that will be made to future 
concessionaires to carry out these works and to establish the 
order of priorities for the works that are going to be offered 
to the public. 
  We know, and the country knows, that fiscal readjustment 
policies, the new tax law, does not exclude the government's 
direction toward a medium and long-term policy. We aspire to a 
free and progressive economy capable of great efforts and great 
works for the good of the people. We are sure the private sector 
will respond to our call with the knowledge they will have 
protection, legal protection, and every protection necessary. 
The state knows its duty is to moderate and assist in those 
cases where its presence is necessary. The state must do this in 
a harmonious manner, without exaggerated orthodox positions in 
one way or another. The state must confront the country's 
situation, and according to the country's situation it must 
encourage the great potential that Venezuela has to advance. 
  The Council of Ministers today approved the creation of the 
National Mining Commission, because we are aware mines 
constitute an immediate and encouraging opportunity for the 
country. 
  We are decisively promoting tourism initiatives, and to this 
end we will continue to carry out necessary privatizations in 
the hotel industry and in all the areas to which investors can 
make considerable contributions so that tourism will, in effect, 
become an important national industry. 
  We are willing to provide every means of support and 
encouragement to those whose legitimate right it is to undertake 
those activities that are essential for the fulfillment of 
Venezuela's potential. 
  We are offering the country the law we enacted today as a 
sign of hope, as a reason for economic reactivation, and as an 
opportunity to unite the efforts of enterprising and trained 
individuals who are entirely capable of working under state 
guidance, guarantees and security. 
  We have been in need of this law for many years. A law was 
passed, but it could not be applied, because established [word 
indistinct] difficulties rendered its fulfillment impossible. In 
this case, as I said at the beginning, we are very optimistic. 
This law is a message we hope will receive an affirmative 
answer. We have presented it to the country as an opening of new 
opportunities and as an offer of new paths, which, we are 
certain, will lead us forward in the fulfillment of the goals of 
growth and prosperity for Venezuela. 

