BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 18 Jun (TANJUG) -- Commenting on the 
cease-fire agreement signed in Geneva and the latest statements 
on possible maps dividing the Bosnian territory for tomorrow's 
edition of the Novi Sad daily DNEVNIK, Lieutenant Colonel 
General Ratko Mladic, commander of the main headquarters of the 
Srpska republic army, said that the Serb army in Bosnia had 
opted for a passive defense to the increasing number of 
Muslim-Croat attacks and provocations because it wanted to 
demonstrate that the Srpska republic was in favor of a peaceful 
political solution to the conflict in this way too. 
  Mladic said that the Muslims would perhaps respect the 
so-called cease-fire if they had a united political and military 
leadership, and if their Western mentors did not encourage the 
war option. 
  Commenting on demands for further Serb concessions, Gen. 
Mladic said that there would be no haggling over the towns that 
have always been Serb and are currently held by the Serbs, and 
that proposals to include clearly Serb towns in the "gray zones" 
were out of the question: Because it is obvious that they 
[Muslims and Croats] are trying to use Western support to gain 
what they could not win in a military way. There has to be a 
compromise, but all three sides must take part in it if 
permanent peace is the final aim. 
  The Serb side has demonstrated a maximum of cooperation so 
far but unfortunately this has not been received positively by 
the West. It has been interpreted as Serb weakness and 
compliance, and that is why fresh concessions are being 
demanded. Even vital Serb interests have been jeopardized in 
order to reach peace, but these interests -- a territorially 
integral Serb republic and its natural territorial link with the 
Serbian motherland -- will certainly not be abandoned. 
  Commenting on the arrival of soldiers from Turkey and some 
other Islamic countries in former Bosnia-Herzegovina, Gen. 
Mladic said that this has exposed NATO's, i.e., U.S. strategy 
because, being afraid of a new Vietnam, they are relying on 
their satellites: Croatian and Muslim armies and military forces 
of certain Islamic countries. However, if the Srpska republic 
comes under an armed attack, its army will respond with all 
available means, Gen. Mladic said in his interview for 
tomorrow's edition of Novi Sad DNEVNIK. 

