Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Lukhashov report in the "Marathon" column: "Moscow </F>
and Kazan: A New Round of Negotiations. Will Tatarstan Get a 
Special Status?"] 
  [Text] As SEGODNYA's correspondent has learned, the next 
round of talks between the Russian and Tatar delegations on the 
signing of a treaty of mutual delegation of powers and 
jurisdiction has been scheduled for 4 February. On the 
following day a meeting will take place between Boris Yeltsin 
and Mintimer Shaymiyev. 
  It is hard to understand what is forcing the Russian 
authorities to undertake this generally unpopular move at this 
moment. In the Kazan corridors of power this treaty is being 
described in no other way than interstate. Possibly Mr. 
Shaymiyev's hints that if the treaty is not signed before 13 
March (on that day repeat elections to the Federal Assembly are 
set in Tatarstan), "the republic's people will react 
accordingly." 
  Be that as it may, the talks have continued for two years, 
and they are now nearing the finish line. 
  According to Tatarstan Vice President Vasiliy Likhachev, who 
is head of the delegation to the talks, the most intensive 
period of coordinating the sides' positions has now begun. Not 
only the draft treaty is being discussed but also draft 
intergovernment agreements, seven of which were signed last 
year. At present five more are pending: on crime control (it 
is practically ready), on finances (the debate is over 
Tatarstan's demands for independence in defining the interest 
rate on credits allocated by the Russian Central Bank and also 
that the republic's government be granted the power to influence 
its share in money emission), on budget relations (through how 
many channels and in what volume to remit taxes to the center), 
on military matters, and on foreign economic activity. On the 
latter issue Tatarstan demands that the republic's status on 
foreign markets be adjusted to its constitution, which says that 
"Tatarstan...is a subject of international law." 
  The Tatar delegation members' optimism is enhanced by the 
fact that, according to Mr. Likhachev, "the Russian side relates 
with understanding to the republic's aspiration to define its 
status in the Russian Federation." The Russian side at the 
talks is represented by Sergey Shakhray, Aleksandr Shokhin, and 
Viktor Gerashchenko. The Russian delegation is led by Vice 
Premier Yuriy Yarov. The Tatarstan vice president, with this 
setup, also considers realistic the long-cherished idea of 
formalizing Tatarstan's special status in the Russian 
Constitution. 
  "At the same time we understand the measure of our 
responsibility in this activity," says republic Prime Minister 
Mukhammat Sabirov. "There are two viewpoints from which the 
results of this work can be perceived by Federation components. 
But we believe that Tatarstan has matured for a new type of 
relations with Russia and for a mutual delegation of powers. I 
am sure that the whole of Russia will follow our example. This 
is the only way of guaranteeing stability of the Russian economy 
and Russia's unity..." 
  Furthermore it also needs to be taken into account that the 
repeat nomination of deputy candidates to the Federal Assembly 
should be completed a month prior to the elections, that is to 
say on 13 February. Therefore the Russian and Tatarstan 
delegations do not have very much time left. And if after two 
years of talks the treaty is finally signed, then one would 
probably agree with Vasiliy Likhachev who has already defined 
this event as historic. 

