BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial from the "Comment" page: "Unity Strengthens"] </F>
  [Text] The merger between the main liberal political 
parties -- the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK) and Meeting 
Point -- will strengthen the electoral position of the 
pro-democracy camp. That prospect alone will provoke China's 
ire. But the formation of the Democratic Party also represents 
a form of united front, a tactical turning of the tables on 
Beijing, and China will find this all the more infuriating. 
  Beijing has been trying to woo what it regards as "moderate" 
liberals away from the "subversive" UDHK. That tactic has 
suffered an awkward reverse. Far from isolating the UDHK, it 
has drawn the democratic movement into its bosom with the 
appointment of Meeting Point Chairman Anthony Cheung Bing-leung 
as a Hong Kong Affairs adviser. Mr Cheung now turns out to be a 
UDHK ally after all. The merger allows Meeting Point to put its 
democratic credentials on display, after some months during 
which it seemed they might have been placed in the bottom drawer. 
  China undoubtedly sees the new party's pending foundation as 
a provocation. Already officials are saying the merger has not 
changed their view that core members of the United Democrats are 
subversive. 
  But the new party is also an opportunity and a challenge. 
For the United Democrats have shown that their oft-proclaimed 
desire for dialogue with China is not mere lip service. They 
see the value of having a link, through Meeting Point, to China. 
The opportunity for China is to take up the implied offer, in 
the interests of hearing different points of view so it can 
better understand the thoughts and feelings of all the people of 
Hong Kong. 
<H5>  Pragmatism </H5>
  The recent unhappy history of political relations between 
Hong Kong and China suggests anger will prevail, but it would be 
far better if dialogue could follow. 
  The merger, however, is not merely an anti-Beijing 
countermeasure. At a more fundamental level, it reflects 
maturity and pragmatism on the part of both parties. It is a 
recognition that neither has anything to gain from allowing 
their opponents to exploit largely artificial divisions in the 
liberal camp. A single party has a better chance of winning an 
election outright than a coalition of like-minded parties. Even 
nominally divided, the democratic camp is less than the sum of 
its parts. 
  However, while the merger may have been dictated by simple 
electoral arithmetic -- and the need to dispel any public 
perception of differences over China policy which would have 
kept the voters away in droves -- its long-term success will 
depend on how it weathers China's expected attempts to blow it 
apart. 
<H5>  Cold shoulder </H5>
  From what mainland officials have said, it seems likely 
China 
would not have appointed Mr Cheung as an adviser if it had known 
he was about to make common cause with the United Democrats. 
Faced with the failure of its attempt to drive a wedge between 
the parties, it must now decide whether to cancel his 
appointment -- and thus confirm its cold shoulder of the UDHK. 
  A more subtle resolution to its dilemma would be to exploit 
Mr Cheung's apparent desire to maintain some favour with Beijing 
to place destructive strains on the UDHK from within. However, 
that would be an admission that the UDHK as a party is not 
beyond the political pale. 
  China should not find dealing with the new party impossible 
on grounds of principle. Meeting Point and the more compliant 
Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood both retain 
group membership of the "subversive" Hong Kong Alliance in 
Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China. The UDHK 
does not. Yet China has accepted the leaders of both the first 
two parties as advisers, while rejecting the United Democrats on 
the grounds that some of its leaders are core members of the 
alliance. 
  In practice, however, China will have difficulty accepting 
members of the UDHK, since this would make it harder to exclude 
it from elections to the first post-1997 legislature. If it 
confirms Mr Cheung's appointment as an adviser, Hong Kong's 
pro-democracy politicians will have strengthened their position 
not only for the 1995 elections but also for those thereafter. 

