Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 8 Jan (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier Qian 
Qichen said here today that the friendly co-existence between 
China and Japan and their mutually beneficial cooperation 
constitutes an important factor in the maintenance of political 
stability and economic development in the Asia and Pacific 
region. 
  Qian, also China's foreign minister, made this statement in 
talks with Japanese Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister 
Tsutomu Hata here this afternoon, shortly after his arrival here. 
  Hata's China trip at the beginning of the new year would 
promote the development of Sino-Japanese friendly ties of 
cooperation, Qian said. 
  According to Chinese officials present at the talks, Qian 
noted that the past year witnessed the strengthening of 
bilateral friendly ties of cooperation in politics, economy, 
culture, science and technology, and the expanded cooperation in 
all fields between the two countries. 
  The past year also saw new progress of Sino-Japanese 
economic 
and trade cooperation, Qian said. 
  He said that China appreciates the Japanese Government's 
positive attitudes in promoting Sino-Japanese ties and hopes it 
will make efforts to reduce its trade surplus with China. 
  Yet, China always advocates that a positive trade balance 
should be achieved through the expansion of bilateral trade, 
Qian stressed. 
  There exist many favorable factors for the two countries to 
expand their trade ties, Qian said, adding that China's economy 
has embarked on the track of sustained and healthy development 
and it is ready to further expand the current cooperation of 
mutual benefit with the joint efforts of the Japanese side. 
  During the talks, Hata reiterated Japan's continued support 
for China's reform and opening-up policies. 
  The third batch of Japanese Government loans to China would 
be used up by 1995, he said, adding that his country is willing 
to continuously provide this kind of loan so as to facilitate 
the bilateral economic and trade cooperation. 
  The three batches of loans have played a positive role in 
China's economic development, and in the meantime, promoted the 
development of the economic cooperation between the two 
countries, Qian said, adding that the Chinese side appreciates 
the positive attitudes of the Japanese Government on the 
provision of the fourth batch of Japanese Government loans. 
  The two foreign ministers have agreed that specific issues 
concerning the fourth batch of loans should be negotiated by the 
relevant departments of the two countries. 
  Hata also reiterated Japan's support for China's resumption 
of its contracting partner status in the general agreement on 
tariffs and trade (GATT). 
  China is an important country and it is necessary for China 
to re-enter GATT, Hata said, adding that Japan would cooperate 
closely with China in this respect. 
  The two foreign ministers also agreed to strengthen their 
cooperation in the area of environmental protection. They hold 
that this accords with the interests of both sides and 
constitutes an important contribution to the world environmental 
protection as a whole. 
  They supported the idea that the relevant departments of the 
two countries intensify their studies on this issue and try to 
reach an agreement on environmental protection cooperation as 
soon as possible. 
  Both of them agreed that it is of great significance to the 
strengthening of mutual understanding that the two countries 
further develop cultural exchanges. 
  They also agreed that the current Sino-Japanese ties are 
good 
and that to steadily develop their ties, the two sides should 
maintain the momentum of high-level contacts. 
  On the Taiwan issue, Hata reaffirmed that Japan sticks to 
all 
the principles of the Japan-China joint communique and will not 
support the idea of "two Chinas" and will not develop official 
ties with Taiwan. This stance on the Japanese side will not 
change in the future, Hata said. 
  Talking about the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula, 
Qian 
said the Chinese Government welcomes the positive progress 
achieved recently through negotiations between the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and the United States. 
  China hopes that the two sides will cherish this progress, 
continue with their talks and settle this issue properly at an 
early date. 
  Hata also voiced appreciation of the progress on this issue. 
  After the talks, the two sides signed three documents on 
Japan's offer to China a financial assistance, totalling 125 
million yen. 

