Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Xiao Rui (5618 3843): "NPC Delegates Hu Yamei, </F>
Yan Renying Propose Conditional Implementation of Euthanasia 
Under Legal Supervision"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 20 Mar (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- At a time 
when euthanasia still arouses much debate in society, some 
medical experts attending the National People's Congress [NPC] 
strongly recommend early conditional implementation of 
euthanasia under legal supervision. 
  At the NPC convened here, noted medical experts Hu Yamei and 
Yan Renying headed the list of proponents putting forward this 
motion. They held that: At present, some old people have lost 
the ability to take care of themselves. They are confined to 
their beds, are incontinent, and unable to control their bowels. 
Their minds are no longer clear, and they must be looked after 
by their children. The aged are very painful. Not only do 
their children find this difficult to bear -- both spiritually 
and financially -- but they also are a burden on the state. 
Under this situation, the implementation of euthanasia is very 
essential. At present, Denmark and some states in the United 
States already have passed euthanasia legislation, and with 
international precedents, China can implement euthanasia under 
prescribed conditions on an experimental basis and under 
legislation. 
  The motion suggests that euthanasia should be allowed under 
the following conditions: 
  Old people who have lost the ability to take care of 
themselves, who have been unable to walk or move their limbs at 
will, who have been incontinent and unable to control their 
bowels for more than one year, and who have not been able to 
recuperate, as proved by medical examination. 
  Cancer patients who have reached an advanced stage of the 
disease owing to widespread metastasis; who cannot recuperate, 
even with long-term treatment; who suffer intolerable pain and 
must use anesthetics and analgesics, such as demerol 
hydrochloride, for a long period of time in order to sustain 
their lives and who are worn out from their use. 
  Under these two conditions, patients who have been proved by 
medical examination to be incurable may ask for euthanasia with 
the consent of their spouses and children. Their cases then 
will be handled by local notaries, and euthanasia will be 
implemented in hospitals in accordance with the notarization. 
  People who have completely lost consciousness and are in a 
vegetative state, who have not recuperated after more than a 
year's treatment, who need special nursing care, and who are a 
burden on their family members and to the state. Under this 
situation, with the consent of their family members, their cases 
can be taken by their family members to notaries for 
notarization, and then euthanasia will be implemented in 
hospitals. 
  It has been learned that some dozens of NPC delegates -- 
including experts, scholars, leading cadres, and ordinary 
laborers from all walks of life -- have seconded this motion 
advocating conditional euthanasia. 

