BFN 

<F P=106> [Report Profiling Female Sinn Fein Leader in Belfast, Una </F>
Gillespie, Including an Interview With Her, by David McKittrick; 
date not given] 
  [Text] For four years Una Gillespie worked as a full-time 
counsellor and education worker at a rape crisis centre, helping 
women combat domestic violence. She is a former student 
activist, a socialist, a feminist, a campaigner for women's 
rights. 
  She looks and sounds like a left-wing member of the British 
Labour Party, but she is one of Sinn Fein's leaders in Belfast. 
She finds no incongruity in working against sexual violence 
while belonging to a party associated with the IRA. 
  "I don't see it as a contradiction. To me, what they're both 
about is removing the root causes and the attitudes that lead to 
violence. 
  "We're in the middle of a conflict we didn't create -- I was 
seven when the British Army came on the streets. But when 
you've tried every peaceful means and you're just being met with 
violence from the state, I understand why people react with 
violence," she said. 
  Her answer illustrates the great gap that exists between the 
republican perspective and that of most of the rest of the 
world. Non-republicans regard the IRA as an aggressive terrorist 
organisation, but republicans genuinely believe the world is 
attacking them. Their sense of victimhood is profound. 
  Ms Gillespie said: "I would love to live in a peaceful 
society where you didn't have to lock the security gate going up 
the stairs at night, didn't have to have bullet-proof glass on 
your windows, didn't have to worry going out in the mornings if 
somebody is going to shoot you dead." 
  Now 32, she was for two years president of the students' 
union at a teacher-training college in Belfast, then women's 
rights officer for a year. She holds a degree in Anglo-Irish 
literature. 
  "I wasn't that interested in republicanism at primary 
school," she recalled. "It was during the 1981 hunger strike 
that I realised it was easy to talk about South Africa or 
Palestine or Nicaragua or whatever, without looking at what was 
actually happening to people here on our own streets." 
  "That's when I made the connection between the international 
struggles and what was going on here." 
  What morals did she draw from the hunger strike, which led 
to 
the emergence of Sinn Fein as a political force? 
  "It was a lesson in how people can find their own power. I 
find working-class people in England, outside of some of the 
mining communities, are very demoralised. They don't have a 
sense of their own power any more, whereas people here still do 
have -- they organise themselves to fight back for whatever 
rights are left to them." 
  Her involvement in campaigns against the strip-searching of 
female prisoners and against plastic bullets led on to working 
for Sinn Fein. She was recently elected as a Belfast city 
councillor after serving two years on the party executive. She 
has never been jailed or arrested, but says her house has twice 
been raided by paratroops. 
  Sinn Fein reserves six of its 24 executive places for women, 
but few of its councillors are female. Ms Gillespie, who is 
single and has no children, says at election time practically 
all the canvassers are women, but few stand for election. This 
is partly for family reasons and partly because of the danger. 
In the past five years, loyalist groups have killed about 20 
people with Sinn Fein associations; several recent victims have 
been women. 
  "For a long time women in Sinn Fein walked round thinking we 
weren't really targets, that men were a sort of buffer zone 
between us and the loyalists," Ms Gillespie said, "but now women 
are being killed, and that deters a lot of women from standing." 
  Offices she and other Sinn Fein councillors used at Belfast 
City Hall were last week blown up by Protestants. 
  A few years ago the party fleetingly took up a pro-abortion 
position, but this was hurriedly abandoned when it became 
evident that it was a guaranteed vote-loser in Ireland. Ms 
Gillespie is plainly not happy with this. 
  "I'll always argue for a woman's right to choose, but the 
fact is that I'm a member of a party which has a different 
policy. All I can do is work to change that." 
  She said things were changing. "If there are any delegations 
going anywhere now, they'd be very conscious that women have to 
be involved... The party has evolved, but there are still 
attitudes what have to be challenged, there is still a long way 
to go." 
  "Women in Sinn Fein have to fight two sorts of battles -- 
you're fighting the Brits and you're fighting the men in your 
own organisation." 
  Sinn Fein may or may not be about to enter the political 
processes proper: that looks to be some way off. But either 
way, its sizeable pool of activists, many of them women, will 
ensure that it remains a formidable force. 

