BFN 

<F P=106> ["Our Opinion" commentary by Orlando Contreras] </F>
  [Text] I would like to read one of today's AFP reports 
before commenting or analyzing: 
  Washington, AFP -- Thursday, President Bill Clinton 
announced 
the renewal of most-favored-nation trading status to the PRC, 
although some sanctions against Beijing were upheld, primarily 
the ban on importing weapons and ammunition. The U.S. leader 
stressed that he had opted to separate the issue of granting 
commercial benefits to the PRC from Washington's previously 
stipulated conditions on the PRC's respect for human rights. 
  As you know, the United States has appointed itself the 
human 
rights judge, except, of course, within its own borders. They 
sanction, however, in accordance with their own judgment, 
whoever does or does not respect human rights everywhere else in 
the world. The world is certainly full of travesties and of 
governments which commit brutal crimes, but Washington does not 
say a word as long as these governments or countries are U.S. 
clients. Something similar occurs with dozens of spurious 
elections on several continents. 
  The PRC Government has strongly and categorically rejected 
the accusations Washington has dared to make regarding human 
rights in the PRC. The PRC's arguments have not convinced the 
U.S. Government. In other words, Clinton and his administration 
believe deep down, above all, that human rights violations do 
exist. I repeat: This is according to the exclusive viewpoint of 
the United States. Clinton, however, decided to maintain the 
commercial benefits, yet another example of double standards of 
that pharisaical type of U.S. policies not grounded on 
principles but on the most coarse and pragmatic of arrangements. 
  On the other hand, the final resolution of the Uruguay Round 
of GATT, as you may remember, called for trade incentives and 
not for protectionism or blockades. Nor did it authorize any 
government to unilaterally make itself into a judge of human 
rights and trade, especially when that government uses the noble 
cause of human rights as a grotesque instrument of its policies 
and for its own benefit. Judges with double standards pervert 
justice. 

