BFN 

<F P=106> [Weekly news conference by President Fidel V. Ramos with </F>
domestic and foreign correspondents at Malacanang Palace in 
Manila -- live; passages in italics in Tagalog] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Ramos] I would like to again 
reiterate that in regard to the East Timor issue, that it was 
consistently -- in this particular case -- national interest 
that I upheld. In the same way that we have upheld national 
interest in the other contentious issues that have faced my 
government. 
  After all, what really is the definition of national 
interest? As we, at our level as national leaders understand it, 
and our other national leaders in other countries understand 
national interest. 
  I think the textbooks as well as the latest historical 
analysis of recent events will show that national interest has 
three components. 
  The first one is the preservation of the way of life, the 
core values, and the institutions of the people. Second, the 
welfare and well-being of the people of that nation. And third, 
the maintenance of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
the nation. These three are parts of the whole that we call 
national interest. 
  Now, in regard to the East Timor issue, as far as our way of 
life, core values, and institutions are concerned, we upheld the 
freedom of Filipinos to assemble and to express their opinions. 
Okay? 
  As far as welfare and well-being are concerned, what were 
really at stake here? Some P19 billion [Philippine pesos] worth 
of investments, projects, enterprises, and agreed partnerships 
or consortiums, divided as follows: 
  -- In the East ASEAN Growth Area, in which the southern 
Philippines is our contribution, some $250 million worth of 
investments within the next few months were at stake; and, 
  -- The rest of the Philippines, minus the southern 
Philippines, some $450 million worth of partnerships, 
investments, and projects. The most notable of which is the 
proposed Alabang in Muntinlupa to Quirino Avenue skyway in which 
the partners are the Philippine National Construction 
Corporation and Citras of Indonesia. 
  And that component is worth $450 million or a total of $700 
million, or roughly P19 billion which represents about 200,000 
jobs. 
  If we are to use 100,000 pesos as the moderate per job cost, 
as it's usually estimated by our economic managers, this is not 
the capital intensive kind of jobs and neither is it the cottage 
industry kind of jobs. This is the figure in the middle. 
  What else is involved in our welfare and well-being? Our 
peace process, especially Mindanao which has been the scene of 
bloody battles, violence, and dislocation of hundreds of 
thousands of Filipinos -- both Christians and Muslims alike. 
That, we would like to finish so that there will be a just, 
honorable, and enduring settlement for all. 
  What else is involved in welfare and well-being? ASEAN 
solidarity and cooperation which has been strengthened over the 
last 25 years since the inception of ASEAN through, precisely, 
the growing and more intimate networking of the six member 
countries. And the proof of the worth of ASEAN is simply that 
many countries now would like to join ASEAN as a subregional 
aggroupation. 
  In so far as our territorial integrity and sovereignty is 
concerned, because of Philippine-Indonesian cooperation -- and 
this started with the so-called Bali Series of Marine and Ocean 
Research and in which the Philippines has been a very active 
participant, hosting even the last one here in Manila about a 
year ago -- we have been able to bring about stabilization in 
this very contentious area of the South China Sea. And of 
course we have the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea or the 
UNCLOS, in which Indonesia and the Philippines -- as the leading 
archipelagic nations -- have been very closely cooperating. 
  And on top of all of that is that the stability within ASEAN 
has contributed significantly to the stability of the entire 
Asia and Pacific Region itself. So that's it. 
  And if you will look back at the events taking place now, 
that we have found the Solomonic solution, thanks to the support 
of everybody particularly the Supreme Court. We have in fact 
threaded the eye of the needle. The hole of that needle 
is so small. We have been searching for it for a long time but 
we found it. That is where we made our entry. Fred [one 
of the correspondents] will translate this for you since he will 
be the last speaker. [laughter from the audience] 
  And I say this in summary because we need to see these whole 
series of events in the proper context and not in the heat of 
emotion or dramatic and not balanced reporting by various 
observers, not necessarily the media. Okay? [passage omitted] 

