BFN 

  [Text] Ankara -- Over 70 deputies who are members of 
various parties act as one with the pro-Islamic Welfare Party 
(RP) regarding Islamic issues, giving the impression that a 
"holy alliance" has been set up in Parliament. 
  The 39 RP deputies along with 39 deputies from the ruling 
coalition partner True Path Party (DYP), 20 deputies from the 
main opposition Motherland Party (ANAP), 13 deputies from the 
Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) and 10 deputies from the other 
small parties and independents constitute the biggest obstacle 
to amending the Constitution by behaving like a "holy alliance." 
<H5>  Some Activities of the `Holy Alliance' </H5>
  Twenty deputies from the DYP, ANAP and the RP submitted a 
draft of a proposed law which would ban Constitutional Court 
judges from making public statements. This was done in reaction 
to Constitutional Court Chief Judge Yekta Gungor Ozden's 
pro-secularism statements and speeches. 
  Thirty-nine DYP deputies who favor Shariah issued a joint 
declaration stating that "Shariah aims to exalt human beings." 
The declaration also condemns Ozden for his criticism of 
Shariah. 
  Deputies from the DYP, ANAP and the RP eliminated the 
provision regulating the basic education system from the text of 
the authorization law. Thus preventing the Education Ministry's 
closing down the junior high school section of the Imam-Hatip 
[religious] lycees by raising compulsory basic education from 
five to eight years. 
  Members of the "holy alliance" tried to prevent Education 
Minister Nevzat Ayaz from dismissing high-level 
"pro-Shariah-sectarian" bureaucrats from this ministry. Despite 
intensive pressure, particularly by the "holy alliance" deputies 
within the DYP led by Kocaeli Deputy Ismail Amasyali, Ayaz has 
not changed his mind. 
  DYP Isparta Deputy Ertekin Duruturk with support from "holy 
alliance" deputies is leading a drive to convert Hagia Sophia 
Museum into a mosque. The necessary majority was obtained to 
include debate on the draft of the relevant law which has been 
sitting in the parliamentary commission for one year on the 
parliamentary agenda. 
  DYP Canakkale Deputy Suleyman Ayhan is leading the attempts 
to prepare joint motion regarding the launching of a probe into 
the activities of the Fener Greek Orthodox Patriarchate. 
<H5>  Members of the `Holy Alliance' </H5>
  From time to time the number of deputies from different 
parties who act like a separate party within Parliament and 
whose joint message is to defend Islam increases to around 200. 
This solidarity in Islamic issues puts the parties and their 
leaders into a difficult position. 
  The party executives, however, remain passive, giving 
"political interest" first priority. These parties which are 
backed by the rightist electorate remain silent in the face of 
the deputies who violate party discipline in order to avoid 
giving the impression that they have taken a position against 
Islamic issues. The deputies who are members of the "holy 
alliance" benefit from this silence and thus gain power and step 
up their political activity. 
  The RP within the FYP: Although the DYP usually defends 
liberal philosophy, it houses pro-Islamic deputies who are 
strong enough to establish at least another RP. The names of 
the DYP deputies who act like pro-RP members are: 
  Etem Kelekci, Baki Durmaz, Hayri Dogan, Cemal Oztylan, Omer 
Lutfi Coskun, Haydar Baylaz, Necmi Hosver, Suleyman Ayhan, Nabi 
Sabuncu, Ismail Kose, Mehmet Ozkaya, Handan Ozuberk, Nurettin 
Tokdemir, Ertekin Duruturk, Abdulkerim Dogru, Ismail Amasyali, 
Yahya Uslu, Abdurrezzak Yavuz, Fevzi Sihanlioglu, Alaattin Kurt, 
Selahattin Karademir, Selim Ensarioglu, Mehmet Ozkan, Hasan 
Kilic, Ali Uzun, Edip Bucak, Irfettin Akar, Riza Akcali, Cavit 
Erdemir, Sadik Avundukluoglu, Ayvaz Gokdemir, Mahmut Ozturk, 
Turgut Tekin, Nevzat Yazici, Ismail Karakuyu Haluk Muftuler, 
Koksal Toptan, Ali Yalcin Ogutcan, Sami Sozat and Abdurrahman 
Unlu. 
  The RP within ANAP: There are nearly 20 pro "holy alliance" 
deputies in this party. The names of those who have been 
identified are: 
  Vehbi Dincerler, Oltan Sungurlu, Mehmet Kececiler, Mehmet 
Sagdic, Hasan Cakir, Suleyman Hatinoglu, Edip Safter Gaydali, 
Ali Er, Halit Dumankaya, Alaattin Elmas, Nabi Poyraz, Sukru 
Yurur, Ersin Taranoglu, Adem Yildiz, Cenap Gurpinar, Lutfullah 
Kayalar and Mahmud Orhon. 
  The members of the Peace Unity Party and the Nation Party as 
well as independent Deputies Hasan Mezarci and Abdulmelik Firat 
act together on Islamic issues within the "holy alliance." 
  Today, the pro-"holy alliance" deputies constitute the 
biggest obstacle before the democratization process. 
  The ANAP members of the interparty commission which has been 
set up for making changes in the Constitution back the RP's 
condition that constitutional Article 24, which stipulates that 
a state based on religious principles cannot be advocated, 
should be changed before changes can be made in other articles. 
ANAP also says that it will not support any change without an 
amendment being made in that article. 

