Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ulyan Ninel: "Communists Are in the Lead"] </F>
  [Text] Ivan Yemets, head of the Central Electoral 
Commission for the elections of people's deputies of Ukraine, 
has told a news conference that as of 2 March, there were 5,833 
candidates for deputy seats registered; this number, due to 
natural causes, can only decrease. On average, it amounts to 
almost 13 candidates per constituency, but there is also one 
constituency in Kiev with 31 candidates, and 3 constituencies in 
Ukraine with two candidates in each. 
  Among the candidates, 62.3 percent is put forward by the 
electorate; 26.7 percent -- by working collectives; and 11 
percent -- by political parties. As it should be expected, 
those seeking revenge "have got the fidgets": Among the 
political parties, the largest number of candidates was put 
forward by the Communist Party -- 6.7 percent. It is followed 
by the Popular Rukh -- 4.1 percent; the Socialist Party -- 3.11 
percent; the Ukrainian Republican Party -- 2.42 percent; the 
Liberal Party -- 1.43 percent; and the Democratic Party of 
Ukraine -- 1.28 percent. According to Ivan Yemets, there are 
more "disguised" party candidates, but not everyone has decided 
to be put forward by the parties due to their anemia and lack of 
influence. 
  Among the candidates for deputy seats, representatives of 
commercial and entrepreneur structures total 13.2 percent; 
workers of state enterprises -- 10.3 percent; representatives of 
state administration -- 5.4 percent; heads and workers of the 
councils at all levels -- 6.22 percent; managers of state 
enterprises -- 4.6 percent; and workers of law enforcement 
bodies -- 5.7 percent. This undoubtedly means one thing -- 
representatives of all interested circles try to fight for power 
also in a legitimate way. The decrease in the number of 
managers among the candidates was assessed by Ivan Yemets very 
simply: The parliament will work on a professional basis. 
  I. Yemets also mentioned one more consoling fact. The 
current parliament has very few lawyers; the situation in the 
future one may be changed: There are 10.4 percent lawyers and 
8.54 percent economists among the candidates. With regard to 
their professions, the candidates are divided in the following 
way: engineers and technicians -- 24.6 percent; education 
workers -- 15.6 percent; medical workers -- 6.3 percent; 
journalists -- 3.09 percent; and agricultural workers -- over 7 
percent. 
  Among the candidates for deputies, 77 percent are 
Ukrainians; 
18.6 percent are Russians; the rest are of 20 other 
nationalities. Higher education is completed by 89.6 percent of 
the candidates, secondary and secondary vocational education -- 
by 8.8 percent; 43.2 percent (according to questionnaires) of 
the candidates can speak foreign languages. 
  Parliament may be exclusively masculine (there are only 7.4 
percent of females among the candidates) and of urban-site 
residents (there are 14.53 percent of rural-site representatives 
among the candidates). 
  With regard to age, the future parliament may be 
medium-aged: 
90.5 percent of the candidates are between 31 and 60 years old; 
more than 4 percent are over 60 years old; and 5.3 percent are 
between 25 and 30 years old. Thus, dear electors, there are 
candidates for every taste. So, the main issue is to elect them. 

