BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Deputy Prime Minister Brigita Schmognerova </F>
"prepared by" Igor Zvach in Bratislava; date not given: "Brigita 
Schmognerova, Deputy Prime Minister for the Economy, Discusses 
Transformation and Its Pitfalls in NARODNA OBRODA"] 
  [Text] When we organized an informal meeting in the 
editorial office last fall, to which, among other economic 
experts, we also invited Mrs. Brigita Schmognerova, we had no 
idea that the next time she visited NARODNA OBRODA she would be 
a deputy prime minister. As an economist, she is--what 
else?--deputy prime minister for the economy. How does she view 
current economic problems? We now offer you an abridged version 
of her answers to some of the many questions we literally 
showered upon her. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] We ventured forth on the road of economic 
transformation virtually from one day to the next. First, the 
gung-ho system, then a certain sobering up, hesitation, and 
doubts--all the way to a slow down. Now it seems that there is 
again a certain speeding up. What does the present government 
intend to do, even though the period of its activity is 
curtailed by the date of the early elections, to ensure that 
transformation acquires an irreversible character? 
  [Schmognerova] First of all, I would like to say that this 
question is slightly hypothetical. Transformation is an 
existential necessity, and the outcome of the elections should 
not--I hope--change anything in this regard. The fact that the 
government can slow down or speed up transformation is another 
matter, and a responsible government cannot view a complicated 
process such as transformation merely from the point of view of 
time. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] All right, let us be more specific--what 
now and what later? 
  [Schmognerova] First and foremost, it is necessary to 
realize that changing ownership is one of the basic tasks for 
transforming the economy. Privatization has become "stuck" and 
complicated recently. Now that the government has decided to 
speed up privatization by means of coupon privatization and 
standard methods, we may assume that the whole process will 
start moving again. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] There was often talk about part-payment 
sales. What do you think of this option, for example? 
  [Schmognerova] Part-payment sales is one of the 
privatization methods. Does this really have a positive impact 
in our situation? Reality shows that it does not. The new owner 
often has trouble with paying the first installment, let alone 
all the others. Therefore, it is necessary to realize that it is 
more effective to sell to someone who is solvent. This does not 
mean that part-payment sales will not be implemented at all; 
they will not be given priority, however. The fact that a new 
owner is not always a good owner is another thing. For this 
reason, it is also necessary, for example, to consider that it 
would often be better to encourage the good managements of 
enterprises--for we do have them--so that they take part in 
ownership. It is necessary, for example, to reappraise 
managerial agreements and to motivate people, let us say, by 
guaranteeing them the option of purchasing shares in the event 
that the enterprise achieves good results. Incidentally, there 
are several of these places. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] The problem of the dire financial situation 
facing many enterprises has become very pronounced--and not only 
recently. They frequently could do something and knew how to do 
it, but where is the money to come from? 
  [Schmognerova] We have somehow "inconspicuously" moved over 
to a different package of problems. Here also, however, it is 
necessary to ponder the issue over a longer time frame. In 
essence, I see a solution to the dire financial situation in the 
business sphere on two levels. First and foremost, in the 
business sphere itself, where so-called bad debts from the past 
prevail. Here it is necessary to find a mechanism for finally 
ridding these enterprises of these debts if they really know how 
to proceed next. We are looking for an effective mechanism. 
Nevertheless, it is already clear that no mechanism for 
clearing debts will help some enterprises. Following tough 
analyses, it is no longer possible to hesitate with liquidation. 
On the other hand, it is also necessary to improve the 
situation in the commercial banks. It is very difficult to get 
credit at the moment. The banks have considerable financial 
resources tied up in the enterprises, and they are not even 
granting credit for propitious projects. The cautious credit 
policy adopted by the National Bank of Slovakia, which was 
reacting to the unfavorable monetary development in the fourth 
quarter of 1993, is also one of the reasons for the shortage of 
credits. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] Credit really is a special chapter. Do you 
see any possibility of improving the current situation? 
  [Schmognerova] I have already outlined it. On the one hand, 
by helping to resolve the financial situation in the business 
sphere and, on the other, by improving the portfolio of the 
commercial banks. It does not just involve this, however. If 
the banks were to continue to administer themselves, as many 
have done until now, we would not achieve much. It is also 
necessary to make improvements here. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] Foreign credits have been discussed for 
quite some time, but there is still no significant change. Why? 
  [Schmognerova] Look, some people think that foreign 
organizations are hesitating, that they are waiting to see what 
happens in the elections. It is not like this, however. The 
negotiations with the IMF are coming to a head, and negotiations 
are under way with the World Bank on a standby loan and on 
credit for the financial restructuring of the enterprises and 
the banking sphere and so on. If these negotiations are 
successful, the way is open for other lines of credit. 
  Many potential creditors often ask me: Will you receive a 
standby loan? This will be an important signal for them that it 
is possible to have confidence in Slovakia. The fact that, 
despite the many loans already obtained, there is a problem in 
drawing on them is something else. There is a lack of good and 
propitious business projects. This should change. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] As we are discussing the IMF and the World 
Bank, these institutions couple the provision of loans to 
compliance with specific recommendations. However, complying 
with some of them often provokes opposition... 
  [Schmognerova] It is necessary to admit that these financial 
institutions are not charitable organizations. Credits from 
them have advantageous repayment periods and interest rates, but 
the state that wants to obtain them has to prove that it will 
not fritter away the money, that it will use it effectively, and 
that it will guarantee its returnability. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] However, the majority of the 
recommendations will not much improve the current situation of 
less solvent and averagely solvent citizens. And, some of the 
recommendations are not discussed much... 
  [Schmognerova] There is no reason not to talk about them. 
After all, the implementation of some of them is already being 
prepared--for example, increasing the state budget's revenue by 
means of a higher tax burden or cutting some subsidies. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] This is the very subject of the increased 
criticism... 
  [Schmognerova] I really see no pressing reasons for this. 
Indeed, this involves categories of luxury goods and services. 
A mistake was made when certain items that are really not 
luxury items found their way onto the lists. The government 
will rectify this. However, it is necessary to add that we would 
have had to adopt these measures whether we wanted to conclude 
an agreement on a loan with the IMF or not. So, we were faced 
with a dilemma: either to adopt them, which would have been 
reflected in price increases of about 3.4 to 4.4 percent, and 
thus resolve the crisis situation in health care, education, and 
in providing child allowances, or not to adopt them and 
irresponsibly burden the budget with a further several dozen 
billion [korunas], which would have to have been paid in future 
years. Or--and this was also a possibility--to condone the 
total collapse of health care and education or get ourselves 
into a situation in which we would be unable to pay child 
allowances to the really needy. Here is just one example--why 
pay for some luxury cosmetic operations from the paltry 
resources for health care? After all, this is absurd. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] And what about the issue of a later pension 
age or lower pensions? 
  [Schmognerova] You have opened a large and sensitive package 
of issues, so my answer will also require more space. This 
involves a series of social issues. I would begin by saying 
that, compared with the past, the IMF and the World Bank have 
altered their approach to us and, thus, also their method of 
negotiating. While at the beginning--a year ago--these 
institutions came to Slovakia with their proposals for an 
economic program on whose basis the negotiations were then held, 
the approach now is different. We have drawn up our analyses, 
we have proposed certain courses of action, and we have sought a 
concessionary and acceptable solution. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] For example, then, the issue of later 
retirement? 
  [Schmognerova] It is a fact that, in Western countries, this 
limit is higher than in our country. For example, in some 
places it is 65 years, or even 67 years, for men. We have 
countered this argument, however, by explaining that these are 
countries with a higher average age, an age to which their 
inhabitants live. The situation in our country is, 
unfortunately, worse. Therefore, this issue was discussed, but 
the Slovak Government did not commit itself to any step. 
However, few people know that this commitment--raising the 
retirement age to 65--is written into the Memorandum on Economic 
Policy to obtain a so-called Economic Recovery Loan from the 
World Bank, which was signed in January 1994. 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] What about the social security net? 
  [Schmognerova] We simply cannot conceal the fact that our 
all-embracing and generous social security net (although this 
does not sound nice) does not encourage enough people to want to 
improve their situation through their own efforts. There are 
plenty of examples. It is often better for a person to be 
unemployed. We also allocate child allowances in an almost 
across-the-board manner, and often people who really do not need 
them receive them. We took, for example--let us admit it--a 
politically accommodating step [with regard to the trade unions] 
when we agreed to the formation of a social fund. But... 
  [NARODNA OBRODA] This "but" may be very significant when we 
realize that this fund is (likewise) a considerable incursion 
into the state coffers... 
  [Schmognerova] Certainly, although the concessionary 
solution is far from the burden of the original proposal from 
the trade unionists. It is, however, true that the inadequate 
targeting of social aid and the various additional squeezes on 
capital--such as the social fund--reduce the amount of what we 
can really use for those who need it most. 

