Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] National Social Defense Secretary Mario Soliz has 
noted that despite a huge effort by Bolivia in the field of 
interdiction of drug trafficking and eradication of coca crops, 
illegal narcotics trafficking has increased during the past few 
years. 
  During the opening ceremony of the first subregional 
cooperation meeting of representatives from Argentina, Bolivia, 
Chile, and Peru, Mario Soliz said he hopes effective policies 
for trafficking control will be established. 
  During the first session of this meeting, which will last 
until 3 February, the Bolivian Government raised two programs 
that represent the basis for the alternative development 
strategy: the opening of export markets and the establishment of 
a Subregional Fund for Alternative Development [Fondo 
Subregional Para el Desarrollo Alternativo]. National 
International Relations Secretary Jaime Aparicio said the 
Bolivian Government is committed to combating drug trafficking, 
its consequences, and one of its main causes: poverty. 
  Soliz explained that the basic task for the four cooperating 
countries is to enhance control and coordination at various 
levels within that broad area of thousands of kilometers of 
shared borders. 
  Soliz said: "There are highways, roads, railways, sea 
routes, 
and airways, which are clandestine routes for drugs, chemicals, 
and precursors. These borders are currently violated by 
criminal drug organizations." 
  In the case of Bolivia, Soliz said, this violation has a 
very 
serious cultural component because coca, a sacred element for 
Bolivians, seriously worries the world when its use does not 
conform to the traditional practices that have been a custom in 
our area for hundreds of years. 
  The social defense secretary said: "Despite efforts by the 
Bolivian Government in the field of drug enforcement, 
eradication of coca crops, and alternative development policy, 
drug trafficking activities have increased." 
  After indicating that Bolivia has achieved significant 
advancements, Soliz noted that 47 percent of the entire coca 
crops existing in 1987 have been eradicated. 
  Soliz added: "Nevertheless, while our country was conducting 
this huge task, supported by international cooperation, the 
international drug cartels attempted to increase the illegal 
crop." 
  Soliz indicated that this subregional meeting of 
representatives of the four participating countries shows the 
responsibility of establishing an alliance against the "deadly 
challenge" posed by trafficking to their governments and 
populations. He said that discussions will focus on all the 
aspects of the drug problem, including the opening of export 
markets for products yielded by the replacement of crops within 
the framework of alternative development and ways to increase 
the effectiveness of interdiction. 
  The social defense secretary said the discussions will also 
involve controls on chemicals trafficking and issues of a 
scientific, moral, and human nature, including the worrisome 
question: Why do people take drugs? 
  National International Relations Secretary Jaime Aparicio 
said the efforts made by the producing countries, like Bolivia, 
are not matched by the international community. 
  Aparicio stressed: "This meeting is part of a drug 
enforcement strategy that views with interest a solution to 
illegal drug production, trade, and abuse. Nevertheless, a 
solution to the causes encouraging these illegal actions should 
also be found." 

