BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by special correspondent Clara Ines Rueda Gomez] </F>
  [Text] Cartagena -- Yesterday, President Cesar Gaviria 
called on the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank 
(IDB) to revise the mechanisms of extending credit and to 
rescind the conditions imposed on developing nations. 
"Considerations such as equilibrium, social as well as 
institutional development, and environmental protection must be 
key elements in development loans for them to become genuine 
instruments of economic development," Gaviria indicated. The 
president made these statements before 65 delegates representing 
27 countries at the opening session of the World Bank, IMF 
Developing Countries Inter-Ministry Committee Forum, or the 
Group of 24. 
  According to Gaviria, the formulas used by the international 
institutions are inadequate for solving the challenges 
confronted, especially those confronted by African or Latin 
American nations. These economies demand answers from the 
developed countries and need assistance to open and modernize. 
  During the forum, which also commemorates the 50 year 
anniversary of the Bretton Woods Agreement, Gaviria stated that 
despite the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of GATT talks, 
developing nations still face obstacles of protectionism and 
discriminatory treatment by industrialized countries, as well as 
poor performance by a large segment of the essential goods 
market. 
  According to the president, the IMF and the World Bank must 
increase their involvement in improving the justice system, 
controlling the population explosion, and encouraging savings 
and private investment. In their role as mediators between 
industrialized and developing nations, these institutions must 
be more active and must preserve their independence. 
  In addition, speaking on behalf of his new position as an 
international leader, the president stated the two international 
organizations should become more involved in the struggle 
against poverty and every nation's social policies. "I do not 
say this based on the rhetoric of North-South cooperation. I 
say it with the conviction that any progress on issues such as 
economic aggregates, regardless of what part of the world it 
takes place, will be fragile and will have political 
consequences, if not accompanied by an improvement in the 
standard of living of individual nations," the president 
indicated. This could be one way to get ahead of the agenda for 
the next few years when problems such as immigration, lack of 
natural resources, and demographic pressures will be the order 
of the day. 
<H5>  New Mission </H5>
  According to Gaviria, the IMF must not only support efforts 
to stabilize those economies in crisis, but it should also 
become more involved in issues like the flow of capital and its 
impact on investment and growth. With respect to the World Bank 
and the regional banks, they should provide technical assistance 
to those countries that have undergone structural adjustments in 
order to evaluate the effectiveness of policies being 
implemented and to ensure an adequate balance between the 
various markets. 
  According to Gaviria, there are parallels between the 
situation the world was going through in 1944 (when the IMF and 
the World Banks were created as result of the Bretton Woods 
Agreement) and the current situation. "In 1994, the entire 
world is participating in the in-depth review of the roles 
played by all nations." 
<H5>  The Debt Crisis </H5>
  The new OAS secretary highlighted efforts by the World Bank 
and the IMF during the 1980's to solve the Colombian debt 
crisis. In his opinion, efforts by the two international 
organizations enabled his country to solve its debt problem in a 
unique manner and at the same time achieve the highest growth 
level in Latin America. 
  Likewise, Gaviria emphasized the fact that the Worlk Bank 
had 
learned to listen to its clients and accept that the best 
policies are those planned in accordance with each country's own 
initiative. He also indicated that the IMF's task has allowed 
some nations to be trusted once again by domestic as well as 
international markets. 

