Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Radmir Kilmatov: "The Government Has Approved an </F>
Inflation Program"] 
  [Text] The federal program for technical reequipment 
and development of Russia's metallurgy in the 1993-2000 period, 
which KOMMERSANT-DAILY reported yesterday, has been approved by 
a decree of the chairman of the Council of Ministers. Actually 
the first combined program for an entire sector which was not 
declared a priority in the government's economic policy (unlike 
the military, agrarian, and fuel complexes) has been 
approved. 
  An assessment of the quality indicators of the sector 
conducted by specialists on the Committee for Metallurgy 
demonstrated that only 10 to 15 percent of the total volume of 
finished metal products can compete successfully in the world 
market at present. The output is not competitive because of its 
high energy and resource consumption. The crisis in metallurgy 
is having an effect on subcontracting sectors, and large-scale 
renovation of the metallurgical industry means the solution of 
many problems in the national economy as a whole. 
  The introduction of new economizing technologies in Russia's 
largest enterprises has been assessed at $15 billion. Developers 
of the program initially proposed that the main financing come 
from the enterprises' own funds, providing only 10 percent from 
preferential investment loans. However, as a result of freeing 
the prices for energy resources, such investments in production 
reequipment for Russia's metallurgical enterprises in their 
current financial condition is "an impermissible luxury." So 
most likely the government, after adopting the program, will be 
resolving the problem of financing it through the budget; for 
this it will have to reduce the number of measures (especially 
as under the government decree, funds will be allocated 
separately for each of the 50 facilities included in the program 
"based on the specific conditions and effectiveness of the 
measures being implemented"). 
  Another method of resolving the financial problems may be to 
expand the representation of outside investors (at present, 15 
percent of the program volume), for which it is essential to put 
an end to the problem of the sector's indebtedness first of all. 
The most logical step from the standpoint of the sector's 
managers might be mutual part payment of the debts, accompanied 
by a "limited" credit emission. Prospects for inflationary 
financing of the program from the budget are determined by 
possible changes in the cabinet's policy and by the fact that 
development of the metallurgical industry is an area "of 
professional interest" to Oleg Soskovets, the first vice premier 
and former chairman of Roskommetallurgii [Russian Federation 
Committee on Metallurgy]. 
<H6>  Basic Objectives of the Federal Program </H6>

  -  Participation 
by enterprises in interstate associations within the framework 
of the Eurasian Coal and Metal Association 
  -  Introduction of 
resource conservation technologies 
  -  Reduction of harmful effects 
on the environment 
  -  Minimization of transportation 
expenditures 

<H5>    Measures of State Support: </H5>

  -  Release of enterprises 
implementing the program measures from payment of customs duties 
when selling metal products and purchasing equipment 
  -  Relief from 
taxation of profit which enterprises direct at investment 
programs 



  Structure of Steel Smelting Production (Percentage of Volume) 

Country       Converter       Electric       Open-Hearth       Proportion of 
              Steel           Steel          Steel             Production 
                                                               With 
                                                               Continuous 
                                                               Teeming 

Russia        34.5            14.0           50.7              23.6 

China         60.3            21.2           18.5              26.5 

United        59.6            36.8           3.6               66.5 
States 

Japan         70.0            30.0           0                 93.9 

Germany       82.5            17.5           0                 90.0 



