Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, March 14 (KCNA) -- The South Korean 
puppet Security Planning Board (SPB) [Agency for National 
Security and Planning--NSP] recently invented and made public 
the case of "Yi Pok-hon's visit to the North" in a bid to do 
harm to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, according to 
a report from Seoul. 
  It alleged that Yi Pok-hon, 32, who had been sought by the 
police in South Korea in 1990 on the suspicion of swindles, went 
abroad and joined an international criminal organization 
engaging in drug trafficking and terrorism by contract and then 
received terrorist training by traveling to the northern half of 
Korea on several occasions and conducted secret activities to 
get rid of anti-North activists overseas at the dictate of the 
North, before being arrested. 
  This is an utterly groundless, preposterous drama invented 
premeditatedly by the "SPB" pursuing a sinister political 
purpose and a disgusting offspring of the anti-DPRK plot aimed 
at slandering the North. 
  It is sheer nonsense that Yi Pok-hon, a ghost invented by 
the 
"SPB", came to the North. And still more preposterous is the 
claim that the North gives terrorist training. 
  We take a serious view of the ridiculous charge of the "SPB" 
that we invited scores of members of the afore-said criminal 
organization to the North with the assistance of Yi Pok-hon and 
gave them special military training and, at the same time, have 
sold arms through them. 
  It goes without saying that this is another brainchild for 
attaching "seriousness" to the case of "Yi Pok-hon's visit to 
the North." We, however, feel it necessary to decisively refute 
the vicious political plot of the puppets to impair the 
dignified international image of the DPRK by linking it with an 
international criminal organization. 
  The case is only a sequel to a long string of the anti-DPRK 
plots which the "SPB" had hatched each time the situation turned 
unfavorable to them. It is nothing but a drama to cover up 
their poor position in which they have become a target of 
worldwide denunciation over the issues of the "National Security 
Law" and human rights abuses in South Korea, and avert elsewhere 
the attention of the world people. 
  The case only shows how nervous the Kim Yong-sam puppet 
clique has got over the fact that the DPRK's authority and 
prestige is growing not only in South Korea but in the 
international arena, while they have got into hot water. 
  Therefore, we cannot but see behind the criminal scheme of 
the Kim Yong-sam puppet clique to deliberately balk the ongoing 
working contact for the exchange of special envoys between the 
North and the South and obstruct the third round of the 
DPRK-U.S. talks at any cost and thus isolate and stifle the 
North with the "international cooperation system." If the Kim 
Yong-sam puppet clique wants to frighten the North with a base 
drama which cannot work with anyone, it would be a serious 
mistake. 

