BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Analysis" by staff reporter Xu Shiquan (6079 0013 </F>
6898): "Wanting To Repeat United Nations' Somalia Operation in 
Rwanda?"] 
  [Text] New York, 23 Jun (RENMIN RIBAO) -- On 22 June, the 
UN Security Council adopted Resolution No. 929, which had been 
proposed by France, with 10 votes in favor and five abstentions, 
under which France was authorized to implement a two-month 
"provisional multinational operation" in Rwanda, where fighting 
is increasingly intense at present. A French Army unit of 2,500 
soldiers planned to enter Rwanda on 23 June. 
  Since the civil war broke out in Rwanda in October 1990, in 
order to overcome the crisis in this central African country, 
the UN Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions one after 
another and set up a "UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda" to 
conduct peace-keeping activities. In explaining the proposal, 
the French delegate said that the reason why France had taken 
the initiative was that massacres had occurred in Rwanda during 
the past two months, and, before personnel and equipment of the 
UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda was replenished, it "needs 
multinational action to protect the lives of civilians." 
However, the new resolution adopted on 22 June was different 
from previous ones in two aspects: 1) The French operation was 
taken outside the framework of the UN Assistance Mission for 
Rwanda, and, in fact, it is a military action taken by France 
alone. 2) The action was not unanimously supported and 
endorsed by the conflicting factions. The opposition party, the 
"Rwanda Patriotic Front [RPF]," which controls more than half of 
the country's territory, is explicitly opposed to the French 
dispatching troops. Delegates from some countries favoring the 
resolution cited the U.S. troops sent to Somalia in December 
1992 as an example. However, it is precisely this example that 
has aroused anxiety from quite a few countries which have 
devoted their efforts to make the work of the UN Assistance 
Mission for Rwanda a success. Chen Jian, China's deputy 
delegate to the United Nations, said unequivocally in his speech 
that considering the factors, including experience and lessons 
gained from the UN peace-keeping activities in Somalia, China 
had decided to abstain from the voting. He pointed out 
emphatically: "Use of force and resorting to tough measures 
will only lead to a further deterioration of the situation." 
The Brazilian delegate, who also abstained, expressed his worry 
that the French action would harm the tasks of the UN Assistance 
Mission for Rwanda. 
  If we look back at the history of war and chaos in Rwanda 
and 
the twists and turns experienced by the United Nations in its 
Rwanda peace-keeping activities, people will not find it 
difficult to understand clearly the position taken by China, 
Brazil, and other countries. 
  There are profound historical, political, and racial reasons 
for the war in Rwanda. Owing to lengthy colonial rule, the Hutu 
nationality, who account for 85 percent of the total population, 
and the Tutsi minority have undergone several periods of bloody 
strife in history. On these two sides of the current civil war, 
the government forces are mainly composed of Hutus, while the 
majority of the RPF are from the Tutsi. Although both sides 
have reached cease-fire agreements several times since the 
outbreak of the war, the flames of war have never been quenched 
due to the difficulty of eliminating these contradictions. The 
government side maintains that the conflict is, in essence, of a 
"nationality nature," that is, the Tutsi people had refused to 
accept Hutu majority rule, which was established by a general 
election held under UN supervision in September 1961. The RPF, 
however, maintains that the conflict is of a "political nature" 
and has called for the setting up of a nationality government on 
an extensive basis. In spite of this, after positive mediation 
by the Organization of African Unity and Tanzania, the 
conflicting parties signed a peace accord in Arusha, Tanzania, 
which agreed to establish a transitional government and 
transitional parliament on an extensive basis in January this 
year. For various reasons, the accord could not be carried out 
as scheduled. On 6 April, when Rwanda President Habyarimana and 
Burundi President Nyaryamira were killed in a mysterious plane 
crash at Kigali Airport, the tragedy immediately escalated the 
war and led to the genocidal slaughter of civilians. As 
estimated in a report to the UN secretary general, in this 
country, which only has a population of 7 million people, 
250,000 to 500,000 people have been killed, 1.5 million people 
are homeless, and 400,000 people have become refugees after 
escaping to neighboring countries. According to the report, 
"absolute proof" indicates that the government and its 
supporters are responsible for the slaughter, as the victims 
have mostly been Tutsis. Under such chaotic conditions, 10 
members of the Belgian task force belonging to the UN Assistance 
Mission for Rwanda were also killed. For this reason, the 
Security Council passed Resolution No. 912 on 21 April to reduce 
the number of troops in the UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda 
from 2,500 to 270, thus, the peace-keeping activities in Rwanda 
suffered setbacks. Although the Security Council adopted 
another resolution, No. 918 on 17 May, to replenish the mission 
so that its troops were increased to 5,500, they were once again 
reduced to 503 people at present and found it very difficult to 
fulfill the tasks entrusted to them. 
  The above facts show that the crisis in Rwanda was not built 
in one day, and the key to resolving this issue is to urge the 
two sides to value the interests of the country above all else 
through patient negotiations so as to gradually iron out 
differences and turn hostility into friendship. It is 
impractical to think that by dispatching a battalion of troops, 
the critical malady can be cured, no matter what motives one 
harbors. One need not look far for a lesson, because the U.S. 
expedition to Somalia can serve as an example. 

