BFN 

<F P=106> [Column by Mehmet Ali Birand: "Turkey Cannot Continue To </F>
Watch Iraq in This Way..."] 
  [Text] There is growing discord in relations between Turkey 
and the United States. The Iraq issue, the most important among 
the problems between Turkey and the United States, is gradually 
worsening. Turkey's flirtation with Baghdad has made Washington 
extremely uncomfortable. Washington is reportedly worried that 
the UN embargo on Baghdad will be violated and the Saddam 
administration's existence will be prolonged if Ankara insists 
on its approach. Washington is also worried that the approach 
maintained by Turkey, which is the most important country from 
the point of view of the UN sanctions, may disrupt the already 
weakening alliance against Iraq; that is, if Turkey does not 
abandon its stance. 
  The U.S. view is this: "The approach you adopted when we 
were about to achieve our goal will encourage Saddam Husayn. 
That will make things difficult for us." Consequently, that 
country is trying to persuade Turkey to change its position. An 
effort is being made to find an intermediary formula to obstruct 
the approach maintained by Turkey, which is swaying under the 
pressure of an economic crisis and the search for an agreement 
with the IMF on credits. 
  Apparently, the embargo on Iraq is being maintained upon the 
insistence of the United States. Washington knows it must 
decide what policy to adopt on Iraq. The pressure at the United 
Nations to lift the embargo is gradually increasing. Many 
countries, Jordan in particular, have said "the embargo should 
be lifted. It is enough." The next few weeks will be very 
important from that viewpoint. The UN Security Council must 
reconsider the issue and decide whether to maintain the embargo. 
Attention is focused on Washington. The decision it will adopt 
to change or maintain its approach will have a bearing on Iraq's 
territorial integrity, regional developments, and the relations 
between Turkey and the United States. 
<H5>  Iraq Has Been Forced To Pay Enough </H5>
  Iraq has suffered enough of a penalty for causing the Gulf 
War. The UN decision to impose an embargo on it has been 
implemented in an unprecedented way. All its heavy arms have 
been destroyed under UN supervision. Baghdad revealed a few 
days ago that it has relinquished its claim that Kuwait is a 
part of Iraq. 
  The embargo has been an adequate lesson for Iraq. Iraq has 
lost some of its wealth and its military strength has weakened. 
But the United States would be wrong to expect its pressure to 
achieve Saddam Husayn's removal. On the contrary, the 
conditions are helping Saddam Husayn to strengthen his 
administration. The Iraqi people have rallied around their 
leader, prolonging the Saddam administration's term in office. 
<H5>  Turkey Cannot Endure the Embargo.... </H5>
  Turkey has suffered significantly from the embargo on Iraq. 
So far it has lost $20 billion. The loss will increase by $5 
to $6 billion a year. The issue has reached a point where it 
can no longer be endured. The serious situation will be better 
understood if this is considered together with the rate of 
unemployment and political and social unrest in southeast Turkey. 
  As if all that is not enough, Turkey has been assigned an 
active task within the framework of the Hammer Force for 
penalizing Iraq. It is as if Turkey is being forced to punish 
itself. 
  That is what the public has been unable to understand... 
  Turkey is expected to continue to support the Hammer Force, 
while its economic problems are ignored and its wish to use the 
oil from the Karkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline is rejected. No one 
agrees with the excuse: "Turkey cannot act against the Workers 
Party of Kurdistan militants in northern Iraq without the Hammer 
Force. Nor can it bomb Iraq's territory whenever it wants. It 
will risk significant world reaction. But the United States has 
preferred to overlook developments in the region because of the 
existence of the Hammer Force." 
  The Turkish Grand National Assembly will debate the 
extension 
of the Hammer Force's mandate for another six months very soon. 
The debate that will be held will be much more serious than 
those that were held in the past. In view of that, Washington 
should consider the anxiety in Turkey when it moves to decide on 
the embargo on Iraq and the withdrawal of the oil from the 
Karkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline. The U.S. approach has begun to 
seriously harm Turkey and the region. 

