BFN 

<F P=106> [Bjorn Lindahl report: "Nuclear Waste Dump To Be Built </F>
Close to Swedish Border"] 
  [Text] Oslo -- Despite protests from local authorities on 
both sides of the border, yesterday the Norwegian Storting 
decided that a dump for radioactive waste will be built in 
Himdalen, 30 km from the Swedish local authorities of Eda and 
Arjang which lie on the border with Norway. 
  It is waste from Norway's two research reactors which is to 
be stored here, together with low- and medium-level radioactive 
waste from hospitals. A cavern will be constructed under a 
ridge 170 meters above sea level in an area where rock types are 
full of cracks and where drainage water runs out into a river. 
  Environmental organizations and Norwegian Geological 
Investigations, where the foremost geological expertise is to be 
found, have criticized the planned facility and think that there 
is a risk that the radioactive waste will leak out into the 
ground water. The International Atomic Energy Agency has also 
asked to see the Norwegian plans. There was tough criticism of 
Norwegian Industry Minister Jens Stoltenberg during the Storting 
debate. 
  "I have never seen so important a question put before the 
Storting with such inadequate information," Environment 
Committee chairman Ragnhild Queseth Haarstad (Center Party) said. 
  Paul Chaffey from the Socialist Left Party wondered where 
the 
negative comments from the experts had been concealed. 
  "Why has the industry minister not included the comments 
made 
by Sweden's National Nuclear Inspection Board?" he asked. 
  The Storting was divided across party boundaries, but the 
Labor Party won enough support from the Conservative Party and 
the Progress Party for a decision to be reached by 71 votes to 
57. Industry Minister Stoltenberg defended himself by saying 
that it is not the rock around the facility which is to prevent 
radioactive leaks. 
  "The barrels will be cast in concrete casings, and these in 
their turn will be placed in a concrete sarcophagus. If we 
notice that the concrete does not come up to standard or if, 
contrary to expectations, radioactivity does leak out we can 
take the barrels out again," he said. 
  Hitherto the waste from the two research reactors at Halden 
and Kjeller has been stored in 1,000 barrels buried underground 
at the Institute for Energy Technology at Kjeller. A further 
1,500 barrels are in a temporary storage facility. As well as 
low- and medium-level waste, small quantities of plutonium -- 
with a half-life of 24,000 years -- will also have to be stored. 

