BFN 

  [Excerpts] The Second Session of the Eighth Hunan 
Provincial People's Congress was solemnly inaugurated in the 
Hunan Provincial Military District Auditorium yesterday morning. 
  The opening ceremony was jointly chaired by the session's 
Executive Chairmen Liu Fusheng, Dong Zhiwen, Shen Ruiting, Yu 
Haichao, Liu Yue, Zhu Dongyang, Wu Yunchang, Zhao Peiyi, and Pan 
Jizhi. Liu Fusheng, provincial people's congress standing 
committee chairman, declared the session open at 0840. [passage 
omitted] 
  Provincial Governor Chen Bangzhu delivered a government work 
report in which he stated: Deputies, on behalf of the Hunan 
Provincial People's Government, I would like to deliver, and 
submit to you for deliberation and approval, a government work 
report on which I will also solicit opinions from the provincial 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] 
committee, as well as other nonvoting delegates. 
  In the first part of the government work report, Governor 
Chen Bangzhu mainly reviewed the province's work in 1993. He 
said: In 1993, Hunan people implemented in an in-depth manner 
the spirit of a series of important speeches made by Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping and the spirit of the 14th CPC National Congress 
and vigorously forged ahead in building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, with the result that they succeeded in 
overcoming numerous difficulties and scored gratifying results 
in many aspects of work. 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu noted: In 1993, Hunan's gross national 
product reached 114.6 billion yuan, representing a 12.6 percent 
increase over the previous year; total agricultural output value 
was 56.35 billion yuan, registering a 5.3 percent increase over 
the previous year; total township and town enterprises output 
value was 82 billion yuan, up by 69.4 percent over the previous 
year; total industrial output value was 144.63 billion yuan, up 
22.8 percent over the previous year; tertiary industrial growth 
was 32.9 billion yuan, up 16 percent; total social commodity 
retail volume was 53.92 billion yuan, up by 20.4 percent; total 
financial revenue was 12.65 billion yuan, up by 36.36 percent; 
and peasants' per capita net income on the part of peasants was 
852 yuan, up by 112 yuan, while the total market commodity 
retail price index showed a 15.1 percent increase. 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu said: While the province's overall 
economic performance was excellent, its general economic 
environment and quality registered significant improvement as 
well. Thanks to effective macroeconomic regulation and control, 
the province expeditiously implemented a structural efficiency 
strategy, improved the industrial structure, altered the ratio 
between primary, secondary, and tertiary industries from 
35.2:37.8:27 to 30.3:41:28.7, made headway in reform and opening 
up, and pressed ahead with all types of reforms with a view to 
building a socialist market economic structure and making its 
national economy more market-oriented. Moreover, he added, the 
province pushed ahead with enterprise reform by implementing all 
relevant regulations to the letter and furthering enterprise 
operative mechanism readjustment. The province conducted 
explorations and made more breakthroughs in finding more 
effective ways and means of implementing the public ownership 
system, further enhanced a socialized rural service system, 
rapidly developed a joint-stock cooperative economy, further 
developed all types of commodity markets, made fresh headway in 
developing such essential production element markets as finance, 
technology, information, labor, and real estate markets, and 
pressed ahead with such corresponding reforms as social security 
system reform, land utilization system reform, housing system 
reform, and other types of reforms. 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu asserted: In 1993 Hunan further 
developed all sorts of social undertakings, and energetically 
built socialist spiritual civilization, democracy, and the legal 
system. The province further integrated science and technology 
with economy, made 1,600 scientific and technological research 
achievements, obtained 2,766 technological patents, successfully 
built some 100 major scientific and technological development 
projects, extensively popularized and applied scientific and 
technological achievements to production, and accelerated 
high-tech industrial development. The province also 
comprehensively implemented the party's education principles, 
made encouraging progress in compulsory education, intermediate 
vocational education, and adult education development, achieved 
new successes in wiping out illiteracy among juveniles, further 
developed college education and scientific research, further 
refined both education management structure and education 
structure, and pushed ahead with education reform. Sports 
undertakings were developed with the result that the province 
won a total of 53 championships in various major domestic and 
international tournaments, was ranked ninth in the Seventh 
National Sports Games in terms of the number of gold medals, and 
further popularized sports activities among the masses . 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu went on: In 1993, Hunan further 
developed medical and public health work, successfully 
controlled population growth, and stepped up family planning to 
a large extent with the result that the province's natural 
population growth rate stayed at 6.95 per thousand. Hunan also 
made significant headway in cultural, news and publication, 
radio and television, and social sciences, further intensified 
ideological and political work, conscientiously organized the 
people of the whole province to study the third volume of the 
"Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," and carried out activities of 
commemorating the centenary of the birth of the late Comrade Mao 
Zedong. The province successfully built a batch of small 
civilized zones, civilized townships and towns, and civilized 
units, conducted other spiritual civilization activities, scored 
gratifying results in the anticorruption struggle, stepped up 
socialist democracy and legal system building, enhanced 
supervision of executive, law enforcement, and judicial organs, 
made headway in comprehensive social order management, won new 
victories in eradicating social evils, and maintained basic 
social stability. 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu continued: In 1993, Hunan also 
successfully carried out national defense education, as well as 
activities aimed at supporting the Army and providing 
preferential treatment to the families of revolutionary soldiers 
and martyrs and at supporting the government and cherishing the 
people. As a result, we further enhanced a sense of national 
defense and strengthened unity between the Army and the 
government and between the Army and the people. 
  Speaking of the province's work in 1994, Governor Chen 
Bangzhu stated: 1994 is a crucial and important year for 
China's reform and construction. Successful work in 1994 is 
bound to have a far- reaching impact on the province's overall 
development in the future. The general guiding ideology for the 
province's work in 1994 is as follows: To focus on building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, adhere to the party's 
basic line, comprehensively implement and carry out the spirit 
of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
mobilize and unify all the forces that can be mustered, firmly 
grasp every excellent opportunity, deepen reform, expand opening 
up, push forward overall development, and safeguard stability. 
  In the government work report, Governor Chen Bangzhu 
stressed: In 1994, Hunan should devote most of its energies to 
the following three key aspects of work: 
  1. Push ahead with all types of reform with an eye on 
building a socialist market economic structure. 
  2. Strive for breakthroughs in various key areas and for a 
sustained, rapid, and healthy economic growth. 
  3. To vigorously build socialist spiritual civilization, 
democracy, and legal system as well as maintain social stability. 
  Governor Chen Bangzhu concluded by saying: Deputies, we are 
now in a crucial period of building a socialist market economic 
structure and socialist modernization and are facing extremely 
arduous and heavy tasks. We should thereby firmly grasp each 
and every excellent opportunity, work hard with one heart and 
one mind, vigorously forge ahead, carry out work in a 
down-to-earth manner, and strive to comprehensively fulfill all 
tasks in 1994 under the joint leadership of the CPC Central 
Committee, the State Council, and the Hunan Provincial CPC 
Committee! 
  The opening ceremony was attended by provincial party, 
government, and military leaders and a number of retired veteran 
comrades, including [provincial party committee Secretary] Wang 
Maolin; Xiong Qingquan; Liu Zhen [provincial CPPCC committee 
chairman]; [provincial military district Commander] Pang 
Weiqiang; and some others. [passage omitted] 
  Those attending the opening ceremony as nonvoting delegates 
included provincial CPPCC committee members who had just 
attended the Second Session of the Seventh Hunan Provincial 
CPPCC Committee, persons in charge of various provincial 
departments concerned, as well as a number of Hunan-based 
National People's Congress [NPC] deputies. 
  In a related development, the Second Session of the Eighth 
Hunan Provincial People's Congress held its second meeting led 
by Executive Chairman Yu Haichao yesterday afternoon. 
  The meeting listened to "The 1993 Hunan Provincial Financial 
Estimates Implementation Report," "The 1994 Hunan Provincial 
Financial Estimates Report," and other reports. [passage 
omitted] 

