CSO 

  [Excerpts] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division. 
The Majles met yesterday chaired by Dr. Rowhani, and the 
deputies from the cities of Ardebil, Kuhdasht, Saravan, and 
Tehran gave speeches. 
  Then the deputy speaker of the Majles gave a speech in which 
he offered congratulations on the birth of His Holiness Reza 
(peace be upon him) and condemned the recent crimes by the Serbs 
in Gorazde. The full text of his speech was printed in the 
previous issue. Then the Majles took up its agenda. 
  We direct the attention of our esteemed readers to the 
detailed proceedings. 
<H5>  Legislation </H5>
<H5>  Bill Forming Rural Water and Sewage Companies </H5>
  The first item on the agenda at yesterday's open Majles 
session was continued consideration of the report from the 
Administrative and Employment Affairs Commission's first 
consultation on the Bill Forming Rural Water and Sewage 
Companies, the general form of which was approved with 118 votes 
in favor, 59 opposing votes, and 30 abstentions. 
  Based on this bill, the Ministry of the Reconstruction 
Crusade is authorized to create a company in each province for 
the purpose of utilizing, developing, and recreating the 
installations for procuring drinking water in the rural areas 
(including purification plants, transfer lines, storage tanks, 
control systems and other things) and hygienically flushing 
sewage. 
  Note 2 in this bill also provides that the credits needed in 
these companies to carry out the duties given in this law will 
be procured by collecting service fees from consumers and, if 
necessary, through government aid. 
  The points for discussion in the bill's rejection by the 
Administrative and Employment Affairs Commission include the 
following: 
  1 - The structure of the rural water and sewage companies 
conforms to a great extent to the structure of the urban water 
and sewage companies, yet in the existing conditions there 
should be major structural differences. 
  2 - The bill presented provides for the formation of an 
urban 
water and sewage company in Tehran with company centers in the 
provinces and company centers in the cities, which will create 
major organizations. 
  3 - The above organizational hierarchy will need many 
specialists and experienced personnel, which do not exist now in 
the rural water division of the Ministry of the Reconstruction 
Crusade, and if it is possible to hire them it will be costly. 
  4 - In the bill presented, the rural water and sewage 
companies will be responsible only for operating rural water and 
sewage services, and thus in effect the Ministry of the 
Reconstruction Crusade's rural water division will remain intact. 
  5 - In practice the rural areas adjacent to the cities in 
most areas are connected with the urban water delivery networks, 
and many rural areas will connect to the urban networks on the 
same basis. 
  Likewise, the rural areas adjacent to the pipelines 
transferring water to the cities will benefit from this 
privilege. 
  The large rural areas have gradually acquired mayoral 
offices 
and have applied to be connected to the service territories of 
the urban water and sewage companies. Thus few rural areas will 
be covered by rural water and sewage companies. 
<H5>  International Rural Traffic Convention [as published] </H5>
  The second item on the agenda was the report from the 
Housing 
and Urban Construction Commission concerning the Bill Adding 
Iran to the International Maritime Traffic Convention, enacted 
by the International Maritime Organization in 1344 [21 March 
1965-20 March 1966], or 1365 [21 March 1986-20 March 1987] in 
the Christian Era, and this bill was approved by the deputies. 
<H5>  Conditions for Choosing Ministry of Justice Judges </H5>
  The third item on the agenda was the report from the first 
consultation of the Judicial and Legislative Affairs Commission 
concerning the Bill To Amend Note 5 of the Law Appending Five 
Notes to the Law on Conditions for Choosing Ministry of Justice 
Judges, enacted in 1363 [21 March 1984-20 March 1985], continued 
consideration of which was postponed to the next session. 
  Based on Note 5 of this law, the chief of the judicial power 
may also select women who have the qualifications for Ministry 
of Justice judges approved 2/14/1361 [4 May 1982] and they may 
be hired as judges serving as consultants to the court of 
administrative justice, the special civil courts, judicial 
aides, investigators, workers in legal research offices, 
compiling judicial laws, managing the supervision of minors, and 
practicing in legal and other offices with judicial positions. 
<H5>  No'i Aqdam, Deputy From Ardebil </H5>
  The Second Five-Year Plan is the only opportunity the Fourth 
Majles will have to implement precisely Article 48 of the 
Constitution. 
  The first preagenda speaker at yesterday's open Majles 
session was No'i Aqdam, deputy from Ardebil. During his speech 
he said one of the tasks of the Majles last year was to study 
and approve the Second Five-Year Plan. He said: In view of this 
opportunity, it is necessary for the Majles specialist 
commissions to study the strengths and weakness of the First 
Five-Year Plan with the cooperation of the experts so they will 
have the awareness necessary in compiling the Second Five-Year 
Plan to emphasize the strengths and cover the weaknesses. 
  He discussed the failure to implement Article 48 of the 
Constitution. He said: This article states that there must be no 
discrimination in the utilization of natural resources, the use 
of national revenues in the provinces, and in the distribution 
of economic activities among the nation's various regions and 
provinces. Every region that has the need and the ability to 
grow should have the necessary investment and resources 
available to do so. Unfortunately, there are many indications on 
the basis of which one may claim that in the 15 years of the 
Islamic revolution there has been in some way discrimination and 
injustice in the distribution of national projects and in 
allocating credits for the nation's various provinces. 
  No'i Aqdam discussed the public expectation that 
discrimination will be eliminated in the distribution of 
treasury funds and that social justice will be carefully 
observed. He said: The Second Five-Year Plan is the only 
opportunity the Fourth Majles will have to precisely implement 
Article 48 of the Constitution. 
  Continuing, he thanked the president of the republic and the 
Council of Ministers for starting the province of Ardebil. With 
regard to the note below Article 1 in the Law Establishing the 
Province of Ardebil, he asked for the division of the resources 
between the provinces of East Azarbaijan and Ardebil. 
  Continuing, No'i Aqdam asked the Administrative and 
Employment Affairs Organization and the Ministry of Education 
and Training to help with changing the Ardebil Office of 
Education and Training to two districts and he asked the Majles 
and the government for help determining the employment status of 
60,000 salaried teachers and instructors. 
  The deputy then discussed the anxiety of the students at the 
nation's teacher-training centers and colleges concerning 
employment issues. He said: The government knows that before 
these dear ones were accepted they were promised special 
privileges such as being definitely hired, being exempt from the 
compulsory service system, and room and board. In return for 
these privileges they promised that as graduates they would meet 
the education and training needs for at least five years in the 
region where they were accepted as part of the quota. It appears 
that making these dear ones anxious and disturbed about their 
future and their destiny will solve nothing at this time, and 
hiring and employing them is one of the commitments accepted by 
the Ministry of Education and training. 
<H5>  'Ali Emamirad, Deputy From Kuhdasht </H5>
  Isn't the genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the crime 
of 
believing in Islam by the American-led infidel world a violation 
of human rights? 
  The next speaker was Emamirad, deputy from Kuhdasht. During 
his speech he said: The rightful expectation of the people of 
Lorestan is that all the executive officials at the center and 
in the province will implement the orders from the president of 
the republic in the shortest time possible concerning the 
alleviation of deprivation, industrializing the province, making 
the best use of existing water by building dams and pumps for 
the purpose of obtaining energy and developing agriculture, and 
in general developing the province and making it progress to 
make up for the backwardness. 
  The speaker discussed the unprecedented welcome for the 
president of the republic by the people of Lorestan and the 
municipality of Kuhdasht. He commemorated Army Day and 
emphasized the tendentious report from Galindo Pohl concerning 
human rights violations in Iran. He said: We ask the lying and 
mercenary people who prepared this report, on what principle do 
you justify making a report without any evidence or 
documentation? Isn't this like a puppet show? Aren't the 
genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the killing of defenseless 
deprived people in Somalia and the slaughter of the people of 
Palestine for being free and believing in Islam and thousands of 
other disgraceful crimes all over the world by the American-led 
infidel world violations of human rights? 
  Continuing, he added: The dear policymakers in educational 
affairs must realize that as long as they consider spending 
money on cultural and educational affairs to be an expense and 
not an investment, as long as they consider the focal point for 
development to be agriculture, industry and other things and not 
committed, specialist and skilled manpower, we must not expect 
to see growth and progress in society and in the country. 
  At the end of his speech he said: Past experience has proved 
that the nations who have climbed the latter of advancement and 
reached their goals are the ones who first made major and 
fundamental investments in this area. 
<H5>  Rezazehi, Deputy From Saravan </H5>
  One of the major reasons young people in the border areas 
are 
turning to narcotics is the failure to create employment and 
sound recreation. 
  The next speaker was Rezazehi, deputy from Saravan. During 
his speech he condemned the crimes of the Serbs in the city of 
Gorazde and he discussed the deprivation in the province of 
Sistan va Baluchestan. He discussed alleviating deprivation and 
helping with development in the Saravan area. He said: One of 
the major reasons the young people in the deprived border areas 
are turning to narcotics is the failure to create employment and 
sound recreation and the lack of educational and sports 
facilities. For this reason I ask Ministry of Guidance and the 
Physical Training Organization to procure credits and build 
cultural and sports complexes such as libraries, gyms, and 
cultural space in this region. 
  Continuing, the speaker added: Saravan has luminous talents 
in the areas of knowledge and scholarship. Unfortunately, due to 
the lack of resources and educational space and the remoteness 
of the universities, these talents have not had the opportunity 
to flourish, and this has led to a shortage of specialist 
personnel. 
  The deputy from Saravan thanked the officials from the Free 
University for establishing the Saravan Free University and he 
asked for its development. Rezazehi asked the minister of roads 
to provide more credits to build and maintain the Saravan roads. 
  In conclusion, the deputy from Saravan asked the minister of 
roads and transportation to help build an airport in Saravan, 
and he asked the minister of the reconstruction crusade to help 
with the construction of a flood wall and earth dams. 
<H5>  Maryam Behruzi, Deputy From Tehran </H5>
  In the last 10 years, in the shelter of the Islamic 
government, Iran has created good successes for women. 
  Ms. Behruzi, deputy from Tehran, was the final preagenda 
speaker. [passages omitted on U.S. and other countries' 
aggressive positions throughout the world.] 
  The deputy from Tehran discussed the situation of women's 
rights in Iran. She said: Today a subject of discussion in 
international gatherings is the issue of women's rights, 
equality between men and women, the elimination of any kind of 
discrimination, developing the economic, social, and cultural 
situation of women, women holding political and management 
positions, raising the position of women, eliminating 
oppression, aggression and violence against women, family 
issues, children's rights, and the welfare and health of elderly 
women. 
  She added: All these issues were discussed at the recent 
meeting of the Union of Women Parliamentary Deputies, due to the 
approach of the Fourth International Congress of Women. In the 
last decade the presence of women in political, management, 
academic, and social positions has increased significantly, but 
despite all these things, today women have not reached the level 
that is specific to Islam, either in terms of their human 
personality, social rights, self-possession or laws that include 
them. Despite the evil discrimination against women by the 
imperialist powers, I announce with full confidence that Iran, 
in the shelter of the Islamic government and in the light of its 
exalted values and enlightened viewpoint concerning women, is 
one of the few nations that have had good successes for women in 
the last 10 years. 
  Continuing her remarks, Ms. Behruzi noted: While the number 
of women parliamentary representatives has decreased from 13 
percent to 11 percent in the world, the number of women deputies 
in the Majles has doubled in the last 10 years. 
  She added: In the Western nations 65 percent of the people 
live outside the family, and the other 35 percent who have 
formed families are not that attached to the family. This is 
truly disastrous. In Iran the family is the most important 
pillar of society, and attachment to the family is considered 
the most valuable social ethic. 
  The speaker said granting maternity pay in the country is 
one 
of the most progressive laws. She discussed the hostility to 
women in the European nations. She said: In Islamic Iran, where 
the valuable teachings of Islam and Islamic culture are 
employed, first of all such an issue does not exist as a social 
problem, and second, thanks to the Islamic revolution and the 
worthy services of the Imam's (peace be upon him) Aid Committee, 
the problem of needy women and children has also been solved. 
  She harshly condemned the silence of the United Nations 
before the slaughter of the defenseless people of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. She added: Unfortunately the European nations are 
selfishly pursuing their own objectives at the price of killing 
the people near them. On the other hand we see that the Security 
Council, on the pretext that some Islamic nations are not 
neutral, has banned their peacekeeping forces from Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. 
  In conclusion Ms. Behruzi said: The deputies have shown 
their 
awareness and their principled approach by approving 
infrastructure and fateful laws. It is expected that before the 
international conference on women in 1995, serious steps will be 
taken to amend and approve the remaining laws pertaining to the 
rights of women and the family. In this regard. priority goes to 
approving the Women and Family Affairs Commission in order to 
have a powerful center for creating legal relations in the 
law-making dimension. 

