BFN 

  [Text] The U.S. Government decision to withdraw the radars 
used for the detection of drug traffickers' light planes 
entering Peru and Colombia created discontent and uncertainty in 
different political circles. 
  Legislators said the United States must assume its share of 
responsibility for the U.S. market's influence on drug 
trafficking activities in the region. 
  Foreign Relations Committee President Oswaldo Sandoval 
(NM-C90) [New Majority-Change 90] said it is difficult to 
explain why the country that consumes most of the drugs cannot 
take adequate measures to help producer nations. 
  "The issue is not how to resolve the problem in the United 
States but how to prevent our countries from producing the drug. 
We need all possible help for this struggle. It is inconsistent 
to withdraw the radars," Sandoval said. 
  The legislator stressed the importance of military 
operations 
to capture planes carrying drugs, which was possible precisely 
thanks to the support provided by those radars. 
  Sandoval said, however, that the radars are owned by the 
United States and the country has the right to withdraw them. 
  Concerning the report in Washington saying that the Peruvian 
Government has forbidden the entry of U.S. warplanes in our air 
space in answer to the radars' withdrawal, the legislator said 
the information was based on an unconfirmed press report. 
  Sandoval said Peru can take measures to make the U.S. 
Government understand that its cooperation is necessary. 
  "We are a very poor country to assume all the responsibility 
for a shared problem. The United States is also responsible. If 
it were not for the millions of consumers in that country our 
region would not produce as much drugs," Sandoval stressed. 
  Agreements Must Be Respected 
  Congressman Luis Enrique Tord (CD) [Democratic Coordinating 
Group] expressed surprise at the international treatment of an 
issue that concerns the entire world community, as is the case 
of drug enforcement. Tord said decisions made by governments on 
the issue must be consistent with their representatives' 
speeches. 
  Tord said more efforts are needed to control and dominate 
the 
scourge, and the United States should cooperate in this struggle 
with high technology. 
  Tord said the agreement for the installation and operation 
of 
radars in support of the Air Force to control the entry of drug 
traffickers' light planes into our territory should be respected. 
  The congressman added that the United States must clearly 
define its policies to support Peru. 
  "Peru must continuously remind the U.S. Government about the 
need to fulfill these types of agreements, which are closed 
after complex political and military conversations," the 
legislator stressed. 
  Regarding the downing of planes, which is opposed by U.S. 
authorities, Tord said the matter involves military, technical, 
and political decisions that must be reviewed. 
<H5>  Not Too Friendly Attitude </H5>
  Congressman Henry Pease (MDI) [Democratic Left Movement] 
characterized the gesture of withdrawing the radars installed in 
Peru and Colombia without previous warning as not too friendly. 
The radars helped control the movement of planes carrying drugs 
in accordance with the drug enforcement agreement signed with 
the United States. 
  "Our Foreign Ministry should take the initiative in these 
and 
other matters to improve our relations and to prevent small 
conflicts from affecting our drug enforcement effort, which 
should be a priority for the country," Pease said. 
  In his opinion, Peru must demand fulfillment and take the 
initiative to fulfill what has been signed by the two 
governments. 
  Regarding the Peruvian decision to forbid the entry of U.S. 
AWAC and P-3 planes, Pease said the Air Force has the 
responsibility to watch over the national territory. 

