Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jan Kristiansen] </F>
  [Excerpts] Geneva, March 29 (AFP) -- GATT trade negotiators 
expressed concern Tuesday [29 March] that the an upcoming summit 
may be marred by a clash between the United States and Asian, 
Latin American and African countries over workers' rights. 
  They said the issue could blow up when ministers of 120 
countries meet in the southern Moroccan city of Marrakesh from 
April 12 to 15 to sign a world trade pact and adopt the mandate 
of a panel to prepare the launching of a new World Trade 
Organization (WTO) next year. 
  The ministers are also set to adopt a formal declaration. 
  "It would be grotesque if we allowed the Uruguay Round to 
stumble at the last second after seven years of really hard 
work," a European delegation head said. The first priority must 
be to seal the Final Act of the Uruguay Round of GATT trade 
negotiations "and take things a step further from there." 
[passage omitted] 
  European officials said much would depend on how hard the 
United States presses the issue when the body supervising the 
Uruguay Round meets here Wednesday to formally adopt the draft 
texts to be approved by ministers at Marrakesh. 
  Last week's U.S. bid to get a reference to labour rights 
included in documents to be adopted at Marrakesh was again 
firmly rejected by a spokesman of the developing countries late 
Monday. 
  Most delegations to the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT) indeed questioned the "wisdom" of the U.S. move, 
senior diplomats said. 
  They said Washington was "pretty isolated" on this issue 
although France was lending its support, unleashing a "hot 
internal discussion" inside the European Union where "social 
dumping" -- selling goods produced with cheap labor under poor 
working conditions -- has become a keenly debated question. 
  And they suggested that by pushing the matter so hard, 
Washington had indeed laid itself open to suspicion that it 
might want to invoke sub-standard labour conditions in a given 
country to restrict imports of its products. [passage omitted] 
  One senior trade diplomat said there was "no way" Washington 
could get a reference to labour rights into a "mutilaterally 
agreed text" at this point. 
  Officials said the European Union was proposing a wording 
stressing that the committee was free to tackle "new issues," 
without any specific reference to labour rights. [passage 
omitted] 
  GATT officials were worried that the row triggered by the 
United States might "spoil the atmosphere" of the Marrakesh 
meeting. But they said this was "not something that will sink 
the Uruguay Round." 

