CSO 

<F P=106> [Article under general heading "Mayor's (County </F>
Magistrate's) Forum" by Jia Tianzeng (6328 1131 1073), mayor of 
Xiangfan City, Hubei Province: "A Realistic Choice in the Reform 
of Enterprise Ownership: From Simple to Complex, Pushing Forward 
in a Scheduled, Classified Progression"--responsible editor Chen 
Bingzhen (7115 3521 3791)] 
  [Text] Reform of the enterprise ownership system is an 
extremely arduous and complex piece of systems engineering, and 
at present the development in depth of this reform is meeting up 
with difficulties of considerable dimensions in theoretical as 
well as in practical respects. The crux of the problem is that 
an all-round solution cannot possibly be achieved overnight as 
long as certain related complementary conditions (including 
establishment of the market system, shifts in the functions of 
government, and transformations in the political organization) 
remain in their imperfect state. The shareholding system is a 
promising way of straightening out the ownership relations, but 
looking at trials conducted in that respect we see that this 
method still could not find acceptance by many state-owned 
enterprises for a variety of reasons. Faced with this reality, 
it seems there is nothing that can be done and no way out, and 
changing the enterprise character is certainly also not a 
desirable alternative. Past experiences in the reform of 
state-owned enterprises are telling us that realization that 
whatever the reform objectives are, they always require a 
continuous progression, from low level to high level, from point 
to area, from shallow to deep, and a progressive move from 
quantitative change to qualitative change. One prescription 
cannot cure a hundred sicknesses, launching an attack on the 
entire front at once will not necessarily bring success. Reform 
of the ownership system of state-owned enterprises must also 
adapt to the new peculiarities of the transitional period, the 
move from planned economy to market economy, and must foster a 
work mentality that is geared to the actual circumstances. Last 
year, we adopted a method of fitting measures to the particular 
factory in question, "one plant, one method," gradually 
advancing in good order, implementing in a scheduled, classified 
progression, and as result had the reform of the ownership 
system of state-owned enterprises take a new great leap forward 
from quantitative change to qualitative change. 
<H5>  Speaking of the Entire City: Implementing in a Scheduled, </H5>
Classified Progression, From Quantitative Change With a 
Multiplicity of Forms to Qualitative Change With Concentration 
on a "Shift in System" and a "Shift in Mechanism" 
  Because character and production conditions are different 
for 
each state-owned enterprise, we have to differentiate in the 
choice of forms by which to straighten out ownership relations. 
  1. Enterprises which operate in conformity with the 
industrial policy and which belong to those with good 
competitive character and vitality, should institute the 
business and managerial forms of companies limited by shares or 
of limited-liability companies. Up to the end of September of 
last year, 39 enterprises throughout the city have on trial 
shifted to the shareholding system. Their total capital is 459 
million yuan, of which 241 million, i.e. 45.6 percent, are 
state-owned shares; 187 million yuan, i.e. 40.7 percent, are 
corporate shares; and 58.28 million yuan shares, i.e. 12.7 
percent, are owned by private individuals. Within the category 
of limited-liability enterprises, 14 are companies limited by 
shares and 25 are limited-liability companies. 
  Enterprises not ready to reform their system throughout the 
entire factory may select one superior shop, one superior 
product, or one superior item and transform that part of the 
operations into a limited-liability company. This form has a 
high degree of adaptability: 
  First, being outstanding for their "three superiors," these 
enterprises have bright prospects in their development. They are 
apt to arouse enthusiasm among its shareholders, be they the 
enterprise, corporate bodies, or staff and workers. They are 
capable of raising capital within a short time and of 
alleviating the adverse effect of retrenchments in capital 
funds. The generating unit at the Nanhe Power Station in Gucheng 
City was old equipment manufactured in 1973, its insulation had 
deteriorated and urgently needed renovation, but that was long 
delayed because of a shortage of funds. Early the year before 
last, the provincial and city sectors in charge of electric 
energy and the Nanhe Power Station put up 2.5 million yuan each, 
organized the Xiangtai Water and Power Development Co., Ltd. and 
this enabled the project to be carried out expeditiously. 
  Second, the form is flexible and the procedure for 
examination and approval is simple and convenient. 
  Third, the form is beneficial in allowing enterprises to rid 
themselves of the burden of old concepts and to enter the fray 
unencumbered. The Xiangfan Knitting Mill No 4 had been operating 
with painstaking effort for many years and until today has been 
bearing a heavy load of old encumbrances. However, the mill's 
bleaching and dyeing shop used superior technology, and its 
products enjoyed a high reputation. They decided to convert this 
shop into an enterprise on the shareholding system; they 
increased its capital by the issue of 600,000 yuan new shares, 
and expanded the scale of its production. They raised annual 
capacity from 100 tons to as high as 1,500 tons, and 
productivity was also greatly improved. 
  Fourth, the form can help accelerate technological 
transformation of enterprises and can rapidly form new 
production lines. For the synthetic electric insulators 
manufactured by the Xiangfan Electric Power Equipment Co., Ltd. 
market demand exceeded supply. The company raised 888,000 yuan 
capital and increased its capacity 2.2-fold, compared to the 
preceding year. During the period from January to August 1993, 
it achieved an output value that was 42.8 percent above that of 
the preceding year, while sales income increased 59 percent, 
with benefits also increasing at a large margin. 
  2. In enterprises with great potential vitality, there has 
to 
be first a reform of all internal component parts in order to 
gradually activate their potential, thereafter transformation to 
shareholding system may be instituted. 
  First, transformation of the cadre system, instituting a 
mobile management mechanism that would allow moving cadres up or 
down. The 350 industrial and communications enterprises of the 
city have instituted the system of inviting applications and 
selecting for employment all plant-level cadres and mid-level 
cadres, and have also initiated simplifications of the 
administrative structure. 
  Second, transformation of the system of employing workers, 
establishing a mechanism for labor composition on the principle 
of survival of the fittest. There were 200 enterprises that 
instituted a move toward optimal labor composition. Out of the 
46,654 staff and workers that participated, 5,173, i.e. 11 
percent, lost their positions. 
  Third, transformation of the distribution system, forming an 
encouragement mechanism on the principle of income distributed 
according to contribution. Throughout the city over 90 percent 
of the industrial enterprises have linked staff and workers' 
income to economic returns. Of these, 49.9 percent pay wages by 
the piecework or over-quota piece work system, 17.9 percent 
according to contracted quantities, 15.7 percent on an internal 
contractual basis, and 16.7 percent pay structural and 
positional wages [jiegou gongzi ji gangwei gongzi 4814 2845 1562 
6327 0644 1511 0143 1562 6327]. 
  3. In the case of some enterprises that are well-known in 
the 
international market, a method of a kind of "grafting on" of 
foreign capital is adopted, turning them into joint ventures. 
Throughout the city, 70 enterprises have joined up with foreign 
capital, constituting a total investment of $68,668,000. Whole 
industries, as the textile, electronics, and light industries 
have begun to move in the direction of joint ventures. For these 
kinds of enterprises, the method applied is based on an 
appraisal of and agreement on the assets, allowing the state to 
continue ownership with regard to the state's due proportion, 
but completely changing the business methods to those of the 
foreign-funded enterprises. Instituting joint venture operations 
has not only brought in advanced and highly efficient management 
methods of foreign-invested enterprises and operational 
mechanisms, and thus promoted development of a export-oriented 
economy, but in addition also solved the problem of financial 
difficulties. 
  4. In the case of the large number of medium and small-sized 
state-owned enterprises or partly state-owned assets, they are 
to be changed by concluding contracts with a fixed time limit 
through risk security [fengxian diya 7364 7145 2107 2131] or 
collective management to "state-owned and community-run," and 
"public-owned and privately run" status. Throughout the entire 
financial and commercial system of the city, 2,660 small shops 
are already in communal or individual operations. They make up 
54.6 percent of all the small shops and have a recoverable 
capital of over 18 million yuan. There are already 14 
enterprises of the industrial and communications systems, of 
which 29 internal units, through the method of leasing, have 
turned into communal or private operations, and of these, 25 
have now already been able to turn an unprofitable into a 
profitable situation. The fine chemicals branch establishment of 
the city's nitrogenous fertilizer plant was unable to bring its 
superior qualities into play because responsibility, authority, 
and interests had not been clearly defined, and internal 
distribution was by the "eating from the big communal pot" 
method. Early year before last, the main plant leased the branch 
establishment to be operated by its own staff and workers, and, 
during the period from January to August, large increases as 
compared with the preceding year were achieved in output value, 
sales income, and in profits and taxes. In addition to 
fulfilling its obligation as to what has to be turned over to 
higher authority, they made a profit of 160,000 yuan. The secret 
of achieving these excellent results by the "state-owned and 
community-run, public-owned and individually managed" method is: 
  1) The lessee has by contract full decision-making 
authority as to production and business operations; 2) the 
lessee has put up capital as security and accepted a limited 
responsibility for operations, and the responsibility, 
authority, and interests relations are clear and definite; 3) 
staff and workers are exposed to competition at their 
workplaces, their income depends on their contribution, there 
being no "large pot" to eat from. 
  Reduced to one point, the enterprises have in these cases 
the 
flexible operational mechanism of community-run or individually 
managed enterprises. 
  5. Enterprises that are hopelessly unprofitable are first to 
be declared bankrupt, and will then, through mergers or other 
methods, have their assets again leased out or be completely 
reorganized. The city has had 91 pairs (groups) with 193 
industrial enterprises reorganized by combining, recovering 102 
million yuan of "sedimental funds" of enterprises in bad shape, 
finding places for 11,154 unemployed personnel, and redeploying 
132 million yuan of fixed assets. At the same time the city 
organized 12 enterprise conglomerates in the areas of health 
service and medicines, tobacco processing machinery, bearings, 
motorcars, earthenware and porcelain, electronics, long siphon 
numeric controls, and machinery. Because of better composition 
of key elements of production, savings were achieved in some 
enterprises in investments for technological transformations, 
and in some cases the period of transformation was reduced and 
profits were earned ahead of time. 
<H5>  Speaking of the Enterprises: Breakthroughs From Certain </H5>
Points, Partial Revitalization Brings About Complete 
Revitalization 
  1. Multiple systems in one plant. Throughout the city, there 
are 77 shops (branch establishments) of 57 enterprises that 
practice "special zones within the plant," and they have 
introduced market mechanism in the "special zones" ahead of 
other sectors. Main forms are: secondary corporate bodies within 
the plant, analogous secondary corporate bodies, internal 
leasing, management in emulation of the foreign-funded 
enterprises, collective contracting, and using shifts within the 
plant of investment capital and labor services for the 
settlement of accounts according to market value. 
  2. System of splitting up the plant. Having shops change 
from 
singular production types to a production type that combines 
production, supply of materials, and marketing in one unit. At 
the same time, establishing within the plant business companies, 
having the departments and offices of the production service 
types change into economic entities oriented toward market and 
opening up for business. Transforming the entire plant, high and 
low, left and right, into relationships that buy and sell among 
each other, conduct commodity exchanges on the basis of equality 
and mutual benefit, and conduct all business according to the 
law of economics and the law of value through signing business 
contracts and agreements. For instance, the Longzhong Cement 
Company of this city conducts buying and selling in connection 
with the conversion of materials and with regard to its 
semifinished products. That means, the supply sector "sells" the 
coal and power, which it has purchased back, to the energy 
management sector, and the energy management sector again 
"sells" it to the production and livelihood sectors. The 
internal bank handles settlement procedure for these transfers. 
If there is a loss, the energy management sector is responsible 
to compensate. In this way a close connection is established 
between the quality of materials management and the very 
personal interests of staff and workers of the management 
sectors, and as a consequence material wastage and loss has been 
greatly reduced. The production shop sells the products of the 
higher stage of the manufacturing process to the lower stage of 
the manufacturing process, there will be high quality and 
favorable prices, and the principle of claiming compensations 
will be firmly maintained. If the quality of the product of the 
higher stage of the manufacturing process adversely affects 
quality or quantity of the lower stage of the manufacturing 
process, the lower stage of the manufacturing process has the 
right to claim compensation from the higher stage of the 
manufacturing process. These relations of "purchasing and 
selling" and the principle of possibly claiming compensation 
compels each stage in the manufacturing process to enhance 
management and to produce at the lowest cost products of the 
highest quality, to ensure profits for its own stage of the 
manufacturing process. During the period from January to 
September of last year, costs at this plant were far below the 
rate at which commodity prices had risen, ensuring higher 
economic benefits for the enterprise. 
  3. Redistributing the fixed assets and liquid assets of the 
main plant against remuneration among the branch establishments 
(workshops) and business companies, creating a dual-level 
contractual framework, namely having the main plant contract 
from the government and having the branch establishments and 
business companies again contract from the main plant. For 
instance, the main plant of the Hubei Friction Seal [moca mifeng 
2302 2361 1378 1409] Materials Factory, in view of the diverse 
state of production and business operations in the various units 
inside the plant, instituted coexisting contractual operations 
of different types. In the case of the rubber plate 
manufacturing shop, whose products were not selling well, it 
instituted profit-first contracting, strictly guaranteeing the 
base figure of profits to be turned over, overcharged brackets 
and shares, excess receipts to be split up proportionately, 
deficiencies in receipts to be made up out of salaries and 
wages. In the case of the brake material manufacturing shop 
whose products were selling well it instituted quantity-first 
unit product quantity wages, bonus and other expenditures 
inclusive contracting; in the case of branches that manufacture 
at a loss policy-related products, it instituted contracting for 
quota reduction of losses; in the case of supply of materials 
and marketing units that are to a certain degree of an 
independent nature, it adopted different forms of contracting 
for reduction of purchasing costs and certain sales 
expenditures. As a result it fully aroused production and 
business enthusiasm among all sectors of the entire plant. 
  In sum, by advancing from point to area, from shallow to 
deep, by pushing on in a scheduled, classified progression, a 
breakthrough was achieved in overcoming the various difficulties 
of in depth transformation of enterprises, and excellent success 
was accomplished in moving from quantitative to qualitative 
change. During the first nine months of 1993, the entire city 
achieved an 36.08 percent increase in industrial output value, 
compared to the preceding year. Involved in this increase were 
114 state-owned large and medium-type enterprises, whose 
increases were of a 54.14 percent magnitude, higher by 18.06 
percentage point over the figure for the city as a whole. They 
achieved an increase of 51.94 percent in sales, compared with 
the preceding year, higher by 14.49 percentage points over the 
figure for the city as a whole. Enterprise profits had also 
increased to varying degrees, as compared with the figures for 
the corresponding period in the preceding year. 

