BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 14 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Premier Li Peng 
and visiting Estonian President Lennart Meri, during a meeting 
here this afternoon, expressed the conviction that there is 
great potential for the two countries' trade and economic 
cooperation. 
  Extending a warm welcome to Meri, Li Peng said that China 
recognized Estonia's re-independence and established diplomatic 
relations with it quickly, and bilateral relations have 
developed smoothly with frequent exchanges at all levels since 
diplomatic ties were formed three years ago. 
  "In the current visit, President Meri has conducted the 
first 
summit meeting between China and Estonia since Estonia regained 
its independence, and the visit is of great significance in 
promoting bilateral friendly cooperation in each field," Li told 
Meri. 
  China respects the Estonian people's chosen path of 
development, Li said. Sticking to its foreign policy of peace 
and independence, he added, China is willing to make friends 
with all countries around the world. 
  China, holding that all countries, small or big, are all 
equal, attaches importance to developing relations with Estonia, 
and is willing to exert efforts with Estonia to help bilateral 
relations grow healthily and stably over the long term, Li said. 
  Meri told Li: "I had fruitful talks with President Jiang 
Zemin yesterday. My visit here is very successful. We are 
looking forward to vice-premier and Foreign Minister Qian 
Qichen's future tour to Estonia. 
  "Exchanging visits of the leaders of two countries will give 
more concrete political and economic essence to bilateral 
relations." 
  He said that the agreement on economic and trade cooperation 
signed by China and Estonia has set a sound foundation for 
strengthening bilateral cooperation. 
  "Now Estonia is stable politically and economically. We 
welcome Chinese enterprises to make investments in our country," 
Meri said. 
  Li Peng said that China and Estonia have made a good start 
in 
trade and economic cooperation, toward which the Chinese 
Government holds a positive attitude. 
  The two countries should adhere to the principles of 
equality, mutual benefit and complementarity in developing trade 
and economic cooperation, and widen the base for cooperation 
gradually while bearing realities in mind, Li Peng said. 
  The Chinese Government encourages Chinese enterprises to 
conduct trade and economic exchanges with Estonia, including 
setting up joint-ventures or factories financed solely by China, 
Li Peng said. However, internationally-accepted practices should 
be taken into consideration and practical efficiency be 
respected. 
  Showing an interest in paper-making cooperation, Meri said 
that Estonia, with abundant forest resources, is to export 
paper-making technologies, paper pulp and other materials to 
China. 
  He said that any kind of investment by Chinese enterprises 
in 
any field in Estonia will be welcome. 
  Li Peng said the departments concerned in both governments 
could investigate the feasibility of the cooperation, and if 
possible, both governments should give impetus to the initiative. 
  Li and Meri exchanged views on cooperation in other fields 
in 
the firm belief that there is great potential for trade and 
economic cooperation. 
  Meri and his party visited the Great Wall this morning. They 
are to leave for Shanghai tomorrow. 

