Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Fabbri: `Seselj Is a Madman'"] </F>
  [Text] Rome -- Serbian extremist Vojislav Seselj's threats 
against Italy? "Raving and empty," Defense Minister Fabio 
Fabbri writes in an article published today in the GAZZETTA DI 
PARMA. Fabbri emphasizes that Seselj is a well-known extremist, 
and not a member of the Belgrade government: "His proclamations 
aim to inflame Serbian ultranationalism." 
  "Any military actions," Fabbri adds, "could only come from 
Serbia, which has inherited the Armed Forces of the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia [FRY], but not from the Bosnian Serb 
militias. Any attack on us would therefore amount to an act of 
war on the part of the Serbian-Montenegrin federation against 
our state -- which would add a very serious dynamic to the 
Bosnian crisis, with unpredictable consequences." In any case, 
according to Fabbri, the FRY Army has no surface missiles 
capable of reaching Italy. If they were to attempt to use their 
MiG-21's and MiG-29's, these would be stopped by NATO's 
defensive screen; again, if they tried to use their "Osa" and 
"Konkar" class torpedo boats, which are equipped with 
surface-to-surface missiles with a 95-kilometer range, NATO's 
AWACS systems would be able to provide real-time information, 
and the 19 units deployed in the Atlantic would be able to take 
action immediately. 
  "At a purely national level," Fabbri adds, "we have improved 
our operational readiness levels, particularly in airports where 
allied aircraft are based. In addition, we have expanded our 
piloted interceptor aircraft alarm systems, and our Nike, Hawk, 
and Spada surface-to-air missile systems, which are deployed to 
defend the bases." 
  Fabbri goes on to write: "As regards, more specifically, the 
terrorist threat, which of course cannot be ruled out, 
surveillance measures have been strengthened in our airports and 
bases, in agreement with the interior minister." 
  Furthermore, Fabbri mentions that security has been 
tightened 
NATO air bases, and measures against the threat of a terrorist 
attack have also been taken. "We must be aware," the defense 
minister writes, "that, following the end of the Cold War, we 
are now living through crucial times for the future of mankind. 
The prestige of the United Nations, NATO, and the WEU [Western 
European Union] is at stake." 

