Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 8 Jan (NOTIMEX) -- Carlos Lage, secretary 
of the Council of Minister's Executive Committee, announced 
today that the Cuban Government will face new difficulties this 
year in guaranteeing electricity and transportation to the 
population. "The tobacco harvest, the food program, and the 
sugar harvest will be given absolute priority in terms of oil 
supplies for 1994, Lage said after touring tobacco producing 
areas in the western province of Pinar del Rio. 
  Lage, considered the architect of the limited Cuban economic 
reforms, said the current tobacco harvest could be the best 
quality seen for the past few years if current weather 
conditions continue. 
  The lack of fertilizer and oil to operate equipment also 
affected Cuban tobacco production, a traditional export product. 
  Nevertheless, Lage said that this year the oil supply 
situation -- the Achilles' heel of the feeble Cuban economy, 
which has been affected by a serious crisis since the beginning 
of the decade -- will improve this year. 
  The shortage of oil (with its corollary lengthy power 
outages), passenger buses, and food were the main hardships the 
island's 11 million inhabitants faced last year. 
  The state-run Cuban Petroleum Enterprise (Cupet) announced 
during the first week of this year that it ended 1993 with a 
record production of 7.7 million barrels of heavy national crude 
oil with a high sulfur content. 
  Engineer Agustin Jimenez, director of the Maximo Gomez 
thermoelectric plant, admitted that the amount is barely enough 
to generate 40 percent of the electricity consumed on the 
island. Using that type of crude also causes excessive corrosion 
to burners and other equipment. 
  Cuba received an average 91 million barrels of oil per year 
in 1989 from the former USSR. 
  According to president Fidel Castro, the island's economy 
cannot function with less than 43 million barrels per year, most 
of which must be purchased on the international market or with 
sugar traded to Russia. 
  The authorities are determined to reach production levels of 
4.5 to 4.6 million tons of sugar this year. That figure is only 
a few hundred tons more than the 1992/1993 harvest, which was 
the poorest in the last few decades. 

