BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Muhammad Husni Mubarak marking Labor </F>
Day at the General Organization for Mobilization and Statistics 
in Madinat al-Nasr, Cairo, on 28 April--live] 
  [Text] [Mubarak] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate. Many happy returns of the day. 
  [Unidentified member of audience] Many happy returns of the 
day, Mr. President. May God preserve you for us and for Egypt 
and may He protect Egypt and Mubarak. 
  [Mubarak] Thank you. Before I begin my speech on the 
occasion marking Labor Day, I would like to address thanks, 
greetings, and appreciation to the brother ministers who served 
a long time in the government [applause] and performed very 
difficult tasks when there have been countless problems. Among 
these I would like to mention Engineer Hasaballah al-Kafrawi, 
who served for 16 years. [applause] No one can forget what he 
did for new communities, worn-out utilities, housing and housing 
units. His work is evident to all. Engineer Jamal al-Sayyid 
was a minister of war production. He did his job. Engineer 
'Isam Radi and Engineer Muhammad 'Abd-al-Wahhab was industry 
minister when all our factories, particularly in the public 
sector, needed development, renovation, and replacement. He put 
in great efforts in this connection. Mr. Fu'ad Sultan, [former] 
minister of tourism and civil aviation [applause] made huge 
efforts, which we all know. Dr. Raghib Duwaydar in the field of 
health and the development of hospitals and Mr. 'Adil 'Izz and 
his efforts in scientific research, and Mr. Yusri 'Ali Mustafa, 
who was economy minister at a time when economic reform was 
being studied and launched. That was a great effort. Dr. Ahmad 
Salamah was minister of local government and the People's 
Assembly's affairs. Mr. 'Asim 'Abd-al-Haqq was minister of 
labor and manpower for seven years. Mr. Maurice Makramallah 
worked as minister of international cooperation. I express my 
personal appreciation to the ministers, who worked for long 
periods and withstood harsh criticism, inquiries, and questions. 
They are relieved of these things now. [audience applauds, 
laughs, and chants slogans] 
  In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
  [Unidentified member of audience] Long live Mubarak, the man 
of peace, the leader of the Arab nation and Africa. 
  [Mubarak] And Europe too. [audience laughs, applauds] 
  [Unidentified member of audience] Mr. President, this is an 
expression of your gratitude as a loyal Egyptian. You 
appreciated the efforts of those who served and gave to Egypt. 
This is an expression of your gratitude. We want another 
expression of appreciation for the workers who have been 
pensioned off and have yet to cash their pension checks. We 
want a sign of gratitude from Your Excellency to these people 
who retired in 1993 from their jobs in press institutions, 
particularly the Dar al-Hilal publishing house. I hope Your 
Excellency.... 
  [Mubarak, interrupting] These issues should be discussed 
with 
the government and not during a public speech. Thank you. 
[applause] 
  [Unidentified member of audience] I approached all officials 
and they did nothing. 
  [Mubarak] Press institutions have their own system. I do not 
think pensions were late without a specific reason. 
  [Unidentified member of audience] They did not pay their 
contributions to the Press Association. 
  [Mubarak] If they did not pay, we can look into the matter. 
If the institutions have not paid, they are independent 
institutions. 
  [Unidentified member of audience] They deducted the money 
from us, Mr. President. The deduction is obligatory. [words 
indistinct] meet with Your Excellency. 
  [Mubarak, laughing] You are welcome. Brother citizens, 
Egypt's loyal workers and sons; when man fairly views the major 
accomplishments that have a tangible impact all over Egypt, he 
can only say to the workers of Egypt on their day: Thank you 
for all you have offered to the homeland. Thank you for the 
generous sweat that sowed the seeds for a brighter future on 
Egyptian soil and a here-and-now rich with thousands of new 
projects. These projects enhance the homeland's production 
capability, provide more job opportunities to the homeland's 
sons, and revive Egypt's aspirations for a better future. 
  Through unparalleled persistent efforts over two successive 
development plans, Egyptian workers managed to execute a huge 
investment program that paved the way for a third plan, now 
under way, representing a staging point in the society's life. 
Completion of this plan means upgrading the living standard of 
the Egyptian citizen, promoting social solidarity, confronting 
unemployment problems properly, and achieving a fair regional 
balance in developing Egyptian governorates. 
  I express my great pride in the Egyptian workers who 
achieved 
this and built edifices of work and production for Egypt and who 
set an example in their awareness of the need for the country to 
be stable so that it can progress. They strongly supported the 
economic reform programs in the production institutions and 
maintained the unity of their struggle, clinging to patriotism 
that protected their ranks from sedition and division. 
  The Egyptian workers maintained their struggle's 
independence 
and uniqueness so that their struggle can remain aloof from 
parties and affiliations with ideologies and doctrines and can 
incorporate all Egyptian workers in one nationalistic fold. The 
Egyptian workers preserved their movement's unity and 
independence when they rejected doctrinal interference in their 
trade unions and when they refused to let these national 
institutions be a stage for party or ideological conflict that 
would break the workers' unity and divert their struggle from 
this great nation's values. [applause] 
  The Egyptian workers abandoned the ideas of dispute and 
conflict despite efforts by numerous political forces that tried 
to exploit the workers' struggle to foment class conflict. They 
also abandoned the ideas of darkness and destruction that seek 
to wreck the nation's strength. 
  The Egyptian workers' will has triumphed and their trade 
organizations supported this nation's values which advocate 
construction and cooperation, reject conflicts and disputes, and 
call for a balance between rights and interests. 
  May God keep for Egypt its loyal workers who preserved 
Egypt's security and stability so that Egypt kept them in its 
heart and mind. [applause] 
  Brother workers, your anniversary is a day of hope and 
Egyptian nationalism. I have hoped and still hope that Egyptian 
nationalism will triumph over the elements of destruction and 
division. I also hope that the nation's interests will be the 
right criterion by which we gauge the legitimacy of actions and 
sincerity of positions. The aim is to achieve a sound national 
reconciliation that charts the boundaries between the right to 
variance in views, a legitimate right guaranteed by the 
democratic regime, and the calls of incitement, conspiracy, and 
violence that tamper with the country's security and jeopardize 
its social peace. 
  I do not see this as a difficult or impossible task. Despite 
the differences that might emerge from varying political views 
on the stage of national action, there are still numerous common 
factors that help reach a common understanding of the higher 
national interest and make national reconciliation possible. 
  We might disagree on which should come first on the list of 
national priorities, economic or political reform. But we 
cannot disagree on the need to incriminate violence, killing, 
and sabotage out of respect for legitimacy and the supremacy of 
the law. We might disagree on how big a role the state can play 
in steering the national economy, but we cannot disagree on the 
state's duty to take care of the less capable classes out of 
eagerness to preserve the homeland's unity and its social 
justice. [applause] 
  We might disagree on some of the laws that organize our 
political life, but we cannot disagree on Egypt's need under the 
prevailing conditions for a cohesive society whose powers are 
intertwined in a just framework that preserves the balance among 
the interests of the various categories of the people and opens 
the way for initiatives by various individuals. 
  Thus, brothers and sisters, I made the call for a national 
dialogue involving all the democratic powers and political 
institutions that respect legitimacy and the law. The objective 
of the dialogue has never been national reconciliation, because 
the state is at odds only with those who are outside legitimacy 
and the law. The supporters of violence among the terrorist 
groups have made threatening the security of the homeland and 
citizens and damaging the people's interests their first 
priority in implementing foreign plots that aim to weaken Egypt 
and impede its progress. These groups are not a party to the 
dialogue and not the object of national reconciliation. There 
can be no dialogue with killers and no reconciliation with 
murderers. Evil has controlled these criminals so strongly that 
they started to terrorize society, kill innocent people, and 
commit despicable crimes that shame every Muslim who is zealous 
for his religion, homeland, and society. 
  Dialogue is not meant to open back doors for illegitimate 
powers that mix religion with political activity to put 
themselves above the law, antagonize and fight the multiparty 
system until they monopolize the national arena, and pounce on 
the chance to rule, kill democracy, and let one view and one 
line of thinking do away with every thinker who dares oppose or 
discuss. 
  Dialogue has always meant to fulfill one last prerequisite 
of 
democracy. Democracy does not mean a chaos of views that 
threaten the homeland's interest or destroy its unity and power. 
Democracy does not mean confusing the dividing lines between 
legitimate powers that operate within a democratic system that 
make it imperative to respect the law and other illegitimate 
powers that advocate violence and destroy the society's 
peacefulness and stability. Authentic democracy can only 
fulfill its prerequisites when the legitimate political powers 
seek a clear-cut agreement that determines the homeland's 
genuine interests and priorities, provides the guarantees that 
safeguard the democratic action march against those who want to 
pounce on it, and creates favorable conditions in the society 
for a degree of national consensus that guarantees the balance 
of the political march and distinguishes between the legal and 
illegal to avoid confusion of stands, waste of the homeland's 
interests, and turning democracy into a kind of anarchy that 
paralyses the society's ability to face up to challenges. This 
will never be. 
  Brothers and sisters, I hope national dialogue will be 
candid and serious and that it will be preoccupied with the 
basic concerns of the homeland. I hope it will rise above 
narrow and limited individual party interests. I hope this 
dialogue will be based on a realistic and objective vision that 
interprets Egypt's priorities accurately, without ignoring the 
existing reality and the data provided over the course of 
history, floating in a vacuum with no consideration for the 
homeland's resources and capabilities, or risking the homeland's 
peace and stability to indulge empty slogans or imitate 
erroneous stances that practical experience has proved very 
serious for the national destiny. 
  Let us all take into account that democracy is not a single 
pattern or sacred preconception that can be applied here in 
exactly the same way that they are applied there. Every country 
has its unique conditions, reality, and course of development. 
Our sublime duty is to be honest with ourselves and to have a 
proper understanding in order to take the right course. We are 
carrying a heavy burden that leaves no room for adventures and 
we are still the target of many powers that do not want 
stability or progress in Egypt. 
  We do not avoid any commitment or promise nor do we back 
down 
on any decision. Democracy is our way of life and our 
irreversible course. However, we should draw attention to the 
need to learn from past lessons, ours and others' as well. We 
have to calculate our future steps correctly as we seek to 
enhance our democratic approach so that Egyptian society can 
continue to be a cohesive entity with interlinked powers. There 
can be no democracy, stability, or progress in a society where 
strife and discord prevail. 
  Brothers and sisters; I have committed myself to the service 
of this homeland, eschewing personal interests and ambitions. I 
fear no one but almighty God. I listen to no voice but my 
conscience and respond to no call but that of the homeland. I 
am well aware of the risks involved in taking steps without 
making calculations, a thing that can, God forbid, cause a 
setback, particularly as we are going through a stage of 
considerable change. This might be the most serious stages of 
transformation in all Egyptian history. The world provides 
numerous examples that prove that my fears are real. 
  Since taking on this responsibility, I have promised myself 
to put the homeland's interests above every other consideration. 
The responsibility is great and the burden heavy; they leave no 
room for risking the destiny of a nation or the future of a 
homeland just to satisfy empty, resonant slogans; they withstand 
no miscalculation to make rapid gains that will soon be carried 
away by the wind. 
  My major concern has always been to lead the ship to a safe 
haven under harsh and complex conditions that resulted from 
entangled local and foreign factors that aggravated problems. 
Under these harsh conditions, which you all know, Egypt's 
greatest and most crucial transformations over history have 
occurred. Democratic practice in Egypt was expanded to 
unprecedented bounds; rightist, leftist, and moderate political 
powers competed in the arena under the umbrella of a free press 
and independent judiciary. The Egyptian economy broke free of 
the fetters that restricted its ability and hampered the 
rejuvenation of its powers, and even limited its activity to 
state efforts. Closed doors barred the contribution to 
development efforts by the nation's capital and local and 
foreign investors' capital. 
  Brothers and sisters, we have shouldered and continue to 
shoulder some difficulties imposed on us by the burdens of this 
stage of changes and reforms. But the ship has passed the 
danger point and reached the shore of safety, hoisting the 
banner of a homeland that has restored its ability to achieve a 
comprehensive development that grows annually to raise the 
living standards of its sons, provide more job opportunities, 
and ensure stability and security for everyone. Our great 
people have succeeded in achieving in very few years a miracle 
that has changed the situation of Egypt, which was on the verge 
of collapse. It has now become attractive to investments that 
are increasingly flowing in year after year. The country's 
revenues from its national production are increasing in quantity 
and quality and this underlines the Egyptian economy's ability 
to achieve its desired takeoff. 
  The destructive activity that the terrorist groups continue 
to practice and this disloyalty to and disavowal of God and this 
homeland will neither change this truth nor eclipse it. Society 
as a whole has discovered the false and spurious allegations 
that these groups attribute to religion. It is evident to 
everyone that they are mere straying and unfair remnants who 
have no qualms about committing atrocious crimes and who let 
themselves do what God has forbidden. They are not deterred by 
religion or morals and are controlled by corrupt heads that have 
made terrorism a trade and an profession and corrupted the 
morals of a perplexed youth who were seeking the right path but 
were led astray, were seeking an honest living but were led to 
illegal seizure of money, and were seeking the true path but 
whose eyes were blinded and whose hearts ceased to feel. 
  Should such people be allowed to speak from the pulpits of 
mosques, to teach believers and the faithful in Egypt lessons in 
religion? Should a small group of hypocrites and deceivers be 
allowed to defend this criminality or present false excuses for 
their vile crimes? God Almighty is right when He says in his 
holy book: Who can be more wicked than one who inventeth a lie 
against God? 
  Brothers and sisters, the time has come to place this 
phenomenon in its true perspective without any exaggeration, 
oversight, or underestimation, because this objective assessment 
that is committed to the facts is a necessary condition for the 
success of the confrontation. I say very clearly that there is 
nothing today in this phenomenon that causes fear about the 
homeland's future as long as the entire people stands united and 
massed in one rank and with full vigilance in confronting the 
straying and straggling groups that lack any popular support. 
The people condemn their actions and vile crimes after their 
role in damaging the homeland's interests have been exposed. 
Their role is to serve vile schemes that aim to impede Egypt's 
takeoff and abort the opportunities for progress. The noble 
Egyptian people will not allow these straggling and hireling 
remnants to dash its efforts and hopes of establishing a 
national and free society whose ability to satisfy the needs and 
ambitions of its sons increase daily. 
  I am confident that this phenomenon is temporary and will 
end. I don't say this from a vacuum but on the basis of the 
great Egyptian people's big successes. These people are 
confronting sedition after realizing its dangers and sins. 
Their vigilant vanguards and their establishments are standing 
against the danger, cautioning, warning, and enlightening. The 
concerned state authorities are hunting down the heads of the 
plot and aborting their schemes decisively and resolutely. 
Thanks to the people's support and vigilance, they have 
maintained the initiative in confronting these criminal 
individuals after the false masks behind which they were hiding 
have fallen. 
  The security forces will not stay idle or be lax in their 
confrontation with this evil affliction regardless of the 
seriousness of the challenges and dangers. The march of 
Egyptian patriotism will continue to march forward, declaring: 
We will save you, Egypt. [applause] 
  Brothers and sisters: We could have rooted out these groups 
and cut short the confrontation time. However, we are anxious 
for the state's measures to remain in a correct framework 
respecting the rules of democracy and adhering to the supremacy 
of law and the Constitution. 
  Recently Egyptian security forces have valiantly and 
strongly 
confronted this terrorist activity while firmly adhering to 
legality and law. The initiative now is in the hands of the 
security forces, which have penetrated this phenomenon in all 
its domestic and external dimensions by monitoring its contacts 
with its agents abroad and discovering the greatest part of its 
networks, hideouts, and plans. 
  I salute the policemen [applause] who have made honest and 
indefatigable efforts to safeguard the security of the homeland 
and citizens and who through the sacrifices of their innocent 
martyrs have been able to contain and abort this danger. I 
salute the great Egyptian people who have given the greatest 
help to the police forces, who have not missed a chance to 
expressing their anger and their condemnation of these groups, 
who have offered several innocent martyrs, fallen victim to 
treacherous crimes. I salute Egypt's intellectuals, writers, 
and artists who have not lost confidence in the homeland's 
ability to contain the danger and uproot it. They have not been 
afraid to perform their national task of revealing the ignorance 
of these groups and exposing their aims and motives. I call 
upon these misled groups to return to their conscience and to 
repent before it is too late. What is right is clear and what 
is wrong is also clear. Destruction and construction cannot go 
hand in hand. The homeland expects its sons to be a support for 
it and not wage war on it. 
  Brothers and sisters, I know as well as you do that the 
success of the Egyptian security services has offended some 
hypocritical groups, who have undertaken a frenzied bogus 
campaign to question every official and every accomplishment. 
They arouse animosity and hatred and spread despair. We have 
been careful to deal with them on the basis of the supremacy of 
the law without restricting their views, because we know that 
they are peddling a rotten commodity to an intelligent people 
who know how hypocritical they are. We are chasing out 
corruption everywhere, because honest rule is a noble commitment 
and we are not slighting one iota of this commitment. 
  But we judge no one on the basis of mere suspicion and heed 
no vindictive defamations. We leave the whole matter to a clean 
judiciary that examines accusations, thoroughly studies 
incidents, and issues independent verdicts influenced by no one 
or nothing except its own conscience and the law. The ruling 
process in Egypt has matured; people's fates are no longer 
determined on the basis of false rumors promoted by some people 
out of spite and personal grudges. The judiciary has assumed 
such a prominent status that it has become impossible for any 
official, no matter how high his position might be, to interfere 
in its judgements. [applause] 
  Old ways of thinking that viewed everyone who had some 
capital as a suspicious opportunist, thus forcing him to 
withhold his money from investments that benefit the people and 
society, have changed. Those who fabricate lies about corruption 
in Egypt deliberately overlook the state's role in uncovering 
corruption and rooting out criminals. Despite their exaggerated 
commotion, they fail to provide a shred of evidence to prove 
that the state has been slack in pursuing a single case of 
corruption. Corruption in Egypt is still limited to individual 
cases. No society in the world, no matter how perfect it might 
be, is free from such corruption. Corruption has not and will 
not develop into a problem in Egypt, as is the case was in many 
states which we all know. In these states, big groups have been 
involved in activities that cast doubt on the purity and 
cleanliness of the entire regime and threaten cohesion among 
state institutions. 
  This absolutely does not mean that we take corruption 
lightly 
or ignore it. We are determined to track it down and strike at 
it with the weapon of the law. The law is the judge and the 
decisive factor that we have all accepted in facing up to any 
illegal activity. 
  Free speech carries a responsibility and a trust. 
Responsible speech is a torch that lights the road for society 
and a deep-rooted tree with heaven-reaching branches. But the 
evil word is just like an evil tree that only bears malice and 
hatred. We do not ask that devious conduct or corruption be 
ignored or that infringement of society's rights go unpunished. 
We only ask that truthfulness and honesty be observed in 
reporting incidents, that facts be respected, and that things be 
put in their proper perspective without exaggeration or false, 
vindictive allegations. 
  Whenever there is nothing to talk about, they talk about 
corruption. No country in the world is free of corruption. I 
am not defending corruption. We allow no case of corruption 
that we learn of to go unpunished. We do not make judgements; 
we refer the cases to the judiciary. If it validates a charge, 
it issues a verdict. As you know, we do not interfere in the 
judiciary's affairs. There are some judges here among you. We 
never interfere. If a person is innocent, it is his rights that 
the judiciary protects. We overlook no case of corruption. I 
hope those who talk about corruption would look at themselves 
and those around them [laughter, applause] 
  They keep talking about corruption, why do they not look at 
themselves and those around them? If they are really clean, 
they can talk and we will listen to them. But if we catch them 
in the act.... [pauses] We do not want to violate the law. 
[applause] 
  Brother and sister workers of Egypt, this day is for us, as 
it is our annual custom to review the achievements, the 
difficulties, and the obstacles we have faced in order to learn 
from them. We are continuing to constantly develop our 
intrinsic resources and look toward a better future that will 
provide opportunities for fruitful work for our sons, raise 
people's income to a level commensurate with their burdens, and 
enable society to have stability and true democracy that give 
momentum to the march of progress. 
  I believe that we are capable of fulfilling these hopes with 
the helping hands of every honest Egyptian citizen and of adding 
to the edifice with the sweat of workers, farmers, scholars, 
intellectuals, businessmen, and experts. We have completed the 
biggest and most difficult stage, rectified the course of the 
national economy, tackled most of the imbalances that impeded 
the economy's ability to grow, and raised production efficiency 
when we began to implement a vast investment program that 
exceeded two billion Egyptian pounds. This has enabled our 
society to implement an ambitious and comprehensive development 
plan whose benefits are steadily growing as a result of 
initiatives taken by individuals. 
  You are all aware of what the situation was in 1982 when I 
took over responsibility; but now we have forgotten. There is 
everything now: water, sewage, telephones, railroads, roads, 
more houses being built, expanding agricultural lands, 
industries, and newly built cities. Have we forgotten that none 
of this existed then and how no one came to invest? Even 
Egyptians did not come forward to invest. There were no 
telephones, roads, electricity, water, sewage, or even houses. 
I remember that I once toured the outskirts of Heliopolis, near 
Nasr city, where many houses had been built, but no one wanted 
to live in them. Why? Because there was no water, no drains, 
no electricity, nothing at all. Have you forgotten about the 
telephone problem? I am only reminding you. You are not young 
and you know all this; you saw all these things. Take the 
telephones. We had half a million lines, of which 200,000 were 
in working order. Today we have 3 million lines. Take the 
railroads, irrigation, agriculture. In irrigation alone, 4,000 
km of canals have been built in the past 10 years. Take, for 
example, the houses that were built in the new cities. Look at 
the industries established there. Look at the agriculture. But 
we forget. If one can remember where we stood and where we are 
today, then he can see how great this achievement has been. It 
is you who have done it. Don't think that I have done it. No, 
you have done it. It has all been Egyptian planning and work. 
[applause] 
  The expenditure on the infrastructure for the past 
development plans was 204 billion pounds. The expenditure for 
the current plan will be another 200 billion pounds. These are 
vast sums because our problems have been accumulating for 50, 60 
years. We had either to confront them or perish. I told you so 
in the past. We have been forced to confront them even though 
huge resources were needed. 
  Now you see them mocking the finance minister and the taxes. 
But where should we get these resources? [audience laughs] 
Should we steal? Should we borrow? But we have to pay the 
loans back or else collapse. It is as clear as that. It is our 
fate that we are facing 60 years of difficulties and we must act 
and therefore suffer. This generation has to suffer whether we 
like it or not. What we are doing is in the people's interest. 
Wages, prices, and economic reform [words indistinct] increase 
in production, quality, and our well-planned privatization. 
  Today they are telling you this or that about privatization. 
No, brothers; everything we do is calculated. I am telling you 
this in front of the prime minister and the ministers. I was 
even speaking yesterday and asked if the boards of the companies 
that are in the red are being paid bonuses and I was told that 
they are not. [audience laughs, applauds] Maybe they were paid 
in the past and got away with it, but nothing of the sort 
happens now and I am saying this publicly. 
  However, as you can see, the board of directors of 
loss-making companies are resigning. We are not sparing anyone 
now. When the public sector began operation, they talked about 
whom we appointed. This may have happened because we were in a 
hurry. However afterward we began an evaluation to see if 
production had increased and if modernization had taken place. 
If not, we asked the board of directors to resign and we 
brought in other people. The people consider that the 
government's property does not belong to anyone. Therefore we 
sell shares to the citizens. We want the workers to gradually 
begin to buy shares. However, there are some huge organizations 
that cannot be privatized in the way you understand it. But if 
these organizations need more capital, let the citizens buy 
shares. For example, there is the Abu-Qir Company which offered 
6 million pounds worth of shares to the citizens. The shares 
were sold out in 48 hours because it is a profit-making company. 
Nobody wants to buy shares in a money-losing company. However, 
we are reforming such companies so that they will become 
profitable. 
  This huge investment program has had a positive effect on 
all 
aspects of Egyptian life because it covers all spheres with 
unprecedented unanimity. This program has increased the 
effectiveness of economic and financial reform policies, and 
this has changed the course of economic development in Egypt, 
giving the national economy increasing strength and flexibility, 
and encouraging the private sector, which is now responsible for 
half of the development projects. 
  The boards of directors of profit-making companies get 
money. 
[audience laughs] The boards of directors of unprofitable 
companies do not. [audience laughs] We reward the workers 
because they produce. 
  Brothers and sisters: It may be beneficial to give some 
examples to indicate the growing nature of Egypt's economic 
capabilities as a result of this huge investment program, which 
has given society a chance to produce and given it immunity to 
sudden fluctuations. Investment in agriculture and land 
reclamation amounts to 15 billion pounds. We have been able to 
add more land to the cultivated areas, which will reach 
1,200,000 feddans by the end of the third development plan in 
1997. The implementation of this program required digging 
canals and aqueducts. From 1982 to 1994 we dug about 4,000 km 
of aqueducts. By the year 2000 we will have dug another 2,000 
km. These 4,000 km are more than we have dug in the past 30, 
40, 50, 60 years. The implementation of this program required 
digging canals and aqueducts longer than the Nile River, and 
building one-fourth as many barrages as were built in Egypt 
since the time of Muhammad 'Ali. 
  I once visited a big country where they showed me a bridge. 
They told me it is the longest bridge over a river in the 
world. They said it is 2,100 meters long; I told them we have a 
2,300-meter-long bridge. [audience laughs] We actually have 
such a bridge in the north, near Disuq. They boasted they have 
a 2,000-meter-long bridge. I told them we have 2,200 and 
2,300-meter-long bridges. We have many bridges over the Nile. 
We have many bridges and barrages on the Nile, but the people 
forget. Television must enlighten the people on what is 
happening in their country so that they can be proud of their 
country. I am proud of my country because I know what is being 
done. Every citizen must know these things so that he will be 
proud of his country. 
  These great efforts have increased crop production which has 
brought the productivity of Egyptian soil near international 
standards. The production of sugar cane and rice has increased 
in recent years. The increase in production of these crops is 
the primary aim of the agricultural policy. These crops are the 
main food source and constitute a considerable part of the 
production requirements for several of our factories. We have 
increasing hopes that our agricultural exports will increase. 
  Brothers, I hear many voices saying we can cultivate the 
desert and eat wheat. But where would we get the water from? 
They say we can achieve self-sufficiency in wheat. From the 
lands cultivated at present? At the expense of rice, cotton, 
etc? I once read in a newspaper about some official in one of 
the councils asking: Why do we import fish when we have the 
Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea? Our coasts do not have fish. 
Why then do our fishermen from Damietta and Port Said go to 
Eritrea and Yemen to fish? We would not have to import fish if 
our seas were full of fish. In the past we had a fleet that 
sailed to Morocco to fish, but it operated at a loss. I do not 
know where they sold the fish. [audience laughs] 
  We should really understand. Yes we have a sea but we also 
have an economic market. This means you don't bring in large 
ships to fish when they can't catch any, otherwise you will have 
to pay the fishermen's wages, the ships will lose money, we will 
have to subsidize them with tax money; and they will only bring 
you 200 or 300 kgs of fish which, if you can sell it, will not 
cover even a small part of the expenditures. 
  We must understand well that we can never satisfy the 
demand. 
By God, we are increasing in number. Does this mean that we 
have to cultivate the desert every time our population 
increases? Where will I get water for this? All our water is 
enough for only 2 or 2.5 million feddans at most. And, my God, 
our population increases by between 12 and 13 million every year. 
  Increases in Egypt's crop production show how we can quickly 
reach the levels of world production and even surpass them if 
the efforts of farmers, workers, and the business sector come 
together. We are proud of the farmers and the great work they 
are doing for this homeland. They must take better care of 
their crops and take into account the recommendations of 
agricultural experts, especially in the wake of the 
liberalization of crop prices. The scientists in Egypt's 
universities, institutes, and research centers must work in the 
fields in order to apply the achievements of the agricultural 
revolution, which has permitted food self-sufficiency in many 
countries. The business sector, whose role in and contribution 
to the national economy is increasing, must invest more in the 
modern technology and services required to raise the Egyptian 
soil's productivity. The great success in the field of 
agricultural expansion and the obvious progress in the 
production cycle confirm the possibility of achieving similar 
success in diversifying our agricultural exports, which should 
be the second main objective of our agricultural policy. 
  I have issued instructions that we should begin planning 
right now under the direct supervision of an apparatus that is 
free of red tape and bureaucracy to seek ways of exploiting the 
new lands in Sinai so that they reach half a million feddans 
after completion of the peace canal project. 
  The comprehensive development of the Egyptian countryside is 
the third objective of our agricultural policy and this means 
focusing on economic activities that are connected to 
agriculture. It is not reasonable or acceptable to let 
development in Egypt's countryside be dependent on the 
production of agricultural crops alone, with half of Egypt's 
manpower being employed in this sector. In fact we have started 
experimenting in a number of villages in some governorates, and 
we will apply the results of these experiments or amending them 
in the light of accumulated experience so that development will 
encompass the whole Egyptian countryside. 
  Brothers and sisters, our hope becomes increasingly clear 
and bright when we review together the outcome of the huge 
effort undertaken in the field of industry. You are the heroes 
and the vanguard of this effort. This effort has proceeded in 
two parallel and complementary directions. The first course is 
the renovation and modernization of existing industrial plants 
that are suffering from wear and tear. The second course is the 
establishment of new industrial zones and equipment with all 
needed utilities and services so that they will be ready to 
receive the biggest number of factories. We have invested 34 
billion pounds in industry and mining over the past 11 years. 
Now we speak in terms of billions whereas before we spoke in 
terms of millions. In the past the biggest power station cost 
100 million pounds, now a power station such as Shubra 
al-Khaymah costs 1.2 billion pounds. A million has become like 
a shilling. [audience laughs] They invented new names for a 
million, instead of a rabbit and [words indistinct]. [audience 
laughs] 
  We have invested 42 billion pounds. We have built new 
industrial zones equipped with services and utilities. So far 
we have built 13 industrial new towns and five new communities, 
and we spent 3.3 billion pounds on providing them with 
utilities. By this investment we have been able to attract 
3,044 projects and factories in the towns of 10 Ramadan, 6 
October, al-Sadat city, Burj al-'Arab, and other areas. The 
Egyptian private sector has invested over 10 billion pounds in 
these towns, providing job opportunities for 170,000 Egyptians. 
  When investors start a project and we give them tax breaks, 
some people say reduce their exemptions. Our brothers in the 
People's Assembly sometimes say there is no need to provide tax 
exemptions--10 years is too much. I provide exemptions to an 
investor to encourage him to employ workers. As far as I am 
concerned, it is better for him to employ workers than to pay 
taxes. He will build houses. What I will do with the tax 
money? I want more houses; if he gives us more, I will treat 
him well. He provides livelihoods for the people and this 
brings happiness to the citizens. This is what we need. 
  Emphasis on industry has produced good results. Industry now 
constitutes 42 percent of total national investment. It 
contributes to 28 percent of the local production and absorbs 20 
percent of the Egyptian manpower expected to be employed during 
the years of the third five-year plan. 
  This success has encouraged us to establish new zones, which 
are being implemented within the framework of the third 
five-year plan. All necessary funds have been earmarked for 
establishing 12 new towns and industrial zones. If these towns 
are not established and the houses and factories not built, 
where will we be? We will be in a mess. The people will have 
no housing, no jobs, no livelihood. All of us must calmly 
remember what we have done. Where were we and where are we now? 
  In the first years we gave priority to the more needy 
governorates, above all the Upper Egypt governorates. We had 
faith in the need to intensify efforts in these areas after we 
felt the increasing desire of the citizens to invest in the 
first area allocated for this purpose, namely the industrial 
zone in Suhaj to which 73 investors have applied in the past 
three months. It is a new zone in Suhaj. We are creating new 
areas in Upper Egypt so our brothers will invest there. Some 
people from Upper Egypt want to invest in Cairo. Why don't you 
invest there. No, they want to invest here near Cairo. People 
want to escape from this Cairo. [audience laughs] It is 
crowded. We will find an agricultural project in Aswan for 
them. So 73 investors booked plots of land in Suhaj and began 
the measures to build their factories. 
  Brothers and sisters, our goal in the next few years is to 
make Egypt a leader among nations receiving industrial 
investments in the Middle East. The whole world is looking for 
investors, and I hope we will not drive them away. Some people 
say: Someone is driving a so and so car. So what, as long as he 
has got a legitimate business? You know how much duty he pays 
on his car? When he goes to clear his car from customs, Finance 
Minister al-Razzaz does not spare him. [audience laughs] He 
has to pay. Where does the money go? This makes up our 
revenue. I know that some people try to find a way out. Some 
people try to bring in cars on a trip ticket [previous two words 
in English], but we know how to deal with them. People have 
told me about this. I also heard something else which is very 
strange, and I told the finance minister about it a short while 
ago. Someone imports equipment the duty on which is 12,000 
pounds, for instance. He leaves the item in customs and tells 
them he does not want it. After a while, it will have to be 
sold at auction. In the meantime, he makes an arrangement with 
some people to buy it at the auction. If the duty on an item is 
12,000 for instance, they buy it for 2,000. Then the original 
buyer gives these people another 2,000 for profit and buys the 
item for 4,000, which does not cover the customs duty. So, you 
have to watch out for such tricks. [audience laughs] Someone 
told me about this last night. However, tricks are everywhere. 
I was abroad and everywhere I went I heard of similar tricks. 
All laws can be circumvented. We are human, after all. 
  Our goal in the next few years is to make Egypt a leader 
among nations receiving industrial investments in the Middle 
East and to be a major center of exports to all world markets. 
This means we must double our determination and efforts in 
several directions. 
  First: to continue our drive to remove all obstacles facing 
existing and new investments. I have heard much from investors, 
and I believe the government is working on measures in the field 
of production necessities and others related to the GATT, so 
that we can be competitive. We must develop our legislation and 
conditions to cope with the world trend so that we could find 
new markets. In our trips abroad we try to find markets. 
Everywhere I go I try to find markets. Hence the initiative I 
announced at the People's Assembly in November, when I called 
for abolishing all administrative procedures for projects with a 
capital that does not exceed five million pounds, so that all 
investors had to do was to inform the competent authority about 
their project. The Egyptians' response to this step has been 
excellent. During the past four months alone, 190 investors 
have applied for projects, to the tune of 410 million pounds, 
that will create 13,000 jobs. Naturally, the people do not want 
to go through lengthy procedures, whether in the electricity 
sector, investment authority, or whatever. I try to attend 
meetings of the investment committee to see what is happening. 
In one such meeting that I attended, I found a project 
submitted by two youngsters for approximately 260,000 pounds. 
They had been waiting for eight months. Why? So the idea 
crossed my mind. I said why don't we remove obstacles facing 
investors with capital up to five million pounds? All they need 
to do is find a plot of land in the new cities or in the desert, 
not on agricultural land, and then inform the authorities. Let 
them start and notify the investment authority, which cannot 
veto them. The investment authority's job is to process the 
papers for them so that they can qualify for the exemption. Now 
that this initiative has succeeded, I call on the government to 
raise the ceiling to 10 million pounds. [applause] The same 
procedures will apply. If you have a project to the tune of 10 
million pounds, inform the investment authority and start your 
project. There are many places in Upper Egypt. We have to make 
a breakthrough. If we do not run, we will be lost. The people 
abroad are running very fast to see where their interests are. 
If we sit still and do nothing, it will not work. 
  Second: to complete as quickly as possible establishing and 
equipping a third group of industrial zones. I believe that the 
government has taken measures to establish these zones in the 
areas north of the Gulf of Suez, Port Said, Damietta, and west 
of Alexandria. On my visits to foreign countries, I discuss 
this issue with interested countries. We have great hopes but 
this will take time. We have been working on this field since 
Reconstruction Minister al-Kafrawi has held this post. He knows 
the area north of the Gulf of Suez. The problem is that we 
cooperate with countries that are beset by bureaucracy much more 
than we are. We are establishing industrial zones in the area 
north of the Gulf of Suez, Port Said, Damietta, and west of 
Alexandria. We will also establish industrial zones in Upper 
Egypt. Anyone can invest in the industrial zones in Kafr 
al-Shaykh or any other area. These industrial zones are not 
confined to al-Minufiyah, al-Gharbiyah, or any other area. 
Anyone can establish projects anywhere and live in these areas. 
  Third: We will initiate a large international effort to make 
these areas permanent sites for completing industrialization, 
and stockpiling products, and distribution for international 
trade. I think I broached this issue during my visit to the 
PRC. We will try to benefit from world experience in 
establishing modern centers for marketing and training services 
and introducing technology into small projects in Egyptian 
cities and the countryside. 
  Our hopes for a better future do not stem from a void but 
from an objective assessment of the huge achievements that 
provide Egypt with enormous production centers that are prepared 
to accommodate thousands of new projects. I do not need to 
repeat the efforts we have exerted and the resources we have 
allocated to rebuild the infrastructure, which had deteriorated 
under increasing burdens. I will not repeat the requirements 
for new expansion. Our goal of rebuilding the basic utilities 
was not confined to providing for the enormous housing needs. 
We focused as much attention on strengthening the industrial 
sector capabilities and providing it with electricity, 
transportation, and a sewage system. I remember that in 1983, 
or perhaps late in 1982, I visited a factory. I asked the 
manager what they made. He said the factory produced 
refrigerators and washing machines. I noticed that the workers 
were sitting doing nothing. I asked why and if the factory was 
not operating. They told me that the power was out and that the 
factory had electric power for only two hours a day. I thought 
if it was reasonable for a factory that had the capability of 
producing 100 refrigerators a day to have electricity for only 
two hours and produce only 10 or 15 refrigerators. I thought 
the workers would be psychologically frustrated, because the 
more they produced the more they could get. The factory was 
losing and the workers were not to blame. Egypt at the time 
produced only 18 billion kilowatts, which was insufficient. 
Now, thank God, Egypt produces over 70 billion kilowatts. Had 
it not been for this increased energy production, we would not 
have had the new towns, industrial progress, or housing, etc. 
We focused this much attention on bolstering the industrial 
sector capabilities and providing the requirements of electric 
energy, transport, transportation, and sewage networks so that 
Egyptian or foreign investors can establish plants or projects 
that provide jobs to thousands of people who enter the work 
market every day. 
  In this respect, I think it is imperative that I mention 
two problems that have exhausted the Egyptian minds in the past 
decades in search of sound solutions. The first is the problem 
of population growth, which exceeds economic and social 
development rates. This may prove to be too difficult for our 
capabilities to handle in the near future. If we do not watch 
out for the population growth, a time will come when we will be 
like some countries that cannot feed their people. If the 
increase continues, where will we get the subsidies from? It 
will have to come through more taxes. We will not be able to 
build roads. We will not be able to create jobs, no matter what 
we do. In the near future, if we do not take this into 
consideration--and this takes years to pay off--Egypt will face 
dangers, maybe not in our lifetime, but during future 
generations, which we work for. The issue of population growth 
is very serious. We will not be able to find jobs, places, and 
a proper life for them. We will be like some countries, which I 
do not want to name, where people live in the mountain with 
questionable food supplies. Someone from one country told me 
that they have approximately 100 million people living below the 
poverty line. They do not even give them bread or anything. 
They leave them on their own to eat grass, and I do not mean 
the other grass [Egyptian Arabic word for grass is hashish] 
[audience laughs] or anything else. Naturally, this also 
results in the problem of unemployment. 
  The second problem is unemployment, which has been on the 
rise in recent years, although its roots and causes go back to 
earlier administrations during which real productivity was not 
the objective of employment. As far as the population growth is 
concerned, the efforts to which the entire people have 
contributed have made noticeable progress which, all signs 
indicate, will be sustained for long years to come. The 
increase in population cannot be stopped over night. It takes 
years for the rate to go down. The growth in population has 
gone down to approximately 2.2, which points to a sensible 
response by Egyptian families to the call for planning. Our 
Prophet has said: A strong believer is better and closer to God 
than a weak believer. If I have a modest income and a family of 
10, how can I feed them? Just having them around the house will 
raise your blood pressure and you will die. [audience laughs] 
Each one will ask for something. But if the family is small, 
no matter what headache they may cause you can handle it, you 
will be able to offer them a proper life, educate them, dress 
them well, and give them medical treatment. This is because we 
do not know what the future has in stock for us. I believe the 
future generations will not go through the labyrinths we, our 
fathers, and grandfathers had to go through. The world has 
shown an interest in the drop in the population growth in Egypt. 
Cairo has been chosen to host one of the most important 
conferences on population in the 20th century under the auspices 
of the United Nations. Thousands of political leaders, 
scientists, and thinkers will meet in Egypt to exchange ideas on 
population issues. 
  The Chinese, for instance, increase by 15 million every 
year. 
I laughed with them and told them: Why don't you take 30 
millions more from us and pretend that you increased by 30 
millions extra in two years. [audience laughs] We welcome this 
conference and the arrival of the elite world leaders, thinkers, 
and experts. But in the midst of this success, we must not 
forget that despite the drop in population growth in the past 
few years, the rate of population growth in Egypt is still 
higher than in many countries that strive to improve the living 
standards of their people. Despite this drop, we expect from 
now until the year 2000 to increase by 12 million people. Of 
them, more than 3.5 million youngsters will join the labor 
market. May God help us find jobs for them. We will have to 
find fruitful jobs for them, not to mention those who are left 
behind without a job as a result of the population increase in 
the past 10 years. 
  All this causes us to intensify government and popular 
efforts to sustain the success made in controlling the 
population increase, whether in hamlets, villages, or cities. 
As for the problem of unemployment, it exists all over the 
world, and I am not defending it. The United States is running 
around trying to open doors for workers. In France, which also 
suffers from a high unemployment rate, the French foreign 
minister has told the people: Don't expect me to solve this 
problem quickly, because it takes years. Here some people think 
it can be solved overnight. Someone comes out and calls for 
unemployment benefits. How can we tell who is working and who 
is unemployed? Maybe someone is working in the private sector 
and is applying for work in the government. Abroad, they have 
computers and know all the information. If someone submits an 
application, they will check his name on the computer. Is our 
system here computerized? No. And to computerize it we need 
money. 
  [Mubarak is asked by someone in the audience about Law No. 
55; he replies:] No, the government is still working on it 
because it is a very complicated issue. Do you want to quit or 
what? [audience laughs] 
  Perhaps the proper way to address the problem of 
unemployment 
is that for the first time we have a detailed chart that 
contains accurate information on the matter. The comprehensive 
survey conducted throughout all governorates and villages shows 
that the number of university and school graduates who have 
applied for work in the past 10 years is 3.946 million people, 
almost four million. We have found jobs for approximately 2.5 
million of them. Also, 835,000 more jobs have been found for 
applicants who do not hold university or school degrees. This 
shows that despite the difficulties, the Egyptian economy has 
managed to provide 3.4 million jobs in the past 10 years; that 
is, 341,000 [number as heard] jobs annually. But we cannot go 
on like this indefinitely. They need industries, land, etc. For 
how long can we keep up? However, the population increase has 
forced on us a situation where a number of graduates remain 
unemployed. They number approximately 2.4 million, and they 
represent 9.2 of the Egyptian work force. The unemployment rate 
is measured in comparison to the total work force, and this is 
the way it is everywhere in the world. I will read to you some 
figures about unemployment in the world, and they are statistics 
obtained from world magazines. In other words, we did not make 
them up to suit our purpose. In Spain the rate is 23 percent; 
in France it is 12 percent, and these are major industrial 
nations. In Italy it is 11.7 percent, in the UK it is 
approximately 10 percent, in Germany it is 9.1 percent, in the 
Netherlands it is 4.2 percent, in Belgium it is 11 percent, in 
Denmark it is 11 percent, in Finland it is 12.5 percent, and in 
Ireland it is 20 percent. This is just to show you the rates 
around the world. The rate in Egypt is 9.2 percent of the work 
force. 
  You are not unaware of the strenuous efforts undertaken by 
the state to cope with this steady increase in the number of 
citizens who join the work force annually. I repeat once again 
that the effective way to address this situation is to increase 
the growth rate in gross domestic product to be more than double 
the rate of population growth. This alone can absorb the new 
work force while at the same time lessen the number of the 
existing unemployed. We will not manage to expand productivity 
unless we are able to sell our products in the world markets. 
This is an important point. If production increases but it 
cannot be sold, nobody will increase the production. It will be 
wasted. Thus, we must find world markets. The world markets 
have their own conditions, and I believe that the private sector 
is more active than the business sector in this regard, and I 
hope the latter will catch up. In the meantime, the private 
sector must be more active, and we are helping it. We are 
opening doors abroad, and it has to do the rest. 
  A businessman with a large production once came to me and 
asked that the government market his products abroad. I told 
him that I would not pay him one fourth of the price of his 
products. [audience laughs] How could the government market 
his products? Let it market its own products, or not, right, 
'Atif [Sidqi]? [audience laughs] 
  We will not be able to expand the production bases until we 
are able to sell their products in world markets. This makes 
the expansion of exports a persistent requirement and a basic 
condition for progress. In addition, this is considered an 
essential requirement for bridging the present gap in the 
balance of payments and the trade balance. This gap is caused 
by the fact that we import $11 billion worth of commodities and 
our exports, excluding oil, total approximately $1.5 billion. 
  We do not doubt that Egypt's workers and producers will 
forge 
ahead to achieve this strategic goal so as to fulfill the 
homeland's hope for Egypt to take its fair share in 
international trade. The government will support every effort 
aimed at promoting exports and will remove all administrative 
obstacles before exporters. It remains for the producers and 
workers to make quality the focus of attention and activity. 
Let 1994, brothers and sisters, be the year of quality and the 
good name of Egyptian products, a year in which we will all 
participate to achieve great strides in our exports and to come 
close to a balance between imports and exports. Achieving this 
goal also requires us to go ahead with reforming the mismanaged 
companies now that we have drawn up a comprehensive program that 
we hope to able to implement in 1995 so that the workers of 
these companies will enjoy new circumstances allowing for 
increased production and higher wages. The workers in any 
successful establishment have a right to have higher wages that 
link wages and production. 
  The stance of the workers establishments on the reform 
program was splendid and proved that Egypt's workers are the 
soldiers of reform who have a real interest in promoting the 
production establishments and their capabilities. [applause] 
  Brothers and sisters, a serious and frank confrontation of 
shortcomings and the roots of problems and a firm commitment to 
the reform programs will win Egypt world respect and will give 
us increasing confidence in a brighter future. The concrete 
indications of this future are the fruits of reform that are 
manifest to everyone. We used to spend more than our annual 
income and would pay the accumulating and increasing deficit by 
borrowing inside and outside Egypt. However, we have 
rationalized our expenditure, developed our revenue sources, and 
have come very close to striking a balance between the state's 
revenues and expenditures. Certain circumstances dictated that 
we impose new taxes but we were careful that most of the burdens 
affect those who can afford to pay. However, it was inevitable 
that part of this burden would affect all segments of society in 
order to curb inflation, preserve the value of the national 
currency, and address the remaining defects that hindered the 
national economy. I am not an economist, but when inflation 
rises, prices will go up. Simply speaking, when inflation 
besets a country, there will be more money than production. 
Prices will skyrocket to the point that no one can control. 
  The economic reform policies, which economic experts and 
international establishments testify are being soundly 
implemented, have generated increased confidence in our national 
economy. The budget deficit dropped this year to less than 3 
percent, but at one time it had risen to about 25 percent. This 
is the main problem in many countries of the world. Inflation 
rates have dropped to 8 percent and the savings deposits have 
continued to increase. 
  Freeing the exchange rate and lifting restrictions on 
foreign currency have improved the investment atmosphere and 
reassured exporters. We have ended the black market. We also 
confronted those using the people's livelihood to acquire huge 
profits by exploiting the flow of subsidies. We faced the 
problem with courage. We devoted the entire subsidy to basic 
commodities for the toiling masses, namely bread, sugar, and 
edible oil. This enabled us to guarantee that this subsidy 
would go to the right people. However, there was much fraud. 
But I do not want to go into details. 
  We eliminated many restrictions that were imposed on 
investment. We reduced taxes on production equipment and tools. 
But some people say this is not enough. However, the issue 
still requires in-depth studies and new measures, because 42 
percent of the national industrial machinery is being imported 
from abroad. This is why the government will look into the 
production prerequisites so that we can compete. I must help 
the industrial sector, the private sector, and the business 
sector to enable them to compete in the world market. The 
current competition is extremely keen. The competition race 
will assume a new stage after the implementation of GATT. 
  We lifted the unjust burdens that obstructed producers. This 
will help them reduce production costs and enhance the ability 
of Egyptian products to compete in local and foreign markets. 
This will also help producers enter world markets and maintain 
a distinguished position for Egyptian exports. 
  Brothers and sisters, the sound starting point in the 
social, 
economic, and even political transformation process dictates 
that we marshal our greatest energies to create a radical change 
in the educational philosophy commensurate with development 
needs and society's requirements. I believe that we are 
pursuing a sound path. 
  The Egyptian citizen represents our most valuable treasure. 
The Egyptian citizen is our hope, and through this citizen 
alone the process of progress is completed and Egypt's aspired 
objectives are achieved. Progress cannot be achieved without 
the promotion of the Egyptian citizen's energies and the 
transfer of the largest number of this people into participants 
in increasing and promoting the quality of production. This is 
first among the many huge tasks that we still have to perform. 
The way to attain this task is to reconsider our concepts of 
the educational and training institutions, which are indeed 
productive establishments that should be given priority in our 
investment programs. 
  The developed world has realized that the potential and 
talent of a productive human being can be perceived and nurtured 
from the first year of education. The school is now a center 
for receiving education and the development of skills. Praise 
be to God, we realized that the importance of promoting the 
quality of education and its role in training and preparing 
skills will always enable the citizens to have the appropriate 
job opportunities. This could never have been done without an 
overall national program to modernize our schools and promote 
their syllabuses. We must focus on the substance and quality 
and not on quantity during the school years to enable our sons 
to carry out school activities that would develop their skills. 
  The implementation of this program started last year when, 
with the cooperation and effective and worthy participation of 
friends, the able sons of this country managed to insure the 
largest possible degree of investment to build thousands of 
modern schools that can serve this new concept and the 
objectives of education. Last year alone, 1,500 schools were 
built and 7,800 others were renovated. All this cost us 1.3 
billion pounds. This is where money is spent. Steps are under 
way to build 1,500 schools this year at a time when the 
investment expenditures were doubled over the past two years. 
The expenditures are four times those incurred in 1992. 
Nevertheless, there still are many things to be achieved because 
the program to modernize the Egyptian schools needs tens of 
billions of pounds. 
  It is worth noting that the plan to develop and modernize 
technical education and vocational training adopts the two-sided 
educational system applied in many advanced countries. This 
system is based on combining education and training in the 
institute because training is the basic factor in creating 
skilled labor, people who can deal with complicated technical 
problems and increase the quality of products. 
  Our new industrial facilities in Madinat al-'Ashir min 
Ramadan, Madinat Sittah Uktubar, al-Sadat, Burj al-'Arab, and 
other areas will pioneer this new educational trend. This 
should get us off to a good start in the 21st century, where 
factory blends with school, laboratory with library, and 
production and industry with science and innovation, and where 
quality is based on research and creativity. 
  The second task facing us is that of finding a comprehensive 
solution to the problems of Egyptian citizen living in 
randomly-built slum areas. The randomly-built areas are scars 
on Egypt's face. The level of public services available in 
these areas is much lower than anything we consider acceptable 
for a dear section of the Egyptian people. 
  As you may know, I have instructed the competent authorities 
to prepare a two-part comprehensive plan to face this problem. 
  The first part, already under way, deals with the problems 
of 
existing randomly-built areas, many of which go back to the 
thirties in this century. 
  When we looked closely into the randomly-built areas we 
discovered that some go back to the year 1924. The first 
shantytown sprang up in 1924. By the sixties the phenomenon had 
mushroomed and in the seventies and eighties it got even worse. 
  In al-Jizah, there is a place called 'Izbat al-Sa'aydah that 
goes back to 1924. Saqiyat Makki dates back to 1960 and 
al-Munib to 1970. In Cairo, 'Izbat Abu-Ard goes back to 1955, 
'Arab Ghunaym and 'Arab Wadi to 1960, Manshiyat Nasir to 1962, 
and 'Izbat al-Hajjanah to 1965. In Alexandria, 'Izbat al-Sayd 
goes back to 1960. All these are randomly-built areas that came 
into being over the years. 
  I would like to tell you this: When we began the first 
development plan we were not able to take care of every problem 
in the country. We had to make priorities. The money we had at 
our disposal was limited. We spend it according to priorities, 
updating the infrastructure, building housing, and so one and so 
forth. 
  Now, it is time to address the problem of randomly-built 
areas. Do you know how much these randomly-built areas will 
cost us? We have spent 581 million pounds so far. In order to 
rehabilitate these areas in 11 governorates, we will need seven 
billion pounds. Shall we cut back all other programs to focus 
on this problem? By the time we get to the other governorates, 
the sum total of expenditure on randomly-built areas will reach 
17 billion. We are aware of the size of the problem and, within 
our resources, will do everything possible to resolve it. I 
want every citizen to live in dignity. 
  In the first part of the aforesaid plan, we will spend 600 
million pounds in urban renovation programs, of which the 
southern governorates will receive about 300 million pounds. 
  The second part of the plan aims at preventing the emergence 
of such areas in the future through the building of planned 
areas in all governorates on a scale sufficient to absorb the 
increase in urban population. This effort will fall within the 
third development plan. 
  A third task facing us is that of protecting low-income 
households in order to achieve social justice. The country will 
continue to offer equal opportunity in education and to provide 
free education in all state-run schools. The state is also 
committed to providing health care to the needy in its hospitals 
and clinics. Over the next few years, we will redouble our 
effort to improve the quality of health care provided in 
state-run hospitals and clinics. 
  The state also takes it upon itself to subsidize bread, even 
if its cost goes up. We are now spending 1.542 billion on bread 
subsidies and will maintain these subsidies on principle, even 
though we are aware of the rising cost involved, due to 
increased wheat prices and the higher demand associated with the 
growth in population. The state is providing this subsidy 
because it believes that the poor should be able to buy bread at 
a price that suits their income. 
  The state's guarantee is confirmed and is continuing in all 
these fields. However, the real guarantee for those who are not 
able to help themselves is achieved by helping them become able 
to help themselves. Therefore, as of next year we will allocate 
more financial resources for the social fund, for the productive 
families project, and for the projects of supporting craftsmen 
and owners of small workshops to help these groups raise their 
income. 
  The fourth mission is the comprehensive and continuous 
modernization of the production of commodities and services. 
This is one of the most important challenges that we must meet 
as soon as possible. This will enable Egyptian producers to 
dedicate their efforts to developing Egyptian commodities in 
form and substance. 
  The fifth mission is the development of the Egyptian 
administration system so that it will be able to effect the 
desired changes aimed at increasing the Egyptian society's 
capacity for production and exports. We must search for 
qualified people and select those capable of turning loss into 
profit and failure into success in our establishments. We must 
train these personnel on the most modern methods of 
administration. This must take place under the supervision and 
auspices of efficient trainers capable of effecting this change 
in the Egyptian administration system. 
  Brothers and sisters, we are dedicating all our effort and 
work for the sake of God and the homeland. In all our steps we 
adhere to the basic interests of the people. We make sacrifices 
to make them happy and we work hard to make them secure. An 
examination of our activity abroad will reveal to those who wish 
to know that the main aim of this activity is to serve the 
domestic front, provide the proper climate for the promotion of 
the national interest, secure the Egyptian people's right to 
develop their resources, achieve the maximum employment of their 
creative capabilities, and arrive at a better life. 
  This was our pledge and commitment when we extended the 
bridges of friendship and understanding to the various peoples 
of the world, in the East and West and in the North and South. 
This was our wish and desire when we exploited these relations 
to find work opportunities for Egyptian workers abroad and to 
open new markets for Egyptian commodities and services. We 
succeeded in canceling half of our debts which accumulated while 
were building our infrastructure from a near zero point. This 
will remain our pledge and commitment as we step into the 21st 
century and participate with other states in establishing a new 
world order. 
  The emphasis of big and small states alike is generally 
turning from political and military affairs to economic issues 
and concerns. In this connection, we note two important 
phenomena that require us to open our minds and devote our 
thinking to the alternatives available to us to deal with them 
and with their effects on our national interests. The first 
phenomenon is represented by the rapid changes that have 
occurred recently in the field of international trade. Many 
people ask what this GATT is. I believe the economy minister 
can explain this issue on television. The recent round of 
Uruguay multilateral talks resulted in the signing of an 
important agreement which will result in drawing up the course 
of trade exchange among world states for the coming decades. 
This agreement was approved in Marrakesh on 15 April. The 
second phenomenon is the tendency of many states in the various 
continents to establish huge economic blocs that will make it 
difficult for small and isolated entities to run their economic 
and trade relations efficiently and effectively unless they take 
the necessary measures to deal with this new situation. 
  In view of the political and technical complications 
surrounding these two phenomena, we must not hesitate to assess 
them and to draft the policy we will follow in confronting their 
effect on us and the fraternal countries with whom we share 
unity of interest and fate, particularly the Arab fraternal 
countries and the African countries. Therefore, I decided to 
make these two topics an object of meticulous and in-depth study 
that does not focus on theoretical issues but on aspects that 
are useful in charting policy and adopting the stands that are 
effective in protecting our pan-Arab interests. 
  Since these two issues should be submitted to the various 
official and popular groupings and institutions for general 
discussion, I believe that the Labor Federation must effectively 
participate in this work [applause] because it would not be fair 
for such issues to be decided far from the concept and 
principles of the labor base. 
  Moving on to the Middle East peace process, we find that 
positive signs give rise to hopes that 1994 will be the year in 
which we find a comprehensive and lasting peace on every track, 
starting with the Palestinian track on which the two sides made 
great strides by signing the Oslo, Washington, and Cairo 
agreements and agreeing on most details for setting up the 
Palestinian self-rule authority to replace the Israeli military 
government and its civil administration. 
  The month of May must witness the faithful and strict 
implementation of these agreements so as to enhance the peace 
process and deepen the concerned peoples' confidence in the 
inevitability of the victory of peace and the influence of 
stability and security against the tendencies toward violence, 
rejection, and impotence. 
  Brothers and sisters, our high hopes for a brighter future 
are based on firm foundations and rational objective 
considerations. This is because they rely on clear-cut 
reasoning and hard work that has enabled Egypt regain its 
pioneering role in making progress. Had it not been for the 
corrective efforts along the economic and political tracks, we 
would have never been able to bridge the huge transformation 
process with the outstanding success that changed the face of 
life in Egypt. 
  Our clear concept promoted our conviction that the homeland 
will only achieve its objectives through the combined efforts of 
all its sons within a secure and stable society where rights and 
duties are equal. We have long experience which confirms that 
society will become more productive and capable if it allows its 
individuals to make initiatives, if it pursues wise policies, 
and if does not isolate itself from the process of world 
progress. 
  We also have a clear awareness that deepens our 
understanding 
of the importance of social solidarity in building a homeland 
free of hatred and rancor, guarded by social peace, unaffected 
by division and internecine fighting, and a homeland with 
safeguards for the interests of every citizen within a just 
system that will save the homeland's stability and harmony. 
  We have lessons learned from experience and the experience 
of 
others. These lessons confirm that a sound democracy can only 
be established by meeting the citizen's economic and social 
needs and demands. We are confident that a just peace 
represents a basic pan-Arab interest for the sake of stability 
and development. We have faced tremendous difficulties, but we 
made sincere efforts to build a firm foundation capable of 
standing fast in the face of emergency changes and capable of 
accomplishing continued development. 
  We have resisted the allure of palliative and temporary 
sedatives, opting instead to address the roots, not just the 
symptoms of problems. We sought out every expert who is willing 
to offer his opinion and effort. We opened the door wide to the 
experience of others, without complexes or sensitivities. We 
did everything humanly possible to stay on the right track, 
working out difficulties, correcting mistakes, and, within the 
limits of the law, deterring the ambitions of conspirators. 
  Our aim has always been that of bringing the country into 
the 
21st century and imparting to it enough vitality to deal with 
the challenges of a new era and to become a part of the march of 
human progress that accelerates daily with the contribution of 
all nations, old and new. 
  The world is moving faster and faster toward a future in 
which there will be no room for nations who are dependent on 
others or those too embroiled in their petty squabbles to read 
the writing on the wall. It is my belief that there is no 
country under the sun worthier than Egypt of becoming a part of 
the new dawn. [applause] 
  We do not need miracles; we have what it takes. Nor do we 
need to look far afield: We are at the threshold of 
achievement. The climate is right. The policies are in place. 
Change is already under way. 
  What every one of us should do now is search his soul, 
explore his duty, and get ready to play his part. What we need 
is faith in God and the country and a sense of responsibility 
toward the country's national interests. The nation is the sum 
total of all citizens. 
  We are not asking for miracles. We ask for solidarity, 
cooperation, and goodwill. These are the bastions that protect 
the country's unity and safety. We do not ask for great 
sacrifices. We encourage scrupulous performance, quality, and 
precision. We need to respect expertise, apply science, 
coordinate our efforts, and strive toward excellence and 
distinction. 
  We do not ask for the impossible. We ask for involved 
participation by every citizen everywhere. There is no longer a 
reason for indifference and apathy. Involved participation 
means that every one of us should undergo a change. We need to 
go back to our roots, to the principles that have brought 
civilization to the Egyptian people and the values that made 
them achieve miracles. 
  Brothers and sisters, truth is not the exclusive domain of 
anyone. Nor is responsibility the exclusive domain of the 
ruler, the party, or the government. Everyone has a part to 
play and is entitled to give his opinion and express his views. 
Everyone has national, ethical, and constitutional rights and 
obligations. 
  I am confident that we all have a sense of commitment to 
national interests and will act in a spirit of patriotism. This 
spirit is particularly felt in times of danger, when clouds of 
sedition gather in the air and the country walks toward a 
turning point of destiny. Regardless of our differences of 
opinion and disparity of views, unity and this spirit of 
patriotism will see us through. 
  Our spirit of patriotism and respect for national interests 
will help us preserve our unity. Our differences, regardless of 
their intensity, will remain within the realm of varying views 
and freedom of expression. Egyptian patriots reject destruction 
and loath any damage to the country's interests. 
  I am confident, brothers and sisters, that Egypt will 
emerge, 
God willing, stronger, more competent, and more determined to 
forge ahead on the path of progress. A new dawn is breaking and 
towering achievements are ahead. 
  Egypt will thrust forward, victorious and robust. Banners of 
glory will brighten the sky in every part of its land. Safe and 
stable, it will see construction grace every part of its land 
and its current and future generations step boldly into the 21st 
century. 
  Brothers and sisters, despite difficulties and troubles, I 
can say with a great deal of satisfaction and gratitude that God 
has guided us onto the right path. God has given us the 
strength to bear the burdens of our duties, the wisdom to make 
the right decisions, and the light to tell good from bad and 
right from wrong. 
  I implore God Almighty to give us the fortitude to stay on 
the right path and to act gracefully and honorably. "And say: 
Work righteousness: Soon will God observe your work, and His 
apostle, and the believers." [Koranic verse] May peace and 
God's mercy be upon you. 

