Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by J. Esplanada and C. Avendano] </F>
  [Text] AIDS has spread to 25 cities and provinces in the 
country, Health Secretary Juan Flavier disclosed yesterday. 
  In a press briefing in Malacanang [presidential office], 
Flavier said most of those affected are in Metro Manila, Angeles 
City and Olongapo City. 
  He also disclosed that two more Filipinos died of AIDS last 
month, bringing to 77 the number of recorded casualties since 
the mid-1980's. 
  Flavier did not identify the victims. He did not say either 
where they died. 
  The two reportedly died some time between 8 February this 
year, when the last previous AIDS death was reported, and 28 
February. 
  As of end-February, Flavier said the health department's 
AIDS/ Human Immunodeficiency Virus Registry had recorded 475 
individuals with HIV, the microorganism that causes AIDS and 
breaks down the human body's defenses against diseases. 
  Of that number, 125 became full-blown AIDS cases, with 77 
dying eventually. 
  Tens of thousands more Filipinos may have been infected with 
HIV but remain undocumented. 
  Flavier earlier estimated their number at 50,000. The basis 
for that estimate was not explained. 
  The health department has also said that, in 98 percent of 
recorded AIDS cases here, HIV was transmitted through blood 
transfusion, with sexual contact accounting for the remaining 2 
percent. 
  There is no known cure for AIDS. 
  But the San Lazaro Hospital in Manila has started using AZT, 
or azidothymidine, on HIV patients. 
  The drug widely used in the Untied States and other 
countries, reportedly slows down the virus' damage to the immune 
system. But it is known to produce side effects like severe 
headache and anemia. 
  The health department's AIDS unit, in the meantime, will 
conduct random AIDS test in New Bilibid Prisons in Muntinlupa in 
response to a request from the Department of Justice. 
  But Flavier said the test "will not be coercive" stressing 
he 
was "against mandatory testing because this will make those who 
are positive to go underground and it will be self-defeating." 
  Justice Franklin Drilon the other day sought "mandatory 
test" 
for 78 inmates at the penitentiary amid reports that a bar girl 
with HIV was providing sexual services to rich or influential 
prisoners there. 
  In Congress, Senator Freddie Webb, chair of the Senate 
special committee on AIDS, said mandatory tests would violate 
the prisoners' human rights and only contribute to the 
"hysteria, stigma, ignorance and misperception" associated with 
the disease. 
  On Drilon's statement that a person loses his civil and 
political rights upon his conviction, Webb asked: "Does a 
person also forfeit his rights as a human upon conviction?" 
  Instead of curbing AIDS at the penitentiary, Webb said 
forced 
tests just might encouraged its spread. 
  He cited the "window period," during which a person may have 
contracted HIV but will test negative because he has not yet 
developed antibodies against it. 
  It takes six months after sexual contact for the virus to 
show up in an AIDS test. 
  "Forced testing may only lead infected inmates who are HIV- 
negative to have a false sense of security," Webb said. 
[sentence as published] 
  In general, he said, mandatory testing could raise a scare 
that would force infected sex workers, homosexuals and other 
citizens to go underground, out of the reach of those who could 
help them. 
  Instead of forced test, he said, Bureau of Prisons Director 
Vicente Vinarao should "do his job" of imposing discipline in 
the penitentiary to prevent irregularities and malpractice. 
  In a related development, the Senate approved Monday night a 
bill promoting voluntary blood donation and regulating the 
practice of "bloodbanking and transfusion medicine." 
  The bill is intended to help curb diseases transmitted 
through blood transfusion, such as AIDS, syphilis, hepatitis B 
and malaria. 
  It also aims to phase out commercial blood banks and 
establish a national voluntary blood donation program within 
three years of its implementation. 
  Dr. Dennis Maducdoc, chief of the health department's AIDS 
unit, said yesterday arrangements were being made with Vinarao 
and Bureau of Research and Laboratories Director Marietta Bacay 
for the random, voluntary testing of inmates by this week the 
earliest. 
  A second HIV antibody test will be given after six months 
taking into account the so-called window period. 
  The test detects the antibodies a person produces in 
response 
to the AIDS virus in his blood. 
  The health department, Maducdoc said, has a standing policy 
against compulsory HIV testing and prefers that a person submit 
himself to the test on his own free will. 
  Once a person decides to take the test, "we will go there 
and 
provide the services," he said. 
  In a news briefing, Maducdoc said testing of the inmates 
would give the health department an opportunity to find out for 
the first time "what is happening inside (the country's) jails." 
  He disclosed that the health department had received 
proposals from non-governmental organizations for financial 
assistance to an AIDS information and education program for the 
inmates. 
  "But this was not given priority for lack of funds," he 
said. 
  He promised, however, to recommend some of these proposals 
to 
an AIDS donors' meeting in June. 

