CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by IZVESTIYA correspondent Aleksandr Krivopalov: </F>
``All England Talking About ``Red Mercury'' and New Russian 
Weapon'': ``The documentary about the new secret weapon of mass 
destruction that has apparently been created in Russia and shown 
on British television's Channel 4 is being discussed in 
London''] 
  [Text] London -- The portable bomb that is barely the size 
of a teacup or ball is apparently capable of destroying 
everything living within the radius of a modern large city or 
rayon. 
  The British have been working on gathering material about 
this for an entire 18 months, trying to find confirmation of the 
rumors that have long roused the Western press to the effect 
that ``red mercury,'' whose very existence is denied by 
scientific-technical experts, is being brought in from Russia by 
some sort of secret contraband channels. 
  No, states G. Roberts, the leader of the narrative in the 
sensational English television investigation, this substance is 
not a myth. It is the main component in the ``pure'' 
thermonuclear bomb that was apparently made in Russia and no 
where else in the world. True, his Russian partners in 
conversation generally remain anonymous on the topic of ``red 
mercury,'' and their evidence does not, it must be confessed, 
sound too convincing. 
  The attempt to obtain responsible and knowledgeable 
commentators ultimately led the film's authors to Yekaterinburg, 
where they uncovered a plot very reminiscent of the old James 
Bond hits: secret meetings at twilight with some unknown persons 
who initially promised to provide the necessary information but 
disappeared at the last moment, afraid of the consequences. 
  Nevertheless, the group from England was apparently able to 
obtain secrets about a weapon that may become a new, even more 
terrifying threat for all mankind. They met with Russian 
scientists who had evidently themselves been personally involved 
in working on this project for 5 years. In any case, the film's 
consultants were convinced of the soundness of this evidence. 
  Another prominent expert in nuclear physics, the American 
professor Cohen, stated that as far as can be judged based on 
the materials gathered by the British television team, American 
scientists are lagging very much behind their Russian colleagues 
in this area. In Cohen's opinion, the spread of nuclear weaponry 
in the world will surely be impossible to contain. 
  The broadcast's finale was an interview with the director of 
a large German firm. The said participant announced that he has 
personal knowledge of sales of ``red mercury'' from Russia so 
large that they terrify him. 
  A Russian Federation Ministry of Defense representative 
denied the suggestion of the existence of either ``red mercury'' 
or a new ``mini-bomb'' created on its basis (see IZVESTIYA, No. 
70). 

