Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Walid Sa'di: "Human Rights File"] </F>
  [Text] The annual U.S. State Department reports on human 
rights worldwide is an effort to show Washington's concern over 
governments' human rights records by chronicling positive and 
negative developments on yearly basis. Presumably, the 
information supplied by the U.S. diplomatic missions abroad 
serves as the basis of these reports. 
  Seldom is there reliance on independent submissions in 
preparing the State Department's views on this subject. In a 
sense, therefore, Washington's judgment is subjective to a great 
extent that may or may not reflect the fact of the matter. 
  Against this backdrop, the message of the State Department's 
1993 report on Jordan appeared to be garbled, lacking a central 
theme. I have some years of experience in human rights 
endeavours, ever since I joined the U.N. Commission on Human 
Rights in 1975, so I can say that I found the reports of the 
international system of human rights remarkably different from 
those prepared by the State Department in content and style. 
Whereas United Nations efforts consist of documented 
information, the Washington ones appear to be a list of 
conclusions and judgments based on interpretations of laws and 
practices. 
  This is not to suggest that the U.S. report on Jordan has no 
redeeming value. On the contrary, the report contains some 
observations and comments that are serious and true to the best 
of my knowledge. My concern, however, is about the overall 
assessment and tone of the report which may give rise to 
speculations about Jordan's commitment to democracy and human 
rights. 
  By way of example, I hasten to cite a few samples of remarks 
contained in the 1993 report which could be misleading instead 
of being informative, as I am sure they were originally intended 
to be. When the first paragraph states categorically that "in 
practice the King sets the broad parameters of foreign and 
domestic policy while the prime minister exercises management of 
daily affairs," one gets the distinct impression that the 
Monarch governs in absolute terms without any constraints or 
guidelines and that the executive branch of government under the 
prime minister is nothing but a municipal council dealing with 
such state matters as the collection of garbage or the supply of 
electricity and water. The picture is further distorted when 
the report goes on to say that Parliament is "subordinate to the 
executive branch." 
  A more realistic and faithful appraisal of the political 
structure in the Kingdom would reveal that for all intents and 
purposes His Majesty King Husayn does not exercise more 
prerogatives than for example the president of the U.S. or any 
other chief executive in many developed countries, not to 
mention developing nations. If the authority of the Monarch to 
dissolve Parliament under special conditions is what bothers the 
U.S., then it is fair to say that the exercises of this power 
has been carried out with maximum discretion and in a manner 
that is echoed in many democratic states. 
  Besides, a Jordanian prime minister is anything but a 
"mayor" 
of sorts. All of us who are privy to the political scene in the 
Kingdom know only too well that the King hands over nearly 90 
per cent of the rein if not more to the prime minister and his 
team of ministers. Some of us are dismayed by such an excessive 
transfer of power and wish that the King involved himself a bit 
more in the management of the country. 
  This line of analysis leads the State Department to the 
equally invalid allegation that Parliament is subordinate to the 
executive branch. I presume that the prime minister and his 
cabinet are viewed as part and parcel of the executive branch. 
If this is the case, as it should be, then the impression left 
by the remark that the legislature plays second fiddle to the 
cabinet needs to be corrected, especially if the current phase 
of Jordanian democracy is taken into consideration. Surely it 
is acknowledged and appreciated that the contemporary and 
ancient history of the country is full of precedents where 
governments were voted out of office by the Lower House of 
Parliament. 
  In the second paragraph of the report, there is also a 
submission that "whereas the government has revoked martial law 
directives, important elements of martial law remain operative." 
  By way of example, the report refers to the "broad scope of 
police powers," as evidence of the continuation of the spirit of 
a martial law regime in the country. To begin with, martial law 
as such is a different subject from police powers per se. The 
former suspends constitutional rights while the latter reflects 
as policy issue on crime and punishment that is not necessarily 
related to martial law regimes. 
  Without suggesting for a moment that policy can have a 
license to arrest and detain people without any legal guidelines 
or constraints, many of us in Jordan do not wish to curtail the 
power of the police to the extent that many western nations have 
done at the expense of internal law and order. No nation would 
want to have criminals loose in the streets and witness the 
commission of crimes that can be preventable. U.S. President 
Bill Clinton has made this very issue the theme of his annual 
address to the Congress earlier this year and called for a more 
effective policy and judicial measures to combat rampant crime 
in his country. The most recent U.S. statistics on crime 
releaved that the prison population in the U.S. has risen 
threefolded since 1974. No one can deny that the increase of 
crime in the U.S. is related, inter alia, to the 
disproportionate increase in legal safeguards offered to 
suspects. For many of us in Jordan, the choice in favour of a 
crime-free society is also a priority and we are not prepared to 
allow marginal legal technicalities stand in the way of keeping 
criminals off the streets. 
  In this vein, Jordanians do not wish to condone torture or 
the ill treatment of detainees or prisoners. As a matter of 
fact, Jordan has ratified the Convention against Torture in 1992 
as evidence of its policy against mistreatment of suspects and 
prisoners. It is also a fitting reminder that Jordan had 
ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR) as far back as 1977. (As a footnote, the U.S. 
acceded to the ICCPR only two years ago!). So when the report 
states that "physical abuse of prisoners during interrogation 
and detention continues to occur," one can only say that this is 
probably true on limited occasions and needs therefore to be 
combated. Yet suggesting that such police excesses, when they 
occur reflect a state policy, makes the report in need of 
correction. Many nations, including some of the most advanced 
ones, suffer from police brutality. Most probably, the extent 
of the problem in Jordan is greater than that in the West. Yet 
it is also fair to say that this phenomenon in Jordan has more 
to do with police training and discipline than with any current 
state policy. 
  What puzzled me most about the report in question, however, 
is the statement in the fourth paragraph to the effect that 
"citizens do not have the right to change their government." 
How absurd can one be! Where in the world do citizens have the 
inalienable and absolute right to change their governments by 
any means? Do the Americans, for example, have the right to 
change the republican form of their government? Nations have 
constitutions which draw the parameters of their respective 
systems of political structure. Jordan is no different and 
enjoys a written constitution that deserves also to be respected 
and upheld. 
  On the issue of freedom of speech and press, there was also 
a 
mention of the view that the "government in Jordan continues to 
exercise limited censorship of local media." Without suggesting 
that we in Jordan have reached perfection in the exercise of 
free press, the Malhas affair and its wide and unimpeded 
coverage is a vivid example of how much press is free in Jordan. 
When the shocking disclosure about the state of food and 
medicine was freely aired by the media, then there is no cause 
for alarm about freedom of thought in Jordan. We certainly have 
more to go before we attain the level of free press that some 
western nations enjoy, but we are certainly well on our way in 
that direction. The only constraint that Jordan insists on in 
this context is to exercise this right in a responsible way, 
something that most nations would insist on, undoubtedly. In 
this vein, the call for making Jordan television more 
independent is increasinly gaining more currency and could very 
well be in the pipeline. 
  To sum it up, Jordan is not perfect in its human rights 
record, but which country is? Moreover, Jordan stands out among 
the other states of the region as indeed examplary in its 
efforts to spring new roots for its democratic process. This 
much was not reflected in the State Department's report on 
Jordan for 1993. 

