Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by David Fletcher, Health Services correspondent: </F>
"NHS Reforms `Getting Out of Control' Warns Report"] 
  [Text] One in three major hospitals, including recently 
formed trust hospitals, will be forced to close or amalgamate 
within seven years, says a report by independent analysts on the 
future of the NHS. 
  "By the end of the decade the current shape of the NHS will 
be largely unrecognisable," says the report, issued today by 
Newchurch and Company, an independent business development 
organisation. 
  It says the upheaval in the reorganisation of London 
hospitals will come to be regarded as no more than "modest 
change" and will be repeated in all big cities. 
  "Whatever the merits of the Government's 1991 reforms, they 
have set in train a process of restructuring which will affect 
every facet of UK health care," adds the report. 
  "It is a process that may now be beyond the powers of 
politicians and policy makers to control." 
  The report argues that the growth of day treatment, the 
introduction of keyhole surgery, the fall in length of hospital 
stays and the shift to out-patient care was already leading to a 
need for fewer hospital beds. This over-capacity is now being 
exposed as competition between hospitals, introduced by the 
Government's NHS reforms, begins to bite. 
  "Forces unleashed by the reforms are acting as a catalyst 
for 
other, wider pressures, and have set off a train of events which 
will lead inevitably to a rapid and fundamental redefinition in 
the who, how, and where of health care delivery. 
  "These trends will particularly affect NHS trusts, many of 
which will have to face sometimes unpalatable decisions about 
how they function." 
  The report says trust hospitals have substantial additional 
management costs and estimates that trust status adds at least 
&pound;250,000 a year to running costs. "For some trusts, the 
economic pressures will prove terminal." 
  District general hospitals, currently serving a population 
of 
about 200,000, will be expected to serve up to 500,000. "The 
workload of the acute hospital could expand by between 50-100 
percent." 
  Strategic Change in the NHS, Newchurch and Co Ltd., 12, 
Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6AX. 

