Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ichiro Ozawa, secretary-general of Shinseito </F>
(Japan Renewal Party), by commentator Yasusuke Ueda; place and 
date not given; first 11 paragraphs Ueda's introduction] 
  [Text] The year 1993 marks an epoch in the political 
history of the post-World War II period: the collapse of 
one-party rule by the Liberal Democratic Party and the birth of 
the coalition government. The commotion of political reform 
touched off by this situation has directly stirred up the 
political community, and there are no immediate signs of 
tranquility. 
  The economic community is panting for breath in the 
recession 
which is said to be the worst following the war, and there is no 
immediate prospect of economic recovery. A glance at the world 
situation shows no visible signs of the reconstruction of world 
order following the end of the Cold War. 
  They say you had better learn from history when the future 
is 
unpredictable. In order to "clearly" anticipate the immediate 
future, it is necessary to "steadily" look back on the immediate 
past. In the immediate past we had the same situation as we are 
experiencing now -- that is, the transitional period called the 
Taisho era. The following are rough comparisons: 
<H5>  Domestic Politics </H5>
  Taisho era: There existed the decline of the clan government 
and the beginning of party politics. In the background lies the 
mutability of the general public as symbolized by rice riots, as 
well as a tendency toward political participation as seen in 
campaigns for universal suffrage. 
  Heisei era: This era witnessed the end of one-party rule by 
the Liberal Democratic Party, and the indignation of public 
opinion at the repetition of scandals. In the background lies a 
mass society engagaed in television politics. 
<H5>  Economics </H5>
  Taisho era: There existed the rapid expansion of economics 
due to the wartime boom of World War I and the rehabilitation 
boom after World War I, and the chronic recession which came 
soon after the collapse of the bubble economy. 
  Heisei era: Japan became an economic superpower through high 
economic growth, heading for the bubble economy. Japan has 
suddenly fallen into a prolonged recession. 
<H5>  International Situation] </H5>
  Taisho era: This era witnessed the collapse of the Imperial 
Government of Germany and the Russian Empire, as well as the 
collapse of the old European order; the dissolution of the 
Anglo-Japanese Alliance; the emergence of the antagonism between 
Japan and the United States; and the intensification of the 
nationalistic movement of China. 
  Heisei era: The stability maintained by the balance between 
the United States and the Soviet Union has been weakened due to 
the collapse of the Soviet Union. There has also occurred a 
continuation of the economic friction between Japan and the 
United States, as well as the rapid upsurge of the Chinese 
economy. 
  The greatest person in the political community of the Taisho 
era was Takashi Hara. Hara, who organized a party government 
for the first time in Japan, was called the "common" prime 
minister. The organization of a cabinet by both a prime 
minister who was neither a veteran statesman of the Imperial 
Restoration of Meiji nor a bureaucrat and soldier, and by party 
men, was the greatest political reform of that time. Now in the 
period of Heisei, when political reform is urged similarly, the 
key man in the current political situation is Ichiro Ozawa. 
There is always a violent blizzard of arguments for and against 
his speech and behavior. This proves he is the center of 
attention. 
  [Text] Ozawa says "he learns from history." Therefore, we 
have asked him to tell us his views on the political climate and 
economics, with due consideration for the immediate past. 
However, we refrained from asking his observations on the 
current political situation, which is constantly on the move. 
Instead, we wanted to know about the path of the immediate 
future as it exists in the mind of Ichiro Ozawa, a politician. 
<H3>  In the Period of "Adjustment," Real Politicians Were not 
Needed </H3>
  [Ueda] In your book entitled "Plan for Reforming Japan," you 
cited four politicians from whom we should learn: Toshimichi 
Okubo, Hirobumi Ito, Takashi Hara, and Shigeru Yoshida. All of 
them exercised great leadership at the turning point of their 
times. What is interesting about Japan is that times changed in 
an approximately forty-year cycle from the Meiji era. 
  The first period is from the Meiji Restoration to the 
Russo-Japanese War. The first leader is Okubo, who is followed 
by Ito. 
  The second period lasted for forty years till the end of the 
Pacific war. Party politics, founded by Takashi Hara, collapsed 
and was replaced by a military dictatorship. 
  The foundation of the third period was established by 
Shigeru 
Yoshida. The period covered forty years, in which we 
experienced postwar rehabilitation, high economic growth, and 
became an economic superpower. It was a fortunate period in 
comparison with the preceding two, for we experienced no war or 
decisive crisis. That fortunate period has at last come to an 
end, and we have entered a turning point. 
  In greeting the fourth period, what do you think politicians 
should do? 
  [Ozawa] You have classified the times into three periods. I 
do not think excessive political action is necessary when a 
period moves on stable rails. Such a period requires 
administrative ability. The idea is that a two-sworded samurai 
is not needed in time of peace. In time of change, however, 
politicians in particular are required to possess a knowledge of 
the times and a knowledge of history, as well as the discernment 
and judgment necessary to foresee the current of the times and 
of history -- to have such abilities and the power to translate 
such abilities into practice. 
  Take the third period, for example. That was the high 
economic growth period after the end of World War II. Even in 
world politics it was a fortunate period, for Japan had the 
least responsibilities. All politicians had to do was 
redistribute the wealth as impartially as possible. In my view, 
this so-called "adjustment" was almost the sole responsibility 
for politicians to perform. 
  However, the time has come for Japan to share responsibility 
in international politics and international economics, which are 
the prerequisites for the creation and maintenance of wealth and 
peace. With the world order in doubt due to the collapse of the 
Cold War structure, Japan has entered an age in which the 
politicians must have a mid-term vision and a perspective on 
Japan's way of life, at least in preparation for the 21st 
century; otherwise, they cannot function as politicians. 
  [Ueda] What is inevitable for Japanese politicians is that 
they must pay attention to human relations of a rural style, 
while simultaneuosly managing modern bureaucratic and 
parliamentary systems of the western style. Party-type men are 
strong in the former, and bureaucratic-type men are strong in 
the latter, but there are very few politicians who are strong in 
both and who can create a vision. 
  This leads to the cause for breeding the dual power 
structure. Takashi Hara had two types of abilities, and kept his 
political party as firm as rock. What do you think of this dual 
power structure? 
  [Ozawa] In Japan, ability is classified into two types: 1) 
the ability necessary to smoothly carry forward human relations 
and social establishments which are indigenous to Japan; and 2) 
discernment, ideas, and the ability to formulate policy, with 
the international community within one's vision. In Japanese 
politics following the end of the war, politicians needed only 
the ability of adjustment within Japanese society. 
  Takashi Hara is a major senior citizen in my home town. 
He placated the kingpins of the clan government like Aritomo 
Yamagata who were still alive and who exercised power even 
though they were weakened; he installed party politics and 
parliamentary politics in the center of the power structure; and 
he tried to develop foreign policies. His character aside, he 
was to be the leader of the times of the Meiji era, next to 
Toshimichi Okubo. 
  If he had been alive, the history of Showa might have been 
different. Because he died, party politics thereafter ended up 
being politics concerned primarily with human relations or 
political relations within Japan, which eventually led to our 
mistake. 
<H5>  Japan Will Sink if It Indulges in an Inward-Looking Attitude </H5>
  The political leaders of the Meiji era turned their eyes to 
the international community, widening their mental horizon. For 
good or evil, they were conscious of being leaders on the road 
from feudalism to modernization. They controlled themselves as 
leaders although emotionally they were Japanese. This 
consciousness gave rise to the progress of the Meiji era. 
  Postwar politics came into being in the midst of the 
protection by the United States and during the confrontation 
between the two great camps -- the United States and the Soviet 
Union. No sooner had this framework been removed than Japan 
became unable to cope with the international community. 
Therefore, the Japanese way of thinking has not essentially 
changed -- Japan is inward-looking. 
  The reason I use the exaggerated phrase "the second opening 
of Japan" is that unless Japan can overcome the inward-looking 
period of 1980-1990 and guide itself again -- in a sense, like 
it did in the Meiji era -- with foreign countries within its 
view, in my view it will surely sink. 
  [Ueda] That requires powerful leadership, but are there 
necessary conditions for accepting such leadership? 
  [Ozawa] The Japanese have a strong tendency to revert to an 
inward-looking attitude typical of the Japanese. The Meiji 
Restoration produced such a change and such leaders through a 
sense of crisis, for Japan as it stood at that time would have 
become a colony under the imperialism of the Western powers. 
The Japanese people were aware of this and accepted it. The 
Meiji Restoration is a great revolution on a world scale. 
  However, the Japanese have lived within the narrow confines 
for thousands of years, and the moment their leaders die they 
lose their awareness and tend to become inward-looking. That is 
an easier way to live; therefore, they tend to evade directly 
dealing with problems such as international isues. That is the 
problem. 
  However, that does not make living difficult for the 
Japanese, nor is Japan in danger of being invaded because of 
external factors. Although the Japanese are well aware of the 
existence of problems, they fail to squarely confront them. 
Therefore, good leaders are thought to be men who are not exact 
but who are moderately affable and gentle. 
  Such a mood prevails not only in the political world, but 
also in companies, bureaucratic organizations, and everywhere. 
People dislike men who freely express themselves or freely 
exercise leadership. 
  [Ueda] Takashi Hara was different, was he not? 
  [Ozawa] Hara probably thought things as they existed at that 
time would not do. He considered what he should do for the next 
era. However, he fell because the Japanese could not keep up 
with him. Therein lies the difference between the people's 
awareness of that time and during the closing days of the 
Tokugawa government. Following the end of World War I, the 
Japanese indulged in the idea of both Japan being a great 
country and of the bubble economy. They had an incorrect idea 
of true democracy and became the ignorant crowd, shouting 
"democracy" and "culture." The people at that time could not 
yet accept a man like Takashi Hara who possessed powerful 
leadership and beliefs. 
  What the politicians should learn is that thereafter 
politics 
ceased to function and the awareness of the people declined, 
losing the possibility of future growth. In short, the people 
indulged in egocentric emotionalism, which is characteristic of 
the Japanese, and politics lost its responsibility, propelled by 
a slogan "Forward, forward! Go, go! Do not stop." I think the 
steering of politics at the turning point of history is very 
important. 
<H3>  The Inability To Issue Deficit-Covering Bonds Is Due to the 
Lack of Political Power </H3>
  [Ueda] There was a great recession early in the Showa era. 
With the outbreak of the Manchurian incident, the attention of 
the people was drawn to that, and party politics in Japan ceased 
to exist. Was it not true that politics could not overcome the 
recession? 
  [Ozawa] It was due to the absence of politicians who had not 
only knowledge of economic problems, but also vision, judgment, 
and leadership. Anyway, the Japanese are an extremely emotional 
people, but if politicians also form emotional judgments, that 
is the end of Japan. The role of politicians is to calmly draw 
objective conclusions no matter what the people say. 
  Politicians exist to form correct judgments at crucial 
times, 
even though they are asleep after the usual drinks of sake. Why 
can the Japanese not understand this despite the enormous 
sacrifices they suffered in their history? 
  [Ueda] The seriousness of the recession at that time cannot 
be compared with that of the current recession. The upturn of 
the economy began at the time of Finance Minister Korekiyo 
Takahashi following the collapse of the party cabinet due to the 
15th May incident. He expanded government finances by issuing 
deficit-covering bonds, which was also to raise military 
expenses for the Manchurian incident. He extricated Japan from 
the great recession through that means. We are deficient in 
ideas expressed by financiers or statesmen, are we not? 
  [Ozawa] We have exhausted every theory and wisdom. As you 
have said, if we adopt an inflationary policy by issuing 
deficit-covering bonds, without fail that will function as a 
kind of lever for economic recovery. However, we will fail if 
we stimulate business activity via a temporary munitions boom or 
in areas where demand is not constantly created. 
  The idea of issuing deficit-covering bonds is necessary. 
However, we must establish a comprehensive policy by which we 
can confirm that issuing bonds will lead to regular 
reproduction, or to the development of a new field, or to the 
accumulation of social capital; otherwise the idea of issuing 
bonds will be defective as a concrete plan. 
  My opinion is we can do it if we want to; to our regret, 
political power is not strong enough for that. 
  Conversely, the lack of political power means the people 
still do not have such awareness. The reason is because we are 
still rich. That makes a great difference. However, if we are 
placed in a situation where we are unable to eat starting 
tomorrow, the seriousness of the people's awareness will be 
quite different. 
  However, the people's understanding is increasing 
considerably. Therefore, I directly tell them about the problems 
of agriculture or rice. My belief is that if I talk to them, 
they will understand. Among the people, however, there is a 
feeling: "We understand, but the situation is not serious 
enough." 
  However weak that feeling may be, such feelings makes the 
politicians hesitant, which makes them liars in the end. That 
causes distrust in politics, bringing about adverse effects. 
<H3>  It Is Irresponsible for Enterprises To Ask for the 
Government's Help Without Making Efforts To Help Themselves </H3>
  [Ueda] You have said politics does not have the power to 
issue deficit-covering bonds. Does that refer to the present 
administration? 
  [Ozawa] No, not to the present administration. Even the 
administration of the Liberal Democratic Party is not much 
different from the present administration. 
  The awareness of the people will deepen if employment 
adjustment becomes more serious. Since the people have a vague 
sense of anxiety, they refrain from spending. They feel anxiety 
because they have not yet formed a clear view of the future, not 
because they are at death's door. 
  The people are merely tightening the purse strings; they 
do have money. The number of people who traveled abroad 
increased compared with that of last year. Although the total 
amount of travel expenses decreased, people went to places where 
the cost was moderate. 
  This is the case with enterprises, for more than half of the 
people in enterprises are still optimistic. They are not 
serious enough. For the last two or three years since the 
collapse of the bubble economy, I have said the current 
recession is a structural one, and that a small amount of fiscal 
expenditure or financial policy will never boost the economy. I 
told the same story to the "Keidanren" (Japan Federation of 
Economic Organizations) people, but they did not listen 
seriously to me. 
  [Ueda] The business community is complaining that politics 
is insensitive to the economy.... 
  [Ozawa] It is the enterprises which are insensitive to the 
situation. I said positively in my speech to the business 
community: "You are solely responsible for the bubble economy. 
You have had the audacity to say that economics is first rate 
and politics is third rate. Why does the first-rater come to 
the third-rater for help now? If you are a first-rater, do it 
yourself." 
  They are wholly responsible for themselves. Politics is 
responsible in that it failed to control the situation and did 
not have the proper economic perspective. However, it was they 
that pushed for doing so. 
  Whether in the automobile or other industries, they have 
increased the working force and equipment investment twofold, 
and are gasping for breath. That is their own doing. A little 
sober reflection will tell you that eternal high economic growth 
is impossible. 
  [Ueda] Which means they have no other recourse but 
self-help? 
  [Ozawa] No, self-help is just one means to an end. English 
words are much in vogue now, like "restructuring." They have to 
restructure themselves, with careful attention to their own 
foothold. Enterprises must restructure themselves so they can 
live not only under slow and stable growth, but also in a mature 
domestic society where demand consists of buying new items in 
place of those that are worn out. Enterprises must make an 
effort in every field, including personnel expenses and others. 
  In that case, the expansion of the economy will cease 
temporarily; therefore, aggregate demands must be somehow 
maintained in its place. Accordingly, government expenditures 
will be increased drastically, even if deficit-covering bonds 
are issued. 
  Since Japan is a third-rate country in stock matters, it has 
much to obtain -- such as its living environment, information, 
communication, housing, and the Shinkansen (a high-speed 
passenger railroad system). While maintaining aggregate demands 
for such items, we will accumulate stock. In the meantime, the 
business community will curtail itself, making itself slim. 
These two must be undertaken simultaneously. 
  The problem with the business community is that it is 
irresponsible, keeps its fatty diabetic constitution intact, 
asks the government for help, and asks the government to usher 
in a good age without any suffering on its part. That is asking 
too much, is it not? 
  There is a story about the use of public funds to write off 
bad debts held by financial institutions. It is not that I am 
against it. However, it is unreasonable for financial 
institutions to ask for the use of public funds to write off all 
their bad debts caused by the inflation of the bubble through 
their indiscriminate lending of money. Unless they reform 
themselves, there is no reason for the nation to provide funds 
for particular enterprises, and enterprises which have conducted 
irresponsible management at that. 
  However, it is quite another story if they say: "We will 
take responsibility by reducing our weight by half. All 
officers will resign. We will reduce our salaries by half. 
Therefore, allow us to use the nation's funds for the 
maintenance of a financial system and for the economy of the 
nation as a whole." 
<H3>  There Is a Danger of North Korea's Attacking Japanese 
Nuclear Power Plants With Conventional Missiles </H3>
  [Ueda] Concerning international problems, Takashi Hara saw 
that Japan should not go to war with the United States even if 
it was obliged to make concessions. Presently the tension 
between Japan and the United States is similar to what occurred 
then. 
  [Ozawa] The United States is still powerful. In addition, 
it has the potentiality for remaining a mighty power. 
  Looking back historically over the Japan-U.S. relationship, 
we find the Japan-U.S. relationship inevitably changes about ten 
years before the turning point in Japan. Therefore, Japan is 
always hit about ten years later. The trade friction between 
Japan and the United States has been brewing for nearly the past 
ten years. 
  The modernization of Japan was prodded by the United States, 
and with guns at that. It was the United States which 
restrained and checked Japan, and it was the United States which 
inflicted a crushing defeat on Japan. But it was also the 
United States which reconstructed Japan. We should give weight 
to the realities of this history. 
  [Ueda] Takashi Hara pointed out that "the Chinese problem is 
the U.S. problem" -- the interests of Japan and the United 
States will clash over China. 
  [Ozawa] That will hold true in the future. There is no 
change in that. The Russian problem will be attached to the 
Chinese problem, and Japan's interests will clash with U.S. 
interests over Chinese-Russian problems. The watertight liaison 
and cooperation between Japan and the United States are 
prerequisite to safety. Moreover, the North Korean problem will 
present the greatest threat to Japan. 
  [Ueda] From the military point of view, the attack on 
Japanese nuclear power plants with conventional missiles will 
have the same effect as atomic bombs. 
  [Ozawa] There is a fair possibility of that. Japan had 
better prepare for an attack in the belief there will be one. 
However, since the Japanese are happy-go-lucky, they will never 
think about it. 
  I have talked with a very influential American, and we 
completely agree on North Korea. 
  Concerning Japan's cooperation with other Asian nations, 
Japan's credibility is now such that no Asian nation will trust 
Japan once Japan's relationship with the United States is 
severed, because Japan has been doing nothing but robbing and 
earning without giving anything back. It is necessary for Japan 
to make steady efforts in that direction for generations to come. 
  [Ueda] The Japanese are unmindful, thinking everything will 
come out all right. 
  [Ozawa] The Japanese are a very happy-go-lucky people. 
(laughter) 
  [Ueda] With the international situation in a state of flux, 
it is necessary for politics to regain its centripetal force. 
However, there is a troublesome problem -- the problem of 
political activities and money. 
  [Ozawa] Money is everything nowadays, is it not? It is 
politicians who are responsible for developing such a tendency, 
but really good politics and politicians will be not be created 
unless the awareness and tendencies of the nation are changed. 
It is necessary for the nation to be conscious of this. We 
must take action before everything gets out of order. 
  For another, the Japanese are reluctant to bear the cost 
of politics in every sense. It is not that the people should 
entrust a lot of money to individual politicians; it is 
necessary for the people themselves to trim the cost of 
politics. But they must give necessary money to politicians. 
They are making a great fuss over politics without bearing any 
of its cost. 
  Politicians exist to steer Japan in the right direction at 
critical moments. Ignoring this, the people expect politicians 
to do trifles for them every day, like repairing the ditches 
behind their houses. Politicians are so busy rendering services 
to the people, they do not have time to think about Japan's 
future. 
  Politicians do not think about Japan's future unless they 
are 
required to do so, because they are most highly evaluated when 
they render trivial services to the people, like repairing 
ditches. Consequently, politics degenerates further and further. 
I think the people are responsible for that. I am being 
attacked because I always say such things. (laughter) 
  [Ueda] It is about time for you to come to the fore. 
  [Ozawa] I have not yet been asked to do that. The time is 
not ripe. Look at what the media is doing every day. All it 
does is find fault with me and heap criticism and slander on me. 
Its awareness of the seriousness of the situation is not enough. 
  [Ueda] Are you thinking about coming to the fore when the 
opportunity is ripe? 
  [Ozawa] It would be best if the time never came when it 
would be necessary for me to thrust myself forward. Then I do 
not have to be overly serious. 

