CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 27--The CPI(M) [Communist Party of 
India-Marxist] politburo today condemned the Pakistani 
government and its resolution on Kashmir placed before the 
United Nations Human Rights Commission at Geneva. It also 
accused the Clinton administration of attempting to pressurise 
the Indian Government. 
  "The latest statement by President Clinton endorsing 
Pakistan's charges about human rights violations in Kashmir is 
part of a calculated plan to pressurise the Indian Government," 
charged the CPI(M) general secretary, Mr. Harkishen Singh 
Surjeet, while addressing a press conference here today. "The 
effort is also to pit the people of India and Pakistan against 
each other," Mr. Surjeet said. 
  Briefing the press on the deliberations of the three-day 
Politburo meeting that concluded here yesterday, Mr. Surjeet 
reiterated his party's criticism against the Narasimha Rao 
Government, accusing it of following a `weak kneed' policy 
against the U.S. 
  "It is unfortunate that, while making diplomatic protests, 
the Narasimha Rao Government has not criticised the U.S. 
administration's stand on Kashmir either in the President's 
address or in the resolution adopted by both Houses of 
Parliament," said Mr. Surjeet recalling the note of 
clarification given by the CPI(M) MPs [members of Parliament] 
soon after Parliament adopting the historic resolution on 
Kashmir. 
  Logical outcome: Linking the foreign policy 
position to the economic policy, the Politburo statement, added 
the obvious by stating "this weak kneed stance is the logical 
outcome of the surrender to US pressures on the economic front 
and the indiscriminate opening to foreign capital." 
  The statement charged the Government of having done precious 
little "even after three months after the Hazratbal shrine 
crisis was defused." Cautioning the Government against "reliance 
on administrative measures alone," it urged for initiative 
towards a `political solution' to the Kashmir problem. 
  Taking stock of the economic situation, the Politburo 
reiterated its charges against the Congress(I) Government of 
showing gross contempt to parliamentary democracy by 
administering price hikes of essential commodities and petroleum 
products. Mr. Surjeet said the party would persist with its 
mobilisation of the people against the Government against the 
economic policies. 
  `Attack on working class': The decision by the 
Government to amend the labour laws, according to Mr. Surjeet 
`constituted a serious attack on trade union rights and the 
working class.' The Politburo had decided to mobilise large 
numbers for the proposed `march to Parliament' on April 5, Mr. 
Surjeet added. 
  Referring to the Ayodhya dispute and the ongoing hearing in 
Supreme Court on this case, the CPI(M) general secretary said 
his party maintained its opposition to the reference to the 
Supreme Court under Article 143 of the Constitution. "All cases 
connected with the dispute should be referred to the apex court 
for a judicial verdict under Article 138 (2) of the 
Constitution," he said. 
  He also said that his party "hoped that the Uttar Pradesh 
State government would take a stand before the Supreme Court 
similar to that taken by the West Bengal Government." 
  Accusing the Congress(I) of utilising defections to 
"engineer 
a majority in the Lok Sabha," Mr. Surjeet said "the reward of a 
Cabinet post to one of the defectors, Mr. Ram Lakhan Yadav, 
shows Mr. Narasimha Rao's blatant disregard for democratic norms 
and the spirit of the anti-defection laws." 

  -  The three day meeting of the Politburo, also discussed a 
whole range of issues, including the crisis engulfing the 
Karunakaran Government in Kerala and renewed its demand for the 
resignation of Mr. K. Karunakaran and his Cabinet, in the light 
of the CAG's [comptroller and auditor general] indictment on the 
palmolein oil import. 

    The meeting also discussed the party proposal to update the 
party programme, which was decided upon in the last congress of 
the CPI(M) held at Madras in January 1992. The Politburo had a 
joint session with the Programme Commission headed by Mr. 
Surjeet himself to discuss the preparation of a draft updating 
the programme of the party. 
  It was decided that the Politburo meet once again on to 
discuss threadbare the report of the Commission in March, before 
placing the draft in this regard to the Central Committee of the 
party, Mr. Surjeet said. 

