Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Amman -- His Majesty King Husayn Monday [28 March] 
linked Jordan's return to Middle East peace negotiations to 
lifting a three-year siege of the Port of al-'Aqabah and 
adopting a "new way of dealing with the Hashemite Kingdom of 
Jordan." 
  The King told the ambassadors of the five permanent members 
of the United Nations Security Council that Jordan's resumption 
of peace negotiations with Israel was contingent on the 
immediate resolving of this "completely unacceptable situation 
and adopting a new way of cooperating with the Hashemite Kingdom 
of Jordan." 
  A statement released by the International Press Office at 
the 
Royal Court said: "His Majesty King Husayn called to his office 
at the Royal Court today the ambassadors of the five permanent 
members of the United Nations Security Council to inform them in 
very clear terms of the pressures and aggravation Jordan faces 
due to the blockade imposed on the Port of al-'Aqabah. 
  "His Majesty said that since the outbreak of the Gulf 
crisis, 
the blockade has resulted in great losses with negative 
repercussions on the Jordanian economy, in addition to the 
suffering of Jordanian citizens and the losses endured by the 
commercial sector in Jordan. His Majesty said that it is odd 
that the such sanctions and such harassment are imposed solely 
on Jordan and not any other country in the region. 
  "His Majesty explained to the ambassadors that since the 
outbreak of the Gulf crisis naval bodies concerned with the 
implementation of the sanctions have inspected more than 1,700 
ships bound for the Gulf of Aqaba. The inspections failed to 
find any violations of the sanctions or of their cause or aim. 
His Majesty stressed that not only are these sanctions and the 
resulting harassments at odds with the historical role that 
Jordan has assumed in order to achieve security, stability and 
growth in the region, but also are a direct affront to Jordan's 
dignity and a violation of to rights. [sentence as published] 
  "His Majesty stressed that from now on the resumption of 
Jordan's involvement in the peace-making process to establish a 
just and lasting peace for the benefit of the entire region is 
contingent upon immediately addressing this completely 
unacceptable situation and on finding a new way of cooperating 
with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan." 
  Attending the meeting with King Husayn were Prime Minister 
'Abd al-Salam al-Majali, Royal Court Chief al-Sharif Zayd Bin 
Shakir and the King's Political advisor Marwan al-Qasim. 
  The interceptions are part of a U.S.-led effort to enforce 
the international sanctions that were imposed on Iraq after its 
August 1990 invasion of Kuwait. 
  Jordan, which has suffered large losses because of the 
sanctions against Iraq, has repeatedly complained of the 
problems the enforcement of the sanctions poses and suggested 
that sea searches be replace by less disruptive land inspection 
at the Port of al- 'Aqabah. 
  Washington said it was studying the proposal, which involves 
a neutral international body such as Lloyds register inspecting 
the cargo. 
  Since early this year, the interceptions of ships headed for 
al-'Aqabah have gone up, causing costly delays to Jordanian 
importers. 
  But the U.S. Navy denied the allegation. "There has been no 
change in guidelines and no change in our procedures," 
Lieutenant-Commander Bruce Cole, spokesman for U.S. Naval Forces 
Central Command headquaters in the Gulf was quoted as saying by 
the Associated Press. 
  But official figures show seven ships have been turned back 
or delayed for periods of up to four days this year, compared to 
20 in all of 1993. 
  Three vessels in March were given extra searches before 
docking, including demands to see every package, complaints of 
unclear mainfests and even a protest of "stinging bees in the 
haches of ships" shipping agents quoted by Reuter said. 
  The Lower House of Parliament last week urged the government 
not to return to the U.S.-backed Arab-Israeli peace talks before 
the siege of al-'Aqabah is lifted. 

