Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The International Monitoring Committee [CIS] has 
asked that measures be taken to ensure people's security during 
the 20 February election and the president has agreed. Civilian 
and military observers are to be deployed in sufficient numbers 
in the concerned constituencies for the second round of 
election. This was disclosed to the media today by the CIS 
chairman, Mr. Hermann Yameogo, who led his organization's 
delegation to a meeting with President Eyadema in Lome II. Mr. 
Yameogo regretted the assassination three days ago of a deputy 
from the Action Committee for Renewal party. Hermann Yameogo 
gives more details: 
  [Begin Yameogo recording] You are well aware of the fact 
that 
Togo has experienced tragic and painful events. The CIS took 
the opportunity to express the emotions felt following this 
tragic event. We came to hold talks with the head of state and 
tell him that we were deeply moved by that incident, because it 
tarnished a process that had gone smoothly during the first 
round of legislative elections. The head of state also 
expressed sorrow over these painful incidents. With his 
agreement, we decided to take all necessary measures to ensure 
security during the second round. In this regard, some very 
precise technical measures were agreed on and we will inform the 
opposition accordingly. 
  As for voter's cards, you know that the disappearance of 
some 
cards was reported in the Lome area. President Eyadema said 
that all efforts should be made to take technical measures that 
will prevent any fraud that at the end would be the (?loss) 
[words indistinct]. The head of state also agreed that all 
efforts should be made -- especially in the constituencies where 
opposition and government candidates are running neck and neck 
-- the [words indistinct] in order to make people feel more 
secure. It was decided to emphasize the security issue to 
reassure the opposition and enable them to go to the polls with 
greater confidence. This is in substance what has been decided 
with the consent of President Eyadema. In sum, security 
measures should be reinforced. Therefore precise technical 
measures were taken and we will inform the opposition in due 
course. We insisted we would like to see observers be properly 
deployed and find technical solutions to the disappearance of 
voter's cards. [end recording] 
  The discussions between President Gnassingbe Eyadema and the 
members of the CIS also tackled the issue of the neutrality to 
be observed by the elements of Force 93. More from Mr. Yameogo: 
  [Begin recording] [Yameogo] I would also like to stress the 
fact that President Eyadema agreed with the CIS to remind Force 
93 of its duty to remain neutral. It did so in the past and 
must continue thus to reassure people. This force is there and 
will assure the security of all. It is not there to influence 
the voters. It will play its role throughout the national 
territory. This decision was accepted by the CIS. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Do you think that the measures 
you just talked about will bring opposition candidates, who have 
said they would not participate in the campaign, back into the 
race? 
  [Yameogo] It should be said that -- just like the last time 
we held talks -- there was also some good will on the side of 
the opposition and it has never refused our suggestions. We 
believe that the measures that were taken this morning will 
reinforce security. We will meet members of the opposition and 
brief them on what the head of state said, and we do not doubt 
that there will good will on both sides. The most important 
thing here is the interest of Togo and it is essential that the 
legislative elections take place and that all factions are given 
guarantees to go to the polls. We think things look good. [end 
recording] 

