CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Damir Herceg: "The Wolves From Rijeka's West </F>
Point"] 
  [Text] Rijeka -- When the honor fell to Rijeka to get the 
9th Guard Brigade, many people asked themselves: How would they 
fill the ranks of that professional unit? It is after all 
well-known that people in Primorje have never been overly fond 
of the military uniform and weapons, but when it is a question 
of defense of the homeland, soldiers are a pride and an example. 
This has best been shown during the last three years of war on 
battlefields all over Croatia, from Kostajnica to Vukovar, but 
especially in the Lika theater. Finally, the young men from the 
Rijeka region have been the most numerous among the volunteers 
in the HOS [Croatian Defense Force], according to certain 
figures. 
  People in Rijeka are proud of their 9th Guard Brigade, of 
their Wolves, and now there are more and more from Primorje who 
want to join the ranks of the Wolves, that is, who want to 
become professional soldiers. It should be mentioned that life 
in the Rijeka region is not so bad that people would have to 
look to the uniform for financial security. In Rijeka, after 
all, in spite of all the troubles in the economy, it is still 
easier to find a job on water or land than in a majority of 
cities in Croatia. It is not just the money, then, that men from 
Rijeka are seeking in the ranks of the professional soldiers. 
  The training for selection of enrollees for all the guards 
brigades of the Croatian Army [HV] is conducted in the garrison 
on Trsat, which many call the Rijeka West Point, partly because 
of its fine location and partly because of the way in which the 
training is conducted. 
  Captain Stevo Prazic, a superb theoretician and pedagogue 
and 
still more superb fighter, is commander of training of 
candidates for selection on Trsat at the moment, so that his 
training is useful even to those who are war veterans. Another 
veteran of the Homeland War without whom the training for 
candidate selection is unthinkable is Lt. Svjetlana Doricic, 
psychologist, who is training officers and other men. At the 
beginning of the war many officers felt that they and the men 
had no need for a psychologist, least of all a woman, but only 
cannon. Today Svjetlana Doricic is probably the most respected 
person in the garrison on Trsat, and not only because of her 
looks, since the story is that many apply for training just to 
have a chance to talk to her. To round out the dominance of 
women in the training of candidates for selection there is also 
Dr. Mirjana Dosen. The basic precondition for someone to be able 
to begin training at all is to pass the medical examination and 
psychological testing. 
  The selection and training of candidates follow the NATO 
formula, and after 30 days of training the two sides can see 
whether a contract is to be signed or not. If either the 
Croatian Army or the candidate is dissatisfied, the person who 
has gone through the training receives payment for that month 
and returns to civilian life, and, if he is employed, to his 
enterprise. 
  They say on Trsat that the important thing is not the 
specialized training and rating one intends to pursue, but 
rather the basic thing is to have your domovnica 
[certificate of origin] and to be between the ages of 18 and 35. 
Good communication has been established with employment security 
bureaus for the region of Rijeka and Istria, where conversations 
are organized with young men who are unemployed. They are 
informed about the advantages of serving in the HV, and after 
these conversations many find it much easier to decide to go to 
Trsat. 
  We visited one company of candidates during training. We 
found them on the exercise ground, and from what we saw, the 
uninformed might think that some Croatian modern version of the 
Normandy landing was being filmed. First Lt. Alen Valjan, a 
Rambo with the face of a child, is the commander of these lads; 
there are three groups of candidates in training: young 
soldiers, veterans of the Homeland War, and civilians, and it is 
up to him to get that "orchestra" in tune. The candidates have a 
reinforced diet, but after 30 days no one any longer has a belly 
hanging over his belt. It would seem that the older and 
"heavier" men are somewhat more concerned about getting in shape. 
  It is evident that the boys are happy with their equipment 
and the way the training is being conducted, since the uniforms, 
berets, weapons, and equipment they are wearing and carrying now 
are for the present those which they have had occasion to see 
only in U.S. war films. Some of them have even pasted the name 
of their girlfriend on their gun, so now we do not know whether 
they like the rifle better because of their girl or the other 
way about. 
  This year has been proclaimed the Year of the Wolf, since 
that species is threatened with extinction; to judge from what 
we saw on Trsat, the Rijeka 9th Guards Brigade will get most of 
the young Wolves. 

