Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Islamic Conference Organization [ICO] has 
demanded immediate lifting of arms embargo against 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. The call was made in a joint declaration 
adopted at the end of a special ministerial meeting of the ICO 
contact group in Geneva. 
  Giving details of the declaration, Foreign Minister Sardar 
Asif Ahmad Ali said: 
  [Begin Asif Ali recording] The declaration stresses that the 
legitimacy and success of the peace process would be ensured 
only if it aims at preserving the independence, territorial 
integrity, sovereignty, and unity of the Republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. The declaration reiterates the well-known 
position of the Islamic countries that the arms embargo against 
Bosnia is contrary to Article 51 of the UN Charter and cannot be 
applied to that republic. The declaration also expresses concern 
over the increasingly volatile situation in (?Sanjak), Kosovo, 
and Vojvodina. It calls for the maintenance and strengthening 
of the sanctions against Serbia until a comprehensive and final 
settlement is achieved. 
  On the question of NATO air strikes against Serbian 
positions, the ministers urged that this decision be 
implemented, as already authorized by the Security Council. [end 
recording] 
  Sardar Asif Ahmad Ahmad Ali called on the Bosnian president, 
Alija Izetbegovic, and discussed with him the latest situation 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The foreign minister briefed the Bosnian 
president about the efforts being made by the ICO contact group 
for halting Serbian aggression against the Bosnian people. The 
foreign minister conveyed the good wishes of the president and 
prime minister of Pakistan to the Bosnian leader, who deeply 
appreciated the support extended to them by Pakistan. 
  Sardar Asif Ahmad Ali also held talks with the Iranian 
foreign minister, Mr. Ali Akbar Velayati, on matters of common 
interest as well as bilateral relations. Both the foreign 
ministers exchanged views on the situation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kashmir, and Afghanistan. 

