Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From BTA's 11 March "Press Review"] </F>
  [Excerpt] Sofia, March 11 (BTA) -- Today's press 
front-pages comments on the cardiac operation Prime Minister 
Berov is to undergo. Prof. Berov had a heart attack on March 8, 
at about 2 a.m. [1200 GMT], and was taken to hospital. He will 
be operated to have a bypass implanted, DUMA and 24 CHASA say. 
TRUD quotes Military Medical Academy Head Colonel Prof. Milan 
Petrov as saying the prime minister could be either operated 
within 15 days or get back to work first and have the operation 
on a later date. The Constitution does not specify the period 
during which the prime minister can be away from work neither 
does it answer a number of questions pertaining to the powers of 
the person sitting in for the prime minister (Deputy Prime 
Minister Evgeni Matinchev in this case), OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK 
writes. According to anonymous sources cited by this daily, the 
activity the acting prime minister is to perform are purely 
administrative. DEMOKRATSIYA, too, quotes anonymous sources as 
saying the Constitutional Court should be approached to rule on 
the powers of the person replacing the prime minister and thus 
fill in the gap in the effective legislation. New Policy Centre 
leader Dimitur Ludzhev yesterday called on acting Prime Minister 
Matinchev to resign, 24 CHASA reports. Prime Minister Berov is 
unlikely to return to politics, this daily quotes Mr. Ludzhev 
and goes on to say that Prof. Berov intends to hand in his 
resignation in case he is unable to soon return to his duties. 
STANDART NEWS for its part quotes Deputy Prime Minister 
Matinchev as saying the relations between himself and the other 
deputy prime minister, Valentin Karabashev, would not 
destabilize the cabinet's performance simply because there is no 
conflict between them. According to Mr. Ludzhev, to be ruled by 
Evgeni Matinchev for Bulgaria would be the same as to be ruled 
by Todor Zhivkov (this country's former communist dictator), 
DUMA says. Dimitur Ludzhev pledged to introduce a vote of no 
confidence in the cabinet headed by Mr. Matinchev when Prof. 
Berov recuperates. According to DUMA, he also predicted 
elections to be held this autumn. OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK quotes 
Mr. LUDZHEV as alleging Evgeni Matinchev to be a former 
communist functionary. The Podkrepa Labour Confederation (one 
of Bulgaria's two major trade unions) does not support Prof. 
Berov's cabinet, 24 CHASA learned from a forum this labour 
organization held in Stara Zagora (southern Bulgaria). [passage 
omitted] 

