Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [News Report: "Time for Sikhs' Independence Has </F>
Arrived--Gurucharan Singh"] 
  [Text] Lahore (Interview by Ahmed Nadim and Aqil 
Ahmed)--The day India attacks Pakistan will be the day Khalistan 
will be created. This was revealed by Gurucharan Singh, 
president of International Sikh Youth Federation of Norway and 
member of Council of Khalistan Advisory Committee, and Joga 
Singh, leader of the Khalistan movement in a talk with the daily 
MUSAWAT. They said that there has been no decrease in the 
intensity of the Khalistan movement. It was an Indian 
conspiracy. The government first infiltrated the organization 
with its agents posing as Sikhs and gave rise to the movement. 
Later, it pulled back its agents to sabotage the movement. 
However, the Indian government's conspiracy was unsuccessful and 
the campaign for an independent Khalistan is still going on. 
They expressed hope that Khalistan will be established after 
five years. They said that the Indian government always sends 
the Sikhs soldiers to the front in each battle so that the 
number of Sikhs is reduced. The government is afraid that these 
soldiers might form the Khalistan Army upon their discharge. 
They further said that Hindus dressed as Sikhs are in the 
forefront when Muslim shrines are debased so that Sikhs and 
Muslims would hate each other. The Indian government does not 
want to see Muslims and Sikhs united. They said that Sikhs and 
Muslims love each other. The Muslims and Sikhs took out joint 
procession in Norway to show their displeasure at the 
destruction of the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya and the siege of 
Hazratbal. They said that Indians raise the slogan of "Hindu, 
Hindi, Hindustan," which means that India is for the Hindus 
only, and those who want to live here must become Hindus. The 
Sikhs leaders said that India has the label of being a 
democracy, but there is no such thing as democracy there. In 
answer to a question, they said the issue of an independent 
nation can be raised in the United Nations. They added that they 
have no connection with terrorists and all terrorism is part of 
the Indian government's conspiracy. The Sikhs are working toward 
removing this accusation. They said that the Indian government 
put Pakistani weapons in police stations so that it can accuse 
Pakistan of helping the terrorists. They said that India will 
disintegrate just like the Soviet Union and Khalistan will be 
established. They said that the constitution and the map of 
Khalistan will be drawn after it is established. Is is certain 
that the East Punjab region of India where Punjabi is spoken 
will be part of Khalistan. Khalistan will be a democratic nation 
where the government will be established by elections and 
politics will be under religion. All minorities in Khalistan 
will have full rights and freedom to practice their religion. 
There will be the policy of open border and free trade between 
Khalistan and Pakistan. They said that their leaders were 
victims of Hindu conspiracies. Quaid-i Azam [Jinnah] was wise to 
get a separate country, Pakistan, for himself while we are still 
slaves. Now the war will continue until Khalistan is 
established. Sardar Gurucharan Singh said the minorities in 
India are treated unfairly and no one has religious freedom. The 
religious places of minorities are being violated, women are 
raped, and innocent children are killed. The Indian government 
does not follow secularism; it is also violating human and moral 
rights. Mentioning the Indian government's raid on the Golden 
Temple, he said that this attack was part of an international 
conspiracy. This attack was launched when the Sikhs were 
celebrating a religious day. More than 13,000 Sikh women and 
innocent children were killed in this raid. Similarly, the Babri 
Masjid was violated in December 1992, followed by killings of 
Muslims. Massacre of the minorities is a part of the Indian 
policy. Whenever the government wants to kill someone, it first 
declares him a terrorist. This way, it calls the freedom 
fighters in Kashmir terrorists. They declared their support for 
Kashmir's efforts for independence and said that the Muslims and 
Sikhs should unit to free Khalistan and Kashmir. Referring to 
the Indian government's atrocities, they said that raping women 
and killing young men in police confrontations have become a 
common occurrence in Punjab. Thousands of people in Kashmir and 
Punjab have been declared terrorists and then jailed. Their 
homes are attacked, the Indian police mass rapes young girls, 
and the young men who try to protest are killed. They said that 
during the British rule, Sikh, Muslim, and Hindu youth who 
opposed the police were labeled terrorists, similarly, the 
Indian government also calls anyone who supports freedom a 
terrorist. In answer to a question, they said that the Indian 
government prepared fake' Sikhs to gave a bad name to the 
freedom fighters. They are asked to commit atrocities and the 
people get the impression that the freedom fighters are involved 
in illegal activities. Similarly, [the Indian government] 
dresses its troops in Pakistani uniforms, carrying Pakistani 
weapons, and have them involved in various incidents to accuse 
Pakistan of them later. All this is done by Indian agents, 
however. They said that Quaid-i Azam did not fall prey to Hindu 
tricks in 1947, and established a separate nation, Pakistan. We 
were fooled by the Hindus and are still their slaves. However, 
we will not remain slaves for long. We will not repeat our 
leaders' mistakes. They said that when a Hindu assassinated 
Mahatma Gandhi, the whole nation was shocked, and when Indira 
Gandhi was assassinated by a Sikh, 25,000 Sikhs were killed in 
one day in Delhi only. They said that operations to control 
situations in Srinagar, Sri Lanka, and Babri Masjid are carried 
out by Sikhs troops to create hatred between Muslims and Sikhs. 
The Sikhs have risen now and will continue their struggles for 
freedom side-by-side with the Muslims. They said that the Indian 
Government had used Sikhs in the 1965 and 1971 wars, and tried 
to kill two birds with one stone--to reduce the Sikhs forces and 
to make the Muslims hate Sikhs. The Sikhs now understand this 
conspiracy. While answering a question, he expressed the hope 
that after Khalistan is established, its relations with Pakistan 
will be friendly. We share a common language and culture. They 
appealed to the Muslims all over the world to support the Sikhs 
in their struggle for freedom. They called for Sikh efforts in 
India to increase until freedom is won. The final victory will 
be ours and Khalistan will definitely be established. 

