BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on economic activities monitored through 7 April. 
  Tax collection in March fell 4 percent with respect to 
February, and 3.7 percent with respect to the estimate for the 
month. Official sources state that 3.57 billion pesos was the 
target, while only 3.44 billion were received. This sum is 
nevertheless 11.2 percent above the figure for March 1993. 
(Buenos Aires BUENOS AIRES HERALD in English 5 Apr 94 p 5) 
  The government's railway privatization policy picked up 
steam 
on 1 April, when the Belgrano Norte and San Martin metropolitan 
rail services were handed over to their new operators. The 
Belgrano Norte line was handed over to Ferrovias SAC, which will 
run the railway for the next 10 years. Ferrovias will be 
receiving government subsidies of $150 million over the life of 
the concession to make new investments. 
  The San Martin line will be run by the Transportes 
Metropolitanos Gral San Martin SA consortium (TMS). The new 
operators will have to invest $70 million during the 10-year 
concession with government subsidies of $10.9 million. (Buenos 
Aires BUENOS AIRES HERALD in English 2 Apr 94 p 5) 
  The World Bank and the Economy Ministry signed loan 
agreements for $3.3 billion covering the next three years. The 
loans will cover food, child education, reform of the provincial 
economies, and the environment. According to Economy Ministry 
sources, $800 million will be spent on bringing the provincial 
economies up to date, and $750 million for education and rural 
poverty plans. The funds will be administered by the World 
Bank. (Buenos Aires BUENOS AIRES HERALD in English 2 Apr 94 p 5) 
  According to data disclosed today by the National Institute 
of Statistics and Census, the Consumer Price Index was up by 0.1 
percent in March, while wholesale prices and construction costs 
rose by 0.2 percent. Retail prices have edged up by 5.2 percent 
over the last 12 months. Accrued inflation since the Argentine 
peso was pegged to the U.S. dollar is 53.2 percent. (Buenos 
Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1957 GMT 6 Apr 94) 

