BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 19 May. 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  On 17 May, 10,000 metric tons of oil from the Madre de Deus 
terminal of the Mataripe refinery contaminated beaches in 
Salvador State and the northern coast of Bahia State. The 
Environment Resources Center hold the Brazilian Petroleum 
Corporation responsible. This is the second time the Todos os 
Santos Beach has been contaminated in 10 days. (Rio de Janeiro O 
GLOBO in Portuguese 18 May 94 p 9) 
  Lead pollution has caused the deaths of approximately 50 
head 
of cattle and horses in Pindorama, in Sao Paulo State. Analysis 
showed a high concentration of lead in the kidneys of the 
animals. The State Basin Sanitation Engineering Company has set 
late June as the deadline for the Incometal company, which is 
responsible for the pollution, to install pollution control 
equipment. (Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 19 May 
94 p A12) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  The Central Peru Mining Enterprise and the Huaron, El 
Brocal, 
and Animon mining companies are seriously contaminating the 
Junin Lake located between the Pasco and Junin Departments. 
They are dumping chemical waste and metals like zinc, copper, 
gold and silver into the lake through the San Juan and Huayllay 
Rivers. The pollution affects 80 percent of the lake which 
measures some 1,184 square kilometers. Nearly 120 species of 
birds used to populate the lake during their annual migratory 
cycle. Today not one species remains. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in 
Spanish 30 Apr 94 p 15) 
  Thousands of fish died last weekend as a result of the waste 
contaminating the beach at the residential zone of Santo Domingo 
in Pisco region. Peruvian researcher Ronald Woodman terms this 
"an ecological crime" and notes that pollution has affected this 
region for many years. He said it may endanger the Paracas 
National Reserve, near Pisco. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1924 GMT 9 
May 94) 
  The Information and Education Center for the Prevention of 
Drug Abuse has reported that coca growing expansion has caused 
the deforestation of approximately 70,000 hectares of the 
Peruvian Amazon. This represents 10 percent of all 
deforestation since it began early this century. Chemicals used 
by coca growers to process cocaine base in Huallaga are 
seriously affecting the ecosystem because large amounts of waste 
from maceration pits installed near rivers are contaminating the 
waters and exterminating many species. Approximately 37 million 
liters of kerosene, 37 million liters of sulphuric acid, 16,000 
metric tons of lime, and 16,000 metric tons of toilet paper have 
been used to process cocaine paste. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in 
Spanish 9 May 94 p 8) 
<H5>  Uruguay </H5>
  An accident in the oil refinery plant owned by the National 
Administration of Fuels, Alcohol, and Portland Cement, on 14 May 
contaminated the Montevideo beach. Approximately 400,000 liters 
of liquid asphalt spilled into the River Plate as a result of a 
fault in a tank at the La Teja plant at one end of the port of 
Montevideo. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2149 GMT 14 May 94) 
  Manuel Romay, the housing, land improvement and environment 
minister, opened a seminar in Montevideo on 16 May. The seminar 
deals with substances harmful to the ozone layer. He said that 
in face of the increasing deterioration of the ozone layer, the 
Housing, Land Improvement, and Environment Ministry will control 
the use of substances harmful to the ozone layer, including the 
creation of the "Ozone Friend" seal which will identify products 
that lack toxic substances. (Montevideo LA MANANA in Spanish 17 
May p 10) 

