Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, March 22 (YONHAP) -- The five 
permanent members of the UN Security Council met Tuesday to put 
the finishing touches to a resolution due next week demanding 
that North Korea accept complete nuclear inspections. 
  Representatives from China, Russia, the United States, 
France 
and Britain held unofficial consultations in the afternoon. 
Council President Jean Bernard Merrimer, French ambassador to 
the United Nations, said after the meeting that they had begun 
to deal with the North Korean nuclear problem but that the 
resolution under discussion contained no sanctions. 
  In essence, the U.S.-prepared resolution calls on North 
Korea 
to immediately invite International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
experts to fulfill inspection requirements. 
  It says the council has decided to consider additional steps 
if necessary, hinting at sanctions in veiled language to win the 
approval of North Korea's longstanding ally, China. 
  The council adopted a resolution last May after Pyongyang 
announced in March that it was bolting the nuclear 
non-proliferation treaty (NPT) to retaliate for IAEA inspection 
demands. 
  The draft of the second resolution emerged this week after 
the IAEA, following two weeks in North Korea, ruled it was not 
permitted to conduct a full inspection by Pyongyang and was thus 
unable to verify that North Korea had not diverted nuclear 
material for non-peaceful uses. 
  The resolution is expected to be adopted by consensus early 
next week after IAEA Director-General Hans Blix reports Thursday 
on where the situation now stands. 
  Five articles under the resolution ask the IAEA 
director-general to negotiate re-entry of the IAEA monitoring 
team into North Korea and to report the results to the council 
as soon as possible. 
  It urges South and North Korea to discuss implementing their 
agreement to denuclearize the Korean peninsula and asks all 
involved nations to help solve the problem. 
  The draft highlights the role of inter-Korean dialogue, 
saying the council reaffirms the importance of the agreement on 
denuclearization. 
  The resolution does not include harsh expressions such as 
"warn" or "sanctions," apparently in deference to China, which 
advocates diplomatic means and opposes sanctions. 
  But it leaves room for future action by suggesting the 
council's readiness to take additional steps. 
  Officials here said China did not express any specific 
opinions during the session. 

