BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 18 KYODO -- Japan's top nuclear policy 
board unveiled a plan Wednesday [18 May] to slow down remarkably 
its plutonium use for nuclear recycling, facing criticism from 
abroad and domestic circles that Tokyo may develop nuclear arms 
out of the substance. 
  The Atomic Energy Commission has worked on revising Japan's 
long-term nuclear energy policy, in which the country's 
plutonium use would be considerably delayed from the current 
program. 
  Aside from the criticism, the changes in the policy are 
being 
made as it has become less necessary for Japan to hastily make 
use of plutonium energy as prospects for future uranium supplies 
have brightened, officials said. 
  The committee headed by Science and Technology Agency chief 
Mikio Omi will draw up a final plan by the end of June, they 
said. 
  The new program requires Japan to reprocess spent nuclear 
fuel as the need arises so that excess plutonium would not be 
produced, and to store excess spent nuclear fuel for a long 
period, the officials said. 
  Under the current plan set in June 1987, spent nuclear fuel 
would be swiftly recycled into plutonium and be reused. 
  The new policy does not change the government's fundamental 
stance that it is indispensable for Japan to establish a nuclear 
energy recycling system as the country has only scarce energy 
resources, they said. 
  Another point of the plan, to recycle all of the country's 
spent nuclear fuel, is also kept intact, they said. 
  Japan will proceed with only limited nuclear recycling for 
the moment, however, including some recycling of plutonium in 
light water reactors, they said. 
  The country's long-term nuclear energy policy was drawn up 
for the first time in 1956 and is revised every five years by 
the committee. 
  The current program calls for Japan to put into operation a 
reprocessing plant in the village of Rokkasho, Aomori 
Prefecture, now under construction and expected to be completed 
by around 2010. 
  But the new policy cites that the scale and other plans on 
the plant will be decided by 2010, the officials said. 
  Japan's only reprocessing plant is being operated in 
Tokai-Mura, Ibaraki Prefecture, and the Rokkasho plant would be 
the second in operation. 
  The Tokai-Mura plant has had frequent problems and has not 
begun full operation. The delay in operation of the Rokkasho 
plant would leave Japan with large quantities of spent nuclear 
fuel. 
  But Japan will store the fuel until the country is able to 
recycle in the future, they said. 
  Japan will also back down from its current policy on 
development of fast breeder reactors, they said. The planned 
start of construction of a demonstration fast breeder reactor 
will be delayed from the late 1990s to the early 2000s, they 
said. 
  The launch of a commercial fast breeder reactor was not 
changed from the current target of around 2030. But fast 
breeder reactors will be consistent with light water reactors 
under the new plan, in comparison with the current policy in 
which they are placed as Japan's future main reactors, they said. 
  Also, Japan will not breed plutonium as long as fast breeder 
reactors are at the experimental level, the officials said. 
  Japan's prototype fast breeder reactor "Monju" reached 
criticality in April, the point at which the reactor's 
fissionable material is capable of sustaining a chain reaction 
at a constant level. 
  Monju, in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, can breed more 
plutonium 
than it consumes, causing several countries abroad to express 
concern that Japan may use the substance for future nuclear 
armament. 
  As a result of the changes in fast breeder reactor 
development, Japan's amounts of both supply and demand of 
plutonium by 2010 would be reduced to between 69 and 79 tons, 
the officials said. 
  The current plan said the amount of the supply would be 85 
tons and demand 80-90 tons. 

