BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 22 KYODO -- Finance Minister Hirohisa 
Fujii said Wednesday he contacted other G-7 major nations when 
the dollar plunged overnight in New York, but refused to comment 
on why noticeable joint actions like in May were not taken. 
  "We were and are in close contact (with other Group of Seven 
major nations)," Fujii told a press meeting in reference to the 
dollar's temporary fall below 100 yen for the first time in the 
postwar period. 
  Asked why G-7 nations did not move jointly to defend the 
fall 
below that level, as was done in May, Fujii said he could not 
comment on details of the talks, and simply stressed that the 
G-7 accord to stem excessive currency volatility remains 
unchanged. 
  When the dollar plunged in May, nearing the 100 yen level, 
G-7 nations stepped jointly into the markets, and in an unusual 
move U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen issued a statement 
confirming the concerted intervention. 
  Fujii declined to comment on whether G-7 nations should 
renew 
the message, and noted, "let me just say that we are in close 
contact." 
  As for Japan, the finance minister said he will take "firm 
actions" to stem the yen's rise, toning up his comments from 
"appropriate and timely measures." 
  Describing the currency movements as "speculative and 
rapid," 
he said, "it is bad not only for that nation but also for the 
world economy." 
  Fujii also reiterated that the yen's rise is the major 
concern along with labor conditions for the Japanese economy, 
which is moving toward a recovery. 
  Asked about monetary and fiscal policies given the yen's 
rise, Fujii said there will be no changes on the fiscal side, 
and his ministry will continue pursuing the already-launched 
measures. 
  Monetary policies are for the Bank of Japan to decide, he 
noted, refusing to comment. 
  He referred particularly to the February 15.25 trillion yen 
stimulus package, which included 5.5 trillion yen in income tax 
cuts for the current fiscal year, and the fiscal 1994 budget 
poised to pass the Diet soon after a long delay. 
  On full-fledged tax reform promised in the March 
market-opening package, Fujii repeated his call on the 
government and the ruling parties to finalize the reform bills 
by the end of the month with concrete scale and dates for 
permanent tax cuts and an offsetting consumption tax hike. 
  The government's Tax Commission and a coalition forum on 
Tuesday issued separate reports on the tax reform, with both 
leaving out concrete figures and dates for later. 
  Political uncertainties are mounting, however, with the 
largest opposition Liberal Democratic Party set to submit a 
no-confidence motion against the minority cabinet of Prime 
Minister Tsutomu Hata, which could cause further delay in the 
tax reform process. 
  On deregulation, also promised in the March package, Fujii 
said his ministry is ready to present "appropriate" steps. 

