BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 2 Apr (DPA) -- The more than 2 million 
residents of Havana awoke today to the unpleasant news that 
electrical outages (blackouts) will be maintained because of 
technical difficulties and a lack of fuel. The power 
interruption plan has shut down electrical power for 6-8 hours a 
day over the past few months, increasing to 10 hours on 
weekends. These power interruptions have caused complaining and 
irritation among the population. 
  The state Union of Electrical Transmissions and Distribution 
Enterprises [UETDE] today reported that the annoying "blackouts" 
will continue for the next few months because of generator 
breakdowns at many electrical power plants. Such breakdowns 
diminish the generating capacity of the national electrical 
system. The enterprise said the scarcity of fuel at the 10 
October Plant, located in Nuevitas about 600 km east of Havana, 
is "temporary." A lack of fuel prompted the plant to operate at 
a reduced capacity 26 through 31 March. The UETDE, however, 
noted that this "low generating capacity" will continue over the 
next few days, including the weekend; therefore, the schedule of 
power outages will continue to be adjusted. The regular outage 
schedule, which is adjusted according to the conditions within 
each of the 14 provinces, has been in effect for the past three 
years in an effort to conserve fuel. 
  Cuba's electrical power plants are being maintained with 
national petroleum, which is very heavy and has a high sulfur 
content. This causes frequent breakdowns and repairs. Up to 
1989, Cuba received some 13 million tons of oil annually from 
the former Soviet Union in exchange for sugar. The suspension of 
the Soviet crude supply triggered a partial standstill in Cuban 
industry and transportation, as well as a significant weakening 
of the national power system. According to unofficial figures, 
Cuba currently receives less than 6 million tons of oil annually 
at international market prices. Most of this oil comes through 
intermediaries, which also increases prices. 

