Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By He Jun: "Zou Launches Huge Price Probe"] </F>
  [Text] Setting up a price-control system is a key and 
urgent task in China's drive to develop a market economy, said 
Vice-Premier Zou Jiahua as he announced a nationwide price 
inspection in Beijing yesterday. 
  Zou urged central and local governments to make every effort 
to restrain price hikes. 
  And he added: "To ease the controls on some prices during 
economic reform does not mean we should let all the prices go 
adrift." 
  The massive price inspection, which is to start immediately, 
has been ordered by the State Council in a bid to ease 
inflationary pressure which has been mounting since late last 
year, said government officials. 
  China's annual inflation rate was 13 per cent in 1993, but 
the figure in 35 large and medium-sized cities shot up to 23.3 
per cent in January this year. 
  The central government has pledged to keep this year's 
inflation rate below 10 per cent. 
  Zou told a nationwide telephone conference that the key to 
checking rises was balancing supply and demand around the 
country, while developing sound price controls. 
  He urged governments at all levels to stop market demand 
expanding too far. 
  This could be done with rigid control of money supply and 
capital investment and by improving the production and supply of 
people's daily necessities, said Zou. 
  He stressed that, price reforms should be carried out 
strictly according to the State Council's schedule, so as to 
reduce any shocks for consumers. 
  Temporary price limits would be introduced to control major 
fluctuations in the price of vital goods and services, he said. 
  He also stressed that a comprehensive system to regulate 
prices should be established, which would include setting up 
reserves for some key agricultural products, a grain risk fund 
and food price fund. 
  The inspection will start, later this month and is expected 
to get results by the end of June, said Chen Jinhua, Minister of 
the State Planning Commission. 
  It will investigate unauthorized price increases imposed on 
goods and services by enterprises, private businesses and 
government institutions since last June, said Chen. 
  The inspection will also be looking for serious price 
violations dating back to June, 1992, he added. 
  Some enterprises have taken advantage of finance, tax and 
exchange rate reforms brought in at the end of last year to 
arbitrarily raise the price of their products and services in 
violation of government regulations. 
  The inspections aim to root out corruption, said Chen. 
  The probe will also seek out other violations such as 
unauthorized rises in the prices of public transport, commercial 
services and agricultural production materials such as chemical 
fertilizers, plastic covers, pesticides and diesel oil. 
  Chen pledged violators would be severely punished, 
especially 
those who attempt to disrupt the inspection. He encouraged 
people to report such cases to the authorities. 

