BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President Fidel Castro with participants </F>
in the 15th International Tourism Convention in Varadero on 20 
May -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Castro] [passage indistinct] What is better? To 
have them speak first? 
  [Unidentified speaker] Commander, I suggest that you answer 
some of their questions. 
  [Castro] This is like arriving to take a test without having 
studied the subject. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Professors do not have to study the 
subject. 
  [Castro] That is so for professors, but I have been a 
student 
all my life and have always felt like a student whenever I have 
been before an audience. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Commander, I am from Argentina's 
Tele-C News... 
  [Castro, interrupting] Yes, but the question from Argentina 
was left unfinished. [laughter] 
  [Unidentified speaker] I am always on the way. Commander... 
  [Castro, interrupting] Let me stand. I cannot see who is 
speaking. [applause] 
  [Unidentified speaker] Commander, I wanted to ask for the 
[words indistinct] of Argentina: What role do you believe 
tourism plays for Cuba at this historic junction? 
  [Castro] I believe that for everyone [words indistinct]. I 
hope it will play a special role and must say sincerely that we 
are prioritizing it while maintaining other sectors, despite 
everything bad and good tourism is said to bring. I say, as 
some say, because we do not know anything about it. We are now 
beginning to learn. In general, I must stress that I have seen 
good things. I do not know if tourism is categorized as very 
good, outstanding, good, regular, fair, or bad. I have yet to 
see the bad tourism category. Rather, I have seen tourists 
falling into the outstanding and good categories. 
  Anything that helps the economy today is enormously 
important 
to Cuba. This is one of the most influential sectors. This 
sector has maintained a growth rate of a little over 30 percent 
annually. Our future success will depend heavily on our ability 
to work and, particularly, on our ability to attain your 
cooperation worldwide. 
  I believe we have the potential. I believe we have great 
tourism potential and an educated people. We have a highly 
developed spirit of hospitality, as well as the will to do 
things right. 
  However, I will answer your question specifically by saying 
that tourism occupies one of the topmost places at this historic 
junction in the country's life and finances. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Thank you. 
  [BBC correspondent Rose Hays, in English with 
passage-by-passage translation into Spanish] I have been at the 
Varadero convention for a week now. There have been many 
debates on tourism industry profits. It is said that right now 
it has probably reached a phase where tourism profits are 
surpassing sugar industry profits. It has been predicted that 
the tourism industry will surpass sugar as Cuba's main source of 
revenue. Do you agree? 
  [Castro] Yes, at least that is our hope. We hope the tourism 
industry will overcome the sugar industry. I have been 
pondering this. The large-scale sugar industry and tourism seem 
to be two difficult things to reconcile. We have almost 11 
million people and a little over 110,000 square kilometers of 
land. I believe we can do both things right. We have hundreds 
of kilometers of beach and thousands of kilometers of coast, 
some of it nestled between the sea and the mountains. In other 
words, we have great tourism potential. However, we still have 
great sugar potential. 
  Other industries certainly tend to surpass the sugar 
industry 
in modern times. For example, Puerto Rico produced 1 million 
tons of sugar about 30 years ago yet does not produce enough 
sugar today to satisfy national demand. Many sugar fields were 
used to grow other crops, to meet urban growth demands, or to 
establish industrial parks. Above all, the sugar industry is 
very difficult and entails extremely hard work. 
  The introduction of slavery in the Caribbean was followed 
by the development of the sugar industry in the tropical heat. 
It is such hard work that the native population was practically 
unable to do it. This is what gave rise to the macabre idea of 
enslaving Africans to make them work in the fields here, in the 
tropics, because they were better suited to that hard work in 
sugarcane, as well coffee, although coffee is not as hard. 
Sugarcane was the hardest crop because the harvesting and 
weeding had to be done by hand. However, the sugarcane harvest 
demands great effort even if you improve working and living 
conditions. Also, it has a cyclic nature. It does not guarantee 
year-long jobs for everyone. This results in a large emigration 
of the labor force from the sugar fields to other activities. 
  Slavery was allegedly abolished at the turn of the century, 
yet tens of thousands of Caribbean people emigrated from 
Jamaica, Haiti, and other Caribbean islands following the great 
boom the sugar industry experienced after the U.S. intervention, 
when hundreds of millions of dollars -- which had a greater 
value then -- were invested to develop the sugar industry. A 
new form of slavery ensued because the Jamaicans and Haitians 
who came to Cuba to work in the sugarcane lived under similarly 
harsh conditions. It is very hard work. 
  I have noticed that sugar production declines as tourism 
develops in the Caribbean islands. The work force transfers to 
tourism. There are islands of every size, from 400 square 
kilometers to 1,000 square kilometers and every other size in 
between. I have noticed the incompatibility of these 
industries. Boosting the tourism industry has resulted in a 
decline of the sugar industry in those countries. 
  Cuba should be able to maintain a highly vital sugar 
industry 
through mechanization and chemical resources once we are again 
under normal conditions and given the available land area, 
population, machinery, herbicides, and automation processes at 
sugar mills. This is what we plan to do. However, there is a 
sugar mill nearby which is about empty of personnel. Almost 
every worker is here, in Varadero. Tourism work is not as hard 
and is more appealing than agriculture and sugarcane. Yet, I 
believe we have a large enough population to maintain both 
industries. However, tourism's potential, keeping in mind that 
we have thousands of kilometers of virgin beaches, is much 
higher than the sugar industry's potential. 
  If we fully develop our tourism potential, undoubtedly, 
apart 
from other factors, the tourism industry will render much higher 
revenues to Cuba than the sugar industry, even if this 
incompatibility did not exist between both sectors. In 
addition, the tourism market is growing much more than the sugar 
market. I have yet to hear anyone say that sunshine makes you 
fat. [laughter] 
  Unfortunately, people are going around saying that sugar is 
fattening and all those kinds of things, all those calumnies 
against sugar. [laughter] 
  However, tourism is healthy and has great prestige. It seems 
that tourism is the faster growing industry in the world. I 
have heard many people say this. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Once again, for Argentina: Regarding 
the U.S. blockade, is the Clinton administration as severe as 
previous administrations? 
  [Castro] I would have to ask you to define severity. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Argentina is well aware of the U.S. 
position, which is not fair to the Cuban people. This is why I 
ask the question. You raised this issue last year, when I had 
the opportunity to meet you and the Council of State. I would 
like to know your thoughts on this today. 
  [Castro] I could say that Clinton maintains the same 
severity, because he maintains the blockade, the Torricelli Law, 
everything. However, he does so in a softer manner and with less 
threatening and less bellicose words. But the severity of U.S. 
policy toward Cuba has not changed. It remains the same. 
  [Rene Capriles, correspondent for Brazil's ECO RIO 
magazine] Commander, I had the pleasure of hearing you at the 
Rio summit. Your address was the most applauded, even by 
President Bush, which was a surprise, as you might remember. 
  You just came from a conference on island-states and 
biodiversity. Biodiversity plays an important role worldwide 
when it comes to genetic patents, on which Cuba has broad 
experience. What are Cuba's prospects in this regard, 
considering tourism, island-states, and the creation of the 
Caribbean common market in the future? 
  [Castro] The analysis of environmental problems was good at 
the Barbados meeting. Both the environment and sustainable 
development were discussed. We noticed in Rio that 
island-states are highly anxious about this. I noticed that 
many countries are highly anxious about the prospects that 
global...[pauses] changes in weather patterns and the greenhouse 
effect. Changes in weather patterns mean more droughts, more 
intense hurricanes, and other climate phenomena which are 
generally disastrous for those small nations. 
  While a hurricane in Florida damages a very small portion of 
the territory, a hurricane on St. Vincent or on any other small 
Caribbean island -- such as St. Lucia or Jamaica -- covers 100 
percent of the island's territory and can destroy everything. 
The rest of the nation can help Florida repair the hurricane 
damage. Islands face territorial limitations and serious 
communication problems. A man from Santiago de Cuba was 
complaining because there are no direct flights between Mexico 
and Santiago de Cuba. Yet, there are no flights between many 
Carribean islands. There are no flight routes. Sea 
transportation is also very difficult. These countries 
experience diverse difficulties for their development. 
  They are affected the most, environmentally speaking. Many 
of those islands, particularly those in the Pacific, would 
disappear if the water were to rise four meters. It would be a 
global disaster because it would affect every port's 
infrastructure. However, certain countries would disappear 
altogether. Certain countries, such as Bangladesh, with a 
population of over 100 million people, would disappear almost 
completely, despite being one of the most densely populated 
countries. 
  Of course, this explains the high anxiety experienced by 
these states and why it was decided at the Rio summit to hold an 
international conference of small island-states. There was an 
increased awareness of the problem in Barbados, more of an 
awareness than in Rio. However, the Rio summit and the efforts 
of the nongovernmental organizations were extremely significant 
in creating an awareness of this problem. I dare affirm 90 
percent of the governments of the world were not aware of 
ecological problems. 
  This was the first time that dozens of heads of state had a 
chance to think about these problems and were compelled to think 
about them. The representatives of the most industrialized 
nations also had to speak and explain things in Rio. 
Consumerist societies are the main culprits of the destructive 
phenomena that has ravished the environment in past decades. 
They consume an overwhelming majority of energy and fossil fuel 
and have poisoned the rivers, lakes, and seas the most. They 
have poisoned the air, have created acid rain, and have 
increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. They are creating 
serious, real problems, including extremely serious problems 
with weather pattern changes. 
  This awareness is somewhat late. Certain damages are already 
irreversible. The amounts of fluorocarbons released have 
damaged the ozone layer and will continue to do so for a long 
time. We must ask ourselves if there is still time to reverse 
this trend. However, since we cannot afford to be pessimistic, 
the least we can do is fight hard to increase awareness so that 
measures are adopted as soon as possible to solve these problems. 
  You might remember from Rio that the U.S. Government 
objected 
and put up the most resistance to the accords. It was 
practically isolated. I must add that this is not the case with 
the current administration. This administration is more 
concerned with environmental issues. The U.S. vice president 
has a book out on the environment. I believe he is quite 
committed to environmental issues. The United States, the 
number one consumer of energy and natural resources, is called 
upon to play a very important role here. 
  This is why any change in the U.S. Government's position 
must seen as positive. This had not taken place yet at the time 
of the Rio summit but was hinted at in the U.S. representative's 
address in Rio and noticed again during the Barbados conference. 
  We must fight harder and harder and harder if we want to 
avoid the catastrophe of incalculable magnitude toward which we 
are heading right now. This is an issue that can be discussed 
at length. A great many variables enter into play because the 
development of various countries can differ so greatly. I 
pointed out in Barbados that Bangladesh's per capita income is 
$220, while Switzerland's is $34,000. [Words indistinct] 1 
billion tons of carbon is consumed. How much more do the 
Chinese people need to attain a gross income 10 times higher? 
India has similar problems. These are very complex, acute 
problems. How will global resources be distributed? How will 
development be apportioned? Will we just decide to leave 
developing nations as they are while developed nations continue 
to develop? 
  Mankind must exert great effort and revise certain theories. 
I hinted at this in my 15-minute address on the problems of 
inequitable worldwide development. What does the future hold 
for a society that can only survive by growing and can only grow 
by depleting the world's natural resources? That question has 
no answer. They are condemned to grow. This is why when one 
speaks of sustainable development, no one knows what one is 
talking about. We ought to speak of societies that can sustain 
themselves or that can survive as they are by recycling and 
reducing levels of carbon dioxide and other polluting gases and 
not by continuing to deplete natural resources. 
  Neoliberalism is in vogue today. However, we are not talking 
politics here, nor do we want to discuss politics. Yet, it is 
in fashion. Neoliberalism is based on the concept of continuous 
growth to prevent a disaster. However, continuous growth will 
result in a bigger disaster. We must focus primarily on the 
growth of those countries further behind, the poorest nations. 
We must do a better job distributing the world's natural 
resources. We must distribute the world's wealth better and 
more equally. Otherwise, the problems will not be solved. Yet, 
we cannot discuss this further here nor turn this into a 
conference on extremely complex philosophical issues. We risk 
missing the mark regarding tourism. 
  [Faustino Castilla, director of Spain's VIAJE Y TOURISMO 
magazine] How can capitalist and socialist views coexist in the 
tourism industry? Unfortunately, I remember what the Cuban 
tourism industry had to endure in the '50s. That was not like 
tourism today but was tourism, nevertheless. How can both 
doctrines coexist today? 
  I would also like to present to you an example of Habanera, 
a 
typically Cuban-Spanish form of music that symbolizes 
Cuban-Spanish unity. [applause] 
  [Castro] He asks: How can the two views coexist? That of 
tourism and what else? Within tourism? You refer to joint 
investments, right? 
  Unfortunately, I do not have Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, or 
Vladimir Ilich Lenin by my side to help me answer your question. 
Yet, I believe, referring even to the founders of socialism, 
Lenin for example, at the time of the famous Bolshevik 
revolution, had even considered the idea of establishing 
capitalism under the control of the proletariat. Lenin's 
original idea was to establish socialism in that country, which 
was one of the most industrially backward, a country besieged 
and blockaded. Lenin finally came up with the idea of 
developing capitalism in Russia, not under the control of 
capitalists but under the control of workers. There were other 
ideas among the political leaders of that era: The 
impossibility of establishing socialism in only one country. 
This was discussed extensively. 
  We must add that among the CPSU's founding concepts was the 
idea that the revolution was going to take place simultaneously 
in every industrialized nation. History has still not proven 
that that was wrong. Although, I will keep my opinion regarding 
what has happened in those countries, there is no doubt that 
building socialism in one single country, entirely surrounded by 
industrialized capitalist countries [words indistinct]. Their 
accomplishments were, in my opinion, truly extraordinary. They 
will be praised someday once this contemporary period is over. 
They conceived with a highly dialectic sense and flexibility 
how to build socialism. 
  We have not relinquished the idea of building socialism. 
We have not relinquished our goals. We are simply adapting to 
our current reality and acknowledging that under such 
exceptional circumstances, following the collapse of the 
socialist bloc and the disappearance of the USSR, our goals 
cannot be the building of socialism but the defense of the 
fatherland, the revolution, and accomplishments of socialism. 
  The development of any country requires capital, technology, 
and markets which we do not have at this time. These are far 
from ideal conditions. We are no longer dealing with building 
socialism in a single country but on a tiny island lost 
somewhere in the Caribbean, lost geographically but not 
politically. 
  Tourism provided the first opportunity to create joint 
associations and to introduce foreign capital in Cuba. We need 
all three things -- capital, technology, and markets -- to 
develop tourism in Cuba. We did not hesitate on the need to 
promote its development. We have been talking about tourism, 
which is a very typical example. There are many other fields 
where the same is happening or could be happening, like the oil 
sector. 
  We will never exploit the oil beneath the Varadero 
peninsula. 
We do not want to...[pauses] A well had already been drilled 
nearby, but we closed it. Estimates have been made on the 
amount of fuel underground, but Varadero's tourism development 
and oil extraction are incompatible. Developing Varadero's 
tourism will yield much more than the extraction of the oil 
underneath it. 
  There are diverse positive indicators regarding the presence 
of oil. However, we need seismological research with advanced 
technology, well-drilling, and capital investment. We do not 
have the capital or the technology to exploit these resources. 
How could we do this if not by associating with foreign 
companies and capital? It would not be socialist but stupid to 
turn a blind eye to this reality. Nothing would be accomplished 
if we did that. We would be left stranded, would fail to 
fulfill the goal of defending the fatherland, the revolution, 
and the accomplishments of socialism. I have given two examples. 
  As we set off down this path -- free of dogma, armed with 
flexibility, and keeping clearly in mind our goals and the means 
to attain them -- we have been making this overture, which 
continues to expand. I believe our goals and the means being 
used to attain them are perfectly in keeping with one another. 
The goals we are seeking are perfectly in keeping with the 
means we are using to achieve them. 
  To tell the truth, it is very important that there be trust. 
We have taken great pains to ensure that we have created trust 
among those who invest in Cuba and are giving investors 
advantages they do not get in many other parts of the world so 
as to make investing here truly attractive. 
  [Words indistinct] show that those first experiences were 
successful. We must calculate how much the capital yields in 
each European country. How much in Italy? How much in 
Switzerland? How much in France? How much must be paid in 
rent? How much does capital invested in Costa Brava, Spain, 
yield? How much in the Canary Islands? We must find ways to 
make capital yield more in Cuba than it does in Costa Brava, the 
Canary Islands, or any other country. 
  All in all, it is a competition. I believe that we are in a 
position to compete and that Cuba has some advantages. As the 
managers of this hotel can attest, cooperation between the 
population and the investors is high because we have persuaded 
the population of the need to take these steps, these measures, 
and to make these investments. 
  I want to stress to you that our people are socialist. 
Harbor no doubts: Our people cannot return to capitalism. 
However, they understand perfectly well all the measures we are 
taking in this sphere and that the associations with capitalist 
companies are in response to the reality of today's world. 
Thus, we have growing ties with multinationals. We do. This 
is a reality and a power in today's world. No one in today's 
world can do without multinationals, because their power 
continues to increase. They have more power, even more than 
governments. The power of governments is declining and that of 
multinationals increasing. We are surrounded by capitalists in 
this world. 
  We are told in geography class that an island is a piece of 
land surrounded by water on all sides. If someone were to ask 
us at present to define socialism in Cuba, the answer would be: 
A noble, courageous, heroic effort surrounded by capitalism on 
all sides. [laughter] 
  We cannot ignore capitalism any more than we can ignore the 
sea around us. Besides -- and this was pointed out by Marx -- 
capitalism has made significant contributions to mankind's 
economic development, such as technological and scientific 
contributions and a great development of the productive forces. 
We could add other things that were unknown at Marx's time: 
management capability, [words indistinct], use of computers in 
administration and management. We could add many other 
contributions capitalism has made to mankind. 
  Also, it would be stupid of me not to make use of any useful 
experience capitalism can contribute. This is how we see what 
we are doing, without relinquishing our principles, goals, or 
ideals. I believe Cuba is not the only country doing this. The 
Chinese people are doing it and have been doing it much longer 
than we. The Vietnamese people are doing it and have had very 
significant successes. However, history will have the last 
word. New paths are always strewn with obstacles, problems, and 
difficulties. Our intelligence and wisdom should help us 
overcome all these difficulties. 
  There are many other difficulties. There are difficulties 
that are not political, ideological, or philosophical in nature. 
Other difficulties could be of a moral nature. 
  I was explaining to the comrades and have at times explained 
to the Cuban people that we cannot afford to be pure within a 
glass case. Purity is not as praiseworthy if one is alone, 
isolated, unpolluted, free of contact with any virus, germ, or 
bacteria. Virtue blooms in the struggle against vice. These 
methods or things we are introducing might bring with them 
certain vices, yet this can serve to develop our virtue. 
  Many have questioned the influence tourism might have upon 
the minds of our people, upon their basic traits. These matters 
have come up. However, experience is teaching us that we can 
develop our country perfectly well. Cuba's ties, culture, and 
contact with the world are growing. We will be all the more 
pure if we are able to preserve our virtues amid the 
contamination certain things might bring with them. I believe 
we will do so in this effort we are making. It will be, above 
all, a test. 
  I once used a metaphor but later had to recant because it 
was 
wrong. I said that virtue could not be preserved in a cloister, 
a convent. Several nuns immediately wrote me and told me the 
remark was unfair. I agreed with them and no longer speak of 
cloisters or convents. I speak of ivory towers. [laughter, 
applause] 
  [Unidentified speaker] [Words indistinct] 
  [Castro] From what magazine? 
  [Unidentified speaker] (SUARA), a magazine with a 
circulation 
of over 300,000 and [words indistinct]. I will not ask any 
questions because my questions were answered by the minister. I 
asked if Cuba was ready to welcome tourists and so on. As you 
have said... 
  [Castro, interrupting] What did he answer? Yes? 
  [Unidentified speaker] Yes. 
  [Castro] He lied to your readers. [laughter] 
  Did he say we were ready or learning? 
  [Unidentified speaker] No, no. This is my first trip to 
Cuba. I want to take this opportunity to do something very 
personal or my daughter will never forgive me: I must tell you 
that she admires you greatly. She is 15 years old, and we have 
explained to her that Cuba is the only socialist country left in 
the world. She asked me to tell you that she is at your service 
for whatever you might need and that you can always count on her 
help. [applause] 
  She has written many letters to you that remain on her desk. 
I have explained to her that it is not easy to reach you. 
However, I will not leave Cuba without asking you to please 
sign this for her and to take our picture. Otherwise, she would 
never forgive me. I am sorry, but this is my only chance. I 
hope the others will forgive me. [applause] 
  [Castro] I will take a chance and honor your request, 
although I can foresee about 350 more like them...[pause] 
  Those noble feelings of solidarity encourage us along, in 
this struggle. Our struggle is not easy. Not everyone 
understands it. I have wanted to talk about it. The fact that 
there are so many good and noble people in the world fills us 
with energy and is an extraordinary boost to continuing to 
struggle, resist, and triumph. Thank you very much. [applause] 
  [(Pablo Amalce), Spanish national radio editor and deputy 
director of VIAJEROS magazine's Cuba section] [Words indistinct] 
in the world, the matter of image as regards tourism. A 
country's image is vital. You know that it is oversimplified 
sometimes. There is also the pitfall of putting forth an image 
currently being used by several other countries, resulting in a 
failure to present the unique characteristics of a destination. 
  What do you -- the president of the Republic of Cuba, a 
great 
communicator, and someone who knows how to rouse and motivate 
diverse audiences well -- think Cuba's tourism image ought to be? 
  [Castro] I do not know what a communicator is. That is a 
technical term used nowadays regarding television, radio, and 
other such resources. I have always relied on the same thing: 
speaking very frankly and trying to explain things as I see 
them. If I do not understand something, I do not attempt to 
explain it. I have endured enough of that in school already. I 
had teachers who explained things in the books that they did not 
understand, could not understand either. 
  First, we could say that Cuba presents the image of a 
beautiful country. It has the natural, physical conditions. 
Columbus first took notice of this. It is a proven fact that 
when he arrived in Cuba, he said it was the most beautiful land 
human eyes had ever seen. I do not know if Columbus ever said 
this to a woman, but it is a fact that he said it about Cuba. 
We have an image as a country of extreme natural beauty. 
However, its people are more important than the land. Cuba's 
image is that of an hospitable, warm, generous, fraternal 
nation. We want the image of a morally and physically healthy 
nation. We want the image of an organized country, the image of 
a country which protects the environment, the air, the water, 
with pure waters, pure air, a welcoming climate. Of course, we 
are a tropical country. Many visitors come from frigid places, 
particularly in winter. They come to escape the snow and cold 
weather or the like. 
  We do not want to be seen as a country with gambling or 
drugs 
or prostitution. We have the image of a country with a high 
level of culture and capability [words indistinct] and pleasant 
the stay of our visitors. We want to educate the people on this 
profession of hospitality so that services can attain levels 
equal or superior to those found in any other country. We want 
a tourism of the people. Everyone wants the tourists to pay more 
money for greater luxury. Of course, we will have some services 
that will also serve those who can afford higher prices. 
However, we also want tourism to be a source of knowledge, 
contact, and brotherly ties among the peoples. 
  We also want the world to see Cuba as an honest country, a 
moral country. This is highly cherished by us because we know 
that in the world such qualities are not abundant. Finally, I 
will borrow from the Bible and Adam and Eve, who are said to 
have been very happy in Eden: We want the world to see Cuba as 
a terrestrial paradise. [applause] 
  [Ed Caprice, director of Berlin's Tropicana tourist company] 
Mr. President, it is not always easy for a small tour operator 
who is not under the German tourism conglomerates' control to 
bring tourism to Cuba. However, I do not want to dwell on the 
difficulties but on the happy moments. One such occasion took 
place recently, when a group of over 40 people came to Santiago 
de Cuba. All of their misgivings were cleared up by the time 
they returned to Berlin. Some of them asked before departing 
Berlin: Can we really travel to Cuba, given the current 
difficulties in supplying the population? However, they were 
all very happy and taken by the tropical beauty, the hospitality 
you mentioned, the revolutionary spirit of the Cuban people 
[words indistinct]. The oldest in the group -- an 84-year-old 
man -- said that the trip to Cuba was the happiest time in his 
entire life. 
  Mr. President, I would like you to accept the catalog we 
have 
put together for Cuba with all our love. Thank you, very much. 
[applause] 
  [Unidentified speaker] Commander Fidel, I have come from 
Bolivia with a friend who works in an enterprise. First, I want 
to express Bolivia's love and admiration for your efforts on the 
Cuban people's survival and freedom and for being an example of 
independence to all Latin American leaders. I do not want to 
leave Cuba without firmly shaking your hand as a symbol of the 
struggle against the economic blockade endured by Cuba and its 
people. [applause] 
  [Emilio Galdez, sales director of Grupo Sol in Cuba] I do 
not 
have any questions because I already have my answers after 
living in Cuba for three and a half years; I received them on a 
daily basis from the honest efforts of the Cuban people and the 
efforts which I have witnessed at all levels day to day in the 
tourism sector, as well as in the society. I ask that you 
continue your struggle and your efforts, which in the last three 
and a half years have yielded results and successes. I ask that 
you continue to set the example which other countries were, 
perhaps, not virtuous enough to adopt. 
  I refer to positive and negative things which have been 
attained in tourism. For example, in my country -- Spain -- we 
have had many successes, but we must lament not having been 
successful in other things and even failures. We have 
experienced a crisis from which we are now recovering. We will 
have to make investments to regain the levels of years ago. 
  Keeping these things in mind, I ask of you to continue this 
path to attain what I believe everyone augurs for this beautiful 
country, which has all the right conditions to fulfill its 
goals. My cooperation with Cuba does not end, but my stay does 
in two months. I must follow orders. My boss has asked me, and 
I agree. I must return to Majorca. 
  However, during my stay in Cuba I have had the great luck of 
working with and making friends not easily found in other 
countries, wholehearted friends, true friends to the end. I 
have had the luck of meeting my wife and having a daughter -- 
Daria Lucia -- in this beautiful country. She is 44 days old 
today. Therefore, my wish is that very soon and before she can 
talk, but when she can understand me I will be able to tell her 
that Cuba has overcome the very difficult special period because 
it truly deserves it. 
  Finally, it is also my wish -- I have asked many friends at 
work to help me with this -- to take a photo of you with me and 
my wife and daughter. 
  Dear friends, I ask you to continue working together and 
more 
united and strong each day for the good and future of tourism in 
Cuba! Viva Cuba! Viva Fidel! Viva the Revolution! [applause, 
pause] 
  [Castro] I have been told that you have made a great effort 
and that it is time to conclude this meeting. I believe you 
have other things scheduled, including a closing ceremony. Is 
that right? When? At nine? I imagine you have to go to your 
rooms and do things. I believe I have tired you enough. 
  It has been a great pleasure to come to this meeting. We 
have heard very friendly words and intelligent and interesting 
questions. We have also experienced moving moments, such as the 
case of the comrade who spoke just now and introduced his wife 
and daughter. We have seen a great example of the ties and 
relations that can be established among the peoples through 
tourism. He asked us to continue along this path. I can affirm 
that we will and that we will never betray the trust of those 
who believed in us. [applause] 
  Our word and commitments are sacred. In no [words 
indistinct] of law, or any canon by Osmany, because we have the 
canon of honor, seriousness, the given word which will always 
prevail. We follow principles of honesty and good faith. We 
follow principles of optimism, and that will always prevail. 
  We only began a short while back and can already see certain 
results. I believe we can speak of a future, given the efforts 
we are conducting. You cannot imagine with what difficulties we 
began to build those renowned causeways. This has helped us 
gain access to marvelous beaches, as marvelous as this Varadero 
beach, in other places around Cuba. We will continue working in 
this manner, with efforts and sacrifice. We cannot nor do we 
deny that we are working under hard and difficult conditions. 
  This is why words such as the ones we have heard today are 
so encouraging; the words of the lady who spoke about her 
daughter and the faith and trust she has in Cuba; the words, the 
words by the Bolivian gentleman; those by the German gentleman. 
I mentioned this because he relayed a message from an 
84-year-old man who said his stay had been the happiest days of 
his life; 84 is a considerable age. Those of us who are a 
little younger felt it. [laughter] 
  An 84-year-old man has experienced practically the entire 
century. He lived through World Wars I and II and has 
experienced calamities of every kind, hard and good moments in 
his life. The fact that he felt the happiest here is 
encouraging and honors us. 
  I will try to maintain that tradition and set this example 
for as long as I can. I am sorry not everyone is here, but this 
hall can only accommodate so many. 
  As you can see, we have a brand new minister. [applause] 
  Perhaps I am getting ahead of myself and prompted your 
generous applause. He has yet to earn that applause. What I 
should have said is that we have a brand new ministry. We must 
find out if we have a brilliant minister. [applause] 
  This has to be seen. However, we have the greatest hope that 
he will prove so. [applause] 
  In any case, another will have to if he does not prove so. 
[laughter] 
  What is clear is that we need a good ministry and an even 
better minister. He has many ideas and initiatives that have 
been warmly welcomed and endorsed. I hope that this will help 
accelerate the development of tourism in Cuba, which will 
continue to have the support of our people, government, and 
everyone. 
  I want to add: Our people did not understand tourism at 
first. It was necessary to conduct an educational campaign so 
that our people, who had been brought up in the strictest ivory 
tower puritanism, would understand the need for tourism, its 
portended dangers, what tourism would represent, etc. 
  I assure you that that struggle is being amply won and that 
the people's enthusiasm and happiness is immediately recognized 
anywhere in Cuba today where a new tourist project is announced. 
  We have had to do difficult things to reconcile certain 
issues. The people had a hard time understanding the dollar 
decriminalization issue, which is why we have had to explain 
every step. We normally explain things to the people. We do 
not want things to appear by decree but by persuading the 
population. We had to explain our own difficulties, the excess 
of currency we have and which any tourist or tour operator 
understands readily, the approximate value of a peso, a dollar, 
a pound. This required taking measures to correct the national 
financial imbalance. However, these measures were not taken by 
decree or accord of the Council of Ministers but were discussed 
at the National Assembly of the People's Government. They were 
discussed at every workplace with millions of workers. A 
consensus was reached before measures were taken. 
  We sometimes have difficult tasks. You see this everywhere. 
However, I believe the essential key is to persuade the people 
and to attain a consensus among the population for every step 
taken. This is how our population came to understand the need 
for tourism and understands it more and more each day. They 
understood the need for the highly touted decriminalization of 
dollars and all that. 
  Our people were brought up in deeply rooted egalitarism, and 
anytime anything gave the appearance of privilege it upset them. 
For example, if someone has a wealthy relative abroad who sends 
things the others did not have, that is still a certain 
privilege. Our population had a very deep sense of equality. We 
have explained to them that this is necessary, that it helps the 
national economy, that it helps those who do not have wealthy 
relatives abroad and that somehow what is received makes its way 
back to them. That is the argument we used to persuade our 
people. I am happy to see how they have come to understand and 
to support tourism. 
  I must also add that I am pleased, very pleased to have had 
the opportunity to meet outstanding people such as you. 
  Thank you, very much. [applause] 

