This      press review series focuses on economic, social, and 
demographic issues in the Maghreb countries of Algeria, Libya, 
Morocco, and Tunisia. 

   REGIONAL AFFAIRS 

   Maghreb Computer Market Expanding 

   Paris weekly JEUNE AFRIQUE has reported that there are 60 
computer sales and service companies in Algeria, 200 in Tunisia, and 
400 in Morocco.  In Tunisia, the value of computer-related imports 
rose from 13 million dinars in 1987 to 59 million dinars in 1992. 
France was the source of one-fourth of these imports, the United 
States provided 20 percent, and the United Kingdom, 11 percent. 
Taiwan's share in the Tunisian computer market has risen from 4 
percent in 1991 to 10 percent in 1992. Overall, the Maghreb computer 
market is growing at a rate of 10 percent per year.  JEUNE AFRIQUE 
cited the publication L'ORDINATEUR AFRICAIN as its source of 
information.  (Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE 9 Mar 94) 

   ALGERIA 

   Debt Payments in Arrears 

   Although Algeria has continued to service its short-term debt, it 
has not made a payment on most of its medium- or long-term debt 
since January.  The government has reportedly cited "technical 
difficulties" as the cause for the delay.  Algeria has continued to 
pay for cereals and other products purchased through the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, drawing on some $550 million in FY-94 
farm credits, but has ceased paying its largest creditors, including 
French export credit agency Coface and Italy's SACE.  The Algerian 
Government is pushing for bilateral rescheduling of these debts. 
(London MEED 25 Feb 94) 

   Food Shortages in Guelma 

   Guelma Wilaya is reportedly experiencing a significant price 
increase for meat, fruits, and vegetables.  Tension is said to 
persist over the prices of popular food items, such as coffee, oil, 
yeast, and flour, and over daily bread lines.  The price of potatoes 
has gone from 16 to 23 dirhams (DA); green onions are up from 26 to 
30 DA; oranges from 22 to 28 DA; meat from 220 to 280 DA or higher. 
Local leaders have reassured citizens that the situation will 
gradually improve as recently received food supplies are distributed 
throughout the region.  (Algiers LIBERTE 10 Feb 94) 
   Fuel Supply Disrupted in Tiaret 

   Long lines at gas stations have been reported in Tiaret and other 
towns.  According to the director of National Enterprise for 
Refining and Distributing Petroleum Products (NAFTAL), fuel supplies 
have been temporarily disrupted due to construction on a section of 
the Mechraa-SFA-Tiaret rail line.  The train transports 12 to 18 
30,000-liter tanks of gasoline and diesel oil daily.  (Algiers 
LIBERTE 10 Feb 94) 

   Security-Related Departure of Foreigners Affecting Economy 

   The number of foreigners who have left Algeria since 31 October 
has reportedly forced businesses to close or to reduce personnel. 
The Algerian Hilton, of Algerian and South Korean ownership, closed 
six months after opening due to ''low profit margins.''  The hotel 
experienced a  significant drop in its occupancy rate due to the 
security situation."  In addition, the French-managed Sofitel hotel 
has brought its French employees home, including managers, and plans 
to direct operations from France.  Sati-Michelin, the only producer 
of tires in Algeria, has laid off 160 workers for an indefinite 
period.  The firm was reportedly robbed by "terrorists" in 1993. 
The French firms Peugeot, Renault, and Air France have all cut back 
operations by drawing down personnel until the security situation in 
the country improves.  (Algiers LIBERTE 7 Feb 94; Algiers LE SOIR 
D'ALGERIE 8 Feb 94) 

   LIBYA 

   Qadhdhafi Announces Acceptance of World Court Judgment on Chad 

   In a 4 March press conference to commemorate the 17th anniversary 
of the Jamahiraya's founding, Libyan leader Mu'amar al-Qadhdhafi 
declared that Libya would implement the World Court's ruling that 
Chad should reclaim sovereignty over the Aouzou Strip from Libya. 
He said that the conflict between Libya and Chad has "finally ended" 
and that "arrangements are under way to implement" the ruling. 
(London AL-HAYAH 5 Mar 94) 

   MOROCCO 

   Nuclear Program Coordination Group Proposed 

   The National Council for Nuclear Energy (CNEN) recently met with 
Minister of National Education Mohamed Knidri to discuss 
establishing a group to coordinate and supervise the use of nuclear 
technology.  According to Knidri, there is a lack of equipment, 
skills, laws, and regulations in this field which handicaps the 
development of nuclear technology.  At the meeting, Minister of 
Energy Abdellatif Guerroui emphasized the need to speed up work on 
developing regulations for nuclear installations and protection 
against radioactivity, and the importance of quickly naming a 
secretarial staff at CNEN.  Guerroui also requested that three 
commissions be formed:  a nuclear regulatory commission, a committee 
to coordinate nuclear activities, and a commission responsible for 
programs for international cooperation.  (Casablanca MAG 7 20 Feb 
94) 

   Election Results in 13 Districts Annulled 

   The Moroccan Constitutional Chamber has declared invalid the 
results of last September's indirect elections in the following 13 
electoral districts: 


BOT 

District/Province/         Deputy                 Party 

Imine-Tanoute/Chichaoua    Ali Rehaymi            National Rally of 
                                                  Independents (RNI) 
Mejjate/Chichaoua          Lehsan Belkatou        Party for Progress 
                                                  and Socialism 
                                                  (PPS) 
El Hajeb/El Hajeb          Bensalem Oulghazi      Istiqlal (PI) 
Bouznika/Benslimane        Abdelkamel El Reghay   RNI 
Tamlalet/Qil'at al-        El-Tehami El-Khayari   PPS 
  Si raghanah 
Zaio/Nador                 Mohamed Ettayyibi      PI 
Central Oujda/Oujda        Aziz El-Housayni       RNI 
Asfi Bayada/Asfi           Abderrezak Chakouri    PI 
Ben Ahmed/Settat           Mohamed Faris          RNI 
Tangier/Tanger             Mohamed Arselan        Popular Movement 
Tan-Tan/Tan-Tan            Mohamed Djalleti       Constitutional 
Union 
Taliouine/Taroudannt       Hasan Belyemeni        Constitutional 
Union 
Bab-el-Muraysa/Sale        Abderrahman El-Qadiri  RNI 
                              (deceased) 

EOT 

   New elections are slated for these districts on 26 April.  There 
will also be elections for municipal and village councils in various 
areas.  According to Paris daily LE MONDE, nine of the 13 affected 
districts in the September elections were won by the current 
majority party in Parliament, with four carried by the opposition. 
If the opposition won all 13 districts in April, it would then hold 
only 135 of the 333 parliamentary seats.  (London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT 
4 Mar 94; Paris LE MONDE 4 Mar 94) 

   Agreement Signed With South Africa for Coal Imports 

   The Casablanca firm Socacharbo has announced a purchase of 
400,000 tons of coal from South Africa to use in thermoelectric 
plants.  The $60 million deal will be financed through an agreement 
between the National Bank of Paris and the Moroccan Foreign Trade 
Bank.  The purchase is the largest between Morocco and South Africa 
since they resumed bilateral relations. (London AL-HAYAH 3 Feb 94) 

   Increase in Foreign Reserves Reported 

   Foreign reserves rose to 36.1 billion Moroccan dirhams (MD) in 
1993, up from MD31.5 billion the previous year.  The Casablanca- 
based Moroccan Economy Center says reserves are equivalent to seven 
months of imports, up from six months in 1992.  Official forecasts 
estimate a further increase in reserves to MD38.8 billion by the end 
of 1994. (London MEED 25 Feb 94) 

   Increased Cooperation With Romania 

   Moroccan Trade Minister Abdellatif Filali and Romanian Trade 
Minister Teodor Viorel Melescanu met recently to discuss improving 
bilateral trade by instituting periodic reciprocal trade missions, 
creating mixed firms, and opening a joint bank.  Morocco currently 
sells phosphates and agricultural food products to Romania and 
purchases durable goods and manufactured products.  Romania is 
involved in port construction and other projects in Morocco, 
including metallurgy, geology, and mining, and in training Moroccan 
professionals.  Melescanu confirmed Romania's interest in 
participation in construction of ports, airports, railroads, and 
highways, as well as agricultural cooperation.  (Casablanca AL 
BAYANE 29 Jan 94) 
   Hydroelectric Power Production Drops Due to Drought 

   The Moroccan Bank of Foreign Trade (BMCE) has reported that 
hydroelectric power production dropped 55 percent during the first 
nine months of 1993 compared to the same period in l992.  This 
figure represents only 5.7 percent of 1993 production from all 
energy sources, compared to 11.5 percent in l992 and 15.4 percent in 
1991.  Due to recent droughts, water reserves have been reduced to 
630 million cubic meters, or 9.3 percent of capacity.  (Rabat 
ALMAGHRIB 21 Feb 94) 

   Students Sentenced After University Violence 

   A Fez court has imposed prison sentences ranging from six months 
to two years on 27 students found guilty in connection with violent 
confrontations at Fez University in January.  Two rival groups -- 
the fundamentalist Justice and Charity Organization (Juma'at al- 
'Adal wal-Ihsan) and the leftist Rank and File (al-Qa'adiyun), 
reportedly clashed on and off the law school campus over issues 
related to the fundamentalists' call for a boycott of classes and 
the alleged display by leftists of The Satanic Verses at a cultural 
week exhibition. (London AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT 17 Feb 94) 

   TUNISIA 

   Foreign Exchange Opens 

   In an interview with Tunis-7 television, Central Bank Director 
Ibrahim El Haji discussed the official opening of a foreign exchange 
following the government's decision to make the dinar convertible 
and to lift restrictions on interest rates.  According to El Haji, 
banks will be able to "fix foreign currencies rates in relation to 
the Tunisian dinar.  Naturally, the Central Bank will still be able 
to intervene in this foreign exchange to adjust the exchange rates 
whenever it is necessary."  El Haji also stated that the foreign 
exchange is restricted to the domestic market, Tunisian banks, and 
the Tunisian financial banking system, although foreign banks can 
participate on behalf of their clients.  (Tunis Tunis-7 Television 1 
Mar 94) 

   Market Data Base for TTP 

   The "Tunisian Trade Point" (TTP), part of the Center for the 
Promotion of Exports (CEPEX), is establishing a link to the 
commercial data base run by Bangkok's Trade Point Development 
Center.  The CEPEX Actualites news bulletin has reported that the 
TTP has collected some 1,000 addresses of European, Asian, and Latin 
American exporters and importers in the food, textile and clothing, 
mechanical, electronic, crafts, and chemical sectors.  The data base 
services will enable users to query foreign databases on-line in 
approximately 35 markets.  (Tunis LA PRESSE DE TUNISIE 22 Feb 94) 

   Tourism Statistics Reported 

   Tourism statistics for 1993 show receipts of over 1 billion 
dinars.  The total number of tourists reached over 3.6 million, of 
which 2,158,851 were Europeans (including 711,872 from Germany and 
60,000 from Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Slovakia, and 
Russia combined).  The number of French tourists increased by 
447,830.  An 11.2 percent increase in tourism for 1994 is expected. 
(Tunis LA PRESSE DE TUNISIE 19 Feb 94) 

   Solar Energy Projects in Outlying Areas 

   Several solar energy pilot projects have been completed in rural 
areas, including a number of electrification projects for schools, 
clinics, and national guard centers.  One project involved supplying 
electricity to 150 rural schools, an effort that was jointly 
financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of 
the Interior, and the AME (expansion not given).  Future proposals 
include an evaluation of the country's solar energy potential and 
the construction of a 29-kW solar station in Hamam Biadha.  (Tunis 
LA PRESSE DE TUNISIE 23 Feb 94) 

   Gabes Anti-Pollution Project 

   Minister of Economy Sadok Rabeh visited two fertilizer plants 
that have been equipped with sulfur dioxide scrubbers at a cost of 
32 million dinars.  The project represented the third and final 
stage of a 33.8 million dinar anti-pollution project authorized by 
President Ben Ali.  The project was begun 31 October 1992 and is 
expected to be completed in October 1994.  (Tunis LA PRESSE DE 
TUNISIE 23 Feb 94) 

   Chinese-Tunisian Economic Cooperation 

   Minister of Finance Nouri Zorgati and Chinese Ambassador Wu 
Chuanfu to discuss bilateral cooperation.  Both expressed 
satisfaction with the current level of relations and looked forward 
to expanding business opportunities.  The ambassador affirmed that 
his country "attaches great importance to strengthening Chinese- 
Tunisian cooperation."  Minister Zorgati emphasized the 
opportunities available to businesses from both countries.  (Tunis 
LA PRESSE DE TUNISIE 23 Feb 94) 

   Maghreb Economic Yearbook 

   The 1993-94 edition of the Maghreb Economic Yearbook has been 
issued.  The new edition contains information on Maghreb-Europe 
ties; analyses on Maghreb countries; economic sector studies by 
country for the Maghreb and EU; economic, commercial, and legal 
documents; and 8,000 addresses of commercial firms and public 
institutions in the Maghreb and Europe.  (Tunis LA PRESSE DE TUNISIE 
19 Feb 94) 

   (QUESTION AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, AFRICA/LEVANT 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6408) 
ENEAG/06 Apr/POLCHF/ECONF/NEASA Division JEG 07/0023Z APR 

