Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "War on Mafia Far From Over, DIA </F>
Report Says"] 
  [Text] Rome, 5 Jan (ANSA) -- Organized crime has suffered 
several blows over recent years but maintains hold on 
significant economic and financial resources and continues to 
intimidate, blackmail and condition even entire communities, 
according to the half-year report by the Anti-Mafia 
investigative directorate (DIA) which Interior Minister Nicola 
Mancino presented to Parliament today. The Mafia strength, the 
report said, continues to lie in its various illegal activities 
and its influence in political, administrative and judicial 
institutions. Given such conditions, the report warned, 
enthusiasm should be controlled over the recent and important 
success by law enforcement. The DIA report went on to observe 
how a "pure terrorist phase" had been consolidated within the 
Mafia, as evidenced by last year's bomb attacks in Rome, 
Florence and Milan, while the recent confiscation of weapons 
demonstrates how organized crime can count on a significant and 
sophisticated arms arsenal. There is ample evidence, the report 
continued, to assume that leading organized crime groups have 
graduated to major wholesale arms trafficking with transactions 
standing out for both volume and value and involving other 
foreign criminal groups and military-political factions in 
foreign countries. 
  Sicily's Cosa Nostra and other domestic crime syndicates, 
the 
DIA said, have access not only to automatic weapons but also 
military explosives, missiles, cannon, armor-piercing 
projectiles and other weapons. Turning its attention to the 
various crime bosses currently behind bars, the DIA report 
underscored the need the bosses have to reinforce their 
leadership over their subjects and how this explained a number 
of "symbolic" murders. There is also a growing restlessness 
among the imprisoned so-called men of honor who are subject to 
special restrictive prison treatment and do not qualify for 
special permissions, alternative detention and working out of 
jail. This ill-feeling, the DIA claimed, has led many of these 
crime figures, over the past months, to decide to collaborate 
with justice. But this, in turn, has also opened the way for a 
new defense strategy for the part of the Mafia. This defense 
strategy, the report said, included a campaign to de-legitimized 
turncoats and state's witnesses and to spread disinformation. 
Examples of this were the statements by jailed Cosa Nostra boss 
of bosses Salvatore Riina on the "manipulation" of turncoats, 
the distorted interpretation of the American trial against the 
Gambino family and the "heavy and unjustified" attacks against 
magistrates and law enforcement. The Mafia is also seeking to 
induce the dismantlement the judicial approach set up by the 
first anti-Mafia pool, denying the existence of a secret 
association and its executive commission. 
  The DIA report when on to show how a process is currently 
underway to unify criminal financial and human resources and 
stated that evidence exists proving that these "organized 
criminal consortiums" had worked with Cosa Nostra in planning 
and carrying out the most recent episodes of Mafia terrorism. 
The evidence cited in support of this situation included 
testimony by a turncoat and a series of "signals" which 
indicated how organized crime groups in Sicily, Calabria and 
Campania and, to a lesser degree, Puglia had developed an 
intricate network of business and activities. This "horizontal" 
integration of organized crime, the DIA report continued, has 
resulted in an increase in geographic mobility and the exchange 
of assets, duties and capital which has also allowed for 
organized crime to expand abroad. Investigators, in fact, have 
known for some time of the presence of Italian criminals 
operating in France, Germany, Canada, the United States, 
Australia and South America. There has also been repeated 
confirmation demonstrating how the Mafia is expanding its 
activities, interests and investments in former socialist states 
in East and Central Europe. 
  In concert with this "horizontal" development, the DIA 
argued, the process of integrating illegal markets has also 
resulted in a "vertical" development which is not always under 
the guidance of Cosa Nostra. Contacts between various criminal 
organizations are "numerous and diversified," the report 
continued, with "elements of an illegal nature." Evidence of 
this were the proven contacts been Calabria's 'ndrangheta [local 
Mafia-style organization] and right-wing extremists in Reggio, 
dating as far back as the 1970's, and contacts between the Mafia 
and the underground leftist groups. It cannot be ruled out, the 
DIA report said, that pacts have been hammered out between these 
various illegal organizations to "pilot change in the country to 
their own advantage." 
  Looking at organized crime's sources of income, the DIA 
report underscored how racketeering "continues to constitute a 
significant source" of illicit income and, over the years, 
extortion has become a tool to take over companies. 
Loan-sharking is equally as serious, the report warned, while 
there would appear to be a decline in drug trafficking, even if 
it remains today one of organized crime's chief activities and 
money makers. Another area of illegal income, the DIA said, was 
through manipulating public works tenders and taking over retail 
activities. This allows organized crime a "clean" outlet to 
launder significant amounts of illegal profit. 
  In its section on organized crime's links with public 
institutions, the DIA report recalled how, in 1993, 34 municipal 
governments were dissolved for Mafia infiltration and 
conditioning; ten in Sicily, two in Calabria, seventeen in 
Campania, four in Puglia and one in Basilicata. A total of 76 
municipal government have been dissolved to date, while charges 
of complicity with the Mafia has reached deep into public 
institutions, law enforcement and the judiciary. 
  The battle against the Mafia, the DIA report concluded, 
represents a fundamental cornerstone in the overall effort to 
renew the State. 

