Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup": "Shanghai Strives To Improve Environment"] </F>
  [Text] Shanghai, January 30 (XINHUA) -- Anyone who revisits 
Shanghai will be happy to see the daily improved environment 
here. 
  Factories discharging heavy pollution in urban areas have 
been removed or switched to produce pollution-free goods, and 
the first construction phase of the waste water treatment 
project on Suzhou Creek across the city has been completed. 
  Projects completed last year included the expansion of the 
Zhabei Water Works, construction of the Yangpu Bridge and 
plantation of lawns and street gardens. 
  According to Gu Yongkang, an official of the municipal 
bureau 
of environmental protection, the rapid economic development will 
inevitably bring with it pollution problem. 
  To develop Shanghai -- China's biggest economic center -- 
into a world first-class metropolis, with clean, beautiful and 
comfortable surroundings, the municipal government is spending 
23.9 billion yuan, including foreign loans, on environmental 
protection and urban construction in the 1991-95 period. 
  Included in this sum is a record 10 billion yuan used in 
1993. 
  "The days are numbered when people smell because of the 
Suzhou Creek a mile off," said Zhou Yucheng, senior engineer of 
the Shanghai construction company for treating waste water. 
  A 33.39-kilometer-long pipe has been laid to carry water 
from 
the creek in the urban area directly to the East China Sea after 
treatment. 
  "When the whole project is completed," Zhou noted, "it will 
be able to treat and clean the waste water in the creek for 
industrial use and irrigating crops." 
  A survey shows that about 300 industrial enterprises 
discharging pollution in urban areas had been removed or 
switched to produce pollution-free goods by the end of 1993 and 
300 more are ready for treatment. 
  "From now on, no factory which does not accord with the 
demands of environmental protection is allowed to be built in 
the urban area," said Gu Bochuan, an official of the Shanghai 
Municipal Economic Commission in Charge of Planning. 
  "Shanghai will follow the new industrial pattern with focus 
on the development of pollution-free, high-tech industries 
including electronics, computer and bio-engineering," he added. 
  While rearranging the industrial structure, China's most 
populous city has also vowed to expand green coverage in its 
limited urban area. 
  According to a plan of the municipal greening department, 
Shanghai will build three new parks this year, bringing the 
total number in the city up to 61, and expand tree belts, lawns 
and gardens by 93 hectares during this period. 
  By the end of the year 2000, Shanghai residents will have an 
average of four square meters of public green areas per capita, 
up from 1.1 square meters per capita at present. 
  According to the municipal environmental protection bureau, 
Shanghai will adopt measures to clean the Huangpu River. 
  Included are construction of animal droppings treatment 
projects on the upper reaches of the river, and taking specific 
measures to prevent and clean industrial pollution. 
  At present, Shanghai is building a second drinking water 
source. 
  Projects whose construction has been completed include the 
expansion of the Zhabei Water Works, Lingqiao Water works in New 
Pudong Area, a newly-established economic zone, Yuepu Water 
Works and the Qingchaosha Reservoir. 
  Upon completion, a bureau official said, these projects will 
greatly help improve the drinking water quality of Shanghai 
residents. 
  In addition, the city will build a wild animal farm and a 
tree belt this year. 
  Huang Ju, mayor of the city, said: "Our purpose is to 
develop 
Shanghai into a city with the world's first-grade ecology and 
modern infrastructure facilities." 
  More and more people in Shanghai are full of confidence in 
this aim. 

