Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report excerpted from ZHONGGUO SHANGBAO report by Xiu Kang </F>
(4423 1660): "Peasant from Yantai Murders Someone With 
Explosives To Resist Tax Payment"] 
  [Text] Liu Shu [0491 2885], a peasant from Yantai's 
Jianggezhuang Town, refused to pay tax every year since 1980; by 
1992, the amount of tax in arrears had accumulated to 470 yuan. 
  Shortly after tax-collecting work began in 1993, Liu Shu 
publicly announced that he would refuse to pay, while 
instigating other villagers to do the same, thus directly 
affecting the unfolding of tax collection in the village. To 
insure the smooth operation of tax-collecting work, town Vice 
Governor Zhang Xiao [1728 2400] came to the Guanghe Village's 
village committee office, accompanied by comrades from the 
county public security bureau and town police substation. Then 
they sent for Liu Shu. Together with the village committee 
Director Xu Shiyou [1776 0013 0645], they did ideological work 
face-to-face with Liu Shu, hoping that he would promptly pay the 
arrears. Liu Shu rejected the criticism, while growing very 
angry; he flung abuse at the vice town governor as well as the 
cadre and policemen from the public security bureau and police 
substation. Quickly, Zhang Xiao and the public security bureau 
cadre and policemen made a decision: Zhang Shu must immediately 
go home to get the money to pay the tax, otherwise, he would be 
solemnly dealt with according to the relevant law. The 
ferocious Liu Shu became mad and pretended that he would go home 
and fetch the money. When he arrived home, he got some 
explosives (7 kg), which he had concealed in his house, wrapped 
them around his body with a fuse, and covered them with his 
overcoat. At around 1020, Liu Shu returned to the village 
office, and suddenly sprang up at the town Vice Governor Zhang 
Xiao, holding him tight, then he pulled the fuse.... 
  The explosives erupted, and Liu Shu had his body blown to 
pieces, with his crime and hatred for the times, and Vice 
Governor Zhang Xiao unfortunately died at his post. In 
addition, three other public security cadre and policemen along 
with a villager were badly wounded. The 20-square-meter village 
committee office was flattened, shreds of the TV set, bills, 
renminbi banknotes, clothes and caps of the deceased, and blood 
and bones from the corpses...were thrown more than 100 meters, a 
really tragic sight. 

