BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salamah Ni'mat in Amman] </F>
  [Text] Jordan denied yesterday that it sought to obtain a 
sophisticated electronic communications system to intercept and 
monitor U.S. military and political contacts during the Gulf 
war. A spokesman for the Royal Court said that the 
communications system Jordan ordered from the Novacom [preceding 
word in English] Company was "designed for other purposes that 
concern Jordan." The Jordanian spokesman added that "the U.S. 
Government was informed" of the purpose of this communications 
system, noting that Jordan sought to obtain the Viper [preceding 
word in English] system before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and 
before the Gulf war. The spokesman noted that "it was not 
strange for Jordan to try to obtain a sophisticated 
communications system at that time." 
  The U.S. weekly NEWSWEEK will publish in its issue dated 
today a report on Jordan's attempt to obtain a communications 
system "to intercept contacts via satellites used by the United 
States, Israel, Russia, and Arab countries." 
  The magazine cites Pentagon sources as saying that the U.S. 
authorities "feared" that the communications system would reach 
Iraq, adding that the U.S. State Department rejected a Pentagon 
request to ban the entry to the United States of a senior 
Jordanian official because he was responsible for "smuggling" a 
communications system from the United States to Jordan. 
  Jordanian sources said that the deal to supply Jordan with 
the communications system was not accomplished because the U.S. 
company was not able to obtain an export license. The same 
sources noted that a U.S. federal court prevented the shipping 
of the communications system because no export license was 
granted and fined the exporting company because it did not abide 
by the exportation conditions stipulated by U.S. law. 
  The Jordanian sources stressed that no accusations were 
leveled against the Jordanian Government or any officials in 
this case. The sources added that "the project was shelved" in 
February 1991 following consultations with the U.S. Government. 
  Official Jordanian sources said that certain official U.S. 
quarters "leaked" anti-Jordanian news "as part of a media 
campaign accompanying the economic and political pressure to 
which we are being exposed within the framework of the peace 
process." Jordanian officials said that the United States' 
continued maritime siege on the Jordanian Port of al-'Aqabah -- 
despite the existence of alternatives to ensure the 
implementation of the economic embargo on Iraq -- is part of the 
economic pressure aimed at forcing Jordan to sign a peace treaty 
with Israel. 
  It is worth noting that Jordan's King Husayn warned two 
weeks 
ago that Jordan's resumption of its role in the peace process is 
now "contingent" on ending the blockade imposed on the Port of 
al-'Aqabah. The blockade, imposed on the port since 1990, has 
cost the Jordanian economy $1.3 billion. 

