BFN 

<F P=106> [Yuriy Rytov article under "Social Focus" rubric: "The Cost </F>
of Strikes"] 
  [Text] It seems that strikes have become a truly national 
affliction in the conditions of our undeveloped democracy (not 
to be confused with "developed socialism"). Everyone is 
striking: miners and metallurgists, teachers and ambulance 
personnel.... 
  While 18,200 people participated in strikes in the first 
quarter of last year, the figure was 114,500 in the first 
quarter of this year. And second place in the list of strikers, 
after the Trojans in the fuel and energy complex (87,000 
people), was taken by education workers (24,700). 
  It hardly need be explained why these people are striking. 
Very tough labor conditions and low wages (as applied to these 
two polarized spheres of people's activity) are inducing them to 
take extreme protest measures. 
  This fact cannot fail to draw the attention of independent 
experts. Why exactly are two extremes -- the working class 
elite and the intelligentsia elite -- coming together in protest 
actions? 
  The answer is unusually simple. These two particular social 
categories of the population have felt the greatest loss -- both 
material and moral -- during the ill-considered and hasty 
economic reforms. 
  We will recall that the profession of schoolteacher has 
always enjoyed special esteem in Rus. Soviet rule did 
substantial damage to that prestige. Yet there were still 
zealots in our country who valued their work much more highly 
than immediate worldly benefits. But that is not why teachers, 
who have been suffered material harm for the umpteenth time, are 
striking now. Schools are collapsing -- their world is 
collapsing. Demanding money for teaching peasant children -- 
excuse me, but this does not happen in any civilized country. 
  And the miners? They were always considered the pride of the 
working class. Now it would seem that a completely democratic 
procedure to coordinate the interests and mutual demands of 
workers, employers, and executive branch organs has been devised 
-- a trilateral commission. 
  But the whole trouble is that the agreements being adopted 
are not being implemented, and the fault lies with the 
executive. This is what causes many strikes: the failure to 
implement tariff agreements, the budget debt as regards the 
financing of research and maintenance and repair work, the poor 
level of technical equipment, a lack of resources for acquiring 
medical and school equipment, etc. 
  But strikes are by no means destroying the national 
economy's 
work. Maybe that is why the powers-that-be have a calm attitude 
to them. For instance, in the first quarter of this year output 
worth a total of only 8.8 billion rubles [R] was lost as a 
result of strikes. This includes R8.2 billion in the fuel and 
energy complex. 
  A drop in the ocean when compared to the losses we are 
incurring because of the continuing objective production 
recession (25 percent for the first half of the year, according 
to expert estimates). 
  But besides the material harm there is the damage to morale, 
which can lead to social cataclysms. Unfortunately nobody wants 
to take that into account. 

