Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Shkoder Cannot Become a Fortress of </F>
Crime and Corruption -- Journalist Gjergj Zefi Assaulted"] 
  [Text] The journalist Gjergj Zefi, former editor-in-chief 
of the newspaper LAJMETARI and now deputy editor-in-chief of 
ALEANCA and deputy chairman of the Democratic Alliance's 
National Assembly, was hit above the eye by a solid object at 
the entrance to the lane where he lives at about 2000 on 2 
March. This act came after continual threats against this 
journalist after his articles denouncing corruption and crime in 
Shkoder. The Shkoder Branch of the Association of Professional 
Journalists issues the following statement: 
<H3>  We Will Write Again Against Those Trying To Turn Shkoder 
Into a "Fortress" of Crime and Corruption </H3>
  We Shkoder journalists express our deep indignation and 
protest at the barbaric act against our colleague Gjergj Zefi on 
the evening of 2 March. This happened precisely at a time when 
unrestrained attacks are being launched against our free press 
and especially against opposition and independent newspapers. 
The state's attacks against us have alternated with attacks by 
hooligans who are nothing but paid mercenaries. This has 
especially happened in Shkoder, where we may also place on 
record the assaults some months ago against the journalist Alban 
Kraja, director of LAJMETARI. Other oblique threats against 
other journalists of our association culminated in the ambush in 
the dark of the journalist Gjergj Zefi, currently deputy 
editor-in-chief of ALEANCA, at the entrance to the lane where he 
lives. We also note that the attacks against Gjergj Zefi come 
from two quarters. On the one hand, there is the procurator, 
the investigator, and the state, who bring him to court over his 
articles and statements in newspapers. All this is in order to 
threaten and gag the brave journalist Gjergj Zefi, whose 
articles have denounced crime and corruption in Shkoder. This 
is also in order to gag all of us, so that we will not mention 
what is happening. Nevertheless, we once again express our 
determination not to falter on the road on which we have 
embarked but to courageously denounce corruption and crime, in 
order not to allow Shkoder to be turned from a bastion of 
democracy and culture into a fortress of crime, terror, and 
corruption, as those who ordered the assault on our colleague 
Gjergj Zefi would wish. 

