CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Juri Laansalu, rural economy advisor to </F>
 the 
Ministry of Agriculture: "Estonia's Wheat Makes Good Flour for 
White Bread"] 
<H8>  We'll Be Planting More Summer Wheat in the Spring </H8>
  [Text] 
  Estonia needs anywhere from 85,000 to 90,000 tonnes of 
eating wheat a year. That, provided that the million-and-a-half 
people living here consume 67,000 to 70,000 tonnes of white 
bread (123 grams per person per day), 5,000 to 6,000 tonnes of 
macaroni and 1,500 to 2,000 tonnes of farina. 
  We consume 235 to 250 tonnes of wheat a day. The stocks are 
being depleted daily and need to be replenished. Right now, it 
is not really important how big the state's total wheat reserve 
is (we know the amount in the State's Silo). What is important, 
however, is that all of Estonia's bakers, confectioners and 
others involved in baking buy their flour from our millers, and 
that these millers, in turn, buy the good wheat grown by our 
farmers. Unless, of course, the millers and bakers prefer to buy 
foreign flour? The determining factors here, of course, are the 
quality and the price of grain and flour. 
<H5>  Quality of Grain </H5>
  Can Estonia's grain growers produce the kind of wheat that 
makes for good white bread? I think that most of them can! 
  Over the past few years, scientific and experimental 
facilities have studied the combatibility of our own and foreign 
breeds of wheat, especially those from the Nordic countries, 
with Estonia's climactic and soil conditions. Seeds for 
preferred breeds of wheat have been bought and also received as 
aid. Instruction has been made available to those who have 
requested it. 
  The growing of wheat has also made progress. In 1993, the 
yield per hectare was roughly 2.5 times bigger than it was in 
1989, while the total yield, over the same period, is down by 
one third. Last year's results showed that, even in poor weather 
conditions, the grain growers managed to turn out a good crop of 
wheat. 
  According to the center for testing the quality of grain, 
the 
wet gluten content was 23 percent or more (that meets the 
requirements of high quality wheat) for 40 percent of winter 
wheat and for 85 percent of summer wheat. A shedding rate of 180 
or more was noted for 70 percent of summer wheat and 80 percent 
of winter wheat lots. The requirements of high quality eating 
wheat were met by roughly 60 percent of the summer wheat and 30 
percent of the winter wheat yield or, by volume, somewhere 
between 36,000 and 40,000 tonnes (not including seeds). And 
that, I repeat, in a year unfavorable to wheat! 
  The highest gluten content was noted for a breed called 
Heta--29 percent (32 percent for 1991, and 37 percent for 1992). 
Wheat with a wet gluten content of 28 percent or more is 
considered to be extra-high quality. The planting area of Heta 
made up two fifth of the total planting area for summer wheat. 
  Figures are free of emotion and indicate our actual 
potential. With the right selection of breed and proper 
technological methods, we can even grow wheat for making 
macaroni. 
<H5>  The Price of Grain </H5>
  It is hard to predict where the world prices for quality 
wheat will be by fall. According to the first issue of 
AGRARWIRTSCHAFT for 1993, volume prices of soft wheat were $143 
a tonne at the ports of Western Europe between September and 
November of 1992. Depending on grain quality, lot size and 
seller, the prices varied up to two times. Including the cost of 
transportation (at $13 a tonne) the average price of imported 
soft wheat at the port of Tallinn is at about $155 or 2,128 
kroons a tonne. 
  What will be the cost of wheat to the producer this year? 
Most likely between 1,300 and 1,400 kroons a tonne (expert 
estimate). No doubt there are big differences between producers. 
If we purchase all the weed- and pest-control materials, 
fertilizers, fuel and lubricants, which will make up close to 40 
percent of the production prices, then we would have to spend 
between 45 and 50 million kroons. To import all of the wheat at 
average prices, however, would call for spending somewhere 
between 180 and 190 million kroons. 
<H5>  Should We Be Importing Production Resources or Grain? </H5>
  Undoubtedly, there are importers who bring in wheat below 
the 
average price. But that does not necessarily mean that white 
bread made out of this is any cheaper, nor do we know much about 
the quality of the wheat being imported. I, as a tax-payer and 
an ordinary consumer of white bread have yet to notice any 
stabilization of prices, only escalation. I dare say that the 
wheat brought in by way of aid in 1992 was of lower quality and 
with a lower gluten content. 
<H5>  In Summary </H5>
  As long as neighboring countries and super-states have laws 
or other legal measures regulating the grain market, Estonia's 
grain market would also have to be protected by similar 
legislation. 
  In 1992, the total of wheat planted was 2.7 times that of 
the 
1989 total. The amount of summer wheat planted last spring was 
the same as it was a year ago, while the winter wheat planted in 
the fall was less than half of that. That indicates that our 
grain market was not functioning effectively, and that our grain 
trade is poorly organized. 
  In countries with a normal market economy, long-term 
contracts are in place between the growers of grain, millers and 
bakers. This creates a feeling of security for all concerned, 
even for tomorrow. It is time for us, too, to start negotiating 
agreements and be done with that by the time spring planting 
starts. 
  In one year, we have consumed the amount of wheat it took us 
two years to grow. The planting area of winter wheat has 
diminished and, whatever was left, suffered damages during the 
winter. Wheat reserves are not infinite. How about planting more 
summer wheat in the spring! We should have enough seed for 
24,000 to 25,000 hectares. 
  Growing wheat would help secure a higher level of employment 
in the rural areas--by providing employment for at least 470 
families. 
  Growing our own wheat is also more favorable to the consumer 
price-wise--by being cheaper by one third. Growing wheat will 
also help stabilize the foreign trade balance, by adding 130 to 
140 kroons to the plus-side. 

