Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Brothers" page] </F>
  [Text] Kosti, Sudan--The "Brothers" [al-Ashiqqa'] page has 
exclusively obtained the text of the speech delivered by Ibrahim 
al-Sanusi, one of the leaders of the military wing of the 
[National] Islamic Front [NIF], to the popular defense 
battalions in Kosti, a town on the White Nile. In his address 
to these forces, al-Sanusi unleashed a scathing attack on the 
so-called global arrogant forces and their Arab and African 
satellites. 
  One of the Islamic Front militia recruits asked whether the 
Islamic regime can stand fast to the end in the face of the 
blockade and its harmful effects on society. The recruit said 
society is not yet sufficiently conditioned culturally to 
prevent an all-out popular rebellion, which the opposition 
forces might exploit to overthrow the regime. Ibrahim al-Sanusi 
answered: We know very well the strength of the Sudanese 
opposition and the limits of its strength. In the first days of 
the "revolution," we offered them samples of the "Islamic" 
state's methods of dealing with the opponents of the Islamic 
regime. We hit them hard while we were strong! We then opened 
the borders to them. They left and became isolated from the 
society that we are now restructuring according to our Islamic 
concept. We have not failed in this objective. But we are 
surprised by a "handful of agents" who are hitting us inside our 
borders through various forms of conspiracy that threaten to 
open the door wide to apostasy!! 
  Al-Sanusi added: If the worst happens, as the brother who 
asked the question warned, it will come as no surprise to us. 
We have prepared ourselves and have the ability to fire in all 
arenas. If the signs of this apostasy begin to appear on our 
land, they must consider their ambassadors and nationals as our 
"hostages" while we consider that all our brothers residing in 
their countries are offering sacrifices to God. These brothers 
know they were born for this purpose, that is, either to be 
God's servants or strugglers. 
  This speech, which was printed and distributed by the 
culture 
and information branch of the People's Defense command, has 
provoked sharp controversy and a crisis between the security 
departments and the military intelligence department over 
whether this speech should be withdrawn and the videotape 
destroyed. The political command was asked to intervene to 
implement the decision. Minister of Presidential Affairs Ghazi 
Salah-al-Din intervened and insisted on keeping this speech in 
the archives of al-Jihad, belittling the possibility of foreign 
reaction in the event that it is leaked out. In a telephone 
conversation with the director of military intelligence, 
Salah-al-Din said: Let them withdraw their nationals and 
ambassadors. Have they left any relations requiring the 
presence of these ambassadors and nationals? 

