Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "There Is No Reason"] </F>
  [Text] It is incredible, unbelievable, to see how trivial 
events can push the country into a crisis that could have very 
serious consequences. The reason for what is happening is the 
simple presence of a small group of U.S. soldiers who want to 
build a school, a road, and a base. These are works that will 
benefit Colombia. The U.S. soldiers will be leaving the country 
shortly. Efforts are being made to give this episode 
constitutional significance. The State Council admitted that 
the Constitution could have been violated, transferred the 
incident to the Chamber of Representatives, and hinted that the 
president should face trial. If one looks into the origin of 
the problem, we would find that it does not have the importance 
some people are trying to give it. The problem is serious, 
though, because as the matter unfolds, dangerous elements may 
appear. 
  The State Council has every right to issue an opinion but it 
has not replied to the government's legal pronouncement and, on 
the other hand, has spoken about whether the Constitution was 
violated. As Colombians we respect what the State Council 
members think, but we believe that their position is undue 
because the authorization by the president, or the government, 
rather, of the presence of foreign soldiers has well-known 
precedents. Military missions or ships with crews from other 
countries arrive and disembark, not for warlike actions but to 
fulfill protocol activities. This is not a violation of 
sovereignty. We think that the Constitution specifically states 
that permits are necessary when armed personnel go through 
Colombian territory with the intention of intervening in a 
conflict in another country. 
  We hope we do not appear distrusting if we say that we think 
that the nasty preelectoral climate exerts influence on 
decisions in which the interests of the fatherland should 
prevail over any other motivation. Can anybody imagine that the 
presence of these U.S. soldiers implies a violation of our 
sovereignty? Are Colombia's liberty and independence in danger 
for allowing the performance of works that do not involve 
warlike activities at all? Those who have visited or are 
visiting Juanchaco could testify that the soldiers are armed 
only with shovels and that the tanks are simple tractors. 
  The president is defending a government branch, the National 
Defense Ministry, or more specifically the Armed Forces. We 
would be the first ones to demand all sorts of sanctions or 
adopting urgent measures if the sovereignty of the homeland we 
love so dearly was in danger. We therefore support the 
president, because the opposite is true. National peace is not 
consolidated with actions as the ones to which this editorial 
regrettably refers. 
  We ask our compatriots to listen to the president, evaluate 
the news conference he gave on 9 February not only to 
journalists but to the general public. Analyze the government's 
position and the valid reasons given by a president who has been 
doing a good job. We should also realize that those who want to 
attain power and are seeking future political positions take 
advantage of well-known incidents to try to undermine the 
prestige President Gaviria has honestly earned during the last 
months of his administration. 

