BFN 

<F P=106> ["Reckless War Moves Against North Must Be Stopped </F>
Immediately"--KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 17 (KCNA) -- The Kim Yong-sam 
puppet clique recently called a "meeting of security-related 
ministers" and issued orders to "examine and strengthen" their 
"policy against the North" and "security posture". And the U.S. 
ambassador to South Korea, the commander of the U.S. forces 
present in South Korea, the puppet defence minister, foreign 
minister and others were closeted to "re-examine" the war 
preparedness of the U.S. forces and the South Korean puppet army. 
  This tells that the Kim Yong-sam group advocating "civilian" 
politics is a group of war fanatics obsessed with the fever for 
Northward invasion overshadowing the successive ruling quarters, 
and it furnishes a clear proof that they make a war against the 
North a fait accompli, says a NODONG SINMUN article today. 
  Noting that military adventures of the puppets assume an 
extremely dangerous nature as they are timed to coincide with 
the massing of ground, naval and air forces in and around the 
Korean peninsula, the article goes on: 
  This notwithstanding, the United States and the South Korean 
puppets allege that the North is to blame for the aggravated 
tensions and the danger of war on the Korean peninsula. 
  It is the height of folly for the United States and the 
South 
Korean puppets to raise a hue and cry over "provocations" by the 
North. It is they who totally reversed the agreed conclusions 
reached at the DPRK-USA contact in New York and aborted the 
DPRK-USA talks for a solution of the nuclear issue on the Korean 
peninsula. It is also they who aborted the inter-Korean 
working-level contact for the exchange of presidential envoys 
between the North and the South and have been carrying the 
situation into extremes with their reckless war rackets. 
  It is as clear as noonday that they are intending to light 
the train of war against the North on some unreasonable pretext 
while massively beefing up their Armed Forces and staging 
nuclear war exercises. 
  The United States is trying to frighten others by military 
threats and attain something therefrom, styling itself "a 
superpower". But it is a big miscalculation. 
  The Kim Yong-sam group's scheme to prolong its remaining 
days 
in return for plunging the nation into a nuclear holocaust by 
following outside forces is a foolish daydream. 
  We want peace but will never beg for it. We do not want war 
but are never afraid of it. 
  The United States and the South Korean puppets must promptly 
stop their criminal war moves against the North. 

