St.   Petersburg Detailed 

<F P=102> 94WD0313A Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT in Finnish 1 Apr 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0313A </F>
<F P=104>  Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOMAT </F>
<F P=105>  Finnish </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Teuvo Arolainen: "German Police Kept Silent </F>
About Container of Cocaine in Kotka Because They Feared 
Information Leak"] 
  [Text] Wiesbaden -- The police of many countries followed 
the shipment's progress to Russia. Finnish and Swedish officials 
were not informed about it. 
  The narcotics police of several different countries followed 
the arrival of a cocaine shipment weighing more than 1,000 kg in 
Russia from Colombia via Finland over a year ago. The shipment, 
which made a stop in Viipuri, came via Goteborg and Kotka, but 
the Finnish and Swedish police were not informed about it. 
  The Germans, who headed the joint international police 
action, decided right from the start of the operation that the 
Nordic police would not be advised of the shipment beforehand. 
  "We wanted to know whether the shipment was actually going 
to 
St. Petersburg and whether the smuggling route was established 
from Colombia to Germany or elsewhere in West Europe," Chief 
Inspector of Criminal Investigation Juergen Maurer of the German 
central criminal police, the Federal Office of Criminal 
Investigation (BKA), said. "And secondly, we wanted to find out 
whether cooperation between the police of the West and East 
European countries would be successful." 
  "In cases like this -- especially when East European 
criminals are involved -- there is always the danger of 
information leaks. This is why we wanted to keep the tip-off 
within as small as possible a group of people," Maurer said. 
  "It was no indication of any sort of mistrust of the Finnish 
or Swedish police. Sensitive information simply must not be 
given to those who don't need it. I apply the same rule to my 
colleagues," Maurer assured us. 
  In keeping silent about it, the Germans took the risk that 
the shipment that was on its way to St. Petersburg might be 
prematurely revealed. According to Maurer, not even the German 
police knew the exact route. 
  "It was not as though we were letting it get through in a 
controlled way. We only heard about Goteborg and Kotka after the 
fact." 
<H5>  Israeli Contact Man Received Tip </H5>
  At the end of February of last year Viipuri customs agents 
seized the 1,092 kg of cocaine. The foundation for the seizure 
was laid in the Netherlands in late 1992 and early 1993 when an 
Israeli drug contact man stationed in The Hague received a tip: 
A big shipment of cocaine was coming from Colombia to St. 
Petersburg. 
  The tip did not supply the exact timetable or the name of 
the 
ship. However, there was enough information to find the 
shipment. According to the tip, St. Petersburg was to be only an 
intermediate stop. The final destinations of the cocaine were 
supposed to be Belgium and the Netherlands. 
  The contact man got in touch with the local narcotics police 
to get the German BKA to get the Russians to join in in tracking 
down the cocaine. After the disintegration of the Soviet Union, 
contacts were built up between the BKA and the Russian Interior 
Ministry and police. 
  The criminal investigation department organized by the BKA 
reported the shipment to the Russians and offered to cooperate 
with them. They agreed to do so and also agreed that the BKA 
would be the international communication coordinator. 
  Packed into cans of meat, the drugs left Colombia in a 
container in January 1993. An Israeli living in Bogota made the 
arrangements for the shipment. In early February the container 
arrived in Goteborg. It was soon loaded aboard the Finnish 
vessel, Bore Sea, which brought the container to Kotka on 15 
February. 
  The container left Kotka by truck for St. Petersburg via 
Vaalimaa. The contents of the container were spot-checked at 
both Kotka and Vaalimaa, but the Finns did not find the drugs. 
<H5>  Drugs Moved Through Nordic Countries </H5>
  The Russian receivers of the shipment in St. Petersburg were 
named in the tip obtained from the Israeli drug contact man. The 
Russian police arrested them when they came to pick up the 
shipment. Members of the same bunch were arrested later in 
Israel, Colombia, Belgium, and the Netherlands. So there were 
Israelis and Russians, among others, in the group. 
  Afterward, it also became clear to the police how the 
cocaine 
was to be sent back to West Europe. The drugs were supposed to 
be unpacked from the original container in Russia, repacked, and 
sent by truck to Antwerp. They planned to use joint ventures 
operating in St. Petersburg and Moscow as fronts for the 
arrangements. 
  There were probably no ready buyers for the cocaine in the 
West, that is, it was not brought in to meet a ready demand. 
"Smugglers often just bring the drugs into Europe first and only 
later look for markets for them," Chief Inspector Maurer said. 
  Cases of smuggling like the St. Petersburg cocaine shipment 
have come to light in East Europe before, but they usually 
involve smaller amounts. Maurer said that he was sure that drugs 
are moved to Central Europe through the Nordic countries and 
Russia. 
  "We have positive proof that the ports of the Baltic 
countries are used to bring in drugs. It's just that no one can 
say how much." 
  According to him, the St. Petersburg case was not the 
biggest 
cocaine seizure from the Germans' standpoint. "The case proved 
that cooperation with the Russians works very well. There were 
no information leaks and everything that was agreed on was 
adhered to." 

