CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lille correspondent Jean-Rene Lore: "PSA-Fiat's </F>
New Factory Will Employ 3,500 in 1995"; first paragraph is LE 
MONDE introduction] 
  [Text] PSA Peugeot-Citroen CEO Jacques Calvet 
emphasized the exemplary nature of the "first big auto plant 
built in France in 20 years" when he inaugurated the facility, 
dubbed Sevelnord, in Hordain, near Valenciennes in the north, on 
Monday, 16 May. The minister of industry, Gerard Longuet, and 
Giorgio Garruzo, general director of Fiat Spa, attended. The 
plant, said Calvet, is "a success that could serve as a model to 
all of France, particularly industrial France." In a region hard 
hit by unemployment, the new factory will employ 3,500 by the 
end of 1995. 
  Sevelnord, which is a joint PSA Peugeot-Citroen/Fiat 
venture, 
will make minivans competing directly with Renault's Espace and 
marketed under the names Peugeot 806, Citroen Evasion, Fiat 
Ulysse, and Lancia Zeta. The joint factory, the biggest auto 
plant built in France in 20 years, will employ 3,500 by the end 
of 1995 and will produce 130,000 vehicles annually (see LE 
MONDE, 17 May). The two partners split the cost of the Fr6 
billion investment, for which they received, stressed Calvet, 
only modest assistance (Fr250 million for regional development 
and a business tax exemption through 1998). 
  Picking up a thread started by Sevelnord director Roger 
Garnier, who described the "first big auto plant built in France 
for 20 years" as a move to defy the trend toward sending 
manufacturing work overseas, Calvet excoriated "the abominable 
Brussels Commission, which spurred European manufacturers to 
relocate offshore." He insisted during a press conference that 
"the individual expertise and combined technologies required, as 
well as the importance of auto manufacturing to our gross 
domestic products, make it an industry in which big 
industrialized countries must invest." 
<H5>  The Subsidiarity Principle </H5>
  PSA Peugeot-Citroen's CEO also reiterated his confidence in 
"occasional collaborative ventures" rather than "total mergers." 
In so doing, he offered his own version of the subsidiarity 
principle, whereby "[partners] do together what each cannot do 
alone, which," to the contrary, "means they do not do together 
what each one can do alone." To stay competitive in the 
promising minivan niche, Peugeot therefore opted to team up with 
Fiat on what is still a very cautious undertaking. "We were 
careful not to push up the cost of equipment," said Calvet, 
commenting on the "attempt to find a better balance between 
automation and manual work." Sevelnord did not opt either for 
full robotization or full automation, preferring to keep the 
flexibility offered by wage earners. "We are not exempt from the 
effects of a market turnaround," he explains. 
  Yet Sevelnord is clearly a modern factory. Though robots are 
in evidence only where they are more suitable than people 
(measurement checks, difficult or laborious tasks), the whole 
production line is computerized, making it possible to customize 
the handling of each vehicle. The goal is to manufacture on 
demand, to adhere more closely to customer needs. 
  Moreover, Longuet hailed the Sevelnord "smart plant" as a 
way 
of responding to the contradictory dual demands of "market 
segmentation and internationalization." The first calls for 
flexibility, while the second requires collaboration. 
  [Boxed Material]: 
<H5>  Record Hiring by Industry </H5>
  With 3,500 new jobs projected by the end of 1995 (current 
staffing is 2,000), PSA-Fiat's Sevelnord factory easily ranks 
first among investments that have created industrial jobs over 
the last five years. It is obviously the top investment in the 
auto industry, since it is the first new car plant since 
Citroen-Aulnay built one 20 years ago. More generally, however, 
none of the big factories built in any sector since 1990 has 
generated more than 1,000 jobs. 
  Whether you look at Aluminium Pechiney's electrolysis plant 
in Dunkerque (550 jobs) or Coca-Cola's factory in the same 
region (200), all fall under the 1,000 mark. Holland's Philips, 
which set up shop in Caen, created 300 jobs with its computer 
board factory, while the computer peripherals plant built by the 
U.S.'s StorageTek in Toulouse initially projected 400 jobs. 
  Hewlett-Packard subcontractor SCI set up a new site (900 
jobs) near Grenoble. Daewoo's plant in Lorraine was the top 
job-creator until now, with a thousand new positions. 

