Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 6 Mar (MENA)--Dr. Nabil Sha'th, political 
adviser to Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat and head of the 
Palestinian delegation to the peace talks, arrived in Cairo 
tonight after a tour of the United States, Britain, and Norway. 
  Upon his arrival, Sha'th said he will brief President 
'Arafat 
on the outcome of his tour, which focused on how to respond to 
the Palestinian people's need for security following the 
criminal al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre in Hebron. He expressed 
the belief that the most important outcome of his tour was the 
agreement of the U.S., British, and Norwegian Governments that 
providing security for the Palestinians is a top priority before 
the peace process can be resumed. The three governments also 
believe that the Palestinian demand is just and must be met. 
  Dr. Sha'th said that British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd 
expressed his country's full consent to the presence of UN 
forces in the occupied territories and British participation in 
them. The Norwegian foreign minister explained that his country 
has issued orders to the Norwegian Armed Forces and Norwegian 
planes are ready to take off immediately once a resolution is 
issued in this respect. 
  Dr. Sha'th said the Americans have declared their agreement 
in principle but want time to study the measures and discuss the 
subject with Israel. 
  Dr. Sha'th explained that in principle the three parties 
agree on the need to restrain the terrorist settlers and prevent 
the Israelis from carrying weapons in Palestinian towns and 
villages. They also agree on other measures to reduce the 
violence by the Israeli army, which after the massacre killed 
people in numbers nearly equal to those in the massacre. 
  Dr. Sha'th said that the three parties affirmed the need to 
return to the talks quickly so that the Israeli withdrawal can 
take place before 13 April. 
  Dr. Sha'th stressed that Egypt will remain a full partner in 
the talks, whether they are held in Cairo or Washington. He 
noted that it is especially significant that he started his tour 
in Egypt and returned at the end. 

