Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Observer Aleksandr Golts article under the "Topic of the </F>
Week" rubric: "Bosnian Knot and Moscow's Policy"] 
  [Text] Do you remember the cheerful mustached idiot in the 
film "Intervention" with his "regular army with a capital R -- 
now that's something special"? It seemed to this inhabitant of 
Odessa, traumatized by the civil war, that the jolly French guys 
coming ashore from their ships were a foreign army that would 
finally bring order to the war-torn country. All this week, 
while NATO's political leaders and military have been hastily 
composing plans for air attacks and agreeing the text of an 
ultimatum to the warring parties in Bosnia, I have been 
recalling this character. Because once again seemingly sensible 
politicians are being taken in by the dangerous illusion that, 
by using military might, they can settle a regional conflict. 
  Having found themselves in a truly unpleasant situation 
following the Sarajevo market tragedy (a tragedy which, let me 
note, was largely attributable to the inconsistency of those who 
have been drawn into settling the conflict), the Western states 
as if by magic resolved to resort to the threat of using 
military force. Judging by reports coming from Sarajevo, the 
various sides in the conflict have apparently agreed to a 
cease-fire; they have also agreed to withdraw their heavy 
weapons or hand them over to UN representatives. However, the 
contracting parties themselves are not hiding their considerable 
skepticism about the likelihood of the agreement being 
implemented. 
  So it is entirely possible that those who issued the 
ultimatum will find they have to carry out their threats in the 
next few days. In previous editions of KRASNAYA ZVEZDA the 
complete dubiousness of the air strikes that are being prepared 
has in my view been convincingly demonstrated. Both from the 
military and the moral viewpoint. It is quite clear that air 
attacks will not disarm those who are training their guns on the 
peaceful inhabitants. And of course, those who really are 
guilty of this crime will escape retribution. I am suggesting 
that we should concentrate on a purely utilitarian approach, so 
to speak. Is it ultimately possible for a foreign "regular army 
with a capital R" to put a stop to an internal conflict which 
has already reached the scale of a full-blown war? 
  All the experience of the last few years, which is, let us 
be 
frank, a sad experience (let us recall Somalia, for example) 
unequivocally demonstrates that however hard such an army tries 
to stay neutral and "give each sister a pair of earrings," the 
use of force in itself inevitably drags this army down to 
playing the role of one of the parties to the conflict. With 
all the consequences that this entails. Then the medicine 
really does become more dangerous than the actual disease. 
  This is precisely the reason why Russia is demanding that 
the 
issue of air strikes be discussed in the UN Security Council. 
As Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev indicates in his letter to 
the UN secretary general, the resolutions adopted earlier by the 
Security Council certainly do not give a "green light" to 
bombing missions. The fact that this approach suits Russian 
interests is demonstrated by its almost unanimous support in the 
State Duma. And if talk of partnership with the West is not 
just idle chatter, NATO cannot fail to take account of the 
Russian position. 
  It would seem that the unanimous Russian refusal to 
countenance a "forced peace" in the former Yugoslavia should 
provide guarantees about a reappraisal of strong-arm methods 
regarding Russia's policy toward Commonwealth countries. 
However, in this instance not everything is so clear-cut. In 
my view, the tragic Yugoslav experience and the West's feeble 
attempts to settle the conflict have not been duly taken on 
board in our policy toward Commonwealth countries. 
  This is the policy expressed in a blueprint which in the 
West is already being called the "Kozyrev doctrine." The issue 
revolves around the statement which has been made in a number of 
the foreign minister's speeches regarding the obvious fact that 
the CIS is a zone of vital Russian interests. Moreover, the 
minister has warned against hastily withdrawing contingents of 
Russian troops from CIS states, rightly regarding our military 
presence as a factor contributing to stability. 
  I completely disagree with those who have been quick to see 
a 
manifestation of imperial ambitions in this approach. The fact 
is that Kozyrev's blueprint is not sustained by speculative 
theories about the resurgence of the Russian empire, but by the 
harsh reality of virulent or smoldering conflicts in the 
post-Soviet area. These are conflicts which pose a direct 
threat to Russia's security. 
  However, the implementation of this blueprint could, in my 
view, conceal a quite different sort of danger. Our politicians 
could rush from one extreme to the other: From their familiar 
disregard for the role of the army to attempts to shift onto it 
all activity connected with ensuring Russian interests in 
conflict zones. 
  Practically any "trouble spot" could serve as an example of 
this. Take Tajikistan. The coalition peacekeeping forces, the 
main role in which is played by the Russian contingent, have 
managed to stabilize the situation and at least somehow to halt 
infiltration of the republic from outside. But has a lull -- a 
temporary lull, as many army commanders believe -- simply been 
exploited as a real settlement? It cannot be said that we have 
pushed official Dushanbe and the opposition toward talks. But 
fact remains a fact: The efforts of our diplomacy have 
certainly not had any real result. And will it not be the case 
that reliance on the army will be our only hope when hostilities 
flare up again in the republic with renewed force? 
  Or take the situation in the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict. 
The ink had hardly had time to dry on the treaty between Moscow 
and Tbilisi, a document which yet again focuses on the 
military-political aspect in the clearest and most explicit 
terms, than hostilities began all over again. It is hard to say 
who initiated these new military clashes. Either the Abkhazian 
forces want to check the truth of Moscow's statements that no 
military assistance will be given to Georgia before a settlement 
is achieved, or Tbilisi is trying to exploit if not the actual 
then at least the psychological advantages of the treaty. 
  It is clear, however, that this treaty has not been a way of 
prompting both sides to seek a political settlement. Nor is it 
evident at the present time that Russia is taking the 
opportunity to pursue a more active policy in the region. At 
the same time the issue of deploying Russian peacekeeping forces 
has been raised. But if this happens when the truce is 
constantly being violated, what sort of peacekeeping are we 
talking about? Our troops will once again find themselves 
between a rock and a hard place. 
  It is probably not Russian politicians' fault that the Army 
is the main instrument for settling military conflicts which 
politicians can then exploit. But it is quite clear that the 
Army cannot and should not be the only instrument. Its 
involvement is effective at the completion rather than the 
initial stage of a settlement, when it is necessary to ensure 
that the agreements which have been secured are carried out. 
However, the idea of using force to compel people to accept 
peace is a dangerous illusion. I am convinced that it will not 
work in Bosnia or in the post-Soviet area. Using the army 
without a consistent political and economic strategy for 
ensuring a settlement gives rise to far more problems than it 
solves. 

