Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Uglev, associate at the State </F>
Institute for Organic Synthesis Technologies, by Andrey 
Zhdankin, place and date not given: "Everyone Will Know the 
Formula for Binary Death"] 
  [Text] Last week the press was following development 
of the affair involving Vil Mirzayanov, a doctor of chemical 
sciences accused of divulging state secrets. Together with Lvov 
Fedorov, Mirzayanov informed the world that in violation of 
every agreement, our country was until recently producing the 
newest types of chemical weapons. The situation exploded when 
his colleague Vladimir Uglev, an associate at the State 
Institute for Organic Synthesis Technologies--the leading 
institute in the sphere of chemical weapons development, stated 
in an open letter that unless he was given an audience with the 
president so that he could convey his point of view on 
"implementation of the Convention on the Banning of Chemical 
Weapons and problems regarding chemical weapons destruction," he 
would be compelled on 4 February to reveal the formulas of these 
weapons to the press. 
  The ultimatum did not have a chance to expire since by 
hook or by crook, V. Uglev succeeded in securing a meeting with 
Yuriy Baturin, presidential adviser on security matters. Our 
correspondent met with Vladimir Uglev immediately following this 
meeting. 
  Zhdankin: What is your relationship to chemical 
weapons? 
  Uglev: I have been involved in their development 
over the course of 15 years. I wound up in a group generating 
the newest developments, and headed this group. Substance A-232, 
based upon which our country's latest binary device was 
manufactured (code name "Novice"--Ed.), came out of my flask. I 
have gone through all the stages--from synthesis to military 
testing of chemical weapons. 
  Zhdankin: What is the essence of our problems 
related to chemical weapons destruction? 
  Uglev: The main problem is the fact that a 
realistic assessment must be made of the extent of their 
stockpiles, because in actuality they significantly exceed the 
declared amount of 40,000 tonnes. "Excess" stores are being 
hurriedly destroyed right now using barbaric methods at various 
testing facilities, including the Shikhany Testing Grounds. 
Specialists who are working there confirm this. In addition, I 
observed such detonations myself. The unit commander (of the 
testing grounds--Ed.), General Danilkin, asserts that 
conventional, nonchemical charges are being detonated. This does 
not conform to reality. There is a certain cloud that forms 
following the detonation of chemical ammunition--I saw this 
myself. In addition, there is the testimony of officers who 
attest that over the course of recent years toxic substances 
have systematically been simply poured out onto the ground, or 
mixed with fuel and burned. These methods present a horrible 
danger to all life in the district, primarily to people. 
  Zhdankin: Why did you select such an inflexible 
form of conversation with the leadership of the country? 
  Uglev: This was an act of desperation. I had no 
other means available to attract the attention of the 
authorities. The judicial persecution of Vil Mirzayanov 
continues. I believe these proceedings are unjust--they trample 
upon the Constitution and human rights. 
  Zhdankin: You have just met with Yuriy Baturin in 
the Kremlin. Did you reach any understanding? 
  Uglev: I am satisfied with the meeting, but I do 
not know how things will go from here. I hope Vil Sultanovich 
will be released in the near future. At my meeting with Yuriy 
Mikhaylovich we reached an understanding that the problem of 
chemical weapons is exceedingly serious and that resolving it 
will require methods other than those being proposed by the 
Convention Committee and directorate headed by the chief of 
Chemical Troops. The problem hinges primarily on social 
questions. I am referring to the mood of the population in those 
regions where destruction is planned. The populace will not 
allow plants to be built. The Chapayevsk experience shows this. 
  Zhdankin: Can it be that chemical weapons are now 
simply unnecessary trash? 
  Uglev: Chemical weapons have a short shelf life. 
They can be used when combat operations are actually underway or 
preparations for them are being made. But time is required to 
accumulate them [as published]. After five or 10 years they turn 
into dust subject to destruction. They become simply a poison, 
dangerous only to whoever possesses them. 
  Zhdankin: You have manufactured this poison with 
your own hands for 15 years, and now you are complicating things 
in your life and the lives of those near and dear to you? 
  Uglev: As one of the developers, I consider it a 
crime to remain silent any longer. I see those circles that used 
to fight in support of chemical weapons--and today they have 
become the ones fighting just as energetically for their swift 
destruction. Obtaining tremendous amounts of money for weapons 
destruction, they are spending it quite unwisely, like always, 
and causing the greatest detriment to the ecology. These are 
extremely dishonorable people accustomed to telling lies under 
any regime. And they are lying now. They have just one 
desire--to stay afloat at any price. 

