Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Noemi Ulloa: "Investment for Life"] </F>
  [Excerpt] Instead of "a loaf of bread under his arm," each 
child born in Ecuador now bears the burden of more than $1,000 
(2 million sucres) in foreign debt. 
  Perhaps for this reason, among many others, the citizens of 
Ecuador today want fewer children than was the case in the past. 
The decline in population growth from 3.1 percent in 1974 to 2.1 
percent per year in 1992 is the most important change in the 
demographic development of the country. 
  About 300,000 children are born in Ecuador every year, and 
approximately 15,000 die before they reach the age of one year. 
  Both the mortality rate and the birthrate have been 
gradually 
declining for about 10 years. According to the figures of the 
National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), the 
birthrate is 18.2 per thousand inhabitants on the national level. 
  Ecuador is among the countries with average birthrates, 
although it continues to have a high rate of infant mortality, 
at 37.9 per thousand live births. 
  According to Plutarco Naranjo, the former minister of 
health, 
respiratory and gastrointestinal infections are the leading 
causes of infant deaths, followed by diarrhea, infectious 
diseases, and parasitic diseases. 
  Naranjo expressed regret that there is no serious long-term 
plan in the country to begin as of now to resolve the major 
problems of infancy. 
  He expressed the view that under the present circumstances 
in 
Ecuador, there is neither enough time being devoted, nor enough 
other resources such as experience, capability, and adequate 
projections for the future being allocated, to be able to plan 
for the future over the long run. 
  But not everything is gloomy. The successes achieved in 
Ecuador in the realm of education place it in a vanguard 
position among the Andean nations. 
  The illiteracy rate (10 percent) is the lowest in this 
subregion, and public expenditure on education as a segment of 
the gross domestic product (GDP) (3.5 percent) ranks second only 
to the figure for Venezuela. 
  To this progress one must add the approval of the new 
Minors' 
Code, which introduces the concept developed in the Convention 
on the Rights of Children that imposes greater responsibility 
for children on society and the family. 
  Despite the advances made, the children in Ecuador will 
enter 
the 21st century at high risk in terms of mortality and 
malnutrition. The basic reasons for this situation are the level 
of poverty in which their mothers are living and the 
unsatisfactory quality and quantity of the health, environmental 
protection, and educational services being offered. [passage 
omitted] 

