BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mats Hallgren: "`Plague Flag' for Swedish Model"] </F>
  [Text] Luxembourg -- Sweden and the Swedish welfare model 
should be a cautionary example now that the rest of Europe is to 
attempt to boost economic growth and reduce unemployment. 
  Sweden's deep crisis shows that there has to be a balance 
between the production sector of the economy and the social, 
public sector. If this balance is disturbed, as in Sweden for 
example, a country's socioeconomic system could be threatened. 
  So claims the EU's [European Union] Economic and Social 
Committee in a report which was handed over to the EU's finance 
ministers at a meeting in Luxembourg yesterday. 
  The Economic and Social Committee is one of the EU bodies to 
which proposed measures are referred for consideration and 
comprises among others representatives of employers and trade 
union organizations in the EU countries. The committee normally 
gives advice and expresses its views on new EU legislation and 
major common political initiatives. 
  In Monday's report the committee gives the views of the two 
sides of industry on the so-called white book on growth and 
employment. The white book is an attempt at a common economic 
crisis program with the aim of halving the record levels of 
unemployment in Europe by the end of the century. This crisis 
program will be one of the main points on the agenda of the EU's 
upcoming summit in Greece at the end of June. 
  In its report the committee makes special mention of 
Scandinavia and Sweden as cautionary examples. The Scandinavian 
welfare model, which has been studied and admired by all the 
industrialized countries for decades, is being reevaluated, the 
report says. There is now clear evidence here that a loss of 
balance between the productive economy and the state welfare 
system gives rise to strong negative reactions and plunges the 
whole of the socioeconomic system into crisis. 
  The report makes special mention of Sweden as an example and 
points out that Swedish unemployment, which has long been very 
low, has now risen to record levels. 
  The large public sector in Sweden is no longer able to 
absorb 
this unemployment. The weakened productive sector and the 
general recession have robbed the public sector of the necessary 
resources, the report states. 
  "We must learn the lesson from this in the EU countries. The 
conclusion is that balance must be maintained between the free 
market sector and the state sector," said Aldo Romoli, Italian 
employers' representative from the Montedison company. 
  However, it is not only the employers' side which points to 
Sweden by way of warning. The trade union representatives on 
the committee back the text of the report. 
  Klaus Schmitz, representative of the German trade union 
confederation: "The figures from Sweden speak their clear 
language. All of us in Europe want a social welfare model, with 
a productive industry and low unemployment. That is why we have 
to analyze the Swedish example and learn from the mistakes that 
have been made," he said. 
  Klaus Schmitz claimed that maintaining the balance between 
the private and public sectors is a necessity in Europe if we 
are to avoid finding ourselves with a model reminiscent of the 
United States: "There there are no concepts such as solidarity 
and social security. Their model fits in badly with our 
European values and it is a model we do not want," Klaus Schmitz 
said. 

