CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Shuhong (1728 2562 4767): "Thoughts on Two </F>
Percentages: For Development, `Look to Nine,' for Stability, 
Look to `Ten'"] 
  [Text] Listening to a Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference committee deliberate a "government work 
report," I was often reminded of two figures, one is the nine 
percent 1994 economic growth rate index and the other is the 10 
percent 1994 price control index (that is, to control price 
inflation to below two digits). A committee member said these 
are two crucial percentages concerning whether the economy can 
sustain rapid healthy growth and overall stability. 
  So, what are the implications of the two percentages, and 
what do they signify? 
<H5>  Starting Out With Two 13 Percent </H5>
  The evening before the "two meetings" [the Second Session of 
the Eighth NPC and the Second Session of the Eight National 
Committee of the CPPCC] convened, the State Statistical Bureau 
published statistical reports on 1993 national economic and 
social development, in which most attention was drawn to two 
percentages: one, gross domestic product grew 13.4 percent over 
1992, and two, the retail price index rose 13 percent over 1992. 
  Two 13 percents: one good, one worrisome. The good news is 
that the national economy continued to sustain a relatively high 
growth rate on top of 1992's high rate. The 13.4 percent implies 
that 1993 had the highest one-year growth since 1985. This 
growth was higher than the world's liveliest economic 
region--the average Asian economic growth rate is seven 
percentage points, enough to astound the world. The worrisome 
thing is that price inflation was too high and inflationary 
presure has not completely subsided. Committee Member Zhou 
Zhiying [0719 0037 5391], deputy director of the economic 
research center of the state statistical committee, explained 
that price inflation greater than two digits occurred in 1993 
for the fourth and fifth times since the country was founded. 
  One good, one worrisome news also can be regarded as both 
good and bad. The committee members believe that rapid growth is 
good but it brings along such issues as serious restraint 
"bottlenecks," too large a scale of fixed asset investment, and 
severe inflation. The secret worry of an "overheated economy" 
lies behind the high speed. Overly high price increases are bad 
but at the same time in 1993 a rather large step was taken in 
price reform. The situation of rather low base product prices 
and infrastructure charges is changing. This is of important 
significance for promoting the formation of market mechanisms, 
so the situation also can be called happiness amidst worry. 
  Nine Percent: The Best Integration Between Pace and 
Results 
  Committee Member Xiong Xingmei [3574 1840 5019], executive 
director of Nankai University's International Economic Research 
Institute is working on the research topic of "economic growth 
and forecasting." He brought along a research paper in which 
they concluded from a model analysis that in 1994 an economic 
growth rate of about nine percent (eight percent to 10 percent) 
was the best choice. Committee Member Xiong was entirely happy 
that the results of their research happened to coincide with 
state planning goals. 
  Committee Member Xiong feels that growth rates greater than 
10 percent are unsuitable, otherwise, we will pay a price for 
sustaining overly high growth rates. Actually, such a price has 
begun to emerge. Input growth rates far and away surpass actual 
economic growth rates and economic results are fal ling. The 
contradictions of an irrational economic structure and 
imbalanced national economic sectors are more prominent each 
day. The pressure of inflation clearly is great. Overly fast 
growth also has given rise to export growth reductions and 
faster import growth. Furthermore, high speed growth allows no 
optimism for the resource and environmental situation. 
  It will not do to have rates too fast yet slower speeds are 
unacceptable. Low speed is contrary to the people of the 
nation's desire to seize good opportunities and accelerate 
growth. Furthermore, overall, China's economy still is a "speed 
and efficiency type" of economy; improved results depend on 
higher speed. Deceleration naturally means slumping results, 
greater losses for enterprises and less fiscal income, or 
overall tension in the economic situation. Likewise, this is 
something we do not wish to see. 
  The way for China's economy to sustain steady, fast, healthy 
growth is to unite high speed with high results. Committee 
Member Xiong believes that the best mixture of speed and results 
is about nine percent. 
  What is the basis for "10 percent"? 
  During the discussions a committee member asked: is there 
any 
basis for proposing the price index be held below 10 percent? 
Was it chosen arbitrarily? 
  Of course there is a basis. Committee member Zhao Haikuan 
[6392 3189 1401 ] explained, according to current international 
standards, a price index below three percent is acceptable 
inflation. Medium range inflation is between four percent and 10 
percent. Serious inflation is over 10 percent. Thus, 
theoretically, 10 percent is the dividing line between general 
and serious inflation. 
  Committee Member Zhao believes that considering the broad 
desires of the masses and cadres, controlling the price index to 
10 percent still is rather high. However, seeing that in 1993 
the growth rate was 13 percent, and at the same time we also 
want to maintain a relatively high growth rate, thus, in see 
king truth from facts, controlling the price index within 10 
percent is not a bad result. It is a positive goal. 
  Although in 1993 such a high price rate did not give rise to 
social problems, would it be alright to exceed 10 percent in 
1994? Commit tee Member Wang Shiying [3769 0013 5391] replied: 
No. Practice proves that the theory of inciting economic growth 
with infl ation is untenable. We must not forget that this index 
is based on the price levels of 1993 which rose too quickly and 
wild ly rather than merely seeing that 1994 goals are in no 
great danger. We cannot overestimate the masses' forbearance. 
  Another critical 30 percent 
  We must both allow the economy to sustain a rather high rate 
of growth and also control the tendency of prices to rise too 
quickly. This is a dilemma. A common critical factor affecting 
the realization of these two goals is the matter of the scale of 
investment in fixed assets, concretely expressed as investment 
rates. 
  The so-called investment rate is a ratio between the scale 
of 
fixed asset investment and gross domestic product. This is a 
commonly used international index to measure whether the 
rationality of fixed asset investment scales. Committee Member 
Zhou Zhiying explained, referring to foreign practices, summing 
up China's economic growth experience and lessons of the past 10 
or so years, an investment rate less than 30 percent is 
appropriate. If over 30 percent, all economic relationships will 
become tense. In 1987 and 1988 investment rates exceeded 30 
percent and the economy was "overheated." There was double digit 
inflation for two consecutive years. 
  What has been the situation in the past several years? In 
1992 the investment rate reached 32.7 percent. At the beginning 
of 1993 when plans were formulated, the need to control 
investment rates to within 30 percent was proposed. But in the 
course of implementation investment scales rose. Ultimately, in 
1993 the investment rate reached 37.7 percent, up five 
percentage points over 1992. In 1994, plans call for fixed asset 
investment of 1.3 trillion yuan. The investment rate still will 
be higher than 32 percent based on a nine percent forecasted 
gross domestic product. The effect on all economic relationships 
cannot be called optimistic. 
  Therefore, Committee Member Zhou Zhiying emphasized that we 
definitely must really do a good job of macroeconomic 
readjustment and control. In particular we must strictly control 
overly r apid growth in the scale of fixed asset investment and 
truly stress a superior investment structure, ensuring that each 
development and construction goal is met, providing a relaxed 
environment to promote reform. 


