Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondents Boris Krivoshey and </F>
Vladimir Taranov] 
  [Text] Moscow, 29 Mar -- "Thanks to the presence in 
`trouble spots' of Russian peacemaking forces, far more numerous 
civilian casualties have been prevented." Thus reads a joint 
statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of 
Defense of the Russian Federation [RF] with which Grigoriy 
Karasin, director of the Information and Press Department of the 
RF Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acquainted journalists at 
today's briefing. 
  "The document states that claims have been made recently in 
remarks by certain politicians and foreign media publications 
about the `ambiguousness' of Russia's peacemaking mission on the 
territories of several countries within the CIS." Furthermore, 
"not only have facts been arbitrarily interpreted but also 
freely or unintentionally distorted." 
  As a result, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the 
Ministry 
of Defense of the Russian Federation stated that "Russia's 
actions are aimed only at halting armed clashes in a number of 
newly independent states, at stabilizing the situation there, 
and at creating the conditions for long-term and stable 
settlements." Over the past ten months alone, Russia has spent 
about 26 billion rubles [R] on peacemaking. There are over 
15,000 Russian servicemen in `trouble spots' on the territory of 
the CIS states. 
  Peacemaking in Commonwealth countries is not "something 
Russia does on its own initiative," the document stresses. In 
all cases without exception, Russia's actions have been 
undertaken at the request and with the consent of the states 
concerned and of the sides involved in the conflicts. This is 
also fully in line with the provisions of the UN Charter, which 
not only allows for, but also welcomes the possibility of 
settling the questions of maintaining peace on the basis of 
agreements between the interested states. Russia has 
consistently advocated the broadest participation of the UN and 
the CSCE in settling the conflicts in CIS countries, the 
statement says. 
  "Firmly pursuing the course towards ensuring peace and 
stability around its borders and towards abiding by its 
commitments under agreements with the countries concerned within 
the framework of the CIS, Russia is not setting its efforts 
against anyone. We are not demanding a special place or an 
exceptional role, but neither are we evading our responsibility 
for the situation in this key region for Russia," says the joint 
statement from Russia's foreign and defense ministries. 

