BFN 

  [Excerpt] (TURKISH CYPRIOT NEWS AGENCY)--Greek Cypriot 
police pressure on Turkish Cypriots living in south Cyprus, who 
make up a community of 1,000 people, assumed appalling 
dimensions following the assassination of Theofilos Yeoryiadhis. 
Turkish Cypriot Ilker Denizci crossed to the Greek Cypriot side 
after being misled by Greek Cypriot propaganda on 4 March 1994. 
He hoped to earn money to have a better life. But Denizci was 
detained by Greek Cypriot civilian police officials in a village 
in the British base area in Akrotiri and taken to the police 
center in Limassol. He was accused of being a Turkish agent. 
Denizci worked as a skilled construction worker. He was 
hastily interrogated. A police official named Andreas [no 
surname as published], nearly 1.70 meters tall, insulted him by 
saying: Dirty dog, we do not want you here. You must all go 
away. 
  Denizci was then mercilessly tortured with electrical 
batons, 
metal bars, and sticks for hours. Cigarettes were applied to 
various parts of his body and an electrical current was applied 
to the more sensitive areas. He was later taken to a village in 
the foothills of the Troodos Mountains in a jeep. Denizci was 
savagely beaten there. He was later forced to sign two 
documents saying that he would not return to the Greek Cypriot 
side and that the Greek Cypriot police treated him well. 
Denizci was placed in a cell-like room after signing the 
documents. Four Greek Cypriot civilian police armed with 
Kalashnikov rifles took Denizci to an area near the Greek 
Cypriot positions across from Doganci [Elea] at about 2200 on 
Thursday [8 April]. He was mercilessly beaten, dragged to the 
ground, kicked, hit repeatedly on the head with hand gun butts, 
and punched in the face for nearly 20 minutes. The Greek 
Cypriot police officials then took the 370 Cyprus pounds he had 
saved while working on the Greek Cypriot side for nearly six 
weeks and forced him to leave and go to the Turkish positions in 
the area. 
  Denizci cannot walk because of the merciless torture. His 
body is covered with injuries and he is receiving medical 
treatment in the Burhan Nalbantoglu Hospital in Nicosia. 
Denizci held a news conference in the hospital yesterday. 
[passage omitted] 

