BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Fei Weiwei (6316 0251 0251): "The Party and </F>
Government Are Concerned About Coal Enterprises' Difficulties; 
Help Them Clear Up Debts"] 
  [Text] According to the Ministry of Coal Industry, serious 
defaulting by users of coal for some time have caused funding 
tensions among coal enterprises and have rendered a small number 
of these enterprises unable to pay their employees' wages. The 
party Central Committee and the State Council have attached 
great importance to and shown great concern for the coal 
industry's plight, listened to many reports from the Ministry of 
Coal Industry, and adopted a series of effective measures one 
after another, thus alleviating funding tensions among coal 
mines to a great extent. 
  The measures included: 1) The state allocated 4 billion yuan 
in loans and funds to help coal enterprises clear payments 
defaulted on by users. So far 2.2 billion yuan has been 
collected. 2) The state appropriately lowered value-added tax 
rate on coal enterprises; thus, the value-added rate on coal 
products has dropped from 17 percent to 13 percent. Moreover, 
state financial departments offered an additional 1.71 billion 
yuan in subsidies to prevent an increased tax burden on key 
state-owned coal mines. 3) Coal prices were raised 
appropriately. 4) Settlement methods for payments for coal were 
changed to avoid the occurrence of new debts, while previous 
debts have just been cleared up. 5) The state will continue to 
provide coal mines with 2 billion yuan in loans at discount 
interest rates and will support coal enterprises in developing 
diverse economic undertakings and tertiary industry and finding 
jobs for excess personnel. 
  Thanks to support given by the state and efforts exerted by 
coal enterprises' employees, the reform of China's coal industry 
has maintained a good momentum and has continued to advance. 
From January to May this year, the country's raw coal output 
amounted to 416 million tonnes, an increase of 2.18 percent over 
the same period last year, and the demands placed on coal by the 
rapid growth of the national economy was thus guaranteed; the 
number of deaths and injuries in the country caused by mine 
accidents this year dropped by 0.6 percent from the 
corresponding period last year; and the fulfillment of targets 
to reduce losses and increase profits has continued to improve 
steadily month after month. 

