Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean-Francois Augereau: "Europe Reaches an </F>
Agreement on Manned Flights"] 
  [Text] Eventually, it took the Europeans over one year 
after their Granada (Spain) meeting of November 1992, to reach 
an agreement on their manned space flight policy. Following 
several postponements, in October and December 1993, 
representatives of ESA (European Space Agency) member states 
agreed on Tuesday 18 January, after a marathon negotiation. 
  The Europeans decided to provide preliminary financing over 
the next two years for the MSTP (Manned Space Transportation 
Program) supported by the French (up to 107 million accounting 
units[.sup]1[/]) and for the Columbus program pushed by the 
Germans (270 million accounting units). The Europeans will meet 
again in mid-1995 to decide whether or not to proceed with these 
programs. 
  The first of these programs, the cost to completion of which 
was estimated last September at a little under 2 billion 
accounting units, aims to service orbital space stations with 
two vehicles: the CTV (Crew Transport Vehicle), a sort of large 
capsule capable of carrying men and equipment; and the ATV 
(Automated Transfer Vehicle), an intelligent service module 
required for setting manned modules and capsules into orbit and 
for their rendezvous operations. According to the ESA, the 
second flight of the new European Ariane-5 launcher, in 1996, 
might provide an opportunity to launch a sort of unmanned 
pre-CTV. 
  The second program, Columbus, has an estimated cost of 2.3 
billion accounting units; it will involve building a manned 
module, the APM (Attached Pressurized Module), which is becoming 
less ambitious as time and budgets go by and should one day be 
added to the future international space station concocted by the 
Americans and the Russians, soon to be joined by the Europeans 
and the Japanese. 
  The ESA council decided to implement an "Act in council" 
that 
should soon bring the MSTP and Columbus programs under a single 
banner, making it easier to negotiate with manufacturers and to 
join forces for the negotiations with Moscow and Washington. 
Footnotes 
  1. One accounting unit is worth about 7 French francs. 

