Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [NHAN DAN 24 March editorial: "Great Potential in </F>
Vietnam-Malaysia Relations"] 
  [Text] Ties between Vietnam and Malaysia and other 
nations in the region have developed positively in the past. 
Vietnam has joined the Bali Treaty, become observer to ASEAN, 
and participated in various ASEAN activities. 
  Following General Secretary Do Muoi's official visit to 
Singapore and Thailand in October 1993, his official visit to 
Malaysia this time will, once again, assert Vietnam's open-door 
foreign policy of independence, sovereignty, and diversified 
diplomatic activities, which has been welcomed by the region and 
the world. It will also help strengthen our foreign policy 
towards Southeast Asia and ASEAN member countries, thereby 
contributing to enhancing stability, security, and development 
in the region. 
  We are pleased to see the great achievements scored by the 
Malaysian people in their efforts to build a prosperous and 
happy country. In implementing the new economic policy in the 
past two decades or more, the Malaysian people through their 
efforts, creativity, and hard work, have brought their country 
from a renowned rubber and tin producing nation to an 
industrial-manufacturing nation with modern electronic 
facilities. Its engineering production sector has contributed 
greatly to the GNP. In the first three years of the 90's, this 
sector's output accounted for 29 percent of the GNP, compared to 
23 percent in the 70's. In 1993, Malaysia attained an economic 
growth of eight percent, thus balancing the national budget for 
the first time. It also achieved a balance of payments surplus 
of $200 million in 1993 compared to a $2.2-billion deficit in 
1992. Its per capita income now is $2,965 [figure as heard] and 
it is estimated that Malaysia's GNP will increase to 8.5-9 
percent in 1994. Therefore, the goal of turning Malaysia into a 
developed and industrialized country by the year 2020 is likely 
to materialize. 
  Vietnam and Malaysia are two close neighbors. We have 
similarities in our history and culture. The two countries 
have, for a long time established relations of friendship, 
mutual trust, and understanding. In recent years, the 
multifaceted cooperation between the two countries have 
developed rapidly and favorably. In 1993, Prime Minister Vo Van 
Kiet paid an official friendship visit to Malaysia, while 
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed returned the visit 
with a trip to Vietnam, thus helping to strengthen cooperation. 
The two sides are effectively implementing bilateral agreements 
on promoting and ensuring investments, and on shipping, 
economic, scientific-technological, postal, and environmental 
protection cooperation as well as on payments between the state 
banks of the two nations. 
  The Malaysian Government has also decided to provide Vietnam 
with $700,000 worth of aid to help us build and develop our 
infrastructure. It has agreed to provide training to Vietnamese 
public health and economic workers. Two-way trade value 
increased from $20 million in 1985 to $100 million in 1990, 
while a substantial increase was attained in 1993. 
  To date, Malaysia has 24 investment projects in Vietnam with 
a total capital of more than $200 million. It is the second 
highest investor among ASEAN countries and 10th among countries 
investing in Vietnam. Bilateral cooperation in culture, the 
arts, and tourism has also been promoted. 
  Worthy of note is that the Malaysian leaders and people have 
expressed their willingness to share with Vietnam their 
experiences in national construction and development. Prime 
Minister Mahathir Mohamed has said: We are ready to enhance 
friendship and cooperation with Vietnam because we are confident 
that Vietnam is honestly wishing to live in peace and 
cooperation with neighboring countries in the Southeast Asian 
community. 
  General Secretary Do Muoi has recently asserted that the 
Vietnamese party, state, and people's wishes to consistently 
strengthen the relations of friendship, solidarity, and 
multifaceted cooperation with Malaysia. 
  We wish General Secretary Do Muoi's official friendship 
visit 
to Malaysia, a beautiful and congenial country, a splendid 
success, thereby opening up the great potential in 
Vietnam-Malaysia ties, while contributing to strengthening 
peace, friendship, cooperation, and prosperity for Southeast 
Asia and the Asia-Pacific. 

