CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Mukhammat Sabirov, prime minister of </F>
Tatarstan, by TATAR-INFORM correspondent Zhanna Khidiatullina; 
place and date not given: "'Our Salvation Is in Our Own Hands'"] 
  [Text] The 19th Session of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Republic of Tatarstan voted the budget of the Republic of 
Tatarstan on condition that a program for extricating the 
republic's economy from crisis be presented for consideration 
prior to 30 May. A correspondent of the TATAR-INFORM Agency 
asked Mukhammat Sabirov, prime minister of Tatarstan, to 
describe how the government will in so short a space of time 
prepare for discussion at a special session of the Supreme 
Soviet a document that will possibly determine the future course 
of the republic's economic development. 
  [Khidiatullina] The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of 
Tatarstan is working on an anticrisis program. Is the situation 
in the economy that serious? 
  [Sabirov] Perhaps we have not been all that successful in 
our 
choice of terms. I would not say that our economy is in a crisis 
phase. Of course, many enterprises are approaching this, but 
there is a whole number of sectors that are developing perfectly 
normally. Nonetheless, as of the start of 1994 the situation has 
been getting more acute by the month. 
  It cannot be forgotten that the integration of Tatarstan's 
economy in that of Russia is so strong that we cannot fail to 
experience all its fluctuations. We have powers sufficient 
merely for influencing the speed and abruptness of these 
changes. I refer primarily to the situation that has taken shape 
on account of the mutual arrears. M. Shaymiyev, president of the 
Republic of Tatarstan, and members of the Cabinet of Ministers 
of Tatarstan have since last year been trying to persuade the 
leadership of the Russian Federation to agree to mutual offsets. 
This can in no way be called a market measure, of course, but 
nor has Moscow thought up any other solution as yet. And 
everyone has become a debtor in this time. Even those that are 
working and selling their products without interruption. The 
Tatneft Association has been forced to lay people off and send 
them on administrative leave because there is nothing with which 
to pay them. This huge enterprise cannot obtain the R400 billion 
it has earned. Reciprocal debts between enterprises of Tatarstan 
and Russia now constitute approximately R2 trillion. 
  Several days ago I traveled to rural areas of the republic. 
There are farms on which people have not been paid since 
November! 
  Many people are applying to the banks for loans. You are 
well 
aware of the rate--21 percent and higher. If their repayment 
times are missed, the amount doubles. The enterprises are, 
understandably, embedding these charges in production costs--a 
well-known chain! And there are some organizations and small 
plants that are already being refused credit (the banks fear for 
their money also), and the former, having spent up their working 
assets, are starting to eat through their fixed capital. 
  We are in a position to support only firms manufacturing 
products which the republic needs. We will do this regardless of 
forms of ownership of the enterprises. 
  Some of them will be deemed insolvent, but what is to be 
done? Tatarstan cannot resolve this problem alone. Particularly 
when it is a question of plants of the former 
military-industrial complex. It is splendid, of course, that 
virtually no weapons are being produced by our hands now, but 
these enormous machine tools which manufactured aircraft wings 
or the hulls of warships are not ready for the manufacture of 
flat-irons or washing machines. How to provide work for 160,000 
persons who, following every conceivable reduction, remain at 
these plants? We are managing to do some things. The 
construction of a tanker fleet will ensure long-term orders for 
the Gorkiy Plant in Zelenodolsk, helicopters of our specialized 
association enjoy continued demand, and the Kazan Aviation Plant 
has called and announced that, aside from the Tu-204, there is a 
decree of the Government of the Russian Federation on the 
placement of orders for the new Tu-330 cargo plane carrying 
20-30 tonnes. But such enterprises as the Lenin 
Science-Production Association cannot, whichever way they turn, 
making linoleum and artificial leather, resolve the problems of 
conversion. It is essential that Russia begin to fulfill its 
obligations identified in the treaty and intergovernmental 
agreements. But, despite all our efforts, we have been unable as 
yet to adopt the necessary measures. 
  [Khidiatullina] So an operational program of the solution of 
Tatarstan's problems is essential? 
  [Sabirov] Undoubtedly, but everything must be done to ensure 
that this program work with a view to the future. Only a madman 
could dream of a return to the past, but we have not really 
attempted to ponder in earnest what precisely the economic 
system in our country might look like. Work has been under way 
in the Cabinet of Ministers for a year now, it is true, on the 
"Guidelines of the Economic and Social Development of the 
Republic of Tatarstan Corresponding to the New Constitution of 
the Republic of Tatarstan." Scientists, economists, and 
practical experts have been taking part. The draft has already 
been prepared. Foreign specialists are conducting an expert 
appraisal of it at this time. Together with the Constitution of 
the Republic of Tatarstan, the treaty between Russia and 
Tatarstan, and the government program, it will be the basis of 
the program of stabilization of the economy of the Republic of 
Tatarstan that is being devised at this time. The main aim is to 
ensure that any development of events have as little affect on 
our people as possible. We are studying the economic situation 
of many countries and borrowing the positive experience of 
Germany, Hungary, and Turkey. But none of these states can 
suggest specific solutions for us. For example, Turkey's private 
enterprises are working excellently, and their product is 
competitive. But we cannot fail to be alerted by the rate of 
inflation and the appearance of large masses of impoverished 
people here. We must blaze our own trail. 
  [Khidiatullina] How is the work on the document that will be 
offered for discussion by the deputies of the Supreme Soviet of 
Tatarstan going in practice? 
  [Sabirov] All ministries and departments are drawing up 
their 
proposals at this time. Every five days members of the 
government meet to discuss the progress of the accomplishment of 
this important task. We had been prepared to consider several 
alternative versions, but when we began to listen to the 
proposals of the ministers and deputy prime ministers, we 
realized that there were no sharp disagreements. Everyone, 
generally, sees the goal identically. Differences arise during 
discussion of the tactics of its achievement. 
  [Khidiatullina] This is strange. A few days ago Ravil 
Muratov, deputy prime minister of the Republic of Tatarstan, 
speaking at a news conference, complained that the number of 
conservatives surrounding the prime minister was inordinate.... 
  [Sabirov] It is possible that this opinion emerged because 
everyone was engaged in the solution of problems of his own 
department or sector. We had never exchanged opinions on 
strategic matters so candidly before. Now, after several such 
meetings and frank exchanges of opinion, we have succeeded in 
bringing our positions closer together. This is easily checked, 
incidentally, because there are verbatim records of all the 
sessions. All agreed on the need for the adoption of 
well-considered decisions. And I cannot accuse any member of the 
Cabinet of Ministers of any opposition. 
  The program will incorporate a whole number of practical 
measures. In addition, we are formulating a mechanism of its 
implementation--enforceable enactments and draft laws and 
edicts. Adopting another declaration would be a waste of time. I 
allow of the possibility of the Supreme Soviet granting the 
president special powers, in accordance with which his edicts 
would have the force of law, for the time of realization of this 
document. Adopting operational decisions and energetic measures 
is impossible without this. 
  The State Committee for Economics and Forecasting has been 
entrusted with collating the proposals of all departments. Its 
chairman, Filza Khamidullin, has been relieved of all current 
business and has the right to enlist any specialist of the 
republic in this work. A rough version of the consolidated 
program will be ready by 16 May, and after the amendments--20 
May--it will be presented to the president and the chairman of 
the Supreme Soviet. All the valuable suggestions of the foreign 
experts will have been inserted in it before 25 May. Although, 
granted all my respect for them, I am convinced that our 
salvation lies in our own hands. 
  [Khidiatullina] Will you have completed all the work by 30 
May, it is a painfully tight time scale. 
  [Sabirov] Had the Cabinet of Ministers not thus far been 
working for, I repeat, almost a year, on a solution of the 
problem, doing this in haste, in a matter of days, would be 
impossible. But I am now confident that the deputies will on 30 
May begin discussion of the program of stabilization of the 
economy of Tatarstan. 

