BFN 

<F P=106> ["Off My Chest" column by Neville de Silva from the "Focus" </F>
page: "Lu Ping's Dismal Visit Shows the Heavy Hand of Beijing"] 
  [Text] However much apologists try to colour wash Hong 
Kong and Macao Affairs Director Lu Ping's visit here to make it 
seem a success, the truth is that he did not endear himself to 
the Hong Kong people. There are those who will airily dismiss 
public opinion polls as of little meaning and significance, 
unless of course such polls tend to buttress their own 
viewpoints. 
  Even if one concedes this, the comments of some considered 
sympathetic to Beijing appear to reflect public displeasure at 
Lu Ping's crass discourtesy in refusing to even say hello to 
Governor Patten. That exhibition of poor taste and even worse 
diplomacy, was compounded by the often contradictory 
explanations offered by Chinese officials and their sycophants 
for Mr Lu's inability to find a few minutes to meet the governor. 
  To add to this dismal performance, Mr Lu's former deputy, 
and 
now Bank of China director Wang Qiren, came up with a puerile 
explanation for not inviting Mr Patten to the note-issuing 
ceremony. It might have been lapped up by sympathetic media, but 
would have sounded silly to anybody with the mental age of even 
a 10-year old. 
  To cap it all, Mr Lu could not find a few minutes to 
formally 
meet the press. Was it because he feared being trapped in their 
own consistencies or was it another instance of Beijing's 
contempt for the Hong Kong people and the value system they 
would like to preserve? 
  Before Mr Lu even set foot in Hong Kong, Chinese officials 
were quick to explain that the director's nine-day itinerary was 
full to the last millisecond. While Chinese officials were 
claiming that a packed programme forbade a visit to Government 
House, the Chinese media proffered its own excuses. Lu Ping was 
like the master and Chris Patten like the caretaker and there 
was no reason for the master to meet the caretaker. 
  Whatever one thinks of the appositeness of that simile--here 
is a caretaker who is not of the master's choosing--the tone 
suggests that Imperial China still lives on in socialist China, 
despite all the Marxist rhetoric about a people's republic and 
other slogans, fast turning into shibboleths under the thrust of 
capitalist economics. The fact is that Mr Lu behaved like a 
petty potentate, a sign surely of the vertically regimented 
political structure he represents. 
  Having first said that a busy schedule prevented Mr Lu from 
meeting Mr Patten, the Chinese then came up with another 
explanation. The governor had not been very friendly towards 
the China-appointed Preliminary Working Committee. That was the 
reason Mr Lu adduced later. In the meantime, there had been 
other explanations from the Chinese as well as their camp 
followers. Given the state of bilateral relations, they said, 
nothing would have been achieved by such a meeting. 
  Some apologists argued that a meeting between Mr Lu and Mr 
Patten was not important. After all, he was coming here to 
attend the PWC meeting and that was the prime concern. Others 
argued that the visit was symbolic, as it showed that Chinese 
officials can come to Hong Kong, talk about Hong Kong, meet with 
Hong Kong people (or a select few) while totally ignoring the 
Hong Kong Government. 
  One might have believed some of these stories had Mr Lu's 
busy schedule been jampacked with discussions with the PWC. How 
much of his time here was really spent at PWC meetings and how 
much of it talking to the business community, to pro-China trade 
unions, closeted with Xinhua officials and other pro-China 
elements? 
  Why wasn't Mr Patten invited to the Bank of China ceremony? 
Because the organisers thought that the governor would be too 
busy. This excuse is both stupid and crude. Perhaps it is 
another sign of the condescending attitude of Beijing officials 
to the Hong Kong people? 
  What is more, Mr Lu publicly issued a political message just 
as Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew and Sir Percy Cradock had done 
before him. The real significance of all this has, 
unfortunately, escaped attention. Mr Lu or Mr Lee can speak 
their minds freely in Hong Kong, even criticise the chief 
executive publicly. 
  Will this still be possible three years or so from now? 
Apart from foreign visitors coming here and talking openly, 
will the Hong Kong people themselves be able to do so without 
being branded as subversives and possibly incarcerated? Will 
even the media be able to discuss issues freely, seeing how 
China reacted the other day to protesting Hong Kong journalists? 
  That is the question Hong Kong people should ask themselves. 
Lu Ping has done little to stem the growing belief that the 
concept of "one country, two systems" is nothing more than a 
high-faluting slogan. Rather, he strengthened fears that the 
essence of Hong Kong's life style will be slowly crushed by the 
juggernaut of Beijing authoritarianism. 

