BFN 

  [Text] A meeting was held at the International Business 
Center today at 0900 to explain the economic development 
situation and investment opportunities in Myanmar [Burma]. The 
meeting was attended by Forestry Minister Lieutenant General 
Chit Swe; Trade Minister Lt. Gen. Tun Kyi; Lt. Gen. Kyaw Ba, 
minister of hotels and tourism; Transport Minister Lt. Gen. 
Thein Win; Brigadier General Abel, minister of national planning 
and economic development; Information Minister Brig. Gen. Myo 
Thant; Deputy Foreign Minister U Nyunt Swe; Mr. Hartarto, the 
Indonesian coordinating minister for industrial and trade 
affairs; Communications Minister Dr. Haryanto Danudirto; Mr. 
Joop Ave, minister of tourism, posts, and telecommunications; 
senior departmental officials; entrepreneurs; Indonesian 
Ambassador to Myanmar Mohamed Sanusi; Myanmar 
Ambassador-Designate to Indonesia U Nyi Nyi Than; directors 
general and managing directors from government departments; 
local and foreign journalists led by U Hla Tun, director of news 
and periodicals; members of the boards of directors of joint 
ventures and corporations; members of economic organizations; 
and invited guests. 
  First, Brig. Gen. Abel, minister of national planning and 
economic development, using a projector, explained the economic 
development situation and investment opportunities in Myanmar. 
He gave statistics on Myanmar's national races, population, and 
natural resources; economic development situation; key social 
and economic factors; investment opportunities; investment 
policies, objectives, incentives, and guarantees; the 
agriculture, livestock breeding, fisheries, forestry, energy, 
industry, and transport sectors; and short-term plan 
implementation. 
  Brig. Gen. Abel said that 91 foreign companies from 16 
countries that understand Myanmar's investment policy had 
invested $1.05 billion as of 16 March 1994. They are currently 
engaged in their respective business enterprises. 
  In response to questions from the Indonesian entrepreneurs, 
Brig. Gen. Abel said foreign investment was welcomed by the 
government on a case by case basis if foreign investors want to 
invest in enterprises that require a large amount of investment. 
He said that entrepreneurs can meet with the transport minister 
to discuss the details they require on investment in domestic 
and external air services. He then pointed to the guarantees 
for foreign investment contained in the Myanmar Investment Law. 
  He said Myanmar's economic growth rate is very fast and its 
economic strength is growing, and that negotiations can be held 
on a firm basis. He said foreign entrepreneurs can invest from 
35 to 100 percent in joint ventures, and that the export 
processing industry has been marked as an area for investment. 
He said he expected gross domestic product to increase at an 
average of 5.2 to 6 percent yearly. 
  Brig. Gen. Abel said that 1996 has been declared Visit 
Myanmar Year; 500,000 tourists are expected to visit the 
country. He said we are aware of the enormity of this task. He 
said there is only one school in the country for training in the 
tourism industry. He said it is estimated that 1 million people 
need to be trained in the services sector for the expected 
500,000 tourists. He said trainees would be sent to friendly 
countries such as Indonesia for training, and it is hoped that 
they will hold training courses in Myanmar in return. He said 
we expect to face many problems in this endeavor, but we hope to 
realize the goal with assistance from our Indonesian friends. 
  Speaking at the meeting, Mr. Hartarto, the Indonesian 
coordinating minister for industrial and trade affairs, and Mr. 
Joop Ave, minister of tourism, posts, and telecommunications, 
thanked Brig. Gen. Abel for his briefing on the economic 
development situation and investment opportunities in Myanmar. 
They said the presence of economic ministers at this meeting 
showed the importance attached to the Indonesian delegation. 
They urged Indonesian entrepreneurs to participate effectively 
in Myanmar's economic sector. 
  Continuing, they pledged to assist in providing the 
necessary 
training and expertise to Myanmar's hotels and tourism sector. 
They said it would be necessary to have fast and effective 
communication in promoting economic cooperation between Myanmar 
and Indonesia. They said the two countries would soon cooperate 
to install more long-distance telephone lines. They expressed 
pleasure at the prospect of participation by Indonesian 
entrepreneurs in Myanmar's economic development. 
  The meeting ended at 1110. 

