BFN 

<F P=106> [Article from the "Opinion" page by Fred Li, Meeting Point </F>
legislator: "New Airport Is the Latest Issue Mangled by UK-Sino 
Politics"] 
  [Text] Liberal Party Legislative Councillor Steven Poon's 
motion on the airport project said: "This council urges the 
Hong Kong government to initiate a series of commitments, which 
include considering further capital injection to facilitate 
China's agreement on the Chek Lap Kok new project financing 
arrangement together with that of the railway link. 
  "The solution of the problem will lead to the speedy 
completion of the whole project, which will be a significant 
boost to the local economic growth, further translating into the 
betterment of Hong Kong people's livelihood." 
  After seriously considering this motion, The Meeting Point 
delegated me to amend this motion. 
  For the record and to put matters in perspective, the 
amendment reads as follows: "This council urges the Hong Kong 
government to initiate a series of commitments, including 
considering further capital injection and forward it with 
substantiated proposals to this council for scrutiny. 
  "This move will surely facilitate the speedy completion of 
the whole project which will significantly boost economic growth 
and enhance Hong Kong people's livelihood." 
  This time around, the pros and cons of the airport issue and 
its ensuing amendment have puzzled the general public because 
they pose two starkly divergent points of view. 
  First, immediately after my amendment, fellow Councillor 
Howard Young moved an amendment to mine by putting back the 
deleted words "to facilitate China's agreement on the Chek Lap 
Kok project." But, at the same time, he retained my words 
"forward it with substantiated proposals to this council for 
scrutiny." 
  Why are there different view points reflected in Steven 
Poon's motion and my amendment? The explanation is this: Hong 
Kong people have been mangled by Sino-British political row of 
which Chek Lap Kok is a part. Ever since British special envoy 
Sir Percy Cradock secretly visited China in 1991 and emerged 
with a compromise that led to the signing of the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU), the British side has lodged four financial 
arrangement packages for China's approval over a period of more 
than two years. But still to no avail. 
  That the airport financing issue is still outstanding 
notwithstanding the signing of the memorandum is the result of 
two built-in flaws. The first is a political approach to a 
practical, economic and technical issue. The second is the 
unrelated Sino- British negotiation, which should have been 
dealt with locally. The conflicting views expressed in 
Councillor Steven Poon's motion and my amendment mirror the 
second default. 
  Meeting Point and I share the same opinion -- the airport 
construction project is a local affair and should have been 
decided and acted upon in accordance with decisions locally 
arrived at. And, as the Legislative Council is an organisation 
representing local viewpoints, it should have used the powers 
vested in it to monitor and scrutinize such a colossal 
undertaking essentially financed by the public coffer. 
Moreover, as the airport project involves the two sovereign 
countries -- Britain and China -- they may well have done a 
great service to Hong Kong by honouring decisions reached 
through our legislature. 
  Councillor Steven Poon based his argument on the premise 
that 
any settlement of the airport case should correspond with the 
MOU theme. 
  Elected Legislative Councillors who have been given a 
mandate 
through the 1991 direct elections to represent the electorate 
seem to have been sidelined on this issue. At best, they are 
regarded as no more than rubber stamps. But, if they do not 
meet this assumption of rubber-stampers, the British side is 
accused of manipulating the legislature to sabotage the 
bilateral agreement reached through diplomacy by the British and 
Chinese governments. 
  Understanding this and seeing things through this 
perspective, we can assume the negotiated agreement, though not 
entirely in our people's interests is, first, insignificant and, 
secondly, has to be force-fed to highlight the MOU principle. 
Such is the logic behind Sir Percy's design. 
  Otherwise how could two sovereign countries taking pains to 
assign their heads of governments to negotiate and formalise an 
agreement in the form of a MOU to sort out a problem of a tiny, 
far-off place called Hong Kong? Councillor Howard Young has 
side-stepped the issue in this regard, because he has not 
differentiated the roles supposedly to be played by the local 
decision-making mechanism and the two central governments. 
  The amendment I made points to a plausible way out for a 
local problem without raising voices. I say give it a try. 

