BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 21 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- Guatemalan 
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio today announced a "hardline" 
policy against drug trafficking, terrorism, general violence, 
and the seizure of land, which "discourages" investments. 
  The president said his administration will firmly act to 
dissuade "covert groups" that seek to sow anarchy and unrest in 
the country in order "to subsequently destabilize the 
government." 
  De Leon Carpio said he will not have the national and 
international community believe he heads a weak government that 
is overwhelmed by corruption and infiltrated by drug trafficking. 
  During a visit to the outskirts of the capital, the 
president 
said he will end the country's anarchy, which is reflected by 
high crime rates, kidnappings, and attacks against the 
infrastructure. 
  "We are going to respond with the law in our hands, because 
we have a strong government now. There will be respect for 
freedoms and rights in the fight against various crimes," the 
former human rights ombudsman said. 
  The Guatemalan president reiterated "there are covert 
groups" 
that seek to destabilize his administration by seizing land. "I 
am going to respond to the demands of the Guatemalan people, who 
no longer want violence, bloodbaths, and armed confrontations," 
de Leon said. The president has been in office since 6 June 
1993. The Guatemalan Government and the Guatemalan National 
Revolutionary Unity (URNG) have been negotiating for several 
months to sign a peace agreement that will end the more than 
30-year-old armed conflict. 
  "I am going to punish those responsible for public 
insecurity," the president warned. He has been severely 
criticized by political opponents due to the wave of 
kidnappings, dynamite attacks, threats, and generalized violence 
in the streets. 
  Human Rights Ombudsman Jorge Mario Garcia has said that 
after 
one year in office, de Leon has yet to respond to the general 
clamor for an end to the attacks and violence, which bring 
mourning to the country. Guatemalan Indian leader Rigoberta 
Menchu, who received the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize, has expressed 
her "disillusionment" over the current administration. 

