BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special to the JORDAN TIMES" by Sa'id Silawi] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Prime Minister 'Abd al-Salam al-Majali said 
Friday [1 April] the government was considering a proposal to 
exempt the first JD [Jordanian Dinar] 5,000-JD6,000 of 
individual income from income tax. 
  In an interview with AL-RA'y and the JORDAN TIMES, Dr. 
al-Majali said the government was reconsidering a number of 
laws, including the law on encouragement of investments with a 
view to ending cutting down bureaucracy and facilitating 
procedures to attract more investments. [sentence as published] 
  On criticism levelled against official media, the prime 
minister said the Ministry of Information had worked out a 
strategy which was adopted last year, but since the minister was 
replaced and the new minister had been heavily preoccupied with 
improtant issues, the official media has looked as if they were 
lagging behind. He noted that the information strategy needs 
people who believe in it in order to translate it into reality 
on the ground. 
  The prime minister said Jordanian press had developed 
tremendously and stressed that the government did not exploit 
its ownership of newspapers' shares to influence the freedom of 
opinion or expression. 
  Dr. al-Majali said the government plans to introduce elected 
district councils in its efforts to decentralise work at 
governorate and district levels. 
  "Decentralisation will turn us into a very advanced state," 
the prime minister said. 
  On the al-'Aqabah siege, Dr. al-Majali said Jordan had 
informed Syria of its decision to stay away from Arab-Israeli 
peace talks until the siege on Aqaba is lifted. Dr. al-Majali 
said the siege undermines peace, adding that "one cannot talk 
peace at a time when he is besieged." 
  On United Nations Security Council Resolution 904 on the 
Hebron massacre, Dr. al-Majali reiterated Jordan's firm position 
towards Jerusalem. 
  "Sovereignty on Jerusalem will only be of God's, and not of 
Israel's, he said. [punctuation as published] 
  The United states has not recognised Jerusalem as the 
capital 
of Israel, Dr. al-Majali said. The inclusion by the Palestine 
Liberation Organisation (PLO), of Jerusalem in Resolution 904 
was done in good intention because "we and the PLO believe in 
the Arab identity of Jerusalem." 

