BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Qiu Liangfa (6726 5328 4099): "General </F>
Description of Campaign Against Illegal Migration in Some 
Localities Along Fujian Coast"] 
  [Excerpts] Fuzhou West Lake Guest House, which is known 
for its scenic beauty, welcomed a number of visitors on 26 
January 1994. The 17-member U.S. State Department delegation, 
headed by Assistant Secretary Robert Gilbert, visited Fujian, 
accompanied by Dai Changshi, deputy director of the PRC Foreign 
Ministry's Consular Affairs Department. The U.S. delegation's 
China visit aimed chiefly at negotiating with the Chinese side a 
crackdown on illegal migration and migrant trafficking. The 
purpose of their trip to Fujian was to learn about the 
conditions of the campaign against illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking in the province. 
  Fujian Vice Governor Wang Jianshuan met with the U.S. 
delegation, while Ren Ziyu, director of the provincial 
government's office of foreign affairs, and Lin Minggui, 
director of the border bureau of the provincial public security 
office, participated in the talks with the U.S. delegation. A 
responsible person of the Fujian Provincial Government set out 
the Chinese Government's persistent position on the campaign 
against illegal migration and migrant trafficking, and briefed 
the delegation on the series of effective tasks and results in 
the campaign, while expressing hope for the augmenting of 
international cooperation, a crackdown on "snake heads" 
[organizers of illegal migration], and checking illegal 
migration. During the talks, members of the U.S. delegation 
expressed admiration for Fujian's work in the campaign against 
illegal migration and migrant trafficking, while saying that 
they would halt and fight against illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking through joint efforts. 
  Thus a conclusion was reached for this stage of the work on 
the issue of seething illegal emigration and migrant trafficking 
in some localities along the Fujian coast. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Marked Results in the Campaign Against Illegal Migration and </H5>
Migrant Trafficking 
  The Chinese Government has long given explicit instructions 
on the campaign against illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking. Governments at various levels in Fujian have 
attached great importance to this work, with various measures 
adopted in recent years. On several occasions, they have taken 
unified action to crack down on illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking. In June 1993, the Fujian provincial leadership 
went deep into the coastal countries to conduct investigation 
and study, and decided to unfold a special struggle to 
"investigate gangs, crack down on snake heads, uproot dens, and 
pursue criminals at large" along the Fujian coast. First, it was 
imperative to eliminate "snake heads" inside the territory and 
to mete out stern penalties; by no means should one rear a tiger 
to court calamity. Second, "snake heads" outside the border 
should be rounded up through the Interpol. Third, it was 
necessary to augment legislative work on the campaign against 
illegal migration and migrant trafficking, and to establish, 
complete and perfect various local decrees, and strengthen the 
practice of doing business according to the law. Fourth, it was 
imperative to reinforce the ability of public security and 
border personnel to fight illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking, encourage and reward relevant people who report 
illegal migration and migrant trafficking activities. Fifth, it 
was necessary to strengthen propaganda and education, publicize 
the danger of such law-breaking activities as illegal migration, 
and to educate the masses to fight illegal migration. These 
measures have scored sound results. Fuzhou -- which had a 
greater number of people engaged in illegal migration and 
migrant trafficking -- regarded the campaign against illegal 
migration and migrant trafficking as an important government 
task; set up a leading group and office dedicated to the 
campaign against illegal emigration; and transferred some 200 
cadres from city, county and prefectural organizations to 
organize some 50 work teams stationed in key villages to unfold 
this work, so as to further establish, complete, and perfect 
control and precaution measures and to implement all regulations 
in the campaign against illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking in a down-to-earth way. In 1993, Fujian uncovered 
138 cases of illegal migration and migrant trafficking, 
involving 1,499 persons; 12 batches of illegal migrants, 
totaling 2,355 in number were received and repatriated from 
Japan, Singapore, Mexico, the Marshall Islands, Honduras, 
Indonesia, Guatemala, and other regions; 303 illegal migration 
and trafficking organizers (namely "snake heads") were rounded 
up, of whom, 86 "snake heads" were given sentences, 39 were to 
undergo re-education through labor, and 109 were held in custody 
for interrogation. 
<H5>  The International Community Should Augment Cooperation </H5>
  Migrant trafficking is a kind of international illegal 
migration activity. Since reform and opening up, Fujian has 
entered a period of the most rapid economic growth in history. 
Owing to the effects of some international and domestic 
factors, however, an undercurrent of illegal migration and 
migrant trafficking surfaced along some coastal areas. It began 
in early 1989. At first, only some people along the coast 
secretly hired vessels heading for Taiwan. Then some people 
pretending to be Vietnamese refugees were trafficked to South 
Korea and Japan. Later, the practice gradually spread to 
Southeast Asia. Since 1990, illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking have targeted the United States. The chief 
characteristics of illegal migration activities were: First, 
illegal migration and migrant trafficking mainly took place in 
some localities along the Fujian coast, and in Fuzhou, focusing 
on the suburbs of Tingjiang and Langqi, as well as some coastal 
towns and townships, such as Tantou, Jingfeng, and Wu Hang, in 
Changle County and Guangtou, in Lianjiang County. Second, 
"snake heads" inside and outside the border tempted and colluded 
with each other to organize illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking. Third, the primary method of illegal migration was 
to board a vessel that sailed out to sea to rendezvous with a 
Taiwan or foreign vessel, then being trafficked to other 
countries and regions. Fourth, illegal migration methods have 
become increasingly surreptitious. Fifth, charges are reduced 
and ways of charging are changed so as to increase temptation, 
leading some of the masses to participate in illegal migration 
with the notion of trying their luck. 
  Take Fuzhou, for instance. The cases of illegal migration 
and migrant trafficking which the city has uncovered in recent 
years were organized primarily by international illegal 
migration and migrant trafficking groups and by triad 
organizations, and were manipulated by "snake heads." The 
behavior of these international illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking groups was operational, professional, secretive, and 
did international harm. The bases for organizing illegal 
migration and migrant trafficking were mostly outside the 
border, and such activities have become increasingly 
internationalized. Since 1993, the activities of a number of 
"snake heads" outside the border have been controlled by the 
Fuzhou public security and border departments, these snake 
heads included people from such countries and regions as the 
United States, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. Most of the vessels 
intercepted while engaged in illegal migration and migrant 
trafficking were old freighters in camouflage. At the same time, 
the illegal migrants had been trained to supply seeking 
"political asylum" as the unified answer when they were likely 
to be apprehended by U.S. immigration service. All this showed 
that the solution to illegal migration and migrant trafficking 
would involve many issues, including foreign affairs, 
international cooperation, and judicial assistance. It is 
imperative for the international community to augment 
cooperation, clarify its responsibility, and crack down on 
illegal migration and migrant trafficking organizations from all 
directions. Only then will it be possible to solve the problem 
once and for all. [passage omitted] 

