Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Question and answer session with President Leonid Kravchuk </F>
by deputies, following speech on nuclear issues at the Supreme 
Council session in Kiev -- live] 
  [Text] [Dorohuntsov] Esteemed Leonid Makarovych, I know 
that you signed the statement and an appendix to this statement, 
which is not very simple and is not very easy for Ukraine. I 
believe that you were forced to do so. That was a political 
decision which will have very important consequences for 
Ukraine, and you have probably assessed these consequences. I 
support your stand and I will vote in its favor. Unfortunately, 
I believe that we do not have an alternative. 
  However, I have the following question for you. As is known, 
our disarmament -- the technical details are up to specialists 
and we are not specialists -- requires significant expenditures. 
What will Ukraine's share -- if there is no possibility to 
express it in absolute figures -- of these expenditures be, and 
what will the share of the so-called world community be? This 
is a very serious question for us. I think here we could do our 
best to take as much as possible; unfortunately, it is not us 
who make these decisions unilaterally. So, I would only like 
you to express your opinion on this matter. In addition, it 
would possibly be good if this brief discussion of ours is 
broadcast in full. Thanks for your reply. 
  [Kravchuk] True, when a resolution is being adopted in this 
hall, or some law, we try to write down in it our maximum needs 
and our maximum benefits, and this can be understood. And when 
the law or some resolution is implemented, and when more than 
one country -- and here three or four countries are involved -- 
compromises are inevitable, otherwise one would never adopt 
anything. Not to adopt a decision at a time when there is a 
Supreme Council resolution and to drive this problem into a 
blind corner would mean extremely grave consequences and a 
threat to the security of Ukraine, and not only Ukraine. 
  I underscore that I was guided by the reservations, which is 
the main thing. Second, in order for you to understand, I was 
guided not by the pressure which was applied and which always 
exists, but by the realities facing Ukraine. And the realities, 
which I have already told you about, are these: Today Ukraine 
cannot safely maintain and service the nuclear weapons which we 
inherited. These weapons are becoming obsolete and pose a 
threat to us. If one fails to understand this, the rest is 
derivative. If we act appropriately, others will adopt an 
appropriate attitude toward us. As far as specific expenditures 
are concerned, relevant calculations are already available. 
Both the United States and the European community already say 
that the financial aid figures for dismantling the nuclear 
weapons will be doubled. 
  Second [as heard], the warheads will be dismantled in 
Russia, 
and Ukraine will be compensated for them according to world 
prices, less the expenditure for their dismantling. 
  The next steps connected with silos and launcher vehicles 
will be agreed upon on the basis of other agreements to be 
worked out on the basis of the resolution. This is because 
there are problems here. We cannot blow up the silos because 
they are located in densely populated areas. However, these 
issues will be stipulated in other agreements. Today the talk 
is about the fundamental decisions and about those fundamental 
decisions which the Supreme Council reservations dealt with, and 
we are trying to implement them. 
  [Yakheyeva] Tetyana Yakheyeva, Electoral District No. 438. 
First, I have a procedural comment to make on the president's 
legislative initiative. This probably relates to the lawyers 
that he consulted. Leonid Makarovych said that he submitted to 
the Supreme Council a draft resolution on the accession of 
Ukraine to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. The treaty 
itself, however, was not submitted to the Supreme Council. I 
would like everyone to know about this. This is like adopting a 
resolution bringing a law into effect, with the law itself 
having not been under consideration. 
  Second, esteemed Leonid Makarovych, I have several very 
short 
questions. The following situation has arisen on the issue of 
nuclear weapons: Our executive power is governed exclusively by 
statements and declarations, being purely political documents, 
and pays no heed whatsoever to resolutions and laws adopted in 
Ukraine, or to its military doctrine or foreign policy. This is 
why I have this question to you: Do you think the implementation 
of this trilateral statement is obligatory for executive power? 
  The second question is this: What agreements were concluded 
during the negotiations on the fulfillment of the reservations? 
For example, was any agreement concluded on the civilian use of 
silo launchers, compensation, or anything else? Was it or was 
it not? 
  Finally, the last question: According to the foreign media, 
which writes in the words of members of the American delegation, 
some secret accords were reached during these negotiations, the 
contents of which will forever remain unknown to anyone. Were 
such accords reached or is it untrue? Thank you. 
  [Kravchuk] I would like to start at the end. A package of 
all the documents which were signed was published. Other 
protocol records related to purely technical matters rather 
than, shall we say, any issues of principle, because it is about 
elimination, withdrawal, their procedure, character, the 
timetable, and so on, and not about political documents, which 
would be of an obligatory nature and which were published in the 
press. In other words, what you are probably referring to is 
these protocol records. I cannot say anything else, I have not 
read it, so unfortunately I do not know what the press writes 
about. 
  Is the statement of an obligatory nature? The statement is 
of an obligatory nature in that we now -- except, shall we say, 
that we, on the basis of existing reservations and of the 
Supreme Council's resolution -- can act accordingly, having 
implemented these reservations with regard to 36 and 42 percent 
of the missiles subject to elimination and reduction. We can 
act right now. So in this sense it is of an obligatory nature, 
because it corresponds with the Supreme Council's resolutions. 
It does correspond with it. 
  As for what you are saying about other agreements, I have 
already said that these issues are settled after decisions of 
principle are made. Then the issues of specific agreements, 
specific issues, are settled. They by all means will be made at 
governmental and inter-governmental level after being worked on 
by experts. This is a whole number of documents rather than one 
document. 

