Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 12 (XINHUA) -- The Tibet Autonomous 
Region made marked progress in economic development in 1993, 
described as a "landmark year" by deputies from the region to 
the Eighth National People's Congress (NPC). 
  At the ongoing session of NPC, China's top legislature, the 
deputies said that last year the region's gross domestic product 
amounted to 3.2 billion yuan, a 9.6 percent growth over the 
previous year; 
  The region reaped a record harvest of 620,000 tons of grain; 
  Rural enterprises turned out more than 100 million yuan 
worth 
of products, up 14.9 percent over 1992; 
  Exports surpassed the 100 million U.S. dollar mark, up 55.4 
percent; 
  The per capita income of farmers and herdsmen reached 515 
yuan, 30 yuan more than in the previous year. 
  Although some of the growth rates were lower than national 
averages, the achievements showed a great step forward for the 
region on the world roof, according to the deputies. 
  Before the peaceful liberation of Tibet in 1951, modern 
industry was nonexistent in the region. Today, Tibet boasts a 
dozen industries and 100 product lines, ranging from electric 
power, coal, chemicals to machinery. Its power generating 
capacity alone has reached 170,000 kw. 
  The infrastructure in the region is also fast improving. 
Deputy Gyainzim from Medog, the last county in Tibet to have 
access to a highway, cited the recent completion of a highway 
leading to his county. 
  To date, a 22,000 km highway network covers the region's 74 
cities, prefectures and counties. 
  A satellite communications network has also been set up in 
the region, with satellite ground stations built in most areas 
and international program-controlled telephone switches in some 
counties and cities connected with the world network. As a 
result, herdsmen in out-lying grasslands can watch television 
and make direct-dial international telephone calls. 
  Expansion of the Gonggar Airport in Lhasa, the regional 
capital, has been completed and another airport is being built. 
  Living standards of Tibetans have improved remarkably. 
Television sets, washers, stereo equipment and other durable 
consumer goods can be found in many herdsmen's homes. Some are 
even able to afford cellular phones. 
  The region is opening wider to the outside world. Last year 
the region received 23,000 overseas tourists. 
  Rapid economic development has not only brought benefits to 
the 2.6 million residents in Tibet but also guaranteed social 
stability and unity among all nationalities in the region. 
  Yang Chuantang, vice-chairman of the regional government, 
attributed the achievements to support from the party, the 
central government and other parts of the country, to reform and 
the open policy, and to hard work by the people of Tibet. 
  In line with the national goal to establish a market 
economy, 
the region has blueprinted its own development, according to 
Yang. 
  By 1997, the region's gross domestic product will reach 4.8 
billion yuan, he said. 

