Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] There is intense interest by concerned parties in a 
substance called "Paramylon," which may become a revolutionary 
drug for AIDS. They say that this natural substance, which is 
extracted from the Euglena (an alga), has the effect of 
preventing the adsorption of the AIDS virus (human 
immunodeficiency virus, HIV) to normal cells in the human body. 
Side effects are regarded as the problem with azidothymidine 
(AZT) and dideoxycytidine (DDI), which currently are approved by 
the Ministry of Health and Welfare (MHW) as AIDS-resistance 
drugs, and there is strong hope for the development of a new 
drug. Expectations regarding "Paramylon" are growing stronger 
with each day. 
  To be precise, resistance to the AIDS virus was confirmed 
for 
sulfated Paramylon. Paramylon is a polysaccharide that is 
extracted from Euglena, and the AIDS virus resistance was 
discovered because it was known that sulfated polysaccharide is 
resistant to the AIDS virus. 
  It has been confirmed through experiments at the test tube 
level that sulfated Paramylon has the effect of preventing HIV, 
which attacks CD4 electropositive T-cells (which play a central 
role in immune reaction), from adsorbing to MT-4 cells. It has a 
different mechanism from AZT or DDI, which have the function of 
blocking reverse transcriptase. Moreover, since it is a natural 
substance extracted from Euglena, it may be less toxic than 
synthetic substances such as AZT, according to Hideki Nakajima, 
assistant professor of the hygiene department, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University. 
  However, although HIV-resistant activity was confirmed at 
the 
test tube level for "Dextran sulfate," also a sulfated 
polysaccharide, it was not effective in clinical tests in the 
United States. Thus Nakajima injects a note of caution that "Its 
true effects will not be known until testing with animals and 
clinical testing are completed." Furthermore, although it is 
known that sulfated Paramylon has less side effects than Dextran 
sulfate, it has been confirmed that it acts as an anticoagulant. 
Although it can be said that "Paramylon is an extremely unique 
material" (Hiroshi Sakagami, professor of the Medical 
Department, Showa University), the trend of future research and 
testing must be watched with care. 
  Incidentally, Paramylon itself is being manufactured by 
Harima Chemicals Inc. (4410) and is being sold as a test drug by 
Wako Pure Chemical Industries (at &yen;8,000 for 10 grams). 

