BFN 

<F P=106> [Address to Congress by Efrain Goldenberg, president of the </F>
Council of Ministers and foreign minister, in Lima on 17 March] 
  [Text] Mr. President of Congress, Messrs. Congressmen: 
  Complying with Article 130 of the Constitution, this 
ministerial cabinet is hereby reporting to Congress to reveal 
and debate the general government policy it intends to develop 
and the main measures that are required for its work. 
  Mr. President: 
  Every time a cabinet reports to this assembly, the first 
great problem has been to gather a set of good results to show. 
Fortunately for Peru, this has not been a problem in our case. 
  Actually, our main concern today is to consider, without an 
overly optimistic attitude and as impartially as possible, the 
large number of indicators that Peru is on the right course. I 
will point only to the most significant ones. 
  With a strict policy of austerity and fiscal order, 
Peruvians 
have collectively attained undeniable macroeconomic achievements 
in only three and a half years. 
  We have controlled the second highest inflation rate and 
longest inflationary period that mankind has ever had to 
confront. Our efforts reduced inflation to 39.5 percent in 
1993, the lowest rate in the past 16 years. We have reduced the 
fiscal deficit from more than 13 percent to a reasonable 1.4 
percent of the GDP, which was financed without resorting to the 
deceitful "machine" for printing money without proper backing. 
  We have doubled tax revenues -- which were not enough even 
for paying current government expenses -- from less than 5 
percent to more than 10 percent of the GDP. 
  We have increased our net reserves, which had previously 
been 
squandered to favor privileged sectors who were close to power, 
increasing them from less than $150 million to more than $3 
billion. 
  We also managed to pull the Peruvian economy out of a 
difficult recession phase. In 1993, the GDP growth rate was 3.3 
times as big as the population growth rate, reaching the highest 
level in the Americas: 6.8 percent. 
  Estimates for 1994 are also encouraging. The inflation rate 
is expected to stand at approximately 20 percent, while it is 
estimated that the fiscal deficit will be eliminated, even 
reaching a primary surplus ranging between 1 and 2 percent of 
the GDP, and a tax revenue level of 12 percent of the GDP. 
Reserves are expected to reach $3.5 billion. 
  Besides, the GDP growth rate is expected to be at least 
twice 
that of the population growth rate, and this means that the 
economy will have more resources for each inhabitant. As in 
1993, it will be a healthy and vigorous growth, based on savings 
and work, all of which will give it stability. 
  On the other hand, the pacification process and the 
eradication of terrorism as a threat to the state are firmly 
moving forward. Several thousand terrorists have been captured, 
and the number of repented terrorists is rapidly growing, 
marking the beginning of massive desertion from terrorists' 
ranks. At the present time, as evidence that the terrorist myth 
is undergoing an internal collapse, 3,000 Shining Path and 1,000 
MRTA [Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement] members have already 
deserted. It is important to note that the vast majority of 
desertions within Shining Path took place after the letters 
written by Abimael Guzman were made public. This shows that the 
government's antiterrorist strategy is effective. 
  Two other facts have clearly reflected the progress in the 
pacification process and the deterioration of the terrorist 
movement. First, the amounts requested by insured enterprises 
from insurance companies to cover terrorist damages are today 
seven times lower than in 1992. 
  Second, the number of tourists arriving in Peru has 
increased 
by 37 percent over the last 8 months of 1993, something that 
would have been impossible had we been a country that did not 
inspire growing confidence and security. 
  Yet beyond those indicators, Mr. President, the most 
impartial evidence of the radical improvement we have 
experienced is our revitalized love for and faith in Peru. 
  When in 1988 -- even before the most difficult time in the 
economic crisis -- a prestigious polling company asked Peruvians 
where they would like to be born if they had a chance to be born 
again, 70 percent of those polled replied that they would like 
to be born outside Peru. We Peruvians did not want to be 
Peruvians. Barely two weeks ago, when asked to answer the same 
question, 77 percent chose to be born again in Peru. 
  Mr. President: 
  We are not here -- we cannot do it -- to change an 
orientation that has allowed Peruvians to envisage a modern, 
prosperous future, no matter how difficult this could have 
seemed a few years ago. 
  Neither are we here to make any claims about 
responsibilities 
that are shared by all Peruvians. Yet we want neither to 
relinquish nor forget our experiences, because they make us 
strong and because they promote our unity. A country that does 
not remember its history is a weak country that repeats its 
mistakes. This cabinet wants to correct mistakes and find 
achievements. 
  We are sure that, along with the pacification process, the 
main achievement of our government has been, far and away, the 
enforcement of deep structural reforms based on the principles 
of the free market, a prudent fiscal and monetary policy, a 
redefined role for the state, a redefined relationship between 
the public and private sectors, opening up to international 
commerce, the modernization of institutions, the liberalization 
of all economic sectors, a rejoining with the international 
financial system, and the enforcement of clear regulations for 
local and foreign investment. 
  Through these reforms the state is creating the conditions 
for private initiative to develop production, which will 
gradually allow greater efforts and resources to be devoted to 
improving the standards of living of all Peruvians. In this way 
the state will be able to better fulfill its unavoidable 
obligation to provide education, health, and justice, as well as 
to maintain and build the infrastructure, provide security, and 
guarantee an open market for the benefit of consumers. 
  In addition, the reforms have allowed a reduction in costs 
and an improvement in the efficiency of operations and 
investments made in Peru, by transforming an artificial economy 
into a dynamic economy that is creating jobs. 
  Mr. President: 
  Economic growth through investment -- not through 
indiscriminate spending -- is the basis of the Peruvian 
development model, because investing is the only way to maintain 
current employment and guarantee future jobs. The logic of the 
reforms, and government action at all levels, is therefore to 
give investments a framework of stability and security. 
  The numerous and valuable human and natural resources that 
Peru has are worthless if incapable of providing security. 
Security -- commercial and non-commercial -- is the first thing 
an investor seeks in a country. It is therefore the best way to 
compete internationally and to strengthen our readmission into 
the economic and financial community. 
  In this regard the new Constitution, which was drawn up by 
this Congress and approved, for the first time in our republican 
history, through a plebiscite, contributes to the consolidation 
of the reform system being carried out, by providing political 
support and juridical stability that will guarantee the 
permanence of the Constitution through the years. The 
Constitution provides economic freedom, freedom for initiative, 
and equal conditions, which makes for a viable nation and a 
promising future. 
  Our government also believes that pacification is a needed 
requirement in order to attract investment and reach economic 
development and social well-being. This is one more reason to 
continue to struggle unceasingly toward achieving the complete 
defeat of terrorism in the near future, which is something we 
are convinced we can. 
  But we are also convinced that it is necessary to have broad 
respect for human rights if we want the effectiveness of the 
antisubversive measures to be complete and lasting. We know 
perfectly well that the success being achieved reflects the 
degree of unity of Peruvian society in the search for common 
objectives, and the support of the organized population in 
alliance with the police. 
  Mr. President: 
  The environment of stability and opening existing in the 
country, as well as the investment opportunities it offers, has 
led to a remarkable growth in national and foreign investment. 
  As a result of these conditions, in the last three years the 
national private sector has invested more than $300 million in 
the fishing sector and in plants for producing fishmeal and 
building ships, and has submitted proposals for mine prospecting 
over 50 percent more hectares than in the entire history of Peru. 
  These conditions also have drawn the attention of 
international investment banks and the main multinational 
corporations, which have expanded the capital of established 
local firms through joint ventures [preceding two words in 
English] with private Peruvian companies, created new firms, or 
purchased state companies. 
  There are three very good examples that show that new 
investments are not to be attributed to sheer luck, but to the 
success of a strategy that gradually is beginning to pay. The 
first example is the fact that 11 companies are prospecting for 
oil in Peru while five others are engaged in exploiting more 
than 50 oil wells. 
  The second example is that the budget the U.S. Government 
submitted to Congress this year allocates more aid to Peru than 
to any other Latin American country. 
  The third, and most significant, example is the recent sale 
of a portion of the state's shares of telecommunications 
companies for a large sum of money. 
  The benefits of this privatization will be clearly perceived 
by all Peruvians. Before the year 2000, Peru will have 1 
million new telephone lines. This means that over the next five 
years more than 500 new lines will be installed every day. This 
will give Peru 250 percent more lines than it has today. 
Furthermore, there will be 10 times more public telephones, and 
telephone services will expand all over the country reaching 
every village that has more than 500 inhabitants, thus linking 
1,500 villages that so far have no telephone services. 
  These three examples clearly indicate that Peru is beginning 
to be looked upon as a country with a future, and nobody would 
bet on the future of a country unless its present is solid and 
stable. 
  Mr. President: 
  It has been made clear that to privatize does not simply 
mean 
the handing over of state enterprises to the private sector. 
  Privatization is a process in which there is the intention 
to 
ensure the full competition of the enterprises to help increase 
production, as occurred, for example, with the Chinese company 
called Shoughang, which increased the production of Hierroperu 
[Peruvian Mines Iron Enterprise], which always ran a deficit, by 
125 percent. 
  Privatization means the democratization and decentralization 
of the country by reducing excess power and control. It also 
means an expansion of ownership by allowing the workers' 
participation in the purchase of the enterprises. 
  Privatization means an enlarging and internationalization of 
our economy by increasing the welfare that we enjoy within its 
framework, thus stimulating social development and economic 
growth that requires larger resources than internal savings can 
provide. 
  Privatization means promoting the creation of new jobs and 
the possibility of achieving adequate technical and production 
levels. 
  Privatization means the release of resources that in years 
gone by were used to cover the deficit of state enterprises, 
which amounted to $2.5 billion in 1990, and to obtaining fresh 
resources so the state can provide increased funds for the 
expansion and improvement of the services it gives the people. 
  In the years that the Commission for Promotion of Private 
Investment (Copri) has been functioning, it has privatized some 
30 enterprises for a total of $1.994 billion and has obtained 
investment commitments amounting to an additional $2.272 
billion. Forty-five privatizations have been programmed for 
1994, including Centromin [Central Peru Mining Enterprise], 
Mineroperu [Peruvian State Mineral Marketing Company], 
Electrolima [Lima Electric Power Enterprise], Pescaperu [State 
Fishmeal and Fish Oil Production Agency], Siderperu [Peruvian 
Steel and Enterprise], and Interbanc [expansion unknown]. 
  Mr. President: 
  The series of reforms that have been outlined also have 
positively influenced the development of the capital market and 
have attracted an interesting international flow of capital, and 
they have multiplied financial and banking operations with the 
rest of the world. 
  The new Banking, Financial, and Insurance Institutions Law 
also has been approved, and it has introduced new mechanisms 
into the capital market that are revolutionizing credit and 
generating a series of operations that are highly profitable, 
especially in the cases of credit and long-term financial 
instruments. We have as an example mortgage bonds, which will 
promote the construction of housing financed with adequate 
interest rates and terms of up to 20 years, thus fulfilling 
Peruvians' longtime desire of having access to their own homes. 
  These reforms in the capital market have stimulated stock 
exchange activities, making the Lima Stock Exchange, which is 
currently managed by the private sector, one of the most 
profitable ones with the largest growth in the world for three 
consecutive years. 
  On 2 March, the Lima Stock Exchange set an exchange record 
of 
$68 million, which means that three-quarters of what was 
negotiated in 1990 was negotiated in a few hours. 
  The development of agile, cheap, and unrestrained foreign 
trade has promoted the expansion of our exchange of trade with 
the world, thus allowing Peruvians access to assets and services 
produced in international markets, which in turn feeds the 
competitiveness of our exports and generates major income from 
imports. Thus, by reducing tariffs from 66 percent to 16 
percent, the income from imports has multiplied two and one-half 
times between 1990 and 1993, increasing from some $600 million 
to some $1.5 billion. 
  It is true that our exports have to be promoted. This is why 
we are carrying out a complete study to determine our 
competitive advantages and potential markets, and we also are 
carefully evaluating our weaknesses and strengths. In a 
globalized and interdependent economy that has trade as its main 
instrument, Peru aspires to recover its position as an exporting 
country. 
  Mr. President: 
  Many of the noteworthy structural reforms already have been 
implemented and are in force. Now it is a question of 
consolidating the reforms that have been implemented and to 
continue rationally with those that still have to be implemented 
by refining development mechanisms and by concentrating on 
improving the conditions that affect the daily lives of Peruvian 
men and women. 
  In order to carry out this challenge it is necessary that we 
place an ever-increasing emphasis on social aspects. This is 
why I wish to explain some of the most important changes that 
have occurred in the sectors directly involved in the country's 
social development. 
  In health care, the hub of the government's strategy is to 
enhance preventive medicine and the quality of basic medical 
care provided at dispensaries so they can effectively solve 
minor ailments affecting the majority of the population. We are 
seeking not only to tackle problems when they are staring us in 
the face, but also to forestall the damages to which nearly 18 
million Peruvians needing medical aid -- which has to be 
provided by the government -- are exposed. 
  In order to attain this objective, we are streamlining the 
Health Ministry through efficient management and the linking of 
administrative systems that previously were unconnected. This 
will be instrumental in improving and expediting the 
decisionmaking process and the administration of the scarce 
resources we have at our disposal. 
  Moreover, the community will share the management of the 
health care system with the government. This will enable the 
community to directly administer health centers and dispensaries 
with government funds. 
  This shared management is not a political measure designed 
for the government to abandon its obligations. It is a 
technical approach to come to grips with the health problem in 
Peru, which will enable us to pinpoint the population's real 
needs. It also conforms to the constitutional mandate to 
coordinate goals with institutions from the sector and the 
people involved. 
  Furthermore, by giving key decisionmaking power to the 
community, the state reinforces nonpolitical criteria that will 
prevent changes of government from affecting long-term health 
care plans that the people are rightfully demanding. 
  To finance their undertakings, health officials have 
obtained 
$200 million from international cooperation agencies. These 
funds will be basically used to supply equipment and 
infrastructure facilities to medical centers and posts. They 
also will be earmarked for improving basic maternal-child 
survival and nutrition levels, eradicating diseases like 
measles, and controlling others like tuberculosis and cholera. 
  Mr. President: 
  The current educational situation poses the enormous 
challenge of modernizing the system by promoting the principle 
of freedom of teaching at public and private levels alike and by 
decentralizing education. To this end, the government is 
promoting community participation, strengthening school 
directors' authority, and internal autonomy for educational 
centers. 
  Educational modernization also requires the improvement of 
school facilities. To this end, more than 200 schools were 
built and nearly 100 schools were refurbished in 1993. One 
school per day will be built in 1994. 
  Educational modernization also requires that teachers be 
adequately trained and earn decent salaries. To this effect, 
the government has started an aggressive training campaign for 
50,000 teachers -- who have been neglected for 20 years -- and, 
for the first time, this training program includes all directors 
of public schools nationwide. 
  The government also soon will implement a gradual salary 
increase for teachers. 
  Additionally, a school evaluation system will be implemented 
that will include tests designed to assess the performance of 
teachers and students alike with a view to ensuring that 
progress be made and that the teaching methods, techniques, and 
subjects are the appropriate ones. To implement these 
objectives, 1 million textbooks will be distributed free of 
charge to schoolchildren in the country's poorest districts. 
  Furthermore, 200,000 children for the first time are 
receiving free preschool education in accordance with the 
mandate of the new Constitution that free education must be 
extended to this age level. 
  Mr. President: 
  Recognizing that good administration of justice is essential 
in any democratic system, our government is trying to make 
justice available to all Peruvians. To this end, we are 
coordinating with the judicial branch an increase in budget 
resources to expand the basic justice system structure by 
increasing the number of justices of the peace and 
first-instance judges. 
  Furthermore, radical changes are being made in the Peruvian 
prison system, which is bound to become the best one in Latin 
America. These changes include the creation of the Prison 
Studies Center and the remodeling of 108 rundown prisons into 
modern penitentiaries. The government's investment plans call 
for the construction of eight prisons and the remodeling of 12. 
  But most importantly, these centers will be adequately 
equipped to provide the necessary services to improve health, 
work, and education for the rehabilitation of some 18,000 
inmates. 
  Finally, the executive branch has submitted to Congress a 
draft law on the national public registries system, establishing 
guidelines for its consolidation, modification, and automation. 
The reform in the area of public registries will guarantee 
property rights and expedite the use of mortgages to secure 
loans from financial institutions. 
  Mr. President: 
  Peru wants to be an integrated country; it wants to expand 
its domestic market and produce more. To achieve this, it 
requires basic infrastructure facilities for transportation and 
communications, electricity generation, potable water and sewage 
systems, and ports and airports. These facilities will improve 
the standard of living of all Peruvians and promote efficiency 
in the private sector. 
  Twenty-six bridges and 3,500 km of roads were either built, 
repaired, or maintained in 1992. This figure rose to 4,200 km 
in 1993. Today these projects include approximately 2,000 km of 
the Panamerican Highway and the Central Highway, and 1,300 km in 
the Selva area. All these projects, which have been implemented 
thanks to efficient management of Treasury funds and 
international cooperation, have used a great deal of manpower. 
  The government also is implementing a plan to take 
corrective 
action and improve efficiency in its power companies, with a 
view to avoiding electricity theft and reducing delinquent 
payments. To this end, it has put into motion the Special 
Benefit Program for the Regularization of Electricity Debts. 
  As a result of greater efficiency, electricity maintenance 
improved markedly in 1990s [when electricity production 
increased 9.3 percent compared with 1992]. 
  Additionally, to increase the energy supply in the future, 
the government has built the Ventanilla plant, which required an 
investment of $100 million, and has earmarked $17 million for 12 
small power plant projects. Work also is already under way for 
the construction of the Cachimayo-Abancay high-tension line 
that, at a cost of $11 million, will be instrumental in bringing 
about the much-delayed and much-awaited electrification of 
Apurimac Department. 
  Besides, the private sector plays a key role in meeting the 
people's needs for infrastructure facilities and public 
services. Thus, thanks to the new Law of Electricity 
Concessions, private companies have been authorized to engage in 
projects that will substantially increase the electricity supply. 
  Mr. President: 
  Our cabinet is aware that there will be no comprehensive 
solution to social problems without promoting the development of 
rural areas, where one-third of the Peruvian people make their 
living. Thus, it wants to assign top priority to modernizing 
the agrarian sector by adopting essential business guidelines 
that will give it greater dynamics. 
  To this end we are implementing a special program for land 
deeds that will enable tenants of rural plots to obtain deeds 
and thus promote the establishment of a formal land market and, 
consequently, attract investments in agriculture as soon as 
possible. Furthermore, tenants with deeds will be able to sell 
their plots or mortgage them to obtain loans for the first time. 
  Similarly, excessive regulations governing water resources 
have resulted in unrealistically low prices, which may be 
corrected through a law on water that we will be proposing to 
Congress. We firmly believe that the consolidation of a market 
for land and water is the best strategy for promoting agrarian 
development. 
  Thus, private companies could invest in major projects such 
as Majes or Chavimochic, which earlier had been entirely 
financed by the state and which -- as proven by facts -- require 
large resources from the Peruvian people to benefit only a few. 
  We cannot fail to mention the painful natural disasters that 
have affected both urban and rural areas of our country. In 
addressing these problems, we count on the determined support of 
the Armed Forces, the National Police, friendly countries like 
Japan and Great Britain, and the solidarity of the Peruvian 
people. 
  We also want to take this opportunity to make a public 
announcement that fills us with satisfaction. The Peruvian 
Government has concluded its negotiations with Shell, the 
world's largest oil company, for an agreement to assess the 
potential of the gigantic Camisea gas deposit. This agreement 
will pave the way for the signing in 1995 of a contract for the 
exploitation of this deposit, the contents of which are 
equivalent to 2.5 billion barrels of oil -- eight times larger 
than our hydrocarbon reserves. 
  The establishment of the Municipal Compensation Fund [Fondo 
de Compensacion Municipal] is one of the most socially 
meaningful measures of our administration. This fund's 
resources are distributed with decentralization in mind, to 
really help out the country's most remote and poorest villages 
and towns. Through the implementation of this fund this 
February, districts like Ate in Lima and Independencia in Huaraz 
received seven or eight times more money than the year before. 
  Mr. President: 
  We are aware that there is a great deal to be done yet in 
order to attain the main goal of our administration and, 
especially, of this cabinet I preside over: a modern and 
efficient, but above all fair, society in which the state will 
guarantee rights, not distribute privileges. In sum, we aim for 
a society capable of offering real and better opportunities to 
all. 
  This society is the new Constitution's main objective, and 
President Fujimori has instructed us to give top priority to 
this goal. On the eve of the 21st century we also believe that 
this is what the people want. 
  At this point the overall social deficit -- that is, the 
difference between what we Peruvians actually consume and what 
we should consume to have access to an adequate basket of basic 
staples -- stands at $15 billion per year, twice the nation's 
overall budget. 
  It is quite clear that these shortcomings will not be fully 
overcome shortly or through the mechanisms of a market economy 
and the creation of new jobs. Therefore, the state as a whole 
must help overcome extreme poverty. 
  The number and the size of the shortcomings are enormous, 
especially if we take into account that between 1986 and 1990 
state spending on social projects fell from $3.2 billion to $750 
million per year. 
  Thus, just as this administration prepared a serious plan 
for 
economic stabilization and structural reforms, it has prepared a 
social stabilization plan that seeks to strengthen basic 
institutions and improve the quality of state spending on social 
projects. This plan is designed to develop low-complexity, 
large-scale, socially meaningful programs that will help take 
care of the most burning needs of the majority of the people, 
especially the extremely poor. 
  Our administration believes that people are the most 
valuable 
capital a country has, and that resources spent on building up 
this capital should not be looked upon as waste but as a very 
profitable investment. This investment, however, should be 
increased like any other investment in a realistic and 
responsible manner in keeping with the growth of state resources. 
  For a start, the state has budgeted more than $1.6 billion 
for social spending this year, twice the amount budgeted for 
1990. We are sure, however, that in the medium term we will be 
able to provide the $2.8 billion we need to fulfill basic and 
urgent social requirements as far as health, education, 
nutritional assistance, and justice is concerned. 
  The long-term approach and the freedom of initiative that 
the 
economic reforms encourage and the economic system established 
in our Constitution advocates are prompted by the aforementioned 
burning needs of Peruvian men and women. 
  Mr. President: 
  During the preceding three and one-half years Peru has 
undergone a radical change that has renewed domestic and foreign 
optimism in our future as a nation. We have ceased to be a 
country concerned only with current problems and threatened by 
political and economic problems. 
  Because of the progress we have made toward pacifying our 
nation and making it economically stable, now we can see the 
light at the end of the tunnel and move surely toward social 
stabilization and development based on investments, savings, 
efficiency, and productivity. 
  At this stage we want to invest more in our human capital, 
which will be essential for meeting the challenges of 
development because we are convinced that we must satisfy the 
demands of our citizens and give opportunities to everyone for 
our country to prosper. 
  Firmly committed to attaining this objective, we have come 
to 
this Congress in compliance with the Constitution to ask for a 
vote of confidence. Thank you very much. 

