CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sa'id al-Qaysi: "Yemen: Secrets of a `Northern' </F>
Attempt to Overthrow 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, and the Secret Link 
Between the Army Command in Sanaa and the Fundamentalists"] 
  [Text] The situation in Yemen is still moving in the 
direction of escalation and an explosion. The Document of Pledge 
[and Accord], drawn up by 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih and 'Ali Salim 
al-Bid, is nothing more than a new maneuver which, in the best 
of cases, would be hard to implement. Putting signatures to it 
does not mean the end of the crisis. Instead, it means the 
beginning of [new] crises. 
  In this field report from Sanaa and Aden, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI 
reveals the secrets about what is going on behind the scenes and 
on the spot. Preparations for secession are taking place, in 
spite of the talk about unity. Each side is gathering its forces 
and rallying its clans and tribes, while awaiting zero hour. A 
few days ago war nearly broke out between the North and South, 
and was only averted because of U.S. intervention. But the 
situation is still like live, burning coals under ashes. The 
unity of today exists only because it is required by parties 
outside Yemen and because the parties in Yemen are afraid that, 
if Yemen splits up this time, it will split up into more than 
just its northern and southern parts. 
  Although there is a general feeling among Yemeni political 
circles that the crisis that exploded last August has calmed 
down somewhat, the political parties in power are refraining 
from asserting that the crisis is on its way toward a solution. 
Anything can happen in this country which is politically and 
socially complex and whose economy is crumbling. In spite of the 
fact that all parties in the conflict are asserting their 
support for "democratic unity" as a firm basis for the building 
of a "modern nation state," as indicated by the Document of 
Pledge and Accord which was initialed on 18 January, the real 
facts are otherwise. Any cautious observer who follows the 
situation in Yemen arrives at the conviction that the issue in 
Yemen is one of power and that the unification was brought about 
in order to solve each party's problems, in accordance with 
their conflicting convictions. 
  Each side is deceiving itself. At least this is true when 
one reads the statements that they make. The Yemeni Socialist 
Party [YSP], the southern member of the alliance, on the one 
hand, asserts--as expressed by Fadl Muhsin ['Abdallah], minister 
of fish resources and member of the Politburo--that the YSP 
believed, before unification between the North and South took 
place on 22 May 1990, that the situation in the North was one of 
fragmentation, that authority there was weak, and that there was 
a lot of popular resentment against rule by Lieutenant General 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih. The YSP leader added: "We were wrong in 
our analysis, gave ourselves a pretext for ignoring our own 
problems, and considered unification to be a way out of our 
crisis in the context of a new international situation with 
which we were unable to cope in the South." 
  As for the main northern party, the General People's 
Congress 
[GPC]--a mixture of soldiers, tribesmen, notables, clergymen, 
Islamists, and fundamentalists--people in it considered that the 
situation in the South was fragile, that the YSP's power was 
weak, that the people there were looking forward to getting rid 
of one-party rule, and that it would then be easy to digest and 
absorb the South and put their hands on the oil wealth, which 
was just beginning to be exploited. 
  Thus the unification was established on the basis of 
mistakes 
in analysis, conflicting intentions, and systems that conflicted 
with each other in every way. Even the secretary general of the 
YSP, 'Ali Salim al-Bid, who is also the vice president, has 
become so pessimistic that he has said: "No unity has been 
established. Only the publishing of news items has been unified. 
There are two powers--a northern and a southern one--and there 
are also two armies and two capital cities. The unified 
parliament has no power." 
<H5>  More Than Two Parts </H5>
  The truth is that the unification was erected not only on a 
foundation of unrealistic intentions, but there was also a lack 
of trust. Crises came, one after the other, and the YSP 
secretary general very often refused to leave Aden. The last 
time he refused to leave Aden was last August, and this is what 
caused the current crisis to explode and induced all the 
southern leaders to go back to Aden. This collective refusal to 
leave Aden has imposed a de facto situation of secession, in 
spite of the fact that nobody has the power to declare 
secession. The president of Yemen cannot do this because "the 
old division is something that is not going to happen again," 
according to an Arab diplomat close to Lt. Gen. Salih. He fears 
the danger of seeing Yemen split up into more parts than just 
the North and the South. And the South has no intention of 
declaring secession because it, at the present time, prefers to 
regain its power in the South and fix the situation there, and 
also believes that it will be possible to get more than this out 
of the situation. 
  This diplomat explains the YSP's strategy to AL-WATAN 
AL-'ARABI as being one that is based on the idea that the 
organizations set up by the unified state have been a failure 
and that it is necessity to regain control of matters in the 
South. It is also based on pushing the crisis to the point of 
total breakdown and the brink of war in order to mobilize the 
northern forces that oppose Salih's rule and produce slogans 
that express the desires of everyone, especially the people of 
the central areas of Ta'izz and Ibb. In those areas the 
predominant feeling is that power is in the hands of the people 
from the northern part of northern Yemen and that they 
themselves are the ones benefiting the least--in addition to 
their feeling that authority in the North is associated with 
those who follow the Zaydi doctrine of Islam and the fact that 
they consider themselves to be closer to the South, which 
follows the Shafi'i doctrine of Islam. 
  The YSP has been able to manage the crisis with skill and 
craftiness so far. The withdrawal of the southern officials to 
the South resulted in the government offices in the North being 
emptied, and this caused the organizations to be shut down and 
the administrative situation to become worse. Public opinion 
then became fully aware of the aspects of corruption and lack of 
security and control by the internal security forces over all 
the nation's institutions. At the same time, the YSP has managed 
to recover its ability to control the South. In fact, the YSP 
has rallied to its banner many people in the southern opposition 
who felt that unification infringed upon their rights and 
impoverished the South. Moreover, the YSP has been able to 
attract members of the northern opposition and to induce the 
Bakil tribes to adopt a position that supports the thesis and 
demands of the YSP. The northern Bakil tribes are the most 
numerous and they dominate the largest geographic area, and they 
are known for the fact that they have been excluded from power 
by the Hashid tribes. The Hashid tribes are headed by Shaykh 
'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar, speaker of the parliament and 
head of the Yemeni Grouping for Reform Party, one of the three 
parties allied with the government, and these tribes are the 
ones that Lt. Gen. Salih belongs to. 
<H5>  Fundamentalist Penetration </H5>
  On the other side of the coin, it appears that the GPC has 
lost a lot of its freedom of action because the crisis has 
revealed the nature and composition of the power structure in 
the North. This power structure is based on the president's 
family, that is, the al-Ahmar family which dominates the 
leadership of the army, and his tribe, the Sanhan, which is one 
of the Hashid tribes whose members make up the Republican Guard 
and Central Security, which number some 80,000 soldiers. 
  The crisis has also uncovered the truth concerning the 
security forces coup which resulted in the deaths of 150 members 
of the YSP. It appeared that there is a relationship between the 
army commanders and the fundamentalist groups led by 
'Abd-al-Majid al-Zandani, member of the Presidential Council and 
the strong man in the Reform Party. Secrets have begun to come 
to light concerning the assassination plans and those 
masterminding them, and they are mostly Yemeni and [other] Arab 
fundamentalist soldiers who were trained in Afghanistan and then 
returned to Yemen, through the aid of al-Zandani and by means of 
financing by 'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar, where camps were set 
up for them in the Sa'dah area, in the northern part of North 
Yemen, and in Ma'rib. A number of them were arrested in Abyan in 
the South, and they confessed what organizations they belonged 
to. They were then smuggled up to the North after they had spent 
a month in the jails of Aden. Official sources assert that these 
fundamentalists include Egyptian soldiers who are on Cairo's 
wanted list. President Husni Mubarak has presented a list of 
their names, as well as maps showing the location of their 
training areas, to 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, the minister of 
planning [and development], who tried to deny the information, 
but without success. 
  In addition to this, the truth concerning the economic 
crisis 
has started to come out. The prime minister, Engineer Haydar 
Abu-Bakr al-'Attas, in a letter sent to President Salih, 
revealed what he claimed to be the counterfeiting of about 20 
billion riyals [YR], an act that was undertaken by a person 
close to the president, by the name of al-'Aqlani Rashidi. The 
prime minister says that the president and one of his assistants 
withdrew at least YR3 billion from the Central Bank during the 
month of November, and the reasons for this were not known, nor 
was it known how the money was spent. In this regard, it is said 
that the money was distributed to the tribes in a campaign to 
mobilize [forces] against the South. 
  The same sources say that the president and the forces under 
his control, in early December, attempted to carry out a plan 
aiming to encircle the city of Abyan, in the South, and surround 
the southern brigade which is guarding the city. The 'Amaliqah 
Brigade, from the North, moved toward the city, but the southern 
army knew about this move and managed to encircle the 'Amaliqah 
Brigade. News from the South says that the United States knew 
about the movements of the northern army and informed the 
southern leaders concerning it, and also demanded that President 
Salih cease all actions which would result in a military clash. 
<H5>  Attempt to Overthrow 'Ali Salih </H5>
  President Salih appears to be weak, he has lost the 
initiative since last December, and he has even begun to make 
statements in support of a dialogue. But in mid-January he tried 
to wreck the dialogue by means of using pressure from the Reform 
Party and the fundamentalists through members of his family. 
Some people have even talked of the existence of a plan to 
remove him and appoint [in his place] Chief of Staff 
'Abd-al-Malik Sayyani, in case he accepts the results of the 
dialogue. President Salih actually did try to avoid accepting 
the Document of Pledge and Accord in a speech he made in the 
city of Ta'izz, in the presence of clergymen, and in which he 
attacked the southern leaders. Also, a committee of clergymen 
was formed for the purpose of blocking the efforts of the 
Dialogue Committee which had arrived at the accord and was 
waiting to have it initialed. 
  It turned out that President Salih also was being subjected 
to foreign pressures, especially on the part of the United 
States, which--in the opinion of a European diplomat who 
followed the crisis from his headquarters in Sanaa--had declared 
that it was against any military conflict and that it favored 
peaceful solutions, and that if a separation of North and South 
were inevitable, it preferred that this be done peacefully and 
without any bloodshed. 
  The Yemeni president had no choice but to accept the 
document, because he knew that a split up between the North and 
South would not necessarily mean going back to the previous 
borders that separated the North from the South. He felt that 
accepting the document did not necessarily mean putting it into 
practice and that there was room for maneuvering. 
  The fact is that there is no one who can bet on seeing the 
document implemented, since it represents a radical overthrow of 
President Salih's authority, according to Muhammad Sa'id 
'Abdallah, known as "Muhsin," who is the minister of housing, a 
member of the Politburo, and one of the YSP's most important 
leaders. The document targets the power structure and is 
designed to reorganize the political system on new bases which, 
in his opinion, confict with the northern system that is based 
on the power of the tribes and the army. One Socialist, however, 
is optimistic and believes that it will be possible to implement 
the document. He even thinks that, if it is only 40 percent 
implemented, this will constitute a victory, especially if the 
clauses concerning security are implemented, if the army is 
removed from the cities, and if some of the local rule clauses 
are implemented. 
<H5>  The Document As a Maneuver </H5>
  There is no doubt that the document is a complicated one and 
is tantamount to an initial agreement similar to the agreement 
between Israel and the PLO in the sense that every clause 
requires a separate agreement. It requires about 40 draft laws 
in order to be implemented, and also necessitates a modification 
of the Constitution. A glance at the document tells us that it 
greatly limits the authority of the president, whereas the 
authority of the prime minister is expanded to include defense 
and finances. At the same time, the administrative, 
security-related, and financial powers of local rule 
[authorities] are expanded. This is against the interests of 
many of the military commanders in Sanaa who constitute the new 
class of nouveaux riches. 
  For this reason, in Sanaa and Aden there is the impression 
that the maneuver will continue. It actually started with the 
negotiations concerning signing the document. President Salih 
made it a condition that the vice president and prime minister 
return to Sanaa, whereas the YSP demands that the document be 
signed and implemented--at least the first part of it which 
concerns security-related matters, that is, removal of the army 
from the cities and organization of the president's and vice 
president's security forces. The YSP has set the condition that 
the document be signed in Amman in the presence of Arab and 
Western leaders in order to guarantee that it be implemented, 
and that the vice president and prime minister return to Aden 
on the basis of the consideration that Aden be the nation's 
capital for six months, that is, until next May. By then the 
clause dealing with security matters in Sanaa will have been 
implemented. 
  Actually everything is moving in the direction of having the 
situation remain as it is today. There are many indications of 
this trend. One of them is the reorganization of authority in 
the South on the political and economic levels. The YSP says 
that, in case the document does not start to be implemented in 
the North, it will be implemented in the South. The YSP has also 
begun to make preparations for a general conference which will 
include all of the parties and key figures and establish a 
"Document Front." [as published] This is a plan that stipulates 
the reorganization of the forces in both the North and the 
South, which rallied under the banner of the YSP, especially 
those from the areas of Ta'izz and Ibb, where the population 
totals 3 million persons. Work is also underway to enlist the 
support of the Bakil tribes and the natives of Ma'rib, the 
oil-rich area in the North. 
  Concerning economic matters, orders have been given to the 
oil companies operating in the South to begin paying interest 
payments and to transfer them directly to the National Bank 
(formerly the Central Bank) in the South. This is a clearly 
separatist step. Right now negotiations with new companies are 
going on without the North being notified. This is also an 
obvious attempt to impose the status quo that resulted when the 
southerners came to the South and refused to go back North, and 
this is secession, even it it is not labeled as such. 
  Thus it is clear that signing the document does not 
necessarily mean the end of the crisis. Instead, it could mean 
the beginning of new crises. Lack of trust cannot be eliminated 
by means of a signature or a kiss. The gulf is a wide one, and 
each side is sharpening its swords to be ready for an 
opportunity to pounce on its enemies. The current truce is one 
that is being imposed from outside, and it is also the result of 
internal apprehension, because each side knows full well that 
the war will involve all of Yemen and that, if it splits up, it 
will split up into more than just the North and the South. 
<H5>  Counterfeit Dollars and Riyals, a Crisis That Could Use Up </H5>
the Oil Revenues 
  Of course the political crisis has been reflected in the 
economic situation, and this has been expressed by a rise in the 
dollar's exchange rate on the parallel market, where it is equal 
to YR65. But, for numerous and complex reasons, one cannot link 
the decline in the Yemeni currency exclusively to the political 
crisis. Yemen is living without a budget because Prime Minister 
Haydar Abu-Bakr al-'Attas was not able to convince President 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih of the necessity of restricting 
presidential expenditures, giving the cabinet authority to 
control and administer expenditures, and not withdrawing funds 
from the Central Bank without obtaining a ministerial decision 
in accordance with the necessities of the budget and the goals 
set by it. 
  Thus the prime minister continued his work in accordance 
with 
the 1991 budget without having the authority to administer 
disbursement operations and without being able to control the 
the money supply and liquidity. The result of this situation was 
that the budget deficit rose to YR25 billion last year, whereas 
the overall value of the budget was YR33 billion. This was 
reflected in the rates of inflation, which worsened to the point 
of being as high as 200 percent per year, which were also 
affected by the increase in volume of monetary liquidity in the 
markets due to the influx of counterfeit currencies of 
denominations of $100 and YR100. 
  Furthermore, the increase in monetary liquidity led to an 
increase in purchasing power and an increase in the value of 
imports, so that the balance of trade deficit totaled YR6 
billion last year and the total public foreign debt went up to 
more than $8 billion. 
  Yemen's currency is not expected to regain its health, 
because the black market finances about 80 percent of the 
imports and because Yemen needs 100 percent of its wheat imports 
and 90 percent of its basic industrial products [are imported]. 
Also, it is not possible to increase the value of the riyal 
without lowering official expenditures and limiting the 
authority of the Presidential Council and the Council of 
Ministers. Any decrease in expenditures will necessarily mean 
following a belt-tightening policy, and will force the 
government to float the riyal in order to have its price be 
determined by the forces of supply and demand in the parallel 
market. In the end, this means raising the prices of imports, 
which will require decreasing the deficit in the balance of 
foreign payments. This will have to be done either by means of 
increasing oil production--which cannot be easily expected 
within a short period of time--or diverting a large portion of 
the oil revenues to cover imports and thus diverting them from 
investment in production or other development projects. 
  There is no doubt that the economic crisis will continue, 
and 
it is expected that Yemen will use up a large portion of its oil 
production during the next two years in order to pay off the 
large deficit in the balance of foreign payments and in order to 
pay off debts and services associated with it, because it is 
also difficult to combat the smuggling operations which are 
sucking up the monetary liquidity which is calculated in terms 
of hard currencies. 

