BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Krasimir Karakachanov, secretary of the </F>
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Union of 
Macedonian Societies, VMRO-SMD, by Valeriya Veleva; place and 
date not given: "Skopje Cannot Play on Our Nerves Indefinitely"] 
  [Excerpts] Mr. Karakachanov, three years after our 
recognition of our western neighbor's independence, has Bulgaria 
managed to state its priorities in Macedonia [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM]? 
  [Karakachanov] Macedonia itself should be a priority of our 
foreign policy, not only from a purely emotional viewpoint. 
Three wars were waged to liberate Macedonia, in which Bulgaria 
sacrificed 200,000 people. Up to 1944, Bulgarian foreign policy 
was oriented in the direction of Macedonia joining Bulgaria. 
The idea was to unite the Bulgarian territories in a single 
state in the name of the Bulgarian nation. Today, the realities 
are different. Bulgaria has no interest in new conflicts in the 
Balkans for the sake of Macedonia, and for this reason our 
policy is aimed at preserving the new state's sovereignty and 
territorial integrity. 
  If we look at the situation purely pragmatically, our 
shortest road to the Adriatic, that is, the sea route to Europe, 
passes through Macedonia and Albania. To develop this route 
would make us more independent and enable us largely to 
eliminate the excessive effects of the Aegean ports on our 
economy. Greece is conducting an extremely emotional policy 
regarding Macedonia, and the embargo it imposed provides no 
guarantee that we may not be eliminated in the same way, in 
certain future circumstances, were we to defend a thesis that 
Greece does not like. 
  From the political viewpoint, very good relations between 
Macedonia and Bulgaria might counter the Athens-Belgrade axis, 
which has traditionally been aimed against Bulgaria. Formed as 
far back as 1913, it exists to this very day, and it has always 
tried to nullify Bulgaria's efforts to become a factor of 
influence in the Balkans. 
  [Veleva] Does this mean that part of the key to our two 
states' survival is for them to combine their efforts? 
  [Karakachanov] If a democratic regime is established in 
Macedonia, one with a sincere attitude toward Bulgaria, and if 
both countries conduct a common Balkan policy, this would be of 
mutual interest. Threatened by Greece and Serbia, at present 
Macedonia is isolated. In addition, one should not forget the 
claims of the considerable Albanian minority in Macedonia. It 
is no secret that certain circles in the Albanian population 
there are working for the secession of western Macedonia, so you 
can see that Macedonia itself has an interest in having Bulgaria 
as a good friend. The two of them together can become an 
influential factor in the Balkans. 
  [Veleva] Despite this, one cannot say that the relations 
between us during the last three years have been brilliant. 
  [Karakachanov] There are two reasons for this. First, the 
Bulgarian politicians either do not appreciate these interests 
that Bulgaria has, or they are not interested in them. At the 
moment, Macedonia is ruled by people who were in power in Tito's 
time -- the same party, the same figures. They are close to the 
Belgrade regime, not only ideologically. Even after Macedonia 
declared independence, they sought alternatives for restoring 
Yugoslavia, according to the Izetbegovic-Gligorov plan. Today, 
no one can deny this. Seeing the weakness of Bulgaria's Balkan 
policy, certain Macedonian politicians are permitting themselves 
to behave quite arrogantly and provocatively at times. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Veleva] What is your comment on the statement by Zhan 
Videnov [leader of Bulgarian Socialist Party -- BSP] that the 
recognition of Macedonia was a "tactical" step by the Filip 
Dimitrov government, and that the Serbian danger is a "myth" 
dreamed up by Bulgaria? 
  [Karakachanov] This is not the first time that Zhan Videnov 
has made an overhasty statement about Macedonia and VMRO 
[Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization]. This shows 
that either he has not given up his party's internationalist 
complexes or he is not familiar with the problem. Even if we 
suppose that the SDS [Union of Democratic Forces] recognized 
Macedonia during the presidential election campaign to win the 
votes of Bulgarians with a nationalist frame of mind, why did 
the BSP not do it? Why did it not win these dividends? The big 
point is that Bulgaria won dividends by recognizing Macedonia, 
not who did it and for what reasons! Our politicians should 
finally realize that there must be a measure of ethics in 
politics. If a "Macedonian question" exists today, if a large 
part of the Macedonian population is confused and does not know 
its own history and roots, this is due only to the stupid policy 
that Bulgaria and Videnov's own party has followed from the time 
of the wars. In 1946 this party committed an act without 
parallel, even in other communist parties: It forced a part of 
the Bulgarian people to renounce their origin, and the Bulgarian 
state forgot about the Bulgarians in Vardar and Aegean 
Macedonia. Today, the recognition of Macedonia has restored the 
trust of many people there in Bulgaria. It seems that Videnov 
wanted to pay obeisance to Yugoslavia, or to the New Democracy 
Party in Greece. Even now, some circles within the BSP claim 
that some kind of "Macedonian nation" is a reality. I ask 
myself: Is the BSP really following a national policy that is 
adequate for the situation in the Balkans? Look at the Serbian 
press; even now it talks about Macedonia as if it were southern 
Serbia. Prominent Serbian politicians, even Milosevic's own 
wife, are working to integrate Macedonia into Serbia. 
  [Veleva] Macedonian President Kiro Gligorov starts his visit 
to Sofia today; the Albanian head of state Sali Berisha will 
come after him; and later Miltiadis Evert, leader of the Greek 
New Democracy Party, will visit us. What can we expect from 
this active foreign policy that Bulgarian President Zhelev is 
following? 
  [Karakachanov] The VMRO-SMD [Internal Macedonian 
Revolutionary Organization-Union of Macedonian Societies] has 
long agitated for a more active Bulgarian policy in the Balkans. 
The meeting between Gligorov and Zhelev should demonstrate to 
the Macedonian side once and for all that Bulgaria's intentions 
are only good. This indicates that Bulgaria will continue to 
tolerate Skopje's provocations and the unnecessary tension in 
the region. Sali Berisha's visit is also a good sign for us. 
As for the leader of the New Democracy Party, it is clear that 
we must raise the issue of the Bulgarians in Aegean Macedonia. 
If these visits are only reflected in media interviews and 
photographs, they are unlikely to produce any results. Bulgaria 
must emphatically defend its interests in the Balkans. 

