CSO 

  [Text] Ceramics are now in electronic components, including 
IC chips, as well as in consumer products, such as scissors and 
knives. In the future, ceramics are also expected to be used as 
advanced materials in the aerospace and nuclear fusion fields. 
  Recently, a study was initiated to try to develop a ceramic 
engine that has high energy efficiency. With a subsidy from the 
Agency of Natural Resources and Energy of MITI, in FY93, the 
Japan Gas Association (JGA) (President: Hiroshi Watanabe) began 
the five-year "ceramic natural-gas engine system development 
project." JGA intends to develop a natural-gas-burning ceramic 
engine with higher conversion and generation efficiencies than 
previous natural-gas-burning metal engines, in order to conserve 
energy. Natural gas has also been used by co-generation systems 
and gas-engine heat pumps. The ceramic engine, if developed, 
will eliminate the need for water cooling, and therefore, it can 
be made in a compact size to permit usage in congested 
municipalities. Today, from the standpoint of global 
environmental protection, attention is focused on the 
utilization of natural gas, which is considered to be clean 
energy with low NO[.sub]x[/] emission. If implemented, the 
natural-gas-burning ceramic engine will not only promote the 
propagation of co-generation, but will also spur 
natural-gas-burning automobile development, which is already 
under way. 
<H5>  Five-Year-Plan Development by JGA </H5>
  Participants in this research project of JGA include four 
major gas companies -- the Tokyo, Osaka, Toho, and Seibu gas 
companies -- and seven corporations, including Isuzu Ceramics 
Research Institute, Noritake Co., Ltd., and Nippon Shokubai 
Kagaku Kogyo Co., Ltd. The total project outlay is approximately 
&yen;5 billion, one-half of which is subsidized by the national 
government. In July 1993, JGA formed the Ceramic Gas Engine 
Development Committee and the Ceramic Gas Engine Development 
Project Section, which is actually to carry out the technical 
development, and it further organized three working groups -- 
Engine Development, Material Development, and NO[.sub]x[/] 
Reduction Technology Development -- within the project section 
to start the project. The development target in the five years 
through FY97 is an engine with a capacity of 200 kW (six 
cylinders), engine drive efficiency of 50 percent (electric 
power generation efficiency of 46 percent), and NO[.sub]x[/] 
emission of 40 ppm (equipped with a denitration device). The 
first year, FY93, for the project will be spent studying natural 
gas combustion, design of energy recovery system, design of 
high-performance materials, design of denitration catalyst, and 
partial test-production of a one-cylinder engine, the basic 
model. 
  Although some of the existing metal gas engines are made 
with 
an electric power output of 5,000 kW, "the ceramic engine to be 
developed will target an output level of 200-500 kW, the popular 
level among co-generation systems," says Tadashi Naruse, 
assistant head of the Ceramic Gas Engine Development Project 
Section, JGA. "Initially, the project team will study the 
single-cylinder engine, and it will eventually combine it to 
make a six-cylinder, 200-kW-output engine that, hopefully, 
incorporates an energy recovery system." 
  In 1978, the U.S. Army and Cummins Corporation first 
suggested that drastic improvement of heat efficiency would be 
gained from a ceramic heat-insulating engine. Immediately 
thereafter, universities and ceramics and automobile makers 
began research, and, at one point, there were said to have been 
10,000 ceramic engine researchers all over the world. However, 
nearly all of them had to give up the research by the second 
half of the 1980s because the strength and reliability problems 
of ceramics could not be solved. Some organizations continued to 
work on the problems, although with reduced manpower. Only a few 
organizations, including the U.S. Army Research Institute and 
Isuzu Motors Ltd., are still continuing full-scale research. 
Isuzu developed a 2,000-cc, light oil-burning engine for 
automobiles and is currently testing the engine. Also, in 1993, 
Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology developed a 
methanol-burning, ceramic two-cycle engine. 
  Many problems will be faced by the JGA project, which is the 
first attempt to develop a natural-gas-burning, ceramic engine. 
The engine to be developed is supposed to recover the heretofore 
wasted energy as power and emission energy, in contrast to the 
existing engines, which lose approximately two-thirds of the 
energy input as heat losses to emission and the engine cooling 
system (these losses are recovered and re-used in 
co-generation). The ceramic inside the cylinder and the ceramic 
piston will permit high-temperature combustion at 750C 
because of the excellent heat insulation and resistance of 
ceramics. Furthermore, because exhaust gas can be converted into 
power energy by a turbo, the engine's power- and 
electricity-generating efficiencies will be 50 and 46 percent, 
respectively (34 and 31 percent for the existing engines). 
Although the ceramic engine's heat efficiency can be improved by 
increasing its compression ratio to the same level as that for a 
diesel engine, it is necessary for the project to solve the 
following problems: high-temperature combustion technology for 
natural gas; combustion control mechanism; high-efficiency 
recovery technology for heat wastes; NO[.sub]x[/] reduction 
technology; and development of low-cost, high-performance 
ceramic materials. 
  Director Hideo Kawamura at Isuzu Ceramics Research 
Institute, 
where ceramic engines have been studied for nearly 10 years, 
says this: "High-temperature-resistant, ceramic cylinder walls 
are most suitable for the combustion of natural gas, which burns 
easily only at a high temperature." He explains how hard the 
project team is trying to burn "not-so combustible" natural gas 
efficiently. He adds, "We plan to create an air insulating layer 
at the top part of the cylinder to further increase the 
insulating effect. Also, mixed gas does not burn easily at a 
high temperature or under high pressure because the viscosity of 
the gas increases. However, we plan to solve the problem of 
mixed gas by installing an auxiliary chamber in the ceramic 
engine to minimize the fuel pressure increase despite a higher 
compression ratio." 
<H5>  Urea Denitration Used for NO </H5>[.sub]x[/] Reduction 
  In an attempt to reduce NO[.sub]x[/], the project team 
also plans to develop a urea-denitration system exclusively for 
high-temperature exhaust gas, a high-precision ceramic machining 
method, and a normal-pressure sintering, ceramic production 
method. 
  Thus far, despite high expectations, ceramics have not found 
many high-volume applications, except in the automobile industry 
for catalysts, turbo wings, glow plugs, and hot plugs of an 
auxiliary combustion chamber. In the future, in order for the 
ceramics market to grow steadily, automobile applications -- 
particularly auto engine applications -- are said to be the key. 
Thus, aside from energy and environmental problems, research 
institutes and makers worldwide who already gave up the 
development are carefully watching Japan's movements. 

