BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Andres Pastrana, presidential candidate of the </F>
Conservative Party; place and date not given -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Good afternoon. I am going to speak sincerely and 
directly, face to face with you, about the changes I will make 
if you elect me as your president on 29 May. I am going to tell 
you about my plans to make Colombia a nation of opportunities 
where we can be sure of getting a good education, being able to 
walk the streets safely, and finding a decent job. 
  Studies have been under way for quite some time now to 
determine the causes of the problems faced by Colombian society 
today. No one has had the courage to admit that real change 
begins by recovering the family unit. We all have the right to 
belong to a family in which we can learn the right values and 
principles and develop a sense of coexistence and solidarity. 
It is essential to protect the development of our children, to 
guide our youths, and to aid our parents in their role. If 
parents do not know how to feed and educate their children, if 
we cannot satisfy their basic needs, if the least little illness 
becomes life threatening, if there is no roof over their head, 
that family will be devoured by frustration, resentment, 
conflict, uncertainty, and neglect. I say this clearly, and you 
know it is so. That is how many, a great many Colombians live. 
  Real social policy comes from an understanding of family 
problems. That is why I insist on education. All parents know 
their child is intelligent. They dream of a better world for 
their offspring and know that if they can get an education it 
will guarantee their future and they will not be forced to live 
a life of deprivation. 
  Education. Knowledge will be the main asset of the 21st 
century. It is our guarantee for looking toward the future with 
optimism. It is the only source of security we can leave our 
children without worrying about someone taking it away from 
them. Alas, there are many children who will never get an 
education. There are too many who have not been given the master 
key to be someone and to make their mark. That is not fair. We 
cannot pay the parents of this country for their efforts with 
the pain of seeing their child denied the right to a future. 
  My great purpose, my great dream, my great pledge is for 
every Colombian child to go to school and get an education. We 
must not deny anyone this first opportunity, which will allow us 
to live in a better society. The wisdom of the street says a 
stitch in time saves nine. If our children get an education, we 
will no longer see the painful sight of the street children 
[gamines], the junior hit man, the army of small fries selling 
candy or cigarettes at traffic lights. 
  There will be education during my administration because I 
want a future. Those who do not understand this do not want to 
solve the problem but to perpetuate it. I am determined to end 
this conflict once and for all. It is impossible for those who 
have only experienced rejection to be on the side of peace, 
solidarity, coexistence, or democracy. To do this I will become 
a constant ally of the nation's parents. I will be an ally for 
the teachers who choose to ride with us on this crusade for 
guaranteed education. This education must be comprehensive and 
high-quality. Let us teach our parents to be good parents and 
our teachers to be excellent teachers. We cannot fool our 
children, parents, and society with poor education. It is not 
fair for parents to invest their resources in something that 
will not help their children live better lives. There is a 
painful relationship between lack of education and unemployment. 
There is another painful relationship between poor education 
and poor employment. 
  A second demand pertains to personal safety and the recovery 
of our right to live without fear. We must not let ourselves be 
cornered. We must recover public places for Colombians. We 
cannot live happily while wondering if our children will make it 
home, if father or mother will be robbed, or if our children are 
safe while we are at work. One cannot conceive of a government 
that is incapable of guaranteeing security, peace, and peace of 
mind for its citizens in their daily lives. Murder and assault 
are on the rise, as are burglary, mugging, and car theft. Every 
day we feel crime getting closer. Today the victim is just 
someone we know; tomorrow it could be a neighbor, a relative, or 
-- God forbid -- our own children. As I see it, there is a 
painful relationship between a community that arms itself and 
government inefficiency. 
  The former governments have mistakenly believed that 
guerrillas and narcotraffickers are the only ones who deserve 
attention from the state, thus neglecting daily security. That 
is why I have proposed the creation of a specialized group, so 
that just as groups that counter guerrillas, kidnappings, and 
narcotrafficking, it can dedicate itself to dismantling and 
breaking up, once and for all, the mafia of common criminals, 
who disrupt the citizens' tranquillity in the country's main 
cities. 
  It is critical that we support the prosecutor general's 
work to definitively eliminate impunity. Nothing is more 
infuriating or frustrating than to see crimes go unpunished and 
criminals mocking their victims because they know they will not 
be punished. Even worse is the scenario where a victim, the 
citizen, is mistreated by a bureaucratized, inoperative, and 
inefficient justice system. For example, a citizen files 
charges and fails to recover stolen goods but must fear 
retribution from the thief he identified. We must guarantee 
citizens that they will receive prompt and full justice through 
fair punishment of the criminal. 
  Our personal safety is now jeopardized by the Constitutional 
Court's ruling on the legality of specific drug quantities for 
personal use. This is unacceptable and inconceivable. We 
cannot allow them to bury our dream of a better Colombia. As a 
parent, I cannot accept this and you cannot either because we 
want healthy children and young people. I do not want those who 
represent our future to fall under the effects of narcotics. I 
will not allow them to murder our future. I do not want to see 
the criminal selling drugs or killing our efforts to restore 
values, family, education, and everyday safety. No to drugs! I 
have always said this and will always say it: I will not budge! 
  I am not one of those who today says no to the court's 
decision but who yesterday was one of the ones who proposed 
legalization. Or do they believe that the marijuana of 15 years 
ago was less harmful than the kind consumed in the streets 
today? What nonsense! No to drugs! Following the legalization 
of the personal dosage comes the legalization of drug 
trafficking. Let us not be mistaken about that. In this 
struggle against the killers of our future, we have paid a high 
price in lives, kidnappings, and grief. That cost will not be 
fruitless. No parent who really loves his children, no teacher 
who values his students, no Colombian who thinks about Colombia 
can agree with those who favor legalization. I will not permit 
it. 
  In the same vein, I want to be clear and categorical: The 
guerrillas are the ones who declared war on Colombians. The 
state is responsible for protecting the lives, honor, and 
property of all Colombians. I will therefore support the 
military and police forces in their relentless pursuit of those 
who insist on undermining the institutions and attacking 
Colombians. 
  I have told the subversives that we Colombians want to know 
what they want. We must consider their needs, but that should 
not be construed as a sign of weakness. It is an opportunity 
for them to voice their concerns. They are already aware of the 
vigorous position the next government will assume in enforcing 
respect for the state of law. 
  I vigorously reiterate that I am not willing to hold a 
dialogue for the sake of holding a dialogue. I am willing to 
negotiate personally once I know in print what the guerrillas 
want. If they decide not to speak clearly to the Colombians, we 
will continue to enforce the law to the letter throughout the 
country without indulgences or concessions. 
  I am also convinced that the economy is not an end in itself 
but a means, if properly used, to help us improve the well-being 
of all Colombians. 
  Some people believe that economic development pertains only 
to large industries. Employment and companies, employment and 
production, employment and education go hand in hand. A good 
business policy is also a good employment policy. A policy that 
favors production must also favor employment. A policy of 
quality production generates quality jobs and demands quality 
education. 
  I have this in mind when I say that I profess and defend a 
social market economy because it must produce social effects 
that are reflected in more and better jobs, in better salaries 
that allow workers and their families to lead dignified, 
carefree lives, in high-quality production, in access to 
adequate markets, and in the procurement of an efficient social 
security system that will promote health and guarantee the 
futures of senior citizens. 
  I admire personal initiative. Colombians have the 
imagination and intelligence to assess and overcome 
difficulties. They can dream because we are capable of 
accomplishing things. That is why Colombians cannot be made 
promises based on the politics of the past. They cannot be 
thrilled by vain promises that do not tell them how these things 
will be done. I want to make a pledge to you, a serious 
commitment: We are going to strive to make work in rural areas 
profitable; to use personal and community initiatives to create 
small and intermediate companies. To achieve it, there must be 
sufficient, inexpensive, and timely loans so those who want to 
expand their businesses can do so. Any endeavor will fail when 
there is no initial capital. In my government, there will be 
loans so peasants can plant again. There will be loans so small 
and intermediate businesses can produce more and better quality 
products. There will be loans for family-owned businesses and 
for production and marketing cooperatives; there will be loans 
for new businesses. 
  I am certain that as we begin our efforts, the first thing 
we 
will produce is employment. Employment is not magic. It does 
not emerge from words but from the decision to produce more. 
You and I must realize that Colombia can grow hand in hand with 
the people, your hand in mine. We are living in a great time 
and we are not going to squander it. Let us consolidate the 
economy. Let us diversify the productive sector. Let us 
endeavor to produce quality products so we are more competitive 
and will therefore have better jobs. 
  Colombians are capable people, and together we will achieve 
our goals. I will stimulate the financial sector so we can 
offer loans to those who need them most. We must build highways 
in the villages so peasants can reach the market with their 
goods. There is nothing to be gained by producing something 
only to watch it go to waste. We must build highways, railroads, 
ports, and airports so our top-quality products can exit through 
the door of economic opening. 
  We can do it. We have to do it. An economy that is well 
administered and oriented is a wonderful instrument of the 
common good. Employment and production are two sides of the 
same coin. I will make the change you are waiting for. This is 
not merely a matter of social sensitivity but of social 
intelligence. Women and young people play a major leadership 
role in all these endeavors. Colombian women must know they will 
have equality in education and equality in the labor force not 
just in terms of opportunities but in terms of wages. We cannot 
continue to accept the fact that at the end of the 20th century, 
women are still earning lower wages. They will have equality in 
terms of loans and leadership. I am saying this clearly so 
there is no room for confusion. We cannot go on tossing 
Colombia's elderly into some attic as if they were old 
furniture. What kind of society is it that complains of poverty 
yet does not take advantage of its wealth, experience, 
accumulated knowledge, and learned abilities? Retiring should 
not be synonymous with dying but with being useful to society in 
another dimension that deserves our full support in terms of 
quantity and efficiency. 
  I have always said this thinking of you. When we are young 
we still have time to do big things. The time for making a 
major decision has come. Colombia will bear the fruits of that 
decision. Our children will be grateful for the wisdom of that 
decision. It is a decision that we must make and that holds for 
Colombia the scope of its hope, a hope I am ready to turn into a 
reality as president. Thank you. 

