Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] On the Day of the Wounded and the birthday of 
Abu-al-Fadl al-'Abbas, the Institution of the Oppressed and the 
Wounded of the Islamic Revolution in Lebanon held a ceremony in 
Burj al-Barajinah attended by Hizballah Secretary General Hasan 
Nasrallah; Deputy Ibrahim Amin al-Sayyid, leader of the 
parliamentary Faithfulness to the Resistance bloc; Deputies 
al-Hajj 'Ali 'Ammar and al-Hajj Muhammad Barjawi; al-Hajj Husayn 
al-Shami, the official responsible for the central bureau for 
social work; His Eminence Sayyid 'Isa al-Tabataba'i, general 
supervisor of the Islamic Revolution Institutions in Lebanon; 
Muslim scholars; and a crowd of wounded people and their 
families. 
  The Hizballah secretary general delivered a speech, which he 
began by talking about Abu-al-Fadl al-'Abbas, his importance, 
and his relations with Imam al-Husayn. [passage omitted] 
  Addressing those who maintain a good opinion of the 
Americans 
and expect them to do good, he said: "The mujahidin, the 
oppressed, and the Islamic peoples who experienced this regime 
and this administration understand the U.S. position and role in 
dealing with events and developments. A U.S. congressional 
delegation arrived in Lebanon yesterday to collect information 
about missing Israeli soldiers. We regarded this matter and the 
manner in which the delegation entered Lebanon as an insult to 
Lebanon and the Lebanese people. It has come to collect 
information and solve the problem of a small number of Israeli 
soldiers who were killed in Lebanon." 
  His eminence asked: "What were these soldiers doing in 
Lebanon? Were they tourists, diplomats, or merchants? Were they 
not occupation soldiers killing people and attacking and 
destroying the roofs over the heads of women and children?" 
  He said: "These murderers, occupiers, and criminals 
warranted the dispatch of a congressional delegation by their 
American master--a delegation that penetrated barriers to 
collect information about them to reassure their Jewish 
families, while there are hundreds of Lebanese and thousands of 
Palestinian prisoners and detainees held in occupation prisons. 
Everyone knows the extent of suffering, pain, torture, and 
coercion that the prisoners are experiencing. The American 
master does not find any need or reason to visit the Lebanese 
and Palestinian prisoners and detainees. Why?" [passage omitted] 
  His eminence said: "If the United States deals with a purely 
humanitarian issue with such crudeness, unfriendliness, and 
racial discrimination, what can we expect from it on political 
issues and in what affects the future of this area and its 
peoples?" 
  He said: "There are no Arabs, Lebanese, Palestinians, or 
Muslims in the U.S. political view and dictionary. There is 
something called Israel's interests. The United States might 
respect some of the interests of others if that will maintain 
its own interests and achieve the interests of the Israeli 
enemy." [passage omitted] 
  His eminence held the United States fully responsible for 
the 
occupation of Arab territory, imprisonment of people, killing of 
civilians, harming of the wounded, the war and destruction, and 
undermining the political and security situation in this area. 
[passage omitted] 

