Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech to the nation by President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali </F>
on 7 February on the upcoming presidential elections, recorded; 
place not given] 
  [Excerpts] Citizens, this afternoon I submitted my 
nomination for the presidency for the next 5 years, in 
accordance with the provisions of the constitution and on the 
basis of my determination to continue serving the country, in 
order to develop the gains and accomplishments we have achieved, 
and to complete the plans and projects which we have started 
together, so that we are able to further consolidate the 
mainstays of the resurgence of the homeland and bolster the 
bases of its impregnability. 
  What has strengthened my determination and reaffirmed my 
will 
is that I regard the next phase as a very decisive one in the 
destiny of our dear homeland. Our country's final move toward 
advancement and progress depends on our success in that phase. 
Therefore, and due to the same reasons which motivated us on 
the dawn of 7 November [1987] to rise up to the sacred duty, I 
come forward again to undertake the trust and leadership of the 
country, appreciating the responsibility of the position, and 
that the responsibility comes before the honor of the position. 
[passage omitted] 
  Dear citizens, we developed the electoral code in such a say 
as to make it compatible with the development of society, as we 
pledged to do, and to guarantee the entrenchment of multiparty 
politics in parliament, so that political parties are 
represented in accordance with the extent of their popular base 
and their impact. Thus we have taken a further step, which will 
be added to previous steps, on the road of democracy and the 
freedom of choice. 
  The campaign for the parliamentary and presidential 
elections 
will begin on 6 March. On this occasion I would like to draw 
your attention to two matters which I believe are of the utmost 
importance. The first of these concerns the election campaign. 
It is the duty of everyone to adhere during this campaign to 
the rules of law and to avoid anything which may harm the 
reputation and honor of the candidates, and to shun all forms of 
slander and insinuations. The administration, which will be 
totally unbiased toward all political contestants and 
candidates, will be closely monitoring all excesses in order to 
curb them at once so that the campaign can take place in a 
civilized manner, and so that the voting is held on 20 March in 
total impartiality and with absolute openness. 
  The second matter is about the need to put the country's 
reputation and interest above all considerations, because the 
elections, which are indeed extremely important since they 
constitute one aspect of a civilized life and are a feature of 
democratic civilian societies, are however only an access to 
what is more important and more lasting. This is namely 
strengthening the constitutional institutions and guaranteeing 
their safety and effectiveness, and guaranteeing the continuity 
of the state and its stability to enable it to devote itself to 
carrying out its duties in the service of the country, which is 
for all Tunisians, men and women, without any distinction or 
exception. 
  What makes these two matters more important is what I said 
at 
the beginning of my speech, that Tunisia is about to enter a 
decisive stage in its historical transformation. We are hoping 
to prepare it in the best possible way to enter the new century 
stronger and more powerful, with better consolidated 
achievements and a readiness to follow world development in a 
competent manner that will allow it to secure a place among the 
other countries of the world. 
  Let us all be committed to the slogan: We are all committed 
to Tunisia's glory. 
  May God's peace, prayers, and benediction be upon you. 

