Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 2 Mar (XINHUA) -- The Central People's 
Radio Network [CPRN] is currently making efforts to upgrade its 
means of program transmission to try to improve the reception of 
its broadcasts in outlying and mountainous areas. 
  It has been some time since listeners from places such as 
Fujian, Guizhou, and Guangxi began writing to the CPRN editorial 
section complaining about receiving unclear, statical, or 
inaudible signals from CPRN broadcasts, particularly Program 
Two, at their places of listening. 
  At the request of listeners, CPRN Assistant Chief Engineer 
Sun Yingnian [1327 6601 1628] gave this briefing: CPRN now has 
seven sets of programs. While Program One and Two and the FM 
stereo broadcast of Program Three are being transmitted by CPRN 
transmitting stations set up in major regions across the 
country, all provinces and municipalities also are receiving and 
relaying CPRN programs. Therefore, I would say that central 
radio broadcasting has basically covered all regions of the 
country. However, the extensiveness of broadcast coverage does 
not necessarily mean the clear reception of broadcasts. The main 
underlying reason for the poor reception can be traced to the 
poor quality of broadcasts at their source. 
  Assistant Chief Engineer Sun Yingnian said: Because CPRN's 
broadcast center is located in Beijing, it needs to first 
transmit its programs to various localities across the nation 
from Beijing and then to retransmit these through local 
transmitting stations. To ensure the quality and continuity of 
broadcast programming, the central radio station adopted various 
means of transmission for its programs, including live-relay 
satellites, microwave, fiber-optic cable, broadcast cable, and 
other advanced means of broadcasting and transmission. The 
problem of poor reception at individual localities usually 
occurs in outlying or mountainous areas which lack the 
conditions required for microwave reception or 
satellite-receiving facilities or a place to receive and relay 
the central radio station's programs, and thus which are thus 
only able to receive programs with shortwave receivers and then 
to transmit them to an adjacent transmitting station for 
retransmission. Because of the unstable signal intensity, heavy 
static interference, or sudden signal loss experienced in the 
shortwave signal reception, the signals received from a 
retransmission of the programs would remain poor, thus adversely 
affecting reception quality. Now a relevant department under 
the Ministry of Radio, Film, and Television has developed a new 
satellite receiving device specially for use in receiving and 
demodulating CPRN programs transmitted via the "Chinasat-5" 
satellite. This device is expected to be popularized in the 
near future. After its popularization, listeners in our 
outlying and mountainous areas will all be able to tune in more 
clearly to CPRN's various sets of programs. 

