BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Florencio Acenolaza, chairman of the Foreign </F>
Relations and Worship Committee of the Chamber of Deputies, by 
Eugenio Andrea Bruno; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [Bruno] What is your opinion of Argentina joining 
NAFTA? 
  [Acenolaza] Argentina's possible entry into NAFTA is 
positive, as it would enhance trade possibilities and improve 
our current negative trade balance position with the United 
States. It has been thought that Argentina's joining NAFTA 
could be in direct contradiction with our participation in 
Mercosur [Common Market of the South], but I do not think this 
is so, as our relations with Brazil, Uruguay, and Paraguay are 
independent. 
  [Bruno] The opposition believes that given the 
characteristics of Argentina's foreign trade -- its main trading 
partners are Europe and Japan -- it would not be suitable for 
Argentina to join NAFTA, as it may imply discrimination against 
these countries. 
  [Acenolaza] I do not think the situation is like that. The 
current trade policy does not have a definite direction. We are 
not thinking about trading exclusively with Europe, as we used 
to do in the past. I believe the point the opposition has 
raised is natural and normal and I accept it as an action by the 
opposition. Let us not forget that if we do not join NAFTA now, 
we will not be able to do so until 1997. 
  [Bruno] Do you believe that joining NAFTA would be 
tantamount 
to sailing under the U.S. flag and participating in the trade 
war it is currently waging against Japan and Europe? 
  [Acenolaza] I believe we ought to start giving top priority 
to our national interests. Our country's main interest lies in 
placing our products on foreign markets and giving jobs to our 
people. It is true that joining NAFTA would imply establishing 
common policies with the United States, but we have to assess 
this from the standpoint of our national interests. We will 
thus see that our joining NAFTA would go hand in hand with an 
economic upswing. 
  The opposition's handling of this issue is simply political. 
It seeks to prevent the government, which is doing things 
right, from joining an economic process that is beneficial for 
us. 
  [Bruno] The other subject that pertains to our relations 
with 
the United States is the one that has to do with patents applied 
for pharmaceutical products and the alleged pressure exerted by 
the U.S. Government. 
  [Acenolaza] That issue is thought to be the number one 
condition for Argentina's joining NAFTA. According to what I 
have managed to find out, however, this is not necessarily so. 
  [Bruno] Is it possible to infer that the pressure the 
government is exerting to have this law passed is, in turn, a 
consequence of the pressure it is receiving from abroad? 
  [Acenolaza] I believe there is a reality which is to try to 
give priority to inventors' rights. The bill under discussion 
is based on the current patents law, namely Act No. 111. 
  The government believes that the rights of the inventor 
should be respected. And so do countries that have nothing to do 
with the United States, like China. With regard to that, I must 
say that there are other countries, like Switzerland and 
Germany, that are also interested in the enactment of this law. 
  I will sum up the government's opinion in one sentence: We 
can no longer pirate research. 
  [Bruno] Is the current trade deficit with the United States 
specifically contemplated in the negotiations? 
  [Acenolaza] Yes, I believe that joining NAFTA will entail 
buying and also selling. We will thus enhance our export 
possibilities to bridge this negative gap. 
  [Bruno] The Brazilian ambassador to Argentina has said that 
if Argentina intends to join NAFTA, Mexico and Canada should 
negotiate within the framework of Mercosur. 
  [Acenolaza] Well, that is a respectable opinion. I believe 
that having signed an agreement with Brazil, Argentina should 
give it preference over others, but this in no way precludes 
Argentina from joining NAFTA. Our country has not singed any 
document in which it is established that Argentina should ask 
Brazil for permission. 
  [Bruno] How are the negotiations on Mercosur progressing? 
  [Acenolaza] Mercosur has two realities. The first is the 
economic stability and balance prevalent in Argentina, and the 
other is the climate of economic and political instability 
reigning in Brazil. 
  When we see that over the last three or four years, trade 
between Argentina and Brazil has doubled, there is no doubt 
whatsoever that both countries have developed economic bonds 
that are very difficult to sever, given the fact that Mercosur 
continues to make headway. I say this without taking into 
account the inflationary process Brazil is going through. 
  Notwithstanding this, we are firmly convinced that Mercosur 
takes precedence over all the other markets. Our insertion into 
Mercosur will be more easily and directly done as it is the 
nearest market and the one that is better developed. At the same 
time Mercosur is in no way incompatible with NAFTA. Argentina 
may join NAFTA and, concurrent with this, continue to be a 
member of Mercosur. As a matter of national interest, Argentina 
should target to both markets. 
  [Bruno] Chile's current foreign minister is in favor of 
regional integration. Is the Argentine Government going to take 
advantage of this to expedite negotiations so that Chile could 
join Mercosur? 
  [Acenolaza] I would first like to tell you that Chile has 
looked on Mercosur with mistrust. Its decision not to join it 
was directly related to this. [passage omitted] 

