Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Dan Margalit: "One Government, Two Fronts"] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] The time has come to 
extirpate the cancerous tumor from Hebron, the city of our 
patriarchs. Not as a gesture to 'Arafat (which is unnecessary) 
or to tacitly fulfill the yearnings of the United States, but as 
a collective punishment to be meted out by the government -- and 
this time directed against the settlers. 
  Rabin was surprised that many settlers cherish the memory of 
Dr. Barukh Goldstein. Their leaders threaten that there will be 
more such doctors. Peres is ashamed of them? Deputy Education 
Minister Mikha Goldman incurs the wrath of religious teachers 
because he criticizes the assassin. All this deserves 
punishment. 
  Punishment to the rabbi of Qiryat Arba' who issued a 
frightful halakhic edict making the lives of all Palestinians 
fair game, as if the word "innocent" no longer applied to them; 
punishment to Knesset members of the National Religious Party 
who sing the IDF's [Israel Defense Forces] praises all year 
round, but this week trampled over its roadblocks on their way 
to Hebron to rally around Rabbi Moshe Levinger; and stiff 
punishment for all those people communing with the mediums, 
psychics, and spirits gathering on moonless nights around 
Goldstein's grave. 
  All of them must know that this government is choking the 
settlements, not to meet the wishes of the Palestinians or the 
Americans, but for the sake of the Jews. So that every settler 
threatening the peace process with "more Goldsteins" should know 
that if he makes good on his threat Qiryat Arba' will also be 
shut down; not as part of a Jewish-Arab settling of scores but 
as a result of purely Jewish introspection and soul searching. 
  Such a move enjoys the support of an overwhelming majority 
in 
Israeli public opinion. It also enjoys a majority by the 
standards of the opposition which has been questioning whether 
the government enjoys an absolute Jewish majority. One may also 
hazard a guess that such a majority also exists among Likud 
voters, who may be willing to fight for Qiryat Arba' but not for 
the provocation embodied in Tall al-Rumaythah. 
  Also, removing the Jews from the heart of Hebron is 
feasible. 
All the government needs is an ultimatum and an evacuation 
order. Those who do not leave Bet Hadassah and Tall al-Rumaythah 
and go back to Qiryat Arba' would be left to fend for themselves 
in Hebron. Of course, they would be solely responsible for the 
consequences. Only the children would be taken away from their 
parents and transferred to a protected site nearby. Once the 
"Bet Hadassah" tumor is gone there will be no "more Goldsteins," 
since Qiryat Arba' will take care to rein them in to spare 
itself the fate of Tall al-Rumaythah. 

