BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, June 27, INA -- 384,022 persons of all age 
groups had died for various reasons as a result of the effects 
of the blockade between August 1990 and March 1994, while in 
1989, the year prior to the sanctions, the number of deaths was 
23,334. 
  A recent report issued by the Ministry of Culture and 
Information, covering the impact of the blockade on the health, 
food, education and environment sectors said the nutritional 
situation of the children under five years of age, the most 
vulnerable group, is particularly alarming. 
  There has been a sharp and significant increase in cases of 
severe malnutrition and related syndromes such as marasmus and 
kwashiorkor [nutritional dystrophy] and of deficiencies of 
protein, calorie and vitamins. 
  The number of cases reported from August 1990 to March 1994 
totalled 4,192,603. 
  The report added the under-five mortality rate has increased 
nearly five fold, rising from 23.8 in 1990 to 126 deaths per 
thousand live births since the sanctions began. 
  This is mainly due to the shortage of vaccines and 
suspension 
of maternal and child health programme. 
  Some communicable diseases which Iraq succeeded to eradicate 
are now widespread. There has been a sudden and striking 
incidence of water-born diseases including cholera, typhoid and 
hepatitis and of other, previously uncommon and completely 
preventable children diseases such as poliomyelitis, measles and 
tetanus. 
  Major surgical interventions have been reduced to 30 percent 
of their pre-sanctions levels and are limited to emergencies 
only. 
  The remaining 70 percent of the operations has been 
suspended 
indefinitely due to the lack of anaesthetic agents and 
dispensable equipment. 
  According to the minister of health, Dr Umid Midhat Mubarak, 
the acute shortage of anaesthetic drugs for curing dental 
diseases have compelled the dentists to look for local 
alternatives which, at best, produce one quarter or half of the 
effect needed. Most patients are now treated with no 
administration of anaesthetics. 
  Laboratory test have been effected tremendously by the 
severe 
shortage of reagents necessary for laboratory diagnosis and of 
laboratory apparatus. 
  Hospital and medical stores suffer greatly from the lack of 
life-sustaining drugs for the treatment of certain 
cardio-vascular, metabolic and endocrine diseases. 
  The problem has been further exacerbated with the shortage 
of 
intravenous replacement fluids and blood transfusion apparatus 
and also with the shortage of serums. 
  Hospitals and health centres are now re-sterilizing and 
re-using glass syringes between patients as disposable plastic 
syringes, all imported from abroad, are no longer available. 
  The plastic syringes plant, at Babil province, has been 
heavily bombarded by US warplanes. 
  The Security Council Sanctions Committee did not approve the 
supply of the equipment needed to put the plant back into 
effective operation. 
  Drugs and medical supplies to Iraq have been substantially 
reduced as a result of the sanctions imposed on the country and 
of the US continued pressure on foreign companies and banks. 
  Iraq used to import annually approximately 400-500 million 
dollars worth of drugs and medical appliances alone. 
  A large proportion of women and children, experiencing 
missile attacks and bombing of residential areas at close range, 
are invariably forced to endure conditions of severe hardship 
and stress. 
  The exposure to certain kinds of guided bombs which, when 
exploded, produce poisonous gases, has led to cases of abortion, 
premature deliveries and congenital deformity, not to mention 
their subsequent effect on the individual's pathological 
behaviour. 
  A Harvard study team found that the majority of Iraqi 
children suffer from emotional reactions (depression, sadness, 
anxiety and fear) and from cognitive reaction (sleep and 
concentration problems). 
  The team also reported that 57 percent of the women 
interviewed suffer from related symptoms like fatigue, insomnia 
and weight loss. 
  Health training institutions, over the past four years, have 
lost about 80 opportunities for training abroad. 
  These cover surgery, medicine, dermatology, dentistry, 
anaesthesia, pathology, psychiatry, orthopaedics, physiotherapy 
and radiology. Medical publications, on the other hand, have 
been banned from entering Iraq because of the sanctions. 

