BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement signed by 19 "distinguished thinkers" attending </F>
an informal meeting of 10 Southeast Asian states in Manila 30-31 
May: "Towards a Southeast Asia of Peace and Prosperity"] 
  [Text] We believe that Southeast Asia should be a 
community. Collectively, this community should be a major 
political, economic, cultural, and moral entity on the world 
stage in the 21st century. 
  Geography has consigned us to living in close proximity with 
each other, and geography has made it incumbent upon us to meet, 
live, and work together as good neighbours. Throughout our 
common history, trade and cultural exchanges have characterised 
our relations with one another. However, we have often failed 
the tests of good neighbourliness. Conflicts and wars have 
arisen, and geographical proximity meant that in such conflicts 
and wars each of us ultimately lost something in the process. 
  Geography has given us a shared destiny, and the fact of 
this 
shared destiny, we believe, means that we must strive to build a 
Southeast Asian community. 
  This community should be a pluralistic community. 
  It should be a community of equal and sovereign states, each 
with its own identity, preferred interests, valued 
relationships, and conceptions of development and progress, but 
also with a sense of common destiny, shared perceptions of its 
own future, and common commitments to the enhancement of 
regional peace and prosperity, fundamental human values, and the 
basic principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. 
  Furthermore, this Southeast Asian community should also be a 
community of peace and prosperity. The states and peoples of 
Southeast Asia should strive to create structures of 
relationships and of shared values, which enable them to live in 
peace with one another and with the rest of the world, to engage 
in mutually rewarding cooperation among themselves and with 
others, and to develop the potential of their own human and 
natural resources to the fullest extent, so that prosperity can 
be shared by all. 
  This Southeast Asian community of peace and prosperity that 
we envision should be a model of international cooperation for 
the rest of the global community. 
  Lastly, we believe that, by virtue of being a model of 
international cooperation and by enhancing the region's 
strengths through collective endeavour, this Southeast Asian 
community should also strive to be a building block towards a 
global community. In this way it becomes a central actor on the 
global political and economic stage. 
  In the past, military might determined the destiny of 
nations. Increasingly, international influence is and will be 
founded upon other factors, most notably, economic and 
technological dynamism, qualities of national resilience and 
moral leadership, and demonstration of the ability to achieve 
peace and security through amity and consensus-building. 
  We firmly believe that the time has come to articulate and 
pursue this vision of Southeast Asia, for the rapid and 
far-reaching changes which have been taking place since the end 
of the Cold War offer us a unique opportunity to shape our own 
destiny as the 21st century approaches. 
  To realise this vision of Southeast Asia, there are a number 
of principles which we believe to be imperative. 
  The first principle is national and regional resilience. By 
this we mean that need to develop and rely upon individual and 
collective capacity to mobilise the full potential of our human 
and natural resources, while seeking ways of minimising our 
shortcomings and limitations. 
  The second is unity in diversity. This means a recognition 
not only of the differences that divide us, but also of the need 
and capacity for reconciling and transcending those differences 
through processes of building trust and consensus. 
  The third is the principle of common national interests. 
This means a recognition that, while there are certain 
opportunities and challenges which are of direct, and sometimes 
critical, concern to individual states, these can be best taken 
advantage of and coped with through collective efforts. These 
opportunities include trade, investment, and human and natural 
resource development, and the challenges consist of such 
problems as the environment, narcotics, illegal movement of 
people, piracy and the spread of disease. 
  The fourth is open regionalism. This means a recognition 
that, while we wish to build a stronger and more cohesive 
community, there is also the need to be outward-looking, to look 
beyond Southeast Asia, and to continue to strengthen political, 
economic, and cultural ties -- be they bilateral or multilateral 
-- with countries outside the region. 
<H5>  Strategy for community-building </H5>
  To become such a community, Southeast Asia must adopt a 
multi-dimensional strategy. 
  In the political and security dimension, we should: 
  -- strengthen the network of bilateral relations among 
Southeast Asian states, 
  -- strengthen and expand ASEAN membership to include all 
regional states, 
  -- extend accession to the 1976 Treaty of Amity and 
Cooperation to all regional states, 
  -- encourage all Southeast Asian states to participate in 
ASEAN-sponsored or -initiated forums, including the ASEAN 
Regional Forum, as mechanisms for region-wide dialogues in 
political security matters, and 
  -- convene regular consultations among all Southeast Asian 
leaders, to strengthen the habit of cooperation and to set the 
direction and pace of community-building. 
  In the economic and technological dimension, we should: 
  -- accelerate the full implementation of the AFTA [ASEAN 
Free 
Trade Area] and CEPT [Common Effective Preferential Tariff] 
agreements by the year 2000, 
  -- prepare and initiate the phased integration of other 
Southeast Asian states into AFTA and CEPT, 
  -- promote collaboration in research, development, and 
distribution of alternative energy resources, as well as the 
management of other natural resources of regional value, 
  -- set up regional mechanisms to study and recommend ways of 
stimulating intra-regional investment, development of technology 
and human resources, as well as transnational flows of 
information and knowledge, and 
  -- extend the ASEAN Business Forum to other Southeast Asian 
states. 
  In the social and cultural dimension, we should: 
  -- take immediate steps to facilitate and expand 
people-to-people contacts and exchanges, 
  -- harmonise immigration laws and procedures, 
  -- upgrade intra-regional communication and 
telecommunication 
systems, 
  -- expand exchange programmes for students and civil 
servants, 
  -- establish Southeast Asian press and information networks, 
  -- promote Southeast Asian studies and languages in 
educational institutions, 
  -- establish a Southeast Asian university system, 
  -- establish a Southeast Asian Cultural Centre in each of 
the 
Southeast Asian countries, and 
  -- set up a Southeast Asian disaster relief mechanism. 
<H5>  Flagships </H5>
  To achieve this vision, a number of "flagship" projects and 
measures must be adopted immediately. 
  -- There should be a Southeast Asian Summit, which can be an 
informal meeting, to give impetus to the building of a Southeast 
Asian community. This should take place as soon as possible. 
  -- There should be a dual-track regional initiative on 
Cambodia. The first track consists of political and diplomatic 
initiatives to revitalise and consolidate the peace process. 
The second involves mobilisation of funds for social and 
economic reconstruction, which will serve to underpin the 
efficacy of the political and diplomatic moves. Such 
mobilisation can include the issuance of bonds, officially 
endorsed by Southeast Asian governments, or the establishment of 
a bank for the reconstruction of Cambodia. 
  -- Southeast Asian leaders should endorse the ASEAN 
initiative on the South China Sea and immediately undertake 
concrete projects of cooperation for confidence-building among 
the states concerned. 
  -- A series of meetings at ministerial and senior official 
levels should be urgently convened to develop mechanisms for 
resolving the various boundary problems, including illegal 
movement of people, narcotics, smuggling, piracy, the spread of 
contagious diseases, natural resource management and 
environmental conservation. 
  -- A series of meetings at ministerial and senior official 
levels should be urgently convened to increase and expand 
economic and technical cooperation among all Southeast Asian 
countries. The main emphasis in the initial stages should be on 
trade, investment and human resource development. 
  -- Southeast Asia should immediately undertake the 
development of alternative renewable energy resources, such as 
rip-tide and deuterium, to be shared by the region. 
  -- Southeast Asia should immediately demonstrate its 
commitment to support projects aimed at harnessing and equitably 
utilising the resources of the Mekong River and its tributaries. 
This commitment will serve to promote and underline the sense 
of regional identity, as well as to encourage a development 
which is likely to benefit the region as a whole. 
  -- Southeast Asia should immediately establish a "Southeast 
Asian Development Corps." This will offer opportunities, 
especially to the young, to learn about other countries' 
problems and their solutions at first hand, and foster a sense 
of regional identity. 
  -- At the 1995 ASEAN Summit in Bangkok, the ASEAN leaders 
should collectively support this vision of a Southeast Asian 
community. 
  We invite all peoples and nations of our region to share in 
this vision and collectively work towards the realisation of a 
peaceful and prosperous Southeast Asia. 
  [Signed] Jose T. Almonte; Mohamed Jawhar Hassan; Pham Van 
Cheong; Kamarudin Jaffar; Carolina G. Hernandez; Dorodjatun 
Kuntjoro-Jakti; Lau Teik Soon; Sabam Siagian; Nguyen Viet Loan; 
Sisowath Sirirath; Sukhumphan Boriphat; Surin Phitsuwan; Sarasin 
Wiraphon; Phanthong Phommahaxay; M. Rajaretnam; Jusuf Wanandi; 
Shaharil Taliba; U Win-Pe; Tan Sri Zainal Abidin Sulong 

