CSO 

    [Editorial Report] OPPOSING VIEWS OF ALTERNATIVE 
DEVELOPMENT -- Appraising the apparent success of the 
government's alternative development policy in the coca-growing 
Chapare region, the Regional Alternative Development Project 
(PDAR) reported to La Paz PRESENCIA of 31 March that road 
improvement programs in the Chapare have contributed to 
significant increases in the volume of fruit sales in 1993. For 
example, it was noted that pineapple sales increased 247 
percent, from 195,000 kg in 1992 to 679,000 kg in 1993. The PDAR 
reported that by the end of 1993, 519 km of road had been 
rehabilitated in the Chapare agricultural areas and 200 km of 
road improvement is envisaged for 1994. The fact that these 
roads are now passable year-round facilitates the 
commercialization of a great variety of agricultural products. 
  In the 13 April PRESENCIA, however, Felipe Caceres Garcia, 
executive secretary of the Special Federation of Peasant Workers 
of the Tropics (FETCT), painted a gloomy picture of alternative 
development, noting that the Chapare coca growers, who have been 
compensated $2,000 per hectare of coca bushes destroyed, are 
emigrating to Argentina or Chile with the money. Caceres blamed 
the government for not providing adequate "alternative" 
occupations or investment opportunities in the region and 
asserted that "at least $20 million has left the country." He 
explained that to date 25,000 hectares of coca have been 
voluntarily eliminated which amounts to $50 million in 
compensation. 
  Caceres pointed out in the 3 April Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS 
that even Enrique Ugalde, under secretary for alternative 
development, admitted recently that he is "tired of calling the 
governemt's coca substitution plan `alternative development,' 
and would prefer to call the policy `alternative revenue.'" 
Caceres also noted that the coca growers and peasants of the 
region thoroughly agree with Ugalde's statement and are waiting 
for the government to come up with "real alternative 
development in the Chapare coca-producing area that will create 
an economy that will liberate the producer from a coca 
monoculture." Caceres said that electrification, road 
improvements, and the creation of schools and health centers may 
raise standards of living, but nobody will be there to use them 
if people emigrate in search of jobs. 
  TOURISM REVENUE -- Tourism, which has enjoyed a 10 percent 
annual growth rate since 1987, is a sector of growing importance 
for the economy, generating $192 million in 1993 and comprising 
3.6 percent of the GDP, according to government sources. La Paz 
PRESENCIA of 18 March reported that Ramiro Ortega, acting 
minister of finance and economic development, said the 
government has presented a draft tourism promotion law which 
aims at generating $220 million in revenue, attracting $300 
million in investment, and creating 60,000 jobs by 1997. Ricardo 
Rojas Harrison, national secretary for tourism development, told 
Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS on 30 March that the National Tourism 
Plan will invest $15 million to develop ecotourism. He added 
that Cochabamba would be the springboard for the plan because of 
its great tourist potential. 
  COCHABAMBA AIRPORT -- Construction of the second phase of 
Cochabamba's Jorge Wilsterman Airport will begin in two months 
at a cost of $26 million, reported Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS of 26 
March. Italy will finance $18 million and the rest will be 
disbursed by the National Treasury. The money will go mainly to 
finance the cost of a new terminal. 
  ENTEL INVESTS IN VARIOUS PROJECTS -- German Medrano, 
executive president of the National Telecommunications 
Enterprise (ENTEL), told La Paz EL DIARIO of 7 April that ENTEL 
plans to invest $24 million in 31 projects around the country in 
1994. Among the most important projects is the radio link with 
Chile. ENTEL's goal is to be linked to the Panamerican cable by 
1995, thereby reducing costs and increasing volume. 
  FAO INVESTMENT -- The UN Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) announced in La Paz EL DIARIO of 2 April an investment of 
$3 million during the next four years for the Alta Cuenca del 
Guadalquivir project which aims at promoting sustainable 
development projects, such as reforestation, soil improvement, 
and land management, for peasants in the central valley. The FAO 
technical adviser in Tarija said that FAO Norway would disburse 
$2 million for this purpose and that $1 million would come from 
the Netherlands. 
  CONCERN OVER "CENTRAL AXIS" DOMINATION -- An editorial in La 
Paz PRESENCIA of 2 April commented on "worrisome" data 
concerning the predominance of the country's "central axis" 
which comprises the Departments of the La Paz, Cochabamba, and 
Santa Cruz. Figures provided by the 1992 Population and Housing 
Census revealed that 68.1 percent of Bolivia's population 
resides in those three departments and over half the population 
in each department resides in the respective capital. According 
to the Ministry of Finance, 91.35 percent of the taxes are 
generated in the "central axis" and 75.1 percent of the 
country's economic establishments and 77.9 percent of its 
employed population are located there. Government authorities 
added that 80 percent of the country's revenue is invested in 
the region. 
  The editorial described this "macrocephaly" as being very 
"dangerous," because it is a result of unbalanced growth not 
accompanied by the creation of of basic social services and 
infrastructure to meet the needs of the population. The 
editorial added that the result was depopulation of many regions 
of the country with the usual "geopolitical and social 
consequences." 
  A commentary by Jose Luis Roca in the Cochabamba daily LOS 
TIEMPOS of 3 April contradicted the PRESENCIA editorial, arguing 
that the " central axis" is a "good thing for Bolivia," because 
it has prevented the rise of the single "hegemonic" city typical 
of other Latin American countries. The commentator explained 
that these departments have "achieved an admirable geopolitical 
equilibrium," and are not a threat to each other. He noted that 
each department along the axis represents "one of the three 
important regions of the country: highlands, valleys, and 
plains," and that they "extend their influence to the most 
remote corners of the nation's territory." 

