Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 11 Mar (XINHUA) -- Finance Minister Liu 
Zhongli submitted his "Report on the Implementation of the State 
Budget for 1993 and on the Draft State Budget for 1994" to the 
Second Session of the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] 
today. His report said that, generally speaking, the 1993 state 
budget was well implemented. 
  Liu Zhongli said in the report: Total state revenues in 1993 
came to 511.482 billion yuan (including the income of 69.384 
billion yuan from domestic and foreign debts), up 23.2 percent 
over the previous year and fulfilling 113.1 percent of the 
budget. Total state expenditures amounted to 531.982 billion 
yuan (including the spending of 33.735 billion yuan in payment 
of principal and interest of domestic and foreign debts), up 
21.2 percent over the 1992 figure and fulfilling 112.5 percent 
of the 1993 budget. This resulted in a deficit of 20.5 billion 
yuan, which was not in excess of the budgeted figure. While 
this central deficit of 20.5 billion yuan was within the budget 
limit, the revenues and expenditures in local budgets were 
balanced. 
  According to Liu Zhongli's analysis, the over fulfillment of 
revenues by a big margin was mainly due to three factors: 
First, the national economy's sustained, rapid growth caused an 
increase in revenues. Second, improved macroeconomic regulation 
and control measures yielded positive results and remarkably 
reduced revenue losses. Third, the central authorities decided 
to implement in 1994 the tax assignment system, under which the 
central government will reimburse local governments a certain 
amount of tax revenues based on their 1993 figures. The new 
system aroused the local governments' enthusiasm for revenue 
collection, and they took a number of measures to strictly 
collect taxes, manage revenues, and prevent tax evasion. As a 
result, revenues increased by a big margin in the fourth quarter. 
  Liu Zhongli said: Expenditures far exceeded the budgeted 
figures. It was mainly because of the principle of balance 
between revenues and expenditures. Under the principle, local 
governments, after delivering to the state the contracted amount 
of revenues, are permitted to spend more if they collect more. 
So, the large increase in local revenues led to a corresponding 
increase in local expenditures. The increased local 
expenditures show that most were reasonable increases, necessary 
to meeting the needs of reform, construction, and other 
undertakings. However, we should also see that the problems of 
starting unauthorized projects and wasting administrative and 
operating funds remained quite serious. A small number of 
localities even recorded false spending. These problems were 
also an important cause for the expenditures exceeding budgeted 
figures. 

