BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Stephane Bothima] </F>
  [Text] More than 100 drug syndicates were operating in SA 
and were using the political instability, unemployment and 
insufficient border control in the region to their advantage, SA 
Police Services special units chief Gen Wouter Grove said 
yesterday. SA did not only serve as a transit destination for 
drugs to Europe, but was itself also, fast developing into a 
major drug market, Grove told a Security '94 conference 
presented by the University of Pretoria's Institute for 
Strategic Studies. 
  Political instability, lawlessness, unemployment, 
insufficient border control and a lack of an awareness of the 
dangers of drug abuse rendered SA an attractive market for drug 
traffickers, he said. Many syndicates were based in Nigeria, 
from which large loads of cocaine were shipped to SA. 
  Worldwide, at least $85bn[billion] in drug profits was 
laundered through the financial markets each year, he said, 
adding that never before had one form of criminal activity 
generated such enormous sums of ready money for investment in 
business, both legal and illegal. 
  Grove said an estimated 2.5-million people worldwide, 
excluding users, were believed to be directly involved in 
drug-related activities. He said heroin was the latest drug 
trend of the 1990s due to the production of and demand for 
cocaine appearing to be leveling off. 
  Grove added that the SA drug market was dominated by dagga 
[marijuana], Mandrax, cocaine, heroin and LSD. 
  SA Narcotics Bureau statistics clearly indicated a sharp 
rise 
in smuggling, especially cocaine, to the region. "The financial 
profit to be gained by the smuggling of this drug is 
self-evident when one considers that the street value of cocaine 
fluctuates between R200/g [gram] and R400/g," he said. 
  Smuggling networks were so well established, not only in the 
southern African region but worldwide, that the same routes were 
often used for drugs, weapons, cars, ivory and gemstones. 
  "Mandrax is increasingly being bartered for stolen vehicles 
and vehicle spare parts from SA," Grove told the conference. 
  Heroin smugglers from southeast Asia and southwest Asia, as 
well as Mandrax syndicates from India, had recently expanded 
their operations in SA via East and North Africa, while 
Colombian cocaine smuggling druglords had moved their operations 
to Nigeria, from which they focused on the SA market, he said. 
  Grove said police agencies simply did not have the manpower 
or resources to match the limitless billions of the drug 
syndicates. To combat the problem, a close relationship between 
all the parties involved in the prevention of drug use should be 
established. 

