BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Lucio Vaz in Brasilia] </F>
  [Text] Congressional leaders in the Brazilian Democratic 
Movement Party [PMDB] have not accepted PMDB presidential 
candidate Orestes Quercia's proposal to break with Itamar 
Franco's government. Quercia contends that if the PMDB does not 
withdraw its support for the government, it will ultimately help 
approve and consolidate the current economic plan that, in his 
opinion, is being used as an electoral tool by Brazilian Social 
Democracy Party presidential candidate Fernando Henrique Cardoso. 
  The PMDB leaders want to maintain their support for the 
government and its plan. This division within the party will be 
another stumbling block in Quercia's candidacy. He is already 
facing the PMDB branches' opposition in the states of Rio Grande 
do Sul and Parana and a lack of mobilization in several other 
states. 
  Deputy Tarcisio Delgado (Minas Gerais State), PMDB leader in 
the Chamber of Deputies, supports Quercia's candidacy. He is, 
however, in favor of maintaining PMDB support for the 
government. He said: "We are going to maintain our proposal of 
lending the government our support, but without relinquishing 
our right to criticize." 
  Senator Mauro Benevides (Ceara State), PMDB leader in the 
Senate, who also supports Quercia, said the party "is committed 
to promoting governability. If the PMDB just pulled out of the 
government, it could hurt several projects of national interest." 
  During the convention that approved his nomination, Quercia 
characterized Franco's government as "small and low." Quercia 
himself admitted that it would not be easy to break away from 
the government. In addition to having three ministers serving 
in Franco's cabinet -- Sinval Guazelli (agriculture), Aluizio 
Alves (regional integration), and Murilio Hingel (education) -- 
the PMDB has many other members holding offices in the federal 
government. 
  PMDB National President Luiz Henrique told FOLHA he is not 
going to convene the PMDB Political Council (which consists of 
54 members) to discuss the matter even if someone formally 
proposes the PMDB withdraw from the government. 
  The 22 May convention showed that Quercia has problems in 
several states. He obtained only 27 votes of the total of 86 
delegates representing Minas Gerais State. Quercia only 
obtained two votes of the total of 54 delegates to which the 
states of Rio Grande do Sul and Parana are entitled. 

