BFN 

<F P=106> [By Saiful Azhar Abdullah] </F>
  [Text] Langkawi, Sun -- Malaysia and Brunei have reached 
an understanding that the overlapping claims on Limbang should 
be resolved through bilateral discussions instead of referring 
the issue to a third party for arbitration. 
  Foreign Minister Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi said today the 
issue would not be referred to the world court for a settlement. 
  "We have an understanding that the issue should be resolved 
and that it should be done at bilateral level," he said at a 
joint press conference with Brunei Foreign Affairs Minister 
Pengiran Muda Mohamed Bolkiah at the end of the first meeting of 
the Malaysia-Brunei Joint Commission for bilateral co-operation 
at the Berjaya Langkawi Beach Resort here. 
  Earlier, Mohamed Bolkiah had expressed satisfaction over the 
discussions to resolve the issue. 
  Abdullah said: "We agree that although this problem is 
sensitive, it is vital that any discussion on the matter should 
be conducted in the spirit of the good relationship, besides 
maintaining the bilateral relations between Malaysia and Brunei." 
  He said Foreign Ministry secretary-general Tan Sri Ahmad 
Kamil Jaffar and Brunei Foreign Affairs Ministry Permanent 
Secretary Datuk Paduka Lim Jock Seng would be responsible for 
establishing the approach to resolve the Limbang issue. 
  Abdullah said the approach to be established by the two 
would 
be referred to the heads of state of the two countries for 
further direction. 
  The issue of overlapping territorial claims on land and 
offshore, along Sarawak's Limbang district rose from Brunei's 
recent declaration of an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) off the 
Borneo coast. 
  The 274-kilometre of unmarked border between Brunei and 
Sarawak has hampered the completion of the Pan-Borneo highway 
linking Sarawak, Brunei and Sabah. In addition, it has led to a 
rise in illegal crossings and logging activity there. 
  Limbang, over 3,978 sq km (about half the size of Selangor), 
was annexed from Brunei in 1890 by the then white Rajah of 
Sarawak, Sir Charles Brooke, but parts of the border area were 
not surveyed in an agreement signed between the British in 
Sarawak and Brunei in the 1930s. 
  The joint commission was set up after Prime Minister Datuk 
Sri Dr Mahathir Mohamed's visit to Brunei in August last year to 
enhance bilateral co-operation and pave the way for peaceful 
solutions to problems. 
  Another important consensus reached at the inaugural meeting 
was on the formation of a joint committee on land and maritime 
boundaries to formulate a comprehensive approach and proposal on 
the delineation, demarcation and survey of land and maritime 
boundaries between the two countries for submission to the joint 
commission. 
  Abdullah said the meeting a]so agreed that, pending the 
final 
demarcation of land boundary between the two countries, the 
Malaysian immigration post at Kampung Tedungan and the Brunei 
post at Kuala Rulah would continue to operate without prejudice 
to the outcome of the negotiations on the land boundaries. 
  The meeting also agreed that the committee should formulate 
solutions on any matter referred to it by the Malaysia-Brunei 
joint commission including cross-border problems such as 
administration of law and order, land ownership including claims 
for compensation, smuggling, encroachment and traditional 
fishing areas. 
  Abdullah said Malaysia had expressed the importance of 
expediting the construction of the Pan-Borneo highway to enable 
trade and traffic movement between the two nations. 
  "We are of the opinion that the highway could contribute to 
the development of the East ASEAN Growth Area," he added. 
  Other areas of co-operation discussed include cooperation in 
technical fields, tourism, education and transportation. 
  On technical co-operation, Abdullah said Malaysia was ready 
to train young Brunei diplomats at the Malaysian Institute of 
Diplomatic and Foreign Relations. 
  In response to a question on Brunei's contribution to end 
the 
conflict in Bosnia Herzegovina, Pengiran Muda Mohamed Bolkiah 
said Brunei's stand was similar to other countries and members 
of the Organisation of Islamic Conference. 
  He added that the aid given by Brunei to end the conflict 
was 
similar to that of other countries. 
  Abdullah said he and his counterparts had also taken the 
opportunity to discuss the Bosnian issue and both of them agreed 
to call for an immediate end to the conflict. 

