BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ambassador Itamar Rabinovich by Arye Golan </F>
in Washington, date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Golan] Ambassador Rabinovich, Syria claims that 
Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin's willingness to implement a deep 
withdrawal and to uproot settlements on the Golan Heights, is 
simply a word game. Following that claim by the Syrian 
Government newspaper AL-BA'TH, is there still hope for a 
breakthrough in peace with Syria? 
  [Rabinovich] I think we have to differentiate between 
statements by the Syrian media and actual moves in the 
negotiations. We are on the eve of the secretary of state's 
visit and the important exchange of views will of course take 
place in Damascus between President al-Asad and Secretary 
Christopher and it does not necessarily depend on what the media 
says. At the same time, we Israelis and those who follow the 
process regret that while the Israeli leaders make very resolute 
declarations about the peace process, which indicate the depth 
of the Israeli commitment to the process and the readiness to 
discuss sensitive and painful issues, the Syrian response is 
disappointing. We would like the response to improve, and we 
hope it will be better, but this is still but the background 
music and not the negotiations themselves. 
  [Golan] Does the peace package prepared in Jerusalem for 
Secretary Christopher to take to Damascus include a working 
assumption of a full withdrawal from the Golan Heights? 
  [Rabinovich] Definitely not. I think we should not 
exaggerate the word, package. In order to make peace or 
ascertain that there is a sufficient basis for an agreement, 
Israel and Syria must agree on more than just two issues. That 
is, even if a formula acceptable to both sides is found on the 
issues of peace and withdrawal, that does not mean that we have 
reached critical mass on the arrangement. 
  [Golan] Have you succeeded in making any progress in the 
secret track you are conducting here in Washington with Syria 
Ambassador Walid Mu'allim? 
  [Rabinovich] The secret track you refer to is so secret that 
even I do not know about it. In the two last rounds of talks, 
we met with the Syrians at discreet meetings -- not delegations, 
just private meetings, which lasted almost until daybreak. 
These talks were good. We started serious discussions there on 
security and a timetable. Starts were made on very complex 
issues. The negotiations with the Syrians are moving very 
slowly. We prepared the ground for the qualitative leap in the 
negotiations, which can be achieved either by the secretary of 
state or the political leaderships in both countries. 
  [Golan] Will that happen sometime in 1994? 
  [Rabinovich] Operatively it could take place in 1994, and 
that would be good. I think the Syrian approach to the 
negotiations is what will decide if the negotiations take off in 
1994 or not. 
  [Golan] Does the package -- or basket, as you call it -- we 
will be sending with Christopher to al-Asad contain new ideas, 
proposals, promises or incentives we have not yet offered him to 
induce him to make peace with Israel? 
  [Rabinovich] No, we are not asking him to do us any favors. 
In the final analysis, they have to do something for an 
agreement to come about. If they want an agreement it is for 
their self-interest. From that point of view, we do not have a 
feeling that we have to make new, more tempting proposals. The 
dynamics of the negotiations have to lead to a situation whereby 
even finding a bridging formula on the issues of peace and 
withdrawal will not resolve the problem, will not form the 
minimal basis for a breakthrough in the negotiations. That is 
the reason for moving to the basket [sal] approach, which does 
not depend on new ideas or initiatives. 

