BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by UNIAN correspondent Oleh Pokalchuk: </F>
"Extraordinary Fascism"] 
  [Text] When, in the summer of 1992, Lvov was literally 
covered with leaflets of Ukraine's Social Nationalist Party 
[SNPU], nobody attached any significance to its party emblem 
shaped like a stylized swastika: After all, following the 1991 
putsch, people's anti-communist convictions were attributed to 
their progressive views. 
  The newly created party had at its core members of the 
organization "Rukh [Ukraine's People's Movement for Perestroyka] 
Guards" [Varta Rukhu] who had been trained in martial arts by 
instructor and psychiatrist Yaroslav Andrushkiv, the future 
leader of the party. The "Varta" started its activities with 
guarding rallies and demonstrations as well as the most 
frowned-upon dissidents. 
  Then dissidents became deputies, and rallies ceased to be 
objects of provocations and, eventually, disappeared completely. 
The last straw that exhausted "Varta's" patience in its 
relations with Ukraine's People's Rukh [NRU] was the latter's 
refusal, during the 1991 putsch, to conduct mobilization 
measures for possible resistance. The "Varta" became an 
independent organization and assumed the image of the present 
UNSO [Ukraine's National Self- Defense]. However, it lacked an 
ideological foundation: Patriotism alone was no longer 
sufficient. A new and very dense political spectrum was taking 
shape at a very fast rate. There only remained space at the end 
of that spectrum. 
  The SNPU got the young peoples' confidence in October 1992, 
during the second picketing of the Supreme Council by students. 
At that time, the youth movement had already acquired 
structure: The Union of Ukrainian Youth [SUM], the Students' 
Brotherhood, the "Heritage" [Spadshchyna], and the scout 
organization "Layer" [Plast] had formed and actively functioned. 
There no longer remained sources from which the SNPU could 
recruit dynamic young people, as was the case of the 
aforementioned organizations. 
  Leaders of the SNPU started active work with members and 
leaders of those organizations and, as a result, the 
overwhelming majority of them joined the party, both officially 
and unofficially. The youth organizations, which had until then 
been liberal, became, as if by magic, the arena for internal 
discussions on the primacy of the national idea over everything 
else. The discussions paralyzed the activity of the 
organizations for one or more years, split them, or destroyed 
them. 
  However, centralized control is necessary, including control 
over the property of organizations. By that time, the 
aforementioned organizations (with the exception of the "Layer") 
had been united in the Lvov regional foundation "Young Ukraine" 
[Moloda Ukrayina]. In a short while, representative of the 
Social Nationalist Party for ideological issues Yuriy 
Kryvoruchko became chairman of the foundation's board. 
  After that, a new phase of development started: Almost the 
entire "Heritage" and one of the three local "Ukrainian Afghan 
War Veterans" organizations joined the Social Nationalists. 
However, some young people turned out to be lacking in 
nationalist consciousness and decided not to join the SNPU, for 
example, the SUM. Then the SUM was placed in such conditions 
when it either had to give up its premises or join the party. 
The SUM vacillated too long -- it was simply ousted from the 
foundation. Then the Lion Society [Tovarystvo Leva] was also 
expelled. 
  However, attempts to encroach upon the newspaper POST-POSTUP 
did not end successfully for the SNPU: It failed to take the 
newspaper under its control. Legally, the foundation still 
remains the founder of the newspaper. However, there also 
remains the most influential and prestigious organization 
Students' Brotherhood, which is also the most numerous one. 
  During the holding of the World Ukrainian Students Congress, 
the entire leadership of the SNPU and about a dozen party 
members arrived in Kiev, for the first time in their party 
uniform -- black shirts and with metal emblems. The Latin -- or 
Old Ukrainian -- "N" is crossed vertically by the "I," which 
symbolizes the cornerstone of the party teachings -- the "idea 
of the nation." 
  After a series of the president's incoherent political 
zigzags and the Massandra agreement, the SNPU decided to take 
over the struggle for Ukraine's salvation. At the invitation of 
the Social Nationalists, their proclaimed Committee for the 
Salvation of the Nation and the State was joined by 
ultra-right-wing organizations -- with the exception of UNA 
[Ukrainian Nationalist Assembly]-UNSO, which the Social 
Nationalists did not risk to invite. The Lvov Students 
Brotherhood also decided to respond to the calls by the 
Salvation Committee and joined it. 
  Then some cells -- the largest of them, the Students 
Brotherhood of the Lvov Polytechnic Institute -- declared their 
separate opposition. Following that, the premises occupied by 
the Brotherhood at 12 Hlyboka Street were raided and the 
nonconformists were beaten up. Lvov deputy Parubiy, a member of 
the SNPU, sent away the militia detail that had been summoned. 
In his subsequent interviews, Yuriy Kryvoruchko stated that the 
SNPU had not been involved in the events at 12 Hlyboka Street. 
Such a way of resolving problems was also applied to other 
organizations. 
  Thus, a concise listing of the SNPU actions in Lvov 
looks as follows: 
  1. The report and election conference held by Rukh (in 
the Lort Palace): The interference by the SNPU members into the 
course of its work and the disruption of the conference (threat 
of physical reprisals against Rukh members and the beating up of 
seven persons). 
  2. The Rukh conference at 13 Shevchenko Prospekt 
[Avenue]: The beating up of several Rukh members, a reporter, 
and the municipal militia by the SNPU members. 
  3. The beating up by the SNPU members of Myroslav 
Soldat (chairman of the SUM) and Andriy Sokolov (deputy chairman 
of the SUM), as well as of several other SUM members. The SUM 
was physically evicted from the building at 23 Shevchenko 
Prospekt. 
  4. The beating up of several members of the "Lion 
Society" and the physical eviction of the organization from the 
building at 23 Shevchenko Prospekt. 
  5. The beating up by the SNPU members of an official of 
the "Fund for Social Adaptation of Young People," subordinated 
to the Cabinet of Ministers, and the eviction of the 
organization from the building at 23 Shevchenko Prospekt. 
  6. Actions by members of the SNPU (approximately 30 
persons altogether) in the building of the Lvov Oblast 
Organization of the Ukrainian Republican Party (there were 
threats to hang O. Pavlyshyn [Republican Party activist] and to 
shoot M. Horyn [chairman of the Ukrainian Republican Party]). 
  7. Pressure upon Lvov's mayor Mr. Shpitser (at the City 
Council and at home). 
  8. On 8 October 1993, the attack by 40 members and 
supporters of the SNPU on the office of the state university 
"Lvov Polytechnic" Students' Brotherhood members, who were among 
organizers of the well-known students' hunger strike in 1990 -- 
Andriy Salyuk, Ihor Slipetskyy, and Andrian Klishch.... 
  It is of interest that, during the election campaign, the 
SNPU claimed credit for holding the students' hunger strike and 
the students' movement in general. This gave rise to written 
protests by true participants in the first picketing of the 
Supreme Council building that were not given much publicity in 
the press. 
  During the first round of elections to the Supreme Council, 
Lvov not only abounded in hook-shaped "ideas of the nation," but 
also in long [fascist] occupation-style banners. Credit must be 
given to the party organizers of the election campaign -- from 
the psychological point of view, the propaganda was very 
skillful and used a broad range of measures -- from 
demonstrating unity with Academician Yukhnovskyy to threats of 
physical reprisals against participants in the nonaligned bloc 
"New Wave" [Nova Khvylya] and their supporters. 
  It was precisely the intensity of the psychological 
brainwashing of the population that resulted in an opposite 
reaction. The number of swastikas seems to have gone beyond the 
critical borderline, and Lvov residents became concerned. The 
SNPU candidates, who had been nominated at all electoral 
districts, got negligible numbers of votes, not higher than 5 
percent. However, it does not by any means follow from this 
that Ukrainian fascism has no future. If we make a comparison 
with Russia, then the SNPU is the early stage of "Pamyat" [a 
Russian fascist organization] under the leadership of a somewhat 
forgotten Russian fuehrer Vasilyev: Black uniforms, military 
bearing, anti-Semitism, and a mixture of Christianity and 
paganism. Then, the events in the SNPU must logically develop 
in the direction of its internal split and further evolution -- 
toward legal discussions (this may be exemplified by a quite 
frank article published by Anatoliy Shcherbatyuk [convicted for 
the dissemination of interethnic hostility] in which the author 
calls for the creation of detachments to carry out Ukraine's 
ethnic cleansing) and toward creating an underground similar to 
Barkashov's [leader of Russian fascists]. 
  The unique "Ukrainian" feature of the above phenomenon lies 
in the fact that Nazis throughout the world select Jews, 
immigrants, or ethnic minorities as targets for demonstrating 
their patriotism, whereas the patriotism of the SNPU began to 
manifest itself through beating up Ukrainians. "Bad taste" -- 
this is how Andriy Shkil, one of the leaders of UNA-UNSO 
qualified the beating up of students by the "Nazis" at Hlyboka 
Street. 
  Sleep quietly, Ukrainian citizens! The dissociation of the 
state information area is so great that you will never find out 
about any unpleasant events in an adjacent oblast, provided that 
these events rate as less serious than the Chernobyl catastrophe. 
  The Ukrainian liberators of eastern Ukraine and of the 
Crimea 
from Communists and Muscovites prefer doing so largely in 
Galicia. Despite the fact that in neighboring Volyn, the people 
who opted for socialism led Communists to the second round of 
parliamentary elections and that in neighboring Transcarpathia, 
the word "Ukraine" will soon be associated with abroad. It is 
not without the help of the SNPU that scared stiff the Lvov 
residents that Communist Holub got 8 percent of votes. 
  Sleep and rest assured that the psychiatrists from the SNPU 
can cure you from the chimera called conscience. 

