BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yehudit Yehezqeli] </F>
  [Text] A plan to create a new Jordan River carrying 
desalinated water from the Mediterranean Sea was presented last 
Wednesday [23 March] to Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin by Dan 
Shomron, chairman of Israel Military Industries, a co-partner in 
the project put forth together with a Jordanian and three German 
firms. 
  The meeting was attended by the ministers of finance, 
agriculture, energy, and environment. The project, which calls 
for a $3-billion investment, would for the most part be financed 
by the German firms and would last 10 years. One of the 
partners in the project said it is designed to meet the water 
requirements of Israel and Jordan upon the advent of the 21st 
century. 
  The plan is based on the original idea conceived decades ago 
by the Israeli engineer Shlomo Gur. Its main components are: 
  Water from the Mediterranean Sea would be carried in a 
63-km-long canal from the 'Atlit area to Ramat Tzvi, north of 
Bet She'an. From this point, the water would flow in a pipe to 
the desalination site, 5 km from Ramat Tzvi, and would drop from 
an altitude of 320 meters. The desalination facility would be 
built near Kibbutz Ma'oz Hayyim, on both sides of the Jordan 
River. 
  The water would be desalinated in a process known as double 
osmosis, using the energy created by the difference in altitude. 
Hence, the desalination would not require electric energy and 
would cause no ecologic pollution. The water would gather in a 
dam to be built about 20 km away, in the Tall Abu-Sus area on 
the Israeli-Jordanian border. 
  The lake that would be created would constitute "a new 
Jordan 
River"-- narrow, long, and deep. It would be 20-km long, 
25-meter deep, and 5-km wide and would carry 1 billion cubic 
meters of desalinated water yearly, in addition to the flood 
water now streaming into the Jordan River and getting lost in 
the Dead Sea. 
  The Dead Sea would get the additional salt settling as a 
result of the desalination process. 
  The entire project, both the pipe and the canal, would be 
170-km long. According to the plan, the cost of desalinating 
one cubic meter of water would be 50 cents, as opposed to the $1 
it costs to desalinate water by the seaside. 
  The project was drafted by Idea G.V., a company formed by 
Israel Military Industries and the German firms Proeussag (a 
steel manufacturer), Noell (a Proeussag daughter company 
specializing in hydromechanics and desalination), and Kaiser (a 
venture capital firm for special projects); and a Jordanian 
firm, seeing that the project would lie half in Israel and half 
in the Jordanian Kingdom. 

