Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The minister of foreign affairs, Alhaji Babagana 
Kingibe, has said that the challenge before Nigeria today is how 
effective its diplomacy is in moving the country forward as a 
nation with a common destiny. 
  Alhaji Kingibe was speaking last night at an informal 
meeting 
with media representatives. Foreign news correspondent Candy 
Young Hari reports that the realization of this objective is a 
preoccupation of this ministry: 
  [Begin recording] [Hari] Alhaji Babagana Kingibe declared 
that he has come to the ministry with a clear idea as to the 
requirements of the job. But times, he said, require an 
effective background diplomacy following the national 
reconciliation that has so far been achieved since the debacle 
of 12 June. He said that the international community knows that 
under the circumstances which Nigeria found itself, there was no 
alternative to the change of government last November. The 
reaction of certain countries therefore is perhaps one of 
sadness rather than anger. Nevertheless, it is the 
responsibility of Nigerians to continue to explain that we can 
determine our future and have a right to expect their 
understanding of our endeavors. To do this, the minister said, 
he is prepared to assist the media to understand the issues 
involved. He appealed to media organizations to develop a 
relationship with his ministry based on knowledge and 
appreciation of the delicate nature of diplomacy. He urged 
media houses with the resources to create a corps of diplomatic 
correspondents in order to facilitate the suggestions. 
  [Kingibe] ...the combat of our diplomacy. I wish that such a 
corps existed. I think the handling of what is happening in 
Cameroon would have been different and would have been more 
supportive. Not that I am saying the coverages are not 
supportive. It is just like it is not informed, you know, of the 
reality of what is going on. That is really the problem. 
  [Hari] The reception was also attended by the minister of 
state in the ministry, Chief Anthony Ani, chief executives of 
media organizations, editors, and correspondents. [end 
recording] 

