Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taiyuan, February 24 (XINHUA) -- The rampant spread 
of endemic diseases in north China's Shanxi Province has now 
been brought under control thanks to the joint efforts of the 
local government and people. 
  The province is one of those blighted by a high incidence of 
endemic diseases such as Kaschin-Beck, Keshan, undulant fever, 
fluorine poisoning and iodine deficiency. 
  A recent survey conducted by the provincial endemic disease 
prevention and cure group shows that out of 118 cities and 
counties of the province, 107 suffer from such diseases and that 
in some counties the incidence of endemic disease has picked up 
sharply over the past few years. 
  It also shows that in Heshong and Qinyuan counties, the 
number of patients suffering from iodine deficiency, gas 
fluorine poisoning and Kaschin-Beck disease reached 120,000, 
accounting for 42 percent of the total population of these 
counties. 
  Analysts here attribute local poverty and economic 
underdevelopment partly to the spread of endemic diseases. Over 
30 percent of poor families had fallen on hard times due to 
chronic diseases, endemic diseases in particular. 
  Analysts say that endemic diseases here mainly attack the 
bones, joints and hearts of children and women of child-bearing 
age. 
  The survey indicates that among 2,853 primary and high 
school 
students in Heshong county who took physical examinations, the 
incidence of goiter was as high as 23.87 percent. 
  And in one village, some 8.8 percent of school-age children 
were deprived of going to school and 9.4 percent of primary 
school students were unable to graduate due to mental 
retardation caused by Keshan disease. 
  Figures show that of 7,172 children aged between seven and 
14 
in 24 counties heavily hit by undulant fever, the incidence rate 
of goiter due to iodine deficiency amounted to 32.94 percent. 
  Despite efforts to improve drinking water quality and 
heating 
facilities in the province, about two million people still live 
in high gas and fluorine poisoning areas. 
  The provincial government and party committee have paid ever 
closer attention to the prevention and control of endemic 
diseases and a range of forceful measures have been adopted 
since last year. 
  The move aims to curb the further spread of the diseases and 
bring the incidence rate under control at a level stipulated by 
the state. 
  Prevention and cure of endemic diseases has now been focused 
on strengthening the leadership and active participation of the 
whole society, according to local officials. 
  In May 1993, a provincial conference on controlling endemic 
diseases was called, and relevant rules and regulations were 
framed to reduce transmissions of the diseases among local 
people. 
  The leading bodies and offices in charge of prevention and 
cure of endemic diseases have now been reorganized in 11 
prefectures and cities, and a sound responsibility system has 
also been set up. 
  The local government at the same time has set aside hundreds 
of millions of yuan to boost the fight against endemic diseases 
from the beginning of 1994. 
  Starting from 1994, it will add one million yuan each year 
to 
the special 1.4 million yuan disease prevention fund. It will 
provide 100 million yuan in the coming three years to improve 
the drinking water in poverty-stricken areas. 
  Another six million yuan will be channeled toward updating 
the research equipment and facilities for preventing the 
diseases. A pharmaceuticals production center and a foundation 
are expected to be built and go into operation within the year. 
  An ample contingent of medical workers specially trained for 
prevention of endemic diseases is being built in the province 
and preferential policies have been formulated for promotion and 
pay for endemic disease specialists and medical workers. 
  Emphasis is being placed on spreading knowledge of endemic 
disease prevention and control and mobilizing the masses to 
fight against the diseases. 
  A book on prevention and cure of the endemic diseases was 
published by the provincial medical department and educational 
commission and will be used for teaching in primary and high 
schools throughout the province this year. 

