Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Ulla Jepsen report: "Muslim Fundamentalists Operate From </F>
Denmark"] 
  [Text] Copenhagen -- Denmark is a base for Muslim 
fundamentalists trying to overthrow the Egyptian Government and 
turn the country into an Islamic state. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, one of the leaders behind the 
fundamentalist groups in Denmark, instigates acts of terrorism 
-- including those against Danish firms and Danish tourists in 
Egypt -- from his home in the Copenhagen area. 
  He is under sentence of death for his part in the 
assassination of Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat in 1981. The 
Egyptian state has requested his extradition from Denmark, but 
Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim has been granted political asylum in Denmark 
and, therefore, cannot be handed over to Egypt. 
  "Kill the infidels and join the fight for an Islamic state 
in 
Egypt," Islamic fundamentalists urge in mosques throughout 
Denmark. 
  For Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim and the other fundamentalists the 
purpose of the terrorism is to create economic chaos and social 
unrest in Egypt, so as to overturn President Mubarak's moderate 
government. 
  "The radical Islamic fundamentalists are dangerous, and can 
easily plan and carry out acts of terrorism from Europe," one 
Islamic expert predicts. 
  But the Danish asylum authorities have no opportunity to 
assess whether or not those seeking asylum are members of 
international terrorist organizations. The asylum authorities 
may not check the identity of those seeking asylum with Interpol 
or with the police in their country of origin. 
  In Egypt, Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim is considered one of the 
leaders of the extremist Islamic groups which, with their bases 
outside the country, attempt to overthrow the Egyptian 
Government and set up an Islamic state. He himself does not 
hide his links with Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, one of the most 
violent and fundamentalist Islamic groups in Egypt. 
  The left-wing Egyptian newspaper AL-AHALI recently published 
an interview with Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, in which he made threats 
against foreign tourists and investments in Egypt, including 
Danish firms such as A.P. Moeller, F.L. Smidth, and Aarhus 
Flydedok, which operate in Egypt, and the 2,000 or so Danish 
tourists who holiday there each year. 
  "Tourism is a non-Islamic source of income which helps keep 
the present government in power, and foreigners have been warned 
to stay away from Egypt," Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim told the Egyptian 
paper. 
  "The radical Muslim leaders such as Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim 
living in various places in Europe and the United States pose a 
very real threat to their countries. It is easy for them to 
send orders for actions, money, or tapes with religious 
propaganda to members of the fanatical groups in Egypt, for 
example," POLITIKEN was told by Hesham Mubarak, a lawyer 
currently writing a book on radical Islamic groups and their 
international networks. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim is a well-known figure in fundamentalist 
circles. In 1981 he was arrested as a leader of the banned 
fanatical group Jihad (Holy War), which later that year was tied 
to the assassination of President Anwar al-Sadat. In 1989 he 
escaped while being moved with other prisoners. Traveling 
through the Sudan and Peshawar in Pakistan, he reached 
Afghanistan where, like Sheik 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman, thought to 
be the brains behind the World Trade Center bombing, he became 
one of the leaders of the Muslim fundamentalist volunteers 
aiding the Afghan Mojahidin in fighting the occupying Soviet 
power. 
  The Egyptian authorities have requested that Denmark hand 
over Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim, but he need not fear ending his days 
on Egypt's gallows. 
  "People who have obtained asylum in Denmark are not returned 
to their own country if there is a death sentence awaiting 
them," Justice Minister Erling Olsen said. 

