Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Wrong Target] </F>
  [Text] It was unfortunate for Jordan that the U.N. Security 
Council, under pressure from the U.S. and Britain, decided last 
week to extend the sanctions imposed on Iraq 
indefinitely--despite the fact that Iraq has complied with most 
if not all of the Security Council resolutions, especially those 
related to arms control. This extension of the sanctions was 
forced by the United States and the British despite favourable 
reports by U.N. envoys and inclination on the part of the other 
council members--France, Russia and China--to start lifting the 
sanctions regime. The council's decision, of course, did not 
take into consideration the fact that the sanctions are having 
tremendously negative results on the Iraqi people and are doing 
so little to change the Iraqi regime itself. Furthermore, the 
sanctions are taking their toll on Jordan, which has lost 
hundreds of millions of dollars already as a result of abiding 
by them. 
  While trade is being freely practised all along the Iraqi 
borders with Iran, Turkey and Syria, the U.S.-led U.N. naval 
force targets al-Aqabah, Jordan's only sea outlet, for a harsh 
regime of inspection. The Jordanian leadership and Jordanian 
officials have repeatedly complained to the U.S. government over 
such an unfair treatment. And U.S. officials, including 
Secretary Warren Christopher during his last visit here, have 
repeatedly promised to address the matter. So far nothing has 
materialised. This state of affairs is of course unacceptable. 
Jordan is being itself blockaded and by its so-called friends. 
Jordanian businesses are losing in terms of delays and 
diversions of cargo and harassments by the U.N. naval force. 
Under international law, a sea blockade is considered to be war. 
  Jordan has over the decades proved itself a respected and 
respectful member of the international community and an adherent 
of the U.N. Charter and its resolutions. Especially as pertains 
to the Gulf crisis, the Kingdom has abided by all the Security 
Council resolutions. For these reasons we feel that the U.S., 
despite protestations to the country, is targetting the country 
for no good reason at all. The U.S., therefore, needs to 
realise that such policies are counterproductive and threaten 
both the well-being of Jordan and the much-aspired to peace in 
the region. 

