Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A call by Philippine President Fidel Ramos for more 
contacts among claimants of the disputed Spratly Islands in the 
South China Sea which will eventually lead to "demilitarisation" 
of the area drew a receptive response from Vietnam, a senior 
Philippine government official said here yesterday. 
  President Ramos arrived in Hanoi on Monday for a three-day 
official visit. He held talks with Vietnamese President Le Duc 
Anh, Communist Party chief Do Muoi and Prime Minister Vo Van 
Kiet. 
  The Philippines and Vietnam are among six claimants of the 
Spratly Islands. With the exception of Brunei, the two 
countries along with China, Taiwan and Malaysia, have maintained 
various degrees of military presence in the area. 
  Speaking at a press conference before heading for southern 
Ho 
Chi Minh City yesterday Ramos said his proposal for more 
contacts as well as for joint resources development in the 
Spratlys is aimed at defusing tension in the region. 
  "We agreed on the need to devise confidence-building 
mechanisms -- cooperative ventures in the area -- that will 
assure the claimant countries and the rest of the region that 
the South China Sea can be transformed from waters of contention 
to an area of cooperation," he said. 
  Ramos added that he also mentioned to the Vietnamese leaders 
"the need to agree on demilitarisation" of the Spratlys. 
  Elaborating on his president's remarks, Undersecretary for 
Foreign Affairs Rodolfo Severino told reporters that 
demilitarisation of the Spratlys should be achieved in an Asian 
way, which is "gradual, step by step, in a consensual manner." 
  The Philippine and Vietnamese leaders also said they would 
like to encourage informal contacts from top level down to local 
commanders among the claimant parties, with a view to reducing 
tension in dealing with the Spratlys, according to Severino. 
  Vietnam has constantly reiterated its sovereignty over the 
Spratlys and the Paracels in which the latter is also in 
bilateral contention with China. 
  Stressing that the proposal for joint studies towards 
military reduction and joint resource development is new to 
Vietnam, Severino said Vietnam nevertheless found this "an 
interesting" idea. 
  The ASEAN Regional Forum, to be held this July in Bangkok 
and 
to which Vietnam is invited to attend, will steer clear from 
controversial issues such as disputed claims over the Spratlys, 
he said. 
  While in Hanoi, President Ramos also presided over the 
signing of several bilateral agreements covering trade, culture, 
tourism and the set-up of a Joint Commission for Bilateral 
Cooperation. 
  The two countries said they would try to increase bilateral 
trade, which last year amounted to only US$48 million, 
facilitate Vietnamese rice for Philippine fertiliser barter 
arrangements, as well as work to establish direct shipping 
services. 

