BFN 

  [Text] The cabinet is preparing for the signing ceremony 
of the agreement with the PLO in Cairo on Wednesday [4 May]. 
Today, the cabinet authorized Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin and 
Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres to summarize the last details of 
the agreement and to sign it. The closure on the territories 
will continue out of security considerations, without any 
connection to the signing of the agreement. Our correspondent 
Sefi Hendler reports from the cabinet sessionz: 
  [Begin recording] [Hendler] Yitzhaq Rabin, as usual, was 
less than enthusiastic about briefing the cabinet ministers on 
the more significant political points included in Israel's 
proposals to Syria. Rabin refrained from addressing the subject 
throughout the entire meeting. Minister Yosi Sarid was not 
offended, asserting that secrecy was essential at this stage. 
  [Sarid] I think that the Syrian track necessitates almost 
total discretion to promote the negotiations' chances of 
succeeding. Right now, everyone should only know what he 
absolutely must. I think that whoever is supposed to know does. 
  [Hendler] Since the Syrian issue was not discussed, most of 
the cabinet session was devoted to the Palestinian track. The 
agreement due to be signed on Wednesday by Rabin and 'Arafat has 
yet to be fully formulated. Rabin and Peres told the ministers 
that four matters were still unresolved: The size of the 
Jericho area, problems with regard to the autonomy's 
jurisdiction, the Palestinian demand to station a policeman on 
the Allenby bridge, and the question of responsibility for the 
Gaza Strip's southern beaches. Since these issues have not yet 
been resolved, the cabinet gave Rabin and Peres a general 
authorization to conclude and sign the agreement. 
  At today's session, the prime minister and the chief of 
staff 
both mentioned the problematic nature of the transitional period 
between Israel's withdrawal and the assumption of control by the 
Palestinians. We are withdrawing and they have not yet assumed 
responsibility, Rabin said. The prime minister complained that 
the Palestinians failed to attend meetings and were holding up 
the transfer of civilian and security responsibilities. 
Ministers Sarid and Tzur commented on this at the end of the 
cabinet session. 
  [Tzur] The PLO is not demonstrating orderly working habits. 
We do not expect the coming days to be very pleasant. The 
transitional period will be difficult and I do not think that 
there are any situation analyses or expectations that terror 
attacks will cease. After the agreement is signed, we will have 
to implement a rapid transfer of civilian and military 
responsibilities. Clearly, the fact that the PLO has not primed 
itself for an orderly transfer will make the transition even 
more difficult. 
  [Sarid] There is cause for concern but also a great deal of 
hope. I think that the general picture is good and positive. 
In several days we will finally be out of the Gaza Strip. That 
is the main thing. That is what we promised and are about to 
implement. That is the first change in the situation on the 
ground since 1967 and we must take an optimistic and positive 
view. 
  [Hendler] The prime minister added that there was no 
intention for the time being to lift the closure on the 
territories, which was motivated by security considerations 
totally unconnected to the signing of the agreement. 
  The prime minister also devoted a large part of today's 
cabinet session to the issue of the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
MIA's and POW's. The ministers received the impression that 
Rabin spoke with sorrow and pain about the mistakes made in the 
handling of the affair. Rabin noted that Yasir 'Arafat had 
given his word, his parole d'honneur [last two words in French], 
to help locate the soldiers missing in action since the battle 
of al-Sultan Ya'qub. [end recording] 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1400 GMT on 1 May adds: 
"At the meeting, Chief of Staff Ehud Baraq urged speeding up the 
evacuation of the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area in view of the 
lack of coordination between Israel and the PLO on the transfer 
of power and land. The chief of staff said the territory should 
be evacuated as quickly as possible because the lack of 
coordination could endanger IDF soldiers. He also said the 
Palestinians have long-range plans to set up an independent 
state, which will include Jerusalem, and they want to realize 
the right of return. Minister Ora Namir had reservations about 
these remarks."] 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1500 GMT on 1 May 
reports: "Agriculture Minister Ya'aqov Tzur said that it might 
become necessary to evacuate certain settlements on the Golan 
Heights; however, Israel must not implement a full withdrawal. 
Tzur expressed the assessment that a full withdrawal would be a 
mistake because the security of the northern settlements could 
not be guaranteed without an Israeli presence on the Golan 
Heights."] 

