Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Elena Siposova: ``The Invisible Killer''] </F>
  [Text] After World War II, in a surge of enthusiasm over 
the expanding dimensions of our economic growth, we forgot that 
just then we began violating the laws of nature. Rebuilding a 
war-devastated republic, again in common with the Czechs, we 
started out without consideration for what was until then 
virginal Slovak nature. Electrification, industrialization, and 
the building up of heavy industries imposed a cruel tax on the 
children and especially on the grandchildren of the 
Stakhanovites of those days. 
  You may say: Why talk about it now? Isn't that what everyone 
knows? We plundered raw material resources, polluted the 
environment, the land, and the water, and continue introducing 
into our environment a multitude of foreign substances that we 
have even found so natural that we systematically and to an ever 
increasing extent inject them into our food chain. 
  Our ill-considered impact on the landscape according to the 
gigantesque model of new construction helped create the sad 
appearance of our hills, woodlands, groves, oak and conifer 
forests, pasturelands, and meadows. At first the leaves began to 
fall, then the needles dried up and, ultimately, entire trees. 
Grass turned yellow, meadowland forest became an almost archaic 
term, trout and crayfish had long gone from brooks and larger 
streams, the frog ceased to sit at the springhead. Finding a 
lizard, not necessarily the rare red one, ought to be rewarded 
today by the top Nike prize. With a ``hind left,'' we have 
deformed the structure of the original Slovak landscape.... 
  Indeed, that's what everyone knows. And they also know that 
bathing in the Hron, the Ipel, the Vah, or, God forbid, the 
Danube, means risking at least an allergic rash. What is 
frightening, however, is that few people are concerned. Long ago 
we found that something must be done about it, but we have been 
putting off the solution. This on the part of the government 
that says that ``right now we have no money for it, it will have 
to wait,'' as well as on the part of all of us because we all 
are in a large or small degree responsible for the devastation 
of our environment. 
  For decades, the totalitarian government successfully 
covered 
up the truth. But even in the subsequent four years, we have not 
advanced much in redressing the problem. Somehow it seems 
inappropriate in decent society to talk about a dangerous 
invisible killer. 
  Are we doing it out of indifference or out of ignorance? A 
system in which truth about the environment of this or that 
region is suppressed may be something we have become accustomed 
to, but adding to it is also another deficiency, which is the 
ignorance of representatives of the regional state 
administration in regard to environmental issues. We will 
attempt a gradual search for the causes of this state of 
affairs. And it is an alarming one. 
  The median life expectancy for men in our country is 66.6 
years. That is six to seven years less than in the advanced 
countries. Women live longer--75.4 years, on average--which, 
however, is five to seven years less than in Western Europe. 
Mortality rose by 2.5 per thousand in the 1960-80 period. We may 
say that is not bad, it virtually stagnates. But, when we 
realize that up to one-fifth of the deceased do not reach age 60 
because deaths due to tumors and diseases of the circulatory 
system have increased and the number of cancer cases have nearly 
doubled over 1965, we must recognize that the situation is 
alarming. Not until 1988 did we learn the facts from certain 
okreses relating to high infant and perinatal mortality. Until 
that time, we were handing out false numbers because the quality 
of medical care was judged by the percentage of deaths. But the 
cause was (and still is) a rising number of children born with 
development defects, risky pregnancies due to a deteriorating 
environment, and problems rooted in social pathology that have 
continued to grow in the past four years. 
  Furthermore, environmental deterioration impacts adversely 
on 
the health of the population, contributing to allergies and 
oncological and cardiovascular diseases, cases of which in the 
advanced countries are already declining in number. Particularly 
dangerous are such negative factors as noise, vibrations, 
radiation, exposure to heat, thermal pollution, radon threat, 
and, above all, harmful substances in food. Nor can we shut our 
eyes to inadequate health care, which has been deteriorating 
from year to year due to reduced subsidies. 
  Up to 55 percent of the SR [Slovak Republic] population 
lives 
in environmentally impaired areas, of whom 41 percent in a 
strongly, up to extremely, impaired environment. The following 
regions, in particular, are unhealthy and endangered: 
Bratislava, Trnava-Galanta, the upper Nitra, central Hron, 
Kosice, central Zemplin, central Spis, the upper Vah, and 
central Gemery. The negative impact on people living in these 
regions has shown up in up to 30 percent of children having a 
weakened immune system, and the illness rates and youth 
invalidity statistics are a warning. 
  Certain plant species have disappeared, and several species 
of trees are endangered. Extinct are 41 percent of the species 
of lichens, which are often viewed as indicatory of the quality 
of the environment. Of 751 species of wildlife, those that have 
disappeared or are endangered include 27 species of fish, 20 
species of amphibians, 19 species of reptiles, 79 species of 
birds, and 30 species of mammals. Man, too, is a mammal. How 
long will he hold out? 
  It is said that money is not everything, but, in matters of 
the environment, this does not apply. Even though no amount of 
money can restore our devastated nature from one day to the 
next, we could nevertheless be helped by money in at least 
conserving the present state of the environment and slowly 
improving it by eliminating waste flows, replanting, 
recultivating the land, and purifying the water. In our country, 
however, environment is viewed like an athlete running in last 
place, on whom it no longer pays to place a bet. It is said that 
this kind of attitude toward resolving one of our gravest 
problems is displayed by people deciding on the allocation of 
moneys from the state budget to this area. We do not realize 
that it is precisely from there that everything begins. 
  The problem was discussed at an informal meeting between 
officials representing the SR Environment Ministry and some 
journalists. They confirmed that investments needed to 
revitalize our environment are not available. The high level of 
programs prepared by the ministry's staff was confirmed also by 
EC experts from Belgium, with whom I had the opportunity to 
discuss our projects. But carrying them out truly depends on 
money. It is needed to clean up the land and water, restore the 
damaged forests, and revive the wildlife. 
  Our economy is characterized by a high consumption of energy 
and raw materials. We need quantities of coal for power 
generation, fuel rods for nuclear power plants, iron ore and 
concentrates, quantities of dressed ores, and other raw 
materials. This industry orientation, alas, is at present the 
only one assuring the regions a modicum of employment. But it 
consumes more than half of the energy the generation of which is 
largely responsible for polluting our environment. After the 
metallurgical industry, its second-largest consumer is the 
chemical industry, followed by the cement and building-materials 
industries. For instance, the ironworks in Kosice and the 
aluminum plant in Ziar nad Hronom and Slovnaft among them 
consume nearly 22 percent of all power produced. It would seem 
that there is no way out of the vicious circle.... 
  If we stop producing the way we have thus far (and for now 
we 
lack finances for higher-quality production), additional tens of 
thousands of people will lose their jobs. But, if we continue, 
the population will pay for it year after year by its health. 
According to a European survey (EMEP) in 1992, the SR was in the 
part of Europe having the highest regional air pollution and 
rainwater acidity readings. In the overall quantity of harmful 
emissions into the air, the power industry, including heating, 
was responsible for 64 percent, transport for 19.5 percent, and 
the metallurgical and chemical industries for 7 percent each. 
  EC representatives David W. Rodda and Tue Rohrsted last week 
in an interview with SMENA stated that the European Communities 
will see to improving the environmental situation in the 
countries of the former Eastern bloc. The promised financial 
assistance is very attractive because it involves a loan at 
minimum interest. But it covers only selected localities 
adjoining international regions, which in our case means the 
Danube Basin. But our high-mountain forests are drying, and we 
can hardly expect to find good uncles from abroad willing to 
finance conservation of the present state of affairs, much less 
its improvement. 
  The total volume of available water stock in Slovakia 
averages out to 2,860 cubic meters of water per inhabitant; the 
European average is 5,000 cubic meters--this while the specific 
consumption of potable water per person per day in our country 
is twice that of Austria. Up to 16 okreses are reporting an 
appreciable deficit in potable water supply.... 
  Why do we need double the amount of potable water the 
Austrians need? For a long time already, advanced countries have 
been making a use distinction between potable and utility water 
consumption. But we think nothing of using potable water even 
for washing cars, and some people love to do that even in 
protected areas. And if one happens to come upon a mineral 
spring and no one is around, owners of those wheeled homes 
rarely hesitate.... An Austrian would not do such a thing, and 
thereby evidently shows his patriotism. 
  There is a great shortage of sewage treatment plants, even 
though more are under construction. We need many more of them, 
also because surface waters especially are greatly polluted. And 
again we run up against an insoluble circle. We have barely 60 
percent of the required quantity of potable water, but we are 
wasting it mindlessly and using it for all purposes because we 
do not have nonpotable, utility water that ought to be used in 
industry. 
  Every year we produce 34 million tons of waste, of which 3.3 
million are hazardous and 1.6 million communal waste. Records 
show that we have 7,204 dumps, of which 335 have permits. A 
certain portion of the waste is incinerated. Of the 70 
incinerators, only two are large (over 100,000 tons annually). 
Of 34 small incinerators for industrial waste, up to 11 lack 
scrubbers for removing exhalates. Hospital waste, too, is burned 
in inadequate incinerators. A special problem is safeguarding 
suitable storage of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel. 
But, in the field of waste management, we are confronted with 
yet another scare. Some canny businessmen take advantage of 
foreign offers and, for a relatively attractive financial 
reward, import tons of waste, especially plastics from the FRG, 
the burning of which releases the kind of exhalates for which 
the German entrepreneur would have to pay millions at home. Our 
entrepreneurs are taking advantage of legal loopholes and 
discard the imported waste in our dumps or even outside of them, 
sometimes with the blessing of local officials, perhaps for a 
bribe or because the responsible officials are not bound by any 
law because current legislation speaks only of a ban on the 
importation of hazardous materials. Customs offices do not have 
experts or laboratories to establish whether the imported waste 
constitutes a hazard. Regional officials, too, have no way of 
verifying the imported materials. Workers at the incinerators 
very often accept them willingly because they feel the marks 
slipping right into their pockets. 
  In this way, we face the prospect of becoming, within a few 
years, the waste dump of Europe. Those who now operate within 
this lethal circle are totally unconcerned that they are robbing 
their children of years of life and preparing an early death for 
them as well as for themselves. There is no shortage of foreign 
offers in this business, just as there are not a few 
entrepreneurs in our country who want to make big money without 
working for it. The question is what the customs authorities are 
doing, why they are not concerned about the many trucks and 
carloads of waste heading for Slovakia from abroad. Is it that 
here, too, an important role is played by foreign currency going 
straight into the pocket? What are the staffs of ecology 
departments at district and community offices doing? Why don't 
they report such doings in their regions to the higher 
authorities? 
  Our readers, too, surely have observed cases of 
environmental 
devastation. Perhaps they are bothered by the lax attitude on 
the part of responsible officials and by the inconsiderateness 
of many among us. We will be glad to publish examples from the 
regions. 

