BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with State Secretary Eduard Lintner, an "expert" </F>
on drugs in the Federal Government, by Holger Wuchold in Bonn; 
date not given: "`When You Have the Plague, You Should Not Call 
for Cholera'"] 
  [Text] [Wuchold] What consequences will the legislature 
have to take following the latest hashish ruling by the Federal 
Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe? 
  [Lintner] There are no implications for the legislature. 
The ruling just confirms the existing legal situation -- 
contrary to the impression that has generally been created. The 
right to ban hashish has been confirmed, and so has the right of 
separate treatment under the law of alcohol and nicotine on the 
one hand and illegal drugs on the other. The right to 
intoxication, which Mr. Nestovic demanded in his complaint, has 
been rejected by Karlsruhe. It is just that "occasional personal 
consumption," as defined by the Constitutional Court, will not 
usually be prosecuted or punished. This is already laid down in 
existing legislation. Sections of the public have created the 
impression that the court has allowed soft drugs. This is not 
the case at all. 
  [Wuchold] Will this affect the government's drug policy, 
which did not hitherto differentiate between hard and soft drugs? 
  [Lintner] The government's drug policy has been confirmed as 
well. The laender are the ones that will have to take measures. 
The Constitutional Court demands that they work out common 
guidelines for uniform jurisdiction in cases that involve small 
amounts of hashish for occasional personal consumption. 
  [Wuchold] Nicotine and alcohol cause 150,000 deaths each 
year. This figure makes the drug problem look almost harmless. 
  [Lintner] It is right that the alcohol problem is far 
greater in terms of dimensions. But, whether deaths are caused 
by alcohol or drugs, they are both catastrophes and should not 
be set off against each other. Calling for cholera if you 
already have the plague in the country would be a perverted 
logic. 
  The conclusion that we have to draw is to step up our 
efforts 
in terms of prevention with regard to all addictive substances. 
The Federal Government is doing this with its campaign "Making 
Children Strong." 
  [Wuchold] One of the arguments for allowing the use of drugs 
has been that this would deprive the drug mafia of its market. 
  [Lintner] These are very theoretical models that have not 
worked anywhere. Take the Netherlands: The assumption that a 
so-called liberalizing of hashish would separate the markets for 
soft and hard drugs did not prove right. Dealers wanting to 
sell hard drugs will always go where they hope to find 
customers. And potential customers are those who have already 
used drugs. The Federal Constitutional Court has also confirmed 
that hashish is a conditioning drug, since almost all the 
addicts to hard drugs have used hashish or marijuana. 
  [Wuchold] But could allowing soft drugs at least cut down on 
crimes related to obtaining drugs? 
  [Lintner] This is another field where expectations have not 
been met anywhere in the world. This has something to do with 
the fact that, say, a heroin addict is not able to work. 
Usually he cannot buy his drugs or support himself with a 
regular income. 
  [Wuchold] Has the narcotics problem in the new laender -- 
let me put it somewhat cynically -- already reached the western 
level? 
  [Lintner] No, thank goodness, it has not. We do not have a 
comparable drug scene in the new laender. But there might be a 
similar problem, although this will not happen as quickly as has 
been predicted. 

