BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhou Lixian (0719 4539 2009)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 27 Jun (XINHUA) -- Vice Minister of Public 
Security Mou Xinsheng pointed out during an interview with this 
reporter: "Three-companionship [san pei 0005 7111 -- serving as 
someone's companion at dinner, drinking, and dancing]" activity 
is a decadent phenomenon and its spread has aggravated 
prostitution and other crimes. So, it must be resolutely 
investigated and dealt with. 
  Mou Xinsheng said: In recent years, cultural and 
recreational facilities have developed rapidly in China, greatly 
enriching the people's cultural life and promoting spiritual 
civilization. At the same time, however, the 
"three-companionship" phenomenon has occurred in some singing 
and dancing recreational establishments. The public security 
organs have investigated and found that the 
"three-companionship" activity is for sexual excitement and even 
leads to prostitution and other crimes. In 1993 police records, 
one-half of the prostitutes and those who visited them were 
detected at recreational spots with the "three-companionship" 
activity. This indicates that recreational spots with the 
"three-companionship" activity are hotbeds of prostitution. The 
"three-companionship" activity seriously pollutes the social 
environment, corrupts social values, and causes strong 
resentment in all circles of society. It is extremely wrong to 
regard the "three-companionship" activity as something conducive 
to attracting outside investment. 
  On the measures to be taken by public security organs 
against 
the "three-companionship" activity, Mou Xinsheng said: The 
Ministry of Public Security has repeatedly called on local 
public security organs to adopt measures to ban it resolutely. 
Recently, the Ministry of Public Security has issued a 
"circular on resolutely investigating and dealing with the 
`three-companionship' activity at recreational establishments." 
The ministry urges local public security organs to 
conscientiously correct the poor management of social order at 
public recreational establishments, and to join the cultural, 
and the industry and commerce departments in improving 
management, seriously investigating and dealing with the 
"three-companionship" activity, and resolutely correcting it. 
Public security organs shall impose harsh punishment according 
to the law on anyone who engages in pornographic activity or 
prostitution in the name of "three-companionship" activity. At 
the same time, public security organs at various levels shall 
not be permitted to connive with and shield 
"three-companionship" activity under any pretext and in any way. 

