Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Learned by this reporter on 23 March from the 
provincial meeting on management of power departments, the 
province's last 400 administrative villages beyond the reach of 
power supply will all be supplied with power by the end of this 
year. Then, 91 percent of peasant households in the province 
will be accessible by power supply, 88 percent of peasant 
households will be furnished with lighting installation, and 
power price in rural areas will become reasonable. 
  In 1993, power departments in the province increased the 
dynamics of the work of supporting poor areas. As a result, some 
680 villages in the province were newly furnished with power 
supply installations. Zibo, Binzhou, and Jining attained the 
target of making all their villages accessible by power supply. 
Dezhou power supply bureau also completed in advance the work 
of supplying power to 56 villages by 20 March, thus fulfilling 
the task of making all villages accessible by power supply. 
Last year, three 110-kilovolt transformer substations and 12 
35-kilovolt transformer substations were newly built in the 15 
poverty-stricken counties in the province, and, as a result, 12 
poverty-stricken counties fulfilled the task of making all their 
villages accessible by power supply. 
  Vice Governor Chen Jianguo said at the meeting: The 
development of power industry is very uneven in rural areas. 
The framework of the rural power supply network in western 
province remains weak, and the per capita share of power there 
remains very low. This has become the major factor hampering 
the rural economic development in western areas. Accelerating 
the development of power industry in rural areas is a 
fundamental guarantee for invigorating the rural economy of the 
province. For this reason, governments at all levels must 
attach high importance on power industry. Meanwhile, by firmly 
embracing the service purpose of orienting the people's power 
industry to people's needs, rural power management departments 
at all levels should regard it as their own duty to ensure the 
lighting service of rural areas and to help rural areas shake 
off poverty and become rich, and should strengthen management to 
not only ensure power supply to peasants but also make the 
numerous peasants use power in correct way. Rural power 
management departments at all levels should continue to manage 
well power price and resolutely lower the price in rural areas 
to a reasonable level so that they can support agricultural 
production and reduce peasants' burden. 

