BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, June 3 (KCNA) -- Inventions produced by 
Korean scientists and technicians are popular in the 
international arena. 
  Inventions of Korea was highly appraised as peculiar, rich 
in 
scientific and technical contents and very high in economic 
value at the 22nd Geneva international exhibition of inventions 
and new technique which was held some time ago. 
  Bottom paint SZ 167-KA, fingerprint access control system 
(fingerprint key) of advanced technology, meari electric 
condenser microphone "ECM-319" for professional use and 
multifunctional inoculant for production of spheroidal graphite 
cast iron which are of worldwide significance, were awarded gold 
medals and universal various gases absorbent and high 
immunogenic hepatitis B vaccine silver medals. Thus Korea took 
first place in medal winning rate. 
  Scientists and technicians and businessmen from many 
countries praised the paint of Korea, saying if it were 
introduced into shipbuilding, it would greatly contribute to 
lessening sea pollution, a knotty problem of the world. The 
fingerprint key astonished people for its speed and accuracy. 
  The high immunogenic hepatitis B vaccine has touched off a 
big stir in the global medical world. It was assessed to be 
over 10 times in efficacy the preventive medicines which had 
been manufactured by countries with developed medical science 
through the application of advanced gene engineering technology. 
It has to itself popularity in the U.N. organizations and 
international fairs. 
  More than 3,000 valuable inventions and new technical 
innovation proposals are produced every year by the Korean 
scientists and technicians who are contributing to the 
implementation of the revolutionary economic strategy of the 
Workers' Party of Korea with sciences and technologies. Many of 
them have been well received at the international exhibitions. 
  The Korean scientists and technicians exhibited over 50 
inventions and took off 44 medals at the Geneva international 
exhibition of invention and new technology sponsored by the 
world intellectual property organization under the United 
Nations. Forty of them are gold and silver medals. 
  Korea entered this organization under U.N. in 1979 and has 
displayed inventions at the exhibition almost every year from 
1980. All the inventions sent there in 1991 and 1992 took 
medals, winning great popularity. 
  The chairman of the organizing committee of the exhibition 
and the chairman of its screening committee said that Korea 
nearly made a clean sweep of medals every time and they could 
gain better knowledge of the economic power and scientific and 
technical potentiality of Korea. 

