Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 26 Mar (INA)--Oil Minister Dr. Safa' Hadi 
Jawad has said that a number of leading U.S., Canadian, British, 
Brazilian, and Spanish oil companies have expressed a strong 
desire to conclude contracts with Iraq and to cooperate with it 
in the field of oil production. 
  In an interview with the newspaper AL-QADISIYAH published 
here today, the minister said that these international 
companies, which play a great and effective role in their 
countries' governments, seek to reemploy their expertise and 
investments in our oil industry despite the continuation of the 
blockade imposed on Iraq. 
  He said that there is another group of oil companies that 
seek to improve and promote their relations with Iraq, and that 
they seek to seize the appropriate opportunity to hold contacts 
and talks with Iraq in order to reach a specific agreement or to 
conclude contracts to develop their investments after the 
blockade is lifted. 
  The oil minister said: Negotiations with the international 
oil companies have taken place not only in Baghdad, but also in 
other world capitals, including Amman and Vienna. He stressed 
that the negotiations with the French oil companies, which were 
recently held in Paris, resulted in agreements that will be 
implemented after the blockade is lifted. 
  He emphasized that the continuation of the blockade not only 
affects Iraq and its people, but it is now affecting the 
neighboring states and other states with interests in Iraq. 
These states have begun to feel the grave damage inflicted on 
their economies. He added that Turkey is now suffering from a 
serious economic crisis after the stoppage of the Iraqi-Turkish 
pipeline, and after banning the crude oil exports through this 
line to Turkey and then to other ports. He said that 
reoperating this line will secure jobs for thousands of Turkish 
workers. 
  Oil Minister Safa' Hadi Jawad added: The closure of the 
Iraqi- Turkish oil pipeline has led to the deterioration of the 
economic situation in the Anatolia region and the Turkish ports, 
to the growth of unemployment rates, and to the deterioration of 
the security situation in the region. 
  He noted: As a result of these problems and obstacles, 
Turkey began to pressure the UN Security Council to allow the 
reopening of the Iraqi-Turkish pipeline, which will reactivate 
trade between the two countries using 1,000 trucks per day to 
transport goods. 
  The oil minister pointed out that Iraq's current production 
of crude oil falls within the limits of 550,000-600,000 barrels 
per day to meet the local needs for oil byproducts. He said 
that important explorations have been undertaken in the central 
and western regions of Iraq, and that previously-discovered oil 
fields have also been developed. 

