Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondent Tzaduq Yehezgali in Havana] </F>
  [Text] [Excerpt] [passage omitted] There are about 200 
children and young people in Cuba today who can speak a little 
Hebrew, have mastered the basic concepts of Judaism, are active 
in a Zionist youth group, and dream of really making Aliyah to 
Israel, in contrast to their elders, who see Israel as a 
stopping-point on the way to America. When we asked one of the 
community leaders this week how many would leave if the gates to 
Israel were opened, he hesitated a little and then said "about 
400 people." "And how many want to go to Miami?" This time, he 
did not hesitate even for a moment: "98 percent." 
  You could see the lightning in their eyes this week, when 
they came to meet the guests from Israel, and especially the 
chief rabbi, the most senior personage from Israel to arrive on 
an official visit to Cuba since relations were severed. They 
danced Israeli folk dances, knew by heart every word of the 
half-dozen Hebrew songs they had learned. There was not one 
young person without a Star of David around his neck. 
  "Here, together, we can forget our everyday problems," says 
Alberto Sus, the young Cuban who leads the Jewish youth group. 
The 40 youngsters go on hikes, have parties and Sabbath eve 
services, and fantasize about life in Israel. Nobody can allow 
himself the luxury of a cafe or discotheque, which are meant 
almost entirely for tourists, but who thinks about going out on 
the town--Sus told us that, "there are nights when I go to bed 
hungry." 
  But really, the situation of this Jewish young man is really 
better in many ways than that of others the same age in Cuba. If 
there is discrimination here, the ones most deprived are the 11 
million Cubans, not the 1,600 Jews. That is the reason the 
leaders of the Jewish community are beginning to suspect that 
people not Jewish in any way are suddenly declaring themselves 
Jews simply because it is convenient. 
  "What worries me," said the Communist party's official 
responsible for religions, Caridad Diego, "is that with all the 
foreign aid to the Jewish community, a privileged class may be 
created here." We talked in the meeting hall filled with gifts 
from heads of states and party leaders from all over the world. 
On the wall was a gilded map of Palestine, a gift from Arafat, 
with not a single Israeli city marked on it. Diego spoke of the 
fear of hostility toward Jews on the side of Cubans who are not 
lucky enough to get aid from overseas. 
  The situation is truly hard. There are hardly any shops in 
the streets of Havana. Occasionally you see an old Chevrolet 
from the prerevolutionary days, or a Russian "Lada," and you see 
many, many bicycles. Those who cannot even get one of these, 
drag their feet around the streets of the city. 
  Without the Russians, there are no subsidies and no fuel. 
Without fuel, there is no electricity, sometimes for most of the 
hours of the day and night. Without electricity, factories are 
closed. This domino has destroyed what the revolution built, and 
what Castro does have to give the Cubans are sayings written in 
the colors of the Cuban flag on every free wall: slogans like 
"Cuba together," or "We will win." But what do the Cubans say? 
"You don't go to the market with slogans." 
  Israel does not have diplomatic relations with Cuba. But in 
the economic realm, the Israelis have already put a foot on this 
Caribbean island. 
  There are at least half a dozen Israelis doing business 
here, 
including former adviser to the prime minister on security 
matters, Rafi Eitan. 
  The most thriving project is that of an Israeli investment 
group that grows oranges here for export. Israelis living in 
Panama import a line of products from Cuba, utilizing the cheap 
workforce and the government incentives. 
  In the black market, it is easy to get products like 
Maccabee 
beer or Telma soup nuts, imported by an Israeli businessman who 
lives here. 
  The Cubans, who are looking for every investor they can get, 
are ready to overlook the symbol of the State of Israel on the 
passport. "We know the Israelis are here," a senior official in 
the Cuban foreign trade ministry told us this week. "We would 
not be against seeing more. We need investors." 

