Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Ivanov, ``Flu Passed Us By''] </F>
  [Text] During the past week, only one case of flu was 
confirmed in Moscow whereby several such cases were recorded in 
the preceding week according to a report to the Interfaks Agency 
by Moscow's chief infectious disease specialist Nikolay 
Malyshev. According to Malyshev, altogether the level of flu 
morbidity does not exceed the usual level. The number of cases 
is decreasing rather than increasing. In N. Malyshev's 
prediction, one can hardly expect a serious flu outbreak in the 
near future. As preventive measures, he recommends that the 
capital's residents use conditioning, fresh air, plenty of 
liquids, lemons, honey, and one drug--dibazol. 
  At the same time, ``diphtheria is giving him a much bigger 
headache'' in the words of Moscow's chief infectious disease 
specialist. N. Malyshev reported that between the start of the 
year and 25 November, 2,001 diphtheria patients were recorded in 
Moscow, including 458 children. During the same period, 86 
persons died from diphtheria. 
  In November alone, 316 new patients were recorded, 188 of 
them children. The number of diphtheria patients compared to the 
same period of the last year increased by threefold. Mortality 
due to this disease is increasing even faster. N. Malyshev 
emphasizes that ``the sole preventive measures is vaccination.'' 
  According to the Russian Federation State Committee on 
Sanitary and Epidemiological Oversight, the level of intestinal 
diseases in Russia has risen again since June 1993 following 
several rather successful years. In 1992, e.g., the lowest 
incidence of dysentery was recorded during the entire official 
recording period for this disease (since 1970). 
  Yet the number of dysentery patients during the first eight 
months of this year rose in the Russian Federation compared to 
the same period of the last year by 21.2%. The greatest 
increase was observed in the northern and northwestern regions. 
Altogether, reports of 30 outbreaks have been received during 
eight months by Russia's State Committee on Sanitary and 
Epidemiological Oversight. 
  Cases of cholera have also been recorded. In July-August, 
this diagnosis was confirmed in 11 Russian citizens who returned 
from India, Pakistan, and Turkey. Two patients were identified 
in Dagestan and Stavropol kray. 


