BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jose Maria Brunet: "Serra Asserts That Roldan's </F>
Lies Will Not Affect his Record"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- Deputy Prime Minister Narcis Serra stated 
yesterday that the "lies" told by former Civil Guard Director 
General Luis Roldan "can never affect my record as a 
politician." Serra attacked the People's Party for giving 
credence to the accusations leveled against him by Roldan, and 
attributed to People's Party Chairman Jose Maria Aznar -- absent 
from the session -- "a lack of political ethics and courage" for 
leveling unfounded accusations against him in connection with 
the Roldan affair. Serra made these statements in reply to 
questions from People's Party Deputies Luis Ramallo and Rogelio 
Baon on the Roldan affair at the Congress of Deputies plenary 
session. 
  For their part, the People's Party representatives took the 
view that Serra should accept political responsibility for 
Roldan's appointment as Civil Guard director general. Ramallo 
accused Serra of being "afraid" at the possibility of appearing 
before the parliamentary committee of enquiry into the affair. 
Serra said in reply that the People's Party was pursuing a 
policy of "defamation" and unproven accusations in this affair. 
<H5>  Tense Atmosphere </H5>
  Serra's appearance came during the weekly question period. 
Deputies Ramallo and Baon asked him eight questions in a tense 
atmosphere characterized by constant interruptions and booing 
and applauding of speakers. The session provided no new 
information about the Roldan affair. Ramallo emphasized that, 
in any event, the deputy prime minister had given his word and 
that this would be on record in the Congress minutes, so that if 
he were some day found to be untruthful in describing his 
relations with Roldan, he could be called to account immediately. 
  The eight questions asked by Ramallo and Baon -- the 
People's 
Party's representatives on the committee that has investigated 
Roldan's conduct in heading the Civil Guard -- sought to cast 
light on the relationship which may have existed between Roldan 
and Serra. The questions included the government's reasons for 
entrusting Roldan with the Crillon report on Mario Conde, which, 
according to Roldan, Serra had ordered. 
  The deputy prime minister did not confine himself to 
defending himself against the accusations leveled against him by 
the People's Party; he counterattacked, and aimed high, accusing 
People's Party leader Jose Maria Aznar of lacking ethics in his 
political conduct in believing and echoing statements made by a 
fugitive from justice. "Today the minutes of the session will 
reflect an act implying a lack of courage and political valor 
because of Mr. Aznar's absence." The People's Party chairman 
said in reply from Valladolid that Spain "will not progress 
through aspersions, or insults. No attention need be paid right 
now to those statements or to people who cannot keep their 
composure." 
  Rogelio Baon and Luis Ramallo took the view that the 
government in general and Serra in particular had assumed 
political responsibilities with respect to the Roldan affair by 
appointing him, accepting nonexistent academic qualifications, 
failing to monitor his conduct while in charge of the Civil 
Guard, ordering intelligence from the Civil Guard which should 
never have been made public, and, finally, allowing him to 
escape. 
  Serra replied to all these points by acknowledging the 
mistakes made in appointing Roldan and in allowing him to 
escape; two former ministers -- Corcuera and Asuncion -- had 
paid for this, he said, by having to relinquish their posts. In 
his opinion the government had therefore already assumed 
political responsibility for the affair insofar as it could be 
called to account. 
  "If what Mr. Roldan reveals what he has done so far," the 
deputy prime minister asserted, "let me tell you that I am 
absolutely at ease, because lies will never be able to affect my 
record as a politician. Second, more conclusive evidence about 
my relations with Mr. Roldan would have to be sought. They were 
those befitting a defense minister and a Civil Guard director 
general, or a deputy prime minister and a Civil Guard director 
general, basically because since I have been in the government I 
have tried to protect and defend that body's military nature. 
Hence, because the system of promotions and military positions 
was my responsibility as defense minister, I consulted with the 
former Civil Guard director general; I also consulted with him 
as deputy prime minister in connection with the measures adopted 
to guarantee security at events in 1992. 

