Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The spread of coca plantations to southern Peru and 
the processing of cocaine paste have increased drug trafficking 
near Bolivia and Brazil. It necessarily follows that cocaine 
should get to consumer markets via new routes. 
  This information -- which was provided by an international 
probe into narcotics control -- together with the analysis of 
the data submitted by drug enforcement agencies in Paraguay have 
led to the conclusion that our country would be the new cocaine 
route. 
  The National Police's Narcotics Department and the National 
Narcotics Directorate [Dinar] are investigating this new route 
and all the evidence seems to indicate that the drug enters the 
country via the Paraguay River and is transported to a port, 
possibly Concepcion, or another located further upstream. 
  The National Police's Narcotics Department has sent 
personnel 
to Fuerte Olimpo to check a shipment of Brazilian cigarettes 
that were consigned to our country from Zarate Port, Bolivia. 
  This drew the attention of the police authorities as the 
expense involved in transporting the cigarette shipment via the 
Transchaco Highway to Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, and from 
there to Zarate Port, where it is loaded into a motorboat that 
goes downstream in the direction of Concepcion is totally 
unjustified. 
  Following the exodus of authorities from Bahia Negra, the 
place is an ideal "post" for drug traffickers to send cocaine -- 
which presumably comes from Colombia rather than from Santa Cruz 
de la Sierra -- to the Pedro Juan Caballero cocaine cartel. 
  This new, small-scale cartel allegedly used this route to 
bring 150 kg of cocaine hydrochloride into the country at the 
end of last week. The Dinar and the National Police's Narcotics 
Department are currently delving into this issue. It is 
surmised that the shipment is already in Pedro Juan Caballero, 
the capital of Amambay Department. 
  There are concrete data to the effect that chemical products 
for processing cocaine are given in exchange for the drug. 
Ether, acetone, and hydrochloric acid come from Brazil through 
Bella Vista and are transported to Concepcion, from where they 
are allegedly shipped to Bolivia. The lack of transport, 
communications, and checkpoints enables the drug traffickers to 
continue their business unhampered. 

