BFN 

  [Text] Melaka (Malaysia), June 13 (OANA-BERNAMA) -- Prime 
Minister Dr Mahathir Mohamed said Monday that foreign investors 
particularly those from Taiwan should have no fear about 
investing in Malaysia as it does not oppress the Chinese 
community. 
  Some of the Taiwan investors had such fear and even 
considered Malaysia unsuitable for their investment because in 
the past there had been reports which depicted Malaysia as a 
country facing the problem of racial conflicts. 
  However, Taiwanese investors who came to Malaysia found the 
reports to be not true and there were no racial conflicts or 
oppression against the Chinese community, Dr Mahathir said when 
opening the [Malaysian ringgit] RM1,200 million (US$1 = RM2.6) 
Ornaetel Corporation (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd [private limited] 
factory at Air Keroh, near here. 
  We are not like other countries which oppress the Chinese 
community and we treat everyone equally. We support the opening 
of Chinese schools and there are no restrictions against the 
Chinese community, he said. 
  According to Dr Matathir, the Chinese community was the most 
prosperous in the world and there were Malaysian Chinese who 
were very much involved in business activities both locally and 
overseas. 
  He said Taiwan had contributed much to Malaysia's 
development 
and industrialisation process through its investment which at 
one time was the biggest when compared to that from other 
countries. 
  Malaysia at one time was merely a raw material producer such 
as tin and this could not contribute towards Malaysia becoming 
an industrialist nation. 
  Hence Malaysia sought a shortcut and invited foreign 
investors bringing along with them heavy and modern technology. 
  At present many investors from Europe, Japan, Taiwan, the 
United States and Australia and in fact from nearly the whole 
world have invested in Malaysia and have directly contributed 
towards its development, Dr Mahathir said. 
  No one who wants to work need be unemployed in Malaysia; at 
present more than one million foreigners have come to Malaysia 
either legally or illegally to work in this country because the 
wages offered are very much higher than in their own countries, 
Dr Mahathir said. 
  The presence of these foreigners in itself proved Malaysia's 
success, he said. 
  Responding to questions from Taiwan journalists covering the 
event, Dr Mahathir said the Malaysian Government welcomed the 
Look South policy of the Taiwan Government as it would draw more 
investors from Taiwan to invest in Malaysia. 

