CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, March 7 (UNI [United News of India]). 
Despite tightening of controls, India continues to be a major 
source of illicit drug production and trafficking, according to 
the latest report of the International Narcotics Control (INC) 
board. 
  During the first six months of 1993, 50 tonnes of cannabis 
(ganja), large consignments of illicit cannabis, resin and more 
than 1.5 tonnes of opium were seized by Indian authorities. 
  Lawful cultivation of both cannabis and opium poppy are 
allowed in India to extract alkaloids for use in the 
pharmaceutical industry. It is also an important source of 
foreign exchange. 
  The report by the Vienna-based agency working in close 
cooperation with the United Nations International Drug Control 
Programme (UNDCP) said most of the cannabis seizures in India 
were effected on its borders with Nepal and Pakistan. Nepal was 
identified as an important base of origin of cannabis to India 
as well as Europe. 
  The board noted that of late Maldives which is a 
non-signatory to the 1981 single convention on narcotic drugs 
has become a major point of trafficking of drugs to Europe and 
America the consumption of illicit drugs also has significantly 
gone up in Maldives. 
  In India, Clandestine cultivation of cannabis was detected 
in 
Kerala, Manipur, Nagaland and Tamil Nadu. Clandestine 
laboratories processing heroin from the opium poppies had been 
dismantled in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
  The report estimated that about six to seven per cent of the 
raw opium from the licensed processing factories was 
clandestinely diverted into illicit channels. 
  The increase in illicit traffic in heroin has been 
accompanied by its growing abuse in certain parts of South Asia. 
In India, heroin abuse remains a major concern. Originally 
confined to the North-Eastern states and larger cities, the 
habit is now spreading to other areas, the report said. 
  Intravenous administration of heroin and the high incidence 
of AIDS infection resulting from that form of abuse have become 
a major problem in Bombay, the report noted. 
  Another area of concern was the increasing illicit 
manufacture of methaqualone. 

