Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 6 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- The military 
chiefs of the weakened Medellin Cartel in Colombia are willing 
to negotiate a peace agreement with the enemies of that dreadful 
organization to prevent their total extermination, the local 
press revealed today. 
  According to EL TIEMPO, during the past 70 days the 
survivors 
of the Medellin Cartel who are currently in jail have 
unsuccessfully sent letters to their emissaries in Cali, the 
country's third largest city, seeking a peace agreement with the 
Mafia in that region. 
  Some time ago, the clandestine group "Pepes" [Persecuted by 
Pablo Escobar], reportedly made up of members of the Cali 
Cartel, announced it would reactivate its struggle against the 
men of slain drug trafficker Pablo Escobar until all the members 
of the once powerful organization are exterminated. 
  "Afraid of what could happen to them--after Escobar's 
death--the terrorist chiefs of the Medellin Cartel have offered 
to pay their debts in jail and for the first time have 
considered the possibility of dismantling whatever is left of 
their armed redoubts," the newspaper said. "In exchange, they 
have requested respect for their relatives' lives and 
negotiations for their money and properties," with Pablo 
Escobar's widow Maria Victoria Henao. 
  Since its creation a year ago, "Pepes" has killed more than 
50 of Pablo Escobar's men and destroyed some 30 properties 
belonging to the Medellin Cartel. According to the police, the 
hunt for the survivors of the Medellin Cartel who are free has 
continued after Escobar's death and this is keeping the people 
related to this organization in a state of fear. The source 
said that "the authorities have evidence related to the killing 
of several cartel agents in Medellin one week ago." 
  One of Escobar's trusted men has said: "Either we kneel or 
they kill us all." This man has confirmed that the terrorist 
chiefs of the cartel are making efforts to secure a peace 
agreement with their enemies. 

