Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Netherlands Positive About Role </F>
in New UN Force"] 
  [Text] The Netherlands is prepared in principle to 
contribute to an international peacekeeping force in order to 
guarantee the safety of Palestinians living in the West Bank and 
Gaza Strip. 
  "If the Netherlands receives an official request from the 
United Nations, it will certainly be given favorable 
consideration," report diplomats in The Hague. The PLO has 
urgently requested the Netherlands to adopt such a position this 
week. 
  Yusuf Habbab, the official PLO representative in the 
Netherlands, made this request in a letter addressed to 
Netherlands Foreign Minister Kooijmans. He expects the 
Netherlands to play its part in the resumption of the Middle 
East peace process. 
  "Protection of the Palestinians is essential to the 
resumption of the peace talks," states Habbab. "The Netherlands 
can play a part in this." Great Britain and Norway also have 
been approached and, according to the PLO, have responded 
positively. 
  PLO leader 'Arafat already has made two previous urgent 
requests to the Netherlands to act as a mediator in the Middle 
East peace process as the Netherlands enjoys good relations with 
Israel. 
  In a recent telephone conversation with Israeli Prime 
Minister Rabin, the Netherlands Prime Minister Lubbers pressed 
for a rapid implementation of the Israeli-Palestinian agreement 
in principle for limited Palestinian autonomy in the Gaza Strip 
and around Jericho. The Netherlands is willing to use its "open 
lines" with Israel and the PLO and has offered the PLO its "good 
services." 
  The possibility of a peacekeeping force has been discussed 
within the Security Council but no decision has been made yet. 
In a statement on Monday [7 March] evening the European Union 
urged the resumption of peace talks and asked the Security 
Council for an "international presence." 
  Netherlands diplomats point out that in countries where it 
has an office, the PLO has clearly launched a diplomatic 
offensive for the formation of an international force in the 
occupied territories. 
  The question is whether the force will consists of military 
personnel or civilians. Until the Security Council makes it 
clear how the term "international presence" should be 
understood, the Netherlands refuses to undertake any specific 
actions. 
  Diplomats also report there is doubt whether Israel will 
agree to a peacekeeping force on its territory. If Israel does 
not cooperate, the United States will not agree to a Security 
Council resolution which stipulates that a peacekeeping force 
should be sent. 

