Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ovidio Bellando] </F>
  [Text] Argentina has made an offer to the United Kingdom 
to clear the mines planted by the Armed Forces in 1982 in the 
Falklands. 
  According to British estimates, there are about 30,000 mines 
but local sources estimate the number is much smaller. 
  Early last week President Carlos Menem authorized Foreign 
Minister Guido Di Tella to make the offer, which was received by 
British Foreign Office representative Peter Hall on 30 December. 
  The explosion of some of the mines and the damages they have 
caused concern the islanders, who have fenced off large areas 
near Puerto Argentino where animals and people are banned from 
entering. 
  The Argentine forces thought the British were going to land 
in that region. 
  During the last days of 1993 the British media reported the 
concern over this issue by British public and private 
organizations. 
  According to inquiries made in official circles, there are 
no 
plans of the mined territory. However, even if the exact 
locations of the mines were known, one must bear in mind the 
possibility that they may have moved -- due to the type of 
terrain -- a considerable distance from the barred area. In view 
of this it is believed that the task of clearing the mines will 
take quite some time. 
  According to information leaked on the meeting Di Tella held 
with the British ambassador, the latter thanked him for the 
offer but warned that he could not give an answer until an 
answer was received from the government of the Falklands, which 
probably would be informed about the offer in "the first days of 
1994." 
  According to what Di Tella told LA NACION, the task of 
finding the mines would not be carried out by local experts even 
though there are highly qualified people in the country to do 
this job. The purpose is to prevent the islanders from reaching 
any conclusions that do not match the government's real 
intentions. 
  Since a year ago a group of Argentine engineers has been 
clearing mine fields in Kuwait sown with sophisticated bombs by 
the Iraqi forces during the Gulf War. 
  If the proposal is accepted, the work will be done by 
experts 
from third countries whose salaries will, obviously, be paid by 
Argentina. 
  The purpose of the offer falls within the framework of the 
"desire for a growing dialogue with the Falklands' inhabitants" 
mentioned in the Argentine Foreign Ministry communique issued on 
3 January on the occasion of the anniversary of the British 
occupation. 
  The communique, recalling the 161th anniversary of the 
occupation, also ratifies Argentina's "incontrovertible right to 
its sovereignty" and reiterates its "firm purpose to continue 
with the progress of dialogue and negotiations with the United 
Kingdom with an eye to strengthening mutual confidence and 
expanding bilateral cooperation in the Southwestern Atlantic." 
  It adds that the Argentine Government has a commitment "to 
promoting the islanders' welfare on an equal level with the 
welfare of all inhabitants within Argentine territory." 
  The proposal to clear the mines was termed by some official 
sectors that still criticize the Foreign Ministry's position as 
"more effective than the (Di Tella's) efforts for a 
rapprochement with the islanders through recorded messages and 
friendly letters." These groups are aware that the initiative 
has the presidency's full support. 

