Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Fernando Rodrigues: "Fleury's Popularity Topples </F>
to 19 Percent"] 
  [Text] Sao Paulo Governor Luiz Antonio Fleury Filho (PMDB 
[Brazilian Democratic Movement Party]) is in a touchy situation 
as he completes two years and nine months of his term. For the 
first time since the first poll was conducted 30 days after he 
took office, his rejection rating has jumped to 30 percent and 
now exceeds his approval rating (19 percent), according to a 
poll conducted in the capital of Sao Paulo State. 
  Governor Fleury found his approval rating (the number of 
respondents rating his performance "very good or good") 
beginning to fall after he had been in office one year and three 
months. At the time, the PMDB governor was enjoying a 
comfortable approval rating of 40 percent. That percentage 
dropped to 36 percent after one year and six months, 30 percent 
after one year and eight months, and 26 percent after two years 
and four months, and is now down to 19 percent. 
  The Sao Paulo governor is managing to maintain an "average" 
rating for his administration. Of those polled, 46 percent feel 
that the Fleury administration is "average." That percentage has 
ranged from 43 percent to 49 percent. The biggest surprise was 
actually the jump of 11 percentage points (from 19 to 30 
percent) among Sao Paulo city voters who consider his 
administration "bad or very bad." 
  Fleury's rejection rating is the third largest among those 
of 
the 10 governors evaluated in the DataFolha poll. Fleury is 
outdone only by Leonel Brizola (PDT [Democratic Labor Party], 
Rio de Janeiro)--the champion, with 54 percent rating him "very 
bad"--and is technically neck to neck with Helio Garcia 
(independent, Minas Gerais), whose rejection rating was 31 
percent. 
<H5>  Magalhaes Improves, Gains on Ciro Gomes </H5>
  Two years and nine months after taking office, Ceara 
Governor 
Ciro Gomes (PSDB [Brazilian Social Democracy Party]) is still in 
first place as the governor receiving the best performance 
evaluation in his state's capital, according to the DataFolha 
poll conducted in 10 capitals on 16 and 17 December. In the 
opinion of 69 percent of Fortaleza's voters, Ciro's 
administration is "very good" or "good." The second-best 
performance was that of Bahia Governor Antonio Carlos Magalhaes 
(PFL [Liberal Front Party]), whose administration was rated 
"very good" or "good" by 67 percent of those polled. 
  Although belonging to different parties, Ciro Gomes and 
Antonio Carlos Magalhaes are two of the governors who have not 
spared the current federal administration their criticism. 
Another point of similarity is that they have always avoided 
attacking each other. 
  But whereas Gomes has remained at the 69-percent level--the 
same score he had in the previous poll, which evaluated the 
governors after two years and four months in office--Magalhaes 
is still climbing. The Bahia governor's popularity started 
soaring as soon as he took office. He began with a "very 
good/good" rating of 25 percent, and the curve has been moving 
almost constantly upward since then. He is up three percentage 
points since the last poll: from 64 to 67 percent. 
  Besides Gomes and Magalhaes, two other governors were 
approved by a majority: Pedro Pedrossian (PTB [Brazilian Labor 
Party], Mato Grosso do Sul) and Roberto Requiao (PMDB, Parana). 
Pedrossian had an approval rating of 54 percent, and Requiao's 
was 49 percent. 
  Five governors were rated "average" by the majority. They 
were Alceu Collares (PDT, Rio Grande do Sul), Vilson Kleinubing 
(PFL, Santa Catarina), Helio Garcia (independent, Minas Gerais), 
Luiz Antonio Fleury Filho (PMDB, Sao Paulo), and Joaquim 
Francisco (independent, Pernambuco). The ratings of two of those 
governors--Collares and Garcia--are almost unchanged from the 
previous poll. 
  The surprises in the group of "average" governors concerned 
Fleury, Joaquim Francisco, and Kleinubing. Joaquim Francisco's 
rejection rating fell dramatically--from 40 percent to 27 
percent--while his rating as "very good" or "good" rose from 16 
to 25 percent. The Pernambuco governor was rated "average" by 45 
percent of those polled in Recife. 
  Vilson Kleinubing maintained his "average" rating (a slight 
drop from 50 to 47 percent), but his administration's rejection 
rating showed a large jump. In the view of 28 percent of those 
polled in Florianopolis, the governor's term has been "very bad" 
or "bad." The figure was 20 percent in the last poll. The number 
considering his administration "very good" or "good" also fell: 
from 25 to 20 percent. 
<H5>  Brizola </H5>
  Rio de Janeiro Governor Leonel Brizola (PDT) is still the 
poll's rejection champion. Of those polled in the city of Rio de 
Janeiro, 54 percent say that Brizola's administration is "very 
bad." The figure is down from 59 to 54 percent, but the 
difference is almost equal to the margin of error for that city. 
  But there are indications in DataFolha's poll that the 
reaction to Brizola among his voters in the state capital is 
changing. His approval rating ("very good/good") is up from 8 to 
14 percent, and that is well above the margin of error. Despite 
that improvement, he still has the lowest approval rating of all 
the 10 governors evaluated. 
  Brizola, who is a potential candidate for president of the 
republic in this year's election, is showing signs of recovery 
in this new poll by DataFolha. Since the governor has the 
residual support of a group of voters regarded as being 
convinced Brizola supporters, it would seem that all he has to 
do is keep a low profile and he will regain the support of those 
voters. 


Performance of Governors* 



The three best ("very good/good"):       The three worst ("bad/very bad"): 



Name and state        Percent            Name and state      Percent 



Ciro Gomes (Ceara)    69                 Leonel Brizola      54 
                                         (Rio de Janeiro) 

Antonio Carlos        67                 Helio Garcia        31 
Magalhaes (Bahia)                        (Minas Gerais) 

Pedro Pedrossian      54                 Luiz Antonio        30 
(Mato Grosso do                          Fleury Filho (Sao 
Sul)                                     Paulo) 



* Single answers to the questions asked. 




Performance of Governors by State (in percentages) 



Name          State         Party          Very         Average    Bad/very    Don't 
                                           good/good               bad         know 



Ciro Gomes    Ceara         PSDB           69           21         5           4 

Antonio       Bahia         PFL            67           27         6           1 
Carlos 
Magalhaes 

Pedro         Mato Grosso   PTB            54           32         6           8 
Pedrossian    do Sul 

Roberto       Parana        PMDB           49           35         12          4 
Requiao 

Joaquim       Pernambuco    independent    25           45         27          4 
Francisco 

Alceu         Rio Grande    PDT            22           48         28          3 
Collares      do Sul 

Vilson        Santa         PFL            20           47         28          4 
Kleinubing    Catarina 

Luiz          Sao Paulo     PMDB           19           46         30          4 
Antonio 
Fleury 
Filho 

Helio         Minas         independent    17           47         31          5 
Garcia        Gerais 

Leonel        Rio de        PDT            14           28         54          4 
Brizola       Janeiro 


<H5>  Understanding the Methodology </H5>
  The DataFolha poll is a survey by stratified sampling based 
on sex and age quotas. This poll, which was conducted on 16 and 
17 December, consisted of interviews with 1,076 individuals in 
Sao Paulo, 646 in Rio de Janeiro, 432 in Belo Horizonte, 432 in 
Salvador, 432 in Porto Alegre, 432 in Curitiba, 431 in 
Florianopolis, 432 in Fortaleza, 428 in Recife, and 431 in Campo 
Grande. 
  The margin of error for the sampling process is plus or 
minus 
3 percentage points in the city of Sao Paulo, 4 percentage 
points in Rio de Janeiro, and 5 percentage points in the other 
cities. 
  DataFolha is headed by sociologists Antonio Manuel Teixeira 
Mendes and Gustavo Venturi. Their assistants are Mauro Francisco 
Paulino, Emilia de Franco, and statistician Renata Nunes Cesar. 
Wilson Aganathios Chammas coordinates the opinion polls with his 
assistant Ailton Gobira. The sample was planned by Sandra Regina 
Dorgan. Solange Rodrigues handled the data processing. 

