Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Declaration of joint program of the Party of Christian </F>
Democrats, Conservative Party, Peasant-Christian Party, and 
Union for Real Politics: "Accord of 11 November"] 
  [Text] Like any other periodical, LAD is the 
recipient of numerous and varied resolutions, declarations, and 
press releases issued by the political parties. We adopted the 
rule not to publish them, as otherwise LAD would turn into a 
partisan publication. But now we are making an exception to this 
rule, in order to present the joint program of four center-right 
parties (PChD [Party of Christian Democrats], PK [Conservative 
Party], SLCh [Peasant-Christian Party], and UPR [Union for Real 
Politics]). We are doing this for several reasons. First, 
because it is an interesting document. Second, because it is the 
fruit of that cooperation among several rightist groupings which 
we have been so assiduously promoting. And lastly, third, we 
pledged to do so in response to the polemics of Mr. Pawel 
Laczkowski. We shall make a second exception to our rule when in 
our next issue we publish the program resulting from the accord 
among other center-right parties, namely, among the 
Christian-National Union, the Center Accord, the Labor Party, 
and the Movement for the Republic. We would of course be even 
more gratified were we able to publish prior to the 
parliamentary elections in a joint program of all the eight 
parties. While there is life there is hope.... LAD 
  We the undersigned representatives of the Party of Christian 
Democrats, the Conservative Party, the Peasant-Christian Party, 
and the Union for Real Politics, referring to the desire to 
cooperate as expressed in the Accord of 11 November 1993, 
perceive the need to build the political bloc of the Right 
together with all the groupings and constituencies accepting the 
view that Poland can no longer remain the staging area for 
socialist experiments, and that the foundation of social order 
is freedom, private ownership, and respect for national 
traditions. 
<H5>  The Sociopolitical System </H5>
  1. The purpose of the state is to provide safeguards for the 
liberty and security of the persons within its reach. The state 
accomplishes these ends by: 
  --Establishing a constitution and a legal system that 
respects the natural rights of man, such as life, liberty, and 
property. 
  --Establishing an independent judiciary whose purpose is to 
protect these rights against the arbitrariness of other 
authorities and fellow citizens. 
  --Establishing the legislative and executive branches of 
government and defining their respective powers (division of 
powers); we champion a presidential-parliamentary system, with 
the president elected by direct, popular vote, which we also 
recommend for local-government executives. 
  --Decentralization of governance by augmenting the powers of 
local governments. 
  --Establishing armed forces, whose purpose is to protect 
national sovereignty and the independence and integrity of the 
state. 
  --Establishing police forces whose purpose is to enforce 
laws 
and judicial rulings. 
  --Establishing special services protecting the state against 
infiltration by foreign agents and counteracting attempts at 
treason. 
  2. With a view toward an unambiguous and cohesive nature of 
the legal system, we affirm that: 
  --All branches of government should refrain from interfering 
with the domain of man's liberties as defined by natural rights, 
unless dictated by the need to protect the life, liberty, or 
property of other persons; this applies in particular to 
parental rights, freedom of conscience and religion, freedom of 
engaging in private enterprise, freedom of agreements, freedom 
of science, freedom of speech, and freedom of movement. 
  For that reason, we deem necessary: 
  --A consistent adherence to the principle of equality of 
citizens before the law. 
  --Acknowledgment of the principle that the state, the Roman 
Catholic Church, and other religious denominations are 
autonomous institutions governed by their own separate rules, 
and that cooperation between the state and the Church is 
desirable for the good of the citizens. 
  --Elimination of group privileges, including the privileges 
of trade unions. 
  --Decentralization of the educational system by enhancing 
the 
influence that can be exerted by parents on the curriculums and 
creating the conditions for the growth of private schools. 
  --Banning arbitrariness in granting publishing, radio, and 
television licenses. 
  --Separation of social insurance from the state budget. 
  --Augmenting the professionalization of the army. 
  --Acknowledging the need to respect freedom of agreements 
and 
prohibiting the regimentation of business; monopolies and 
concessions breed crime and, because they conflict with the 
principle of free competition, they hobble economic growth. 
  --Acknowledging the principle that business and professional 
activities may not be restricted by compulsory membership in 
associations of businessmen or professionals. 
<H5>  Economic Structure </H5>
  1. In acknowledging that, side by side with rule of law, 
private ownership is a guarantee of autonomy of the individual, 
national prosperity, and stability of government, we deem 
necessary the propagation of private ownership by means of: 
  --Reprivatization, comprising the restitution of property to 
persons deprived of it in the past owing to actions of 
authorities motivated by class prejudices. Restitution in kind 
should not include the property transferred to physical persons 
under the land reform. 
  --Extensive privatization of the state sector, with the 
exception of the elements needed for proper governance in a 
state with a market economy. 
  2. As to monetary policy, we deem necessary: 
  --Regulation of money supply by adapting it to the scope of 
economic growth. 
  --A lasting elimination of the budget deficit. 
  --Prohibition against any fixing of currency exchange rates 
and prices by the government. 
  3. In affirming that income is subject to ownership, we 
believe that 
  --Taxes should be spent solely on purposes that are equally 
useful to everyone. 
  --Taxes should be levied solely by legislation. 
  --Along with a reduction in fiscal encumbrances, progressive 
taxation should be gradually eliminated. 
  --Multiple taxation of income conflicts with the principle 
of 
protection of ownership and therefore the inheritance tax, the 
gift tax, and the tax on the acquisition of property rights 
should be immediately abolished. 
  --Farming is a strategic branch of the economy and at the 
same time is a branch that is slower in adapting itself to 
market requirements during the transition period. It should be 
afforded conditions protecting its competitiveness. 
  4. While we acknowledge the importance of the scale of 
fiscal 
encumbrances to economic growth and national prosperity, we deem 
necessary 
  --An immediate reduction of taxes to an extent adapted to 
the 
pace of privatization of the state sector. 
  --A change in the tax system consisting in its maximum 
simplification so as to eliminate the need to audit incomes and 
reduce to a minimum the cost of collecting taxes as well as 
simplify said collecting. 
  5. Any deprivation or restriction of ownership may take 
place 
solely on the basis of or by executing a judicial ruling issued 
when the owner perpetrates a felony or fails to implement a 
contractual or legal obligation. 
<H5>  Traditions </H5>
  1. In affirming the Christian nature of our civilization, 
whose principal feature is tolerance, we acknowledge the need to 
take into consideration in public life the good of the family, 
the protection of human life, and moral order. 
  2. In acknowledging that the Fatherland is a legacy to which 
we are the heirs and therefore bear the obligation of 
transmitting it to future generations, we emphasize the need for 
individual contributions to the accomplishments of our nation 
and in particular for enhancing its prestige among the nations 
of the world by contributing to its might and laying the 
economic foundations for national independence. 
<H5>  Raison d'Etat </H5>
  We support cooperation based on the free flow of people, 
capital, and goods across the boundaries of sovereign states 
with competing tax systems and national currencies. We declare 
our support for the political forces in Europe and the world 
which champion free international trade, and we declare our 
readiness to cooperate with them in achieving that goal. 
  2. In acknowledging the need to rely primarily on our own 
forces, we deem it necessary to base the safeguards for our 
national security on the existing military structures that 
protect the principles of our civilization. 
  3. We desire to foster amicable relations with all the 
neighbors of the Polish Republic on the principle of mutual 
respect of national interests, in the belief that such friendly 
cooperation is a major premise for the growth of our countries 
and the prosperity of our nations. 
  Warsaw, 17 December 1993 

