BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a comprehensive review 
of all items in the 17 June issue of the Arabic-language 
newspaper Cairo AL-SHA'B that pertain to political Islamic 
issues. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Writer on Mistreatment of Detainees 
  2. Jailed Journalist Honored 
  3. U.S. Policy on Islamic Movements Viewed 
  4. Muslim Brotherhood Writer Interviewed 
<H5>  WRITER ON MISTREATMENT OF DETAINEES </H5>
  A 2000-word commentary by 'Adil Husayn entitled "What Kind 
of 
Dialogue Is This if Opposition Members Can Be Hauled Off to 
Abu-Za'bal Prison at Will?" appears on page 7. Questioning the 
government's seriousness in seeking political dialogue, Husayn 
bolsters his arguments by recounting instances of abuse of 
political detainees. 
  Husayn writes: "I do not believe the government is serious 
about national dialogue. If it was serious, why did it have to 
delay it for seven months?" He adds: "Circumstances forced the 
government to propose dialogue with other political parties, but 
`backsliding' has marked its position on that issue for the past 
few months." 
  Following a few opening paragraphs, Husayn dedicates the 
remainder of the commentary to a detailed description of the 
suffering of the "political detainees" held in Abu-Za'bal 
Industrial Prison [sijn abu-za'bal al-sina'i]. The following 
account of abuse was reported to him by an eyewitness, 
'Abd-al-Nasir Fahmi 'Abd-al-'Al, an engineer from al-Minya who 
"describes what he experienced and saw in this prison in which 
2,500 Egyptian youths are held." 
  The suffering of the detainees, Husayn discloses, begins 
with 
the first moment of their incarceration: "The detainee's 
experience in this prison begins with the `gauntlet,' or `the 
welcoming beating.' Officers, NCO's, and detectives gather as 
the detainees are made to face the wall. They slap, punch, and 
cane the detainees, the latter having been made to strip 
completely. The detainee is beaten on every part of his body. 
Sometimes a stick is inserted in his anus. The process is 
accompanied by a good measure of name-calling. Every detainee 
is ordered to slap the one next to him or place his finger in 
his anus. They are also forced to dance and sing obscene songs." 
  Husayn then describes conditions of overcrowding and lack of 
hygiene in the prison. He concludes the article with a call on 
the interior minister and public attorney to respond to the 
above-mentioned allegations: "We demand a statement from the 
interior minister about this crime. We consider this article a 
request for investigation by the public attorney. We call on 
all democratic forces to object. Yes, we call for 
investigation, but, first of all, for an end to this crime." 
<H5>  JAILED JOURNALIST HONORED </H5>
  A 1,000-word report by 'Abd-al-Rahman Isma'il on page seven 
describes a ceremony held at the Journalists Association on 16 
June in which the Egyptian Human Rights Association gave its 
"Opinion and Expression Award" to 'Abd-al-Sattar Husayn, 
AL-SHA'B's military correspondent, who is serving a prison 
sentence in Masra'at Turah prison for publishing "military 
news." The award was given to show "solidarity with his cause. 
He has been subjected to the worst possible human rights 
violations as a price for speaking his mind." 
<H5>  U.S. POLICY ON ISLAMIC MOVEMENTS VIEWED </H5>
  Muhammad Jamal 'Arafah explores U.S. policy toward Islamic 
movements in a 1,800-word commentary on page 8 entitled: 
"Interest Is the Sole Criterion: Has America Agreed To 
Cooperate With Islamic Movements in the World?" 
  'Arafah begins by stating his conclusion: "It seems that the 
U.S. Administration is about to formulate its attitude toward 
Islamic movements in the world in general and the Arab region in 
particular on the basis of one criterion, its interests and 
influence." 
  To substantiate this view, the writer cites articles from 
NEWSWEEK, THE WASHINGTON POST, FOREIGN AFFAIRS, and LOS ANGELES 
TIMES, all containing a conciliatory tone toward the Islamists 
or pointing to a softening of the U.S. stand toward Islamic 
movements. 
  'Arafah then articulates his view of a self-serving United 
States ready to accommodate Islamic movements to protect its 
global position: "It is clear that the new U.S. tendency to seek 
the involvement--not containment--of Islamists in the political 
process in some countries--such as Algeria--aims to serve U.S. 
supreme interests. The tendency, sugarcoated with such slogans 
as `human rights' and `spreading democracy worldwide,' is 
symptomatic of a United States determined to hedge its bets 
against a possible rise of the Islamists to power." 
  The United States may still change its mind, however. The 
new phenomenon, 'Arafah tells us, "does not seem more than a 
change in temporary U.S. `tactics' rather than a shift in 
`strategy.'" 
  To assess the durability of the new U.S. attitude, 'Arafah 
has in mind to apply an litmus test: "The real test of the 
veracity of the new U.S. tendency is to see if it will ever 
filter through to countries other than Algeria. If the Americans 
extend their call for the participation of Islamists [in 
government] to their traditional allies--Egypt and Tunis, among 
others--then the new attitude is real, albeit self-serving." 
<H5>  MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD LEADER INTERVIEWED </H5>
  A 2,000-word interview with Muslim Brotherhood leader Hamid 
Abu-al-Nasir by Sha'ban 'Abd-al-Rahman, for which the place and 
date are not given, appears on page 9. Abu-al-Nasr reiterates 
objectives of his organization, saying that it is committed to 
democracy and shuns violence. 

