BFN 

  [Text] At a 5 May press conference, our Foreign Ministry 
spokesperson answered questions from national and foreign 
correspondents. 
  AFP and ITAR-TASS correspondents asked: Please inform us of 
Vietnam's reaction to the results of the South African election; 
the election of Mr. Nelson Mandela as president of the Republic 
of South Africa. 
  Answer: Vietnam welcomes the results of the South African 
election; the victory of the ANC and the election of Chairman 
Nelson Mandela as South Africa's president. This victory is the 
result of a long and hard struggle by the South African people 
against apartheid. It is also the victory of the world's unity 
and support for the South African people, especially for the ANC 
in its fight. Vietnam wants to develop relations with the new 
South Africa. In order to express the Vietnamese people's unity 
and support for the South African people and the ANC, Vice 
President Nguyen Thi Binh will attend the upcoming presidential 
inauguration in South Africa. 
  A VNA correspondent asked: Please inform us of Vietnam's 
opinion regarding reports that Chinese ships, in coordination 
with Taiwanese ships, have conducted surveys and exploration in 
the Truong Sa Archipelago [Spratlys] area, and that other ships 
have conducted oil and gas exploration there as well as in 
Vietnam's Tu Chinh [Vanguard Bank] area. 
  Answer: There are two different issues here that are 
sometimes confused. I would like to clarify the following: 
  1. Vietnam has had enough historical and juridical documents 
to reaffirm its undisputable sovereignty over the Truong Sa 
Archipelago. Therefore, foreign activities involving 
exploration, surveying, and exploitation of resources in the 
Truong Sa Archipelago without Vietnam's permission are in 
violation of Vietnamese sovereignty. 
  With respect to measures to settle the dispute there, 
Vietnam 
has made it clear that these should be on the basis of equality, 
understanding, mutual respect, respect for international law and 
the 1982 Convention on Maritime Law, and respect for the 
national sovereignty of countries that have special economic 
zones and continental shelves. All sides must refrain from 
further complicating the situation, using violence, or 
threatening to use violence. Vietnam has consistently followed 
this line. 
  2. The Tu Chinh area lies fully within Vietnam's economic 
zone and continental shelf. Vietnam determinedly reaffirms its 
sovereignty over this area in conformity with the regulations of 
current international maritime law. There is no disputed area 
here; this issue was intentionally created by somebody and 
incorrectly accepted by somebody else. 
  Even before 1975, this area was divided into lots for 
bidding 
by foreign companies to conduct surveys and exploit oil and gas, 
including the Mobil Company of the United States. After 1975, 
the Vietnam Oil and Gas Company divided it into lots, conducted 
surveys, and explored for oil and gas. This included setting up 
joint ventures with foreign countries. Nobody said anything 
about it. In fact, nobody could say anything about it because 
Vietnam acted in accordance with international law. 
  Vietnam and other regional countries are concerned about 
recent reports regarding the activities of some countries, which 
complicate the situation in the Truong Sa Archipelago as well on 
Vietnam's continental shelf. In its pronouncements, the 
Vietnamese side has resolutely demanded an end to those 
activities and has confirmed the consequences of these illegal 
activities. [trong cacs tuyeen boos cuar minhf, phias vieetj nam 
dqax kieen quyeets dqoif chaams duwts nhuwngx hoatj dqoongj dqos 
vaf khawngr dqinhj trachs nhieemj veef nhuwngx haauj quar do 
cacs hoatj dqoongj trais pheps nayf gaay ra] We hold that 
respecting international law is an absolute condition for 
preserving stability and developing cooperation. 

