BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video; from the "Xinjiang News" </F>
program] 
  [Text] Speaking at a regional united front work 
conference, which ended yesterday, Abulaiti Abudurexiti, deputy 
secretary of the regional party committee and chairman of the 
regional government, emphasized: We must strengthen the party's 
leadership over united front work, firmly grasp the magic weapon 
of united front, and relentlessly promote work related to ethnic 
and religious affairs. 
  He said: Xinjiang, the motherland's northwestern frontier, 
is a region where various nationalities live in compact 
communities. Strengthening the unity of various nationalities is 
essential for consolidating and developing the socialist 
relationship between nationalities and maintaining social and 
political stability in the region. This is the prerequisite and 
guarantee for doing a good job in the work of all fields in 
Xinjiang; and herein lies the vital interests of the people of 
all nationalities in the region. Party and government organs at 
all levels and their leaders must comprehensively and correctly 
implement the party's policy toward ethnic minorities, 
conscientiously foster an awareness of the legal system and 
policies, and persist in doing things according to laws and 
policies. They should periodically check the progress in 
implementing the policy toward minority nationalities and 
promptly solve problems whenever they are discovered. 
  He pointed out: Economic construction is the central task 
for the whole party membership, as well as for the work related 
to ethnic affairs. We must work hard and self-reliantly and, in 
light of Xinjiang's realities, fully utilize our advantages to 
continually build up our capability for self-development and to 
accelerate economic development. 
  Discussing religious activities in Xinjiang, he said: The 
situation of work related to religion is generally good. The 
party's policy concerning religion has been further implemented, 
while religious activities are basically conducted according to 
the law. Religious believers at large support the party's 
policy of reform and opening up, and they have made their share 
of contributions to Xinjiang's social stability and economic 
development. We will continue to improve work related to 
religion, and implement the religious freedom policy in an 
all-round manner. While publicizing and implementing the 
religious freedom policy, we must pay keen attention to overcome 
bias in the understanding and oversimplication in the 
implementation. We must earnestly implement the State Council's 
regulations on the management of religious venues and the 
regulations on foreigners' religious activities in the PRC, as 
well as the regional regulations governing religious activities, 
so as to continuously strengthen the management of religious 
affairs according to the law and make sure that religious 
activities are in line with the socialist cause. 
  He emphasized: Party committees and governments at all 
levels and leading party cadres must thoroughly understand that 
ethnic and religions affairs are not trivial matters. We will 
continue to focus our attention on ethnic and religious affairs 
and make unremitting efforts to promote ethnic and religious 
work to lay a more solid social foundation for ensuring 
Xinjiang's long-term political stability and order and economic 
take-off. 
  Zhang Fusen, deputy secretary of the regional party 
committee, said: All party members, leading cadres at all 
levels in particular, should study once again general and 
specific policies related to united front work. They should 
obtain a better understanding, unify the thinking, and ensure 
the implementation of the policies. They should also work out 
effective and feasible suggestions and measures for the 
implementation of the policies in light of local realities, 
thereby creating a new situation in Xinjiang's united front 
work. [video shows close shots of Zhang Fusen, Wang Lequan, and 
other regional leaders] 
  Regional party, government, and military leaders Wang 
Lequan, 
Hailiqiemu Silamu, Pan Zhaomin, (Li Fengzi), (Abudureyimu 
Amiti), Hederbai, Yusufu Aisha, Feng Dazhen, and Wu Jiahe 
attended the conference. 

