Article   Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [All Iranian names as published] </F>
  [Editorial Report] London AL-WASAT in Arabic in its 21-27 
February issue publishes on pages 17-19 an approximately 
2,500-word report by Hasan 'Awwad on the current "power 
struggle" in Iran. 
  The report says that Iranian President 'Ali Akbar 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani "received a painful blow a few days ago" when 
Ayatollah 'Ali Khamene'i, leader of the Islamic revolution, 
dismissed the president's brother Mohammad Rafsanjani, chief of 
the Iranian Radio and Television establishment. The report adds 
that this decision, which took the president and his brother by 
surprise, was welcomed by hardliners inside and outside the 
establishment. The report says: "The Iranian institution 
considered Khamene'i's decision and its timing -- one day after 
the revolution anniversary celebrations which ended on Friday 
[11 February] -- a painful blow to Mohammad Rafsanjani and the 
president, who tried to benefit from the assassination attempt 
which took place at the beginning of the celebrations at the 
Khomeyni tomb. The president wanted to strengthen his 
popularity and influence, which began to decrease around the 
time of the presidential elections last summer." 
  The report then reviews the assignment of Mohammad 
Rafsanjani 
as the chief of the Iranian radio and television establishment, 
his dealing with establishment officials, the "deviation" that 
prevailed in the establishment, and the conflict he waged with 
Murtada Awini, former official in charge of the Islamic Art and 
Culture Center. 
  The report says that Khamene'i wanted to dismiss Mohammad 
Rafsanjani before this date, however, he sought to maintain 
internal balances. However, the report adds, Khamene'i 
instructed a parliamentary committee to prepare a report on the 
radio and television, its negative points, and deviations. This 
prompted Mohammad Rafsanjani to commit deadly mistakes, which 
resulted in his dismissal. The report cites "sources" as saying 
that Khamene'i wants to prevent the establishment of any 
dictatorship in the country and to institutionalize Iran. The 
sources added that when the parliamentary committee issued its 
report on the radio and television, Mohammad Rafsanjani reacted 
emotionally and leveled "severe accusations" against the members 
of the committee. The supporters of the committee staged 
demonstrations in Asfahan and called for the officials in charge 
of the radio and television to be punished. What exacerbated 
the situation, according to the report, is that Mohammad 
Rafsanjani banned live coverage of the parliament's discussions 
and the speeches of its members. Consequently, the parliament 
supported Khamene'i and called on him to send more inspection 
committees to institutions under the president's control, with 
the exception of the Armed Forces, which are under the 
supervision of Khamene'i himself. 
  The report says that the first thing 'Ali Larijani, new 
director of the radio and television establishment, must do is 
to sack the official in charge of foreign radios because he was 
criticized, more than any other official, by the parliamentary 
committee. 
  The recent change in the administration of the radio and 
television establishment prompted President Hashemi-Rafsanjani 
to appoint Mostafa Mir Salim as minister of culture and Islamic 
guidance. In addition, other changes were made and will be made 
at the instructions of Khamene'i to cope with the era of 
economic and social reform. 

