Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sabina Slonkova and Jan Cech: "Police in Western </F>
Bohemia Are Searching for Germans Suspected of Terrorism"] 
  [Text] Prague--Bavarian and West Bohemian police are 
searching for a group of seven Germans who are suspected of 
taking part in actions of the infamous terrorist organization, 
the Red Army Faction (RAF). Four women and three men have 
allegedly been hiding in West Bohemia for several weeks, where 
they arrived from Erfurt, Germany. This is what a high official 
from the secret service is saying. In connection with the 
undercover nature of the fight against terrorism, the officer 
wanted to remain anonymous. 
  The spokesman of the West Bohemian police, Jiri Soukup, 
confirmed yesterday that Czech police had received photos of 
terrorists from their German colleagues. There is a reward of 
50,000 German marks, which as about 870,000 korunas, for 
arresting any of them or providing information leading to their 
arrest. 
  The investigation conducted by the police has brought no 
results thus far. Miroslav Master, deputy of the West Bohemian 
police director, said that no evidence has been found suggesting 
that the terrorists are hiding precisely in Western Bohemia. 
However, it cannot be ruled out that they are in another part 
of the country. 
  The fact that the police are searching for the terrorists in 
the Czech Republic is not at all exceptional. People from the 
antiterrorist and counterespionage departments of the police 
have believed for a long time that intentionally sought-after 
terrorists are hiding in our country. They are particularly 
members of Arab terrorist commandos, who are hiding in 
unregistered apartments of people from Arab or Czech-Arab firms 
and RAF activists. Josef Doucha, of the Central Criminal 
Police, said in an earlier interview for MLADA FRONTA DNES that 
the probability of bomb attacks or other terrorist actions was 
smaller in the Czech Republic than in Germany, for example. 
  Experts on terrorism are of the opinion that terrorists 
could 
have established their hinterland in the Czech Republic in 
earlier times. Until 1989, the former Czechoslovakia was a 
frequently sought haven by foreign terrorist organizations, who 
used to come here at the invitation of the then communist 
regime. One of the most famous was, for example, Illych Ramirez 
Sanchez, nicknamed "Carlos," the chief of the Hands of the World 
Revolution. 

