Language: <F P=105> Hindi </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dinkar Shukla: "Clinton Creates Doubts Regarding </F>
His Intentions in Kashmir"] 
  [Text] New Delhi, 3 February--Three former foreign 
secretaries of the Indian Government believe that the Clinton 
government's designs for Kashmir are not sincere. They believe 
that by repeatedly raising the question of human rights 
violations in Kashmir, the United States is planning a big game. 
Is it working toward establishing an independent Kashmir? In 
response to this question, former foreign secretaries C.S. Jha, 
Maharaja Krishan Rasgotra, and A.P. Venkateshwaran all agree on 
one thing: India should be alert to U.S. plans. These three 
foreign secretaries are the same people who, in a joint 
communique last week, accused the United States of interfering 
in India's internal affairs. 
  The three former foreign secretaries told JANSATTA in the 
context of their joint communique that President Clinton, his 
senior assistants, and administrative officials issued 
statements during the last year that create just one image. It 
is clear that the U.S. administration's concern about human 
rights violations is superficial. The real reason is different. 
If we look at it within the framework of the United States' 
long-range strategy and defense plans, then we can understand 
it. Mr. Venkateshwaran referred to the 25 January inaugural 
speech given by President Clinton to a joint session of the 
House, in which he emphasized the importance of maintaining his 
country's supremacy in international relations. According to Mr. 
Rasgotra, with the end of the Cold War, the United States is 
moving forward with the idea in mind that the whole world is 
under its control. 
  Mr. Jha thinks that because the Democrat government is 
facing 
defeat on every front of foreign policy, it is worried, and 
perhaps President Clinton wishes to show some accomplishment on 
the Kashmir front. But trying to gain something there at the 
cost of India's unity and oneness will be very dangerous. There 
will be serious results, including the disruption of peace in 
this area, confrontations between India and Pakistan, and damage 
to our secular and democratic structure of government. 
  The three former foreign secretaries also believe that there 
is another reason for the U.S. attitude toward India: India's 
refusal to sign the NPT [Nonproliferation Treaty]. The Clinton 
administration is very angry about this. Mr. Jha and Mr. 
Rasgotra said that India does not have to accept U.S. pressure. 
After China became a major nuclear power and Pakistan attained 
nuclear capability, it would be meaningless for India to sign 
the NPT. Such a step would be suicidal. 
  Mr. Rasgotra suggested that India should oppose U.S. 
pressure. This is important for our national interest. He said, 
"We may be weak and poor now; however, we do not have to accept 
pressure from anyone." He said that the NPT was written in 1968. 
India has maintained its nuclear option since then. It should 
stay firm on its policy. 
  The three former foreign secretaries said that India is not 
a 
minor country; rather, it is the largest democracy in the world 
and the second largest country in terms of population. Mr. 
Venkateshwaran believes the Indian Government is to blame for 
the current situation. It has quietly tolerated external 
interference in Kashmir and other areas, especially U.S. 
interference. He accused the Narasimha Rao government of not 
caring for the nation's pride because it lacked self-confidence. 
* 

