Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Highly Important Work That Brought Turn in Development of </F>
Revolution" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, March 10 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN today 
dedicates a signed article to the tenth anniversary of the 
publication of "On Building Up the Revolutionary Ranks and 
Further Accelerating Socialist Construction," a famous work of 
the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, on March 10, 1984. 
  For the validity and truthfulness of the idea and theory 
contained in it, the work has displayed a great vitality through 
its successful application in the practice of our revolution 
over the past ten years, the article says, and goes on: 
  The significance and vitality of the work lie, above all, in 
that it has helped render the solid political and ideological 
unity of our party and revolutionary ranks more unbreakable, 
their single-hearted unity around the illustrious leader. 
  Expounded in the work are all the matters that should be the 
guiding principle in strengthening the party and revolutionary 
ranks, including the task of the party organisations to continue 
with the vigorous work for strengthening the unity and cohesion 
of the party. 
  Now the Korean people are closely united around the dear 
leader Comrade Kim Chong-il in ideology and purpose, in morality 
and sense of obligation, with absolute worship for the dear 
leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. It is the noble traits of the 
Korean people to entrust their destiny entirely to the party and 
the leader, breathing and talking as the party does and always 
keeping step with it. 
  They are convinced that when they are guided by the dear 
leader they have nothing to be afraid of and they will certainly 
win. This is the unshakable faith and will cherished deep in 
their hearts in following the illustrious leader. 
  The significance and vitality of the work also lie in that 
it 
has helped effect a new upsurge in socialist economic 
construction. 
  In the work the dear leader stressed that a great upswing 
should be effected in socialist construction and set forth 
detailed tasks and ways of dynamically accelerating socialist 
economic construction. 
  Under his wise guidance socialist construction is making a 
confident progress along a straight road of victory and economic 
construction is rising to a new high tide in Korea today. 
  The work has displayed a great vitality in establishing the 
habit of setting store by the military affair in the whole 
society, displaying the beautiful traits of Army-people unity 
and carrying on the three-revolution team movement. 
  It was a proud fruition of our party's great idea of 
Army-people unity that our People's Army and people rose up as 
one man last year in hearty response to the order of our Supreme 
Commander General Kim Chong-il and decisively frustrated the 
aggressive moves of the enemies and firmly defended our-style 
socialism. 

