Language: <F P=105> Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Karmo Kaas: "New Economics Minister Is </F>
Interested in Cooperation"] 
  Economics minister Toivo Jurgenson said that he 
cannot criticize the present Ministry of Economics for having 
deviated from the government's economic policy, but he is not 
satisfied with the results of privatization and new legislation 
in the area of economics. 
  Jurgenson said that the work of the economics 
ministry 
has drawn a lot of media noise lately. The government, in its 
current activity, is bound by the coalition agreement and the 
economic principles specified therein. And, since the economics 
ministry is part of the government apparatus it, too, will be 
bound by the same principles in its daily activity. 
  "In my contacts, so far, with the top management of the 
ministry, and also in the practical work of the ministry, I have 
noticed no deviations from the government's platform of economic 
policies," Jurgenson said. "One of Isamaa's [leading 
faction 
Fatherland] lines of economic policy is the open economy 
principle, the implementation of which requires both competence 
and courage and, in that respect, the economics ministry is 
beyond reproach. 
  Speaking of the process of administering and privatizing 
state enterprises, the economics minister favored the idea of 
forming administrative groups, and exercising the owner's role 
through them. 
<H5>  Government's Teamwork Was Hampered </H5>
  Toivo Jurgenson felt that much could be said about 
the 
tactics of carrying out economic policy and the realities of 
life. Presumably, most of the people want to see privatization 
take hold as soon as possible, to foster the fast and massive 
development of enterprise based on private property. This 
development could even be faster, if it weren't for all the 
problems that started to pop up around the economics ministry. 
"Privatization is a delicate and complicated process, and if 
people involved cannot reach an agreement on the most elementary 
level on how to function as a team, then one can say that 
something is rotten," Jurgenson said. 
  He noted that he cannot blame any specific agencies or 
individuals, nor can he point to any specific shortcomings in 
the process of privatization or acquisition of private housing, 
but he is not satisfied with the results achieved todate. 
  The effectiveness of the ministry's work could also be 
measured by the number of legislative acts submitted to the 
government or processed by Riigikogu [Estonia's parliament]. The 
economics ministry has made a conservative showing in this area 
but, here too, it is difficult to state clearly why this is so. 
"I have formed my own opinion on this, thinking that one of the 
reasons could be the inability within the government to agree on 
the structural principles of legislation dealing with 
enterprise," Jurgenson said. "It is not clear, however, 
what 
kinds of laws are needed, and what kind of internal structure 
they should have." 
  He added that sending legislative bills from the government 
to Riigikogu again requires teamwork on the part of the 
government, which has been severely hampered by conflicts 
between the economic and financial ministries, and also between 
the ministries for finance and justice. 
  Jurgenson saw negotiations with the Ministry of 
Finance 
and other ministries as one of the first tasks to be tackled, so 
as to get a better definition of areas to be covered by each of 
the ministries. 
<H5>  Economics Minister Has No Wish to Change the Team </H5>
  Toivo Jurgenson maintained that his goal as economics 
minister is to improve the ministry's work in the area of 
legislation, and to contribute to a faster and more massive 
implementation of privatization. 
  The new economics minister wants to pay more attention than 
was done previously to privatization outside the capital city. 
  Jurgenson said that he is ready to work with the 
present 
team at the Ministry of Economics provided, of course, that this 
is what the employees want. The executive apparatus of the 
ministry should work, regardless of the changes taking place in 
the government. "One thing is clear, however, there is room for 
only one politician at the ministry," the economics minister 
said. 
  Jurgenson admitted that passions have been 
overheated in 
the course of the government 'overhaul' and that 
over-politization of some business circles has pushed him 'up 
against the wall.' "I try to see it from the human point of view 
and hope that the business circles mentioned did not, to the 
very end, understand what they did," Jurgenson said. "If I 
were a businessman and wanted to express my political views, I 
would start a political party." 
  The minister added that he wants to continue constructive 
cooperation with the business circles that opposed his 
nomination. 
  "In this sense, I am a pragmatist and will not go snooping 
to 
find out who signed what political petition," Jurgenson 
said. 
<H5>  Toivo Jurgesnson (36) </H5>
  Graduated, in 1980, from the highway and bridge construction 
section of TPI [Tallinn Polytechnical Institute], specializing 
in building bridges. 
  After his graduation, worked in different structures of the 
Tallinn city government, most of the time as chief engineer for 
the technical construction board of the city government. In this 
position, Jurgenson was involved in all engineering and 
technical aspects of construction, including engineering 
preparations for the new housing projects (Lasnamae, 
oismae), and the construction of all bridges and 
tunnels 
ordered by the city government. Jurgenson considers the 
construction of the overpass across the Parnu highway to 
be 
the high point of his building career. 
  In 1986, Jurgenson was asked to continue the work he 
did 
for Tallinn on the national scale, and joined the planning 
committee of that time. 
  In 1989, the current economics minister joined the 
construction firm Rave where, by his own admission, he had his 
first exposure to building according to internationally accepted 
standards. 
  Jurgenson became more involved in the problems of 
economic policy in 1988, when the Christian Democratic Party was 
created, and formation of the party's economic program began. 
  In 1992, he was elected to Riigikogu on the Isamaa 
[Fatherland] ticket, and his year-and-a-half on the 
parliamentary commission on economics has, according to 
Jurgenson, given him the interesting experience of coming 
up 
with legislation in the area of economics. He has also 
participated in problem solving for Bank of Estonia and some 
state enterprises like RAS Eesti Lennujaamad [RAS Estonia's 
Airports] and energy companies. 

