Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The BMFT [Federal Ministry of Research and 
Technology] has approved three pioneering pilot projects to 
develop and test new technologies for cleansing heavily 
contaminated soils for which no reclamation process exists to 
date. The funding budget for these polluted site reclamation 
projects in the new federal laender amounts to more than 25 
million German marks [DM]. The following cases of pollution are 
to be treated: 
  -- mercury pollution at BUNA AG; 
  -- dioxin and heavy-metal contamination at the Ilsenburg 
Copper Mill in the Wernigerode district, Saxony-Anhalt, and 
  -- the Zichov ``Great Hell'' industrial dump used by the 
Schwedt petrochemical combine near Angermuende in Brandenburg. 
  With a DM19-million grant, the BUNA project is by far the 
largest of these pilot reclamation projects. From 1938 to 1990, 
BUNA AG used calcium carbide, plus the carbide, acetylene, and 
chlorine that it produced itself, primarily to produce PVC 
[polyvinyl chloride], solvents, and organic intermediate and 
special products. Over the many years that it operated, 
chlor-alkali-electrolysis and ethanal production by the mercury 
process built up a high level of mercury contamination in the 
buildings, production plant, and the site in general. 
Inadequate plant maintenance and a complete lack of environment 
protection systems are two of the causes, but war damage also 
contributed to the high level of contamination. Several 
thousand tonnes of mercury cannot be accounted for; they were 
presumably discharged into the surrounding area via exhaust 
fumes and effluent or penetrated the soil and the buildings and 
plant directly. 
  In addition to developing and testing advanced analysis and 
inspection methods for locating and assessing hazards, the 
project sets out to devise safe, environment-compatible, 
cost-effective methods for demolishing the buildings and plant 
using physical and thermal processes. On-site safety and health 
safeguards for the workers involved are major aspects. The 
pilot project is scheduled to conclude with a full-scale trial 
involving the demolition of a hangar bay and the electrolysis 
plant and the cleansing of a representative quantity of 
contaminated material and soil. 
  There are no technically proven and economically viable 
processes to date for eliminating mercury contamination. A 
success scored in the BUNA project would therefore pave the way 
for dealing with other polluted sites as well. Mercury 
contamination is also present in Bitterfeld, Ammendorf, and 
Osternienburg, where mercury was used in electrolysis plants. 
In the original federal laender, the former Marktredwitz and 
Eilwenn-Frankenbach sites and numerous former potassium cyanide 
treatment works suffer from mercury pollution. 
  The site of the former Ilsenburg Copper Mill and the area 
surrounding it have a high level of dioxin, furan, and other 
heavy metal pollution after decades of copper extraction from 
secondary sources such as PVC-covered copper cables or computer 
scrap without any environment protection measures whatsoever. 
Extreme concentrations of heavy metals are recorded in the 
sewers running into the Ilse drainage canal. The site is to be 
used in the future to extend the nearby Ilsenburg Rolling Mill, 
the major local employer. Dust containing dioxin blows over the 
urban area and the already polluted arable and pastureland, 
representing a high hazard potential. The drainage canal is at 
extreme risk, and the neighboring rolling mill, which is still 
operating, is under threat. 
  The project that has now been approved will develop reliable 
processes for decontaminating industrial buildings that cannot 
be demolished in the normal way. Existing processes will also 
be adapted for scrap, stockpile, and industrial site 
decontamination and dioxin- and heavy metal-polluted residue 
treatment. The results of the project will be used in the 
reclamation of numerous other secondary raw material recovery 
mill sites in the new federal laender. A grant of DM4.2 m 
illion has been awarded for the first stage of the project. 
  The Zichow ``Great Hell'' is a large geologically formed 
hollow measuring about 12,000 sq.m, which has been used since 
1964 as a dump for the former Schwedt/Oder petrochemical 
combine. By 1989, 100,000 cu.m of production residue and 
hazardous waste in solid, paste, and liquid form had been dumped 
there without any environmental precautions being taken. The 
practice of burning chlorous fluids off on the surface of the 
lake thus created polluted the surrounding area with dioxins. 
The lack of a sealed foundation means that the dump drains 
directly into the groundwater and the drinking water 
conservation area. 
  The initial phase will comprise the development of a 
practicable reclamation strategy for decontaminating liquid and 
solid deposits in the light of a hazard potential assessment, 
and the immediate implementation of protective measures for 
averting the danger. The second phase envisages a pilot 
reclamation of part of the toxic dump using a combination of 
various reclamation methods. The subsidy for the first phase 
amounts to DM2.2 million. Here again, the existence of numerous 
tar lakes makes for a high degree of transferrability. 
  These three major reclamation projects complement the 
funding 
program that has been under way in the original federal laender 
since 1989 under the heading, ``Pilot Reclamation of Polluted 
Sites,'' which sets out to demonstrate the efficacy of 
reclamation processes in the face of a number of different, 
though representative, problem cases in large-scale trials and 
to develop new processes. Since its launch, the BMFT has spent 
more than DM100 million on this program. The results will be 
used to devise a comprehensive guide to help reclamation teams 
work out strategies and select the right processes. 

