Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kim Smirnov: "A General Cleanup of Space Must </F>
Begin"; the first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] Who does not know the words from the "Little Prince" 
by Saint-Exupery: "He got up in the morning, washed up, put 
himself in order and immediately brought his planet into order! 
We know very well what must be done for the purity of the 
oceans, forests, cities and the atmosphere. We do a poor job of 
monitoring, to be sure. But it is not suspected that space also 
must be brought into order. Meanwhile the accumulation of space 
debris hides a danger which is in no way less dangerous than 
that from the `ozone holes.' This was told to me by Lidiya 
Rykhlova, a department head at the Astronomical Institute, 
Russian Academy of Sciences." 
  Too frequently people concentrate on the lesser evil, not 
seeing that right here, alongside, a different and greater 
misfortune is taking shape. For example, how many now speak of 
the meteorite danger for cosmonauts! But now the Americans have 
carried out the following experiment: on a returned satellite 
they counted the number of impacts from bodies of cosmic and 
artificial origin. There were far more of the latter. Scientists 
assert: the total mass of natural bodies in near space now does 
not exceed 200 kg. And that they and we have littered there 
about 3 million kilograms. So in actuality are cosmonauts 
threatened? 
  The first task of the new world space "service" is to 
monitor 
the unplanned falling of artificial space objects. But there 
also are other cases. The objects do not fall to the surface, 
but without warning explode in space and this may cause a 
precipitous increase in fragments on the "falling domino" 
principle. 
  For example, our Proton booster is one of the most reliable 
in the world. For this booster virtually all the shots into 
orbit have been "without a miss." But now it has been clarified 
at the conference on space debris: the last stage of the Proton, 
when after it has put a satellite into orbit, continues to 
"dangle" in space and after several years may explode. Six such 
cases were discovered. If it is taken into account that there 
already have been about 200 Proton launchings (and 6- 7 are 
still being planned annually), you can visualize how these 
"cleanest" rockets will increase the danger. 
  Now through the joint efforts of our and American 
specialists 
the reasons for the explosions seemingly have been clarified and 
will be eliminated. But in any case there also is one more 
common reason: attention has been concentrated on current 
launches and what will happen there after five years with the 
spent parts gives no one concern. 
  In this connection the problem acutely arises of stationary 
satellites, in particular, meteorological communication 
satellites. These are vehicles which are launched to such an 
altitude that at all times they hover over the very same point 
on the Earth, revolving together with it with the same angular 
velocity. Since the orbit of these satellites is unique and 
individual, a small "window" has been allocated to each country 
with an admissible deviation from it of only 74 km. 
  Upon exhausting its useful life, the satellite remains in 
this "small window." It would be good to have it removed from 
there in order not to hinder new launches. But this will cost as 
much as its operation for a month. When the dilemma arises of 
removing a satellite from orbit a month before exhaustion of its 
useful life or receiving valuable information for a month more, 
the latter choice is usually made. But, indeed, ever-newer 
satellites are being launched there. 
  True, there already have been precedents for more long-range 
solutions. Already in 1979 the Soviet Union removed the first 
such satellite from orbit. Some other countries took the same 
step. But in most cases stationary satellites remain in their 
orbits, concentrating into very small space "clusters." 
  Visualize that in this dense clustering of satellites there 
is an unplanned explosion of a spent vehicle. Indeed, already 
about 4500 satellites of different countries have accumulated in 
this orbit. Incidentally, there have already been such 
explosions, but up to this time we do not know how many 
fragments they have generated. Observations from the surface 
make it possible to see only fragments which are larger than a 
meter. 
  It is clear that observation methods and instruments must be 
improved. But something else also is clear: there must be strict 
international laws restricting and preventing space 
contamination, in this respect regulating both the launch of 
vehicles and their return to the Earth. 
  How to contend with space debris? It is possible to find a 
traditional way: by strengthening the skins of ships, their 
resistance to meteorites and the fragments of man-made vehicles. 
But it also is possible to decrease the number of launches 
without thereby reducing the amount of equipment put into orbit. 
Indeed, the principal component of space debris is cast-off 
rocket stages and the common task of all the space powers is 
"cleaning up" their technology in order that it be accompanied 
by the fewest parts so that fewer of them will be "dumped" in 
space. Unfortunately, for the time being there are no impressive 
projects for the cleanup of space anywhere in the world; perhaps 
this is in the imagination of science fiction writers. Mankind, 
as before, lives in this respect in accordance with the Russian 
proverb: "as long as the thunder does not burst forth, the 
peasant does not cross himself." 
  But the time for crossing oneself has long passed. For 
example, orbiting the Earth at a relatively low altitude there 
are 54 satellites with radioactive energy sources aboard. In 
principle it is assumed that when their active existence ceases 
there will be sufficient time for the nuclear fuel to 
"deactivate" to a safe level. But, indeed, here also there were 
unpredictable, unmonitorable accidents. Misfortune could be 
prevented through the common efforts of different countries. 
Incidentally, the last such case became the direct reason for 
the first meeting of space "cleaners" in Germany, at Darmstadt, 
in 1992. 
  The second conference of the International Coordinating 
Committee on Space Debris was held recently in Moscow. 
Absolutely new business and for the time being four 
organizations are participating in it: the Russian, European and 
Japanese Space Agencies and NASA. Working groups on 
observations, measurements, compilation of catalogues, research 
on the environmental impact, on tests and protection and on 
reducing contamination are already in operation. In short, the 
"reduction of space to order" has begun. For the time being work 
is for the most part with modeling. But the time is coming when 
in circumterrestrial space there will be gigantic vacuum 
cleaners, debris collection machines, debris containers and 
conductors. 
  Scientists and specialists are sounding the alarm. Even 
astronomers are complaining: space debris is hindering 
observations and more and more often it is being mistaken for 
meteorites and novae. But people throughout the world will sleep 
calmly, that is, until a manmade fragment crashes onto their 
heads. 

