Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lagos, 28 Feb (PANA) -- The United Nations has 
identified "loopholes in the national and international control 
systems" and "the threat of corruption," as drawbacks to the 
global anti-narcotics campaign. "Corruption among government 
and criminal justice personnel is an insidious threat to the 
very principles and effective functioning of the international 
drug control system", Antonio Mazzitelli, a UN Drug Control 
Program [UNDCP] associate field adviser, said Monday [28 
February] in Lagos. He was launching the report of the 
International Narcotics Control Board [INCB] for 1993. 
  The 60-page report highlights "some emerging trends in drug 
abuse and trafficking, analyzes the world drug situation, and 
identifies new or significant trends at the regional and 
national levels." It also examines the operation of the 
international drug control system and the "large-scale abuse of 
pharmaceutical preparations, particularly those containing 
codeine and those often used for cough syrup". 
  The report of the Vienna-based board calls for national and 
international efforts to be stepped up for effective global drug 
control. It warns against the growing abuse of "synthetic 
stimulants" all over the world, and requests international 
cooperation against the phenomena. 
  The board also wants combat measures against the abuse of 
"khat, ephedrone and zipeprol", which it said, have proved fatal 
in Brazil. It noted that the control of "precursors" and 
essential chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of drugs, 
addressed by this convention, still appeared in many countries. 
"While a practical framework for international precursor 
control and cooperation are in place, very few governments avail 
themselves of these opportunities or provide the necessary 
information for the function of such mechanisms," the report 
says, and calls for precursor-control efforts to be strengthened. 
  The report disagrees with the proposal to legalize the 
non-medical use of drugs, saying that the move constitutes "a 
threat to the international drug control system." The board 
stressed the importance of community involvement and monitoring 
of drug abuse situation, and called on governments to place high 
priority on reduction policies. 
  The board based its 1993 report on its visits to 17 
countries 
including Bolivia, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, 
India, Israel, Kenya, Myanmar [Burma], Nicaragua, Peru, Poland, 
South Africa, Uruguay and Zambia. It also cited a joint mission 
with the UN Drug Control Program to Ethiopia and Cameroon. 
Mazzitelli said the report was being launched simultaneously in 
some 37 countries. 

