Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "How Should the Breakdown of Sino-British Talks </F>
Be Viewed?"] 
  [Text] After the British Government unilaterally made 
public the proceedings in the Sino-British talks on the issue of 
Hong Kong's political structure in the form of a White Paper, 
yesterday, Chris Patten gazetted the remaining part of his 
"constitutional reform package." Thus, cooperation between 
China and Britain on the Hong Kong issue became completely 
impossible, and the door to reopening the talks was tightly 
closed by the British side. The Chinese side solemnly stated 
that the three-tiered political structure formed according to 
the legislation of the British Hong Kong authorities under the 
condition of no agreement being reached by the Chinese side and 
the British side would not be extended beyond 30 June 1997. At 
that time, the Chinese side would reorganize the three-tiered 
political structure according to the Basic Law and the Joint 
Declaration in order to realize the political ideal of "one 
country, two systems" and Hong Kong people's exercise of 
administration in Hong Kong. 
  Yesterday, at the party to celebrate the coming of the new 
spring held by the Preliminary Work Committee for the 
Preparatory Committee of the Hong Kong Special Administration 
Region, State Council Premier Li Peng made an explicit 
statement. He said that, henceforth, the Preliminary Work 
Committee would shoulder heavier duties and play a more 
important role. This indicated that the transitional period in 
Hong Kong had entered a new stage. 
  Yesterday, Wang Fengchao, deputy director of the State 
Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, also announced in 
Beijing that, because the British side deviated from cooperation 
with the Chinese side, the Chinese side had no other option but 
to "build another kitchen" according to the provisions of the 
Basic Law and the Joint Declaration. 
  That is to say, before China resumes sovereignty over Hong 
Kong on 1 July 1997, each of the two sides may go its own way 
and do what it likes in shaping Hong Kong's political structure 
in the remaining transitional period of some three years. The 
British Hong Kong Government will adopt Patten's original 
package, while the Chinese side will rely on the Preliminary 
Work Committee and other institutions to unite the vast majority 
of Hong Kong compatriots to make preparations in all fields for 
Hong Kong's return to China strictly in accordance with the 
spirit of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. 
It is expected that the work in this period will be arduous and 
difficult, but it is also a sacred task of which we are proud. 
  In the fierce dispute between the Chinese side and the 
British side, the Hong Kong compatriots have gradually come to 
clearly see the fact that Britain has never been willing to 
honestly return sovereignty over Hong Kong to China. After the 
4 June incident in 1989, the British Government changed its 
policy and appointed Patten the last British governor of Hong 
Kong. Patten then dished out his constitutional reform package 
and had no scruples about taking the out-and-out "three 
violations" path in an attempt to plant pro-British forces in 
the political structure at all levels beyond 1997 and thus 
influence the administration of the Special Administrative 
Region [SAR] so that the future SAR Government might become an 
extension of the British Hong Kong Government. This was only a 
pipe dream of the old colonialists, and it was certain to fall 
through. 
  The Sino-British Joint Declaration has been in force for 
over 
eight years. In theory, the signing of the Joint Declaration 
indicated the beginning of the transitional period of Hong 
Kong's return to China. As long as China and Britain acted 
according to the provisions of the Joint Declaration and the 
Basic Law, they would certainly be able to harmoniously 
cooperate and jointly maintain Hong Kong's stability and 
prosperity, thus effecting a smooth transition. By doing this, 
Britain would also be able to wash away its dirty name of being 
the last colonialist in the world; moreover, this would be the 
beginning of a new stage of long-term friendly cooperation 
between China and Britain. The British authorities did not want 
to act in this manner, however. Being represented by Patten, 
they retrogressed from their cooperative position across the 
board and obstructed China's efforts to resume sovereignty over 
Hong Kong. Patten even traveled to Europe, America, and Oceania 
to encourage the Western powers to interfere in Hong Kong 
affairs in order to politically internationalize Hong Kong's 
position. This further laid bare the British authorities' 
unwillingness to return Hong Kong to China. 
  If the so-called "democrats" who are loyal to the British 
Empire enter the Legislative Council and even take the "through 
train" to enter the SAR Legislative Council after 1997 according 
to the arrangements of Patten's reform package, then there will 
be no tranquility whatsoever in Hong Kong's politics, and the 
political unrest will also shake the economic base and the 
social order. Then, the stability of the mainland may also be 
disrupted by pro- British politicians in Hong Kong. Didn't the 
activities of some pro-Western politicians, who claimed to be 
"champions of democracy," at the time of the 4 June incident 
provide evidence for this? 
  The Chinese side has now decided to build another kitchen, 
and it was forced to do this by Patten's thorough "three 
violations." In order to ensure the implementation of the 
Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law and to 
guarantee the realization of "one country, two systems" and Hong 
Kong people's administration in Hong Kong after 1997, more Hong 
Kong people have seen through the nature of Patten's "three 
violation" constitutional reform farce, which is not only 
unfavorable to Hong Kong's prosperity and stability but also 
directly undermines this prosperity and stability. 
  Thanks to China's economic growth, Hong Kong's future has 
become increasingly intertwined with China. China's reform and 
opening have been welcomed by the whole world. Over a short 
period of only three years, Patten is still trying to further 
his perverse acts and push his reactionary policy. No wonder he 
has caused concern and condemnations among British people at 
home. We believe that certain changes will occur within the 
British Parliament, and more and more people of insight will 
oppose Patten's practices and protect Sino- British friendship. 
  How should we approach the breakdown of the talks on Hong 
Kong's political structure? The Hong Kong people are full of 
confidence. As Premier Li Peng said, no matter what happens with 
the Hong Kong issue, China is no longer in the year 1840 but is 
in 1994. The wheel of history is rolling on, and no one will 
obstruct it! 

