Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Russian Liberal Democratic Party Chairman </F>
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy: "What Are Germany's Interests?" -- 
introductory passage by DEUTSCHE NATIONAL-ZEITUNG] 
  [Text] The smear campaign against the winner of the 
Russian parliamentary elections, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, worst of 
all in the German opinion industry, is unprecedented. The 
Springer concern, which represents Israel's interests, has taken 
the lead in this respect. Springer's BILD is not even ashamed 
to write: "Russian Hitler -- I Was His Sex Slave." At the same 
time, Peter Scholl- Latour, who was once a foreign legionnaire 
and then press spokesman of the separatist Hoffmann government 
in Saarland, and as such fought for France, describes in BILD 
the "great danger" that Zhirinovskiy would return Koenigsberg 
[Kaliningrad] or northeastern Prussia. In that case, Bonn 
should by no means "give in to Zhirinovskiy's pressure." In DER 
SPIEGEL, Rudolf Augstein is very concerned about the 
allegedly-threatened Poland, which had considered "its present 
western border with the Germans secure." It is true that we 
could not "wage war alone" against Moscow to protect the 
Oder-Neisse line, "nor can (Poland) protect it alone.... We 
must back the country, even though we cannot give it contractual 
guarantees, as the British did in 1939." If future generations 
eventually read in the history books about the great concern 
that Germany might get back some of its territory, of which it 
was criminally robbed, they will think the current generation 
must have been crazy. In the following article, Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy describes the situation as it really is in an 
exclusive for DEUTSCHE NATIONAL-ZEITUNG and DEUTSCHE 
WOCHEN-ZEITUNG. We call upon our readers to distribute this 
newspaper and this article as widely as possible, and thus 
contribute to finding the truth: 
  As chairman of the strongest Russian political party, the 
Liberal Democratic Party, which won the parliamentary elections 
in December, I am trying to find out which German interests 
could have caused the federal foreign minister to refuse to 
grant me an entry visa. 
  It is generally known that hundreds of thousands of sham 
asylum-seekers registered by German courts and authorities have 
not been deported. Jewish citizens from Russia and the CIS 
republics are promptly granted visas for the Federal Republic 
upon request to stay here indefinitely and take advantage of the 
excellent German social welfare network. Hundreds of thousands 
of foreigners cross the Oder-Neisse border and come to Germany 
illegally, and many of them call for and are granted the "right 
to stay," even though such a right does not exist in the German 
legal system. 
<H5>  No Special Role for Germany </H5>
  According to the calculations of prominent Social Democratic 
Party of Germany [SPD] politicians, the German taxpayer has 
probably paid 100 billion German marks [DM] over the last three 
years. My stay in Germany would have ended before 11 January, 
the opening session of the Duma, and would not have cost the 
German taxpayer a single mark. 
  My pro-German attitude may appear unusual, if we recall the 
visits of many politicians who have appeared in the Federal 
Republic over the past decades, criticized the German people, 
and were generously rewarded for so doing. By the same token, 
even some media in Germany say that "citing German interests" as 
a reason for refusing entry to me involves many different 
considerations, because "regrettably," I "did not attack the 
Federal Republic, but even courted it" (STUTTGARTER ZEITUNG 30 
December, 1993). 
  Regarding my way of thinking, I ask the Germans to 
understand 
that, as a Russian, I was not brainwashed for re-education. So 
I do not see why the German people, half a century after World 
War II, should be condemned to a special role. I do not see why 
Germans born after 1945, or not yet born, should assume 
collective responsibility and collective liability. 
<H5>  Smear Campaign as in the War </H5>
  The winners of World War II did not repeat the "basic 
mistake" they made after World War I, but staffed the opinion 
industry in Germany, after 1945, with reliable persons of their 
choice. When reading, hearing, or seeing the German media 
spread slander against me, I get the impression that I am at 
war, or as if war were imminent. There is no abuse or 
defamation that would not be leveled against me. 
  My family had to make many sacrifices in the fight against 
fascism. However, the yellow press in Germany has touted me, in 
many ways, as the "Russian Hitler." Even though the elections 
in Russia were not too free in my view, but were still freer 
than they often are in the "free West," the Russian people have 
been disparaged. My voters did not know what they were doing, 
claims the media, and were seduced by demagogy and even 
hypnosis. To fill the cup to the brim, I, being a passionate 
animal lover, have been denounced as an arrant tormenter of 
animals, enjoying even dog fights. In this respect also, the 
truth is exactly the opposite of what the media says. I am -- 
and I have always said so -- an absolute opponent of any kind of 
animal fights and generally any cruelty to animals. 
<H5>  Everlasting Friendship With Germany </H5>
  It is correct that I do not think the Oder-Neisse line is 
history's last word, nor do I think that it is cause for alarm. 
Rather, I was amazed -- and I was not the only one -- that in 
the Two-Plus-Four negotiations, Bonn, under the pressure of 
Western "friends," did not even suggest a peaceful revision 
regarding territories west of the Oder, such as Stettin 
[Szczecin] or Swinemuende [Swinoujscie]. It should be 
remembered that Warsaw occupied these territories by coup de 
main, which was not approved by the then victors. 
  If Russia and Germany had a common border -- in eastern 
Prussia, for instance -- this would by no means lead to the 
extinction of Poland as a state, as malicious people have 
insinuated. Discussing all German-Russian matters in cordial 
harmony with my friend, Gerhard Frey, is no sin. However, our 
friendship does not justify hateful insinuations "that 
Zhirinovskiy and Frey are redrawing the map of Europe from 
Berlin or Munich" (SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG of 30 December 1993). 
  The peaceful revision of borders through negotiations is in 
line with international law. My policy is oriented toward 
lasting partnership and everlasting friendship between Russia 
and Germany. This requires unlimited sovereignty, full equality, 
and mutual non- interference. 
  In Russia, German language and culture are rising fast 
again. 
United Germany is the heart of Europe. It is with great 
sympathy that I watch the German language's apparently tortuous 
journey until it is finally given the rank due to it in 
international bodies dominated by the West. 
<H5>  Bad Blood Through Entry Ban </H5>
  Just as it was impossible for Metternich to prevent a small 
German unity, and for Mitterrand, the smallest German unity, it 
is a hopeless venture, over the long run, to chain the German 
giant and deprive him of his rights. 
  The entry ban imposed on me has also created bad blood in 
the 
Russian Army, which backs me. I advocate the withdrawal of our 
troops from the territory of the former GDR. But how can other 
foreign troops continue to be deployed in Germany, and the 
Bundeswehr be subdivided into multinational units under foreign 
command? 
  My policy is opposed to every degradation and special 
treatment of Germany. We want a normal and sound, a vigorous 
and German Germany, naturally also with a strong national army 
under a German general staff. 
<H5>  Our Friendship Is Directed Against Noone </H5>
  Our friendship is directed against noone, but is the ideal 
guarantee of wellbeing, self-determination, and peace. These 
goals cannot violate Germany's national interests. 
  My model is Bismarck. His great social laws on the one hand, 
and his ingenious foreign policy on the other, have made the 
creator of the small German empire immortal. A renewal of the 
Reinsurance Treaty, which was one of the masterpieces of the 
great chancellor, would have spared our nations World War I and 
thus probably also World War II. Such insanity must never 
repeat itself! 
  Even though I highly respect President Yeltsin, I will run 
in 
the next presidential elections, and I will win. To be sure, 
the Foreign Ministry in Bonn -- which hopefully will be in 
Berlin very soon -- must show consideration for many things. 
But as it is, Russians and Germans are the greatest European 
peoples, and Russia is the world's greatest state. 
<H5>  Germany Must Live </H5>
  Being a democrat, I of course respect the freely elected 
German federal government. Neither an entry ban nor the 
defamatory media campaign can make me change my clearly 
pro-German policy course. The Russian people certainly cannot be 
influenced against me by all the distortions of news agencies 
and press media, television and radio stations from Germany. 
What is rather unavoidable is this: "What will politicians do 
if Zhirinovskiy, who can today be refused an entry visa, sits in 
the Moscow Kremlin as president in two years?" (DIE WELT of 31 
December 1993). 
  The false reports on me will, however, contribute to 
reviving 
anti-German resentment in Russia. My compatriots are wondering 
why a consistent friend of the Germans such as myself should be 
one of the main targets of so many malicious attacks from the 
media that spreads its venom from Germany. 
  I also appeal to the intelligence, admired worldwide, of the 
Germans, the people of poets and thinkers. In the summer of 
1992, I went to Germany for comprehensive talks with Mr. Frey, 
and at a joint news conference in Munich and a rally of the 
German People's Union [DVU] in Thuringia, I expounded my theses 
on everlasting German-Russian friendship. In the spring of 
1993, Mr. Frey and I were at similar meetings in Moscow, the 
Liberal Democratic Party Congress, and a ceremony on the 
occasion of my birthday. In the fall of 1993, we repeated this 
on a large scale at the DVU mass rally in the Passau Nibelungen 
Hall. 
<H5>  The Work of Intelligence Services </H5>
  The speech I held in Nibelungen Hall is accurately recorded 
on the video "Passau 93: Germany Must Live". There has probably 
hardly ever been a non-German politician over the past decades 
who has affirmed and defended the German people's vital rights 
and interests as clearly and thoroughly as I have done. 
  Every thinking person will therefore know what to make of 
those people who, citing an alleged "intelligence service 
recording," imply that I intend to annihilate Germany and, prior 
to its "total destruction," extort huge reparation payments, 
until it becomes a "poor country." 
  I have very often commented to DEUTSCHE NATIONAL-ZEITUNG on 
the fatal work and terrible goals of intelligence services that 
set us at one another's throats and try to destroy our 
friendship. 
  Nothing has changed about my goals -- Germans and Russians 
in 
fraternal unity and everlasting friendship! 

