Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vaga Amirkhanyan: "Dram... and Only Dram"] </F>
  [Text] The information debut of the new management of the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, finally, took place 
yesterday. 
  Bagrat Asatryan, manager of the Central Bank, in his first 
words expressed his intention and hope for a more constructive 
dialogue with the press. Because, according to him, previous 
dialogues were of a critical rather than a realistic nature. 
  Not considering concrete matters more expedient today, Mr. 
Asatryan dwelled on the global programs of the Central Bank. 
They represent the transformation of the old banking system into 
a modern independent structure answering the requirements of an 
independent state. This is a complex task--with due regard for 
the difficult legacy of the past. 
  Next Mr. Asatryan reported that meetings of the management 
of 
the Central Bank with the prime minister and the president of 
the Republic of Armenia had already been held. The latter are 
well informed about the problems of the Central Bank and intend 
to give it proper assistance. With regard to the press coverage 
of Central Bank activity Mr. Asatryan asked that patience and 
restraint be shown--at least at first. However, he promised to 
let the press into the "dark alleys" of the banking system at a 
later date, of course, within the limits of what is permissible. 
  Then Bagrat Asatryan and deputy manager Armen Darbinyan 
answered journalists' questions. The questions were most 
diverse: the very first programs and financial policy of the 
Central Bank, the problem of transfers and pensions, the 
prospects of the dram, the possibility of entering the ruble 
zone, assistance on the part of international organizations, 
inflation of the dram, the problem of the currency rate, and so 
forth. 
  The transformation of the Central Bank into an independent 
organism and the development of the money and credit program 
and, in general, of the financial policy were mentioned as the 
principal and paramount goal of the Central Bank. 
  Regarding the transfers of pension allowances: Although they 
are made in the course of work, a global solution of the problem 
is a long-term task. With regard to the prospects of the 
national currency, according to Mr. Asatryan, the last month 
demonstrates a certain stabilization of currency. At least a 
free rate of the dram already exists. 
  The report that as yet not a single state has recognized the 
dram as Armenia's official currency was very depressing. 
Nevertheless, in Asatryan's opinion, there is no way back, that 
is, to the ruble zone. The manager of the Central Bank even 
expressed surprise about this matter: Armenia as an independent 
state should have and has a national currency. The fact that 
this currency is secured to one extent or another--depending on 
the present level of economic development--is another matter. Be 
that as it may, the idea of the strengthening and stabilization 
of the dram as the primary goal of the Central Bank was 
expressed very unequivocally. At the same time, the intention to 
establish a single--instead of the present three--rate of 
currency units was expressed. Hope was also expressed concerning 
support on the part of international organizations. At least, 
according to the management of the Central Bank, the matter is 
not closed. And besides, can it be closed if nonpolitical 
(according to their representatives) organizations, in fact, 
advance arguments of a political nature? 
  With regard to clearing transactions with CIS states, 
according to Mr. Darbinyan, negotiations on this point with the 
central banks of these states lie ahead. The matter of the 
establishment of a single clearing center is touched upon. An 
interstate bank for settlements with CIS states will function in 
Moscow soon. This will not solve problems on a global scale, but 
will greatly improve the situation. 
  Well, we shall see what we shall see. Especially as, apart 
from the forthcoming de-facto glasnost and openness, Messrs. 
Asatryan and Darbinyan promised journalists and, consequently, 
the republic's entire public, glasnost and openness in Central 
Bank activity. 

