BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Angel Paez of the Research Unit] </F>
  [Text] In publications signed by the Sol Peru Committee in 
Paris, Esparza Marquez or "Comrade Enrique" issues a merciless 
attack on the Shining Path [SL] cells headed by Adolfo Olaechea 
Cahuas and Luis Arce Borja which, from abroad, refuse to accept 
the negotiations between SL leader Abimael Guzman and the 
government. 
  In his book, "SL: The World's Most Lethal Subversive 
Movement," British reporter Simon Strong interviews "Comrade 
Enrique" several times. He says: "Guzman believes he is the 
most reliable militant in Europe." It was he who in 1986 
received Guzman's order to organize cells in 26 European cities. 
  Adolfo Olaechea, chief of the Sol Peru Committee in London, 
who is in direct contact with LA REPUBLICA, said: "Esparza 
Marquez has been against the people's war since 1980, he even 
asked for pardon from the party and President Gonzalo for his 
opposition to the war." 
  Olaechea's comments contrasts with what Simon Strong saw and 
verified. 
  Strong says in his book that "Comrade Enrique" belongs "to 
the cream (of the SL community in Stockholm, Sweden). He 
belongs to the family of Augusta de la Torre whose best brain is 
`Enrique.' He is a soft spoken handsome man who receives the 
respect a mature school director should get." 
  Strong states that Esparza Marquez (who only identifies 
himself as "Enrique" for security reasons) arrived in Sweden in 
November 1982 "after an apparent rupture with Abimael Guzman." 
After "writing a repentance letter" to his sister in-law's 
husband, he received instructions to start SL cells in Europe. 
  Later "Comrade Enrique" obtained Guzman's attention and was 
appointed PCP-SL [Peruvian Communist Party - SL] representative 
to the managing committee of the International Revolutionary 
Movement, MRI, which groups Maoists communists worldwide. 
  Adolfo Olaechea maintains that Esparza Marquez is more like 
the leader of a movement that negotiates with representatives of 
the Alberto Fujimori administration in exchange for personal 
benefits. 
  Olaechea notes: "Opportunistic individuals infiltrated in 
the 
Peruvian revolutionary support movement (...), and seek 
arrangements with Fujimori against the interests of the Peruvian 
people in exchange for personal favors, (this) does not weaken 
but rather strengthens the revollution (...)." He adds: "The 
fact that Mr. Esparza and an insignifcant group have become 
Fujimori's mouthpiece abroad and publish a bulletin entitled 
`SOL PERU', can only cause temporary confusion." 
  But the most serious accusation by Adolfo Olaechea Cahuas, 
who in 1991 organized the Sol Peru Committee in London precisely 
at Comrade Enrique's request, is that Esparza Marquez phones 
Abimael Guzman Reinoso with the approval of the Alberto Fujimori 
adminsitration to expedite the negotiations. 
  According to Olaechea this has been admitted by Esparza 
Marquez himself: "By his own admission, Mr. Esparza has been in 
direct telephone contact for several months with `President 
Gonzalo' with the approval, support, and facilities provided by 
courtesy of Mr. Fujimori and his advisor (Vladimiro) Montesinos 
(Torres)." 
  In his contact with "LA REPUBLICA", Olaechea adds that "Mr. 
Esparza is obviously illegally representing Dr. Guzman. He is 
negotiating but he is also disregarding and overlooking the PCP 
central committee." 
  In a "Sol Peru Committee" bulletin issued in Paris, Esparza 
refers to Luis Arce Borja and Adolfo Olaechia Cahuas. He states 
that those who oppose the Peace Agreement are "opportunists and 
alleged `supporters' of the people's war that is entrenched in 
Europe." 
  According to "Comrade Enrique" and his followers, the 
letters 
issued by Guzman and the Canto Grande inmates are proof enough 
of the PCP-SL's willingness to achieve a Peace Agreement: "They 
are now unable to shout out that 2,500 PCP war criminals are 
`crazy,' `drugged,' that they have made statements `under 
pressure,' or less still that they have `joined the Fujimori 
administration.' They will have to bite their dirty tongues and 
swallow the filthy abominations they have said." 
  Esparza Marquez is undoubtedly referring to the cells led by 
Olaechia and Arce, the director of THE INTERNATIONAL NEWSPAPER 
that is published in Brussels. 
  But Olaechea -- who notes that he and Arce Borja think alike 
-- says: "It does not matter if certain individuals, including 
certain prisoners described by the regime as `SL members,' have 
signed letters supporting the negotiations. This has little 
relevance because the war continues to be conducted by the PCP 
central committee." 
  Olaechea says: "Under the leadership of the PCP central 
committee" not "of President Gonzalo," thus implying that he is 
questioning Guzman's "leadership." 
  Olaechea states: "It is wrong to allege that Olaechea and 
Arce Borja say that `the dialogue does not exist.'" He adds: 
"What is not possible to witness is a sterile dialogue with the 
turncoat dictatorship that is oppressing and massacring the 
people." 
  The London Sol Peru Committee leader said: "It is necessary 
to unmask the false negotiations between the regime and the gang 
of traitors [felipillos] headed by Esparza" which will fail 
"despite the ?illions of lies they tell President Gonzalo in an 
endless litany." 
Luis Arce Borja and Adolfo Olaechea -- the spokesmen in Europe 
of the SL sector that does not believe in dialogue with the 
government and even less in a Peace Agreement -- have stated 
that "the victory of the people's war is irreversible," and that 
no "plot" or "fabrications" will weaken it. 
  Olaechea does not believe his differences of opinion with 
Esparza Marquez -- who controls cells in Sweden, France, Spain, 
the United States, the Netherlands, Denmark, and other countries 
-- constitute a division of the PCP-SL abroad. 
  Olaechea Cahuas believes the SL "is developing the Sixth 
Great Military Plan which seeks to prepare for a strategic 
offensive that will culminate in the seizing of power 
nationwide." He asserts: "Javier Esparza's adventures; the 
letters of this prisoner and the others who either cannot or 
simply will not continue to fight, and the speculations about 
Fujimori's farce, are of little importance and their only 
objective is to confuse and deceive the credulous." 
  Incredibly, Olaechea minimizes the obvious and overwhelming 
differences between the two groups. 
  Olaechea states: "Fujimori's fabrication died a natural 
death 
a long time ago." He adds: "His efforts to revive it by trying 
to agitate the destitute, with Esparza's complicity, is 
temporary. This will be demonstrated shortly." 
  Javier Esparza Marquez, "Comrade Enrique", is married to 
Abimael Guzman's late wife's sister. He is persistently 
described as the Peruvian Government's puppet to divide SL. 
  Esparza Marquez lives in Sweden. He is one of "the 
ambassadors of terror" who faces extradition along with his 
wife, Gisella La Torre Carrasco and her brothers, Boris and 
Carlos -- Abimael Guzman's brothers in law. 
  Olaechea states: "Fujimori and his adviser Montesinos are 
involved in trafficking in lies and bribing the submissive in an 
effort to divide Peruvian revolutionaries." He adds: "He thus 
resorted to Javier Esparza Marquez, the husband of Doctor 
Guzman's late wife's sister." 
  In his communique, Olaechea explains that the Sol Peru 
Committee in Paris is not led by Maximiliano Duran Araujo, 
brother of the outlawed Teresa, the Central Committee leader and 
wife of Osman Morote Barrionuevo. 
  Duran Araujo has been living in Paris for the last decade. 
He was constantly attacked by "the international press" for 
"trafficking with the people's war and usurping the name of the 
party." 
  A nuclear energy expert, Duran Araujo spreads SL propaganda, 
but in his own style. Olaechea said: "In spite of other 
disagreements, it must be stated that Maximiliano Duran is not 
part of this fabrication." 
  In a sort of show of force, Esparza Marquez includes in the 
Sol Peru Committee bulletin statements by other Maoist 
organizations in favor of the Peace Agreement, including that of 
the political bureau of Mexico's Revolutionary Communist Union, 
UCR. 
  Esparza Marquez charges Olaechea, Arce, and their followers 
with disavowing Abimael Guzman as the "PCP chief" (please note 
that they refer to the "Central Committee directorate" which is 
currently commanded by Oscar Ramirez Durand), and with 
distributing false party documents. He makes the following 
threat: 
  "They are spreading despicable concoctions, which have 
unveiled their atrocious ambitions as counterrevolutionary 
gangs, and have devised plans to destroy the PCP's work abroad." 
"Comrade Enrique" states in his publication: "By imitating 
perverse assassins, they are making accusations. The blood 
debts caused by these despicable actions will never be 
forgotten. No matter where they may try to hide, the party's 
iron hand will fall on them." 
  Blood is not precisely a game among Shining Path members. 
  Those who are against the Peace Agreement have showered 
threats on their comrades who support an understanding with the 
regime: They have promised to reduce them "to a few black ashes." 

