BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Santa Fe de Bogota Emisoras Caracol 
Network in Spanish at 1230 GMT on 11 May, as part of its "0600 
to 0900 Newscast," broadcasts a live 60-minute interview with 
Colombian Liberal Party presidential candidate Ernesto Samper 
Pizano by unidentified reporters at the Caracol studios in Santa 
Fe de Bogota. The interview is moderated by Caracol News 
Director Dario Arizmendi. 
  Before the interview gets under way, Arizmendi notes that 
the 
newscast was supposed to host a "debate" between Samper and 
Conservative Party presidential candidate Andres Pastrana on the 
topics of "peace and drug trafficking," but he adds that 
Pastrana opted not to attend. Arizmendi does not give any 
reason for Pastrana's failure to attend, other than to say that 
after being invited to the debate, Pastrana sent a letter "to 
various media directors, proposing a list of topics, the radio 
and television newscasts to be visited, the duration of each 
debate, and so on." Arizmendi adds that the day before, 10 May, 
Pastrana's campaign manager "could not say whether Dr. Andres 
Pastrana could come to Caracol at this time in the morning." 
  The interview begins with Liberal Party Candidate Ernesto 
Samper Pizano replying to a question about the economic and 
political cost of peace with the guerrilla forces operating in 
Colombia: "The day we evaluate what violence costs the country, 
we will then realize that peace is very cheap." Samper agrees 
there is a "need for peace management" because a great many 
logistical issues are involved, such as where will the former 
guerrillas live, how will they earn a living, and what will be 
done with their property. Samper adds, "Already, many 
guerrillas are involved in organized crime." 
  Samper then stresses the need to "support peace through the 
business sector," noting that as development minister, he 
arranged some very interesting meetings with businessmen with 
this goal in mind. 
  In replying to another question, Samper says guerrillas 
should be guaranteed minimum subsistence. He continues by 
saying "everything else" is negotiable, adding that the 
government is the one to set conditions and that the 
negotiations must be brief. He adds that it is necessary to 
draw out the bottom-line conditions required by both the 
government and the guerrillas before the two sides sit down to 
negotiate. 
  On the topic of when the peace process should begin, Samper 
says: "No deadline should be set, but the process should begin 
the day after the president is chosen -- and I hope it is me -- 
on 30 May." 
  The topic then shifts to kidnapping, which one reporter 
describes "as intimately linked to subversion," and he asks 
Samper how his government intends to deal with this problem. 
Samper replies that he has supported the work of the Free 
Country Foundation, adding, "we need more legal regulatory 
guidelines." He continues: "We must have security organizations 
that must be committed to relatives of kidnapping victims in 
order to rescue the victims and return them to safety." 
  On the subject of the two basic guerrilla proposals -- 1) 
land reform and greater assistance for peasants, as demanded by 
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia; and 2) a 
nationalistic oil policy, as demanded by the Army of National 
Liberation -- Samper is asked: "To what degree would your 
government be willing to give in?" 
  Samper says the problem with agrarian reform is that 
"everything has been left half done; about 1 million hectares 
still need to be distributed." 
  He adds that Colombia has long-standing oil legislation, 
adding: "I do not think it is a good idea to change the rules of 
the game for oil investors overnight. Adjustments can be made, 
as has recently been the case, so that the amount of royalties 
are not only proportionate to the size of the well, but in 
accordance with the well's productivity. Therefore, a higher 
producing well will earn more money for the government. 
Nevertheless, in no case whatsoever would I establish laws that 
disregard the rights of investors." 
  In terms of land reform, Samper says: "The law also outlines 
certain ways to capitalize the agriculture and cattle-raising 
sector. There are many aspects of agrarian reform that 
specifically deal with land issues. Therefore, there is no 
reason for me to disagree with you that we, of course, need to 
return the Agrarian Savings Bank to the peasants and to give all 
workers in the farm sector new and improved living conditions." 
  Returning to the subject of dialogue with the guerrillas, 
Samper says he would entrust the work "to a high commissioner 
who would have the specific task of establishing all contacts, 
not only with the guerrillas, but also with civilian society, to 
create an atmosphere of peace." Asked whether peace is his top 
priority, Samper replies: "Peace must come hand in hand with 
security. For the common man on the street, aside from not 
being mugged, peace may very well mean also having job 
opportunities." He adds: "This peace must also be achieved 
within an overall security process, which means improving the 
security conditions under which many Colombians now live." 
  The subject then turns to the recent Constitutional Court 
decision to decriminalize the so-called "personal dose" of 
drugs, and Samper is asked whether he agrees with the 
government's position of waiting for the full text of the ruling 
to be published "next week" before announcing its final 
position. Samper says: "Yes, but we must also understand that 
the debate is not just a legal one, but also a political and 
social debate because the simple decriminalization announcement 
for personal doses of drugs could begin turning countless 
sinister wheels in the drug underworld, which would encourage 
the selling of drugs for personal use to youths at rock-bottom 
prices." 
  Liberal Party presidential candidate Ernesto Samper 
continues by saying he has changed his views on the legalization 
of drugs because "when I proposed legalizing drugs 15 years ago, 
the drug business only involved a few peasants who grew 
marijuana in Santa Marta's Sierra Neveda. At the time, I said: 
Let us buy out their drug production; let us give them the 
ability to change their crops, and this will allow us to get out 
from under the power of drugs. No one took any notice, and we 
then went from marijuana to coca, from coca to cocaine, and then 
came drug trafficking, and from drug trafficking we went to 
narcoterrorism. Obviously, conditions today make legalization 
totally unviable. It is not that I have changed my position. 
Instead, the circumstances have changed over the past 15 years, 
and this is why right now I have spoken out against 
decriminalization because people might get the idea that this is 
some sort of pardon for everything that has taken place over the 
past 15 years. 
  "There are, however, very respectable people who continue to 
work on the legalization idea, for example, Dr. Alvaro Gomez 
Hurtado, who currently supports Dr. Andres Pastrana. Gomez has 
not been heard recently on any of these topics. It would be 
good to know whether he shares the opinions of Dr. Pastrana on 
this point, or whether he insists on his legalization idea." 
  Samper is asked whether the government should negotiate with 
the remaining drug cartels, as well as "how should these drug 
traffickers be confronted?" Samper says he is "a fanatic 
believer that drug traffickers should be prosecuted under the 
law. If the prison terms have to be reviewed, fine. If 
term-reduction mechanisms need to be separated to prevent the 
two mechanisms from running in parallel, then this should be 
done. I fully agree that an immediate review should be 
instituted. We cannot deny Colombians the right that those who 
break the law receive a fair trial and a safe jail to serve 
their time. This is basically what the surrender policy is all 
about. I will therefore continue to support this policy because 
I believe we cannot wait for the United States to reduce 
consumption or wait for Germany to halt the trafficking of 
chemical precursors to resolve the drug problem." 
  The discussion then turns to Colombian coffee policy, and 
Samper is asked, if he were presidet now, what instructions he 
would give to Finance and Public Credit Minister Rudolf Hommes 
regarding a hike in coffee prices. Samper replies: "The current 
domestic price for a pound of coffee is approximately 85 cents, 
while international prices have already reached $1.25. 
Therefore, a 5-percent increase would only translate to four 
cents, which seems very low to me. I believe we need to go much 
higher. I do not want to mention a figure to avoid being called 
a populist." 
  Samper adds: "Even if Dr. Pastrana does not like it, coffee 
growers have a right to receive a good portion of the prices 
fetched on the international market. The rest can be set aside 
for a stabilization fund to cover sluggish periods. It seems to 
be completely senseless to argue that coffee prices should be 
frozen to control inflation. Coffee growers, like any other 
sector of the economy, have the right to benefit from market 
opening. That is why I maintain, as part of my coffee doctrine, 
that we need to free coffee from state macroeconomic 
supervision. Why should the government reach into the pockets 
of coffee growers each time it needs to reduce inflation? No, 
if the economy is to be open, then it should be open for 
everyone." 
  After Arizmendi urges Samper to give specific examples 
concerning his coffee policy, Samper replies he would propose 
two hikes in coffee prices -- "one right away, between 10-15 
percent, and I would leave an adjustment that they will likely 
seek from me in September pending." Samper adds: "I prefer to 
increase coffee prices rather than to adopt Pastrana's proposal 
to forgive the debt. Forgiving the coffee producers' debt seems 
to me extremely dangerous. If we begin pardoning debts, as Dr. 
Pastrana proposes, can you imagine the financial system's 
collapse?" 

