BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of government resolution No. 48-CP on administrative </F>
reform -- dated 4 May] 
  [Text] At present, administrative procedures, especially 
procedures for receiving and resolving works related to citizens 
and organizations have been stipulated by various sectors and 
echelons. They lack uniformity, and are cumbersome and 
complicated. Such procedures are usually established at the 
convenience of the organs in charge without paying adequate 
attention to the aspirations and convenience of the people 
concerned. Many state organs have failed to correctly comply 
with stipulations on receiving and resolving work related to the 
people. There have also been instances of passing the buck 
among state organs in charge which eventually leads to the work 
being unresolved. Worse still, many procedures, expenses, and 
fees have been created not in accordance with their authority. 
The collection of charges and fees has also been made above set 
levels. Regulations on state administrative procedures have not 
been made public, nor have competent and qualified cadres been 
appointed to receive and resolve work. 
  When receiving and resolving work related to the people, not 
a few civil servants have shown less respect for the people and 
have adopted officialism. They act as if they are doing a 
favor. Worse still, they inconvenience the people by asking for 
bribes. Resolving works in this way has not only caused a loss 
of time, energy, and money for various public organs, units, and 
the people concerned, but is also the main reason for 
corruption, thus causing indignation and eroding the people's 
confidence in the state. Therefore, reforming administrative 
procedures is now a pressing demand that meets the people's 
legitimate demands. This is also an important goal of 
administrative reform. The goal to be attained is to implement 
a radical change in relations between the procedures for 
resolving works between state organs themselves, between state 
organs and other agencies and units, and between state organs 
and the people in receiving and resolving works. 
  The government hereby implements the following works, 
beginning in the second quarter of 1994: 
  1. First, cabinet members, heads of government organs, and 
chairmen of provincial and city people's committees directly 
under the central authority must continue to carry out the prime 
minister's directive No. 40-TTG, dated 29 October 1992, 
stipulating several points in the working relationship between 
comrades in charge of the administrative apparatuses at all 
levels. The main substance of these points is as follows: 
  A. The law on government organization and the government's 
operational statute affirms: Deputy prime ministers are those 
helping the prime minister and acting on his behalf in providing 
operational guidance and taking direct responsibility for 
resolving various works within the areas of activity assigned. 
They must regard this task as being delegated by the prime 
minister. Cabinet ministers must maintain regular contact with 
the prime minister and must personally meet and work with the 
prime minister when needed. When working with a prime minister, 
they must comply with the advice of the deputy prime minister 
concerned, regarding his advice as being made on behalf of the 
prime minister. 
  This spirit must also be displayed in the working relations 
between cabinet members and the chairmen of those provincial and 
city people's comittees directly under the central authority and 
also between those comrades in charge of various administrative 
echelons in a province or city. This is to enhance individual 
responsibility, ensure centralized and unified leadership, 
overcome bad bureaucratic practices, and avoid inconveniences 
and sluggishness. 
  B. In the working relations of cabinet members and the 
chairmen of provincial and city people's committees directly 
under the central authority, cabinet ministers must personally 
work with the chairman or the deputy chairman -- as assigned by 
his chairman -- of a provincial or city people's committee 
directly under the central authority to resolve promptly and 
dutifully those issues within their authority in the shortest 
possible period. The state of a cabinet minister or a deputy 
minister forcing the chairman or the deputy chairman of a 
provincial or city people's committee to have advance meetings 
with each department of the ministry concerned before the 
minister resolves an issue must be ended. In cases where 
suggestions made by a province or city involve many ministries, 
the responsible ministry must act as a lead in discussions with 
other relevant ministries and must not let the chairman of a 
provincial or city people's committee approach every ministry to 
solicit advice from various ministers prior to having the issue 
resolved by the minister in charge of the sector concerned. 
  C. Regarding works beyond the authority of a minister, the 
chairman or vice chairman of a provincial and city people's 
committee directly under the central authority must work with 
the prime minister or a deputy prime minister. In this case, 
the minister in charge of the government office must be 
dutybound to arrange a meeting for the prime minister or one of 
his deputies to work directly with the chairman or vice chairman 
of the provincial or city people's committee directly under the 
central authority. 
  Those stipulations cited in Points B and C above will also 
be 
applied to the heads of those organs belonging to the government. 
  D. In the working relations between the chairman of a 
provincial or city people's committee with the directors of 
various offices and with the chairmen of precinct and district 
people's committees, such works must also be dealt with in 
accordance with the above spirit. 
  E. In the working relations between the chairman of a 
precinct or district people's committee and the chairman of a 
village and ward people's committee, this spirit must also be 
fully observed. The chairman of a precinct or district people's 
committee must devote a large part of his time to staying close 
to various villages and wards in order to resolve works locally, 
trying to minimize cases where works are to be resolved through 
conferences. 
  2. Ministries, heads of ministerial-level organs, and heads 
of government organs, and the chairmen of provincial and city 
people's committees directly under the central authority must 
initiate a drive to scrutinize all stipulations now in force 
governing administrative procedures and charges and fees in 
areas under their responsibility, including those stipulations 
promulgated by lower echelons. This is to promptly restrict 
those unauthorized administrative stipulations and procedures 
and to supplement and revise those procedures no longer 
compatible with reality, which are disrupting the activities of 
other organs and units and inconveniencing the people. 
  If there are stipulations promulgated by higher echelons 
which they deem necessary to revise, supplement, or abrogate, 
they must petition the organs concerned to consider the possible 
revision, supplementation, or abrogation. This work must be 
carried out in all areas of activity with an emphasis on 
procedures governing the granting of permits for exports and 
imports, for investment activities, and for house construction 
and repair; procedures governing land allocation, the 
registration of business operations and occupational practice, 
the ownership and use of communications means, and household 
registration; procedures governing entry and exit from the 
country, and the registration of buying, selling, or transfer of 
assets, capital loans, notary public, and enterprise inspections. 
  As for old procedures which are now still compatible and 
which are stipulated fragmentarily in various documents, they 
must now be organized into a single memorandum in accordance 
with the authority of the minister and the head of the 
ministerial-level organ, or the head of the government organ 
concerned in order to facilitate implementation, inspection, and 
supervision. 
  Those procedures related to many ministries and sectors, and 
the ministry with the main functions of state administration are 
responsible for coordinating with various ministries concerned 
in the promulgation of interministerial stipulations. 
  Ministers, heads of ministerial-level organs, heads of 
government organs, and chairmen of those provincial and city 
people's committees directly under the central authority must 
directly inspect and provide guidance for the deployment of this 
task beginning immediately from the second quarter of 1994, 
regarding this as one of the central tasks of their ministries, 
sectors, and localities to be carried out between now and the 
end of 1994. 
  After reexamining various administrative procedures, the 
ministers, heads of ministerial-level organs, and heads of 
government agencies, within their administrative authority, must 
make public the system of documents which stipulate new 
procedures under various formats so each agency, unit, and 
citizen is aware of and complies with them. Upon completion of 
revising and supplementing a procedure, they must promptly make 
it public. This task must be completed by the end of 1994 at 
the latest. Meanwhile, through inspection and reexamination of 
various administrative procedures of those sectors concerned, we 
must promptly help other agencies and units revamp all those 
elements receiving and resolving works related to citizens; and 
we must be determined to deal with and remove those cadres found 
guilty of abuse of their positions, or who are found unqualified. 
  3. In addition to laws, regulations, and other legal 
documents of the government or the prime minister, only the 
ministers, the heads of ministerial-level organs, and the heads 
of government agencies are authorized to stipulate 
administrative procedures for activities under their area of 
management. They must take responsibility for the government 
for these procedures. 
  New stipulations and those orders supplementing, revising, 
or 
rescinding those stipulations on existing administrative 
procedures must be put into writing. This will ensure their 
uniformity, accuracy, and consistency with the laws, 
regulations, and other legal documents of the government or the 
prime minister. 
  All stipulations on administrative procedures must be 
simple, 
comprehensible, and easily carried out and must be openly 
promulgated so each public organ, unit, and the people are aware 
of them. 
  As for those stipulations on administrative procedures under 
the responsibility of various ministries and central-level 
sectors which need separate stipulations to suit the 
characteristics of a number of localities, ministries and 
central-level sectors must write letters delegating their 
authority to provincial and city people's committees concerned 
directly under the central authority to promulgate them. Such 
stipulations of the provincial and city people's committees must 
have the consensus of those ministries and sectors in charge of 
this field of activity and all those stipulations on 
administrative procedures of ministries and sectors must be 
openly promulgated. 
  4. Responsible ministries, sectors, and localities must 
scrupulously comply with decision No. 276-TT, dated 28 July 
1992, of the chairman of the Council of Ministers -- now known 
as the prime minister -- on unifying all stipulations on 
managing various charges and fees throughout the entire country, 
and must strictly ban public organs and civil servants from 
creating charges and fees beyond the stipulations in that 
decision. 
  The Ministry of Finance is responsible for cooperating with 
relevant organs in providing uniform guidance for the system of 
management for each item of charges and fees. 
  5. At the sites where documents, papers, and complaints from 
the people are received and resolved, all stipulations on 
procedures for resolving every kind of works must be openly 
posted after these stipulations have been examined, revised, and 
supplemented by various ministries and sectors in accordance 
with the above spirit. 
  The different sorts of work must be clearly defined and the 
state organs responsible must complete it. If there are 
regulations for the collection of charges and fees, they must 
also be publicly announced. 
  Government officials charged with the duties of contacting 
and dealing with the public, and receiving documents must be 
qualified, honest, earnest. They must carry identification 
cards bearing their full name and rank. They are only allowed 
to resolve the work at the office. 
  When receiving papers requesting the resolution of a piece 
of 
work from the public, they must issue acknowledgement notes with 
the answering date. A piece of work that has met all 
requirements must be quickly approved according to the law and 
must not be delayed in any fashion. Clear reasons must be 
stated in response to applications that cannot be approved. If 
an application does not meet all the requirements, practical 
guidance must be given so that the applicant does not have to 
come back too many times. The head of an organ must outline 
regulations dealing with any case that involves many sections of 
the same organ, so that when any citizen and organization needs 
to apply for something, they only need to see one official who 
is charged with the duty of receiving the application and 
dealing with the case. 
  6. People who lodge their applications have the right to 
complain to the head of the receiving office or the head of a 
higher organ. They can also bring government officials to court 
for their mistakes, and incorrect action that cause them 
inconvenience when proper administrative procedure are not 
observed and if they behave in an authoritarian, insolent, and 
demanding manner. 
  Any head of state organs and government officials who 
violate 
state regulations when dealing with the public must be 
disciplined quickly and correctly. This must begin with their 
removal from present duties. On the other hand, it is necessary 
to deal lawfully with people who take advantage of the right to 
complain to cause disorder and taint the reputation of 
government officials and state organs. 
  7. To quicken the reexamination of current administrative 
procedures; the introduction of new regulations; and the 
supplement, adjustment, and cancellation of certain 
administrative procedures; the Government Office is entrusted 
with the duty of coordinating with all sectors in organizing and 
soliciting opinions from state organs and mass organizations. 
This will be done for outdated or illegal administrative 
procedures that inconvenience public organs, units, and the 
people. It will also affect those with loopholes, which bad 
people can take advantage of. No postage is needed for letters 
sent by public organs, units, and the people to the Government 
Office contributing views on administrative procedures that need 
to changed or abrogated. The Government Office is responsible 
for compiling and categorizing the suggestions before informing 
related ministries and sectors for action. 
  8. The minister of the Government Office is to coordinate 
with the chairman of the Government Organization and Personnel 
Commission, the minister of justice, and the chairman of the 
State Inspector Commission in helping the prime minister 
instruct all sectors and localities to execute this resolution. 
It is suggested that the central offices of mass organizations 
and the mass media closely coordinate with ministries, central 
sectors, and people's committees at all levels to widely 
publicize the aforementioned line to solemnly and efficiently 
execute this regulation. 

