BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with former Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi </F>
Miyazawa by AERA editor Hiroshi Tadaki; place and date not 
given: "Will Japan Become a Normal Country, as Advocated by 
Ichiro Ozawa? And Will It Go Nuclear?"] 
  [Text] Japan-U.S. Ties: The Situation Does Not Call 
for the Flamboyant Term "A Relationship of Equality" 
  [Tadaki] Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa explained that the 
breakdown of the Japan-U.S. trade talks was a necessary step to 
turn Japan-U.S. ties into a fully mature relationship. Mr. 
Miyazawa, how do you view the failure of the trade talks? 
  [Miyazawa] It is quite normal that Japan and the United 
States cannot reach an agreement on trade at the working level. 
The prime minister or the president deal with the matter only 
after being informed about the failure of working-level 
negotiations. I expected both leaders to make the utmost 
efforts to reach an agreement, even by holding an all-night 
conference. 
  In July 1993, when the Group of Seven [G-7] nations held a 
summit in Tokyo, I agreed with President Bill Clinton to put 
into specifics a new framework for resolving bilateral trade 
issues after six months. Therefore, when I handed over my duties 
to Mr. Hosokawa, I said, "Mr. Hosokawa, you will have to forge a 
consensus within each ministry by the end of the year, in order 
to prepare a concrete plan for trimming Japan's massive trade 
surplus, before you head to Washington for the Japan-U.S. summit 
talks." 
  Unfortunately, Prime Minister Hosokawa was very busy dealing 
with domestic affairs until the eve of the Japan-U.S. summit 
meeting. He managed to get political reform bills through the 
Diet, but he was compelled to scrap his tax-hike plan [to 
replace the 3-percent consumption tax with a 7-percent national 
welfare tax]. He was too busy to catch his breath until he got 
onto the plane heading for the United States. His mind was too 
occupied with domestic affairs to think about the Japan-U.S. 
trade talks. He did real wrong in delaying the drafting of the 
budget plan for the new fiscal year. I think that the 
government should have compiled the fiscal year 1994 annual 
budget by the end of 1993. 
  [Tadaki] Do you think that the Japan-U.S. relationship has 
now declined to a critical level? 
  [Miyazawa] As they did at the Lillehammer winter Olympic 
games, Japanese reporters probably had the urge to report [on 
the progress at the Japan-U.S. summit talks] by saying: "Go, 
Japan, go; we won!" However, reality does not allow us to be 
pleased with the outcome of the summit, in saying that the two 
countries now enjoy "relations of equality." For the United 
States, the failure of the framework talks means that there is 
no longer any commitment between the two countries. Moreover, 
the negotiations will not resume for awhile. Now, the U.S. 
concern is how to exert pressure on Japan. The U.S. 
administration, as well as the U.S. Congress, is expected to 
make the utmost efforts to pressure Japan to lower its trade 
surplus and to further open its market. 
  Now, the U.S. Congress is considering a bill designed to 
impose sanctions on Japan. However, [John D.] Rockefeller is in 
the Senate. In a recent speech, Clinton said: "Rockefeller, 
who is a great Japanophile, is on my side [on this issue]. This 
inspires me with great confidence." Rockefeller's family, from 
the time of his father, has loved Japan, and he studied at the 
International Christian University [in Tokyo]. We should do our 
best to respond [to the United States' demands]. 
  "The United States gives the rest of the world a helping 
hand, simply because it wants to spread its values, because it 
wants to make its values common to all, and because it wants to 
foster its values in the four corners of the world," Henry 
Kissinger has said seriously in the past. Despite the end of 
the cold war, or I should rather say because of the end of the 
cold war, Japan and the United States should have a common goal 
in mind, which is the spreading of their values throughout the 
world. 
  Moreover, to be more realistic, Japan will have to further 
improve its relations with Southeast Asian nations, as well as 
with China. Each of these countries has its own potential 
enemy: Some are afraid of Japan, while some others are nervous 
about China. However, no country feels this way toward the 
United States. The United States constitutes a stabilizing 
force in this part of the world. Japan needs the United States 
not only for its own sake, because the U.S. presence in Asia is 
also indispensable for Japan's maintaining intimate relations 
with China and Southeast Asian nations in the 21st century. 
  When I made a tour of Southeast Asia in 1993, I delivered a 
speech in Bangkok to set out the so-called "Miyazawa Doctrine." 
A storm of applause arose particularly when I said: "Japan 
will never become a military power. Even if there is a conflict 
in Asia, Japan is not able to play the role of a policeman. 
Moreover, it will never try to perform such a duty." All 
Southeast Asian nations still expect the United States to 
continue to act as a stabilizing force in this part of the world. 
<H5>  Political Situation: The Mission of the "Political Reform </H5>
Government" Is Now Over 
  [Tadaki] Prime Minister Hosokawa caused a stir by announcing 
a tax hike plan. He failed to reach an agreement on trade with 
President Clinton. He was forced to withdraw his 
cabinet-reshuffle plan. Under such circumstances, it seems that 
he can hardly maintain his high popularity. 
  [Miyazawa] The Hosokawa administration was created to 
accomplish political reform. In my opinion, there is no more 
justification for its existence because it has already completed 
its mission. However, Prime Minister Hosokawa does not think 
so. He thinks that his administration should also achieve 
economic reform, as well as administrative reform. If he really 
wants to do so, he has to give priority to adjusting the 
policies between coalition members. Otherwise, nothing will go 
smoothly. As a matter of fact, his tax hike plan and his 
cabinet-reshuffle plan have caused flaps because of a lack of 
coordination. The Hosokawa administration can barely coordinate 
policies because the eight coalition members did not forge 
common ground on key policies at the start. To bystanders, 
everything that Prime Minister Hosokawa does seems to be very 
precarious. 
  [Tadaki] Behind the uncertainty lies the difference in views 
about political realignment, namely the conflict between those 
who favor a "two-party system" and those who prefer a "moderate 
multiparty system." What do you think of this? 
  [Miyazawa] Under the market system, there will always be 
some 
people who will be in a disadvantageous position or who will 
find it difficult to survive in a highly competitive world. Not 
including Marxism, I think it is necessary to have political 
groups, such as the Social Democratic Party of Japan, to act as 
these people's spokesmen. In my opinion, about 20 percent of 
politicians should be the mouthpiece of these people. Thus, I 
wonder whether a two-party system would really benefit the 
public. It will be regrettable if the current multiparty system 
is transformed into a two-party system and if constitutional 
reform becomes the main point of contention between the two 
parties. Although this issue needs to be discussed thoroughly, 
I do not appreciate a framework under which there are two big 
parties arguing over the question of whether the Constitution 
should be revised. 
  [Tadaki] Ichiro Ozawa says that the use of armed force is 
justifiable when this is done as an international contribution. 
How to you view his concept of a "normal country?" 
  [Miyazawa] UN Secretary General Butros Butros-Ghali 
previously stressed that the United Nations will intervene in 
regional conflicts by bringing UN troops into action to create a 
peaceful world. However, what happened in Somalia shows that 
matters do not work out this way in reality. Moreover, at this 
moment, the United Nations does not have the fullest confidence 
of people as a neutral and fair organization. When I look at 
what has happened in the world recently, I can say that things 
are not moving in the direction called for by Mr. Ozawa. 
  The expression "fighting in a just cause" remains a dreadful 
memory for Japanese. The memory of the past cannot disappear so 
easily. Japanese feel strongly that Japan should never repeat 
its past mistake. Japanese might think differently should the 
international situation turn ugly. Fortunately, the 
international situation is taking a favorable turn. Therefore, 
Japanese should continue to follow their pacifist line with 
confidence. 
  Now, let us suppose that Japan revises the Constitution to 
strengthen its military, of course in the cause of self-defense. 
In the long run, some people will certainly begin to say that 
the most cost-effective solution for Japan is to go nuclear. 
Enforcing mandatory military service is practically impossible 
in Japan. A volunteer system is possible, but no matter which 
way it is done, military personnel costs will increase. 
Therefore, some people will insist that the best way is to 
become a nuclear power. Setting aside the question of whether 
it will be possible to deploy nuclear weapons on land, some 
people will certainly argue that Japan at least can have a 
submarine with a nuclear capability. 
  To say nothing of a despotic state, if a democratic nation 
wants to keep from using its nuclear weapons but wants to have a 
potential for deterrence, it absolutely should have a completely 
mature control system. What I would like to stress here is that 
it is not easy for Japan to have such a control system. 
  When President George Bush came to Japan in January 1992, he 
fainted during a banquet held at the prime minister's official 
residence. Instead of staying with her husband, Mrs. Barbara 
Bush continued to enjoy the banquet. She told me, "I am staying 
here because if I leave with him, I will give an incorrect 
impression to the world." 
  As a first lady, she was fully aware that the entire world 
is 
watching every move of the U.S. president, because the key to 
launching a nuclear attack is in his hands. I was deeply 
impressed by her stately manner. 
  [Tadaki] The Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] has discharged 
its duties under the cold war era. Don't you think that the 
party needs to accomplish self-reform? 
  [Miyazawa] The LDP has lost the public's confidence because 
of its money-dominated politics. Its policy itself was not so 
bad. What we need is a structural reform of the party, and we 
are conscious that it will take time for the public to recognize 
that our party has undergone a drastic change. Once self-reform 
is achieved, I am sure that our party will be able to win the 
confidence of the public again as a political party that will 
carry out a comprehensive policy in the public interest. 

