BFN 

  [Text] Joaquin Villalobos and deputies Guadalupe Martinez 
and Eduardo Sancho, members of the People's Revitalizing 
Expression [ERP] and National Resistance [RN] factions of the 
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front [FMLN], yesterday 
downplayed the alleged death threats issued by a ghost group. 
  The threats were made on Thursday night through a communique 
signed by the Salvadoran Revolutionary Front [FRS] and read on 
several radio stations. In the communique the FRS threatened to 
kill Villalobos, Martinez, and Sancho, whom it accuses of being 
"traitors to the revolution and to the spirit of the peace 
agreements." [see previous Terrorism Report for threat text] 
  According to the report, these leaders disregarded 
directives 
issued by the FMLN Directorate, resulting in division within the 
ranks of the former guerrilla organization. Martinez and Sancho 
accepted seats in the Salvadoran National Assembly Directorate, 
and five other deputies supported the candidacy of current 
Assembly President Gloria Salguero Gross. This decision created 
heated friction between 21 colleagues who won seats in the 
Assembly. 
  "I do not worry about anonymous threats; they are the result 
of the opportunity created by discrepancies within the FMLN," 
Villalobos said. The former guerrilla fighter denied that the 
charges are sponsored by members of parties that are annoyed 
with the RN and the ERP -- the Communist Party of El Salvador 
(PCES), the Farabundo Marti People's Liberation Forces (FPL), 
and the Revolutionary Party of Central American Workers (PRTC). 
  Nevertheless, he accused these groups of having discussions 
with the left in a "fanatical" way that may provoke violent 
actions. Villalobos, leader of what is now considered the social 
democratic current in the FMLN, stated that the communique might 
be the work of extremist left- or right-wing groups that 
"disagree with the debate currently under way." Villalobos 
issued an appeal to leading FMLN groups, urging them to stop 
signing newspaper communiques that predict expulsions and 
sanctions characterized by what he termed "fanatical attitudes." 
  Meanwhile, Deputies Ana Guadalupe Martinez and Eduardo 
Sancho 
said they are not afraid of their former comrades in arms and 
they consider the threats to be part of a psychological campaign 
launched by radical left- or right-wing groups. 
  Martinez considers an assassination at this point to be out 
of the democratic context that prevails in the country, saying: 
"I hope only a small group wrote the communique and published it 
in the media. If an assassination occurs, we would be returning 
to the past." 
  Referring to this, Legislative Assembly President Gloria 
Salguero Gross asked the FMLN to unite, work in harmony, and 
legislate in favor of the people. The deputy asked the people 
who sent the communique to "reflect," because "violence is no 
longer an option." 
  A similar statement was issued by Deputy Gerardo Suvillaga, 
who condemned the manifesto from the self-styled FRS, and he 
asked the FMLN to settle its disputes. Meanwhile, Defense 
Minister Humberto Corado said the anonymous communiques are not 
consistent with the new political reality, because "there are 
opportunities for any tendency to publicly state its position." 

