Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Zhu Baoxia: "Fresh Call for Family Planning"] </F>
  [Text] China will not change its policy on population 
control, declared the country's top family planning official, 
State Councillor Peng Peiyun. 
  The country's birth rate was stable last year compared with 
the previous year, which is an encouraging sign. However, Peng 
warned government officials not to feel complacent over last 
year's success. 
  Peng made the remarks on Sunday at the opening of the 
National Family Planning Work Conference in Beijing. 
  Statistics from the State Family Planning Commission showed 
that last year, China registered a birth rate of 18.09 per 
1,000, despite a surge in the number of women entering 
childbearing age. 
  Women in the 20 to 29 age group topped 121 million last 
year, 
just 1.13 million fewer than the peak in 1992. 
  However, both the country's overall birth rate and the 
natural growth rate of the population last year held steady with 
the previous year -- considering the allowable margin of error 
in the annual census. 
  Last year's birth rate was 18.09 per 1,000 and the natural 
growth rate was 11.45 per 1,000. The corresponding figures for 
1992 were 18.24 and 11.6 per 1,000. 
  By the end of last year, the Chinese population had reached 
1,185 million, a net increase of 13.46 million from a year ago. 
  The birth rate in 10 provinces and municipalities, including 
Beijing, Tianjin and Shanghai, has dropped to below 15 per 1,000. 
  The rate for minority ethnic groups also went down to below 
22 per 1,000. 
  Peng attributed the success to enhanced leadership in the 
government's family planning work and improved services in urban 
neighborhoods and rural villages. 
  She said that she believed the current economic reform has 
encouraged more people to have fewer children in order to have 
more flexibility for better jobs and a higher living standard. 
  The country still faces severe population problems in the 
next few years, cautioned Peng, who is also Minister of the 
State Family Planning Com mission. 
  Peng said the country's family planning policy, aimed at 
controlling rapid population growth and improving the people's 
physical quality, suits China's basic conditions and serves the 
interests of the whole nation. 
  The current family planning policy encourages urban families 
to have only one child. Rural families, however, may have a 
second child if they already have one girl and need additional 
help in their families. The policy is more flexible for ethnic 
minorities. 
  Peng stressed that controlling population in the rural areas 
remains the critical point in the country's family planning 
programme. 
  She also urged governments at different levels to increase 
their input into the national family planning programme. 
  The family planning service in villages should be improved 
to 
include education facilities and the distribution of 
contraceptives. Village services also should provide premarital 
physical examinations and health care services for babies and 
women. 

