BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, May 31, BNS -- Finnish President Martti 
Ahtisaari, on a visit to Estonia, met with Estonian President 
Lennart Meri, Parliament Chairman Ulo Nugis and Prime Minister 
Mart Laar in Tallinn today. 
  The presidents at their meeting discussed mainly Estonia's 
relations with Russia, but also Estonia's integration with the 
European structures, Raul Malk, deputy chancellor of the Foreign 
Ministry told BNS. 
  The press office of the Estonian presidential chancellery 
said Ahtisaari at the meeting had expressed his support for 
Estonia in the country's demand that Russian troops be pulled 
out from its territory by Aug. 31. The presidents also spoke 
about the topic of the retired Russian military living in 
Estonia. The Finnish leader informed his Estonian counterpart 
about his meeting with Russian President Boris Yeltsin. Meri 
spoke about the results of last week's visit by Russian Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev to Tallinn. 
  The Finnish president then continued to the parliament and 
the government house at Toompea, where he met with State 
Assembly Chairman Ulo Nugis and Prime Minister Mart Laar. 
Cooperation between the Estonian and Finnish parliaments was 
the main topic at the meeting between Ahtisaari and Nugis, the 
parliament press office reported. Nugis at the meeting spoke at 
some length about the main problems the parliament is working on 
at the moment. Also discussed were current issues of the 
interior and domestic policy. 
  At the meeting with the Estonian prime minister, the Finnish 
president again clearly expressed support for Estonia's efforts 
over Russian troop withdrawal and the hope that Estonia and 
Russia despite current hardships will reach the necessary 
agreements on the issue. Ahtisaari said Finland will continue 
assistance to Estonia's defense forces, border guard and police, 
Laar said. 
  Also discussed at the meeting were economic relations 
between 
the two countries. Laar said the Finnish president had 
expressed satisfaction at Estonia's economic progress and 
emphasized the importance of keeping up the free trade 
agreements between Estonia and Finland, including the one on 
farm products. 
  Ahtisaari and Laar contended that Finland's prospective 
joining with the European Union would have a positive effect on 
Estonia as well as the entire Baltic region. The Finnish 
president expressed hope that his country's people will vote for 
EU membership in the national EU referendum, Laar said. Other 
topics discussed at the meeting included environmental 
cooperation, the Via Baltica road transit route project and 
setting up a gas pipeline to connect the Nordic region, Baltics 
and Central Europe. 
  From the parliament and government house at Toompea, the 
Finnish presidential couple and Estonian President Lennart Meri 
continued to the nearby Dome Church. The Finnish president 
later visited the Tallinn Town Hall, meeting with Tallinn Mayor 
Jaak Tamm. At 4.45 p.m. the Finnish president laid a wreath at 
a monument in central Tallinn to youth killed in Estonia's War 
of Independence. 
  President Ahtisaari and the director general of Finfound, 
Markku Pekonen, gave a press conference later in the day. 
Ahtisaari in his remarks to reporters again emphasized that 
Finland is and will remain the largest trade partner for 
Estonia, and that this is being positively referred to by both 
sides. 
  When asked by a BNS correspondent whether the Finnish 
president at talks with the Estonian leaders also discussed 
introducing visa- free travel between the countries, Ahtisaari 
answered that the topic had not been on the agenda this time. 
  Ahtisaari declared Finland's support for Estonia in the 
country's strive to join the European Union. The president 
reminded of his country having backed Estonia always when the 
Baltic state recently has worked towards membership in 
international bodies. 
  When asked about whether Finland was having territorial 
claims against Russia, Ahtisaari's answer was negative. "Each 
state must determine by itself what position to adopt as to the 
border issue," he said. 
  Speaking about relations with Russia, the Finnish president 
said he regards it as most important that movement toward 
democratization and market economy would continue in that 
country. 
  Ahtisaari said Finland and Estonia as neighboring countries 
must keep each other well informed. "No political diversities 
exist between us; there are a number of issues that are of great 
interest for both of our countries," he said. 
  The Finnish president also visited the Estonian Foreign 
Ministry and had a meeting with staff at his country's embassy 
in Tallinn. President Lennart Meri gives a dinner in honor of 
his Finnish counterpart later in the evening. 
  The Finnish president's visit continues with a trip to 
Estonia's second-largest city, Tartu, Wednesday. 
  This is the first time since 1925 that a Finnish president 
pays a state visit to Estonia, said the Estonian Ambassador to 
Finland, Jaak Joeruut. He added that the heads of state of both 
countries had visited each other also after that, but that those 
trips had been lower-key ones. Joeruut further pointed out that 
Ahtisaari was visiting Estonia shortly after his election as 
president, which, the ambassador said, shows what importance 
Finland attaches to contacts with Estonia. 

