Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Ahmad al-Malat: "Officials: Isn't It High </F>
Time You Sought Righteousness?"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] President Husni Mubarak has 
said on more than one occasion that he wants a dialogue with the 
various national and political forces. This statement pleases 
us. He recently told the French newspaper LE MONDE that "there 
is an Islamic movement that prefers political struggle to 
violence, that this movement joined certain social 
establishments, and that it has won the elections in certain 
vocational associations, such as the doctors, engineers, and 
lawyers associations and others." 
  If this is the president's approach, particularly his 
emphasizing that the Islamic movement does not favor violence, 
why do the security agencies and the disciples of the Vanguard 
Organization [an organization of Jamal 'Abd-al-Nasir's era] 
insist on branding the Muslim Brotherhood as violent and 
extremist? Why is there this insistence that every bad thing 
that befalls this good country comes from under the Muslim 
Brotherhood cloak, as a former president once said? Officials: 
Don't you feel the direction of the wind coming from the mouth 
of the leader. If the president's wish is sincere, and we think 
it is, then this wish is a primary duty and must be fulfilled. 
  It is the truth that is almost bursting forth from the sick 
hearts in their war against Islam. We can hardly finish reading 
a statement when another slaps us on the face, kindling sorrow 
in our hearts over the loss of a Muslim's chivalry, honesty, and 
clear conscience. A few days ago at the College of Economics 
and Political Science, the education minister said: "There is a 
group that exploits religion to serve their own narrow political 
interests. If this group takes power, its program would be to 
hang those who uphold certain views." Yes, this is what he 
said, as if the advocates of Islam's tolerance, guidance, and 
purity are executioners and bloodthirsty. "It is a grievous 
thing that issues from their mouths as a saying. What they say 
is nothing but falsehood." [Koranic verse] 
  ROSE AL-YUSUF magazine, noted for its war against the Muslim 
Brotherhood, which was forced to speak the truth after it became 
clear to everyone that the Muslim Brotherhood won more than 47 
seats and the National Front won 56 seats in the Lawyers 
Association's by-elections. The Nasirist newspaper AL-'ARABI 
said that the Muslim Brotherhood won 40 seats, compared with the 
60 seats won by the National Front. I don't know what this 
National Front is. 
  If we accept these results, even though they are not true, 
it 
means that 40 percent of the lawyers voted for the Muslim 
Brotherhood. What more do you expect? It is an undeniable 
force, even though you do not recognize it. Is it in the 
interest of the homeland to cooperate with this large bloc of 
the people's representatives in the highest echelons or to 
antagonize it and conceal its reality and tangible efforts from 
the people? 
  Many civilized countries give the ruling authority to 
parties 
that wins less than 40 percent of the vote. The Zionist entity, 
your new ally, has been ruled by the Likud or the Labor Party 
with a smaller ratio. In the United States, power is exchanged 
between presidents: A president hands over power to his 
successor calmly and without uproar--and even congratulates him 
on his victory. Carter, Reagan, Bush, and Clinton are examples 
of this. When will you learn? 
  The real results of the Lawyers Association by-elections in 
the governorates are known to the officials. These results are 
the real reason that the elections in Cairo were postponed. 
More that 56 percent of lawyers registered to vote in the 
general assembly elections, and the authorities realized beyond 
a shadow of doubt the overwhelming support for the Muslim 
Brotherhood. 
  The pretext of "you disturbed the water where I am drinking" 
is a story without end. It is the conflict between right and 
wrong that will continue until Doomsday, as our prophet, may 
God's prayers and peace be upon him, truthfully said. 
  Tell me: Does the public prosecutor have the right to 
suspend any elections indefinitely? Does the chairman of the 
judicial committee supervising the elections have the right to 
take such action? This is a breach of law and legality. We 
deem the Egyptian judiciary to be far above sinking in this 
stinking quagmire. Tell me: Can anyone stop the People's 
Assembly or the Consultative Council elections by submitting a 
notification to the public prosecutor that claims that there is 
a mistake in the voter rolls? 
  The Muslim Brotherhood does not fear voter turnout. Indeed, 
it contributed to the revival of voter participation. Recent 
elections show that the turnout is double what is used to be. 
  When the Brotherhood opposed Law No. 100, which requires a 
quorum of 50 percent of the members to convene an association's 
general assembly, it did not do so because it was afraid of 
losing seats. The Brotherhood opposed the law because it 
objected to the poor voter turnout throughout the country. 
  The Muslim Brotherhood took it upon itself to encourage 
people to participate in elections. Its success in the Lawyers 
Association elections illustrates its efforts in this 
connection. Indeed, we contend that the greater the number of 
voters, the greater the share of Muslim Brotherhood candidates. 
  The Asyut University Faculty Club elections prove what we 
say: More than 85 percent of the teaching staff voted. Our 
respected brother, Dr. Muhammad al-Sayyid Habib, the club's 
chairman, won 80 percent of the vote, greatly exceeding the 
number votes obtained by all other candidates. Are university 
professors terrorists? Do they encourage extremism and teach it 
to our young students? If this were the case for the cream of 
our men and scholars, what would happen to Egypt? People: is 
there not a sensible man left among you? 
  If we add what happened in the Lawyers Association elections 
to what, God willing, is likely to happen in other associations, 
particularly in the faculty elections in Asyut and other places 
where free and fair elections are held, we arrive at this 
question: Isn't it time for the authorities to revise their 
policy? How can they deprive the representatives of more than 
40 percent--a ratio they themselves admit--of the people their 
formal right to express their views? How can they deny free 
people recognition? 
  The Egyptian Government is trying to drive 'Arafat--claiming 
that he represents the Palestinians and the PLO--to conclude a 
peace deal with the Zionists, bloodthirsty cannibals that they 
are, who killed the prophets, displaced an entire nation, 
usurped its land, and turned its people into refugees. 
  The government is calling on the Sudanese Government to 
conclude a peace agreement with the rebels in the south who are 
seeking to separate the south from the mother country in order 
to establish a non-Muslim, pagan-Christian homeland. 
  Wouldn't it be better for the government to extend its hand 
to those who seek to make Egypt prosperous and proud and add 
strength to Islam? 
  Officials: Do you want it to become another Algeria, where 
innocent blood will be shed? We assure you that we do not want 
that. We believe what the impeccable Koran taught us: to deal 
with people with wisdom and good counsel. The people know the 
difference between food and bait and will not swallow your bait. 
  Both of us stand before the [ballot] box that does not 
lie--the free, honest box, the box that exposes all defects. We 
are like two racehorses, and you must accept the facts. The 
future, God willing, belongs to Islam, whether you like it or 
not. "The believers shall rejoice with the help of God. He 
helps whom He will, and He is exalted in Might, Most Merciful." 
[Koranic verse] 
  Hopefully you will hear and make the others who insist on 
shutting their ears to the resounding declaration of 
righteousness from the minarets hear as well. Or are their 
hearts under lock and key? 
  I can only remind them of the words of God, may He be 
blessed 
and exalted: "Has not the story reached you, of those who went 
before you--of the people of Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud--and of 
those who came after them? None knows them but God. To them 
came apostles with clear signs but they put their hands up to 
their mouths, and said: We do deny the mission on which ye have 
been sent." [Koranic verse] 

