Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sa'id al-Qaysi in Kabul and Nayil Mukhaybir in </F>
Paris: "The `Golden Crescent' Outstrips the `Golden Triangle' in 
Opium Production; Triangle Sides Are Afghanistan, Pakistan, and 
Iran"] 
  [Text] Where do the extremist Islamists get the money to 
cover the cost of their operations, to fund their networks 
throughout the world, and to buy their weapons? How can leading 
figures like Ayman al-Zawahiri live in Geneva, one of the 
world's most expensive cites, Rabeh Kabir in Bonn, Rachid 
Ghannouchi in London, and Anwar Haddam in Chicago--without known 
sources of income? 
  The Iranian role in funding the many fundamentalist 
movements 
no longer requires evidence: it is officially acknowledged. The 
latest information, however, indicates that Tehran, which is 
going through a severe economic crisis, has initiated a policy 
of austerity towards the support of these movements, forcing 
them to seek out financial sources besides Iranian support. 
  What are these sources? Who are the extremists' new backers? 
A few weeks ago, Western and Arab security reports spoke of 
alternative funding networks used by the fundamentalists. In 
this investigation, AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI exposes the secrets and 
details of these globally organized and coordinated networks. 
The most dangerous of these is an international fundamentalist 
network that trafficks in drugs and smuggles them, in 
cooperation with global mafias; the role of the Golden Crescent 
(Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran); of Golboddin Hekmatyar and 
American intelligence; and the evidence of a new and dangerous 
leadership for fundamentalist extremism based in Afghanistan. 
  Two months after the raid carried out by the French 
authorities against the Algerian fundamentalist network and one 
month after a similar operation on a smaller scale against the 
Tunisian fundamentalist network, French investigators uncovered 
first-hand information about the facts of the North African 
fundamentalist networks and their connections and branches. 
While Paris ended up releasing all the detainees, it confirmed 
the presence of an infrastructure for turning France into a 
terrorist base behind the lines. However, the most important 
thing the investigations have uncovered so far, and to which 
they still accord the greatest importance in following up its 
European and global tentacles, relates to the North African 
fundamentalist movements' funding networks. AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI 
has learned that French security agencies discovered, during 
their raids on some of the Algerian and Tunisian Islamists' 
homes and headquarters, huge sums of money, in the millions of 
dollars, and a complex, secret, and organized movement for 
transferring funds and financing. The French were surprised by 
the fact that the money they discovered in secret hiding places 
in the homes of some of the fundamentalists was mostly in 
dollars and other foreign currencies such as Belgian francs, 
German marks, Swiss francs, and pounds sterling, in addition to 
checks drawn on international banks. In the house of an official 
of the Algerian Brotherhood group (the legal face of FIS 
[Islamic Salvation Front]), they discovered $50,000; in the home 
of one of those responsible for funding and logistics, in the 
northern city of Lille, they discovered $300,000, and $30,000 at 
the home of another finance official, who had been able to flee, 
and $54,000 at the home of one of Rabeh Kabir's confidantes. 
  The largest amount was discovered in the house of an 
official 
of the Tunisian Ennahdah movement, one Salah Karkar, who has 
been placed under house arrest. That amount was 2.7 million 
francs in checks. Besides this, the investigations into the 
secret documents discovered in the suspects' homes led to the 
discovery of statements from bank accounts opened in more than 
twenty banks in France, Switzerland, and Belgium, in addition to 
800 addresses worldwide. French authorities are still trying to 
identify some of these banks and the accounts opened with 
numbers referred to in code in the files, but so far it appears 
that Paris discovered a huge fundamentalist funding network with 
numerous branches and activities. It consisted of an 
international funding network passing through the United States, 
Denmark, Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, the Comoros Islands, and 
Iran, and a very active logistical and coordinating apparatus. 
Perhaps the biggest surprise for the French authorities was that 
this was the first time they were able to expose some of the 
leaders of the North African fundamentalists' funding networks. 
The French have never discovered such large amounts of money, 
even during the investigation of the terrorist operations of 
1986. At that time, the police discovered only 140,000 francs 
(about $28,000) with the first Tunisian suspect, Fouad Ali Saleh 
and his group; then, it was known that the source of the money 
was Iran. 
  Pending the completion of the global investigation, the 
study 
of the other documents, and the monitoring of the funding 
network's tentacles, a basic question must be posed: who is 
behind the funding of the fundamentalists, and where and how did 
they gain access to this volume of money? 
<H5>  Sources of Funding </H5>
  The fact is that the French are not the only ones asking 
this 
question. American intelligence is asking it insistently, and 
has been trying to solve the puzzle since the World Trade Center 
bombing in New York. Numerous Western and Arab security agencies 
have been wondering for some time about the Islamic movements' 
actual source of funding, which plays a crucial role in 
nourishing, developing, and spreading them, and escalating their 
activities, both inside the Arab countries and abroad. In the 
last few weeks, Western security circles have received 
information about the delivery to the armed movements in Algeria 
of huge financial and military assistance that played a role in 
these groups' move to make the situation more tense and make it 
explode on a wider scale. Before that, security officials in 
some European and Western countries that have experienced 
increases in fundamentalist activities, and to which a number of 
fundamentalist leaders have fled, tried to answer similar 
questions. 
  How are the armed fundamentalist movements able to fund 
their 
military operations? How can Ayman al-Zawahiri, leader of the 
Egyptian al-Jihad, live in Geneva, one of the world's most 
expensive cities? Where does he secure the funds to cover his 
minimum expenses, which include, at the least, residence in two 
or more apartments and the employment of a number of guards? 
Likewise, how can Rabeh Kebir, the chairman of the executive 
committee of the Algerian FIS abroad, afford the cost of living 
in Germany with a large group of fundamentalists? And where does 
Rachid Ghannouchi, leader of the Tunisian Ennahdah Movement, get 
his income from, while he lives in London without a known 
livelihood, working actively to lead the international Islamic 
movement with Shaykh Hasan al-Turabi? The same questions might 
be asked about FIS member Anwar Haddam, who lives in Chicago, as 
well as other fundamentalist figures scattered through the 
countries of the world. It might also be asked about their means 
of getting the funds to attract and recruit numbers of Muslim 
immigrants. 
  French investigation sources supplied part of the answer 
when 
they uncovered private sources on which the fundamentalists rely 
for funding, with which they meet their needs and purchase 
weapons. These sources represent the fundamentalist funding 
strategy in use in most countries of the world. There is the 
Islamic tax imposed on immigrant families and Arab and Muslim 
shopowners, and contributions are collected in mosques and 
outside them by charitable societies and social, cultural, and 
athletic clubs. Plus, there are Islamic bookstores, travel 
agencies, and import-export companies; there is smuggling, or 
trafficking in smuggled, stolen, or counterfeit merchandise 
(such as Lacoste shirts), the smuggling of automobiles and spare 
parts, which are sold in France, for example, or smuggled into 
Algeria for sale on the black market, in what is called 
"trabando." 
  There is, in addition, the foreign funding and assistance 
some of the fundamentalist movements receive from businessmen, 
wealthy Islamists, countries and regimes, both in cash amounts 
via trusted intermediaries, or through secret channels and 
transfers to numbered bank accounts. 
  Of course, Iran ranks first in funding the fundamentalist 
movements, something that no longer requires evidence, and which 
Tehran has never denied, especially as it has maintained its 
policy of "exporting the revolution" and set up organizations to 
support these movements, such as Bonyad-e Mostazafin, 15 
Khordad, and others, in addition to the budget for the 
Revolutionary Guards and foreign intelligence, which amounts to 
hundreds of millions of dollars. 
  But the surprising thing is that a number of Western and 
Arab 
security agencies began some months ago to start secret 
investigations of the existence of other funding channels for 
the extremist fundamentalist movements. Those who know the 
secrets of global terrorism and extremist organizations confirm 
that Tehran started decreasing its direct financial assistance 
to fundamentalist movements more than a year ago. They add that 
this does not mean Iran has stopped supporting and encouraging 
these groups; nor has it retreated from its plan to export the 
revolution and terrorism. However, its crushing economic crisis, 
austerity policy, and the Rafsanjani government's eagerness to 
improve its image by moving away from the major front for 
supporting terrorism, have all led to reducing the budget and 
financial support. Observers have seen this in Iran's way of 
dealing with its two principal allies, Sudan and Hizballah in 
Lebanon. After reducing aid to Khartoum to the point of refusing 
to supply it with free oil, the squeeze has been put on 
Hizballah in Lebanon; many of its institutions are now suffering 
from a decline in the volume of Iranian assistance. According to 
some information, Tehran now allocates less than $100 million 
annually to support these fundamentalist organizations, 
societies, and networks spread throughout the world, giving 
priority to terrorist cells. 
  What are the extremists doing, then, to cover this 
shortfall? 
Their budget requires many times what Tehran is offering, 
particularly as their activities and ambitions are constantly on 
the rise; money, too, is an important and vital resource for 
persuading the poor and deprived to join them, for building 
secret networks and training camps, arms purchases, and 
logistics. Sudan, which carries aloft the banner of 
pan-Islamism, cannot even feed itself. Some Arab regimes, such 
as Iraq and Libya, offer support, but it is conditional and 
linked to a specific tactic for a limited time, restricted to 
meager material capabilities of these two countries, bearing in 
mind that Libya recently opened a channel of aid to the 
Islamists, offering especially to the North Africans among them 
material and military support to damage the West. 
  Therefore it was necessary to find an alternative to Iranian 
funding, but in such a way as to please and placate Iran, as it 
still refuses to turn over its control of the "global Islamic 
revolution" to anyone else. Thus Iran took it upon itself to 
secure an alternative, and to help establish a new funding 
network for the fundamentalists, whose tentacles have been 
clearly exposed for months, to the surprise of many global 
observers, Arabs, and Muslims--including some of the Islamists. 
<H5>  The "Golden Triangle" Network </H5>
  What is the new network for funding the fundamentalists? How 
does it work? Who controls it? 
  The information obtained by AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI was gathered 
from diverse sources, and drawn from secret reports recently 
prepared by Interpol, U.S. intelligence, the U.S. 
counter-narcotics bureau, and Arab and Western security agencies 
that have monitored this network for months. 
  These reports all agree that the principal sources of 
funding 
for the extremist Islamic movements today is drugs and 
smuggling. The information confirms that the pan-Islamist 
leadership has in the past--since the early 1970s, to be 
exact--been able to establish an international funding network 
combining terror, the drug mafia, and linked to at least one 
international mafia in relations to cooperate, coordinate, and 
swap expertise. While Peshawar today is a primary gathering 
point for the terrorists of the Muslim world, especially the 
Afghan Arabs, it is also an important center for the funding of 
this terror, and for supplying the world's fundamentalist 
networks with the funds they need for their activities. The 
information on funding sources for the extremist fundamentalists 
uncovered by the investigations of more than one Western and 
Arab security agency indicates that the Golden Crescent has 
taken Iran's place, with its approval and its active 
participation, in this funding process. The Golden Crescent is a 
term narcotics experts apply to the obscure regions of Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, and Iran, considered the world's second largest 
producer of opium--from which heroin is made--after the Golden 
Triangle (Burma, Thailand, Laos). 
  It is a known fact that all factions of the Afghan mojahedin 
have relied, and still rely, on drug revenues as a major 
resource for arms purchases, and thus a primary means of 
resuming the war among themselves. The present prime minister 
and chief of the Hezb-e Eslami, the radical Golboddin Hekmatyar, 
is considered one of the major drug traffickers in Afghanistan 
and the world; some sources describe him as being more 
important, and more dangerous, than Khun Sa, the drug lord in 
control of the Golden Triangle, and Pablo Escobar, the recently 
assassinated chief of Colombia's Medellin cartel. Hekmatyar is 
not new to the world of drug trafficking. The U.S. 
administration had prior knowledge of his activities in the 
opium world when it suggested that the CIA choose him as a 
preferred ally, above all the other mojahedin during the war 
against the Russian invasion of Afghanistan. At that time, 
Hekmatyar was able to broaden his activities and develop drug 
smuggling networks even into the United States--with the 
cooperation of senior Pakistani officers, working, in their 
turn, with some cabinet ministers, in the production and 
smuggling of opium from the Golden Crescent. 
  It is ironic that all this occurred with the active 
participation and energetic cooperation of CIA men. During the 
several years of the jihad against the Soviets and communism, 
dozens of trucks crossed the Pakistani border into Afghanistan 
every day, carrying arms guarded by Pakistani intelligence, and 
returning the following day carrying opium to be turned into 
heroin in more than 200 portable "kitchens" and secret 
laboratories all along the Pakistani frontier. All this was in 
the sight and hearing of the CIA and DEA (the U.S. Drug 
Enforcement Administration), to the point that even some U.S. 
intelligence people joined the smuggling networks and 
facilitated the delivery of their goods to the United States in 
exchange for a percentage of the profits. There was also intense 
cooperation at the time between Hekmatyar, U.S. intelligence, 
and the Pakistani Bank of Credit and Commerce International 
network, to launder drug money and secure contact with arms 
dealers to supply the Afghan mojahedin. 
<H5>  U.S. Intelligence and Vietnamese Experts </H5>
  But it took time for the Soviets to leave Afghanistan; the 
mojahedin to triumph; Hekmatyar's coup against the United States 
and tilt towards Iran, to set up lines of close cooperation, 
some of them with extremist Islamic movements working under 
Iran's protection, for Washington and the West to feel the 
threat. They began to be wary of the dangerous relations between 
global and fundamentalist terror and drug trafficking, 
especially after the spread of the "Afghan Arabs" created and 
trained by the CIA in their home countries, and their part in 
terrorist operations against the existing regimes there. 
  In fact, the famous American lawyer Jack Blum, assigned by a 
congressional committee to study the connection between drug 
production and smuggling networks and terror funding, uncovered 
serious information that led him to direct an accusation at the 
Americans. He said, "For 10 years, we made this place one of the 
biggest international drug trafficking centers, and a major 
center for global terrorism. In plainer language, in 1979, the 
year of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Golden Triangle 
produced 200 tons of opium; production then saw a huge increase 
year after year. In years past, Hekmatyar had recourse to the 
services of Vietnamese experts who had experience in funding war 
with drugs. Experts estimate that next year the Golden 
Crescent's production will exceed that of the Golden Triangle; 
that is, more than 3,000 tons. This means that heroin revenues 
there will constitute the majority of international drug 
trafficking revenues, which are estimated at $500 billion per 
year, especially as they produce heroin, which is one of the 
most expensive drugs, with a per-kilo price ranging from $50,000 
(in Amsterdam) to $75,000 (in the U.S.)." 
  Furthermore, U.S. intelligence took part in building 
Hekmatyar's `empire' by opening large markets for the Golden 
Triangle's products, inside the United States, where the 
Pakistani-Afghani smuggling networks control the greater part of 
the U.S. heroin market, and introduced it to new and reliable 
smuggling corridors with the assistance of the CIA. 
  After the end of the Afghan jihad against the Soviets, 
Hekmatyar cooperated with Iran to build global smuggling 
networks, which were joined by a large number of Afghan Arabs 
and began to include, very gradually, extremist fundamentalist 
groups from several Arab and Islamic countries whose activities 
and distribution were prepared and coordinated to be a major 
financial resource for pan-fundamentalism. And so this network 
aimed at Europe through Iran, and thence to Turkey and Bulgaria. 
From there, they divided up among the countries of the (former) 
Eastern Bloc and Western Europe, especially Holland, Germany, 
France, and Italy. French statistics show that 70 percent of the 
heroin comes from Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran. With the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, the Golden Crescent network 
expanded into these new countries, and cooperated with the 
republics of Central Asia, which in recent times have 
experienced an explosion in the cultivation of drugs with the 
cooperation of the Golden Crescent's `experts.' 
<H5>  Cooperation With the Mafia </H5>
  International reports confirm that the global fundamentalist 
drug network has succeeded in penetrating markets by close 
cooperation with the international mafias that have historically 
controlled them. Agreements were signed with the famous Sicilian 
Cosa Nostra, with many Russian mafias, and the local mafias in 
most countries. This cooperation with international mafias led 
to drugs-for-arms deals that play an important role in 
facilitating the delivery of all types of arms to extremist 
religious movements in most countries. The local networks 
introduced the extremists to secret and formerly unknown routes, 
through which they are able to infiltrate this or that country, 
and which also supply them with secret refuges to which to 
escape from the pursuit of security men. 
  The Interpol report recently revealed that a few months ago 
networks for smuggling drugs from from the Golden Crescent have 
made inroads into the dark continent, which has not been known 
for consuming drugs. According to this information, the African 
network uses Zanzibar and Mombasa (Kenya) as its two routes into 
east and west Africa. A number of Arab and African security 
reports indicate that this network belongs to the fundamentalist 
network. These markets were opened to fund the extremist Islamic 
movements active in Africa, which are based in Sudan. 
  Even more dangerous is the fact that the global 
fundamentalist funding network does not confine its activities 
to wholesale, but focuses on controlling the drug trafficking 
market with half wholesale and retail. Numerous security bureaus 
in Western Europe meet in this phenomenon, which was recently 
discovered while following and intensively monitoring the 
movements of the extremist Islamic networks in some European 
countries. French intelligence discovered that drug trafficking 
plays a major role in funding Algerian FIS cells and those of 
the Tunisian Ennahdah Movement, on its soil. They saw that there 
are complex and closely coordinated and organized networks 
controlled by Tunisians and Algerians. They have their own 
Pakistani supply network, specializing in smuggling heroin into 
Europe through Iran. The French security agencies had previously 
discovered, in investigating the backgrounds of the social and 
athletic clubs controlled by fundamentalists and pursuing drug 
dealers, that the true aim was not protecting Arab and Muslim 
immigrants from this plague, but controlling the market. The 
agencies noticed that some FIS members and some of the North 
African fundamentalists who sell smuggled and stolen goods in 
the "thieves' market" in Paris soon turn to selling drugs, as it 
gives them a bigger profit. Thus the share taken out to fund the 
Algerian fundamentalists is bigger. In Germany, Belgium, and 
Holland, the Turkish network linked to the fundamentalist 
network is in control. In most of the other European countries, 
this phenomenon has been clearly noticeable recently, without 
security agencies being able always to determine the link 
between the drug dealers and fundamentalist extremists. 
<H5>  Hekmatyar the New Leader </H5>
  Some reports go so far as to speak of a highly organized and 
prepared global fundamentalist network, assigning the tasks of 
all stages, from drug smuggling to distribution, by way of 
bartering them for arms and smuggling them to networks 
specializing in money laundering in several foreign banks in the 
Caribbean islands, the British isles, Europe, and some countries 
of Latin America, as well as banks in Los Angeles, Montreal, 
Luxembourg, Switzerland, Italy, Hungary, Poland, and Russia. 
  The information adds that every major fundamentalist 
movement 
active today in this or that Arab or Islamic country has a 
representative in charge of funding operations, securing money 
and arms, and linked to the leadership of this global network in 
the area under Hekmatyar's influence in Afghanistan. It appears 
that this network has been able to attract more Islamic factions 
than Iran, especially those that declined to announce their 
obedience to the Islamic Republic, preferring to maintain their 
independence and their ideology, opposed to Shiite 
fundamentalist hegemony. 
  For this reason, experts today agree that the primary leader 
of the new pan-Islamism is not Khamene'i, nor even Hasan 
al-Turabi, but Golboddin Hekmatyar, the main overseer of the 
drug trade in the Golden Crescent, and hence the main backer and 
"maestro" of the extremist fundamentalist movements. In the view 
of these experts, the reason that leaders of the global Islamic 
movements flock to Afghanistan--like Hasan al-Turabi, Rachid 
Ghannouchi, and others--is to coordinate with the new leader and 
seek his favor. Observers say that the recent war Hekmatyar 
waged against the group of President Rabbani and [Ahmad] Shah 
Mas'ud, with the cooperation of former American [as published] 
communist Dostam, was part of his new plan to take power in 
Afghanistan and proclaim it an Islamic republic, and the main 
base and refuge for extremist fundamentalist movements. For 
years, Hekmatyar's region has been a refuge for the Afghan Arabs 
and extremists fleeing their countries. Since Benazir Bhutto 
assumed power in Pakistan and announced her intention to expel 
the Afghan Arabs from Peshawar, Jalalabad has become the major 
alternative sanctuary for the Afghans and extremists, a 
gathering center for their leaders, such as Egyptian Shawqi 
al-Islambuli and Algerians Kamreddine Kherbane and Abdallah 
Anas, and the major planning and funding site for terrorist 
operations in the Arab and Islamic countries. 
  It is noteworthy that some religious groups tried in the 
beginning to criticize Islamists for resorting to this method of 
funding, especially as drugs are prohibited in Islam: not only 
their sale, but their cultivation, production, consumption, and 
storage. So much for the al-Turabi-Hekmatyar theory, which has 
spread through the ranks of the fundamentalists, that justifies 
this trade on the basis of waging war against the West, and the 
strategy of fragmenting its societies. This is what is generally 
claimed by some Islamic drug dealers in the streets of Paris, 
Rome, or Bonn: they say that they sell only to whites. More 
dangerous is that the promotion of this trade on a wide scale 
has led to the transformation of Third World countries, among 
them Islamic countries, from producing to consuming countries. 
It is noteworthy that Afghanistan and Pakistan have both become 
big consumers of drugs, as well as other Islamic and Arab 
countries that have recently experienced an increase in drug 
smuggling activities; there was also a strategy to corrupt Arab 
and Muslim society. It has already reached the point where some 
leaders of Islamic groups have issued religious rulings 
legitimizing drug smuggling and use as a means of mobilizing 
fighters to undertake suicide operations. This was seen in the 
Lebanese war, but with the militias of all sides; now it is seen 
in the suicide operations of some extremists in Algeria, where 
more than one report has revealed the fact that fighters were 
addicted to drugs before they took on dangerous attacks. In any 
case, drug trafficking is not the only forbidden sin committed 
by the extremists. It seems that the call of Shaykh Abdelbaki 
Sahraoui, imam of the Khalid Ibn Walid Mosque in Paris and 
co-founder of FIS, fell on deaf ears when he attacked those 
Islamists in a sermon and asked them to stop trafficking in 
smuggled goods. He reaffirmed that this was illegitimate and 
forbidden: "they would be better off selling flowers." As one 
Muslim clergyman said, "Is it not also forbidden for a Muslim to 
kill his Muslim brother?" But it appears that the extremist 
fundamentalists' new logic is that "the end justifies the 
means." The means that they recently used secures them funding 
that is comparable to the budgets of some rich countries. That 
is more important to them, even if they undertake the biggest 
defamation of the image of Islam by building mafia-style 
smuggling networks hiding behind Islamic values, without any of 
their members daring to oppose or question the health of their 
calling or their credibility. 

