CSO 

  [Excerpts] Although he is dubbed a "godfather MP" by the 
media, veteran politician Piya Angkinant insists he has never 
been involved in the drug trade. 
  "I deny one million per cent that my reputation was built 
through a trade in contraband goods, including illicit drugs. 
In my view, drugs are the worst thing. My generation never got 
involved with drugs," he said. 
  Former Chat Thai MP Piya, widely known as the "Phetchaburi 
Godfather," revealed for the first time that he received the 
pseudonym because he had acquaintances from all walks of life in 
the province. 
  "In Phetchaburi province, I've studied in almost every 
school. Friends who studied with me years ago have now become 
`big' in various government agencies." 
  "I still keep in touch with them. They help me every time I 
have a problem. At present, several of them are in the Army, 
the Police Department and in the judicial branch." [passage 
omitted] 
  He said he stopped employing bodyguards 10 years ago. 
  "At present, I go about with a driver only," he said. "I 
used to have enemies, but all of them have died." 
  He was drawn to politics, he said, because his family had 
been involved in politics for years. 
  Piya failed to win a seat in Phetchaburi last time round, 
but 
plans to run in Phetchaburi again in the next general election. 
  He said his son Chaiya would also compete in the next 
election. 
  "My son and I are canvassing for the next general election. 
I usually give out about Bt500-1,000 per charity. To date, 
I've spent hundreds of thousands of baht of my own money," he 
said. 
  Asked about his political ambitions, Piya said he was ready 
to become a Cabinet minister. In particular he would like to be 
Interior Minister. 
  He believed he could persuade influential figures in the 
country to stop their campaigns of violence. 
  Piya said he did not know if Chat Thai MP Thanong 
Siriprechapong, was guilty of the charge, laid in the US, of 
smuggling more than 45 tonnes of marijuana into the United 
States. 
  "Since I entered the Chat Thai Party, I have never heard 
such 
a story," he said. 
  However, Piya said Thanong should resign from the House and 
from Chat Thai. 
  He said it would be difficult to get the House to pass 
legislation against money laundering because some MPs may think 
they would be affected by the new laws. 
  Piya was a five-time MP for Phetchaburi province. He was 
first elected to serve in the House in 1975 and served as 
personal secretary to former Chat Thai leader Pramarn Adireksarn 
the same year. 
  In 1979, he was personal secretary to former prime minister 
Gen Kriangsak Chanamand who was also the then agriculture 
minister. 

