CSO 

<F P=106> [Collection of essays: "An Investigative Report on China's </F>
Surplus Rural Labor Force; Exploring the Sources, Part I -- 
Migratory Workers, Do You Know Where You Are Headed?"] 
  [Text] Editorial Note: According to 
scholars, in the modernization process, China's rural areas will 
have 120 million surplus workers who must be removed from their 
land. According to newspaper reports, more than 10 million 
civilian workers will move across regions during the Spring 
Festival this year. This huge mobile army will consist almost 
entirely of young people. It is inevitable that we are concerned 
about their fate, their struggle, and their tremendous effect on 
the Chinese society as it heads toward modernization. 
  ZHONGGUO QINGNIAN BAO reporters in five provinces in the 
east, west, north, south, and central parts of the fatherland 
have chosen five fairly typical administrative villages as the 
sources of migration and five cities as the "destinations" of 
migration and have combined sociology and journalism in 
conducting a serious investigation, and they have obtained 
initial results. 
  Beginning today, this paper will publish a series entitled 
"An Investigative Report on China's Surplus Rural Labor Force" 
to share the results with our readers. We hope to attract some 
attention and promote the development and maturity of 
appropriate new mechanisms. 
<H5>  Where the Migratory Cranes Gather--by reporter Dai Yuanzhi </H5>
[2071 5913 2388] 
  In the hinterland of northern Jiangsu Province, at the 
junction of three of Yancheng City's counties--Funing, Jianhu, 
and Sheyang--lies a village called Dagang. Its nickname is 
"Share-a-Cigarette-With-Three-Counties." Reportedly, once upon a 
time there was a wealthy family that built high walls and dug a 
deep moat, and the village was named Dagang--big harbor--after 
the moat. At first it was but a grassy marsh with poor soil 
where only garlic grew, and so people also called it "Garlic 
Village." According to some old-timers, a Chen family originally 
from Suzhou's Lumen was "driven out by Hong Wu" and ended up 
there. 
  With the arrival of the swallows comes spring and the wild 
geese fall. Each year, flocks of cranes fly from the frozen 
north to coastal Yancheng to spend the winter. The migrant 
civilian workers return home several times a year, just like the 
migratory birds in their homeland. 
  Every year, in early summer, civilian workers who work south 
of the Changjiang River go back north to harvest wheat and 
transplant seedlings. Liu Xunjun [0491 6064 0193] also goes home 
to farm his own 3 mu of land. 
  Liu comes from Binhai County' Zhenghong Township, the 
hometown of the martyr, Gu Zhenghong. Liu graduated from junior 
high in 1983 and worked on the farm for two years, and that is 
why going back to the farm is nothing new to him. Last year, he 
went home and dug a 50-60 meter drain ditch in no time. The old 
peasants in the village even praised him, saying, "well, you've 
been away for a few years, but you're still good at digging 
ditches." 
  He went to Shanghai in 1988, repaired cables for half a year 
before deciding to go to Wuxi. 
  His three married brothers have set up separate households. 
At home, only his little sister is still around to keep his 
60-some-year-old widowed mother company. Usually his mother and 
sister can handle the farm work, but during summer harvest and 
planting, there is wheat harvesting, threshing, tilling, 
irrigating, and transplanting to do, and during the autumn 
harvest and planting, there is harvesting, threshing, plowing, 
and wheat planting to do, and he cannot bear over-working his 
mother and little sister. 
  The workshop has implemented a contract system, and during 
the busy seasons, Liu Xunjun will either go on leave or arrange 
with his fellow workers to take over his work (in this way, his 
wages and bonuses will not be deducted), so he can spend 10 days 
or so to work back home. He lost 10 jin during the autumn sowing 
season in 1991. Only in this way can he keep his contracted 
responsibility farm from turning into wasteland, and only then 
can he make a thousand yuan or so away from home. 
  During the harvest season, he will return home to find the 
swallows that have been returning to his house for decades have 
already arrived from the south, and by the time harvest is over 
and the seedlings planted, the swallows will have already gone 
south again. He thinks to himself, "I too am but a migratory 
bird." 
  He is lucky. His brothers are willing to help; he can go 
home 
twice a year, and he can still keep his wages and bonuses. But 
Lu Ningdong [7627 1380 2639], who works with him, was not as 
lucky. 
  Lu used to work for a construction company. He took half a 
month off to go back home during the busy season. His group 
leader lost his request of absence, and his superiors took that 
to be an unexcused absence and docked him a month's wage plus 
200 or 300 yuan from his year-end bonus. The group leader 
vouched for him but to no avail, and in his anger, he quit his 
job. At first, he couldn't even get his workman's deposit back. 
Someone showed him the way, and he went and bought a chicken, 
and only then could he get his money back. 
  "Their hearts are divided--they have to work away from home 
but tend to the family farm too." They are workers as well as 
peasants. Normally they are workers, but during the busy season 
they are peasants. They are like a flock of migratory birds, 
changing with the seasons, running back and forth between their 
hometown and their place of work. 
  Today, not too far north of Liu's hometown, in Chendu 
Township across from northern Jiangsu's main irrigation ditch, 
30 small village-level farms have been set up to centralize the 
land and implement collective contracting or concentrate the 
land in the hands of a few large farming households, so that 
people who are working away from home will not have to worry 
about their farms. Liu and his friends are envious. 
<H5>  Follow One's Instincts--by reporter Mao Hao [3029 3185] </H5>
  Gouzi Village is located in the hilly part Qianqiu 
Prefecture of northeastern Sichuan. It is named after a buddhist 
temple, Guozi Temple (an elementary school today). The 
prominent families in the village are all originally from 
Huguang. There used to be a Huguang guild hall in Hengsheng 
Plaza. Guozi village used to produce an abundance of corn. At 
one time, Guangan county, to which the village belongs, was 
known as "Golden Guangan." Historically, the village was not 
particularly famous for anything, and its economy is not very 
prosperous; no famous names or events have ever been recorded in 
the county annals. Industrialist Liu Yanlin [0491 1693 2651] who 
started out as a hired-hand was elected to Sichuan Province's 
CPPCC last year, thus becoming the village's best-known 
celebrity. 
  According to this reporter's investigation, most civilian 
workers who leave home for the first time have never left 
Guangan County before; a large percentage have only gone as far 
as Hengsheng Town. When choosing their job locations, most 
people rely on information provided by friends and relatives 
plus their own impression from radio and television shows, and 
so we can say they are following their "instincts." 
  Forty-some-year old Feng Zhigang [7458 1807 0474] is a 
failed 
hired-hand. "I am heart-broken," said Feng, who is working on 
his family farm today. "My disadvantage is that I have no 
education, I have no brain. When people say something is round, 
I agree; when they say it is flat, I agree too." In 1986, the 
company commander of the village militia told him that money 
could be made transporting sand in Hunan, and so he went there. 
But by then, the state had stopped the excavations. Feng went 
there for nothing. "In 1987, I heard that money could be made in 
Hainan, and I borrowed money and hurried there, but by the time 
I got there, all the projects had been completed. I had to do 
odd jobs along the way to get myself home." In 1988, Feng went 
to Hainan again. This time he made 300 yuan, but the boss saw 
that he was an honest man and gave him a citation instead of 
real money. Today, sickly Feng sits before the reporter in 
dejection. He said, "I will never go out again." 
  A middle school student in the same village by the name of 
Xiao Guanghe [5135 0342 0678] had a similar experience. In 1984, 
18-year-old Xiao heard from his cousin that there was work in 
Guiyang. He had never stepped outside of Hengsheng before, but 
he was young and bold, and he headed out by himself only to find 
that things were very different from what he had expected. "It 
was a terrible year. I did not have enough money to get home. I 
took the bus to Wangqi and walked more than 100 li to get home." 
  But Xiao at least had some education. "Back then I watched a 
lot of television. Most news came out of Guangdong. My 
father-in-law's neigbor kept sending money back from over there. 
This time I made sure that the capital construction works had 
just begun before I headed out there. I made the peak 
construction season, and adding that I had some experience by 
then, I worked six years straight, and each year I was able to 
bring home several thousand yuan." Today, Xiao is a small labor 
constractor with 23-30 hired-hands of his own. He came home 
early this year to build a new house for himself. When talking 
about this year's plans, he sounds very "well-seasoned," 
"Guangdong is almost completely opened up. I think the big 
bosses are heading to Fujian, thinking that there will be 
massive construction work there. I have asked around. They have 
shifting sand there which makes construction difficult and 
requires special skills." So long as the labor market is 
underdeveloped and labor export to undertake large-scale 
complete construction projects is still impractical, naturally 
those in Guozi village will not be the only people to follow 
their "instincts." 
  The reporter has found that most of Guozi village's civilian 
workers who "follow their instincts" have more or less been 
given some information, and in this respect, their relatives 
play a very important role. There is a direct correlation 
between how accurate and timely the information and the 
closeness of the relatives from whom they obtain their news. Liu 
Yanlin is chairman of the board of Guangdong's Chuanhui Group, 
and out of the seven Liu families in his former brigade, eight 
people have gone to work in Guangdong, and although few directly 
work in Liu's company, because of their access to information, 
they tend to be more rational about their "instincts" and 
generally are more accurate and steady in making their choices. 
This perhaps is a characteristic of the flow of rural surplus 
labor in the early stage. 
<H5>  Crossing the Tangula--by reporter Sun Kai [1327 0418] </H5>
  Gangu County was originally known as Fujiang. The 
county was created in Tang Dynasty; that is, it was created 
after conquering the Jiang people. Xinzhuang Village is situated 
in the valley in the better part of the county. The Weihe River 
flows by the village, and so the land is irrigated, but there 
are few farms. 
  The wind blows, the snow drifts. 
  On the world-renowned Qinghai-Tibet Highway, at 5,000 meter 
above sea-level, standing beside a truck loaded with cargo are a 
group of fur-clad men. In their midst stands a kerosene stove. 
Noodles--their lunch--are being cooked. 
  They are Huang Aisheng [7806 1947 3932] and his partners, 
all 
from Xinzhuang Village. They are going to Tibet to do business. 
  They hire a big truck in Gansu, fill it with clothing, food, 
and so on, go cross Qinghai Province and follow the 
Qinghai-Tibet Highway from Golmud into Tibet, and from there 
they go to Lhasa and Xigaze and other places to sell their 
goods. They make several trips a year. Huang Aisheng said, "It 
is easier to do business in Tibet than in the hinterland. If you 
don't mind hard work, you can easily make 10,000 yuan a year 
after expenses." 
  Huang said, "When we first came to Tibet, the lack of oxygen 
and the headaches alone were intolerable, not to mention other 
problems. In Golmud people warned us that Tibet was a dangerous 
place. They said that once they took a bus from Lhasa to Golmud, 
and it broke down half-way. The smart ones spent some money and 
hired another car, but most people thought that they had already 
paid the bus fare and if they left, they would be throwing money 
away plus they would have to pay again. So they sat down and 
waited for the bus to be repaired. Little did they expect that 
by night-fall the bus was still not repaired, and they had to 
spend the night on the bus. The night was cold and the air was 
thin. What a murderous night." 
  Huang said, "It is not easy to make money. When we first 
came 
to Tibet, the language alone posed a real problem. Every night I 
tried to learn the Tibetan language from the natives. Good thing 
that these minority races are very friendly and very warmhearted 
people. Both the Tibetan nationality and the Uygur nationality 
with whom I did business earlier in Xinjiang are very friendly 
people. Today I can speak two minority nationality 
languages--Uygur and Tibetan. Another problem is the customs 
outposts along the way. If you are stopped, you will have to 
pay up or you are going nowhere. Once I was stopped at a Qinghai 
customs outpost. They saw that Gansu's customs had already 
collected all the necessary fees, but they said their rates were 
too low and made me pay more." 
  The villagers said that years ago, Huang used to carry grain 
from Shaanxi to Gangu and was once arrested by the militia at 
the train station. Later he worked as a hired-hand in a 
construction site. He even worked as a street vendor in 
Xinjiang. He has done many things. 
  Huang said, "We peasants can endure all kinds of hardship, 
suffer all kinds of punishment. So long as we can make some 
money and have a better life, we are willing to do anything and 
work anywhere. Of course, we won't do anything illegal." 
  Many of Xinzhuang Village's peasants have gone to Xinjiang 
and Tibet instead of the coastal areas. This is rather puzzling. 
But to them it is the logical thing to do: "It is difficult for 
people like us to adjust to the developed regions. But the 
backward areas are a different story. For one thing, we more or 
less share a common language, and for another thing, life is 
tougher here, and people from the well-developed areas seldom 
come here, and so there are more opportunities for us." 
<H5>  Following in the Old-Timers' Footsteps--by reporter Liu Jian </H5>
[0491 0256] 
  Like numerous other natural villages in northern China, 
Liujiaguanfang, a small village at the edge of the Yimang 
mountain area, was, according to legend, moved from beneath a 
large Chinese Scholar tree from Shanxi's Hongdong County during 
Ming Dynasty's Hongwu Year. Most people (except for the women) 
have the same last name, Liu. According to the "Liu Family 
Annals," revised in the eighth year of Xianfeng of the Qing 
Dynasty, the Liu ancestors had come from Haizhou, south of the 
Changjiang River. 
  Liu Hengyun [0491 1854 6663] has gone to the northeast to 
visit his sons. His sons are working in the coal mines in 
Heilongjiang's Qitaihe coal mines. Last autumn, the elder son 
married a local girl. The old man has gone especially to visit 
his son's new home. 
  Traveling a thousand li to visit family--this is quite 
common 
among villagers from Liujiaguanfang. 
  Shandong's peasants have this famous saying, "Old people do 
not venture north; young people do not head down south." It 
means that old people do not go to the northeast, because 
coolies come from there; it is not a place for old people. Young 
people should not go down south, because it is a place full of 
temptations where young people can easily be tricked or 
corrupted. For hundreds of years, Shandong's peasants have 
traditionally stayed in the three northeastern provinces. In the 
first 30 years after the founding of the PRC, Shandong 
transferred out 162,000 people each year, mostly to the 
northeast, especially Heilongjiang. This did not include the 
temporary migrant workers who did not move their households but 
would travel back and forth. 
  Today, 80 percent of Liujiaguanfang Village's young men 
under 
25 years old have been to the northeast. Of course, they have 
gone out and have returned. But of those who have left and never 
to return, scores of families and nearly a hundred descendants 
of Liujiaguanfang villagers can be found in Heilongjiang's 
Qitaihe City alone. 
  When Liu Zaitian [0491 0961 3944] and Liu Hanying [0491 3352 
5391] were living in Liujiaguanfang last year, their homes were 
50 meters apart. Today, they are living in Qitaihe City, and 
their homes are only 5 meters apart. In the 500 square meters 
around their homes, there are 11 families originally from 
Liujiaguanfang. 
  Liujiaguanfang is my hometown. At 17, my father twice went 
to 
the Qitaihe coal mines and once to the Bianhe oil fields. The 
fourth time he headed east of Shanhaiguan, he already had four 
children at home. My eldest aunt's family is scattered in 
Yichun, Shangzhi, and Musuo in Heilongjiang. My youngest aunt 
lives in Jilin. My uncle also wandered throughout Heilongjiang 
when he was a teenager. My five uncles have all been east of 
Shanhaiguan. 
  Many people eventually move away after drifting back and 
forth. In 1993, seven people from three Liujiaguanfang families 
moved to Heilongjiang and Jilin permanently. 
  Today, it is no longer true that "only one way leads east of 
Shanhaiguan." In recent years, Jiaodong Peninsula has become one 
big construction site, and in the prefecture where 
Liujiaguanfang is located, the prefectural capital Linyi has 
become a commercial center. The demand for labor has increased 
significantly, and the flow of labor force has therefore 
branched out. In addition, one of the villagers has become an 
assistant manager is a labor service company, and a succession 
of 13 of his neighbors have joined the organized labor export 
team. They go east, west, north, and everywhere. Liu Tianchao 
[0491 3944 6389] and Liu Shun [0491 7311], the two brothers, are 
in Qitaihe, and their little sister is working in a joint 
venture enterprise in Tianjin as a physical health instructor. 
  When men braved the journey to the northeast in the old 
days, 
women never joined in. Today, the flow has branched out in all 
directions. Almost all of Liujiaguanfang's single women have 
left. Most have gone to Yantai's Changdao County to help raise 
fish. 
<H5>  Going to the Edge of the World for Greener Pastures--by </H5>
reporter Lu Yuegang [4151 6460 0474] 
  From Nanchang south 80 km to the famous "medicine 
capital" Zhangshu City and then across the Gongjiang River and 
head south for another 46 km is Huangtugang County's Huxia 
Village by the river Mengshui. This is a typical rural 
administrative village, with its rolling hills and hillocks at 
the edge of the Poyanghu plains. It is comprised of six natural 
villages. Its planting industry emphasizes two crops of rice 
each year and a crop of peanuts. It is named "Huxia Village" 
because it is situated at the lower reach of Jianhu lake. 
  Only 35 people have left Huxia village to work elsewhere. 
This is not a large number compared to the town's other 
villages. Sixty percent of Tuohu Village's and 56 percent of 
Huangjia village's workers have left. Most of them have gone to 
Shenzhen and Ningbo. 
  To almost-30-year-old Zou Xiaolan [6760 1420 5695], going to 
work in Ningbo has nothing to do with her wanting to see the 
world. Zou Binzi [6760 2430 0098] told me that she is the kind 
of spirited woman who is fed up with the rural custom of paying 
bride-price. She said, "I am not a pig or a dog." In choosing a 
husband, her standard is that he must be educated and that the 
two must be able to communicate in spirit. The purpose of her 
going to work in the city is clear. She wants to be independent. 
To reach this goal, she is willing to endure setbacks, hardship, 
fatigue, and discrimination by the city people. 
  Where can she go? To a rural society cut off from the 
outside 
world, information about work availability has to come mainly 
from good friends and relatives. This is also one of the main 
reasons why most of Huxia Village's surplus labor is still 
working on the land. Going away sounds very attractive to them. 
The numbers all add up: Even in Shenzhen or Zhejiang's Ningbo, 
if one is frugal, an ordinary skilled worker can easily take 
home a net of 2,000 to 3,000 yuan a year after paying for living 
expenses. This point alone makes it impossible for many to be 
"so attached to home as to be unwilling to leave it," even if it 
means taking a chance. 
  Huangtugang's county party committee secretary, Du Shuiyuan 
[2629 3055 3293], specifically went to the post office to find 
out about remittances in 1993 and learned that at least 15,000 
yuan was remitted each day, and not including the amount people 
brought home with them, this was a sum of 6 million yuan, 30 
times the county's total revenue. Du Shuiyuan told me that not 
long ago, the director of the prefectural policy research 
department came to Huangtugang to study the issue of rural 
surplus labor, and after checking with the post office and 
credit cooperatives, it was found that so far, the peasant 
workers who worked away from home had made 13.70 million yuan. 
  This is in sharp contrast to the kind of income generated by 
agriculture. 
  The grass is greener on the outside. Where can people go to 
make money and settle down? This is a question every able-bodied 
person in Huxia Village is wondering about day and night. 
<H5>  Map Showing the Flow of Rural Labor From Five Administrative </H5>
Villages 
  Gansu: Xinzhuang Village's surplus labor heads for Lanzhou, 
Xinjiang, Guangdong, Baoji, Henan, and Shanghai. 
  Shandong: Liujiaguanfang Village's surplus labor heads for 
the Northeast, Beijing, Tianjin, Wuxi, Lianyungang, and 
throughout Shandong Province. 
  Jiangsu: Dagang Village's surplus labor heads for Wuxi, 
Suzhou, ad Shanghai and so on. 
  Jiangxi: Huxia Village's surplus labor heads for Shenzhen, 
Ningbo, Nanchang, Beijing, and nearby counties and cities. 
  Sichuan: Guozi Village's surplus labor heads for Guangdong, 
Xinjiang, the Northeast, throughout Sichuan, Hainan, ad Fujian. 

