BFN 

  [Text] The joint military committee has issued the 
following communique: 
  At a time when the joint military committee was making a 
field visit to the camp of the 1st and 3d Armored Brigades in 
'Imran, which it reached at 1200 yesterday, and after meeting 
with the commanders of the two brigades and making a field tour 
of the camp, accompanied by the two brigades' commanders, the 
committee noted that all were in a state of maximum tension. 
The engines of tanks and vehicles were running. The committee 
reached an understanding and agreement with the commanders to 
switch off the engines of the tanks and vehicles. All went for 
lunch, after which the committee was to meet again with the 
commanders of the two brigades. Afterward, the committee was to 
meet with the personnel and officers of the two brigades to talk 
to them and calm them down. While the brother members of the 
committee were having lunch with the commanders at the officer 
hall and at around 1400, three shots were heard from an 
automatic machine gun. The source of the shots was not known. 
However, somebody fired them in the air. At the same time, 
gunfire was heard from a heavy machine gun after which shells 
were fired by the tanks in the camp, as well as all other kinds 
of weapons in all directions. It was with extreme difficulty 
that the military committee managed to leave the camp from 
various directions. 
  The joint military committee has informed the political 
leadership in Sanaa and Aden of the incident. It also met with 
a number of dignitaries, notables, and citizens in the region. 
Afterward, everybody headed in the direction of the fighting 
units. Loudspeakers were used to convey the appeal made by the 
chairman of the Presidential Council and commander in chief of 
the Armed Forces, the vice chairman of the Presidential Council, 
the defense minister, the chairman of the General Staff, and the 
members of the military committee, for an immediate cease-fire. 
  The military committee demanded that all vehicles and tanks 
remain in their positions until tomorrow morning. 
  While expressing its regret for this regrettable incident, 
the military committee will pursue its mission to keep the 
cease-fire and work collectively to instill once again 
reassurance in the hearts of the officers, noncommissioned 
officers, and personnel in the 'Imran Camp. The committee 
appeals to all of them to exercise self-restraint and 
demonstrate patience and wisdom. It also appeals to all members 
of the Armed Forces to deny any chance to those who are trying 
to ignite sedition between the sons of the one homeland and to 
work to restore confidence to enhance national unity. 

