BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Weak Diplomacy"] </F>
  [Text] Thailand's image in the eyes of foreign countries 
appears to have suffered a great deal. There is the internal 
pressure created by the hunger strike and associated protests. 
Regarding external pressure, the International Labor 
Organization [ILO] condemns child labor and child prostitution, 
and the United States views Thailand suspiciously concerning 
support for the Khmer Rouge in its fight against the Cambodian 
Government. 
  We devoted our attention to the United States for 40 years 
during the cold war by standing alongside it during three wars 
in Korea, Indochina, and the Persian Gulf. The U.S. suspicion 
could strongly impact on Thailand and indicates its inclination 
to support the Cambodian Government to suppress the Khmer Rouge. 
This situation will result in prolonged fighting and make 
Thailand suffer. 
  The U.S. Department of State's position, as expressed 
through 
its spokeswoman Christine Shelley, clearly shows the victory 
scored by Cambodia's diplomacy -- its ability to persuade the 
superpower, which is an ally of Thailand, to believe that 
Thailand was giving support to the Khmer Rouge fighting machine. 
On another angle, the fact that the U.S. Department of State 
did not believe that Thailand did not support the Khmer Rouge 
and the fact that the ILO blatantly criticized Thailand at the 
Geneva conference demonstrated that Thai diplomacy has failed 
completely in international circles. 
  We urge the government to give higher priority to foreign 
policy as well as to all forms of foreign contacts and efforts 
to improve our national image. The prime minister himself must 
visit major countries more frequently. It is clear that it is 
not enough to let the foreign minister go it alone. We must 
accept that our diplomacy is weak. 
  It is worth noting that the United States currently views 
Thailand with little satisfaction. This is clearly reflected in 
the attitude of U.S. envoy Lambertson and by former envoy 
Abramowitz whose article in THE WASHINGTON POST was directly 
critical of Thailand. In addition, U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher may criticize Thailand while he is here to 
attend the upcoming ASEAN meeting. 
  We must try our utmost to convince the world that Thailand 
does not support the Khmer Rouge. We, however, should not 
prevent the United States from helping the Cambodian Government 
if that is what it wants to do. As a junior friend, we should 
only remind it of the consequences of falling into a quagmire as 
it once did in the Vietnam war. 

