Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Bombay, Jan 24--Punjab director general of police 
K.P.S. Gill today said U.S. President Bill Clinton's 
presumptions on alleged human rights violations in Punjab were 
based on highly exaggerated figures propounded by pro-Khalistan 
forces in the west and were so far removed from the ground 
realities as to be entirely out of proportion to the situation. 
  Mr Gill told reporters here that even Amnesty International 
in its latest report on Punjab had presumed that all the 
"disappearances" from the villages were "the work of the 
police," while the true state of facts was that "even we are 
looking for these boys." 
  He said one of the facts mentioned in President Clinton's 
letter to pro- Khalistani forces in the United States referred 
to 60,000 prisoners in Punjab's jails while, in fact, the total 
capacity of jails in the State was only about 8,000." And, at 
the moment, we have only 750 plus terrorists in prison." 
  However, the Central Government has given an adequate reply 
to the U.S. President, he said. 
<H5>  Amnesty claims </H5>
  Elaborating on Amnesty International's claims, the Punjab 
Police chief said the alleged disappearances of youths from the 
State was largely caused by their migration to the west on false 
or forged documents. These youths later resurfaced in the United 
States or European nations and, while on the point of 
deportation back to India by unsympathic foreign governments, 
were allegedly picked up by Pakistan's Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI) for recruitment in their terrorist forces. 
  "We are as much interested in looking for these boys (about 
500 altogether from Jalandhar, Hosiarpur and Kapurthala) as is 
Amnesty International. In fact, many of these boys have been 
picked up by the Amnesty International itself," Mr Gill said. 
  He said a group of Canadian members of Parliament, fed with 
reports of such disappearances on a recent visit to the State, 
were amazed to come across the vibrant lives of youths in 
Punjab's villages, and had to admit that the streets of Punjab 
were not devoid of young Sikhs as claimed by some forces 
operating in the west. 
  About his success in controlling the situation in Punjab, Mr 
Gill said "I was relatively more successful in containing 
violence in Assam than I have been in Punjab. The situations are 
very different and need a study of the ground realities before 
they can be tackled in an individual manner. All that it needs 
is a commitment to the task in hand." 
<H5>  Punjab formula </H5>
  He denied that the Punjab formula would work equally well in 
Kashmir as the situation there was different. "You cannot 
duplicate situations. Assam was not Punjab and Punjab is not 
Kashmir. You can't go into these situations with pre-conceived 
notions," he said. 
  Mr Gill said there had been no change in Pakistan's attitude 
toward terrorism in Punjab as was evident from the statements of 
Dr Sohan Singh who had revealed that about eight to ten 
separatist groups each with two or three leaders were still 
active in that country and were being urged by Pakistani forces 
to press in more recruits to terrorism. 
  The people of Punjab, however, were fed up with violence 
which was beginning to prove counter-productive to the terrorist 
forces. "The people do not want to be subjected to any further 
violence. This is a major factor that will ensure that there is 
no return of terrorism to Punjab," Mr Gill said. 
  At the moment there were only 25 hard core terrorists at 
large of which ten were in Pakistan and others either in Europe 
or the United States, he said. "They are generally travelling 
around but we get information of their re-entry into Punjab very 
early and apprehend them within hours." 

