CSO 

<F P=106> [Article including interview with Border Guard chief </F>
Lieutenant General Matti Autio by Sven Wikstrom; place and date 
of interview not given: "Border Guard Increases Electronic 
Surveillance"] 
  [Text] Detectors reveal people illegally walking by and 
their movements can be seen on a display screen. 
  The Border Guard is increasing its electronic surveillance 
on 
our maritime and land borders. The installation of a network of 
radars and cameras covering the entire outer or open sea area in 
the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Bothnia is nearly completed. 
  They plan to get the system into operational shape by the 
beginning of the sailing season. 
  Electronic surveillance will be increased with the aid of 
appropriations in southeastern Finland and perhaps elsewhere 
near border-crossing points. The Border Guard has procured tens 
of different kinds of sensors, or detectors, through the 
combined use of which they will try to detect illegal travelers. 
<H5>  Testing To Begin in Imatra District </H5>
  The aim is for the officer on duty at the Border Guard 
station to be able to follow the movements of a traveler 
throughout the entire width of the border zone by linking 
detectors. With his radio the duty officer will be able to 
immediately guide a rapidly moving, motorized border guard to 
the road the traveler is on. 
  The detectors can be adjusted so that the guard is not sent 
out after hares or deer. 
  Testing of the experimental system will begin in the course 
of this spring on both sides of Vuoksi in the Imatra border 
zone. After the tests -- perhaps as soon as this fall -- they 
will begin to extend the new technology to other parts of the 
border, chiefly in southeastern Finland. 
  "We are thinking of using the technology locally in each 
area," Lieutenant Colonel Jorma Kosunen said. He heads the 
surveillance technololgy development projects. 
<H5>  Invisible Fence Made of Detectors </H5>
  The focal point and the biggest user of electronic systems 
is 
the Southeast Finland Border Guard unit, which is responsible 
for the Viipuri coastal channel, the border-crossing points of 
Vaalimaa, Vanikkala, Nuijamaa, and Pelkola near Imatra, as well 
as the Saimaa Canal. 
  The Border Guard was unwilling to even tell us what the 
equipment it has procured looks like on the outside in order to 
preserve its effectiveness. "This much I can say: The equipment 
will not prevent anyone from coming in, but it will help us 
observe people who do," Kosunen said. 
  The barbed-wire fence running along the edge of the border 
from the shores of the Gulf of Finland to the latitude of 
Ilomantsi is not part of the new system. "That was built at the 
time only for cattle." 
  With the exception of the monitoring cameras, the detectors 
are often so small or well-concealed that anyone walking by them 
does not see them or cannot suspect that they are there. Some of 
the sensors react to motion and others to heat or vibration. 
  An invisible fence made of small detectors that react to 
changes in the magnetic field can be built in an area. The 
smallest metal object -- even, say, a watch or the bows of a 
pair of eyeglasses -- can trigger the system. 
  Even now, the Border Guard has, in addition to its fixed 
surveillance networks, different kinds of detectors that can be 
moved quickly from one place to another, as is necessary. Border 
guards can follow the operation of the equipment and the signals 
they transmit from cars or other vehicles, also making use of 
them to check on anyone walking by. 
<H5>  Powerful Cameras Sound Alarm at Sea </H5>
  Surveillance at sea is up to now still being conducted with 
conventional methods only in the Oulu and Rauma Coast Guard 
districts. Starting with last summer, tens of new radar units 
and remote-controlled cameras were installed on the rocky islets 
and islands of the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Bothnia. 
These powerful cameras can be programmed to sound the alarm as 
soon as a solid object appears on the screen. 
  The data transmitted by the new equipment are read off 
display screens at Coast Guard district command posts in Kotka, 
Suomenlinna, Hanko, Nauvo, Mariehamn, and Vallgrund on 
Raippaluoto in the Gulf of Bothnia. 
  In addition, duty officers in Coast Guard districts receive 
data from the surveillance networks of the Armed Forces and 
pilots. In the near future pilots and coast guardsmen will tend 
more to sit in common facilities, maritime communications 
centers, and in part use the same equipment. 
  Information gathered by radar units and cameras on islands, 
in surveillance equipment, and on ships, as well as by sensory 
monitoring can be combined with the aid of computers to form a 
picture of the maritime situation. Coast guardsmen can follow 
its development -- ship movements, among other things -- on 
their display terminals regardless of where they are. 
<H5>  Small Boats Seen at Territorial Waters Limit </H5>
  The Coast Guard is able to monitor the open sea as far as 
the 
limit of our territorial waters with the new technology, that 
is, the technology is powerful enough to observe small boats at 
the territorial waters limit. If necessary, the system can be 
extended even farther than that. 
  According to Lt. Col. Kosunen, this coming summer will show 
us whether the hopes set on the equipment are fully realized. 
"We won't get a chance to test the systems before the sailing 
season begins," he said. The weather imposes its own limits on 
the technology. 
  The new equipment will reduce the need for patrolling. 
Patrolling of the outer sea area is left almost solely to Outer 
Patrol ships and monitoring machines. Instead of constant 
patrolling with boats, the number of verification runs will 
increase. An object that has been spotted can be observed from a 
boat or an airplane. 
  According to Kosunen, these electronic devices will cost the 
Border Guard several million markkas, but they will spare 
manpower and quickly pay for themselves. 
<H5>  "Pressures on Borders Constantly Growing" </H5>
  Since extradition treaties are making access to Central 
Europe difficult, Lieutenant General Autio fears that ever more 
newcomers are heading for Finland. 
  The Border Guard was rather radically reorganized nearly 
five 
years ago. Small stations were combined, staff officers were 
transferred to the field, the focus of staff and operations has 
been shifted to the southeastern border and the Gulf of Finland, 
and border guards have assumed responsibility for passport 
inspection at the borders and among passengers at sea. 
  [Wikstrom] Border Guard chief Lt. Gen. Matti Autio, to what 
extent can technology replace people in border surveillance? 
  [Autio] We won't know that until later, but there used to be 
one or two men round the clock at border-crossing points, for 
example. Now there are cameras at these places. With all the 
expenses involved, one man costs from 200,000 to 300,000 
markkas. A camera does not cost a fifth of that, and you can get 
a good radar unit for what it costs to employ a man for a year. 
  [Wikstrom] Will the last of the men be taken out of the 
field 
too? 
  [Autio] We'll never get to that point -- the borders will 
have to be patrolled in the future too, but in different ways 
and with different equipment than before. 
  [Wikstrom] The EU's [European Union] goal is to eliminate 
surveillance of its internal borders. Can this goal be achieved? 
  [Autio] Speaking just as a border guard, I say that nothing 
will come of it if persons and goods are inspected everywhere 
and every day, especially goods. For the EU to realize this 
hope, the essential prerequisite is effective surveillance of 
its external borders. Furthermore, many other things are needed, 
among them a pattern of united action by the various police 
forces. 
  [Wikstrom] The surveillance of Finland's borders has been 
praised as being the best in Europe. Is the border surveillance 
of other countries effective? 
  [Autio] The surveillance of our external borders is in good 
shape, but why does Finland have to stand for the fact that 
others do not do their job in maintaining proper surveillance of 
their external borders? Must we be saddled with the 
responsibility for the grief caused by other countries' 
negligence, especially since no one even really knows how many 
nationals of third countries are already illegally in Europe. 
  [Wikstrom] How many? 
  [Autio] There's talk of a million. They are circulating 
here. 
  [Wikstrom] How many of them in Finland? 
  [Autio] Scarcely anyone can say. 
  [Wikstrom] So we cannot put an end to surveillance of our 
internal borders? 
  [Autio] People have often been investigated in two, three, 
perhaps many countries and it has been established that they are 
not in need of asylum. Nevertheless, this group of perhaps 
millions of people are circulating here illegally. It's 
certainly hard for me to imagine that at least some degree of 
surveillance of our internal borders is not necessary until the 
system is in operation everywhere. 
  [Wikstrom] Have Finland, Norway, and Denmark tightened 
surveillance on the Swedish border because of these people from 
third countries who are circulating there? 
  [Autio] As concerns Norway, I can't say. 
  [Wikstrom] Should internal borders be kept closed in Europe 
because of those who are now there illegally, even though 
external borders are maintained? 
  [Autio] If some people have entered your borders and and 
lived in the country for years, you can hardly throw them out 
very easily. 
  [Wikstrom] What happens to them? 
  [Autio] Maybe a new deal. It sometimes seems that they want 
to divide them up. There are many foreigners in Central Europe 
whom they want to get rid of. 
  [Wikstrom] Is one of the aims of the EU countries of Central 
Europe to obtain, among other things, the hassle-free departure 
to Finland of the millons of illegal residents in these 
countries by opening its internal borders? 
  [Autio] The Germans have said straight out that they cannot 
carry this burden alone. The greatest pressure would scarcely be 
concentrated on Finland. 
  [Wikstrom] Germany has concluded extradition treaties with 
its neighbors for the repatriation of those who have illegally 
entered the country. Is this producing pressures on Finland's 
borders? 
  [Autio] It goes without saying that people will no longer go 
to a country from which they can be extradited. After all, they 
can try to go to, say, Russia or the Baltic countries and from 
there [to Finland] across the Baltic or the Gulf of Finland. 
Russia's problem is that the states of the former Soviet Union 
do not generally require visas for any country whatsoever. It is 
easy to get into Russia and from there on to elsewhere in Europe 
and some of them may head for Finland. We must bear in mind that 
the Chinese too are already on the move. 
  [Wikstrom] Do we have to fear that people coming from the 
CIS 
countries and other third countries are trying to get into 
Finland via the Baltic countries and Russia? 
  [Autio] The pressures are constantly growing. 
  [Wikstrom] Should Finland conclude extradition treaties? 
  [Autio] Yes, with the Baltic countries and Russia. 
  [Wikstrom] How urgent are the treaties? 
  [Autio] We should conclude them right away. It's better to 
act sooner than later. 
  [Wikstrom] Would extradition treaties eliminate all the 
problems? 
  [Autio] We'll never get a watertight system. There's nothing 
dramatic about this, but we'll be in trouble before long if we 
do nothing. Germany, Austria, and the rest of Central Europe 
have launched a policy of extradition. I believe that Central 
Europe will bring illegal arrivals under control with this. In 
Germany at least, their numbers have dropped sharply. A year ago 
over half a million had entered Germany illegally. Now the 
figure has dropped to a fraction of that. The next big question 
is what Greece, Italy, and Spain will do. 
  [Wikstrom] So extradition treaties would be the most 
effective means of surveillance of external borders? 
  [Autio] Yes, it's the most effective of the international 
expedients. 
<H5>  What Do the Men in the Forests Say? </H5>
  [Wikstrom] How has the image of a border guard changed, Lt. 
Gen. Matti Autio? 
  [Autio] The new image of a border guard proves to be that of 
a vigorous young man who is at home in the natural environment, 
goes in for physical fitness, is highly educated, versed in 
languages, and adeptly handles ADP [Automatic Data Processing] 
-- a very international type. 
  [Wikstrom] How do the old hands, the men in the forest, feel 
about the new generation of border guards -- are there A and B 
men at the border stations now? 
  [Autio] I don't know, but I can well imagine that that could 
be the case somewhere. Among them there are certainly older 
border guards as well at border-crossing points. What is of 
importance are personal attributes and a desire for reform. To 
be sure, it is precisely at this time that a change is occurring 
among us, and at a very fortunate moment. We firmly intend to 
take on a somewhat new bunch of recruits this year too. 
  [Wikstrom] Are the border guards getting to be border 
police? 
  [Autio] Throughout history border guards have performed 
these 
kinds of duties in border districts, on both land and sea. The 
emphases have undeniably varied at different times. Once Finland 
became independent, the organization displayed a strong military 
aspect: There was the Muurmanni Legion and the White Sea 
Expedition. When peace came, we assumed duties that were more 
police-like in nature than before. At the same time we 
maintained a military system. The pattern is repeating itself. 
We still have the impression that the Border Guard is and will 
continue to be a militarily organized organization. That makes 
sense. 
  [Wikstrom] Will the Border Guard continue to train recruits? 
  [Autio] That depends on many things, but my rough estimate 
is 
that we will only be training recruits in future at three 
locations: Ivalo, Kainuu, and the remainder at Imatra. 
  [Wikstrom] Would it be terminated at Joensuu? 
  [Autio] These alternatives should be considered, for 
example, 
now. The training of recruits is very important so that we 
maintain contact with the populations of the border districts. 
It is an important part of our training and a good foundation 
for recruits. The specter of our having to reduce the number of 
Border Guard or Coast Guard units does exist. 

