CSO 

<F P=106> [Article under "Foreign Policy" rubric by Yevgeniy Silin, </F>
director-coordinator of the Association for Euro-Atlantic 
Cooperation: "Partnership for Peace in an Apocalyptic Light. 
Cooperation Is Not Determined by One of the Parties"] 
  [Text] Discussions 
  "Russia's participation in the Partnership for Peace may 
critically destabilize the situation on the southern flanks," 
warns Doctor of Philosophical Sciences Aleksandr Ignatenko in 
the 13 May issue of SEGODNYA. 
  It could, we agree with him, if the country and its 
leadership follow all the author's assumptions, making Russia's 
future look completely hopeless or even fatal. Fortunately, I 
think we can avoid such a fate if we note the excessive weight 
of schematic determinism in the very method of approaching this 
acute and urgent problem, not only on the part of the author of 
the aforementioned article, but of quite a few investigators of 
the subject as well. 
  According to A. A. Ignatenko's version, in order to "doom 
Russia" it must itself get involved in realizing several of the 
author's assumptions, which, he is sure, will certainly happen 
if our country accedes to the "notorious" program. 
  Ignatenko considers that "The inclusion in Atlantic 
structures of Russia, as well as all the other parts of the once 
great Euro-Asian state--the Soviet Union, will lead to the 
appearance of a global military-political bloc of nations of the 
'North' (Northern Hemisphere)." And since Russia, unlike its 
potential partners in the NATO program, is in direct, immediate 
contact with the "South," with its extremely high-conflict 
zones, NATO will burden our country with the unenvious role of 
pacifier of the "South," for which it (Russia) will pay the 
price of its demise. The reality of such a course of events is 
borne out, in the author's view, by the vital interests of the 
NATO countries themselves, some trends in Russian policy, and 
certain schemes of its military and political leaders. 
  On the whole, there is nothing wrong with such warnings, and 
it is good that the Russian public is given timely notice of the 
possible dangers of partnership, if we embark on it with no one 
knows whom and no one knows why. If the content of the 
partnership is defined by one side, not by us, and according to 
the worse possible scenario for us. But that is far from being 
the case. With its Partnership for Peace project NATO is 
extending Russia a hand with a specific proposal that meets our 
own wishes not to take hasty steps to expand the organization to 
the East and not, thereby, isolate Russia in Europe. 
  Judging by things, on the whole the framework, i.e., most 
general, agreement on the Partnership meets such wishes. The 
specific commitments of Russia and NATO under the program are 
still to be thoroughly worked out and, it must be hoped, the 
common sense of both sides will not permit landing in a 
situation detrimental to Russia's national interests. Moreover, 
these interests can hardly be subordinated to a single reference 
frame, a single geopolitical axis or paradigm. It is obvious 
that for Russians "North"-"South" relations are no less 
important than West-East relations. The very Eurasian nature of 
our country requires the establishment of harmonious relations 
of cooperation and interaction for peaceful purposes in all 
geopolitical directions and along all conceivable axes. The 
global character of international intercourse and formidable 
challenges to all humanity have only strengthened the need to 
take into account the interdependence of problems of Russian 
foreign policy in every direction. 
  Getting back to the "extended hand" metaphor, I hasten to 
respond to those who question the intentions of the party 
extending that hand. In politics realists should, of course, 
voice healthy doubts, but they should verify their doubts 
against their own actions. Only in the 20th century our country 
experienced for itself the negative consequences of the "empty 
chair" tactics and a priori rejection of projects and programs 
from which others certainly benefited. One need but recall our 
nonparticipation in the work of the UN Security Council when it 
was debating the Korean question or our refusal to take part in 
the Marshall Plan. 
  We cannot guarantee that all of those in NATO who put 
forward 
and supported the Partnership for Peace idea did so solely out 
of altruistic or Russophile considerations. More likely than not 
they are guided by their own interests, however understood, but 
their own. However, NATO's will and actions in this, as well as 
other, questions represent a certain balance of different 
interests of the countries comprising the alliance. At times 
nuances in the motivations behind the actions of individual NATO 
countries and politicians vary significantly. It is the duty of 
our own foreign policy makers to carefully weigh this diversity 
and inject our own interests into the common behavior patterns 
of the participants in partnership relations, whatever form they 
may take. 
  So far, reasoning according to the logic of the author of 
the 
reviewed article, we can only add one assumption: whether, in 
the absence of Russia, the NATO countries might not give the 
role of pacifiers of the "South" to the former republics of the 
USSR in Transcaucasia and Central Asia which have already joined 
or are hastening to join the Partnership program. That is, of 
course, an entirely speculative assumption. But are not 
prophesies of the threat of worsening Russian-Chinese or 
Russian-Muslim relations if Russia becomes a member of the 
Partnership as speculative? Warnings about the loss of markets 
for our military-industrial complex [MIC] and other troubles 
should, apparently, be viewed in the same light. 
  The conference, "Russia and NATO: Security in the 
Euro-Atlantic Region," sponsored recently in Moscow by the 
Euro-Atlantic Cooperation Association, demonstrated the 
artificial character of a priori rejection of the proposal. As 
Western participants in the conference told us, one of the main 
conclusions they drew for themselves was that some Russian 
politicians rejected the Partnership idea out of hand not 
because of any organic flaws discovered in the program, but by 
virtue of the urge to come out in opposition to official policy 
on any issue. 
  Naturally, members of parliament, political parties, 
scholars, the press, and society as a whole, are entitled and 
duty bound to critically appraise the actions of official 
circles in the international arena, especially if they are 
imprudent, contradictory or, occasionally, unreasonably 
far-fetched. However, it appears that with regard to the problem 
we are debating the official policy promoters managed to display 
a healthy degree of caution and find forms of expressing 
specifically Russian interests, the interests of a great 
Eurasian power, a bridge between West and East, a major 
influential force of the CIS, a connecting link in the unified 
defense space on the territory of the former USSR. 
  It should be noted, and the aforementioned conference once 
again confirmed, that official Russian politicians are 
considering possible (and in some cases already implemented) 
partnership relations with NATO precisely with due consideration 
of our interests in interaction with the entire world, along all 
lines; that in Europe, too, we view the role of NATO and 
associated formations in the context of European countries' 
participation in the activities of the United Nations and the 
CSCE. The buildup of practical forms of relations between NATO 
itself and those organizations, of which Russia is an equal 
member, is the earnest of the promise of the Partnership program. 
  Incidentally, specific consideration of proposed forms of 
partnership in this program is an indication of the reasonable 
modesty of the initial proposals, whereas the ill-conceived 
issue regarding the standardization of weapons, with imminent 
difficulties for our MIC, is, in the eyes of many scholarly 
Russian experts, on the contrary, more an opportunity for 
overcoming political and technical barriers to the opening of 
foreign markets to all that is of value which our industry can 
still produce. 
  In short, common sense with a necessary degree of prudence 
does not, in our view, permit offhand dismissal of the 
Partnership for Peace program, insofar as we have not yet 
overcome the dearth of confidence in East-West relations, have 
not yet done away with all vestiges of the Cold War, while our 
current economic and domestic difficulties leave no place for 
negative attitudes towards positive sprouts of the desired 
harmony in European and world affairs. It is another matter not 
to permit exploitation of our difficulties, which is just what 
exponents of Russophobic ideas in both the West and the East who 
have rushed in to replace anticommunism since the target of 
their hate has ceased to be a source of real military threat, 
are striving to do. 
  It is all the more necessary for Russia not to miss the 
chance to enhance confidence towards itself in the eyes of close 
and distant neighbors in both West and East, to help find a 
mutually acceptable variant of cooperation between two defense 
communities, NATO and the CIS, even if the former is at the apex 
of its influence and effectiveness while the latter is just 
taking its first steps towards establishing itself. It is 
important to launch a mechanism for coordinating the reciprocal 
interests and programs of Russia, NATO and the CIS. 
  All too often a position of haughty contempt coupled with 
blind distrust of other parties in international relations has 
served our country ill. In our view, it is precisely on such 
soil that apocalyptic pictures of Russian downfall could acquire 
real, but totally unwanted, features. 

