BFN 

<F P=106> [Debate between State President F.W. de Klerk and ANC </F>
President Nelson Mandela at the Johannesburg Civic Center 
Complex, chaired by SABC political reporter Freek Robinson, with 
panelists SABC radio correspondent Ferial Haffejee, SABC 
political correspondent Lester Venter, SABC announcer Tim 
Modise, and BBC foreign editor John Simpson -- live] 
  [Text] [Robinson] Good evening and welcome to the Civic 
Theater in Johannesburg for this historic debate between two 
South African leaders of international stature. Both are 
recipients of last year's Nobel Peace Prize and the American 
Liberty Award. Both are certain to be part of a new government 
of national unity. Their position in that government will be 
determined in South Africa's first nonracial election, now only 
12 days away. Twenty-six parties are in the race. Tonight, for 
the first time, these two prominent leaders square up in public 
debate. We present to you F.W. de Klerk of the National Party 
[NP] and Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress. The 
debate will start with opening statements, followed by questions 
from a panel of journalists. They are Tim Modise of Radio 
Metro, Ferial Haffejee of SABC radio -- and of course, this 
broadcast is also going out live on radio -- Lester Venter, the 
SABC's political correspondent, and John Simpson, foreign editor 
of the BBC. The toss of a coin determined that Mr. De Klerk 
will start. Mr. Mandela will make the last closing statement. 
Mr. De Klerk, you have the opportunity now of three minutes. 
  [De Klerk] Goeienaand [good evening], good evening, 
sanibonani [good evening], dumelang [good evening]. In less 
than two weeks, the South African nation will go to the polls, 
for the first time ever really together, as a nation. As the 
state president, it has been my privilege to lead the process 
which brought us to this historic moment. In that, I have been 
assisted by leaders from many other parties, also Mr. Mandela 
here, and I pay tribute also to them. 
  I promised when I took office to guide South Africa to a new 
era. I promised to end apartheid. I promised to release Mr. 
Nelson Mandela. I promised a new constitution through 
negotiation. I promised a free and fair election in which all 
South Africans can participate with an equal vote. I promised 
justice to all. I have kept that promise, and this has brought 
us to a new beginning. The years of apartheid are over. A new 
beginning awaits a new South Africa. Your vote will decide 
whether that new beginning is a good one or a bad one. It will 
be a good new beginning if the result of the election achieves a 
balance of power between the two main contenders, the NP and the 
ANC. If any one party gets too much power, it will be a bad 
beginning, bad, also, for all South Africa. Our people who are 
going to vote have the choice to make it a good beginning or a 
bad one. The electorate in South Africa are deeply concerned 
about a number of issues. Time only allows me briefly to deal 
with two. I hope that during question time we can come back to 
it. Our people are concerned about their jobs, about their 
prosperity. They are concerned, deeply concerned, about the 
social services and the lack of it, and they are concerned about 
violence. If you vote for the new NP you will enable me to 
continue with my task to bring conciliation, reconciliation, and 
thus, peace and prosperity to our country and all its people. I 
look forward to cooperate. 
  [Robinson] Thank you. Thank you Mr. de Klerk. [applause] 
Mr. Mandela, you now have the opportunity of three minutes for 
an opening statement. 
  [Mandela] My fellow South Africans. It is an honor for me to 
appear here tonight on the eve of a historic election, when many 
South Africans will claim...[pauses] reclaim their hopes for a 
better life. I am humble to represent the work and struggle of 
so many people who made democracy a reality in our country. It 
is their good work that inspired me every day during those 27 
years of my prison life. It is that good work that inspires me 
tonight. I will resist the temptation to deal with issues which 
are unimportant. 
  There is much at stake in this election, and I must use this 
opportunity to state very clearly the very differences between 
ourselves on our approach to the major national issues facing 
this country. Those of you who are watching this discussion at 
your homes, look to us to exercise effective leadership worthy 
of the contribution and the sacrifices that we have made just to 
bring about a little improvement in your own family, in the 
difficult situation in which we live. The African National 
Congress has put forward a thorough and realizable program of 
action. 
  [Robinson] Thank you, Mr. Mandela. We must leave it there. 
Now...[applause] Thank you. Now questions from our panel. The 
two parties have agreed on a format in which the answers and 
questions will be bound strictly by time. A candidate has two 
minutes to answer a question from the panel. His opponent will 
have two minutes to respond. Each will then get one minute to 
make further statements. We start with Tim Modise putting the 
first question to Mr. de Klerk. Tim. 
  [Modise] Well, thank you, Freek. Question to Mr. de Klerk: 
Mr. De Klerk, violence, both political and criminal, poses a 
number one threat to the elections, and over the past few years 
it has continued unabated, and seemingly the government is 
unable to deal with it. With that kind of record, as still 
incumbent president, what guarantees do you give the electorate 
tonight that violence will not get completely out of hand and 
thus subvert the forthcoming elections? 
  [De Klerk] Thank you for the question, Tim. Let me start 
out by saying I disagree with the analysis that the government 
is not dealing effectively with it. Yes, there is too much 
violence, but the government has taken extensive steps to deal 
with it. In kwaZulu-Natal there is a state of emergency. In 
the other trouble spot in South Africa, the PWV [Pretoria, 
Witwatersrand, Vereeniging] area, but specifically Johannesburg 
and surrounds, 11 districts have been declared as unrest areas. 
We've increased the police force by almost from 75,000 to round 
about 100,000. 
  The government is taking whatever steps are possible, but 
its 
task has been made very difficult by, inter alia, our main 
opponent, the ANC, by their demonizing of the police force, by 
driving a wedge between communities and the police force. Our 
task has been made extremely difficult by the continued 
existence and activities of the self- defense units and of 
activities also of supporters of the ANC. I sit here with eight 
extracts from the Goldstone reports, showing that the violence 
in all eight instances -- and they were serious instances -- in 
all eight instances was attributed to ANC supporters and Inkatha 
supporters at each others' throats. That is not an easy problem 
to solve. The government has done its duty in that regard. 
  If we look at the future, I believe that the election will 
lay a basis for real reconciliation in South Africa. The 
electoral strife will be over. It will be clear who are the 
winners, who are the strong parties, and in a government of 
national unity our approach will be to take hands with all those 
who serve with us, and jointly to continue to deal with the 
problem of violence. 
  [Robinson] Thank you, Mr. De Klerk. [applause] Mr. Mandela, 
your response in two minutes. 
  [Mandela] I deal with this question on the basis that it is 
the duty of the leadership to put before the public a total 
picture. Any leader who is merely promoting the point of view of 
his political party is not a leader who is going to help to pull 
out South Africa from this mess. What I find unacceptable is 
the fact that the president should misquote the report of Mr. 
Goldstone, because if you look at his report, the police are 
deeply involved in this violence. You have one of the top 
police officers who has been suspended from his duties, 
precisely because there are serious allegations against him, of 
gun-running, of working with murderers, to murder innocent 
people. I have discussed these issues with Mr. De Klerk on a 
one-on-one basis, confidentially, provided him with evidence of 
the activities of his police. There is one thing he does not 
want to know; there is one thing that he covers very stubbornly, 
and that is the involvement of senior police officials in this 
violence. That is the proof. That is the total picture. 
[applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. De Klerk? Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. A 
rebuttal from you, Mr. De Klerk. 
  [De Klerk] Yes. The fact of the matter is that the Goldstone 
Commission was an initiative of the government, and I have 
constantly said if there is any evidence of any involvement of 
any members of the security forces in the fomenting of violence, 
of them being partisan, of them being involved in violence and 
political acts, then it must be reported to the Goldstone 
Commission, and the Goldstone Commission, when it brought out 
its report, I immediately acted. Can the ANC say the same with 
regard to people who have been implicated by the Goldstone 
Commission? They are high on the ANC's candidate lists. We 
have taken, and will continue to take, firm action, if there is 
any evidence. Lastly, the Goldstone report, in this instance, 
referred to a small group of people. It does not refer to the 
whole police force, and Judge Goldstone went out of his way to 
emphasize that it is not the police force as such which is 
involved. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela, a final reply from you in one 
minute. 
  [Mandela] Well, again Mr. de Klerk is not putting accurately 
the report from Mr. Goldstone, because that report, whilst it 
accepts that there are many policemen who are good, has actually 
laid grave charges against senior police officers and I don't 
accept the explanation which the state president has given. He 
has much to explain than he has done. He is less than candid in 
putting facts before the public. [applause] 
  [Robinson] I'm afraid there is no time left to have further 
explanation on that particular issue. I now invite Ferial 
Haffejee of SABC radio to put her question to Mr. Mandela. 
  [Haffejee] Good evening, Mr. Mandela. 
  [Mandela] Good evening. 
  [Haffejee] Everywhere you've gone on your election campaign 
trail, you've promised--and people have demanded--jobs, houses, 
and peace. But 7 million people don't have jobs, 3 million 
don't have homes, and almost 300 people have died in political 
and criminal violence in this month alone. Has yours been an 
election campaign been a campaign trail of empty promises? 
  [Mandela] Not at all. We have got a plan to build a better 
life for all South Africans, and a better life means housing, 
jobs, free college education, hospital services. We believe 
that these are realizable. The present budget of South Africa 
is 126 billion rands. Last year, the National Party government 
paid 10 billion rands for arms, guns, and tanks and only 2 
million...[pauses] billion, for houses. 
  We are going to rearrange the budget so that we can be able 
to address the basic needs of the masses of the people. We 
believe that we have a very clear plan which has been discussed 
not only with members of the liberation movements but with 
government departments, with business, with academics, state 
corporations, all of whom regard this plan as being reasonable 
and which they support. For that reason we say that our plan is 
realizable. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk ...[applause] Mr. de Klerk.... Thank 
you. Mr. de Klerk, your response in two minutes. 
  [De Klerk] The National Party and the ANC have been 
promising 
very much the same things. We also promise houses, we also 
promise better education, better health facilities, and more 
jobs. The real test is: Who has a plan which can achieve it? 
And I say that the National Party has a plan which can work 
because we can only achieve that if we have dynamic economic 
growth, and we can only have dynamic economic growth if we get 
investments, and we'll only get investments and new factories 
being built and increased economic activity if we follow 
economic policies which are in step with our policy, because our 
policy is in step with the economic policies which have 
succeeded across this world. 
  The ANC's policy is riddled with that which has failed. It 
is riddled still with clinging to nationalization. You won't 
get investments as long as that is the case. The ANC continues 
to talk about stronger government intervention and more central 
... centralist control. Those economic policies will not 
succeed in generating the wealth which we need. The ANC's plan 
is going to cost much more than they indicate. 
  I've had an independent investigation done. In the first 
year, implementation of that plan will cost 70 billion rand. 
That 70 billion rand is just a little bit less than the total 
income from personal income tax of the state. It means that the 
taxpayers' income tax will be doubled if we have to raise the 70 
billion and that their tax on cigarettes, on beer, on petrol 
will also be doubled. It is not affordable and 
therefore...[pauses] and you can't save it from the defense 
budget. Mr. Mandela is bringing in 12,000 new MK's [Umkhonto we 
Sizwe -- ANC Military Wing] into the defense force. The defense 
budget is going to rise and not deplete, therefore, we will have 
to generate wealth and that is the only way. 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk, the clock demands that I stop you 
there. Mr. Mandela, you can respond in one minute. 
  [Mandela] This is the reply of a man who is not used to 
addressing the basic needs of the majority of the population, 
whose government is committed to a small minority. He is 
alarmed that we have to devote so much resources to blacks, 
whose concerns they don't care for. 
  [Robinson] Ladies and gentlemen, can I please ask you to 
give 
Mr. Mandela an opportunity. We've agreed there will be no 
interjections. Thank you, Mr. Mandela. Go ahead. 
  [Mandela] That is the reason why Mr. de Klerk has consulted 
some unspecified people to conduct a study. Again, I say Mr. de 
Klerk is less than candid in analyzing national issues. We have 
produced at length, we have circulated to everybody, including 
government officials. Where is their plan? Where is it? 
[applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk, you have one minute. Thank you, 
thank you, ladies and gentlemen. One minute. 
  [De Klerk] Mr. Mandela, our plan is absolutely on the table, 
and it has been accepted by the National Housing Forum. It was 
basically impeded by the ANC and ANC-supported organizations. 
They did not want the plan to be realized. We have a plan 
which will draw in those billions of rands from the private 
sector. We have a good housing plan on the table, which will 
achieve all those results. I care for all South Africans, 
irrespective of their race or color. 
  But let me say, Mr. Mandela, my comments were not the 
comments of a man who is less than candid. They were the 
comments of somebody with experience, of somebody who sat in the 
cabinet and worked through budgets since 1978, and who knows how 
the economy of the state works. And there is... No, it wasn't 
apartheid. We abolished apartheid, we made the country free, 
we...[applause] 
  [Robinson] Ladies and gentlemen, please give him an 
opportunity. 
  [De Klerk] I'm giving you the assurance, when you share 
responsibility in that government of national unity, you will 
realize that we have over the past 4 years already cut the 
budget to the bone. 
  [Robinson] Thank you, Mr. de Klerk. Lester Venter, our 
political correspondent, has the opportunity now to put a 
question to Mr. de Klerk. 
  [Venter] Thank you, Freek. Mr. de Klerk, you said earlier 
that the election will determine which is the strongest party. 
Now if that is not the NP, then in two weeks' time you will be 
a former state president of South Africa, and in fact that will 
be a direct consequence of the process that you yourself set in 
motion four years ago. 
  But of the many consequences to be counted in that process, 
South Africa today is one of the most violent places in the 
world. You've accused your political adversaries of bringing 
into government an out-dated ideology -- namely, communism 
itself. As you stand today with these prospects ahead of you, 
are you happy with the way things have turned out for that 
process that you set in motion, and are you content, in fact, to 
now take a subservient role if it so turns out in that 
government? 
  [De Klerk] Thank you, Lester. Let me start out by saying the 
NP has become the most representative nonracial party in South 
Africa. We are growing by the day, and we are going to come up 
with a dramatic result, so don't be too sure in the assumptions 
that you've made. But if the ANC turns out to be the party with 
the largest slice of the vote, we'll firstly be very near to 
them. Second, I will become executive deputy president, not at 
the behest of the ANC, but in terms of the constitution, and I 
will be representing, in that government of national unity, 
proudly, millions and millions of moderate South Africans, and I 
will be putting their case, and I will be looking after their 
interests, and I will be cooperating with the other parties, 
because that is what the government of national unity is about, 
that we should rise above our political differences and address 
the challenges which we face in this country, address the needs 
of all our people. 
  It is in that spirit that I say, yes, I'm happy with the way 
it has turned out. There was no other alternative for South 
Africa. We were on the road to total confrontation, which would 
have annihilated everything which has been built up in this 
country. We have negotiated a good, balanced constitution with 
checks and balances. The power of politicians are effectively 
limited. There will not be any form of suppression. The courts 
will be independent. We have a good bill of rights in that 
constitution. There will be power-sharing, there will be 
devolution, there will be federalism. Yes, I'm happy with what 
we achieved, and I have confidence in the future. 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela your reply. 
  [Mandela] It is a source of great concern when those who 
claim to be experienced make vague and starry-eyed claims which 
have no basis, whatsoever. I must say that the African National 
Congress is an organization with more than 80 years of building 
national unity in this country. [applause] 
  [Robinson, interrupting] Thank, you. Thank you. 
  [Mandela, continuing] There is no organization in this 
country as divisive as the so-called New National Party of my 
friend on my left. It is actually promoting racial hatred. I 
hope...[audience murmurs] 
  [Robinson, interrupting] Please, ladies and gentlemen. 
Please. 
  [Mandela, continuing] I hope I'll be able to demonstrate now 
how they are trying to turn the colored community against the 
African people...[audience murmurs] through slogans which are 
totally without foundation and where the Independent Elections 
Commission has condemned the National Party for promoting 
inflammatory and racist attitudes in the community. That is the 
so-called New National Party. That is the false claim of 
building unity which my friend is making. I reject that 
totally. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. De Klerk you have one minute to reply. 
  [De Klerk] I would like to start out by telling Mr. Mandela 
that the National Party support base amongst the so-called 
coloreds is a spontaneous, warm, and very strong support base. 
We have proven, in our relationship within the party, that 
reconciliation can work. I didn't have to intervene as leader 
to get a colored person appointed into an important position in 
the Western Cape as Mr. Mandela had to do because his own 
supporters wouldn't elect one. We have a good relationship and 
the colored are our people, my people. They are South Africans. 
They are wonderful people, and I totally reject the accusation 
that the National Party is racist. I don't have 150,000-rand 
fines against me in the National Party for intimidation, as the 
ANC now has. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. De Klerk, time demands that we stop there. 
Mr. Mandela, a final rebuttal from yourself. 
  [Mandela] This document, Die Winde van Verandering [The 
Winds 
of Change], is full of the most scandalous, outrageous, racist 
allegations, where they say the slogan of the African National 
Congress is: Kill the coloreds, kill the Boer. I challenge Mr. 
De Klerk to renounce that statement now. 
  [De Klerk, interrupting] I have, last night. 
  [Mandela, continuing] If he is less than candid. Last night, 
when you knew you were coming to this debate. [applause, 
laughter] 
  [Robinson] We must leave it there -- unfortunately, as we've 
agreed in the format of this program. And now we go to John 
Simpson, the foreign editor of the BBC to put his question to 
Mr. Mandela. 
  [Simpson] Mr. Mandela I hope you'll forgive my being frank. 
I'm thinking very much of the kind of people who are watching 
this program in other countries than South Africa. Many of them 
are going to see the National Party [as heard] as a party with a 
past that has not always been very good, or very democratic, not 
always been nonviolent in many ways, even within its own 
organization. They are going to see that you've made a number of 
very large election promises which have raised the expectations 
of people a great deal in this country and they are going to 
wonder, frankly, whether South Africa under your presidency 
won't be heading down the same road that many other countries in 
black Africa have. Will you...will you, for instance, borrow 
money on the scale that so many other countries have -- Zimbabwe 
for instance. How will you deal with this problem? 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela? 
  [Mandela] South Africa is not a poor country. As I have 
said, our budget this year is 126 billion rands. We also are 
going to reorganize the budget, restructure the budget, in order 
to avoid the wastage of apartheid. We will be able to use the 
country's resources in a more efficient manner, and to prevent 
the corruption which is so endemic in the NP government. 
  [Robinson] Please, ladies and gentlemen... 
  [Mandela] The gravy train where most of the funds of the 
country had gone has come to an end. We have committed 
ourselves to leaders trying to lead a style of life similar to 
those of the community. We are going...[pauses] I am going to 
suggest that my own salary, if I am elected as state president, 
must be cut. [applause] I am doing that, unlike the NP 
government, which has paid, attempted to pay, large sums to the 
director generals when there are 5 million people unemployed, 
when there are 7 million people without houses. We are not 
going to live like fat cats. My friends in the NP can do that. 
That's what they know. 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk? A response from Mr. de Klerk. 
  [De Klerk] May I at the outset say that our deficit before 
borrowing is much too high. If we want to be in step and 
attract foreign investment and be sure of the support of the IMF 
and the World Bank, we will have to continue in South Africa to 
maintain strict fiscal and financial discipline. This is what 
the government has@?en doing. By doing it and by taking other 
steps we brought down the inflation rate to single-digit 
figures, and soon it might be 7 percent. We've brought down 
interest rates. All our economic indicators are pointing in the 
right direction. 
  I'm very glad to hear that in the government of national 
unity I will have the support of Mr. Mandela in being frugal 
with regard to government expenses, but then we must be frugal 
across the board, because it is at the moment organizations 
allied to the ANC who are once again doing damage to the South 
African economy by strikes with regard to various disciplines. 
And through those strikes they are first helping to create an 
atmosphere which is not conducive to free and fair elections, 
and second, they are harming the economic interests of the 
country. So I'm glad to hear that he's committed to fiscal and 
financial discipline. He won't have any difficulty with me in 
achieving that, but if he thinks that he can save on the salary 
of politicians enough to solve the economic challenges which we 
have in South Africa, then he's in for a big surprise. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Thank you for your cooperation. Mr. Mandela, you 
can have a rebuttal. 
  [Mandela] Obviously Mr. de Klerk was not listening when I 
was 
speaking. I may as well add that I'm happy he is going to 
cooperate with me if I say a state president should pay a tax on 
his income, on his resources, on his purse. That is what heads 
of state do throughout the Western world, not in South Africa. 
We are also going to issue government bonds, reconstruction 
bonds, both in South Africa and abroad, to raise the funds that 
we need. We are going to impose a fair tax to be paid by 
everybody. All these are going to help to get revenue for the 
country, but we are not going to live like fat cats. The days 
of the gravy trains are gone. Everybody should know that. 
[applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk, your final reply. 
  [De Klerk] I was under the impression that the ANC has 
promised lower taxes for everybody in its manifesto. Bonds 
which you raise also carry interest with them. One of the 
biggest problems of South Africa is that the fastest growing 
item in our budget has been the interest on loans. Every loan 
that you take out needs to be repaid, and who repays it? The 
taxpayer. Therefore, we need across the board to ensure that we 
maintain fiscal discipline. That is the economic solution for 
the future. I've been listening very carefully to what Mr. 
Mandela has said, and I'm very glad that we're going to have a 
government of national unity, because it is clear that our 
experience will be absolutely essential if we want to have good 
government in South Africa. 
  [Robinson] We now move on to the next question. John 
Simpson again of the BBC, foreign editor. Your question now to 
Mr. De Klerk. 
  [Simpson] Another frank one, if I may. In February 1990, you 
assured white voters that they would have a part to play in the 
future political development of the country. At the end of your 
negotiations with the ANC, Mr. Joe Slovo of the ANC-South 
African Communist Party came out and said, I think, the Nats 
[National Party] caved in at the end. By 1999, perhaps earlier, 
you won't be part of the national...[pauses] of the government 
of national unity. Is it possible, do you think, that whites in 
South Africa will then perform the same function that they do 
in, say, Kenya or Zimbabwe, that's to say they earn the money, 
earn some of the money, but they don't have any part to play, 
whatever, in the political process of the country? 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk? 
  [De Klerk] The answer is a frank no. I'm white, but I'm no 
longer the leader of a white party. I don't represent white 
interests. I represent a value system and my party has support 
across the board from all population groups, colors [pauses] 
...colors, creeds, and races in South Africa. If my party is 
not the biggest party in this election, it will definitely be so 
in the next election. [applause] And the whites within the 
National Party and many other whites, also supporting other 
parties like the DP [Democratic Party], don't look upon 
themselves as a little group of people who are going to sit in a 
corner, divorcing themselves of South Africa and its problems 
and its people. We are part of a South African nation. Color 
in the National Party's vocabulary has become unimportant. What 
is important is: What do you believe in? We believe in free 
enterprise. We believe in good family values. We believe in 
real peace. We believe in reconciliation. We believe in 
Christian norms and standards and that is bringing together all 
the people across the old divisions from all the population 
groups, into our party, and that is giving an impetus to our 
party which assures that for those who believe in this value 
system, which has proven itself across the world, which is in 
step with the successful part of the world, will become the 
dominant political factor. The ANC is a conglomeration. It's 
going to rip apart because they don't have a clear philosophy. 
They live in the past. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Your reply, Mr. Mandela. You have two minutes. 
  [Mandela] It is quite clear that we are dealing with 
somebody 
who either does not know what he is talking about. If he does 
what he...[pauses] if he does know what he is talking about, he 
does not care. In the first place, it's a false statement to 
suggest that any one individual started the negotiation process 
in February. Everybody knows that negotiation is the result of 
the suffering of the masses of the people [applause] -- 
supported by the international community. It is them who came 
out to the streets, called strikes, boycotts, who were shot and 
killed by the racist security police of the National Party, who 
threw us in jail, who turned our lives into nightmares. Those 
are the forces who have brought about these changes in this 
country. We have been dragging Mr. de Klerk and the National 
Party, screaming, not wanting to come forward with us on this 
process. There are various examples which we can quote but we 
are happy....[pauses] I'm happy that we are working together. I 
met him three times in prison. We agreed to work together, and 
that is what I am committed to in spite of all the differences 
that we have. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk, your rebuttal in one minute. 
  [De Klerk] The National Party changed its policy to its 
present policy three and a half years before Mr. Mandela was 
released from jail, in 1986. Secondly, Mr. Mandela can't bluff 
with these accusations. The families of the victims of the 
necklace murders which we had from supporters of his 
organization, the people in the townships who are suppressed and 
intimidated by the SDU's [self- defense units] -- they know who 
are suppressing them. The people whose houses have been burned 
down know who are the guilty ones, and the parents of the 
children whose lives have been ruined by the misuse of education 
by the ANC know who caused the misery for their children. 
[applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela? 
  [Mandela] This election is about securing a better life for 
our people. That is what the ANC is concentrating upon. Mr. de 
Klerk is alarmed because he is a leader of a party which even 
today is maintaining apartheid. He is spending three times, in 
education, on a white child than he does on a black child. What 
is the reason? What is his reason if apartheid has died? He 
has not built houses for Africans for more than 10 years. What 
is the reason for that discrimination? I cannot vote. There 
are 5 million people unemployed. 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela, with respect to you, you need to 
finish. We must unfortunately leave it there. May I point out 
to our audience, to the extent, of course, that you are clapping 
and egging your leaders on, that you are also taking their time. 
May I please ask our political correspondent, Lester Venter, 
now to put his question to Mr. Mandela. 
  [Venter] Thank you. Mr. Mandela, the Inkatha Freedom Party's 
decision to stay out of the election, the Zulu king's claim for 
an independent kingdom, and the associated tensions and the 
violence that arise from this situation seem to be problems that 
will not go away soon. In fact, this country could end up with 
a secessionist struggle waged from kwaZulu. If, when you are in 
power, how do you plan to deal with this matter? 
  [Mandela] I have maintained constant dialogue with the IFP, 
as well as with His Majesty, the Zulu king. I attach a great 
deal of importance to peaceful solutions of problems, and I 
think that it has now been demonstrated that that is a very 
powerful weapon. I am going to continue to talk to the IFP, to 
the Zulu monarch. But the situation that is taking place now in 
kwaZulu-Natal where there is no free political activity in many 
areas in that country, where people are dying by scores, have 
compelled us to link the political initiative and security 
measures together. We regret that, because we would like to 
emphasize, to concentrate, on the peaceful initiative. We are 
doing that now. We will do that after 27 April. We will have 
formidable resources of being able to ensure that we reinforce 
our political initiatives as a government which exercises state 
power. [applause] I hope we will succeed. 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk, you have two minutes to reply. 
  [De Klerk] On this issue there has lately been very good 
cooperation between the government, the NP government, and the 
ANC, and specifically between the two of us. I welcome that. I 
was critical earlier on. I felt that the ANC did not do enough 
with regard to Inkatha, but that is in the past. We have met in 
the Kruger National Park. It was an important meeting. We have 
made certain proposals, the ANC came forward also with 
constructive proposals. Inkatha and the Zulu king also came 
with specific proposals, and if you analyze the proposals from 
all three sides, there is already really a clear framework for 
consensus and for agreement. 
  We then agreed, with regard to the monarchy, to form a 
working group. That working group has reported back to its 
principals, and I think it is a good report, I can live with it. 
I have some criticism, but basically I can live with it, and I 
would like to thank all those who made an input. So I think the 
problem of the Zulu monarch can, within the framework of the 
transitional constitution and the principals, be really 
accommodated in a very dignified way, and we need not be worried 
that that problem cannot be solved. 
  Inkatha is, in the words of Chief Minister Buthelezi 
himself, 
not a Zulu party. My analysis is that Inkatha has made major 
mistakes by not participating. I have bent over backwards from 
time to time, making new suggestions how to bring them aboard. 
Together with the multiparty forum we have called Parliament 
together, changed the constitution, and brought in five, six 
fundamental changes which really accommodated their most potent 
objections to the first version of December. 
  [Robinson] I'm obliged to stop you there, Mr. de Klerk. 
Mr. Mandela, the last few words on this matter. 
  [Mandela] We must also assess...[pauses] always assess the 
statements made by Mr. de Klerk about the Inkatha Freedom Party 
-- that this is his former ally. They used funds, state funds, 
in order to finance the murderous activities of the Inkatha 
Freedom Party. [audience murmurs] Mr. De Klerk admitted in July 
1991 that they had given 8 million rands of our taxes, of our 
money, to Inkatha. He admitted that. He had earlier admitted 
that they had given 250,000 rands to Inkatha. Always assess his 
statements with regards to Inkatha against that background. 
[applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. De Klerk? 
  [De Klerk] I find the sudden aggression of Mr. Mandela on 
this issue strange. It is the one thing that we have been 
cooperating well on. Can I just say that Mr. Mandela is 
referring to historical situations. I have stopped all the 
covert actions, and the Kahn committee under Professor Kahn has 
monitored it has assured me now that he is happy with the way in 
which all the covert activities which took place without my 
knowledge have been properly put under the table and it's 
finished. Can I just say that as far as Inkatha is concerned, 
we are near to each other because they also believe in free 
enterprise, because they also believe in federalism. It is a 
policy bond, yes, which exists between us, but this government 
does not fund murderous activities. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Time is up on this issue. Thank you, ladies and 
gentlemen. I invite again now Ferial Haffejee of SABC radio to 
put the question to Mr. de Klerk. 
  [Haffejee] Thank you, Freek. Mr. de Klerk, many people 
believe that your government has not been accountable. There 
have been three years of Third Force allegations; nobody has 
taken the rap for it, although you may have appointed a number 
of commissions. Many billions of rands have been lost to 
corruption; again, nobody has taken the rap for it. How do we 
ensure accountability in the future, especially under a 
government of national unity where there is no opposition 
watchdog? 
  [De Klerk] The National Party government has already put 
into 
place the instruments to ensure that accountability. We have 
strengthened the position of the auditor general. We have made 
him more independent. We have appointed an ombudsman, and we 
have given that ombudsman more powers. Apart from all the 
commissions that we've instituted, we've built into the 
financial and administrative control system absolute improved 
systems to ensure that this is properly dealt with. But most of 
the corruption that you refer to took place in some of the 
homelands, and if you analyze the reports you will find that the 
emphasis was, for instance, on Lebowa and on kwaNdebele. Those 
two homelands were run by Chief Minister Ramodike and Chief 
Minister Mahlangu. They are now on the ANC's candidate list -- 
[laughter] -- well knowing, well knowing that that corruption 
took place under their administration. I am against corruption 
and I have a proud record -- this government has a proud record 
-- of absolutely, fearlessly following up every allegation of 
corruption, and whenever anyone was found to be guilty, firm 
steps were taken. Accountability of the government comes into 
being when there was negligence or where there is knowledge, and 
in none of these instances has any government member been 
accused of negligence or of having had knowledge of the 
corruption which was uncovered. 
  [Robinson] Mr. Mandela, your response. 
  [Mandela] There is no transparency or accountability insofar 
as the National Party government. When we held a commission of 
inquiry into allegations of violation of human rights, we 
published our report. We took South Africa into confidence. He 
appointed a commission, General Pierre Steyn, to investigate the 
activities of the MI [Military Intelligence]. He did dismiss 
certain officers. I then asked him to give me that report, 
because I said to him that report has got confirmation of the 
existence of the Third Force. I have not got that report from 
him even now. I am the leader of the most important political 
voice in this country. I started negotiations [audience 
murmurs] when I was in jail. I discussed it with...I discussed 
it with Kobie Coetsee, quite apart from the contribution of the 
masses of the people, but he has not given me that report. The 
reason, because it has got concrete evidence of the existence of 
the Third Force. That is the reason why there is no 
transparency in the statement which Mr. De Klerk is making -- is 
less than candid. That is the reality. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Opportunity for a rebuttal, Mr. de Klerk? You 
have one minute. 
  [De Klerk] Minister Coetsee and I have explained -- I think, 
now, three times -- the situation with regard to the so-called 
Steyn report, and I'm really not going to do it. I only have a 
minute. It wasn't a report of that nature, but I took steps. 
There was a transparency with regard to the commission's report 
on the detention camps, but were they acted against by the ANC? 
No, they're once again high up on the candidates' list. The 
very people who have been implicated by that commission are now 
maybe ministerial candidates in the government of national 
unity, having been implicated by that commission. The ANC 
should take steps against their supporters who make themselves 
guilty of atrocities or any unacceptable behavior. That is what 
we are doing constantly. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Opportunity for a final reply, Mr. Mandela. 
  [Mandela] He has completely evaded my question. I am saying: 
If that report was innocent, he would have published it, he 
would have given it to me. I am his partner. We are trying to 
solve this problem together. We are trying to promote mutual 
confidence so that we, the two of us and other players, can 
persuade a government of national unity to build this mutual 
confidence, to proceed with the task of nation-building. He has 
not given me that report. Why? [applause] 
  [Robinson] We must leave the issue there. Now for the final 
question from my colleague, also from Radio Metro, Tim Modise, 
and it goes to Mr. Man?ela. 
  [Modise] Thank you, Freek. Mr. Mandela, we've been listening 
to the promises of the ANC and the NP tonight. The ordinary man 
and woman in the street is watching this and is listening. They 
want to know are they going to feel safe on the streets after 
the government of national unity has been elected? They want to 
know if there will be delivery of social services, given the 
strikes that have been taking place, especially in the 
homelands? They want to know if public violence and criminal 
violence is going to be eradicated completely in South Africa. 
Above that, they want to know if there will ever be racial 
reconciliation in this country. 
  [Mandela] The ANC is committed to national reconciliation 
and 
to nation-building. There is no organization in this country 
which has issued a policy statement to compare with the Freedom 
Charter, which is the most devastating attack on all forms of 
racialism. We have come out with a clear program to ensure a 
better life, to build houses, to offer employment, to provide 
free, quality education. But you must remember that violence is 
not caused by those who carry a gun, by those who stab. It is 
also caused by poverty, illiteracy, hunger. All these are evils 
of apartheid. We are going to address these problems, and 
restructure the police force so that it could be a community 
police. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Mr. de Klerk? 
  [De Klerk] I and the National Party share the deep concern 
of 
all our people about the violence -- and within the government 
of national unity which will no longer have any legitimacy 
problem -- I believe that we will be able to address it through, 
firstly, restructuring, improving the economy -- if our policy 
is followed then we will succeed with that. 
  Unemployment is one of the problems of crime and violence. 
The so-called lost generation, the millions of young South 
Africans, mostly of them black, who are not properly trained, 
who left school early -- they need to be looked at, and at an 
earlier occasion Mr. Mandela and I have already talked about it, 
that in the government of national unity we will have to address 
this problem in an imaginative way. 
  Yes, I believe that through economic growth, through 
improvement of social conditions which can then be afforded 
because there is economic growth, we can improve the quality of 
life of our people. 
  We have already started to improve the relationships between 
the police and the community, and I'm fully in favor of 
community policing and the new constitution makes provision for 
that. I hope that the election will also bring to an end the 
demonization of our police force. We only have one police force 
in South Africa. One-third of them are at the moment almost 
full-time busy in preventing or fighting or managing political 
unrest and political violence. Hopefully, when the election is 
over those policemen and women will also be able, once again, to 
concentrate on crime prevention and on accosting criminals and 
on bringing them to book. I really believe that the election 
will bring us to the end of this violent period. 
  [Robinson] Thank you Mr. de Klerk. I must stop you there. 
[applause] Mr. de Klerk, we are doing very well on time. You 
are very disciplined, both of you. I will give you 
one-and-a-half minutes each now to respond. Mr. Mandela. 
  [Mandela] The exchanges between Mr. de Klerk and I should 
not 
... not obscure one important fact about our country. I think 
we are a shining example to the entire world of people drawn 
from different racial groups who have a common loyalty, a common 
love, to their common country. That is the dominating issue. 
We are going to fight these issues out, but we have men and 
women in this country who have reason -- who are honoring the 
ideals of liberty and democracy in this country, and in spite of 
my criticism of Mr. de Klerk, Sir, you are one of those I rely 
upon, that we are going to face the problems of this country, 
together, and with other....[applause] 
  [De Klerk] Thank you for those kind words, Mr. Mandela. I 
am also...[pauses] I can also testify that on major issues such 
as nation building we are finding it possible to work together. 
Can I say that we won't have peace before we have real 
reconciliation? This election is about the future. It is not 
about the past, and until we bury the bitterness of the past, 
until....[pauses] One can never forget injustice, but you can 
forgive. And we need forgiveness, we need reconciliation, we 
need to put our hands in each others' hands, and all the 
population groups need to say: We need each other, we have a 
common destiny, let us work together. And that is why I am so 
satisfied that we have agreed upon a government of national 
unity, because that is the instrument we need to lead this 
country toward that nationhood which will make us all proud 
South Africans and which will ensure that we as a country will 
move forward together. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Well, thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Well, with 
that we come to the end of the question and answer session. I 
will now ask each of you to have a final closing statement. We 
have some time. I will give you four minutes. Mr. De Klerk, as 
agreed, you will go first. 
  [De Klerk] Having come to the end of this debate, I would 
like to appeal to all the voters out there -- firstly, who have 
not decided as yet for whom to vote -- to seriously consider 
their position. We need a balance of power. There is only one 
party which can form that balance of power against the ANC, 
which is a strong party with wide support -- they are the 
favorite -- and that is the National Party. It is the new 
National Party, notwithstanding what has been said. It is a 
party which has renewed itself from within. It was an internal 
process; we have cleansed ourselves from within. We have 
admitted that our past policy led to injustice. We have 
apologized for that and we say: We have a job to do; we also 
want to rectify those injustices. This new National Party is a 
growing party. This new National Party is fighting to become 
the biggest party, not for jobs for ourselves, but because we 
believe in the values for which we stand. 
  We believe in sound family values. We believe that parents 
should still be parents and that children shouldn't deal with 
parents and grown-ups as is happening in our country at the 
moment. We believe in Christian norms and standards. We believe 
in free enterprise. We believe in universal human rights and 
feel that the Bill of Rights needs to be strengthened. We 
believe in religious freedom, and we care about the needs of our 
people. We know many people are suffering. We must accept the 
challenge to fight hunger, to fight poverty, to ensure that more 
and more jobs will be created, to build homes for the homeless, 
to improve the quality of education, to bring primary health 
care nearer to the people. We have accepted it as a party, and 
we will work together with all those who also stand for that. 
  And on peace -- we are committed to peace. Our hands are 
clean. The National Party, none of the National Party supporters 
are involved in violence. We are a peaceful party, and 
everybody who knows our party can testify as to that. And if 
one of our party members gets out of line, we discipline him. 
  The National Party believes in the future of this country 
and 
all its people. We see our country on the threshold of a new, 
wonderful, prosperous era. The whole of Africa wants us to 
succeed. The whole of Africa is reaching out toward a successful 
conclusion of the process in South Africa, because Africa needs 
us. The international community wants us to succeed because 
they realize that South Africa has a pivotal role to play, not 
only in Africa, but also globally. The whole world is waiting 
for us to succeed because what we have embarked upon in South 
Africa -- all the leaders of all the parties together -- has not 
succeeded in many countries elsewhere. There is a way, and that 
way is the real tolerance and the real commitment to peace, and 
the adherence to workable policies which have succeeded 
elsewhere. That is the way, and that is the way of the new 
National Party for which I ask the support of all the voters out 
there. [applause] 
  [Robinson] Thank you. Mr. Mandela, the final closing 
statement from you. 
  [Mandela] To deal with my statement, I would have liked to 
know from Mr. De Klerk, who was disciplined when 8 million of 
tax payers' money was given to Inkatha Freedom Party? [sentence 
as heard] That was in July 1991. Who was disciplined? His 
vague statements are counterproductive, because they lead to the 
conclusion that Mr. De Klerk is less than frank in making 
important statements on national issues. 
  But I want to say that various points of view have been 
expressed here. I want to assure you that on the 27th of April 
you will make your choice, and I don't doubt what it is going to 
be. The choice will be whether you want the same problems to 
continue within the next five years -- massive unemployment, 
limited opportunities, continued racial division -- or whether 
you want the beginning of a new era of hope, of peace, of 
security, where the basic needs of everybody have been attended 
to. 
  Here, we are saying the ANC has the most cogent plan to deal 
with this situation. The fact that Mr. De Klerk when we asked 
for his comprehensive plan to deal with these basic needs, he 
can only tell us of some document he has given. There is no 
evidence at all of the circulation. I have never received it. 
He has never given to me. I have been with him very frequently. 
Where is their plan? With whom was it discussed? 
  But we are saying: Let us work together. Let us work 
together for reconciliation and nation building. I am proud to 
hold your hands...for us to go forward. [applause] Let us work 
together to end division and suspicion. I have traveled 
throughout this country, spoken to thousands of people. I know 
that they deserve a better life. They deserve a better future. 
And the only organization I am calling upon you to vote for is 
the African National Congress. [applause] If you vote for the 
African National Congress, you are voting for an organization 
which has got an experience of more than 80 years in nation 
building. It's an organization which will never issue documents 
of this nature, which today in 1994 says, Boesak, why are you 
not with your people? Why are you with Africans? It is the 
most divisive party in this country. If you want national 
unity, that is the organization I lead -- the African National 
Congress. 
  [Robinson] Thank you, Mr. Mandela. We must leave it there. 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you. May I thank both 
of you for the spirit of this debate, and with that we come to 
the end of this historic from the Johannesburg Civic Theater 
Complex. We bid you good night. 

