BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] As the political events in Nigeria unfold, the SUN 
RAY and the CHAMPION chronicle some events by the political 
class and the Federal Government to achieve certain levels of 
expectations. According to the SUN RAY, the government is making 
efforts to transfer some policemen in their security bid. It 
recalls that this follows the escape of Chief M.K.O. Abiola, 
whom the police declared wanted after he was alleged to have 
declared himself president. 
  The CHAMPION, on its part, reports that the Nadeco [National 
Democratic Coalition] has opposed government's transfer of the 
duties of the secretary of the National Constitutional 
Conference to the office of the clerk of the defunct National 
Assembly. The paper quotes Nadeco's spokesman as stating that 
this may not address the issues affecting Nigeria objectively. 
Reporting differently, the TRIBUNE has it that the Nadeco 
spokesman said his association may have dialogue with the Abacha 
regime, provided the democratic wish of Nigerians are [as heard] 
respected. 
  The DAILY TIMES, in a major headline, writes, "Abacha Begins 
Peace Talks," in relation to the meeting the Nigerian leader, 
General Sani Abacha, is expected to have with traditional rulers 
today in Abuja on the political development in the country. The 
paper reports that the Abacha-traditional rulers parley will be 
followed with that of leaders of thought throughout the country 
tomorrow, Tuesday. According to the TIMES report, this is aimed 
at achieving peace and understanding in Nigeria following recent 
political events between the government and the pro-democracy 
activists. 
  In a related story, THE GUARDIAN quotes Nigeria's minister 
of 
national planning as stating that he would not support anything 
that would lead to the disintegration of Nigeria, even though he 
supported the cause of 12 June which should be regarded as a 
process of political development. 
  On its back page, THE GUARDIAN reports that some 
pro-democracy activists have gone into hiding for fear of being 
arrested by the police as they step up their call for the 
release of Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti, the chairman of the Campaign 
for Democracy, CD, who was detained by the police for calling 
for a civil disturbance against the government because of the 
political situation in Nigeria. 
  The DAILY TIMES, in another story, reports that the wife of 
late Liberian leader Samuel Doe has escaped from custody in 
Lagos. It reports that the lady was earlier declared a security 
risk because of her conduct. Based on this, the TIMES adds that 
36 immigration officials, including a controller of immigration, 
have been suspended indefinitely. 
  The paper also carries a story which says documents 
detailing 
the Bakassi Peninsula belonging to Nigeria is [as heard] in a 
safe custody of a bank in Nigeria. It notes that the document 
carried an 1891 deed of conveyance signed by one British 
resident, Mr. (Alfred Dixon) in Calabar, under the Royal 
Protectorate of East Niger. 

