BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 2 (XINHUA) -- Independent marriage 
based on mutual love and a family life in which husband and wife 
are equal have become the main current in contemporary Chinese 
society, says a white paper released by the Information Office 
of China's State Council today. 
  The white paper, entitled The Situation of Chinese Women, 
says that the founding of New China in 1949 put an end to the 
feudal marital and family system that had endured for several 
millennia. 
  In New China, the white paper says, women have gained the 
right of self-determination in marriage and enjoyed equal status 
in family and the same rights of possession and inheritance of 
family property as men. 
  Sample investigations show that 74 percent of young couples 
make the decision themselves to wed or do so after consultation 
with their parents, it says. 
  In old China, the white paper says, over 95 percent of 
marriages were arranged and on a monetary basis. 
  It says that Chinese women have gained the important 
personal 
right of being able to retain their maiden names. In old China, 
most women had no formal name before marriage. They adopted 
their husband's surname after they wed. 
  The white paper says that in New China, women earn their own 
income through work. The share of women's earnings in total 
family income has risen from 20 percent in the 1950s to the 
present 40 percent. 
  "As they have become economically independent," the white 
paper says, "Chinese women have gained more management and 
decision-making power in principal family and economic matters. 
Sample investigations show that in over 58 percent of urban and 
rural families, major affairs are decided by the husband and 
wife together. This figure continues to climb." 
  China has 267 million families and every year about 10 
million newlywed couples join their ranks. Currently, the 
divorce rate in China is 1.54 per thousand, the white paper says. 
  "Because Chinese families are basically stable," the white 
paper says, "family functions, such as living arrangements, 
child rearing and support for the elderly, are fully in 
evidence." 
  The white paper says that women's rights to decide whether 
or 
not to bear children are duly protected. In old China, women 
were just child bearing tools, and they were often persecuted by 
their parents-in-law or abandoned by their husbands because they 
were unable to provide any offspring, let alone a son. In New 
China, women are in control of their own child bearing and they 
can discuss with their spouses whether or not they will go 
through with a pregnancy. 
  The white paper points out that maternal health is protected 
by the state. By the end of 1992, China had 346 maternity and 
children's health care centers, 2,841 clinics and 34 pediatric 
hospitals, initially forming a national health network for women 
and children. 
  Compared with the early days after the founding of New China 
in 1949, the white paper says, the mortality rate for pregnant 
and lying-in women has dropped form 1,500 per hundred thousand 
to about 94.7 per hundred thousand, and the infant mortality 
rate has fallen from 200 per thousand to 31.42 per thousand. 
  It says that the average life expectancy of Chinese women 
has 
risen from 36.7 years in old China to the present 72 years. 
This is three years above the figure for Chinese men and seven 
years higher than the average life expectancy of 65 years set as 
a goal by the United Nations for the women of the world by the 
year 2000. 
  However, the white paper says, the bad habits of arranged 
and 
mercenary marriage linger on in some rural areas, especially in 
the outlying and backward spots. Cases of drowning and 
abandonment of female infants and trafficking in women occur 
from time to time. 
  "The Chinese Government is paying close attention to these 
problems. It is vigorously advocating the equality of the sexes 
and educating women to use legal weapons to defend themselves. 
Strong measures have been adopted against unlawful cruel 
treatment of women to ensure that their legitimate rights and 
interests are not infringed upon." 

