BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam's speech at the </F>
foreign ministerial conference of nonaligned countries; from the 
"Commentary on Current Events" program] 
  [Text] Foreign Minister Nguyen said affirmatively in his 
speech: Vietnam completely approves of the Nonaligned Movement 
[NAM] chairman's appraisal made in his report -- namely, under 
the present situation, we must work according to the NAM's basic 
goals and principles of peace, independence, sovereignty, 
equality, and development to further enhance the NAM's role. 
  On how the Asia-Pacific and Southeast Asian regions can 
realize those goals and principles, Foreign Minister Nguyen 
emphasized: The region has recently entered a new era in which 
the trend of peace, stability, and cooperation is having the 
upper hand and the tendency of dynamic and sustained development 
is full of promise. 
  Foreign Minister Nguyen also pointed out: Some hidden 
factors of worrisome turbulence, such as conflict of interests 
and territorial disputes and claims, exist in the Asia-Pacific 
region, particularly in the East Sea area, the Korea peninsula, 
and Cambodia. 
  Foreign Minister Nguyen pointed out: Recently, the East Sea 
area has witnessed some events that caused great worries to 
public opinion in the region and the world, particularly to 
Vietnam because these events happened on Vietnam's continental 
shelf and exclusive economic zone. International laws demand 
all countries to respect the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of others including their continental shelf and 
exclusive economic zones. 
  Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam reiterated Vietnam's 
sovereignty as a coastal country, and the Vietnamese people's 
determination to protect sovereignty over their continental 
shelf and exclusive economic zone in accordance with 
international laws, especially the 1982 UN Convention on the Sea. 
  During the conference, Foreign Minister Nguyen reaffirmed 
Vietnam's goodwill stance to settle all differences in 
accordance with the aforesaid principles. He appealed to all 
parties concerned to exercise self-restraint, and not to take 
any action to further complicate the situation. 
  Foreign Minister Nguyen pointed out: The security and 
stability of the East Sea area is the common security and 
stability of the entire Asia-Pacific region, as well as one of 
the decisive factors for the safety of sea lanes and for the 
trade and development of one of the most active regions of the 
world. Vietnam urges all parties concerned to adhere to the 
aforesaid international laws to settle differences over the East 
Sea issue, which involves the interests of many countries. 
  Foreign Minister Nguyen affirmed that Vietnam guarantees 
such 
an action. 
  On the human rights issue, Foreign Minister Nguyen pointed 
out: It is the people of each country who have the right to 
judge and push ahead the implementation of human rights in their 
own countries. No other government or organization will make 
decisions for them, even if the decision is made in the name of 
sincerity. 

