BFN 

<F P=106> [By Guy Rogers and Neil Lewis] </F>
  [Text] Johannesburg May 9 SAPA -- Political heavyweights -- 
dictators past and present, guerrilla chiefs and the wealthy 
governors of Western coffers -- streamed into Jan Smuts airport 
from across the globe on Monday to attend Tuesday's [10 May] 
presidential inaugration of Nelson Mandela and to sing the 
praises of democracy. United States Vice-President Al Gore, 
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, Palestinian Liberation 
Organisation Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, Tanzanian founding 
President Julius Nyerere and more than 80 other leaders arrived 
to heap praise on South Africa and its people. 
  Heading a 65-strong U.S. delegation, the most senior to 
visit 
South Africa, Mr Gore said the moment was historic not only for 
South Africa but for all mankind. The inauguration of African 
National Congress leader Nelson Mandela marked a transition in 
the history of the world, he said. The U.S. civil rights 
movement and the struggle for democracy in South Africa were 
historically intertwined with both countries sharing the spirit 
of the fight for full democracy. "And so the people of the 
United States rejoice with the people of South Africa. We look 
forward towards starting a new and more vigorous relationship. 
We see the inauguration tomorrow (Tuesday) of Mr Mandela as the 
beginning of a partnership between our two countries." Included 
in the us delegation was first lady Hilary Clinton, Mr Gore's 
wife Tipper, the Rev Jesse Jackson and U.S. Secretary of 
Commerce Ron Brown. 
  On his arrival, Mr Hurd said there has been a huge upsurge 
in 
British business interest in South Africa. He said he was in 
the country to show Britain's support for a new South Africa and 
was going directly from the airport to visit British-aided 
projects in the East Rand townships. 
  Croatian Prime Minister Mr Nikica Valentic said South Africa 
had shown it was possible to satisfy diverse interests in a 
positive way. "We are a country that has emerged from war. The 
message (from South Africa) is political solutions have to be 
sought by peaceful means," he said. 
  Former British prime minister Lord James Callaghan said 
South 
Africa would be an example to the rest of Africa. Asked if he 
had a message for this country, Lord Callaghan said: "South 
Africa is going to work out its own destiny." 
  Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said the struggle 
against apartheid had few parallels in modern history. "We are 
confident that under Mr Mandela's sagacious leadership the scars 
of the past will soon heal and the goal of peace and development 
will be achieved." 
  The diminutive Mr Arafat, wearing his traditional black and 
white keffiyeh, said he brought greetings from the Palestinian 
people "and best wishes for my brother and friend President 
Mandela...and Mr (F W) de Klerk". He was greeted by ANC 
representative Stanley Mabisela who held the PLO leader's hand 
as the large delegation strode into the airport building. 
  Mr Nyerere, once a crusader against colonialism and a 
long-time enemy of Pretoria, said he had always wanted to come 
to a free South Africa. "I never believed it would come. But 
here it is." 
  Bangladeshi Foreign Minister A S M Rahman, who was asked if 
his country would be investing in South Africa, said Bangladesh 
had no money to invest "but we will share our knowledge". 
  On his arrival, Danish Prime Minister Poul Rasmussen praised 
the demise of apartheid as "a victory for humanity" and pledged 
R375 million [rand] in aid for South Africa's transition. He 
said he hoped the two countries would exchange "experiences", 
expecially in the labour market, and he extended a formal 
invitation to Mr Mandela to visit Denmark. The Danish national 
soccer team, European champions in 1992, were scheduled to visit 
South Africa in 1995, Mr Rasmussen announced. "This is a most 
happy moment in Danish international politics. (It) is the fall 
of the Berlin Wall...in human terms...a victory for humanity." 
  From Syria to the Bahamas, Italy, Slovakia, Georgia, Malta, 
Iran, Malaysia, the Philippines and Romania they continued to 
pour into Jan Smuts from dawn and into the night. Other 
notables included the Irish President Mary Robinson, Greek King 
Constantine and Mr Abdul Rahman Taib who is the Industry 
Minister of Brunei, the richest country per capita in the world. 
Also among them were European Union Chairman T Pangalos, 
Portuguese president Dr Mario Soares, French first lady 
Danniella Mitterand, Spanish heir apparent Prince Asturias and 
Finland President Mr Martii Ahtisaari [name and title as 
received] who is credited with brokering Namibian independence. 
The presidents of Zambia, Angola, Mozambique and Namibia, as 
well as Lesotho King Letsie III, were due to arrive later in the 
night. 
  The prize for the biggest present went to the Philippines -- 
a four-foot square box in colourful wrapping paper and ribbon 
reportedly containing shoes for Mr Mandela. 
  By 6PM there was still no news of the expected appearance of 
Libyan Chief Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi or Cuban leader Fidel Castro. 
A Cuban aircraft arrived early on Monday but apparently it was 
carrying only cigars. 
  On his arrival, Zambian President Frederick Chiluba said: 
"Africa has been decolonised and is in the process of 
democratisation -- that is the challenge." 

