BFN 

  [Text] The Syrians must finally understand that the prime 
minister is prepared to withdraw from practically the entire 
Golan Heights in exchange for full peace and appropriate 
security arrangements. This is the assessment of political 
circles in the wake of Rabin's recent statements. All this in 
anticipation of another Middle East shuttle by U.S. Secretary of 
State Christopher, a mission which does not raise many hopes. 
Israeli sources believe this is a premature and consequently 
unwarranted shuttle at this stage. The prime minister is 
departing for an official visit to Russia tomorrow. The foreign 
minister, who serve as acting-prime minister, returns tonight 
from Romania following his meetings with 'Arafat. Our political 
correspondent Gadi Sukenik reports: 
  Shim'on Peres, who is returning this evening, will travel to 
Cairo next weekend, where he will meet 'Arafat's deputy 
Abu-Mazin [Mahmud 'Abbas] and try to prepare the ground for a 
Rabin-'Arafat meeting in approximately two weeks -- a meeting in 
which the two may sign the agreement on IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho. At the same time, 
more difficulties and delays are still expected to take place. 
  Rabin and Peres would prefer to implement the withdrawal 
from 
Gaza before making decisions on the Syrian track. Warren 
Christopher, however, is unwilling to accept any more delays. 
Christopher and his entourage will travel to the Middle East 
capitals next week and will arrive in Israel next Thursday, from 
where they will continue to Damascus. It is still unclear to 
where they will continue from there. Jerusalem sources express 
wonder about the timing of the trip, during which the signing of 
the agreement with the PLO is not expected to take place. 
Despite the slight expectations for an imminent breakthrough 
with Syria, Yitzhaq Rabin is increasingly clarifying his 
willingness to reach a compromise in the north. Now he is 
explicitly talking about a willingness to evacuate settlements 
and implement a deep withdrawal in exchange for peace. Most 
political circles in Israel are convinced that what Rabin is in 
fact signalling is as follows: Mr. al-Asad, now it is your 
turn. Prove to the Israelis you are heading toward full peace 
and willing to provide full security for Israel. I, for my part, 
will convince the Israelis that in exchange for this it is 
possible to implement a phased withdrawal from practically the 
entire Golan Heights. 
  Meanwhile Rabin will depart tomorrow for a first, four-day 
official visit of an Israeli prime minister to Russia, during 
which he will meet senior Russian leaders and representatives of 
the Jewish community. Rabin is not expected to have an easy 
time on the political level, because the Russians are insisting 
to have a more prominent role in our region -- this without an 
appropriate level of coordination with the United States. 
President Yeltsin is facing nationalist pressures. The new 
Russian power politics increasingly remind Israeli figures of 
the old Soviet Union's methods during its heyday, a period which 
brings back bad memories in Israel. 

