BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed talk: "U.S. Imperialists' Maneuvers Which Run </F>
Counter to Nuclear Disarmament"] 
  [Text] The haughtiness of the United States whose habit is 
to encroach upon other countries' sovereignty has been revealed 
all the more. This is shown by the U.S. Defense Department's 
plan to push ahead with the development of up-to-date missile to 
detect and destroy our missiles they claim to be hidden 
underground. 
  The U.S. warmongers are now pouring $90 million into the 
development of this up-to-date missile. This is an open 
military action aimed at crushing [apsal] our republic by force. 
  The entire world knows that the U.S. hardline conservative 
force is stepping up the anti-DPRK pressure commotions under the 
pretext of our nuclear issue. They are openly raving about the 
detection and destruction of our missiles they claim to be 
hidden underground, attempting to wage a military attack on our 
republic. What an intolerable crime this is! 
  As facts prove, the United States raves about respecting the 
sovereignty of other countries and peace, but in actuality, it 
does not abandon the concept of confrontation and ambition for 
war but attempts state terrorism and armed interference against 
other countries, habitually engaging in dogmatism and 
arbitrariness. 
  The U.S. maneuvers to develop a new up-to-date missile under 
the so-called signboard of nuclear nonproliferation is a crime 
running counter to nuclear disarmament. It is a new military 
operation against the independent Third World countries, and an 
open act aimed at fattening monopolistic U.S. military suppliers. 
  As is known, U.S. military quarters put forth the so-called 
nonproliferation defense strategy early last December. This 
strategy encompasses such matters as the development of weapons 
to detect and destroy the underground military facilities used 
for the production of nuclear weapons and mobile missiles, the 
composition of a new military doctrine for war with some 
countries armed with nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons, 
and the intensification of cooperation with NATO, and other 
allies, to realize them. 
  As the particulars of the nonproliferation defense strategy 
show, the United States is scheming to develop a newer murder 
weapon to maintain its monopolistic nuclear position and to 
oppose the developing countries under the pretext of 
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. 
  After the collapse of the former Soviet Union, the United 
States has come to regard our country and those other countries 
engaged in building a new society under the anti-imperialism and 
independence banner as the enemy. 
  The present U.S. Administration claimed that it makes the 
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons the basis of its state 
foreign policy, in which case the United States should place 
prior emphasis on reducing and completely abolishing its 
existing nuclear weapons in conformity with the trend prevailing 
after the end of the Cold War. At the same time it should 
prevent nuclear danger by the countries which are actually 
developing nuclear weapons or have ample potential to do so. 
  However, the U.S. imperialists are acting to the contrary, 
occupied by thoughts of nuclear hegemonism. They are not only 
continuously accelerating their modernization of nuclear weapons 
but overlooking the acts of nuclear weapons development by their 
allies and those other countries which are obedient to the 
United States. When it concerns countries to which they take 
offense, even peaceful nuclear activities come under suspicion 
and are unjustly checked. 
  A typical example of this is that the U.S. imperialists are 
loudly raving about nuclear weapons development and nuclear 
threats regarding our peaceful nuclear activity and are 
attempting to impose sanctions on us by mobilizing even 
international organizations. The U.S. Defense Department is 
developing a new missile capable of detecting and destroying the 
so-called missiles hidden underground and mobile missiles and 
dragging their allies to carry out their strategy, spreading the 
so-called nuclear threat under the signboard of regional 
security, which is all aimed at crushing our republic by force. 
  The U.S. imperialists are dragging Japan and other allies to 
carry out their aggressive strategy. The Japanese NIHON KEIZAI 
newspaper, in its recent issue, disclosed that Japan and the 
United States have agreed to provide a new framework to 
intensify military technology exchange--this is not accidental. 
Underlying herein is a sinister scheme that the United States 
develop modern weapons using Japanese technology and funds and 
that Japan attempts to become a military power with the backing 
of the United States. 
  Our people strongly oppose and denounce the U.S. maneuvers 
to 
monopolize nuclear weapons and build up arms and to crush our 
country and other independent anti-imperialist countries. In 
the recent UN disarmament meeting, the developing countries 
consistently exposed and condemned the double standard applied 
in the development of nuclear weapons and in the nuclear 
nonproliferation by Western countries, including the U.S. 
imperialists, and noted again the unjustness of the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. 
  The U.S. imperialists should listen to the just voice of the 
world's peace-loving people. Instead of raving in words about 
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, the U.S. imperialists 
should put it into actual practice. 
  The U.S. imperialists' pushing ahead with their plan to 
develop an up-to-date missile could lead the extremely strained 
situation on the Korean peninsula to a further dangerous phase. 
The United States should hold itself responsible for the 
consequences arising from this. Our people and the officers and 
men of the People's Army are keeping a sharp eye on U.S. actions. 
  The United States should immediately stop the reckless plan 
to develop the anti-DPRK missile, and withdraw some 1,000 
nuclear weapons of various types and aggression forces from 
South Korea without delay. This is the real nonproliferation of 
nuclear weapons and an act in the interest of the United States 
itself. 

