Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "US Meddling"] </F>
  [Text] A senior U.S. State Department official's remarks 
last week expressing a desire to see South Korea abolish its 
National Security Law have not been generally welcomed here in 
Korea. The remarks, contained in a key-note speech delivered by 
Thomas Hubbard, deputy U.S. assistant secretary of state for 
East Asian and Pacific affairs, at a seminar on U.S.-South 
Korean relations in the Pacific era sponsored by American 
University, in fact have touched on a raw nerve in many quarters. 
  Though Seoul wants to play the dispute down, this is the 
first time that any senior U.S. government official has publicly 
expressed a desire to see the controversial Korean law repealed. 
We particularly wonder what motivated the chief U.S. delegate 
to the working-level contacts between Washington and Pyongyang 
on the North Korean nuclear issue to express this desire, 
whether officially or privately, just before inter-Korean 
dialogue was due to start. Even if the remarks were made as a 
bona fide suggestion to a close ally, they can be criticized as 
interference in the domestic affairs of a foreign country. 
  Needless to say, the National Security Law, which was 
enacted 
immediately after the Republic of Korea was founded in 1948, is 
a by-product of the tragic Korean division into South and North. 
The law from that time contributed greatly to the protection of 
South Korea's system of free democracy and to deterring the 
North Korean communists in their continuous attempts to 
infiltrate into and subvert the South throughout the 1950-53 
Korean War triggered by Pyongyang. 
  On the other hand, the law has long been disputed by critics 
who claim that with its excessively comprehensive and ambiguous 
punitive provisions against anti-state acts and "acts benefiting 
the enemy," it contravenes the general rule of law and the 
principle that crimes and the punishment due them must be 
specified concretely. Besides that, the security law was abused 
to suppress anti-government elements by the previous military 
governments. 
  Consequently, notably after the June 29, 1987 
democratization 
package was declared, the opposition forces began to strengthen 
their calls for the abolition of the law in the cause of 
democratization and the protection of human rights. They cited 
the fact that the situation has changed significantly since the 
collapse of the Soviet Union and the Communist bloc in Eastern 
Europe, South Korea's establishment of diplomatic links with 
Russia and China and the adoption of the historic inter-Korea 
agreement to simultaneously join the U.N. 
  For its part, the Seoul government has maintained its stand 
that it should not abolish the controversial domestic law as 
long as North Korea continues to stick to its policy of seeking 
to communize the South by force as provided for in the preamble 
of the Workers Party charter and Article 11 of its new socialist 
Constitution. At the same time, the government is prepared to 
reduce the scope of acts subject to the law substantially. We 
should remind ourselves the north Koreans have persistently 
demanded for more than two decades that Seoul repeal the law 
which it has denounced as a tool to suppress human rights. 
  We find it strange that a ranking U.S. official should be 
speaking for Pyongyang in connection with human rights in South 
Korea, and not taking issue with the terrible violations of 
human rights in North Korea. No one can overlook the grim fact 
that the North Korean criminal code has provisions for death 
sentences and property confiscation in punishment of a wide 
range of anti-state offenses including simple dissidence and 
political opposition. 
  The security law in the South must be only a temporary law, 
but it should be abrogated if and only if North Korea truly 
abandons its plot to communize the South, irrespective of 
whether the two Koreas are unified or not. In the meantime, it 
is also hoped that the security law will be amended to more 
restrictedly apply in such a way that safeguards both human 
rights and the nation's security at the same time. Only in this 
way can the basic order and free democracy be kept intact. This 
kind of law amendment is suggested on the basis of a national 
consensus, namely through a compromise between the ruling and 
opposition parties. But now it is premature to abolish the law. 
  We presume that the U.S. official may have uttered his 
suspicious remarks in response to an adamant call in the 
U.S.-North Korea nuclear contacts that it do so. Our government 
should urge the U.S. to request Pyongyang that it change its 
horrible criminal law and discontinue its Stalinist despotism 
before expressing a desire to see an ally scrap a security law. 

