Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Liang Guihe (2733 6311 0735)] </F>
  [Text] Paris, 22 Jan (XINHUA) -- French President 
Mitterrand met with Qian Qichen, the visiting Chinese vice 
premier and foreign minister, at the Elysee Palace this morning. 
The two had a 30-minute talk in an animated, amiable atmosphere. 
  Mitterrand told Qian Qichen: "It is a great pleasure to meet 
you today. I warmly welcome your official visit to France. We 
hope for further contacts between the two countries." 
  Mitterrand said: "Since the sixties, I have visited China 
many times, and met Mr. Deng Xiaoping on three occasions. He 
left a deep impression on me." He added: "China is a giant. I 
have watched closely its changes and developments. The speed of 
your country's growth is marvelous. The Chinese leaders have 
led their people in achieving political and economic development 
in the past 15 years, and I must pay respects to them." 
  On bilateral relations, Mitterrand said: "Previously, the 
development of relations between the two countries had slowed 
down. I am very glad to see the new development of 
Franco-Chinese relations, which will benefit both sides. Now we 
will further improve and develop bilateral relations from this 
starting point." 
  Qian Qichen said: "China and France are countries with long- 
standing cultures and unique spiritual wealth. In the past 
three decades since the establishment of diplomatic relations, 
bilateral ties have expanded considerably. Despite temporary 
difficulties and twists and turns, the two countries have 
generally maintained and developed effective cooperation. 
Recently, the Chinese and French Governments reached an 
agreement on improving bilateral ties, thus turning a new page 
in Sino-French relations which have normalized and will further 
develop. We are very happy about this." 
  Qian reiterated that the Chinese Government attaches 
importance to developing friendly ties of cooperation with 
France. The Chinese Government seeks to continually develop 
lasting and stable relations with France. This will not only be 
conducive to the two countries, but will also contribute to 
peace and stability in the world. 
  Qian said: "China and France are mutually complementary in 
the economic and trade fields; and there is much that the two 
countries can do together. We welcome French companies to 
invest in China and compete fairly. This will boost economic 
and trade relations between the two countries." He added that 
France plays an important role in international affairs, and 
China and France can support each other and cooperate on many 
important international issues. 
  Qian also briefed Mitterrand on China's economic development 
and reforms. 
  At the end of the meeting, Mitterrand invited Qian to 
inscribe in the visitors' book, in which Qian wrote: "May the 
traditional Sino-French friendship grow continually." 
Mitterrand said: "I share the same wish." 
  Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu and Ambassador to 
France Cai Fangbo were present at the meeting. 
  Qian arrived here earlier today for an official goodwill 
visit at the French Government's invitation. 

