BFN 

<F P=106> [Philip Johnston report: "Internment an Option, Says </F>
Mayhew"] 
  [Text] Pressure on ministers to consider the introduction 
of selective internment in Northern Ireland was renewed 
yesterday following the Loughinisland pub massacre. 
  Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland Secretary, said 
internment remained an option in the right circumstances and 
emergency powers were available if required. 
  "It isn't for nothing this Government insists on asking 
Parliament to renew annually the provision for internment," he 
said in Lisburn, Co Antrim. 
  "It has been retained because the Government believes that 
circumstances can be envisaged in which it would be necessary to 
use that power." 
  Mr Andrew Hunter, chairman of the Tory Northern Ireland 
Committee, said now was the time for selective internment. 
  "When heightened terrorist activity is expected or taking 
place I believe that lifting 20 or 30 key people who are vital 
to the command structures of such organisations could make a 
major difference," he said. 
  "I know it is an abuse of civil liberties but it saves 
lives. 
The escalating sectarianism of the last few days is a classic 
example of a time to move in." 
  However, the calls were resisted by Mr Kevin McNamara, 
Labour's Northern Ireland spokesman, who said such a move would 
"completely de-rail" the peace talks. 
  Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, urged that there should 
be no Republican retaliation for Saturday's murder of six 
Catholics watching football in O'Toole's bar in Loughinisland, 
Co Down. 
  He was quoted on BBC Radio as calling for "calm and 
restraint" in the face of a "premeditated attack aimed at 
deflecting those engaged in the peace process from that process." 
  Mr Adams also confirmed that Sinn Fein would give its 
long-awaited response to the Downing Street declaration within 
the next week or so. 
  "I hope the British Government has the political will to 
move 
this situation on, and so we can all move forward. Sinn Fein 
will not be found wanting," he said. 
  Sir Patrick's comments on internment were a well-used 
ministerial formula for dealing with the issue and did not 
appear to mark any new policy departure. 
  Powers to detain suspected terrorists without trial are 
available in the Emergency Provisions Act under which Northern 
Ireland is governed directly from London. 
  Internment powers were last used between 1971 and 1975, but 
the policy was too indiscriminate to be effective and the 
detention camps became rich recruiting grounds for the IRA. 
  Mr Albert Reynolds, Ireland's prime minister, has 
consistently rejected any question of internment in the 
Republic. Britain argues that without Irish assistance, 
terrorists would merely flee across the border and use the 
Republic as a safe haven. 

