CSO 

  [Text] The March 1994 fiscal year (fiscal year 1993) 
earnings reports of 21 banks including city banks, long-term 
credit banks, and trust and banking companies have been released 
on a flash report basis. Although operating earnings which 
reflect earnings in their main line of business dropped only 6 
percent from the prior year, recurring earnings fell 40 percent 
leading to the fifth year of declines because of aggressive 
disposal of bad loans. "Write-offs" to include losses from the 
disposition of bad loans rose by a multiple of 2.5 to 3.6 
trillion yen and exceeded annual operating profits of 3 trillion 
yen, resulting in record losses. Disposition of bad loans will 
continue in fiscal year 1994 and bank profits are not expected 
to recover until after fiscal year 1995. Although the real 
economy shows signs of a recovery, the residual effects of the 
bubble economy will continue to affect the financial industry 
for some time to come. 
  The foremost characteristic of the March 1994 yearly 
earnings 
reports is that the banks are engaged in a "write-off race" in 
giving highest priority to the disposal of bad loans. Including 
sales to the Cooperative Credit Purchasing Co., the 21 banks 
disposed of about 5 trillion yen in bad loans during the 
two-year period beginning in the March 1993 fiscal year. 
Although the publicly disclosed bad loan balance of the 21 banks 
as of the end of March, including those where interest payments 
have not been made for six months or more or the issuers have 
failed, total about 14 trillion yen, leading city banks indicate 
that, "since some of the loans are secured by collateral, about 
70-80 percent of the bad loans are about to be liquidated." The 
bulk of the residual bad loans, amounting to 20-30 percent of 
the balance, are expected to be disposed of by sometime in the 
March 1995 fiscal year. Aside from the publicly disclosed bad 
loans, there are loans made to housing loan companies where 
interest payments have been reduced or pardoned, meaning that it 
will take more than two years to completely liquidate all such 
bad loans. 
  In terms of profits, operating profits, which continued to 
expand until the prior fiscal year because of widening profit 
margins created by declining interest rates, will now enter into 
a shrinking margin phase for the first time in three years. The 
majority of the banks have effected write-offs within the scope 
of operating profits, but in the fiscal year ending in March 
1994, they accounted for undeclared profits in stocks, loans and 
some real estate to create funds for use in offsetting bad 
loans. Massive write-offs produced a drop in recurring profits 
of 40 percent compared to the prior year and a drop in current 
year profits of 13 percent. 
  A look at the various operating aspects shows that, among 
city banks, Sanwa Bank ranked first in operating profits, 
recurring profits and current year profits. In the write-off of 
bad loans, the Tokai Bank led city banks by disposing of loans 
carried by nonbank affiliates in the amount of 380 billion yen. 
It was followed by Sakura Bank in the amount of 350 billion yen 
and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank in the amount of 330 billion yen. 
Sanwa, Fuji, Sumitomo, Mitsubishi and Asahi Banks each also 
wrote off loans totaling more than 200 billion yen, bringing the 
total write- off of bad loans for city banks to a total of 2.4 
trillion yen or twice the level of the prior year. 
  There were no changes in the profit rankings of long-term 
credit banks, but, in terms of write-offs, The Long-Term Credit 
Bank of Japan led by disposing of 300 billion yen in bad loans, 
including those associated with EIE Company-related loans and 
among trust and banking companies Mitsubishi Trust and Banking, 
Sumitomo Trust and Banking, Mitsui Trust and Banking and Yasuda 
Trust and Banking each wrote off loans in excess of 100 billion 
yen. 
  The banks took action to write off bad loans irrespective of 
profit levels because of the guidance furnished by the Ministry 
of Finance and Bank of Japan as well as consideration for the 
low assessment of Japanese banks by overseas investors based on 
declining ratings of bonds in investment portfolios. However, 
unlike U.S. banks, there were no Japanese banks which produced 
deficit earnings reports in the process of taking write-off 
actions in connection with earnings reports for the year ending 
in the March 1994. However, some sources express the view that 
"the phased disposition of bad loans as practiced by Japanese 
banks will delay the recovery in financial business circles." 

