Language: <F P=105>English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Geothermal Energy: A Serious </F>
Alternative"] 
  [Text] European researchers have high hopes for geothermal 
energy. Thirty years from now, this energy source should be a 
serious alternative to nuclear power. 
  Geothermal energy is very different from other "alternative" 
energy resources such as wind and solar power, because it has 
the potential to produce power at an industrial scale, of the 
order of hundreds of megawatts. Italy, for instance, already 
produces 500 megawatts of electricity per year this way. 
  The intention is to construct a giant underground heat 
exchanger linked to a turbine to test the industrial viability 
of this renewable source of power. However, significant 
difficulties include the economic and technical viability of 
recovering this energy in small fields (typical in Europe) and 
the high costs of hot dry rock research. Consequently, the 
success of the latest Community projects will determine the 
future of geothermal energy use. 
  Under the Joule II (non-nuclear energy) programme, 
scientists 
at Soultz-sous-Forets (France, Lower Rhine) began work in 
December 1992 on a project consolidating research underway since 
the 1970s. The aim is to inject water into hot rocks at a depth 
of 4,000 m (in a granite platform criss-crossed by numerous 
faults forming a giant `radiator' at 180 degrees Celsius) to 
produce sufficient energy to drive an electricity generator. 
  Two other sites are being examined in the United Kingdom and 
Germany. Some 60 scientists are involved in this project 
(ECU5.5 million, plus a further ECU3.3 million for 1994-95), 
from around twenty universities and institutes in France, United 
Kingdom, Germany, Sweden and Switzerland. 
  In Soultz, the first stage involves drilling boreholes 
through the sedimentary layer and granite platform, to prove the 
technical feasibility of an industrial-scale pilot with a 
capacity of several Megawatts. Equipped with a generator, this 
industrial pilot will be built after 1995. If all goes well, a 
prototype geothermal energy power station (producing 5-10 
Megawatts) will follow around the year 2000. It will be linked 
to the electricity grid and work as a complement to traditional, 
small power stations. 
  Better understanding of the basement rock fracture systems 
has already allowed researchers to produce a model of a Hot Dry 
Rock reservoir. A 3,950 m borehole has been drilled and could 
form the first part of the future pilot system, while the next 
borehole (4,000 m deep) will be used to test the circulation of 
hot water. With these holes, researchers will be able to begin 
construction of the pilot and study problems like corrosion, 
pumping, and modelling (chemical and thermal) of the rocks. 
  Corrosion problems, which are crucial to the industrial 
phase, will be solved by removable internal tubing systems 
and/or injection of corrosion-inhibiting substances. Hydraulic 
models of the rocky massifs exploited (over 3,000 cubic km) will 
be made to check the impact on deep water resources in the 
region. Calculations show a balance could be quickly 
established between the pumping system and natural water 
circulation between the rock faults. An early estimate of 
progress and planning of the industrial pilot project will be 
presented in Soultz in 1994. 
  Whatever the future of geothermal energy, this research has 
already improved understanding of rock mechanics and drilling 
techniques. This knowledge will find applications in the oil 
and civil engineering sectors. Another spin-off has been the 
composition of an Atlas of Geothermal Resources in the EC, 
Switzerland and Austria, to be updated this year to include 
Central Europe. 
  For further information contact: Dr. Andre Gerard, 
Socomine, Route de Kulzenhausen, BP 39, F-61290 
Soultz-sous-Forets, France, Tel.: 33-88-80-53-63, Fax.: 
33-88-80-53-51. 

