BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 8 KYODO -- A government white paper 
called Friday [8 April] for enhanced "social support" for child 
care, saying it costs parents an estimated 20 million yen to 
raise a child from birth through university graduation. 
  The 1993 White Paper on Health and Welfare, approved at a 
cabinet meeting, particularly called on companies to improve 
conditions for child care for their employees. 
  Companies should view support for child care as necessary 
costs for securing a work force, introduce a child care leave 
system and create corporate nurseries, it said. 
  The white paper also urged corporations to promote 
reemployment of female workers who have left companies to take 
care of their infants. 
  The report also calculated the costs of rearing children. 
  For a couple whose first child is born when the husband is 
30 
years old and the second two years later, bringing up the two 
children and putting them through college costs 39.78 million 
yen if the wife works part time, and 45.05 million yen if she 
works full time. 
  The calculations also assume the couple buys a 40 million 
yen 
condominium when the husband is 35 years old. 
  The higher costs for a couple with the wife working full 
time 
are due to extra nursery expenses. 
  The financial burden of rearing children is especially heavy 
when they are attending college, accounting for 45 percent of 
the total disposable income of the family if the wife works full 
time, and 70 percent if she works part time. 
  The white paper also sounded the alarm about the declining 
birthrate, which dropped to a record 1.50 births per woman of 
childbearing age in 1992, when only 1.2 million babies were 
born, from 2.14 in 1973. 
  The dwindling number of children could put a squeeze on the 
nation's economic growth and increase the social security burden 
on workers, the report warned. 
  Wide-ranging measures are needed to halt the trend, 
encompassing nursery facilities, working conditions, housing, 
and education, it said. 
  Pointing to the importance of housing conditions, the paper 
noted a correlation between the number of children and the size 
of houses. 
  Toyama Prefecture, which boasts the largest proportion of 
housing floor space per person, was also the prefecture with the 
largest number of children per family, 2.3, it said. 
  Akita Prefecture, which ranked third in per-capita house 
area, came ninth in the number of children at 2.0 per family, 
the report said. 
  Families in Tokyo, which ranked second from the bottom in 
terms of house area, have only 1.0 child on average, the 
smallest rate in Japan. 
  In line with the white paper, the Health and Welfare 
Ministry 
plans to compile a package of measures for supporting 
childbearing and child care by the end of fiscal 1994, which 
ends next March 31. 

