BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by MAE: "Christian Democratic Appeal Is Major </F>
Loser, Spectacular Gain for Parties for the Elderly"] 
  [Text] The Hague, 3 May (ANP) -- On Tuesday [3 May], in the 
elections to the Second Chamber, the social democratic party, 
PvdA [Labor Party] easily won the race for first place. The 
difference between the current coalition partners is three 
seats: The PvdA won 37 seats (minus 12), the CDA [Christian 
Democratic Appeal] had to make do with 34 (minus 20). 
  PvdA leader Wim Kok said that the PvdA "is back after having 
been away." He announced that he will use that position to put 
together a firmly progressive cabinet with a social face during 
the formation period. 
  As expected, the elections resulted in a major 
redistribution 
of political forces in the Netherlands. The governing parties 
(the CDA and the PvdA) suffered unprecedented setbacks, losing a 
total of 32 seats (20 and 12 respectively). The balance of 
political power was thoroughly shaken up. 
  The electoral turnout on Tuesday was 78.1 percent, 1.8 
percent less than in the September 1989 elections to the Second 
Chamber. 
  The "revolutionary" election result makes a three-party 
cabinet a necessity. The self-evident governmental 
responsibility of the CDA is over, after nearly 80 years. 
Virtually any governing coalition is now possible. All 
possible combinations of three of the four major parties can 
count on constituting a majority of approximately 90 seats. 
  CDA leader Elco Brinkman humbly acknowledged the historic 
defeat of the christian democrats. He congratulated his PvdA 
colleague Kok on becoming the leader of the largest party. 
Brinkman in no measure concealed his disappointment at his own 
electoral loss: "The disappointment is great, and I am very sad 
about the result." 
  The right-wing liberal VVD [People's Party for Freedom and 
Democracy] made substantial gains, moving from 22 to 31 seats. 
VVD leader Frits Bolkestein described the outcome as "one of 
the best results ever achieved." In the final run-up to the 
election, the VVD left the left-wing liberal D66 [Democrats 66] 
way behind in the race for third place. According to 
Bolkestein, the government coalition received an unbelievable 
thrashing. According to the liberal leader, the VVD "quite 
clearly has a firm prospect of participating in the government." 
  The D66 finally became a really major party. Hans van 
Mierlo's parliamentary representation doubled, to 24 seats. 
However, that splendid progress was less spectacular than had 
been predicted in the opinion polls. Before the elections, that 
target was set on something like 30 seats. However, van Mierlo 
kept his cards close to his chest when giving his first 
reaction. "You should not be choosy when you receive such a 
large present. So must I ask whether it could not have been a 
little larger?" 
  In the early evening, it became clear that the party that 
the 
Green Left had hoped to be celebrating would have to be called 
off. To their personal bewilderment, the party led jointly by 
the duo Brouwer/Rabbae saw the predicted gains turn into a loss 
of five seats. 
  Rabbae was bitter about the result and blamed the loss 
primarily on the fact that the PvdA, in his words, had "emerged 
as vanquishers," suffering considerable losses but winning the 
fight for the largest number of votes, partly at the cost of the 
Green Left. "The voters are confronted with the power issue; 
many voted for the PvdA at the last moment," Rabbae claimed. 
  However, the greatest surprise was the progress made by the 
parties for the elderly. Between them, the General Association 
of Elderly People [Algemeen Ouderen Verbond (AOV)] and the +\55 
Union entered the Chamber with seven seats. The rebellion among 
the elderly against the AOW [Old Age Pension] plans of the major 
parties unexpectedly led to a major reaction after all. The AOV 
bagged six seats, the Union one. Leerkes, the +\55 Union's 
leader said that it was "actually unfortunate" that there were 
two parties representing the interests of the elderly. He said 
that in the wake of the elections, he would immediately have to 
talk about forming a single party. 
  To the dismay of the remaining parties, among the smaller 
parties it was the right-wing Center Democrats (CD), embodied by 
Hans Janmaat, that won out. The one-man party climbed from 0.9 
to 2.5 percent and gained between two and three additional 
seats, depending on how the remaining seats are shared out. 
PvdA leader Kok reacted by describing this outcome as a 
"deplorable flight to right-wing extremism. These firebrands 
are gaining too many seats. This is a blot on our political 
history, but we may not resign ourselves to it. These parties 
must not be allowed to eat their poisonous way through the 
system," he said. 
  The Socialist Party (SP) will be entering the Second Chamber 
with two seats. That result is in line with predictions made 
before the elections. SP leader Marijnissen was delighted upon 
hearing the news that the SP had finally made it into the Second 
Chamber after a number of failed attempts. "We have a foot in 
the door and will form part of the opposition in a conventional 
manner," he said. Of the small Christian parties, SGP 
[Political Reformed Party], GPV [Reformed Political Union], and 
RPF [Reformational Political Federation], the latter bagged two 
additional seats and will return to the Chamber with a total of 
three representatives. The SGP will have to settle for less 
than it had bargained for, and will only occupy one of the three 
seats. The GPV retained its two present representatives in the 
Chamber. 

