Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 20 (XINHUA) -- An agreement on 
environmental protection between the Chinese and Japanese 
Governments was signed here today. 
  Chinese Premier Li Peng and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa attended the signing ceremony after their two-hour 
talks. 
  Signing of the accord marks that a successful Sino-Japanese 
cooperation on environmental protection over the past decade has 
made another step forward. 
  Xie Zhenhua, head of the Chinese State Bureau of Environment 
Protection, and Michihiko Kunihiro, Japanese ambassador to 
China, signed the agreement on behalf of their respective 
governments. 
  According to Xie, China and Japan started cooperation in 
environmental protection as early as in the 1980's. Since then, 
frequent visits, joint research, personnel training, joint 
scientific and technical projects have been going on between 
Chinese and Japanese technicians and environmental managers. 
  According to an exchange of notes between the two 
governments 
in 1991, Japan donated 10.2 billion Japanese yen to China to set 
up a Sino-Japanese friendship environmental protection center in 
Beijing which is under smooth construction and due to be 
completed by the end of 1995. 
  Between 1992 and 1993, with the aid of the Japanese 
Government, the two countries carried out an investigation of 
the water pollution in Boyang Lake in east China and a 
purification program, which has achieved satisfactory results. 
  During the past few years, China and Japan also stepped up 
cooperation in regional environmental protection such as in 
northeast Asia and northwest Pacific ocean. 
  According to the new agreement signed today, the two 
countries will cooperate in the fields of prevention and control 
of air pollution, acid rain, water pollution and the disposing 
of harmful wasted gases, research in the impact of pollution to 
human health, improvement of urban environment, protection of 
ozonosphere, and protection of natural ecological environment 
and biological varieties. 
  The two sides will strengthen the exchanges of scientists 
and 
technical personnel and of technical information and data 
concerning research and development of environmental protection. 

