CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Marc Roche: "Decartelization an Optical </F>
Illusion"] 
  [Text] The multinationals that control 80 percent of the 
shares on the Johannesburg stock exchange have prepared 
themselves for the country's first multiracial elections. 
Ostensibly, to make the transition to economic power sharing. In 
reality, to shelter their assets.... 
  London--"We must encourage participation of South Africa's 
blacks in the mining and financial groups; it can only be 
beneficial to all sides." For the Anglo-American Corporation, 
the 30 March announcement of the dismantling of the cartel's 
Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company (JCI) subsidiary 
marks an historic step on the road to "the new South Africa." A 
new leaf, oh yes, by all that's holy! "Anglo" directors swear up 
and down that the break-up of the large industrial group--which 
encompasses independent entities in such diverse domains as 
gold, coal, agrofood, the press, and breweries--is bound to 
create many jobs at every level that are open to blacks. 
  But serious London analysts of the South African economy are 
not fooled: "Modification of the corporate structure and the 
opening of a few companies amount to nothing more than the 
business community throwing a few scraps to Mandela. It is a 
phony dismemberment that does not redistribute any national 
wealth to black entrepreneurs," opines one city expert. Julian 
Ogilvie Thompson, current president of Anglo-American and de 
Beers, has already taken the precaution of purchasing JCI's 
highly lucrative platinum division and its 16-percent interest 
in de Beers, the world's biggest diamond firm. 
  The extraordinary high-wire maneuvering by South Africa's 
big 
multinationals in preparation for the first multiracial 
elections has led entrepreneurs--English-speakers and 
Afrikaners--to coin a new term: unbundling [preceding word in 
English] (literally, decartelization). Does it amount to a 
cultural revolution, with white businesses cooperating in 
economic power sharing and agreeing to be melted down into the 
new mold? Or is it all a conjuring trick, allowing a handful of 
groups to continue controlling the economy? 
  Appearances would tend to support the former version, but 
the truth is probably closer to the latter. 
<H5>  Mastodons </H5>
  Anglo-American-de Beers; Rembrandt Group; Old Mutual; 
Sanlam; 
Liberty Life.... Whenever one thinks about the South African 
economy, the temptation is to identify it with these five 
groups, which like all-devouring octopi control between them 80 
percent of the stock on the Johannesburg exchange. These 
ubiquitous mastodons hold interests in every domain and have 
swollen to enormous size through acquisitions. 
  For a very long time, the ultrastrict controls on foreign 
exchange (through the intermediating mechanism of a dual market 
for the South African rand), which prevented them from investing 
abroad, constrained these giants to invest in sectors quite 
remote from where they started. Their structure is pyramidal, 
via holding companies at the top that have permitted a handful 
of great families such as Oppenheimer, Rupert, and Gordon to 
keep control over their assets without holding a majority of 
their subsidiaries' stock. As defenders see it, such a financial 
system protects the companies against hostile takeover bids, 
inspires confidence in the banking sector, and makes it easier 
to raise the capital needed for large investment projects, 
notably in mining and mineral exploration. 
  Until just recently, Brian Gilbertson headed a shadowy group 
known as Gencor. A year ago, Sankorp, the investment holding 
company, itself a subsidiary of the Sanlam insurance company, 
granted "independence" to four of Gencor's subsidiaries: Malback 
(pharmacy), Sappi (lumber industry), Engen (oil refining), and 
Genbel (finance). 
  This "vertical" dismemberment was effected to enable Gencor, 
the world's largest producer of platinum and second-largest 
producer of gold, to shift the focus back to its mining 
activities. To hear its president talk, the break-up came in 
response solely to the financial imperative of reducing the 
incongruous disparity between the relatively weak stock market 
performance of the subsidiaries and the stronger performance of 
the conglomerate's stock. 
  This capital restructuring was also intended to allay the 
apprehensions of big American and British institutional 
investors, which distrust conglomerates that are too complex. 
"These massive, hypercentralized conglomerates are real 
dinosaurs that no longer have a place on the contemporary 
economic landscape, since their boards of directors cannot 
really be made accountable to shareholders," says Steve Oke of 
the Smith New Court firm. 
  But what is most intriguing is the political significance of 
this far-reaching restructuring. Sankorp, for example, sold its 
10-percent interest in an insurance company to an insurance 
group, Methold, held by black interests. The ANC, after being 
consulted discreetly by Finance Minister Derek Keys, Gencor's 
CEO from 1986 to 1991, gave the green light. 
<H5>  Offshore </H5>
  But to infer from this that South Africa's future will be 
one 
of sweetness and light.... Well, as commentators have pointed 
out, most of the recent dismantlings--with Gencor the major 
exception--have led to the creation of extraterritorial offshore 
vehicles intended primarily to protect overseas holdings. Such 
is the case with Anglo-American, which controls nearly 40 
percent of de Beers, which itself controls about 30 percent of 
the former. In October 1993, Anglo-American transferred all its 
non-South African interests except for diamonds to a "screen" 
company, Minorco, 75 percent of whose stock is held by the 
Oppenheimer family. Established about two decades ago as a 
portfolio company, Minorco has become a mining enterprise in its 
own right. "Well played! Thanks to Minorco, which is now its 
secular arm overseas, Anglo-American can present itself as a 
purely African operator. Anglo can tell Mandela that all its 
investments are either local or in neighboring countries," says 
one observer. 
<H5>  Skepticism </H5>
  As for de Beers, it founded the Zurich-based de Beers 
Centenary AG, which has acquired synthetic diamond fabrication 
plants, financial interests in several holding companies, and 
quantities of diamonds from the Central Selling Organization in 
London. For its part, de Beers Consolidated Mines retains only 
South African interests. The two companies are run by the same 
man, Julian Ogilvie Thompson, and have the same board of 
directors--and shares in them cannot be purchased separately on 
the stock exchange. 
  South Africa's second biggest industrial house, the Rupert 
family, has a Swiss holding company, Richemont (established 
1988), that controls foreign assets, notably the maker of 
Rothmans cigarettes and luxury brands Cartier and Alfred 
Dunhill. South African assets are managed by a separate company, 
Rembrandt. Johann Rupert, the founder's son, holds only an 
honorary title as director of Richemont, but he keeps close 
watch on the illustrious luxury companies it manages. He's 
always levelheaded and ready for dialogue with the ANC, but firm 
and even intransigent when it comes to the essentials: the 
interests of his group. It is the same with Nicky Oppenheimer, 
who is "only" vice president of Anglo and de Beers but keeps 
close tabs on titular director Julian Ogilvie Thompson. 
  These maneuvers by the white capitalists have been greeted 
with skepticism in London. Some observers have pointed out that 
while the word nationalization may be banned from ANC's 
vocabulary now, Nelson Mandela's party has vowed to break the 
mining oligopolies with antitrust legislation. But only a wizard 
could say when and how any new regulations might force these 
national "institutions" to give up any of their wealth. 
  Given the great danger of economic paralysis in South 
Africa, 
the enormity of the task awaiting the new government team, and 
the commercial inexperience and financial weakness of potential 
black shareholders, analysts are under no illusions: The era of 
the great South African cartels has not yet ended. 

