Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Morten Fyhn report: "EU Stands Firm on Alcohol"] </F>
  [Text] Brussels -- While Trade Minister Grete Knudsen was 
stubbornly repeating in Brussels yesterday that Norway is 
adhering to its demand to be allowed also to keep its alcohol 
wholesale and import monopolies, the EU [European Union] 
countries reached agreement at an internal meeting that Norway 
must make do with keeping only its alcohol retail monopoly. A 
letter to Norway containing the offer that Norway should accept 
a Finnish-Swedish solution is expected to be sent within a few 
days, AFTENPOSTEN has been told by well-informed sources. 
  At a meeting yesterday of the EU countries' special working 
group for the negotiations with the applicant nations, there was 
broad agreement that there can be no suggestion of giving Norway 
a better solution in the field of alcohol policy than that which 
Sweden and Finland have already accepted. Norway's argument 
that its alcohol monopolies are an issue that has already been 
decided in the EEA [European Economic Area] and that is now 
being looked at by the ESA [EFTA Surveillance Authority] -- the 
special overview body for the EEA agreement -- was rejected as 
untenable. Norway is now negotiating membership of the EU, and 
this is something that is quite different from the EEA, several 
countries said at the EU meeting. 
  Well-informed sources have told AFTENPOSTEN that if Norway 
will not accept a Swedish-Finnish solution, it will be 
impossible to close this important chapter in the negotiations. 
It would then also be impossible to complete the negotiations 
with Norway, it was added. The attitude at the meeting between 
the EU countries sent the clear message that people are 
beginning to lose patience with Norway over this issue. It was 
also said that the EU has actually given Sweden and Finland a 
generous solution by not demanding that the state's retail 
monopoly should also end. 
  Trade Minister Grete Knudsen was in Brussels "to get to 
know" 
Hans van den Broek, the European Commission's man responsible 
for the negotiations, and to review the state of the 
negotiations. At a news conference after the meeting, Knudsen 
said that the two had talked about what "minor matters" in the 
negotiations are in line to be tidied up in order to clear the 
way for a concentration on fisheries, agriculture, and regional 
policy. However, it was unclear whether agreement had been 
reached on any issues that could be "tidied up." 
  "We had a long conversation," said the trade minister, who 
again reiterated what now is Norway's well-known position. 
According to Knudsen, the Swedish-Finnish alcohol solution is 
not so good that it might not still end up before the EU court. 
The Norwegian position is that the monopolies are already being 
scrutinized by the ESA, and that "we agree that this matter must 
be settled by a court." 
  The trade minister gave no sign of any Norwegian willingness 
to give way on any of the remaining issues in the negotiations 
-- and these are still quite numerous. But she also stressed 
that Norway wants to maintain a rapid pace in the negotiations 
in order to be able to negotiate in parallel with the three 
other applicant countries and hopefully complete the 
negotiations before the 1 March deadline. 
  Our new trade minister -- who because of her post is 
responsible for the negotiations with the EU -- is clearly 
working hard to get on top of her new job. By her own admission 
she needs -- and this only two weeks before the negotiations are 
planned to be completed -- to get to know the key figures on the 
EU side. That was why she met Van den Broek yesterday, and that 
is why she is traveling to Athens tomorrow to get to know Greek 
European Affairs Minister Theodhoros Pangalos, because Greece 
has the responsibility for leading the negotiations on the EU 
side. 

