BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Monica Vecco] </F>
  [Excerpts] During a visit to the basin of the Pichis and 
Palcazu Rivers, LA REPUBLICA established that several groups of 
drug traffickers from San Martin and Ucayali, who managed to 
dodge repression by the security forces, now operate in the 
mountainous Pasco region. 
  Laboratories for the production of cocaine base paste, large 
quantities of precursors, groups of Colombian henchmen, and 
airstrips for the clandestine shipment of drugs dominate the 
region where three successive governments have unsuccessfully 
tried to execute a regional development program. 
  Dozens of Peruvian and Colombian "firms," most of them from 
Uchiza, operate in the Pichis-Palcazu region. The region is 
shared by the Colombian "Palenque," "Crespo," and "Palito" 
firms, and Peruvian traffickers Reynaldo Quiroz Ruiz, aka 
"Pacho," Luis Lopez Aguilar, aka "Somoza," "Cabezon," "Tio 
Rios," "Raymond," "Los Ayacuchanos," "Rene," and "Lucho Pelado." 
  "Lucho Pelado" comes from Tocache and heads a "firm" that 
purchases large quantities of cocaine paste. This firm operated 
in Uchiza, Aguaytia, and Zungaro, where it handled about 500 kg 
per month of washed cocaine paste. 
  Colombian drug trafficker "Crespo," who previously operated 
in Campanilla and Saposoa, is one of the largest buyers in the 
zone. He moves approximately one tonne of washed cocaine paste 
per month. 
  "Somoza," who operated in Sion and Juanjui, is one of the 
few 
to have a cocaine hydrochloride laboratory in San Juan town, two 
and one half hours up the Pichis River. 
  But the most powerful firm belongs to the much-feared 
Colombian trafficker "Palenque," who is responsible for an 
average of three 600-kg drug flights per week, that is, 
approximately two tonnes per week. 
  Three new "firms" started in the region about two weeks ago. 
Among them is "La Coneja," which used to supply precursors to 
the Cachique Rivera brothers in Aguaytia. The firm allegedly 
represents the Cachique Rivera brothers. 
  On 26 March, "Palenque," who is one of the cruelest 
traffickers, sent his henchmen to set fire to "La Coneja's" 
laboratory on the Palcazu River bank. About 15 neighboring 
houses also caught fire and were reduced to cinders. "La 
Coneja," who drives a late-model white Tercel along the dusty 
roads of Palcazu town, has been warned to leave. 
  Previously, "Palenque" opposed the entry of the Cachique 
Rivera brothers, who moved with their army of henchmen to 
Iscozacin, from where they currently make their shipments to 
Colombia. 
  The "colochos" (Colombians) hold the monopoly of the cocaine 
hydrochloride production and zealously defend it from any 
Peruvian "firms" that want to supply the Cali Cartel. The 
Cachique Rivera brothers are the only ones who have the mafia's 
authorization to produce cocaine hydrochloride. 
  In June and November 1993, joint DEA [Drug Enforcement 
Administration] and Navy forces used five gunships during 
operations in Palcazu and Puerto Victoria. On both occasions, 
the traffickers were warned and managed "to flee" in time. 
  LA REPUBLICA learned that some "firms" took refuge in Puerto 
Bermudez, where the Army's OR 34-A Oxapampa battalion is 
stationed. Some battalion officers reportedly receive 
"protection fees" to turn a blind eye to the traffickers' 
activities. 
  It is said that while Captain Marcos Rios Ruiz was commander 
of this Army base, between April and August 1993, drug planes 
were seen operating from the Puerto Bermudez commercial airport. 
A merchant who chose not to identify himself said: "Everyone 
knew this was going on but could say nothing out of fear." 
Civilians charged that the Army captain received "protection 
fees" to allow traffickers to operate. 
  Puerto Bermudez Mayor Evaristo Zumaran Cayata was also 
charged with cooperating with the "firms." The "Juana Corina" 
Mothers Club in Puerto Bermudez accused the mayor of "pocketing" 
$4,000 for every flight he authorized. 
  During a heated meeting on 2 January 1993, the mothers asked 
Zumaran Cayata "to say what happened to the money he received 
for signing permits. It was to have been used for local 
projects." Neither the mayor nor Judge Jorge Camacho, who was 
his aide and was also accused of corruption on the same 
occasion, answered. 
  Machinery belonging to Puerto Bermudez City Hall was used to 
improve the Gavilan airstrip that was administered by "Somoza" 
and hired to other "firms." Army Captain Carlos "Alex" Alzamora 
replaced Rios Ruiz. According to civilian sources, he allowed 
traffickers to set up a clandestine airstrip along a portion of 
the Marginal highway near the town of Gavilan, 7 km from Puerto 
Bermudez. 
  Some honest people of the region have stated that before 
Alzamora was replaced by Captain "Coyote" [not further 
identified] in December 1993, the number of "firms" increased, 
converting the peaceful town of Puerto Bermudez into a shelter 
for traffickers. 
  Last 24 March, a high-ranking officer from the Army 
Inspector's department arrived in a MI-17 helicopter to inspect 
the military units in Oxapampa. Just three days before, the 
newly appointed commander of Puerto Bermudez battalion, Captain 
"James" Becerra Luna, gave orders for the Gavilan clandestine 
airstrip to be mined and surrounded by barbed wire to prevent 
traffickers from using it. They only left one four-meter wide 
lane open for the circulation of traffic. Less than 150 meters 
away on the Marginal highway is a checkpoint where the Army 
permanently checks the circulation of vehicles and passengers 
from La Merced to the Pichis-Palcazu valley. 
  A month earlier, the FAP [Peruvian Air Force] placed 
concrete 
and steel blocs that were ripped out and only replaced after 
drug planes had been allowed to land. One woodcutter of the 
zone said: "The soldiers blocked the way when an aircraft was 
about to land." As soon as one landing strip is destroyed, the 
traffickers build another. 
  Some 3 km from Gavilan is the Cajonari airstrip and two 
hours 
up the Pichis River, the "Pacho" firm has a 900-meter strip in 
San Jose de Azupizu, from where an average of three aircraft a 
week take off. There are more strips along the Pichis River in 
San Juan (where "Somoza" firm has a cocaine hydrochloride 
laboratory), San Pedro, San Pablo, and Santa Isabel towns. The 
Cajonari and Lorenzillo Uno airstrips are located in the 60 km 
that separates Puerto Bermudez from Palcazu. 
  In the towns of Raya, Esperanza, Quirishiari (an indigenous 
Ashaninka Indian settlement), Siria, Lorenzo, Lorenzillo Uno, 
and Lorenzillo Dos, which are between Puerto Bermudez and 
Palcazu, there are large coca leaf plantations and laboratories 
where "Pepe," a chemist from Pucallpa, turns coca leaves into 
cocaine base. 
  There are airstrips in Puerto Victoria and Isla Codo, the 
latter is just one hour from Ciudad Constitucion, on the Pichis 
River. The Cachique Rivera brothers allegedly have a cocaine 
hydrochloride laboratory in Ciudad Constitucion. 
  In the town of Santa Rosa de Chivis, one hour from Gavilan 
by 
the Marginal highway, the traffickers have another airstrip. To 
build this airstrip, last September, the traffickers seized 
machinery belonging to the Pichis-Palcazu project and abducted 
one of the operators who was found only after two days of an 
exhaustive search. 
  Palcazu, 150 km from La Merced town along the Marginal 
highway, is the main drug center for the valley, which has many 
laboratories where merchants deliver the unrefined or processed 
drugs. Local inhabitants say it "is the center" where the main 
firms as well as henchmen, prostitutes, and terrorists gather 
after fleeing from Huallaga. 
  Palcazu bridge is one of the favorite places to close deals. 
This is where the merchants, who ride motorcycles or brand new 
pickups, bring their knapsacks containing their work tools 
(spoons and candles) to test how pure the drug is. In Puerto 
Bermudez, the drug is more pure, therefore, it costs more. 
Merchants pay up to $720 per kg of "base," while in Palcazu the 
price is $650. In Zungaro, Aguaytia, and Pucallpa "base" costs 
$520 per kg. 
  Approximately 7.5 kg of cocaine "paste" is obtained from 100 
square meters of coca plantation. About three kg of "base" or 
"washed paste" is obtained from 7.5 kg of cocaine "paste." About 
one kg of cocaine hydrochloride is obtained from one kg of 
cocaine "base." 
  The arrival of thousands of people and the circulation of 
hundreds of thousands of dollars in the Pichis-Palcazu Valley 
seems to have brought the prosperity settlers expected from 
ambitious development projects. Prosperity is apparent. 
  Towns may lack water, electricity, airfields, sewerage 
systems, and telephones but just as in the Huallaga valley, 
trafficking has attracted many prostitutes, common criminals, 
and subversives who "escaped" from Huallaga. 
  The latest population and housing census shows that the 
population of Palcazu increased from 16,000 to almost 20,000 
people following the coca migration. [passage omitted] 
  But the most serious concern for farmers in the zone is that 
the wide area opened by traffickers in Pichis-Palcazu threatens 
the native forest of the high jungle region. Hundreds of 
thousands of hectares, where not even a single coca plant was 
grown, are now being destroyed. The rivers are beginning to show 
the first signs of contamination due to the indiscriminate 
dumping of chemicals used for making drugs. 

