BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on crime, investigations, trials, sentencings, and other 
judicial-related activities in the PRC monitored by Hong Kong 
Bureau during the period 16 to 30 April. The source and mode of 
processing are given in parentheses at the end of each entry. 
  As evidenced by the stories listed below, PRC crime 
reportage 
did not focus on any one single issue during the month although 
Guangdong's crackdown on vehicular theft continues unabated. 
<H8>  National </H8>
<H5>  Customs Crack Down on Forged Bills, Documents </H5>
  The Chinese Customs recently issued a circular calling on 
all 
localities to crack down on good being smuggled by the use of 
forged customs papers, chops, and signatures. Since the 
beginning of this year, the customs has uncovered over 20 such 
cases worth 90 million yuan, accounting for 35 percent of the 
cases handled during the same period. The goods smuggled by 
these means included vehicles, motorcycles, color television 
sets, rolled steel, and polyster fiber. (Summary) (Hong Kong 
MING PAO in Chinese 13 Apr 94 p A11) 
<H5>  Public Security Bureaus Tighten Crackdown on Drug Trafficking </H5>
  Public security bureaus nationwide have been carrying out 
antinarcotics raids since the beginning of the year and more 
than 2,000 drug-trafficking cases have been uncovered, nearly 
100 percent up on the same period last year, and some 2,000 kg 
of various drugs have been seized. Yunnan, Guangxi, Fujian, and 
Guangdong have taken strong action against drug traffficking 
both on the borders and at sea. Yunnan solved 900 drugs cases 
involoving 700 kg of heroin. Guangxi and Guangdong both cracked 
over 400 drugs cases, arresting some overseas suspects. Fujian 
Province boosted the number of raids, solving 22 cases and 
seizing nearly 40 kg of drugs and arresting 57 suspects, 
including several Taiwan natives (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO 
XINWEN SHE in English 1233 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Police Crack Down on Electricity Power Line Thefts </H5>
  Police cracked down on peasants stealing electricity power 
lines last year and over 1,000 people were caught stealing power 
supply property and damgaing facilities. More than 750 cases 
were uncovered by police. Some 19 culprits were sentenced to 
death and 64 offenders imprisoned. Farmers in poor areas stole 
power and phone lines, transformers, and poles and sold them as 
scrap metal to waste recycling stations. The recyclers often 
sold the processed waste back to the power stations. About 
$4.17 million's worth of equipment was stolen last year 
resulting in $11.5 million in economic losses. According to the 
Ministry of Power Industry, almost 24 million kwh were lost 
(Summary) (Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 18 Apr 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Successes Scored in Fight Against Smuggling </H5>
  Since last August, all localities have launched a 
large-scale 
struggle against smuggling. Shandong organized public security, 
customs, industrial and commercial, and other law enforcement 
departments and assigned 1,700 personnel to form 140 patrol 
teams, which patrolled the harbors and ports throughout the 
whole province, day and night, effectively checking large-scale 
smuggling. Yunnan Province took action against the smuggling of 
cars and motorcycles through its borders. Jilin adopted stiff 
measures to effectively check the illegal activities of using 
the frozen Tumen Jiang to smuggle cars. Guangdong focused its 
attack on the use of motorboats for smuggling, detaining a total 
of 49 boats. Fujian strengthened management over ships and 
boats and cracked down on smuggling activities using small 
boats. Shanghai organized the relevant departments to 
resolutely close down the cigarette smuggling market in Guangfu 
Road. Beijing organized the relevant departments, waged special 
struggles on six occasions, and handled 281 cases concerning 
enterprises and institutions involved in smuggling. Guangxi 
Autonomous Region combined the reorganization of foreign trade 
with the anti-smuggling struggle and adopted resolute measures 
to curb smuggling from the sea. According to incomplete 
statistics, the country handled 10,062 smuggling cases in the 
first half of the year, worth 2.64 billion yuan. The 12 coastal 
and border provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities 
handled 236 major smuggling cases, each involving over 1 million 
yuan. A total of 1,181 suspects were questioned, 216 arrested, 
and 124 were sentenced. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in 
Chinese 23 Apr 94 p B11) 

<H8>    Provincial </H8>
<H8>  Fujian </H8>
<H5>  Procuratorate Cases Involve Party, Government Cadres </H5>
  The Fujian Procuratorate has disclosed that the number of 
major cases involving party and government cadres has increased 
sharply and has become the characteristic of the current 
corruption and bribery cases. Last year the province 
investigated 52 cadres at and above county and office level; the 
major cases accounted for 62 percent of the total, both reaching 
the highest rate in years. The large bribery case, involving 
3.36 million yuan and 15 departmental level cadres, including 
the director and party committee secretary of the Minjiang 
Hydropower Engineering Bureau under the Power Ministry, shocked 
the nation. Last year the Fujian Procuratorate placed more than 
1,870 cases of corruption and bribery on file for investigation 
and prosecution, of which 13 involved over 1 million yuan; 52 
cases involved cadres at and above county and office level, an 
increase of 370 percent over the previous year; and five cases 
involved cadres at above department level. Through handling 
these cases, the procuratorial organs retrieved losses of 75.3 
million yuan for the state and collectives. (Summary) (Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0926 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Xiamen Customs Crack Down on Forged Bills, Chops </H5>
  The Xiamen Customs recently set up a special group to crack 
down on smuggling and maintain normal imports and exports. 
While handling the formalities for importing motorcycles, the 
Xiamen Customs Port Office in Heping discovered that the customs 
certificates, customs chops, and signatures of the customs 
officials were all forged. The Xiamen Customs also found that 
the lawless elements in society frequently forged papers to 
smuggle goods in and out of the country. In view of this, the 
Xiamen Customs maintained contacts with the Guangdong and 
Shanghai Customs, found their weak links, and took joint action 
to crack down on smuggling using forged customs papers. 
(Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 1100 GMT 22 Apr 94) 
<H8>  Guangdong </H8>
<H5>  Public Security Organs Thwart Human Smuggling Cases </H5>
  The public security organs and border defense departments of 
Shantou, Huizhou, and Foshan in Guangdong recently cracked three 
human smuggling cases organized by lawless elements at home and 
abroad. They intercepted a total of 153 illegal emigrants from 
Fujian and Hunan and arrested four human traffickers from Taiwan 
and the interior. (Summary) (Hong Kong MING PAO in Chinese 23 
Apr 94 p A12) 
<H5>  Shenzhen Public Security Bureau Smashes Gambling Den </H5>
  Police officers from the Shenzhen Public Security Bureau 
recently smashed a large gambling den in the western suburbs of 
the city, arresting 23 staff members of the "Amusement Center" 
and 58 gamblers, and confiscating 24,840 yuan and HK$15,800 
(Hong Kong dollars) in cash and two slot machines. The 
so-called "Amusement Center," run by someone surnamed Huang and 
others, did not have a business license but could earn between 
10,000 to 20,000 yuan a day. The public security organs also 
sealed the illegally established "Shatou Amusement Center," 
imposed a fine of 60,000 yuan, and confiscated the gambling 
devices. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 17 Apr 94 p 
A3) 
<H5>  Shenzhen Sentences Nine Criminals to Death </H5>
  Shenzhen Special Economic Zone in Guangdong Province held 
five large-scale meetings between 23 and 27 April, conducted by 
the Shenzhen Municipal Intermediate People's Court and the 
people's courts in Baoan, Nanshan, Futian, and Longgang 
Districts, to pronounce sentence on 106 criminals involved in 34 
serious cases. Nine culprits were sentenced to death and 97 
received suspended death sentences, life imprisonment, or other 
priosn terms. Those sentenced to death and immediately executed 
had been found guilty of murder, robbery, and rape,. More than 
10,000 residents attended the meetings. (Summary) (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 0857 GMT 28 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Vehicular Thefts Show Sharp Increase </H5>
  Statistics show that Guangdong now has 3.27 million 
vehicles. 
However, more than 4,000 vehicles and 26,000 motorcycles were 
stolen in 1993, an increase of 180 and 47 percent respectively 
over the previous year, involving losses of 100 million yuan. 
In the first two months of this year, the numbers of stolen 
vehicles and motorcycles rose by 45 percent over the same period 
last year. Both the numbers of carjacking and stolen car cases 
top the nation's list. According to the Guangdong Political and 
Legal Conference and the Conference of Public Security Bureau 
Directors held recently, a special struggle against vehicle and 
motorcycle theft, led personally by director Chen Shaoji of the 
Guangdong Public Security Department, was launched provincewide 
commencing 1 April. (Summary) (Hong Kong WEN WEI PO in Chinese 
15 Apr 94 p A6] 
<H5>  Struggle Continues Against Vehicular Theft </H5>
  During the last 10 days, Guangdong Province has: Solved 
1,153 cases of car theft, 118 cases of carjacking, and eight 
cases of carjacking-related murder; broken up 327 gangs which 
disposed of stolen vehicles; arrested 1,164 culprits; and 
recovered 1,102 stolen vehicles. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdon 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 17 Apr 94) 

<H5>    Foshan City Clamps Down on Vehicular Theft </H5>
  In accordance with the provincial public security department 
plan, Foshan City public security organs are waging a citywide 
struggle against the thefts of motor vehicles and bicycles. 
Since the endo of March, the city has arrested 122 criminals 
who stole or carjacked motor vehicles and 167 criminals who 
resold stolen bicycles; solved 110 cases of vehicle theft and 
carjacking; and recovered five stolen cars, 116 motorcycles, and 
1,216 bicycles. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong People's Radio 
Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 16 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Smuggled Goods Net 320 million Yuan in 1st Quarter </H5>
  In the first quarter of this year Guangdong Province handled 
1,354 smuggling cases and the confiscated goods and fines 
imposed totaled 320 million yuan. Because of the seriousness of 
the smuggling situation, the relevant departments are adopting 
further measures to severely crack down on such crimes including 
the destruction of vessels used for smuggling and further 
rectification of markets for cars, motorcycles, and household 
electrical appliances. This will block the channels for 
circulating smuggled goods and the public will be mobilized to 
boycott them. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in English 
0745 GMT 29 Apr 94) 
<H8>  Guangxi </H8>
<H5>  Fangchenggang Security Bureau Finds Obsolete Arms in Ship </H5>
  The Guangxi Fangchenggang public security organs found some 
obsolete arms in a foreign ship a few days ago. The "goods" 
were bought as scrap metal by the Fangchenggang Yinhai 
Industrial Corporation from a foreign company. The corporation 
leased a foreign vessel to ship the goods to Fangchenggang 
without the authority of the Chinese side. There was a total of 
57 rifles of various types which could have been used after some 
repair. They included 18 Tommy-guns, 17 automatic and 
semi-automatic rifles, 11 light machine guns, two heavy machine 
guns, four carbines, and one flamethrower. (Summary) (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE in Chinese 1419 GMT 16 Apr 94) 
<H8>  Haikou </H8>
<H5>  Intermediate People's Court Sentences Seven, Executes Three </H5>
Criminals 
  The Haikou Intermediate People's Court held a public meeting 
on 4 April to pronounce judgment on seven criminals. Xu 
Changbing, Xu Shijun, and She Jiangtao were sentenced to death 
and deprived of political rights for life for kidnapping, 
blackmail, and murder; He Jiuxing and Wang Di were sentenced to 
death with a two-year reprieve and deprived of political rights 
for life for armed looting and injuring a caretaker; and Li Kun 
and Chen Qi were sentenced to 15 years and 10 years imprisonment 
and deprived of political rights for five and three years 
respectively, for looting. (Summary) (Haikou HAINAN RIBAO in 
Chinese 5 Apr 94 p 1] 
<H8>  Jiangsu </H8>
<H5>  Lianyungang Foreign Trade Entities Adulterate Fodder Exports </H5>
  In Jiangsu Province, the Lianyungang Import and Export 
Inspection Bureau and the port authorities have taken legal 
action against 31 foreign trade enterprises, storage companies, 
warehouses, and goods yards found guilty of adulterating fodder 
exports. On several occasions since the latter half of last 
year, these entities mixed sand or mud with export items such as 
animal feedcake, corn, and dried sweet potato. They also mixed 
their products with others which had not been examined by the 
inspection bureau or which had failed to pass examination. A 
goods yard put a considerable amount of sand into goods being 
loaded for export while in another case, over 60 percent of mud 
and sand was mixed into a batch of cottonseed cake weighing 60 
tonne. A total of 17 businesses had their import and export 
licenses cancelled while 24 others were fined 316,000 yuan and a 
quantity of products was seized and destroyed by the bureau. 
(Summary) (Beijing Zhongguo Xinwen She in English 1323 GMT 19 
Apr 94) 
<H8>  Jiangxi </H8>
<H5>  Nanchang Security Bureau Launches Campaign Against Criminals </H5>
  Nanchang City Public Security Bureau has achieved marked 
results in its special campaign against serious criminals. In a 
unified operation from 14 to 16 April the bureau arrested 412 
criminals, of whom 38 were important escaped convicts; broke up 
43 criminal gangs; and solved 669 cases. The current campaign 
is mainly targeted at major violent crime, criminal gangs, evil 
gangsters, drug trafficking, armed crimes, fraud, selling forged 
currency, prostitution, and patronizing prostitutes. (Summary) 
(Nanchang Jiangxi People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1100 GMT 18 
Apr 94) 

<H8>    Qinghai </H8>
<H5>  Provincial Security Organs Crack Down on Drug-Related </H5>
Activities 
  Since the beginning of the year, Qinghai public security 
organs have successfully cracked a number of drug-related 
criminal activities, including 11 serious and exceptionally 
serious trafficking cases. They have arrested 13 drug 
traffickers and seized nearly 0.9 kg of heroin and over 1 kg of 
opium. Last year, the authorities cracked 156 drug trafficking 
cases, of which 60 were serious, arrested 189 drug traffickers, 
and seized large amounts of drugs. These figures were higher 
than those in the previous two years. (Summary) (Xining Qinghai 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 28 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Procuratorate Handles Major, Important Corruption Cases </H5>
  The Qinghai Provincial Procuratorate held a news briefing 
about handling a number of major and important corruption cases. 
In the first quarter of the year, the procuratorate received 
and handled 230 submissions concerning various types of economic 
crimes. Of this number, 34 were graft cases involving 35 
people; six were for embezzlement of public funds involving six 
people; and 33 were major and important cases. Of the economic 
criminal cases placed on file for investigation and prosecution, 
nine major cases of embezzlement and bribe taking by cadres at 
section level and above involving 10,000 yuan each have been 
handled; 13 cadres were involved of whom two were departmental 
directors, two were deputy departmental directors, and six were 
section heads or senior. Cadres involved in the cases included 
a factory party committee secretary, and armed police unit's 
lieutenant colonel political commissar, and a departmental party 
committee deputy secretary. (Summary) (Xining Qinghai People's 
Radio Network in Mandarin 2300 GMT 20 Apr 94) 
<H8>  Shanghai </H8>
<H5>  Commercial Bureau Cracks First Motorbike Smuggling Case </H5>
  Shanghai cracked its first motorbike smuggling case and 
confiscated the smuggled motorbikes from the Shanghai Motor 
Products Trading Center. During an inspection of the sales of 
imported motorbikes last September, Shanghai's Jingan Industrial 
and Commercial Bureau found that there was something wrong in 
the papers for imported Yamaha and Suzuki brand motorbikes. 
After half a year of investigation, they discovered that the 
papers were forged and the departments concerned have sternly 
punished the illegal action by the Shanghai Motor Products 
Trading Center. (Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1240 
GMT 21 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Procuratorate Handles 300 Major Corruption Cases in First </H5>
Quarter 
  Shanghai's procuratorial organs cracked 357 corruption and 
bribery cases in the first quarter of this year, of which 292 
were major cases, accounting for 81.7 percent of the total. In 
a real estate deal between Shanghai and Hong Kong, the director 
and deputy director of the Shanghai Meilian Real Estate Company 
accepted bribes of 300,000 and 400,000 yuan respectively. In 
the first quarter, the procuratorial organs placed 43 cases of 
corruption and bribery on file for investigation and 
prosecution, of which two were related to party and government 
organs, six to judicial departments, nine to law enforcement 
departments, and 26 to economic management departments. There 
were 39 cases of corruption and bribery in real estate, 
securities, futures, and other fields, of which 16 involved 
foreign-funded enterprises. (Summary) (Hong Kong TA KUNG PAO in 
Chinese 13 Apr 94 p 2) 
<H8>  Tibet </H8>
<H5>  Public Security Organs See Increase in Counterfeit Renminbi </H5>
Cases 
  Tibet, the roof of the world, recently uncovered counterfeit 
renminbi in 100-yuan, 50-yuan, and 10-yuan notes. The Tibet 
public security organs discovered the trading of counterfeit 
renminbi in Lhasa, Zhedang Town in Shannan, and Zalang County 
and arrested a number of criminals involved. Last year the 
region uncovered 37 cases of counterfeit renminbi trading and 
confiscated 110,000 yuan in fake notes. Use of counterfeit 
money is tending to spread to the remote mountain areas. 
(Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 0934 GMT 
26 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Police Arrest Nepalese Drug Trafficker </H5>
  Local police in Tibet arrested six people including a 
Nepalese for drug trafficking, seizing 393.9 grams of heroin. 
It is alleged that the Nepalese had imported the heroin from 
his own country and was selling it to Lhasa peddlers. They were 
caught red-handed by the police who had been working on the case 
for two weeks. (Summary) (Beijing CHINA DAILY in English 18 Apr 
94 p 3) 

