Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["W.A." commentary: "Superpower Pretensions"] </F>
  [Text] When Gorbachev was canvassing for perestroyka, he 
substantiated it by saying that the Soviet Union will sooner or 
later lose its international weight without an economic 
foundation. But Russia, as the central country of the destroyed 
Eastern empire, does not want to hear of this; it ignores 
almost stubbornly such an insight. Although the economic 
situation is even worse than in Soviet times, Moscow is 
insisting more resolutely than ever on a leading role in world 
politics. Only the United States is recognized as an equal 
power. "Strategic partnership" is the slogan that Russian 
Foreign Minister Kozyrev enjoined to his U.S. counterpart, 
Christopher, in Vladivostok on Monday [14 March] in a way that 
was as self-confident as it was demanding. 
  However, it was not necessary for Kozyrev particularly to 
press the U.S. secretary of state, who had been treated in a 
humiliating way in Beijing the day before. According to 
Christopher, Washington, which copes with the Chinese only with 
difficulty in the political field, is now seeking all the more 
"harmonious cooperation" with the Russians. From the West's 
point of view, against the background of the numerous regional 
conflicts, there are certainly many arguments in favor of 
involving the Russians in the effort to check the trouble spots 
and to use the former Soviet influence in certain areas of the 
world. However, the impression that in this troubled world 
nothing works any longer without its participation was not 
supposed to be conveyed to the Russian leadership. However, 
Kozyrev seems to be convinced of exactly that, because otherwise 
it cannot be explained why he is meanwhile demanding from the 
United States closer coordination on virtually every 
international issue. 
  Since the West helped the Kremlin gain new influence in the 
Balkans, there is no holding Moscow's diplomacy any longer. 
Only a few days ago, Russia also returned to the Middle East 
stage when, without being invited, the active Kozyrev declared 
himself mediator between Israel and the PLO. If the power of 
veto in relations between East and Central Europe and the West 
is added, the West should actually ask itself whether this can 
be the purpose of a strategic partnership with Russia. 

