BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by State President F.W. de Klerk at National Party </F>
headquarters in Linwood, Pretoria; italicized passages in 
Afrikaans -- live] 
  [Text] Colleagues, candidates, fellow Nationalists, fellow 
South Africans. Four years and three months ago, I said in 
parliament that the time has come for us to break out of the 
cycle of conflict, tension, and violent struggle in which we 
have been embroiled for decades. I said that the table had been 
laid for sensible leaders to begin talking about a new 
dispensation and to reach an understanding by way of dialogue 
and negotiation. I said that the agenda would include a new and 
dynamic constitution, the removal of any form of discrimination 
and domination, equality before an independent judiciary, the 
protection of minorities as well as of individual rights, 
freedom of religion, and universal franchise. 
  During the past week, we have seen the realization of that 
vision. We have a new and dynamic constitution. We have the 
assurance that there will be no domination of any South Africans 
by any others. We have seen the end of discrimination. We have 
equality before the law. Minority rights have been secured. 
Individual rights and all these other rights are guaranteed by a 
charter of fundamental rights and by a strong and effective 
constitutional court, and during the past week we have held our 
first universal franchise election. After so many centuries we 
will finally have a government which represents all South 
Africans. After so many centuries all South Africans are now 
free. [applause] 
  This new election did not take place without problems. 
We had serious hitches, shortcomings, and irregularities. Hard 
work is taking place to deal with these problems within the 
framework of the law, and the necessary steps will be taken. 
Despite all these problems, there can, however, be no doubt 
that the ANC has received the most votes countrywide and the 
National Party, the second most votes. The National Party [NP] 
will ensure during the ratification process that it and other 
parties get everything they have a legal right to, and that 
errors will be corrected as far as possible. This must happen 
quickly. South Africans are impatient. The new parliament, the 
government, and regional governments must be put together now. 
We must move ahead in this country. 
  Despite all these problems, a word of thanks is in 
order. Many people worked hard to make the election possible. 
They had little time, and many changes took place during the 
process, such as the double ballot and the Inkatha Freedom 
Party's entry to the election. I also wish to express my thanks 
to Judge Johann Kriegler and the IEC [Independent Electoral 
Commission] for their hard work. The fact that we had 
serious criticism does not in any way detract from our 
appreciation. To the Air Force too, which in the end had to 
jump in to lend a hand, also a word of thanks. Thank you also 
to the security forces, and in particular the South African 
Police, for their contribution to a peaceful election. And 
especially to the voters, in particular those who supported the 
NP. We will not disappoint you. 
  While we concede that another party gained the most 
votes, the NP says: Our second place is not a defeat; it is a 
victory for the cause we stand for. [applause] The 
spirit among the voters during the election was a revelation, a 
revelation that we must never forget. There was tolerance, 
patience, excitement, and a visible desire for reconciliation 
and peace. Our people want the new South Africa to work, the 
election to succeed, the bitterness of the past to be put aside. 
This attitude must serve as a guideline, to all leaders in the 
years ahead, of what the people of South Africa expect of 
them. 
  I also said four years ago that Mr. Nelson Mandela would 
play 
an important role, and then noted that he had declared himself 
willing to make a constructive contribution to the peaceful 
political process in South Africa. During the past four years 
Mr. Mandela has played such a role. His role was a leading and 
an honorable one. I thank him, and I congratulate him. He 
deserves the congratulations, good wishes, and prayers of all 
South Africans. I look forward to working with him 
constructively within the government of national unity in our 
common effort to promote the well-being of all our people. 
  During the past four years we have proved that we can work 
together. Despite our differences, our relationship has become a 
symbol of the ability of South Africans from widely different 
backgrounds to cooperate in the national interest. This spirit 
will be essential to the success of the government of national 
unity. 
  He will soon assume the highest office in the land with all 
the awesome responsibility which it bears. He will have to 
exercise this great responsibility in a balanced manner which 
will assure South Africans from all our communities that he has 
all their interests at heart. I am confident that that will be 
his intention. Mr. Mandela has walked a long road and now stands 
at the top of the hill. A traveler would sit down and admire 
the view, but a man of destiny knows that beyond this hill lies 
another, and another. The journey is never complete. As he 
contemplates the next hill, I hold out my hand to Mr. Mandela in 
friendship and in cooperation. As far as my own position is 
concerned, I should like to make it clear that I believe that my 
political task is just beginning. Everything that we have done 
so far -- the four years of difficult and often frustrating 
negotiations, the problems and the crises -- have been simply a 
preparation for the work that lies ahead. [applause] 
  The greatest challenge...the greatest challenge which we 
will 
face in the government of national unity will be to defend and 
nurture our new constitution. Our greatest task will be to 
ensure that our young and vulnerable democracy takes root and 
flourishes. We must make the transitional constitution a living 
organism. We must remain vigilant against any attempts by any 
level of government to erode any aspect of the constitution or 
of individual minority or religious rights. Our courts must 
build up a sound basis of case law which will provide further 
guarantees for the maintenance of constitutional rights. We 
must rally all the genuinely democratic institutions of our 
society in a grand coalition for the defense of the constitution 
and its principles. We must also ensure that we adopt the right 
approaches in the economic and social spheres. We need a strong 
and a vibrant economy based on tried and tested principles of 
free enterprise. Only then can we ensure that we will generate 
the wealth which we need to address the pressing social needs of 
large sections of our population. We must ensure that social 
services are affordable, caring, and effective. 
  We must also continue to observe our values, good 
family values, the moral values befitting a country based on 
Christian norms and standards. 
  I will be in a good position in the government of national 
unity to promote these objectives. I will not be there at the 
whim of any person or any party, but in my own right as the 
leader of the National Party, as the representative of many 
millions of South Africans who have put their trust in us and 
who have supported our policies and our principles. [applause] 
Just as we could not rule South Africa effectively without the 
support of the ANC and its supporters, no government will be 
able to rule South Africa effectively without the support of the 
people and the institutions that I as your leader in the 
National Party represent. I enthusiastically pledge that 
support in the interests of working for national reconciliation 
and reconstruction. 
  Our party is in a good position to make a key 
contribution in this regard. The changes that have taken place 
within the National Party over the past few years are nothing 
short of a miracle. This fact will be proven in the expected 
election results. Although we are not the biggest party at 
present, there can be little doubt that our party is the most 
representative party of all our population groups. This is a 
solid foundation for the future and for future growth. 
  I wish all in our party, my fellow leaders, our workers 
who worked so hard in this election, all our supporters, good 
luck with our performance in the election. Thank you for the 
graciousness you showed in making possible the changes we have 
introduced. Thank you for your hard work and sacrifice, faith, 
and support, and loyalty. It is that which we will be able to 
build upon. 
  We in our party represent to a certain extent the nucleus of 
our new nation. Within our party we have already achieved the 
reconciliation which South Africa as a whole needs. We believe 
that we have the recipe for the future, and we plan to spread 
our message and win further support, until one day we shall be 
the largest party in the country. [applause] Our objective will 
be to prove this already at the polls in five years' time. 
  I know there are those who are skeptical towards the 
new dispensation, and there are also those who even want to 
oppose it violently. If for them it involves religious freedom, 
language, cultural rights, or individual rights, or community 
rights, then I say to them tonight, we must stand together, 
because we in this party will also fight for those rights. If 
they are concerned about self-determination in a practically 
achievable manner without ever again bringing back any form of 
discrimination on a single inch of land in South Africa, then I 
say, we will support that. But if it involves racism and 
unachievable dreams, then they are on the wrong path, and then 
there will be no peace. Then it will be a useless course, and I 
ask them tonight: Become part of the solution. The election 
has shown once and for all that those minorities which want to 
force solutions on their fellow South Africans are heading 
toward a dead end. 
  I should also like to use this opportunity to thank all 
those 
who have helped South Africa, to bring South Africa to this new 
era. The list is very long. It includes our negotiators, the 
cabinet, officials, the security forces who have helped to keep 
the process on track. It includes foreign leaders who have 
given us so much support. It includes you, the supporters of my 
party. It includes thousands of ordinary people who have 
remembered us in their prayers. 
  Most importantly, on a very personal note, I must thank my 
wife, Marike, and my family. [applause] 
  Ladies and gentlemen, this is an important milestone in the 
history of our country, perhaps the most important that we will 
ever see. Next Tuesday I shall lay down my responsibilities as 
state president, secure in the knowledge that we have achieved 
what we set out to achieve four years and three months ago. I 
shall be handing over the presidency to Mr. Mandela, but I shall 
not be leaving government. I shall be surrendering power not to 
the majority of the moment, but to the South African people. I 
shall do so with the strong conviction that henceforth 
sovereignty will ultimately lie with them and in the 
constitution. A power greater than man has given South Africa 
the spirit, the chance to go forward in peace. God Almighty has 
been kind to us. Now it is up to the political leaders to join 
together, to work together, for the good of our people, and to 
complete the task of healing and reconciliation. God bless 
South Africa. Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika [God Bless Africa]. Thank 
you. [applause] 

