BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Kang Xinwen (1660 2450 2429)] </F>
  [Text] Brussels, 18 May (XINHUA) -- Li Ruihuan, chairman of 
the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference [CPPCC], met here today with Willy 
Claes, Belgian deputy prime minister and minister of foreign 
affairs. They exchanged views on the development of 
Sino-Belgian relations and China's relations with West European 
countries. 
  Li Ruihuan said: A good development momentum has appeared in 
Sino-Belgian trade and economic relations in recent years. A 
vast market provided by China's national economy with sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development and advanced technology, 
equipment, and funds from Belgium offer great potential and 
broad prospects for trade and economic cooperation between the 
two countries. China is willing to make joint efforts with 
Belgium to further develop the mutually beneficial cooperation 
between the two countries. 
  On relations between China and Western Europe, Li Ruihuan 
said: The Chinese Government attaches importance to developing 
long-term, stable, equal, mutually beneficial, and cooperative 
relations with West European countries. These relations are 
good on the whole. Both sides share the same or similar views on 
major international issues. Economically, the two sides have a 
sound foundation for cooperation and broad prospects for 
development. Since last year, the relations between the two 
sides have noticeably improved and developed; the exchange of 
visits by high-level personnel has increased and yielded 
positive results; and trade and economic cooperation have 
steadily developed. Strengthening cooperation between China and 
West European countries in various fields is conducive not only 
to both sides but to the peace, stability, and economic 
development of the world. Of course, there are some problems in 
the relations between China and West European countries as well 
as some restrictions imposed by the European Union in its 
relations with China. Such restrictions are incompatible with 
the times and should be abolished. Li Ruihuan then pointed out: 
Mutual relations can develop smoothly provided the two sides 
abide by the principles of seeking common ground while reserving 
differences, mutual respect, noninterference in each other's 
internal affairs, peace, and mutual benefit. 
  Showing his understanding of Li Ruihuan's viewpoint, Deputy 
Prime Minister Claes said: The European Union should take a 
positive attitude toward China by relaxing its restrictions on 
China in trade and economic affairs and opening to the country. 
Claes said: The development of trade and economic cooperation 
between Belgium and China is satisfactory. With a strong wish 
to develop relations with China, Belgium is willing to take 
measures to further expand trade and economic exchanges between 
the two countries. He then expressed the belief that Chairman 
Li Ruihuan's visit would help enhance mutual understanding and 
cooperation. 

