BFN 

<F P=106> [By David Chazan] </F>
  [Excerpts] Nairobi, April 19 (AFP) -- At least 25 civilians 
were killed and nearly 60 wounded when Rwandan Government forces 
shelled a Kigali stadium sheltering thousands of displaced 
people Tuesday [19 April], a UN official said. Most of those 
killed were members of the minority Tutsi tribe which dominates 
the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front. They had abandoned their 
homes and fled to the Amahoro stadium in a rebel-held 
northeastern neighbourhood to escape Hutu killing squads roaming 
the streets, UN spokesman Moctar Gueye said by telephone from 
Kigali. 
  Fighting between rebels and government soldiers battling for 
control of the capital for nearly two weeks intensified Tuesday 
morning before a lull in the afternoon, Gueye said. UN efforts 
to broker a truce have so far failed as the two sides have 
rejected each other's demands. But UN officials are continuing 
to shuttle between rebel and army commanders in an effort to 
bring them back to the negotiating table. [passage omitted] 
  The UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda [UNAMIR] lodged a "very 
strong protest" with the military after four or five shells hit 
the stadium, where a battalion of Bangladeshi peacekeepers is 
based, Gueye said. 
  With no sign of progress towards a ceasefire, tribal clashes 
appeared to be spreading to Burundi, which shares the same 
ethnic composition and blood-steeped history of tribal feuding 
as Rwanda. Fighting between Burundi's Tutsi-dominated army and 
armed Hutu militants has erupted in several mainly Hutu areas on 
the outskirts of Burundi's capital Bujumbura since the weekend, 
officials said. It was unknown whether anyone was hurt. 
  Burundi, still reeling from ethnic massacres that claimed 
tens of thousands of lives last year after its first Hutu 
president was assassinated, had remained relatively calm since 
its President Cyprien Ntaryamira and Rwanda's Juvenal 
Habyarimana, both Hutus, were killed in what the Rwandan 
military said was a rocket attack on their plane. [passage 
omitted] 
  A Ugandan journalist from the government daily NEW VISION 
described how reporters had helped pull 10 survivors from a pit 
where they had been thrown with the corpses of about 800 people, 
mostly Tutsis, hacked to death by government troops in Kaziguro, 
northeastern Rwanda. 
  UN special envoy to Rwanda Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh said 
Monday that the world body would not abandon Rwanda but could be 
forced to pull its personnel from the country if the fighting 
did not stop. 
  Tanzania, which mediated a peace accord signed in August to 
end nearly three years of civil war in Rwanda, announced new 
peace talks for this weekend, but it was unclear whether rebel 
or government representatives would attend. 
  The International Red Cross meanwhile resumed distributing 
food in Kigali on Tuesday. It had suspended relief operations 
after six wounded people were shot dead while being taken to 
hospital in a Red Cross vehicle last week. 
  Some 30 aid workers from the Red Cross and the French 
medical 
agency Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) are 
tending to hundreds of wounded people in Kigali, where drugs and 
supplies are running desperately low. 

