BFN 

<F P=106> [By Huang Yiming: "Hainan Province Grows Up Quickly"] </F>
  [Text] The economy of Hainan, China's youngest province, 
has been developing at high speed and its investment environment 
has improved remarkably, Governor Ruan Chongwu told CHINA DAILY. 
  The situation was the result of years of work, he said, 
which 
had laid strong economic foundations for the province. 
  The island's gross product is expected to rise 18 percent 
this year to 27 billion yuan ($3.1 billion). Output from 
manufacturing industry is forecast to go up 30 percent to 13.03 
billion yuan ($1.494 billion) and output from agriculture is 
expected to rise 10 percent to 9.74 billion yuan ($1.12 billion). 
  At the same time local revenue is expected to be 3.35 
billion 
yuan ($0.38 billion), an increase of 18.4 percent, Ruan said. 
  The province is set to improve the preferential policies it 
uses to attract more foreign investment, he added, and it will 
work hard to adjust its economic structure to improve returns. 
  The 34,000 square kilometre island is China's second largest 
behind Taiwan. It is also the largest of the country's five 
special economic zones, though it is the smallest province. 
  The island's position in the South China Sea places it at 
the 
centre of the Asia Pacific region and makes it a convenient 
staging post for trade between China and Southeast Asia. 
  But it has managed to avoid the industrial pollution which 
afflicts many of China's developing provinces. Indeed, plants 
flourish in this natural greenhouse. 
  The island government has had more autonomy than most other 
regions since the Chinese government made it both a province and 
special economic zone in April, 1988 . 
  It was given clearance to use preferential policies in its 
development of State Land resources, appraisal and approval of 
basic construction projects, control of foreign currency, 
finance, tax and the management of people into and out of the 
province. 
  These have helped maintain the vigour and vitality of the 
province. 
  Six years ago, the place's industry and agriculture were 
both 
rather backward. 
  But it worked hard to make use of its natural advantages and 
so its economy began to develop rapidly. This process has been 
helped particularly by the practical policies brought in by the 
provincial government, which stressed efficiency and the 
creation of a solid foundation for economic development. 
  The island's electricity capacity is now 800,000 kwh, twice 
the figure in 1987, providing electricity of 2 billion kilowatts 
a year. 
  Hainan has built 17 ports and 59 berths with an annual 
handling capacity of 11 million tons linked to 15 domestic 
shipping lines and connecting with 24 countries and regions. It 
has also established the Hainan Ocean Transport Company, with 
five 10,000-ton ships. 
  The island has 14,000 kilometers of road -- more for its 
size 
than anywhere else in China -- and an expressway is being built 
from east to west across the island. 
  Thirty-three air routes come out of Haikou and Sanya 
airports 
connecting all major domestic cities plus Bangkok and Singapore. 
  Telecommunications are near perfect as 100,000-phone lines 
connect it with China and more than 210 countries and regions. 
  Along with the improvement in the investment environment, 
more and more foreign investors have come to the special zone. 
  Last year, the province attracted $730 million from abroad, 
61.5 percent more than in 1992. Moreover, $238 million in 
foreign loans and $80 million in debt issues was used to build 
up the province's infrastructure. 
  The foreign exchange income from tourism last year was $113 
million, 11.8 percent higher than 1992. 
  All these efforts indicate Hainan is becoming more open and 
has the necessary conditions for large-scale development. 
  In order to establish more perfect socialist market economy 
and to keep it growing "Hainan will positively promote reforms 
in all fields," said Ruan. 
  "The emphasis of reform is to put the company system into 
practice in State-run enterprises. Moreover, we will work to 
reform the tax management system, administration, the housing 
system and so on. 
  "The purpose of what we do is to create a perfect 
environment 
for all tourists and investors from home and overseas." 

