BFN 

<F P=106> [By So Lai-Fun] </F>
  [Text] Pressure is mounting to scrap a law which allows 
British forces to inspect identity cards, amid fears it might be 
used by the People s Liberation Army (PLA) after 1997. 
  Legal experts said giving the PLA such a power would violate 
the Basic Law and the Joint Declaration. Under the agreements, 
the PLA's jurisdiction is limited to defence and disaster 
control. They are not to be involved in the territory's 
internal security. 
  Legislators said there was no need for British forces to 
retain such powers now that their role in border security was 
being taken over by the police. 
  Under the Public Order Ordinance, a member of the British 
forces is entitled to ask any person for proof of identity, if 
he "reasonably" believes it necessary to prevent, detect, or 
investigate an offence. 
  Senior law lecturer at Hong Kong University, Johannes Chan 
Manmun, said it was "a dangerous concept" to give the PLA the 
right to check the public's identity cards. "They are only in 
charge of defence matters or regulation in riots and not 
internal duties of public order," Mr Chan said. 
  Chairman of the grass-roots Human Rights Commission, Ho 
Heiwah, said he feared the power would be transferred to the 
PLA, whose actual duties were uncertain. "Inspecting one's ID 
card definitely should not be a duty of the PLA," he said. 
"Once the power is abused, the consequences are more serious 
than with the police because there are no checks and balances. 
The line is very clear, according to the Basic Law, they have 
no right to participate in the territory's internal security and 
that's the basic principle for the stability of Hong Kong," he 
said. 
  Mr Ho urged the government to sort out all legislation 
concerning the role of the British forces and to amend all 
unnecessary powers. 
  But officials said the power was needed for the army to 
catch 
illegal immigrants along the border. The army had rarely 
invoked the law, said Principal Assistant Secretary for Security 
Karen Pong Leung kwok-hing and she did not see why the clause 
should be scrapped. 
  However, legislators Emily Lau Wai-hing and James To Kun-sun 
said they did not see such powers as necessary in the present 
climate. 
  Mrs Pong said the government was amending all legislation 
with colonial implications but she did not know how the Public 
Order Ordinance would be affected. 
  The government has said it wants all laws adapted before 
1997 
and endorsed by China in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group. 
  Legislators said they would raise the issue in the bills 
committee to be formed to study the Public Order Ordinance 
amendments. 
  Members of the Beijing think-tank overseeing Hong Kong's 
transition held conflicting views. Tam Yiu-chung, member of the 
Preliminary Working Committee's legal affairs sub-group, said it 
would violate the Basic Law if the PLA had the power to inspect 
ID cards. However, Rita Fan Hsu Lai-tai co-convenor of the 
social and security sub-group, said that, in principle, the 
privileges and powers of the PLA should be no less and no more 
than those enjoyed by the British forces. 

