BFN 

  [Text] Amman (PETRA)--The chambers of industry of Moscow 
and Amman Sunday signed a memorandum of understanding and 
cooperation aimed at stimulating economic and trade relations. 
  Head of the Amman Chamber of Industry Khaldun Abu-Hassan 
said 
after the signing that the two sides agreed on exploring ways to 
launch joint industrial ventures and exchange information on 
organising trade fairs. 
  Russia and Jordan will also facilitate the missions of 
visiting businesspersons from either side and help them organise 
seminars and conferences designed to promote trade between the 
two countries, he added. 
  During the talks, held at the Amman Chamber of Industry, the 
two sides reviewed ways to boost the volume of trade and agreed 
on setting up related joint committee or a business council, Mr. 
Abu- Hassan said. 
  The head of the Russian team underlined his country's desire 
to set up joint investment companies with Jordanian 
businesspersons and the exchange of industrial expertise. 
  The Jordan News Agency PETRA, quoted the head of the team as 
saying that the Moscow chamber represents an area comprising 20 
million people and houses 34 per cent of the Russian 
technological industries which earn nearly 25 per cent of the 
gross national product (GNP). 
  At the outset of the meeting, Mr. Abu-Hassan presented a 
briefing on Jordanian industries, Jordan's trade with Russia and 
prospects for investments in the two countries. 
  Jordan has strong and growing relations with Russia in all 
fields and has been importing an average of $50 million worth of 
Russian products annually, against $37 million worth of 
Jordanian products, said Mr. Abu-Hassan. 
  "We look forward to increasing the volume of trade with 
Russia and launching joint industrial ventures in the two 
countries," added Mr. Abu-Hassan. 
  PETRA quoted the Amman Chamber of Industry chief as saying 
that the two countries have been exchanging food supplies, 
electrical appliances, construction material, furniture timber 
as well as computers. 

