Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Milovan Drecun] </F>
  [Text] The airports in Sarajevo, Tuzla, and Mostar are of 
strategic and tactical importance for NATO. One of the most 
important operative-strategic directions from central Europe to 
the Adriatic Sea goes from Subotica-Novi 
Sad-Zupanja-Tuzla-Sarajevo-Mostar-Port of Ploce. That was also 
one of the most important and sensitive directions for the 
defense of the former Yugoslavia. That direction is not only 
the shortest but also allows great possibilities for high-speed 
advancement from central Europe toward the sea and vice versa. 
The most important part of the defense along this direction is 
in the wider region of Tuzla, which is a significant mining and 
industrial center in the former Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Gornje 
Dubrave airport was built by the former Yugoslav People's Army 
in order to provide effective support for ground troops. 
  That direction is still very important not only for NATO but 
also for the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia]. The presence 
of 1,350 members of the UN Protection Forces [UNPROFOR], who 
have Leopard tanks, in the Tuzla enclave shows that, due to NATO 
interests, UNPROFOR wants to concentrate military potential in 
that region, primarily for military purposes. It is obvious that 
the Gornje Dubrave airport is meant to be opened for NATO needs 
since it has a better location than the airport in Sarajevo, 
which is in a valley and frequently engulfed in fog, and the one 
in Mostar, which is rather far from the FRY. 
  The central location of the Dubrave airport enables an 
effective control of the air space not only over the former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina but also over the FRY, and enables the 
effective control of the crossings over the Drina River. Also, 
the use of the UNPROFOR ground forces, or the Muslim formations 
in that region, for a possible spring offensive -- which the 
Muslims have been announcing -- could completely cut off 
Semberija from the Bosnian Krajina and the republic of Serbian 
Krajina, that is, it could cut off the corridor. 
  The airports in Tuzla, Sarajevo, and Mostar are very 
important for safeguarding air communications, with which U.S. 
and West European forces for fast intervention could be 
transported into the regions of protruding deployment of forces 
[as heard] in Albania and Macedonia, where the forces for quick 
intervention in crisis spots are based. 
  The announced opening of the Gornje Dubrave airport has 
justifiably caused suspicions among the Serb leadership, and not 
only because of the possible arming of the Muslims but also 
because of possible military operations on the ground aimed at 
cutting off the largest part of the Srpska republic and the 
republic of Serbian Krajina from the FRY. 

