Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional guerrilla activities and clashes with 
government military units monitored through 7 February. Source 
is cited in parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  Today, military sources reported that Colombian Armed Forces 
have seized half a ton of explosives hidden by Army of National 
Liberation (ELN) guerrillas in a house located in Santander 
Department. No arrests were made during the operation. A 
spokesperson for the Fifth Army Brigade stationed in Bucaramanga 
said the explosives, which included more than 500 kgs of 
explosives and mines known as "leg breakers," [quiebrapatas] 
were hidden at a local ranch. According to the report, the 
rebels favor this type of explosive to block military patrols, 
and it has inflicted numerous casualties on the the region's 
peasants. In another military operation which took place on 
Thursday, an army patrol was also able to seize weapons and 
12,000 rounds of bullets from an ELN group operating in Cucuta, 
Norte de Santander Department. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 0124 GMT 8 
Feb 94) 
  Ecopetrol [Colombian Petroleum Enterprise] authorities 
reported that crude oil pumping operations at the Los Llanos 
central pipeline were suspended on 3 February as a result of an 
ELN attack which caused considerable damage to the pipe's 
infrastructure. According to an Ecopetrol spokesperson, ELN 
guerrillas detonated a dynamite charge near the Rio Chiquito 
area, located in the municipality of Aguazul, Casanare which 
destroyed an important stretch of the pipeline. Police and 
military authorities in the area have announced an increase in 
security measures along the Casanare petroleum infrastructure in 
order to prevent any further attacks. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 3 Feb 94 p 14A) 
<H5>  El Salvador </H5>
  This Saturday, the National Civilian Police (PNC) uncovered 
a 
new weapons stockpile in an underground warehouse in San 
Francisco Gotera, Morazan Department. The discovery was the 
result of information provided by local peasants. Weapons seized 
included 50 blocks of TNT, 20,000 rounds of assorted shells 
including those for FAL, AK-47, and 16-mm rifles. PNC sources 
pointed out that in the past few days they have uncovered 
numerous weapons in the area. (San Salvador EL DIARIO DE HOY in 
Spanish 7 Feb 94 p 11) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  National Police sources report that one intelligence 
services 
junior officer had been tortured and killed on Sunday by alleged 
subversives in the Lima district of Los Olivos. Police 
investigating the case believe the police officer was killed in 
another area and afterwards the body was dumped at Los Olivos. 
Several months ago, two police lieutenants were also killed by a 
guerrilla commando unit in the same area. (Paris AFP in Spanish 
1557 GMT 7 Feb 94) 
  A DINCOTE (National Counterterrorism Directorate) agent was 
killed this past Saturday by a four-man Shining Path `death 
squad' in Huancayo, Junin Department, located 315 km east of 
Lima. The agent was killed when his car was intercepted by the 
terrorists while driving towards the local DINCOTE headquarters. 
In another incident, two terrorists were killed Friday in 
Huaraz, 400 km north of Lima when an Army patrol clashed with a 
20-man Shining Path column that was trying to hold-up a bus. 
(Madrid EFE in Spanish 1845 GMT 6 Feb 94) 

