BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Enzo Bettizza: "The Union of the Extremists"] </F>
  [Text] This is not the first time that Italy has been the 
target of threats and blackmail from the East in connection with 
the war in the Balkans. Before Zhirinovskiy, another extremist, 
the leader of the Serbian Chetnik right wing, Seselj, had 
threatened to use medium-range missiles to hit not only the 
Aviano base in the Friuli region, but other Italian cities as 
well. Seselj, who is both the ally and the rival of the 
national communist Milosevic in Belgrade, is also the 
postcommunist, racist prototype that seems to have inspired 
Zhirinovskiy in his pan-Slavic extremism. The threat to destroy 
Aviano is, therefore, a recurrent symbolic gesture uniting the 
extremists of Belgrade and Moscow in the resurgence of 
belligerent pan-Slavism that has for some time festered most 
virulently in Serbia, even longer than in Russia. 
  Will, indeed can, the transition be made from the symbol of 
reprisal to the act of reprisal? After the blazing words 
uttered by Zhirinovskiy in the heart of West Europe, in the 
building that houses both the Council of Europe and the European 
Parliament in Strasbourg, the question is more than justified 
and is on the lips of many. Could the Serbs, egged on and 
backed by Zhirinovskiy, set about responding to the two strikes 
against their positions around Gorazde carried out by the NATO 
planes, with actions of suicidal folly? 
  For the time being, this hypothesis seems destined to remain 
just that. The Serb's policy of expansion and "ethnic 
cleansing" in the former Yugoslavia, and in Bosnia in 
particular, has undoubtedly been ruthless, bold, and 
bloodthirsty, but it has never been reckless or foolhardy. They 
have been cutting butter as far as the West is concerned. They 
have struck hard where they have been able to strike, but they 
have always stopped where they met strong, united resistance, as 
they did in Sarajevo in 1991 or, more recently, in Sarajevo 
after world reaction to the marketplace massacre. They did not 
attack the UN forces on the ground in response to the recent 
shooting down of their four fighter planes caught flying over 
Bosnia. Milosevic has always pretended to prefer diplomacy to 
force, he has negotiated, he has beaten about the bush, he has 
traveled tirelessly between Brussels and Geneva. His 
satellites, the Bosnian Serbs, have always divided themselves 
cleverly between the diplomatic moderateness of their political 
leader, Karadzic, and their military chief Mladic's tough acts 
of war. 
  One cannot see why they should fail to resort to reason, 
which they are capable of doing when they consider it necessary, 
at a time when the United Nations and NATO are demonstrating, 
with the recent strikes, their will to take selective rather 
than destructive action for the time being against the Serbian 
positions surrounding Gorazde. Indeed, the NATO aircraft have 
given "warning signs," at least to date, rather than engaging in 
real acts of indiscriminate air warfare against all the Serbian 
military lines on the hills surrounding Gorazde. The Bosnian 
Serbian generals, and Milosevic as well, probably appreciate the 
meaning of the Western warning and will seek some way out of the 
impasse in which the strikes have placed them. 
  This does not mean that a withdrawal, or feigned withdrawal, 
from Gorazde will signify the abandonment overnight of their 
intention to complete their great political design. This design 
is to take, if not Sarajevo which is further away, at least the 
Muslim enclaves of Gorazde, Zepa, Srebrenica, and Tuzla, all of 
which lie on the fateful banks of the Drina, the river sung and 
so often dramatically described by the Bosian Nobel prize 
winner, Ivo Andric. "The Drina must never divide the Serbs," 
Karadzic has said. 
  The other side of the Bosnian coin, unfortunately, is Russia 
on its own account. When Zhirinovskiy threatens to shell 
Aviano, when he states that he wants to run to the aid of his 
Orthodox Slav brothers in Bosnia, what he is really seeking to 
shell is Yeltsin's headquarters. Yeltsin, not Aviano, is his 
real target. This is why Clinton, forced by European impotence 
to take the NATO and United Nations controls, perhaps 
disorientated by the excessive responsibility that has fallen 
onto his shoulders, was mistaken to give the go-ahead for the 
strikes without giving the Russian president advance warning. 
The idea that Russia must not be excluded, but diplomatically 
involved in all the more serious decisions regarding the war in 
the Balkans, is right. It is this war that Yeltsin's enemies 
aim to use to unseat him and push the precarious domestic 
situation in Russia over to the Right. Giving Yeltsin no 
notice, failing to consult him, adding the picture of his 
powerlessness to that of general European impotence, means tying 
his hands and handing him over as a prisoner to his and the 
West's enemies. 
  We realize that this is a difficult line to take. We realize 
that, between diplomacy and nondiplomacy, there is also a choice 
to be made that affects thousands upon thousands of innocent 
lives. But at the same time, we know that, should Yeltsin fall, 
the carnage in Bosnia could spread like wildfire and in no time 
at all become carnage on a European scale. The West, and Europe 
in particular, did nothing beforehand, and now, late in the day, 
they sadly find themselves forced to steer a hazardous course 
between decisions that are becoming daily increasingly difficult 
and complex. 

