Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Pelts report: "The Case of the State Committee </F>
for the State of Emergency: It Was Planned To `Instill Order'"] 
  [Text] Let us recall what feelings were aroused in us all 
by the tanks and armored personnel carriers which appeared in 
the capital 19 August 1991. This was the first time, and it 
shook us and aroused bewilderment and anger. 
  Yes, everything was different then. People, ordinary 
residents of the capital, seemed prepared to lie down under the 
caterpillar tracks. No less bewildered, officers and soldiers 
looked at them and heard the words "Shame!" and "Fascists!" 
addressed to themselves for the first time. 
  It was a dirty business -- to make the Army clash with the 
people, whom it is called upon to protect. But the court, which 
is continuing the interrogation of Marshal Dmitriy Yazov, former 
USSR minister of defense, is not in the business of emotions, as 
the saying goes. 
  The second consecutive session was devoted to ascertaining 
the actions of undoubtedly one of the key figures in the State 
Committee for the State of Emergency -- the former USSR defense 
minister. The nature of the state prosecution's questions 
attests that the prosecutors are seeking to determine the 
precise degree of guilt of each of the accused. Therefore, 
literally all actions, including those before the start of the 
dramatic events of 19 August, are being worked out in detail. 
  As is known, before the start of the interrogation Dmitriy 
Yazov himself gave a brief account of the history of the sending 
of troops into the capital and even put a figure on their 
numerical strength. But many specific questions are arising in 
the course of the interrogation concerning the nature of the 
servicemen's actions and also the tasks which the troops were to 
have been set subsequently. 
  One thing is clear: At that time the chief gamble was made 
on the Army. It was planned to "instill order" precisely with 
its help. But the rapidly changing situation, the Muscovites' 
determination, and the obvious dissension among the members of 
the State Committee for the State of Emergency themselves 
prevented those plans from being realized. 
  The interrogation of the former defense minister will most 
likely continue at the next session of the Russian Federation 
Supreme Court's Military Collegium. 

