Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Beatriz V. Goyoaga] </F>
  [Text] According to Lower House Foreign Relations Committee 
chairman Florencio Acenolaza, the existence of oil around the 
Malvinas has not been proven and if any were to be found, the 
amount would be so small and the difficulties of exploitation so 
extraordinary that it would not be commercially viable. 
  The existence of oil in the Malvinas has been a source of 
conflict between Argentina and Britain. The UK (as published by 
the Herald) recently announced a major oil industry impact study 
but the Argentine deputy denounces the existence of oil as "a 
lie and a political maneuver to manipulate Argentina when 
discussing fisheries or sovereignty. This (manipulation) is not 
only encouraged by the Foreign Office but also by people in this 
country who wish to change current Argentine policy." 
  Acenolaza believes that the existing oil basins are all 
under 
Argentine territorial jurisdiction and exploitation conditions 
are the most difficult in the world -- so difficult that oil 
prices would be as high as $50 per barrel when world prices are 
under 15. 
  "The existence of oil is an invention of British authorities 
as a strategy to gain a better position when discussing 
fisheries or sovereignty. It is untrue and a blatant lie that 
there is oil in the Malvinas. The UK is manipulating 
information aimed at confusing public opinion over the real 
possibility of finding oil in the islands." 
  Deputy Acenolaza, himself a geologist, underlines that 
former 
state oil company YPF had prospected in the Malvinas and the 
existence of oil could not be proven. On this subject, YPF 
spokesman Juan Carlos Ferrari declined comment, explaining that 
the company "does not have or give any information regarding oil 
in the Malvinas." He also added that in 1933 a member of the 
Foreign Office had said that there was no oil in Saudi Arabia. 
  "Geologists know that geological conditions to certify the 
existence of oil-fields in the Malvinas do not exist. Both 
islands are made of Paleozoic rock, which lack the natural raw 
material to generate hydrocarbons. The stratographic base, made 
of crystalline rocks, has a natural incapacity to hold 
hydrocarbons. It is equally impossible with the quartz or sandy 
rocks which make up the greater part of the territory." 
  The deputy also underlined that in the South Atlantic and 
the 
British exclusion zone there are two oil basins dating back to 
Jurassic times, which correspond to the geological formation of 
the Patagonian oil basins. 
  He recognizes the existence of three oil basins with 
insignificant amounts of oil. The "Cuenca de Malvinas" basin to 
the southwest of the islands was surveyed by a concession which 
discovered oil and gas only in two wells (Ciclon XI and Salmon 
XII) but in such small quantities that it did not justify 
exploitation. The geological information of the "Banco Burwood" 
basin to the Northwest is reportedly so limited that no 
guarantee for the existence of hydrocarbons can be given. In 
the third basin -- "Cuenca de San Julian" -- the sedimentary 
depths hardly reach 2,500 meters and the existence of 
"generating rocks" for oil has not been proven. 
  According to the deputy, the barometric and weather 
conditions of the three basins together with the low price of 
oil make the possibilities of finding oil in the Malvinas 
irrelevant. 

