Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung] </F>
  [Text] China's ailing state enterprises have suffered 
losses of at least 130 billion yuan (HK$115.44 billion) and the 
multiple debts among them stood at 140 billion yuan, according 
to official statistics. The plight of the 14,000-strong 
state-owned medium and large enterprises was addressed in a 
report compiled by the State Economic and Trade Commission 
(SETC). 
  Giving an account of the chronic problems facing state 
firms, 
the report said many of these enterprises encountered grave 
operational difficulties. "They are faced with (the threat of) 
closure, half- closure or even bankruptcy. Many enterprises 
have had difficulty in paying wages to their workers," the SETC 
report said. 
  The SETC said the problem of so-called triangular debts had 
worsened. Based on a survey among coal, electricity and 
metallurgical industries conducted recently, the report said the 
total size of triangular debts had reached 140 billion yuan. 
The shortage of funds for fixed-asset investments was also 
responsible for the increase in debts, it said. In the face of 
the re-emergence of the triangular debt problem, senior Chinese 
officials at the NPC have indicated that another concentrated 
drive to clear the debts would be launched in some badly-hit 
regions. 
  Based on a joint survey conducted by several ministries in 
16 
major cities, the SETC reported that state enterprises were also 
faced with a huge external debt burden. The enterprises 
surveyed had a total of 319.5 billion yuan of debts--excluding 
the debts they owed each other--while their total assets stood 
at 447.1 billion yuan. The same survey found that the state 
enterprises in the 16 cities had to shoulder the financial 
burden of giving pensions to 3.07 million retired workers, who 
represented 36.7 percent of their payroll. The SETC report 
admitted that the burden of community services, low floating 
capital and out-dated production structures had added to the 
plight. 
  The SETC report said the central Government would take steps 
to close loopholes through which state assets could be lost 
during the transitional period of enterprise reform. Mapping 
out the strategy to revamp the state sector this year, the 
report said the central Government would organise relevant 
departments to solve the problem of multiple debts. 
  The problems of the past--unreasonable debts and the 
shortage 
of funds for retired workers--would be solved so that 
enterprises could compete in a market economy, the report said. 
It said the SETC would launch a joint inspection with the 
Finance Ministry to asses the assets of 10,000 medium and large 
enterprises later this year. Emphasising that state firms had 
contributed 67 percent of the total business tax in the country, 
the report said their standing as the backbone of the national 
economy must be upheld. This would guarantee the stability and 
development of the national economy, the report said. 

