BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, May 13 (AFP) -- UN High Commissioner for 
Human Rights Jose Ayala Lasso made an impassioned plea Friday 
[13 May] for the world to end the "unimaginable human tragedy" 
in Rwanda. 
  "The world must do something to halt this violence," said 
Ayala Lasso, who arrived in Europe Thursday from five days in 
Kigali, where he met with the chiefs of the Hutu-led government 
army and the mostly Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front. 
  He obtained assurances from the government army that several 
thousand civilians held captive in the capital would be freed 
soon. 
  He said he had asked the warring parties to guarantee the 
safe delivery of humanitarian aid, but added: "the 
international community must really commit itself to putting 
pressure on this country." 
  Ayala Lasso said the majority Hutus and minority Tutsis had 
both welcomed his proposal to set up a commission to determine 
the causes of the massacres which have left some 200,000 dead in 
the tiny highland central African state, and responsibility for 
them. 
  The office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
meanwhile 
said that with U.S. planes now operating an airbridge taking aid 
to some 250,000 Rwandan refugees in Tanzania had intensified, 
and was flying in plastic sheeting for shelters. 
  Some 2,000 refugees are continuing to cross the border each 
day, said spokesman Ron Redmond. 
  In Paris, Foreign Ministry spokesman Richard Duque said 
France had asked the United Nations to ensure that UN troops in 
Rwanda protect refugees sheltering in the Milles Collines Hotel 
in Kigali, saying they had been threatened. 
  France supported a proposal by UN Secretary General Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali for beefing up the UN troop strength in Rwanda, he 
said, and it appeared the warring parties had agreed to this. 
  Theogene Rudasingwa, the secretary general of the Patriotic 
Front, meanwhile told a press conference in Johannesburg that he 
was "shocked" that France should refuse to support "the real 
democratic forces of the Rwandan opposition" rather than the 
government, which was behind the "massacre of the Tutsis." 

