Energy   Development Strategy 

<F P=102> 946B0068B Beijing TAIYANGNENG [SOLAR ENERGY] in Chinese No 
1, 28 Feb 94 pp 2-4 </F>

<F P=103> 946B0068B </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing TAIYANGNENG [SOLAR ENERGY] </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Huang Yicheng [7806 3015 6134] of the National </F>
People's Congress Finance and Economics Commission: "Ideas on 
China's Energy Resource Development Strategy"] 
  [Text] Energy resources are an indispensable material 
foundation for mankind's social progress and economic 
development and for people's daily life. Based on the "three 
steps" idea of comrade [Deng] Xiaoping, if we want to build 
China up to "near the economic levels of developed countries," 
besides other conditions, we must have guarantees of energy 
resources. Thus, on the basis of China's concrete conditions we 
must consider China's energy resource development strategy. 
  China's characteristics are 1) a large population, and 2) 
low 
energy resource consumption levels. At present, each person in 
the developed countries consumes an average of more than 5 tons 
of standard coal a year (the United States has already surpassed 
10 tons), whereas China's total energy resource consumption in 
1992 was about 1.1 billion tons of standard coal, which when 
divided by our population of 1.1 billion gives a per capita 
figure of about 1 ton of standard coal. Coal accounts for about 
three-fourths of the energy resources we consume. 
  If an economy is to develop and people's lives are to be 
improved, then per capita energy resource consumption must 
certainly increase. However, this increase must be restricted by 
various factors such as resource and environmental restrictions, 
and so on. In another 50 to 60 years, when China's economy 
approaches the levels of the developed countries, our population 
will have grown to about 1.5 billion. At that time, even if we 
do not attain a per capita energy resource consumption of 5 tons 
of standard coal but will only reach 3 tons, China's total 
energy resource consumption would be 4.5 billion tons of 
standard coal. In the present situation in which China only 
consumes 1.1 billion tons of standard coal a year, China's 
atmospheric discharges of sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, carbon 
dioxide, and other pollutants have already approached the 
amounts discharged in the United States, the world leader. It is 
very hard to envisage that in several decades China will be 
producing, transporting, and burning several billion tons of 
coal because of the serious impact this would have on China's 
economy and the atmosphere and environment. 
  Today, we all live on the earth which we all depend on for 
our existence, energy resource development strategies and 
policies have now crossed over national boundaries, and they can 
affect not just the existence and development of the people of 
one's own country but have a worldwide impact as well. Thus, 
when we are studying China's energy resource development 
strategy, we must look at balancing demand, resources, finances, 
and other conditions, and we must strive to maintain equilibrium 
among energy resource production and consumption and the ecology 
and environment. 
  Based on this principle, I feel that besides the need to 
accelerate the development of conventional energy resources in 
the short term, China's energy resource development strategy 
should focus on two areas. First, we must adopt important 
measures to increase energy resource utilization efficiency, use 
our present 1.1 billion tons of standard coal properly, and use 
strategy to focus on energy conservation. Second, we must 
develop non-polluting renewable energy resources, especially 
hydropower, bioenergy, wind energy, and solar energy. 
<H5>  I. Conserve Energy Resources, Increase Energy Resource </H5>
Utilization Efficiency 
  The efficiency of energy resource utilization in China is 
rather low at present with an overall efficiency of only about 
30 percent, our energy consumption per unit GNP is 6 to 10 times 
higher than in the advanced countries, and our energy 
consumption to produce a unit of product is 50 to 100 percent 
higher than in foreign countries. There is considerable 
potential for using our present energy resources well. Thus, 
conservation of energy resources is an important national policy 
of our country and should be adhered to for a long time. We must 
establish laws and regulations regarding energy resource 
utilization. In production and consumption, we must make 
conserving energy and improving energy resource utilization 
efficiency an important standard for checking. 
  1. We must make macro readjustments in the industrial 
structure and product mix and energetically develop those 
industries and products with low energy consumption and high 
product value. Several large energy-producing provinces (such as 
Shanxi and Heilongjiang) in China's interior have energy 
consumption per unit of product value more than five times 
higher than economically developed provinces along the coast 
(such as Jiangsu and Zhejiang), and two of the main reasons are 
the significant differences in their industrial structures and 
product mixes. 
  2. We must require that newly-built enterprises and 
restaurants, hospitals, schools, residences, and so on conform 
to new energy resource consumption standards, have specialized 
personnel to conduct energy conservation inspections of these 
designs, and not approve the construction of those that do not 
meet the standards. We certainly cannot build those that do not 
conform to energy conservation standards at the time they are 
being built and that will require technical upgrading for energy 
conservation after they are placed into use. Rational energy 
consumption standards should be formulated for all new 
energy-consuming products that go into production such as water 
pumps, blowers, electric motors, refrigerators, televisions, 
washing machines, and so on, and they should be strictly 
examined and we should not permit the production of those that 
fail to meet requirements. Those products that are already in 
production should attain energy consumption standards within a 
limited period of time. 
  3. We must focus on energy conservation and reducing 
consumption in all industries. 
  In the electric power industry, for example, the average 
amount of coal consumed to supply electricity per kWh of power 
from thermal power plants in 1992 in China was 420 grams of 
standard coal. This was 10 grams lower than in 1990, but it is 
just 320 grams in advanced countries like Japan, Italy, and 
others, and in the former Soviet Union, because they developed a 
large number of heat and power cogeneration plants, the amount 
of coal consumed to supply electricity is even lower, just 310 
grams per kWh. The former Ministry of Energy Resources pointed 
out that the amount of coal consumed to supply electricity in 
China's thermal power plants should be reduced from 430 grams in 
1990 to 360 grams in 2000, a reduction of 70 grams. At that 
time, thermal power in China will generate 1 trillion kWh of 
electricity, so this could conserve about 140 million tons of 
coal. The 360 gram index is not so high as to be unattainable. 
Shitongkou No. 2 Power Plant, imported and built by the Huaneng 
Company, has two 600MW generators that only consume 300 
grams/kWh to supply electricity. If all of China attained this 
level by the 2020s and projecting China's thermal power output 
then at 3 trillion kWh, this could conserve 400 million tons of 
coal. 
  The state should formulate a series of policies to spur 
energy conservation in the electric power industry. The most 
important among them is raising depreciation rates in the 
electric power industry to ensure that a power plant's 
depreciation capital over 15 years is sufficient to enable it to 
replace its equipment. In addition, we must strengthen power 
plant management and demand energy conservation results in 
management. Enterprises that manufacture power generation 
equipment should continually improve design and manufacturing 
levels and reduce coal consumption in the power generation 
equipment they produce to less than 300 grams within 10 to 20 
years. 
  In another example, developing centralized heat supplies and 
heat and power cogeneration is an effective way to raise energy 
resource utilization efficiency and conserve energy resources. 
China has over 500,000 industrial boilers and heating boilers 
that burn up over 400 million tons of coal a year, and each year 
we must add small boilers with over 10,000 tons of steam output. 
Because the capacity of these boilers is too small, it is very 
difficult to achieve automatic coal loading for burning and it 
is very hard to attain the design thermal efficiency levels of 
large and medium-sized boilers (over 90 percent). The result is 
high energy consumption and low thermal efficiency which, added 
to the great difficulty in carrying out dust removal in small 
boilers, also results in substantial pollution. Even more 
regrettable is that because they have users of heat, they 
already had good conditions for creating energy conservation and 
reducing coal consumption in thermal power plants, but they have 
not really been utilized. Currently, the thermal efficiency in 
thermal power plants is only about 35 percent, and the main 
reason is the presence of unavoidable "cold-end losses" in which 
nearly 60 percent of the heat energy is discharged into the 
atmosphere. If they had users of this heat, they could recover 
and utilize these losses to supply heat, which would greatly 
increase the overall thermal efficiency. This was what the 
former Soviet Union did. 
  Implementing centralized heat supplies can turn scattered 
small boilers into large and medium-sized boilers, which can 
raise automatic operating levels, improve boiler efficiency, and 
raise dust removal levels. Having larger boilers means higher 
steam parameters, and the steam can first be used to generate 
electricity and then the steam that generated the electricity 
can be supplied to heat users, which means heat and power 
cogeneration plants. Calculated and actual results show that 
adopting this type of upgrading measure can conserve one-half of 
the energy resources. The State Planning Commission's Energy 
Conservation Investment Company has conducted experiments at 
several sites nationwide with substantial benefits. Dandongbei 
Chemical Fiber Plant, for example, replaced over 50 scattered 
small boilers with three 70-t powdered coal boilers and replaced 
nearly 30 small smokestacks with a large smokestack fitted with 
electrical dust removal, and it installed two 12MW back 
pressure-type steam turbine generators. This small cogeneration 
plant burns the coal from its former 50-plus scattered small 
boilers to supply heat and generate an additional 24MW of 
electricity, and it can conserve about 50,000 tons of coal a 
year while at the same time solving the region's long-term 
atmospheric pollution problems. 
  Experts in China and foreign countries feel that heat and 
power cogeneration is an effective energy conservation measure. 
The United States originally had not extended cogeneration, but 
to raise energy resource utilization efficiency during the 
Carter administration it formulated encouragement policies. 
Substantial advances in heat and power cogeneration in the 
United States during the past 10 years have raised the overall 
efficiency of energy resource utilization. To encourage and 
support the large number of scattered heat supply small boilers 
China now has in upgrading to centralized heat supply and 
cogeneration plants to produce both heat and power, the State 
should formulate several policies such as having the State 
provide more than one-half of the loans for independently built 
small cogeneration plants in the investment per kW of installed 
generating capacity, allowing the surplus power that is 
generated to be sold to power grids at the same price as thermal 
power, allowing small cogeneration plants to not participate in 
grid peak regulation, and so on. 
  In summary, there is great potential for using our existing 
energy resources well and raising energy resource utilization 
efficiency to conserve energy resources. Above, I discussed 
examples in two areas, but there are many other large energy 
consumers such as the metallurgical industry, chemical industry, 
construction materials industry, construction industry, and 
others where there is great potential that could be exploited in 
the area of raising energy resource utilization efficiency. For 
example, the electricity used for lighting in China currently 
uses large numbers of incandescent lights, whereas new types of 
energy-saving lights can conserve more than 80 percent of the 
electricity compared to incandescent lights. If we used new 
types of electrical light sources, the amount of electricity 
that China would conserve in one year would be equivalent to 
adding 20,000MW in installed generating capacity! In another 
example, the world's developed and relatively developed 
countries all use hollow-core bricks in their structures, which 
can conserve electricity by 30 to 40 percent, whereas China 
still uses solid-core bricks. For this type of broad-ranging and 
mature energy-saving technology, the State should certainly make 
the decision to use legislation to extend them and engage in 
administrative intervention when necessary. 
  Conserving energy is a matter for all of us. We must 
establish and raise all people's energy conservation 
consciousness. Energy conservation should not result in 
inconvenience in people's lives but should instead use 
improvement of energy resource utilization efficiency and the 
establishment of energy-saving industries, an energy-saving 
economy, and an energy-saving society to consume the least 
possible amount of energy resources to produce the greatest 
possible amount of material wealth to make people's lives even 
more convenient and attractive. 
  Conserving energy requires substantial capital inputs. In 
the 
overall calculation, however, the investment to conserve 1-t of 
standard coal is more economical than new construction. The 
state should set aside a portion of investments from its 
investments in energy resource capital construction for use in 
energy conservation. It should also focus on energy conservation 
in its technical upgrading investments. 
<H5>  II. We Must Energetically Develop Non-Polluting and </H5>
Renewable New Energy Resources 
  1. Make a major effort to develop hydropower 
  China has over 600,000MW of theoretical hydropower resource 
reserves with 378,000MW that could be developed and used. 
Currently, we have developed only 40,680MW and even though we 
plan to place 4,000MW into operation during 1993 the extent of 
development and utilization is still far from adequate. Thus, we 
must accelerate the pace of hydropower construction, adapt to 
local conditions, and move forward with large, medium-sized, and 
small hydropower stations. First of all, there should be 
attraction in policies to give everyone the initiative to invest 
in developing hydropower. We must speed up preparatory work, 
accelerate the pace of construction, and shorten construction 
schedules. In the management system, we must establish the 
corresponding development companies based on river basins (such 
as the Qing Jiang Development Company) and provide them with 
policy support such as permitting the recovery and reloaning of 
state investments, etc., to enable them to achieve rolling 
development. 
  2. Extend bioenergy resources 
  China formerly led the world in developing biogas but 
because 
of the effects of the small-scale agricultural economy, with 
each household building its own small pit, the gas production 
efficiency is low and the intensity of labor is great, so they 
have developed slowly. Holland's recent experience in building 
large biogas pits on cattle farms and using heating and mixing 
technology can increase gas output by a factor of three and 
produce gas year-round, with the biogas being used to generate 
electricity. We should adopt advanced technology, increase the 
scale and mechanization levels of biogas construction, and 
achieve industrialized production. 
  China produces over 600 million tons of crop straw each 
year. 
The current direction is ammoniation of straw, utilizing the 
vitamins and proteins in the straw to raise cattle, sheep, and 
hogs, and using livestock wastes as a biogas raw material to 
produce biogas. Biogas production only utilizes the carbon and 
hydrogen contained in the straw, while the dregs retain the 
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and other elements in the 
straw. This could be an important strategic measure in 
development of the rural economy, and I propose that the State 
might as well work on "straw engineering." There is also 
abundant grass, stalks, leaves, organic wastes, and so on that 
can be used as raw material for producing biogas. 
  Developing new types of biogas pits is an important way to 
provide energy resources to rural areas and they can be 
developed by adapting to local conditions in cities and 
townships. This is a good arrangement for dealing with excrement 
and garbage in an energy-saving society. Moreover, enterprises 
that generate organic residues and waste liquids can establish 
new types of high efficiency biogas pits to obtain energy 
resources and improve the environment. 
  Another way to utilize bioenergy is using agricultural 
products to produce alcohol, and some countries are now 
conducting experiments. There are also prospects for using wood 
chips, bagasse, fruits, tubers, and so on to produce alcohol for 
use as an automobile fuel. 
  3. Make major efforts to develop wind energy 
  Wind energy is one of China's big advantages. Tests done 
over 
many years by meteorological stations indicate that China has 
over 400,000MW of usable wind energy, distributed mostly along 
the coast and in the wind energy belt running from Xinjiang 
through Inner Mongolia to northeast China. 
  Wind-powered electricity generation is simple and does not 
pollute the environment. It is receiving attention in a growing 
number of countries like the United States, England, Denmark, 
Holland, India, and other countries where it has developed very 
rapidly in recent years. China has worked on small (200 to 300 
W) wind-powered generators for several years and now has a 
foundation. We have now extended more than 100,000 units which 
have partially solved the electricity supply problems for 
lighting and television of grasslands pastoralists with very 
good results. However, China's development and utilization of 
wind energy as a proportion of our energy resource consumption 
is miniscule, and we should develop it quickly to gradually turn 
it into a force in our energy resources. 
  Currently, the main problem in energetically extending 
wind-powered electricity generation is that the technology for 
large and medium-sized wind-powered generators in China is not 
mature and our equipment must rely on imports, so manufacturing 
costs are high. We must import internationally mature technology 
such as large wind-powered generators with unit capacities of 
200 to 400 kW and organize large batch domestic production. It 
is entirely possible to reduce the manufacturing costs per unit 
kW to the present level for hydropower construction. All 
countries of the world have adopted preferential policies for 
developing wind energy such as tax exemptions, allowing the 
electricity that is generated to be supplied to grids, providing 
electricity prices that permit repayment of the principal and 
interest, and so on, and China should do this too. 
  4. Develop and utilize solar energy 
  Solar energy is a very clean energy resource. It can be said 
that China is also very rich in solar energy. China's average 
annual sunshine time is more than 2,600 hours, and some regions 
(such as northwest China and Tibet) have sunshine times of more 
than 3,000 hours. It we use it to generate electricity, we could 
generate it for as many hours as hydropower does on the average 
in China. There is still no scientific figure for the usable 
amount of solar energy that China has, but it certainly is 
greater than hydropower and wind energy. 
  During the past several years China has made many advances 
in 
the area of utilizing solar energy, mainly in the areas of 
building greenhouses to produce vegetables and using solar 
energy to produce hot water, but we only have a few trial 
projects to use solar energy to generate electricity. 
  Foreign countries have done a great deal of research and 
experimental work in recent years on utilizing solar energy to 
generate electricity and they have made significant advances and 
substantially reduced the costs of power generation. They have 
progressed from monocrystalline to polycrystalline silicon and 
developed from polycrystalline silicon to non-crystalline 
silicon and recently have also developed to crystal plated film, 
and the photovoltaic conversion efficiency has risen from a few 
percent to over 10 percent. Now the total investment cost has 
dropped to $1,000-plus per kW. As the technology advances, 
developing solar-powered electricity generation in large amounts 
will become a possibility. In this field, we should organize 
scientific research forces, closely track advanced steps in the 
world, and prepare to make solar energy an important force in 
China's energy resources. 
  We should also do some research and experimental work in the 
areas of using solar energy for structural heating and supplying 
residential hot water. We should further improve utilization 
efficiency and solve the technical problems of using solar 
energy during the winter. 
  5. Develop hydrogen energy and other renewable energy 
resources 
  There are huge reserves of hydrogen. All countries in the 
world are now doing research on ways to economically produce 
hydrogen. Chemical methods can be used to produce hydrogen, and 
solar energy and surplus hydropower can be used to produce 
hydrogen. Breakthroughs in this area could provide us with clean 
and huge reserves of hydrogen. China should also undertake 
research in this area. 
  Geothermal resources are relatively abundant in many 
locations in China, and ways to further develop and utilize them 
in a planned manner should receive our attention. 
  There is also tidal energy, wave energy, and so on that can 
be developed and utilized in adaptation to local conditions. 
  6. Accelerate the development of nuclear power 
  It should be said that nuclear power is also a clean energy 
resource. The world has now completed 424 nuclear power reactors 
and the safety problems and technology that worry people have 
now been guaranteed. Moreover, new types of nuclear power plants 
are now being developed that can be made even safer. In coastal 
regions, if we fail to develop nuclear power in the long term I 
fear that we will be unable to solve their power supply problems 
in economic development. 
  Because purchasing nuclear power equipment from foreign 
countries is expensive (the investment in the two 900MW 
generators at Daya Bay is more than $4.1 billion), we will be 
able to develop it on a larger scale when we can do our own 
manufacturing. Nuclear power has made progress in China in 
recent years, but for various reasons the progress is too slow 
and Korea, which does not have the machinery industry that China 
does, has caught up with us. 
  In summary, a correct energy resource development strategy 
will affect China's economic development and affect the lives of 
every one of our citizens. I hope that experts in this area can 
all participate in research and discussion on China's energy 
resource development strategy, draw on collective wisdom and 
absorb all useful ideas to form correct policies, and include 
them in the state's economic and social development strategy and 
programs so that all industries, all departments, and all 
regions can implement them. 

