Language: <F P=105> Malay </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Shah Alam, 29 December -- In 1994 the Ministry of 
Health will undertake a campaign against AIDS resulting from 
casual sexual relations. 
  Mohammed Farid Ariffin, deputy minister of health, said that 
cases of AIDS resulting from casual sex have increased, 
following a reduction in the number of cases of the disease 
caused by drug addicts sharing needles for injecting narcotics. 
  The deputy minister said that AIDS resulting from casual sex 
has increased from 2-3 percent to 10-15 percent now, while the 
incidence of the disease caused by drug addicts sharing needles 
for injecting narcotics has dropped from 90 percent to 80 
percent. 
  He added: "If we are not careful, this situation will become 
more serious if the number of cases of AIDS spread through 
casual sexual relations increases further and even exceeds the 
number of cases among drug abusers." He made this statement to 
reporters on 29 December after opening an AIDS awareness 
campaign in the State of Selangor and an AIDS Hotline (Telephone 
No. 03-5501550) in Shah Alam. 
  According to the deputy minister, a majority of the 7,097 
persons who are HIV positive are between 15 and 35 years old. 
  He said that as a result the Ministry of Health has 
undertaken a campaign against AIDS resulting from casual sexual 
relations, using for this purpose most of the 1994 allocation of 
24 million Malaysian dollars to prevent AIDS. 
  He said: "The ministry will handle this problem carefully 
and 
will emphasize and try to encourage the people to live moral 
lives and observe proper values." 
  Mohammed Farid said that the ministry will also obtain the 
views of leaders of all religious groups, including Islamic 
ulama [religious teachers], and seek their opinions on handling 
the problem of AIDS resulting from casual sexual relations. He 
said: "This problem will be referred to them once again because 
the government's wish to encourage people to use condoms when 
they have sexual relations is a sensitive matter." 
  Previously, in his speech on the occasion he expressed the 
hope that the people would also be vigilant and not be careless, 
although he said that these points are always included in the 
campaign against AIDS. 
  He said: "I am concerned that, whenever I discuss this 
matter, I find that people pay little attention to AIDS. I do 
not want AIDS to spread because of carelessness." 
  He warned that hospital personnel should always follow 
established guidelines when they treat people suffering from 
AIDS. 

