BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 13 (XINHUA) -- Chinese President Jiang 
Zemin pointed out during his talks with his Estonian counterpart 
Lennart Meri that Sino-Estonian ties have enjoyed smooth 
development. 
  Meri said that a good basis exists for the two countries to 
develop mutually beneficial cooperation. 
  During the talks, Jiang said that Meri's visit was an 
important event in bilateral ties, which would give impetus to 
Sino-Estonian cooperation. 
  Jiang appreciated the positive attitude the Estonian 
Government and Meri are taking toward developing Sino-Estonian 
relations. "The Chinese Government is satisfied with the smooth 
development of the bilateral ties since the two countries 
established diplomatic relations three years ago," Jiang said. 
  Meri expressed his thanks for China's acknowledgement of 
Estonia soon after it regained independence and said that his 
current China visit is of historic importance. 
  "The two countries have differences as well as lots of 
common 
points," he said. "There is a good basis for the two countries 
to develop mutually beneficial cooperation." 
  Although Estonia is a small country, it is important in 
terms 
of geopolitics and the global economy, which would play an 
important role in China's entry into the market of West Europe, 
Meri said. 
  "I hope that entrepreneurs of the two countries will further 
their contacts in order to expand bilateral economic 
cooperation," he added. 
  The Chinese president said that China respected and 
understood Estonia, a country regaining independence, to 
determine its social, economic and foreign policy according to 
its reality. 
  "We always hold that all countries, big or small, rich or 
poor, strong or weak, are all equal members in the international 
community," Jiang said. "We are against seeking hegemony and 
power politics, as well as interference in other countries' 
internal affairs." 
  Non-interference in other countries' internal affairs, Jiang 
said, is the core of a new international political and economic 
order China advocates establishing. 
  He stressed that China's principal task was to handle its 
own 
affairs well and to develop its economy, which was an important 
contribution to the world. 
  Although the two countries have conducted direct trade for 
only a short time, it has had a good start, Jiang said. "The 
delegation of entrepreneurs the president brought to China this 
time will create a good opportunity for people in the industrial 
circles of the two countries to establish contacts with each 
other," he added. 
  China, along with Estonia, would like to develop a new 
economic cooperative field on the basis of equity, mutual 
benefit and joint prosperity, Jiang said. 
  Meri expressed his appreciation for Jiang's view that 
stability is the prerequisite of development, and said that 
every country should have a "brake" built into its economy. 
  He said that China had achieved positive results in its 
economic reforms. 
  The two leaders also exchanged views on regional and 
international issues of common concern. 
  After the talks, they signed a Sino-Estonian joint 
declaration. 
  Before the talks, Jiang presided over a ceremony to welcome 
Meri. 

