BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nicholas Wood and Janet Bush: "Economy on Course </F>
for Prosperity"] 
  [Text] The Government said yesterday that Britain was on 
course for a new era of prosperity after the Treasury released a 
revised forecast for growth, inflation and public borrowing this 
year. 
  Kenneth Clarke, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said the 
figures amounted to the best circumstances for sustained growth 
with low inflation that he could remember for a very long time. 
  John Major told MPs the forecast was "extremely good news 
for 
the British economy" and the Government had no intention of 
letting it slip. 
  Mr Clarke remained cautious, however, about the prospects 
for 
early tax cuts. As right-wing Conservatives seized on the 
figures to support their campaign for tax cuts in the November 
Budget, the Chancellor emphasised that he would make reductions 
only when the deficit was firmly under control. "I will be 
absolutely ruthless in delivering economic recovery first," he 
said. 
  The Chancellor was careful not to rule out a start to tax 
cutting this autumn and senior Tories indicated that they 
believed the figures would allow the party to make an early 
start on reasserting its tax-cutting credentials. They 
predicted that November tax cuts would be coupled with a fall in 
the public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR). 
  They said if Mr Clarke delayed any good news until November 
1995 -- so that tax cuts would not take effect until April 1996, 
probably a few months before the next election -- the public 
would be likely to dismiss any changes as a cynical pre-election 
bribe. 
  The new forecast, unveiled by Mr Clarke at a Treasury press 
conference, predicts that the economy will grow by 2.75 per cent 
this year -- up from 2.5 per cent last November. This was 
coupled with a big cut in the Budget forecast for underlying 
inflation -- down from 3.25 to 2.5 per cent at the end of this 
year. Mr Clarke also shaved 2 billion pounds off his 
projections for public-sector borrowing. The deficit is now 
expected to be 36 billion pounds, falling to 28 billion pounds 
next year. 
  The Chancellor said: "The overall message is very 
encouraging. It shows a combination of monetary policies which 
are aimed primarily at low inflation and fiscal policies which 
have got the public finances under control." 
  Mr Clarke said he was not going to be "populist" about tax 
cuts, and it would be a mistake to start ringing the calendar 
with the dates of future reductions. While he was clearly 
seeking to lower expectations, probably in the hope of 
delivering a pleasant surprise in the autumn, he also sought to 
reassure Tory MPs worried that the economic recovery would not 
be accompanied by an upturn in the Government's dismal political 
fortunes. 
  "These figures give them (backbenchers) comfort because the 
economic outlook is brightening all the time... We have to be a 
credible tax cutting Government, which means we have to 
demonstrate to the public that we do indeed cut taxes when we 
can afford to do so, when we have public finances under 
control," he said. "Our main aim is to produce this economic 
recovery and then we will all cheerfully turn to tax cuts." 
  Mr Clarke's cautious approach to taxation failed to satisfy 
David Shaw, vice chairman of the backbench Tory finance 
committee. He said on BBC Radio: "It (the forecast) makes the 
case far stronger to cut taxes a bit sooner and its very 
supportive of the general argument that we should be moving in 
this Budget towards a slight easing of the tax situation. I 
hope that the Chancellor in November will put 1-3 billion pounds 
into tax reductions." 
  Gordon Brown, the shadow Chancellor, said Mr Clarke was 
being 
complacent because he had done nothing to address the 
fundamental problems of the economy. "Growth will not reach even 
3 per cent before 1996, if the Chancellor is to be believed. 
The prospects for long-term and high sustainable growth needed 
for rises in the standard of living are simply not there," he 
said. 
  Alan Beith, the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman, said 
"panicky" Tory MPs were increasing pressure on the Chancellor to 
go back to the days of boom and bust. 
  The City took at face value the Chancellor's assertion that 
his growth and inflation forecasts were "prudent and sensible 
and that this was not "a government which is encouraging its 
forecasters to go wild with over-optimism." However, economists 
took issue with his predictions for the public finances, 
suggesting that they were far too cautious for political reasons. 
  Michael Saunders, chief economist at Salomon Brothers, the 
American security broker, said the Government wanted to keep 
pressure on high-spending government departments as the public 
spending round begins. 

