Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
December 29, 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   HUNGARY 

   PARLIAMENT PASSES 1994 BUDGET:  Parliament approved the law on 
the 1994 budget with 190 votes (54.3 percent) for, 157 against, and 
three abstentions on 14 December.  The budget envisages a deficit of 
329,561.4 million forints, which is the balance of an expenditure of 
1,637,695.2 million forints and a revenue of 1,308,133.8 million 
forints.  The law authorizes the finance minister to issue state 
bonds worth 300 billion forints with over 12 months maturity, and 
increase the stock of treasury bills and other state papers by 
29,561.4 million forints to refinance the deficit.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 2101 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   BUDGET DEFICIT 170.7 BILLION FORINTS ON 31 OCTOBER:  The Finance 
Ministry has published the central budget figures for September and 
October.  The deficit in September was 162.7 billion forints, up to 
170.7 billion forints at the end of October.  The ministry said the 
deficit could so far be financed through state bond issues. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1452 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   LIBERALIZED EXPORT LICENSING SYSTEM FOR 1994:  The government has 
approved a new export-import licensing system for 1994.  No export 
license will be needed next year for poultry industry products, 
certain pork and beef kinds, or for cereals and numerous 
horticultural products, with the exception of wheat.  As for 
industrial products, permits will continue to be necessary for the 
export of energy sources and industrial basic materials of 
fundamental importance.  As a result of the new measures, the export 
de-regulation level will rise from the current 64 percent to 78 
percent next year.  No further restrictions can be introduced in 
industrial imports due to the limitations of international 
contracts.  However, control of imports can be increased in 
agriculture.  The government will therefore bind certain dairy 
industry products and certain sugar and farinaceous industry 
products to permits.  This will cut the import de-regulation level 
from 90 to 88 percent in 1994.  The deficit of the foreign trade 
balance is expected to be more than $3 billion this year.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1207 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   NATIONAL BANK TO FIX ONLY CENTRAL CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATE:  As of 
January 1, 1994, the Hungarian National Bank (MNB) will fix only the 
central rate of foreign currencies to the forint, and stop fixing 
the selling and buying rates.  The change will be effected under an 
amendment to the 1991 law on accounting.  The amendment allows 
foreign importers and exporters to pay in forints.  Previously, only 
foreign currencies were approved as a means of payment.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 2131 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   BANKS TO BE PRIVATIZED IN THREE STAGES:  The State Holding 
Company (AV RT) is to privatize the major commercial banks in its 
portfolio in three stages.  The first Step will be to find 
professional strategic investors to take stakes of between 30 
percent and 50 percent.  In exceptional cases, investors could 
acquire more than 50 percent.  The second step will be to involve 
other long-term investors to provide the necessary capital for the 
expansion of the banks' activities.  This could include domestic and 
foreign insurance companies, pension insurance funds, and investment 
companies.  In the third phase, the banks' shares will be introduced 
onto the Budapest Stock Exchange (BSE). 

   After privatization, the breakdown of ownership in each of the 
banks is expected to be:  Strategic investors between 30 and 50 
percent, financial investors between 2 and 10 percent, employees and 
management between 5 and 10 percent, and small investors between 5 
and 20 percent.  The state will retain a stake in the banks, with 
the proportion to remain in long-term state ownership laid down in 
an August 1992 government decree.  In the case of the National 
Savings Bank (OTP) and the Hungarian Bank for Investment and 
Development (MBFB) the amount is 50 percent plus one vote, in the 
case of the Hungarian Credit Bank (MHB), the Commercial and Credit 
Bank (K and H), the General Banking and Trust Co. (AEB), Budapest 
Bank (BB), and the Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank (MKB), the amount is 
25 percent plus one vote, and in the case of Postabank it is 20 
percent.  The state, through the AV RT, currently holds between 35 
and 65 percent in MHB, BB, MKB, K and H, and AEB, and wholly owns 
the OTP bank.  Under the 1991 law on financial institutions, the 
state must not hold more than 25 percent of a bank's registered 
capital, either directly or indirectly, after January 1, 1997 and 
from January 1, 1995 the state may only have voting rights on a 25- 
percent stake even if the actual stake is higher.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 0903 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   NATIONAL BANK BOND ISSUE IN JAPAN:  The Hungarian National Bank 
(MNB) launched a 50 billion Japanese yen (JPY) bond issue with a 
maturity of 10 years on the Japanese capital market.  The bonds, 
which bear annual interest of 5.45 percent, were issued at 100 
percent.  The annual yield is 209 basis points above the yield of 
the most recently issued comparable Japanese state bonds.  The yield 
spread of the latest Hungarian Samurai bonds, which were issued in 
July and which had a maturity of six years, was 235 basis points 
over the comparable Japanese state bonds.  With its 16th issue of 
Samurai bonds, the MNB has been able to exploit the opportunity for 
cheap borrowing on the Japanese capital market.  The lead manager of 
the issue was Daiwa Securities.  Nine Japanese, together with 
another three financial institutions, were involved in organizing 
the issue.  A total of 28 banks have signed up for the subscription. 
The bonds may be subscribed on December 21.  The payment date is 
January 6. 

   The funds raised from the bond issue will contribute to next 
year's debt-servicing obligations.  Funds from the issue of 1 
billion German marks' worth of bonds in Germany at the end of 
November and 10 billion Spanish pesetas' worth of bonds issued in 
Spain early this month will also flow into the MNB's account in 
January.  Taken together, a total of $1.3 billion will flow into the 
central bank's account, including the current Samurai bond issue and 
a $175 million syndicated loan organized by the Central-European 
International Bank (CIB).  This will cover more than 50 percent of 
the MNB's $2.4 billion in principal repayment obligations next year. 
The MNB has foreign exchange reserves of more than $6 billion.  This 
year, the central bank took out JPY 170 billion from four bond 
issues on the Japanese capital market.  Since 1987 there have been 
15 bond issues on the Japanese capital market, to a total value of 
JPY 460 billion.  The current issue of Hungarian bonds in Japan 
takes place a week after the Japan Credit Rating Agency (JCR) 
downgraded Hungary from triple B plus category to triple B. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0722 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   HUNGARIAN-RUSSIAN FOUNDATION TO DEVELOP ECONOMIC TIES:  The 
commercial representation of Russia in Hungary and seven Hungarian 
ventures have set up a Hungarian-Russian foundation under the name 
of "Eastern Connection," in order to develop bilateral trade and 
expand socio-economic relations.  The main goals of the foundation 
include seeking out and creating reliable business relations for 
Hungarian and Russian firms.  It will maintain offices in both 
Budapest and Moscow.  The organization also wishes to promote the 
establishment of joint ventures.  The value of Hungarian-Russian 
trade in the first 10 months of the year totalled $2.5 billion, and 
could be over $3 billion by the end of the year.  This figure places 
Russia in seventh place among Hungary's trading partners, and first 
among Eastern European countries.  (Budapest MTI in English 1910 GMT 
9 Dec 93 AU) 

   SAAB-SCANIA NEGOTIATIONS WITH DUNA AIRCRAFT:  The Swedish company 
Saab-Scania is holding talks with Duna Aircraft Factory Inc. on a 
possible cooperation agreement.  According to Saab-Scania's defense 
industry specialist Hans Werner, there is an opportunity to 
cooperate with the Duna Factory in the manufacture of aircraft 
bodies and frames.  It was neither confirmed nor denied whether the 
two companies had signed a contract regarding the manufacture of 
Saab-Scania's multifunction JAS 39 Gripen military aircraft next 
year.  Saab-Scania has approached several Hungarian electronics and 
software companies with the aim of future cooperation.  The names of 
these companies have not been disclosed.  The company had also 
received recommendations from the Industry and Trade Ministry.  The 
modern Gripen fighter planes, which cost much less to maintain than 
MiG-29s, would be suitable for the Hungarian Army, Werner said.  He 
said it would also be possible to sell Gripen planes manufactured in 
cooperation with Hungarian companies on third world markets. 

   Duna Aircraft's production manager, Csaba Szucs, confirmed that 
the company was holding talks with Saab-Scania.  The aircraft 
factory was established last year with initial capital of 10 million 
forints and is owned by company employees.  Duna Aircraft leases 
machinery and offices from the Pest Region Machine Factory, which is 
now in liquidation.  As well as maintaining the Hungarian Army's 
MiG-21 fighter planes and MI-2, MI-8, and MI-24 helicopters, the 
company manufactures heating equipment and machinery for enamelling 
wires according to demand.  This year, the aircraft factory is 
expected to have turnover of 1 billion forints and to turn a profit. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0811 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   PANNON GSM SIGNS AGREEMENT WITH DENMARK, FINLAND:  Pannon GSM has 
signed a roaming agreement with Denmark and Finland in order to 
facilitate the use of telephones throughout Europe by Hungarian GSM 
900 MHZ subscribers.  This is the first such agreement, a Pannon GSM 
press release said.   Pannon GSM is made up of Telecom Finland, 
Telecom Denmark, Telecom Sweden International, PTT Netherlands, 
Norwegian Telecom, and the Hungarian companies MOL RT, Videoton, and 
Wallis Holding.  Pannon GSM won a tender for the development and 
operation of the 900 MHZ GSM system in October.  Under the tender, 
Pannon GSM and Matav-US West are to share the concession rights for 
Hungary.  The service should be launched by April 1, 1994 at the 
latest.  The cost of constructing the two parallel networks is 
expected to be around $200 million each.  (Budapest MTI in English 
1903 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   FUTURE COCA COLA BOTTLING, DISTRIBUTION CENTER:  Coca Cola Amatil 
is to establish a 2 billion-forint soft-drink canning and 
distribution center for Eastern Europe at Dunaharaszti, south of 
Budapest.  Coca Cola Amatil Italaru (Magyarorszag) has spent 7 
billion forints on establishing bottling, refilling, canning, and 
polyethylene container plants in Hungary during its two-and-a-half 
year existence.  The current investment is planned to be carried out 
in several steps by 2000.  In the first phase, a new sales center, 
warehouse, and central office building will be completed by May 
1994.  Coca Cola Amatil's share of the Hungarian sof t-drink market 
is 50 percent.  The Hungarian investment by the Australian-owned 
Coca Cola Amatil is part of the Coca Cola Company's $1.5 billion 
project for Central and Eastern Europe.  (Budapest MTI in English 
0812 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   HUNGARO DIGITEL VSAT CONTRACT GOES TO ATT TRIDOM:  The Hungarian 
telecommunications company Hungaro Digitel has purchased $3.2 
million worth of satellite communications equipment and services 
from the U.S. company AT and T Tridom.  AT and T Tridom won the deal 
following a closed tender.  Hungaro Digitel, a consortium of high 
technology and investment companies, including Antenna Hungaria, 
Hungary's second largest telecommunications company, will provide 
data, voice, facsimile, and video communications services to 
businesses and other organizations throughout Hungary and Europe. 
Hungaro Digitel will install an AT and T Clearlink hub station with 
an eight-meter antenna and Clearlink System 400 VSAT's (very small 
aperture terminals).  In addition, Hungaro Digitel will become an 
authorized AT and T Tridom distributor.  The purchase is part of 
Hungaro Digitel's long-term commitment to VSAT technology.  Hungaro 
Digitel has successfully installed and operated a pilot VSAT hub in 
Hungary. 

   The general manager of Hungaro Digitel, Denes Jobbagy, said that 
selecting AT and T Tridom equipment in combination with the large 
hub antenna would enable them to use smaller antennas at customer 
sites.  He said that the smaller, 1.2-meter antennas would make for 
speedy installation and significant cost savings for customers.  The 
construction of hub facilities in Budapest has begun, and the 
nationwide network is expected to be operational by early next year. 
AT and T Tridom, which is headquartered in Georgia, United States, 
is a wholly owned subsidiary of AT and T specializing in global VSAT 
satellite communications.  This will be the third hub in Hungary. 
One owned by Hungaro Digitel is in experimental operation phase 
while the other was constructed for Banknet.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 0712 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   STOLLWERCK PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN BUDAPEST PLANT:  The 
confectionery firm Stollwerck Budapest Ltd. plans to invest more 
than 1 billion forints in its Budapest factory.  The German parent 
company will install machinery worth 20 million German marks in 
order to establish a regional production center in Budapest.  Last 
July, the German company bought the Hungarian confectionery company 
Ouintie and sold two of its four factories to Jacobs Suchard and 
Nestle.  Stollwerck Budapest Ltd. currently makes 30,000 tons of 
confectionery products a year.  Eighty percent of the company's 
output is sold in Hungary, with the remainder exported to 
neighboring countries.  Turnover this year is expected to be 6 
billion forints.  (Budapest MTI in English 0740 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   UNILEVER BUYS FROZEN-FOOD PRODUCER:  Unilever has signed an 
agreement with the State Property Agency to buy the Baja 
Refrigerating Co., a producer of deep-frozen vegetables.  Unilever 
has bought 96.3 percent of the shares for $3.7 million and is taking 
over the company's debts.  The remaining shares, 3.7 percent, are 
owned by the local municipality.  Over the next two years, Unilever 
plans to invest $5 million for production modernization and output 
increase.  In 1992, Unilever bought an ice-cream factory in Hungary, 
and later it purchased one of the country's largest vegetable oil 
plants, which currently produces margarine, soap, and detergents. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0757 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   EBRD NAMES DAIWA-MKB LEAD MANAGER FOR BOND ISSUE:  The European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) has selected Daiwa- 
MKB (Budapest) to be lead manager for a forint denominated bond 
issue on the Hungarian capital market, the president of the 
investment and securities company, Mitsuo Kiyokawa, said.  More than 
a year ago, EBRD sources revealed plans to issue forint-denominated 
bonds with a maturity of five to seven years to the value of at 
least 2 billion forints.  The timing of the issue was dependent on 
finding suitable projects for investment in Hungary and on 
conditions on the capital market.  Last year, the Hungarian partner 
in Daiwa-MKB, the Hungarian Foreign Trade Bank (MKB), was named in 
the Hungarian press as a possible investment target for the EBRD. 
The MKB has been talked about as one of the first Hungarian 
commercial banks that will be privatized.  (Budapest MTI in English 
0749 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   IMF EXPERTS HOLD TALKS WITH FINANCIAL OFFICIALS:  The current 
balance of payments deficit is expected to reach nearly $3 billion 
by the end of the year, according to State Secretary of the Finance 
Ministry Almos Kovacs, who outlined talks with an IMF delegation in 
Budapest.  Kovacs said the IMF experts examined the fulfillment of 
terms of the stand-by credit agreement between the Hungarian 
government and the IMF.  Government representatives detailed the 
measures taken to boost exports and cut domestic consumption, 
including amendment of the tax and customs rules, devaluation of the 
forint, raising central bank interest rates, and increased support 
for agricultural producers in next year's budget.  The IMF experts 
agreed with the measures and said that, in January-February 1994, 
they will examine whether deterioration of the balance of payments 
has been halted.  The talks also included the state budget deficit 
for 1994.  The deficit is increasing due to revenues from 
privatization being over-estimated.  The IMF ensures a stand-by loan 
of about $400 million for Hungary.  The first tranche, $80 million, 
was paid immediately after the agreement.  Further payments will 
take place only if Hungary encounters solvency problems.  At 
present, the country's foreign currency reserves are at more than $6 
billion, thus there is no need to call upon the loan.  (Budapest MTI 
in English 1115 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   DECLINE IN TOURISM SURPLUS:  At the end of September, the tourism 
surplus (the balance of income from tourism and the amount of 
foreign currency bought by Hungarians) was $150 million less than at 
the same time last year.  Income from tourism in the nine-month 
period was $902.2 million, 3 percent down on last year, while 
expenditure was up 30 percent at $532.1 million, the Hungarian 
National Bank announced.  The nine-month surplus in tourism was 
$370.1 million as compared to $516.8 million in the same period of 
last year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1238 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   CONTINUED DROP IN UNEMPLOYMENT:  The number of registered 
unemployed continued to fall in November, the National Labor Center 
reported.  At the end of the month, 635,000 jobless were on record, 
20,100 fewer than in October and 70,100 fewer than the February 
maximum.  The out-of-work rate is down from 12.6 to 12.2 percent. 
The proportion of first-job-seekers among the unemployed fell from 
10.7 percent to 10.5 percent.  (Budapest MTI in English 1805 GMT 10 
Dec 93 AU) 

   PARLIAMENT PASSES MAIN 1994 BUDGET PROVISIONS:  In a voting 
procedure, MP's adopted the main components of next year's central 
budget with 174 votes for, 128 votes against and one abstention. 
The deficit of 329,561.4 million forints is the balance of an 
expenditure of 1,637,695.2 million forints and a revenue of 
1,308,133.8 million forints.  The law authorizes the finance 
minister to issue state bonds worth 300 billion with over 12 months' 
maturity, and increase the stock of treasury bills and other state 
papers by 29,561.4 million forints to refinance the deficit.  As 
MP's approved the proposed amendments backed by the finance 
minister, the original main estimates did not considerably change. 
The only exception was the proposal to boost the Welfare Ministry's 
budget for payment of a one-off supplement to large families. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0910 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   HONG KONG TRADE SHOW IN BUDAPEST:  Nineteen companies from Hong 
Kong are displaying their products at a trade show that opened in 
Budapest's Grand Hotel Corvinus Kempinski.  The trade show, 
organized by the Hong Kong Trade Development Council, has been held 
twice a year since 1990.  Trade between Hungary and Hong Kong grew 
by 38 percent in the first six months of this year, compared to the 
same period of last year, and is expected to amount to $42 million 
for the full 12 months.  Hong Kong trade development council 
officials say trade shows have played an important role in 
increasing trade and stimulating the demand for computers, office 
technology, clothes and entertainment electronics in Hungary. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0925 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   FRENCH GROUP ACQUIRES 51 PERCENT OF PANNONIA HOTELS:  The French 
hotel group Accor has bought 51 percent of Pannonia Hotels Rt under 
a deal expected to be finalized between the State Property Agency 
(SPA) and Accor.  The SPA had held 82 percent in Pannonia Hotels Rt, 
with the remainder held by local councils.  Ten percent of the SPA 
stake is to be sold in exchange for compensation coupons.  Pannonia 
has a registered capital of 6 billion forints and is the third 
biggest hotel chain in Hungary, operating 27 hotels.  Pannonia owns 
the Novotel in Budapest, which has been operating under a Novotel 
and Accor franchise since 1982.  Pannonia hotels had pre-tax profits 
of 540 million forints on net turnover of 4.906 billion forints last 
year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1022 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   TRADE MINISTER VISITS ISRAEL:  Hungary's Industry and Trade 
Minister Janos Latorcai, arriving in Israel to discuss industrial 
and trade cooperation with leading Israeli companies earlier this 
week.  Latorcai held talks with the president of Bank Leumi, which 
has an affiliate in Hungary, leading officials from the National 
Federation of Israeli Industrialists and managers of several firms 
with Hungarian partners, including Elbit, an electronics company and 
Clal, a department store chain.  Sun Frost, a member of the 
investment group Clal, is partial owner of a Budapest discount store 
and the refrigerating company of Zalaegerszeg, Western Hungary.  To 
boost cooperation, Clal offered to set up a supermarket chain in 
Hungary, in which Hungarian goods would make up 70 percent.  Clal 
also plans to build more cold-storage plants and supply machines for 
vegetable growing. Elbit, the largest Israeli investor in Hungary 
today, proposed cooperation in manufacturing medical and other 
electronic equipment.  The company already operates diagnostic 
centers and dialysis stations at several Hungarian locations. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1030 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   FREE-TRADE AGREEMENT WITH ISRAEL BEING PREPARED:  A free-trade 
agreement with Israel is currently in the planning stage, but is 
unlikely to be signed before the general election, an official at 
the Ministry of International Economic Relations said.  Hungarian 
exports to Israel were worth $23 million in the first nine months of 
this year, while imports amounted to $24.7 million.  In 1992, 
Hungary imported $43.3 million worth of products from Israel, while 
exports to Israel amounted to $30.5 million.  Israelis have so far 
invested $100 million in Hungary, though the proportion of 
investments in the industrial sector is low.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1144 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   THIRTY MILLION FOREIGN VISITORS DURING JAN-SEPT 1993:  Thirty 
million foreigners visited Hungary from January to the end of 
September this year, 20 percent up from the same period last year, 
according to a report released by the national tourism office. 
Twenty million visitors came from Eastern Europe, 10 million from 
Western Europe and overseas.  Interest toward Hungary is growing 
again in Austria and Germany, the report says.  This year, the flow 
of Turkish citizens travelling via Hungary eased a little compared 
to previous years.  The growth in the number of visitors from 
Eastern Europe was due mainly to those coming from Soviet and 
Yugoslav successor states.  According to end-of-August figures from 
the National Tourism Office, currency revenues from tourism totalled 
$770 million, while expenditures, mainly currency allowance to 
Hungarian citizens travelling abroad, amounted to $460 million.  The 
surplus amounted to $310 million.  The growth in expenditure was 
caused by the rise in currency allowances to Hungarians.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1936 GMT 1 Dec 93 AU) 

   RISE IN MANUFACTURING OUTPUT:  Figures for the first nine months 
of this year show an increase in Hungary's industrial production, 
after a 40-percent drop between 1985 and 1992.  There was also a 
rise in machine engineering output, and the value of 
telecommunications and information technology exports.  However, 
experts still warn for caution.  With exports falling in aggregate 
and investments stagnating, growth might prove fragile.  The 
economic system is constantly changing in Hungary.  Due to the 
liberalization of import prices, the removal of state subsidies, the 
privatization of state property, and the closure of lame-duck 
factories, industrial production fell sharply, entailing 
unemployment and in places serious social tension.  Presuming that 
limited state intervention was vital in the transition period, the 
Ministry of Industry worked out a program to help 14 large companies 
of outstanding importance for industrial and employment policy. 
Implementation of the scheme has already begun. 

   This January, the government adopted the industrial policy plan 
of the Ministry of Industry and Trade running until 2010 in three 
stages.  Crisis situations will have to be tackled and the 
production fall stopped by 1995, when COMECON-linked capacities will 
be fully dismantled and remaining ones modernized.  Certain loss- 
making branches, such as mining, metallurgy, textile, clothes, and 
shoe production will be radically cut. 

   Stabilization after successful crisis management is expected to 
lay the foundations for a planned 4-6 percent growth between 1996 
and 2000, with a simultaneous drop in the industrial workforce from 
the present 750,000 to 650,OOO-700,OOO.  No breakthrough in 
industrial restructuring is seen likely before 2000-2010.  The 
government intends to promote the desired changes by programs to 
encourage enterprise and innovation, assist technical and 
infrastructure development, and ensure foreign market, financial 
human policy and other services. 

   According to the ministry, the conditions for a lasting growth 
are not yet reached, but there are several signs of improvement. 
Over the first nine months of this year, production was 3.5 percent 
up on last year, with a 10-percent drop in workforce.  The number of 
bankruptcy and liquidation procedures has decreased.  The government 
measures for the 14 large companies included in the crisis- 
management program have been carried out, and a credit and debtor 
consolidation scheme involving 70-80 companies has started. 

   At present, the remainder of iron metallurgy is being 
reorganized, and the situation of the textile, clothing and 
electronics industries analyzed.  With state participation, a 
research and development program is to be launched in the fields of 
medicine and vehicle production, automation, information technology 
and quality development.  (Budapest MTI in English 1522 GMT 2 Dec 93 
AU) 

   EBRD TO PARTICIPATE IN HOTEL PRIVATIZATION:  The European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is to participate in the 
first major Hungarian hotel privatization, with $7 million.  The 
EBRD will be a main shareholder, up to $7 million, in the HOLPA SA 
intermediate holding company, together with the strategic investor, 
the French Accord firm, which is to acquire 51 percent of Pannonia 
hotels, the third largest hotel chain in Hungary.  Hungarian 
shareholders, including Pannonia employees and the State Property 
Agency (SPA), own the remaining 49 percent.  The EBRD officials said 
that through its participation, Pannonia will acquire new sources 
for its investments in Hungary and in Central and Eastern Europe. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0907 GMT 3 Dec 93 AU) 

   TRADE TALKS WITH IRAN:  Conditions for a more balanced and varied 
bilateral trade between Hungary and Iran are the topic of discussion 
between a Hungarian delegation, headed by International Economic 
Relations Minister Bela Kadar, and Iranian partners at talks begun 
in Tehran over the weekend.  The Hungarian delegation travelled to 
Tehran to attend the 9th session of a bilateral joint-economic 
committee.  They held talks with Commerce Minister Yahya al-Eshaq, 
heavy industry minister Muhammad Hadi Nejad Hosseinian, and the head 
of the Central Bank.  At the talks, Kadar asked the Iranians to 
finalize the order for a further 500 Ikarus buses from Hungary, and 
the head of the Central Bank agreed that Iran should expedite the 
settlement of outstanding debts.  (Budapest MTI in English 1518 GMT 
6 Dec 93 AU) 

   Hungarian-Iranian joint committee talks ended with favorable 
results.  Minister of International Economic Relations Bela Kadar 
reviewed ways to develop bilateral economic relations with his 
Iranian partners during his visit to Tehran in December.  Iran 
continues to count on Hungarian capital goods, in spite of the 
unbalanced bilateral trade levels.  Hungarian imports from Iran are 
far lower than exports to that country.  In 1992, the value of 
Hungarian exports to Iran totalled $116.2 million, but was hardly 
more than $50 million in the first nine months of this year.  The 
value of imports from Iran were only 5 percent of this.  As a result 
of the talks, the Iranian side agreed to pay its debt of some $30 
million within 100 days.  So far, agricultural cooperation between 
the two nations has mainly implied training and education.  As a 
result of the current talks, both sides agreed to create production 
cooperation -- for instance, in the cultivation of plants improved 
with Hungarian technologies, which Iran could then export to various 
Asian countries.  As of January 1, Hungary will reduce the import 
customs on Iranian carpets and Iranian processed marble from 12 to 3 
percent and fully abolish duties on unprocessed products.  (Budapest 
MTI in English 1135 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   FRENCH-AMERICAN CONSORTIUM IN RUNNING FOR MATAV SHARES:  A 
French-American consortium of France Telecom and US West is trying 
to win the national concession competition announced to acquire the 
minority share in the Hungarian Telecommunications Company, MATAV 
Co.  The two foreign firms have united their professional skills 
under the name Duna Telecom, the firm told the press today.  Four 
consortiums comprising well-known world firms are in the running for 
the MATAV Co.  MATAV is Eastern Europe's first state 
telecommunications company to be privatized, with a value estimated 
at $3 billion.  (Budapest MTI in English 1857 GMT 6 Dec 93 AU) 

   AVERAGE EARNINGS 29,500 FORINTS IN OCTOBER:  Employees at 
companies with more than 20 workers earned 29,502 forints on average 
in October, nearly 1,000 forints more than in September and 27.1 
percent more than at the same time last year, according to the 
Central Statistics Office (CSO).  Average earnings in the first 10 
months were 26,959 forints, with manual workers earning 21,061 
forints and white-collar workers 40,387 forints a month. Bank 
employees earned the most, 70,100 forints, and textile industry 
workers the least:  Their incomes rose by less than 18 percent from 
January to 0ctober.  The 10-month net value of average earnings was 
18,237 forints, 20.2 percent up on last year.  With consumer prices 
rising by 22.8 percent this year, real incomes fell by 2.1 percent. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1008 GMT 7 Dec) 

   TEN-MONTH BUDGET DEFICIT 170.7 BILLION FORINTS:  At the end of 
October, the central budget showed a deficit of 170.7 billion 
forints, with revenue of 710.3 billion forints and expenditure of 
881 billion forints.  The deficit rose by 8 billion forints from the 
end of September.  The finance ministry, however, has not published 
detailed budget figures for September.  The ten-month deficit 
represented 80.3 percent of the annual target deficit of 213.3 
billion forints contained in the supplementary budget approved by 
parliament in July.  Budget revenue stood at 75.5 percent and 
expenditure at 76.4 percent of the figures projected for the whole 
of 1993 in the supplementary budget.  The Finance Ministry's ten- 
month budget figures are similar to preliminary figures published in 
the National Bank of Hungary's Monthly Report at the end of 
November.  The central budget deficit stood at 160.4 billion forints 
at the end of October last year.  (Budapest MTI in English 1316 GMT 
7 Dec 93 AU) 

   OPEL TO SELL MORE THAN 15,000 CARS IN HUNGARY THIS YEAR:  By the 
end of November, GM Hungary had sold 14,926 new Opels in Hungary, 
and the company has orders this year for 15,760, according to PR 
Manager Andras Danos.  This gives Opel a market share of around 20 
percent.  Of the total, 9,587 were Opel Astras (including the sedan 
version, which is not made in Hungary).  In addition, GM Hungary 
sold 3,943 Opel Corsas, 827 Opel Vectras and 434 small commercial 
vehicles, of which 285 were Opel Campos. 

   By the end of November, the General Motors plant in Szentgotthard 
(western Hungary) had assembled 12,386 Opel Astras and made 70,395 
1.6-liter Opel engines.  The number of Opel Astras assembled is 
expected to reach 13,374 by the end of the year, and the number of 
engines 75,466.  GM Hungary originally planned to produce more 
engines this year, but production plans were cut back as a result of 
the recession in the Western European car industry, Danos said.  Of 
the 70,395 engines, 8,900 were 16-valve Opel Corsa GSI engines and 
all the others were 1.6-liter Opel Astra engines.  Of the Opel 
Astras assembled at the Szentgotthard factory, 9,444 were put on the 
Hungarian market and 2,942 went for export, with 1,910 going to 
Turkey, 768 to Italy, 168 to Germany and 96 to the Czech Republic. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0843 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   CHANGES PROPOSED TO FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATIONS:  The government 
is expected to discuss changes to the foreign exchange regulations 
this year.  The legislation will be submitted to Parliament only in 
the first half of next year.  The new regulations will contain 
restrictions instead of the list of permitted activities contained 
in the existing regulations.  The proposed legislation contains the 
following restrictions: 

   Transport of products:  Convertible currency for the transport of 
products can be purchased only with the permission of the foreign 
exchange authorities.  This restriction, however, does not apply to 
companies with international business activities. 

   Insurance:  With the exception of insurance companies, those 
classified as resident under the foreign exchange act may not take 
out insurance policies with foreign insurance companies.  This 
restriction does not apply to certain kinds of policy taken out by 
Hungarians working abroad or to Hungarians taking out insurance on 
foreign real estate abroad or on moveables inherited or received as 
a gift.  Construction companies working under a foreign contract can 
purchase convertible foreign currency for the insurance of their 
moveables abroad. 

   Hungarian insurance companies may provide insurance to foreigners 
only on real estate and moveable property based in Hungary. 
Individual non-residents may take out accident and life insurance 
from Hungarian insurance companies during their stay in Hungary.  If 
the insurance premium is paid in forints that have been exchanged 
from foreign currency, the insurance payment will be made in 
convertible currency. 

   Business profits, dividends, and capital gains:  With certain 
exceptions stipulated in the foreign exchange act, Hungarians must 
exchange these forms of income into forints in Hungary.  (Residents 
may reinvest the income on their shares in foreign companies in the 
same company without the permission of the foreign exchange 
authorities.) 
   Income from rents:  Forint amounts deriving from the renting of 
foreign-owned property may not be converted into foreign currency. 
Resident individuals may purchase foreign currency to pay rent on 
property abroad only with the permission of the foreign exchange 
authorities. 

   Resident individuals will be allowed to take up to 20,000 
forints' worth of convertible currency out of the country without 
permission.  Foreigners may take out the same amount without having 
to show a certificate to prove that the equivalent amount was 
brought into Hungary.  Resident and foreign individuals are allowed 
to take out or bring in up to 10,000 forints in denominations of no 
more than 1,000 forints. 

   Exchange of currencies:  Foreigners will be allowed to convert 
forints into convertible currency only with the permission of the 
foreign exchange authorities.  Residents will be able to purchase 
convertible currency to pay foreigners for pensions, social security 
contributions, copyright fees, or entry fees for sporting events. 

   In order to prevent money laundering, the foreign exchange 
authorities will stipulate the documents and statements the banks 
must require for the sale or transfer of foreign currency. 
(Budapest MTI in English 1007 GMT 8 Dec 93 AU) 

   FINANCE MINISTER SAYS ECONOMY IMPROVING:  "Hungary is on the 
threshold of economic growth, and industrial production will be up 
by between 3 percent and 3.5 percent this year," Finance Minister 
Ivan Szabo has said.  Inflation could be kept under control, and 
consumer prices would probably increase by between 16 percent and 18 
percent next year after an expected 22 to 23 percent increase this 
year.  He estimated that production in the manufacturing sector 
would grow by approximately 7 percent and that production in the 
building industry would increase by 10 percent this year.  Although 
the sharp increase in imports was the main factor behind the 
deterioration in the current account, the fact that machinery and 
investment goods make up the bulk of imports was a positive sign. 
Szabo stressed that next year's economic policy would focus on three 
areas:  economic growth, maintaining economic equilibrium, and 
keeping inflation under control.  (Budapest MTI in English 1850 GMT 
29 Nov 93 AU) 

   INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION UP IN FIRST 9 MONTHS:  Industrial 
production was up 4.3 percent at comparative prices in the first 
nine months compared with the same period of 1992, the Central 
Statistical Office reports.  The value of industrial production was 
1,675 billion forints in the first nine months of this year.  In 
September, the seasonally adjusted volume of production was 3.4 
percent down on August but 6.5 percent up on the monthly average of 
1992.  Nine-month industrial sales were 3.4 percent up on last year. 
Output in manufacturing industry, which represents 84 percent of all 
industrial production, was up 3.3 percent on the same period of last 
year. 

   Domestic sales accounted for 72 percent of total sales of 
manufactured goods.  Domestic sales were 3.9 percent up and export 
sales 2 percent down compared with the corresponding period of 1992. 
Domestic sales of food, drinks, tobacco products, textiles, clothing 
and leather goods all fell, while domestic sales of other 
manufactured goods rose.  Drastic falls occurred in exports of 
vegetable oil (57 percent down) and meat (38 percent down), while 
exports of clothing were up 7.6 percent, textiles up 17 percent, and 
shoes up 28 percent.  Exports of engineering products rose by 1.9 
percent, and exports of chemicals were up by 9.7 percent.  Existing 
orders in manufacturing industry were on average the equivalent of 
two and a half months of production.  The period for the engineering 
industry was 3.4 months, for the chemical industry 2.6 months, and 
the iron and steel industry 2.2 months.  The lowest levels of orders 
was in light industry (1.4 months) and the building industry (1.1 
months).  (Budapest MTI in English 1314 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   MNB DEPUTY CHAIRMAN ON STATE OF ECONOMY:  The net external debt 
has stayed almost unchanged since 1989, at $15.3 billion at the end 
of August 1993.  Hungary could meet all its foreign capital and 
credit obligations with still about $3 billion of currency reserves 
and borrow no money next year, Deputy Chairman of the Hungarian 
National Bank (MNB) Frigyes Harshegyi said.  At the end of 1989, 
Hungary's gross foreign debt was $20.3 billion and its net foreign 
debt $15 billion.  At the end of August 1993, gross foreign debt 
stood at $23.8 billion, while net foreign debt at $15.3 billion.  At 
1989 end, Hungary's currency reserves were about $1.7 billion, and 
now they total $6 billion.  Last year and this year, annual interest 
payments were $1.2 billion.  Capital and interest payments together 
make $3.5-4 billion this year, like last year.  Last year, Hungary 
had $13-14 billion from exports and services, and this year about 
$11 billion.  Both years, $1.5 billion of working capital came into 
Hungary.  Hungary's annual interest burdens are only 3-3.5 percent 
of gross domestic product.  (Budapest MTI in English 1919 GMT 30 Nov 
93 AU) 

   EBRD TO LAUNCH NEW PROGRAMS:  The European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is to assist Hungarian 
privatization, finance certain infrastructure investments, and grant 
loans to small and medium companies.  The EBRD is already examining, 
under its special restructuring program, how 18 selected Hungarian 
firms not suited for sale in their current condition could be 
preprared for privatization.  A new construction is emerging in 
connection with the trans-European network program approved at the 
Copenhagen EC summit, to finance Hungarian highway building and 
railroad modernization ventures.  The EBRD would provide 70 percent 
of the loans, the PHARE program would provide up to 15 percent of 
the cash, and the remaining 15 percent would be covered by the 
Hungarian budget.  Discussions were also held about possible EBRD 
participation with micro-loan constructions in the financing of 
small and medium ventures in Hungary.  This could probably take 
place in the second half of 1994, and will be a new element in the 
EBRD practice, as the bank has so far not dealt directly with loans 
valued at less than $5 million.  (Budapest MTI in English 0737 GMT 
26 Nov 93 AU) 

   ASSISTANCE FOR SMALL, MEDIUM-SIZED BUSINESSES:  The State 
Property Agency (AVU) is currently preparing proposals for the 
provision of financial assistance to small and medium-sized 
businesses.  The scheme would help small and medium-sized companies 
that have purchased property from the AVU, and which do not now have 
adequate operating capital.  Many such companies are unable to 
borrow money because of a lack of collateral.  The AVU approved the 
basis of the proposal, under which the businesses would receive 
assistance to borrow money.  The companies could take out loans 
guaranteed by Hitelgarancia Inc., which was set up in December last 
year, with initial capital of 3.5 billion forints to guarantee loans 
connected with privatization, ESOP (Employees' Shared Ownership 
Program) schemes, and development loans.  In addition, the 
businesses would be eligible for a 50 to 60 percent state subsidy on 
the interest payable on the loan.  In order for the program to go 
ahead, the Hungarian National Bank must ensure refinancing, the 
state budget must guarantee provision of the interest subsidy for 
five years at an estimated cost of 2 billion forints a year, and the 
AVU must increase Hitelgarancia's capital by 1.5 billion forints. 
The state currently holds 57 percent in Hitelgarancia.  Under this 
year's property policy guidelines, not yet approved by Parliament, 
the AVU was to raise Hitelgarancia's capital by 4 billion forints. 
Only 2.5 billion forints has so far been paid.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1557 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   SUGAR INDUSTRY OVERCAPACITY:  Annual consumption of raw sugar 
produced from sugar beet is expected to be 400,000 tons this year 
and is likely to remain at that level.  Synthetic sugar consumption 
is expected to amount to 50,000 tons.  Both figures take into 
account the amount of sugar used by the food industry as well as 
that for household consumption.  Hungarians consumed an average of 
34 kilograms of sugar each this year.  Five years ago, domestic 
sugar consumption amounted to an annual 550,000 tons.  A reduction 
in the export of wine to the former Soviet Union alone reduced sugar 
consumption by 50,000 tons.  According to Agricultural Ministry 
State Secretary Rasko, the sugar industry is oversized.  In the 
eighties, the sector had the capacity to refine 47,000 tons of sugar 
beet a day, and this had increased to a daily capacity of 52,000 
tons by this year.  The lack of demand will result in a reduction in 
the amount of sugar produced because exports are impossible as a 
result of low world market prices.  He expects that five or six of 
the 12 sugar plants will close down within the next 10 years. 

   Only those sugar refineries which can solve the main problems of 
the industry, such as high energy and manpower costs, will be able 
to survive.  It costs $570-580 to produce one ton of sugar in 
Hungary, while the world market price, with freight and insurance, 
is around $280-300.  Sugar may only be imported under license, with 
sugar imports burdened with a levy of 86 percent.  80 percent of 
this is a customs levy and 6 percent is customs duty.  As a result 
of the poor harvest this year, 40,000 to 50,000 tons of sugar will 
have to be imported next year.  The Ministry of Agriculture is to 
import sugar through the State Office for Reserve Management next 
spring.  The Ministry of International Economic Relations has given 
permission for the import of 97,000 tons of sugar this year on which 
the duty has been reduced to 45 percent.  The machinery used to 
produce sugar in Hungary is obsolete, and while Belgium is able to 
produce 80 tons of raw sugar per hectare, Hungary produced only 24 
tons per hectare this year.  The average production of raw sugar per 
hectare is 30 to 31 tons in Hungary.  However, Rasko estimated that 
in optimal conditions 45 to 50 tons of raw sugar could be produced 
per hectare.  As a result of this year's drought, sugar beet was 
harvested from only 84,000 hectares, 18,000 hectares fewer than the 
area sown.  (Budapest MTI in English 1602 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   HUNGARY REPORTS POOR AGRICULTURAL SITUATION TO FAO: 
Deterioration in security of food-supply is especially alarming in 
Africa and several Eastern and Central European countries, it was 
stated at the Rome General Assembly of the UN Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO).  According to the Hungarian Agricultural 
Ministry, agricultural producers and entrepreneurs in Hungary have 
far less protection than in most industrialized states.  In 1992, 
OECD countries subsidized agriculture by an average 44 percent, 
while the level of state support in Hungary over the last four years 
has fallen by four-fifths to 8 percent.  Farm export subsidies are 
more than 70 percent in EU countries, compared with less than 10 
percent in Hungary. 

   The Hungarian group reported a nearly 30-percent drop in 
agricultural output in the last three years, owing to unfavorable 
weather (only three of the past 10 years had nearly enough 
precipitation), the loss of eastern markets, worldwide recession, 
declining domestic demand because of waning purchasing power, delay 
of ownership changes, and a debt of 27O billion forints, which 
discourages banks from giving credit.  Hungary asked FAO to give 
priority to help the changes and development in Eastern Europe 
without hurting the interests of developing countries.  The 
agricultural minister stressed that Hungary had no wish to compete 
for the scanty resources available to FAO, which he said should 
concentrate on promoting the transition to a free-market economy and 
improving market access in reforming countries.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1354 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   EC, HUNGARY SIGN AGREEMENT TO PROTECT WINE BRAND NAMES:  An 
agreement to protect wine names and regulate the EC-Hungarian wine 
trade was signed by Hungary and the EC Commission.  The wine 
agreement, closing a four-year dispute, clarifies the protection of 
Hungarian wine names.  For a long time, Italian and French companies 
exporting wines under similar names were reluctant to recognize 
Hungary's exclusive right to the name "Tokay."  The agreement, in 
force as of December 1, protects EC wine brands in Hungary and 
Hungarian wine names in EC markets.  Similarly to other agricultural 
products, a certain amount of wine will be given customs preferences 
by both sides.  (Budapest MTI in English 1816 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONTINUED ASSISTANCE FROM BRITISH KNOW-HOW FUND:  The British 
Government's know-how fund will continue to help restructure and 
develop Hungary's economy.  After giving advice to banks, helping 
set up entrepreneurial centers and Budapest's stock exchange, and 
assisting privatization, the London-based fund will now give support 
in launching a privatization program for small investors next year. 
It will also continue training Hungarian managers in Britain.  Since 
1990, British investors have put $450 million of capital into 
Hungary, about half of all British investment in Eastern Europe. 
There are 150 joint ventures with British participation and 70 
British companies have representations in Hungary.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1624 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   MNB ISSUES 1-BILLION-MARK BOND ON GERMAN MARKET:  The Hungarian 
National Bank (MNB) issued its third bond package on the German 
market this year, valued at 1 billion German marks (DM) 
(approximately $600 million).  The maturity is 10 years.  Interest 
warrant conditions have improved since the last issue in August, 
however, when interest was 8.75 percent, as compared with 8 percent 
for this issue.  A 27-bank consortium, headed by Commerzbank, quoted 
the issuing price as 101.80 percent.  The interest margin has 
narrowed relative to German state bonds.  The current issue brings 
the value of bonds issued by the MNB on international capital 
markets to about $5 billion.  The fact that a further cut in German 
interest rates can be expected was a consideration in the current 
step.  Payment is expected to take place on January 13, at which 
time the sum will be at the disposal of the MNB.  Three German banks 
-- Commerzbank, Deutsche Bank, and Bayerische Landesbank -- have 
listed about 80 percent of the bonds.  In 1993, the MNB issued bonds 
on the German capital market valued at DM3 billion, compared with 
DM1.2 billion in 1992 and DM75O million in 1991.  (Budapest MTI in 
English 1309 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONTROVERSY OVER BANK CONSOLIDATION:  Hungarian State Holding 
Company (AV RT) Chairman Szabolcs Szekeres described as "suicide" 
the carrying out of bank consolidation each year.  In his view, it 
should be made clear instead that even the largest banks can be 
liquidated if necessary.  Szekeres was outlining the reasons why a 
decision on this year's bank consolidation was delayed and doubted 
whether the recapitalization of banks is necessary at all. 
According to the AV RT, it would be sufficient if the government 
gave guarantees on classified loans, which the banks could use.  A 
decision has also not been reached as to who should have property 
rights following the bank equity raises, the Finance Ministry or AV 
RT.  In the latter case there would be a legal problem, Szekeres 
said.  Corporation law stipulates that if a shareholders company 
acquires a majority share in another shareholders company, which 
then becomes a controlled company, it is obliged to offer the owners 
the chance to purchase their shares, or to pay a fixed dividend. 
Szekeres said that it is still not known how much the AV RT would 
have to pay to banks involved in bank consolidation.  He did not 
exclude the possibility of AV RT paying with its own shares. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0942 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   AV RT LOOKING TO REDUCE STAKES IN INSURANCE COMPANIES:  The 
Hungarian State Holding Company's (AV RT) board of directors has 
decided that it will move to reduce AV RT's stakes in Hungaria- 
Allianz and AB-Aegon insurance companies.  Despite a government 
decree stipulating that AV RT's current stakes in the two firms, 
accounting for 35 percent in Hungaria and 20 percent in AB-Aegon, 
are to be held in permanent state ownership, AV RT would like to 
reduce these to 5 percent each, with difference to be offered for 
sale.  The two insurance companies represent a total 3 billion 
forints of the losses of AV RT's 17 most unprofitable companies, 
with Hungaria taking the lion's share of 2.1 billion forints.  The 
two firms are included in a strategic study on growth and 
development AV RT is preparing on several of its companies. 
However, AV RT has said that Allianz, a majority shareholder in 
Hungaria, is unwilling to cooperate in the study, making it 
impossible to complete.  According to AV RT's chairman, one reason 
for Hungaria's problems is government regulation of premiums. 
(Budapest MTI in English 0905 GMT 30 Nov 93) 
ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1736z Jan 

