BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Daryush Sajjadi] </F>
  [Text] Tehran--"Bosnia is the greatest shame for Western 
civilization," said Bosnia-Herzegovina Foreign Minister Irfan 
Ljubijankic. 
  Irfan denounced Britain saying London had adopted the 
dirtiest policy for the destruction of Bosnia. 
  The foreign minister arrived here on Friday [10 June] at the 
invitation of Foreign Minister Dr. 'Ali Akbar Velayati for talks 
with Iranian officials on Balkan problems. 
  In an exclusive interview with the TEHRAN TIMES, Irfan 
denied 
the British allegation that the Iranian Embassy in Sarajevo 
circulated a letter in which London was blamed for the 
deteriorating situation in Bosnia. 
  "Not Iran, but we, Bosnians, circulated that letter which 
mentioned simple facts," Irfan said. 
  British policy on Bosnia is transparent and no document is 
needed to prove that London has adopted the disgusting course 
against Bosnian Muslims, Irfan said. 
  He scoffed at the logic of Britain, France and Russia who 
claim that the arms embargo has been imposed on former 
Yugoslavia to curb bloodshed in that war-torn country. 
  "This assumption is wrong," he said. "Bloodshed could have 
been restricted if there would have been a balance of weapons 
between the Muslims and Serbs," he said. 
  "The continuation of the arms embargo is one of the reasons 
we consider Russia, Britain and France partners in the crimes of 
the Serbs," Irfan said. 
  "Bosnia is not situated in Latin America or Africa, it is 
sitting in the heart of Europe, that claims to be the most 
civilized," Irfan said, adding that what is going on in Bosnia 
is the most shameful issue for the West. 
  He disputed with Greek Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias 
who 
in a recent statement from Tehran said that the Bosnian issue 
belongs to Europe and the fact is Europe does not want an 
Islamic state in that continent. 
  However, he said, there are a great number of open-minded 
people in Europe who accept Muslims and Islam and they denounce 
the feelings of apprehension for Islam. 
  "We are a peaceful nation and do not want to bother others," 
Irfan said. 

