BFN 

  [Text] Nairobi, 5 May (AFP) -- Army and rebel fighters 
pounded central Kigali with shells Thursday [5 May] in a fierce 
battle for control of Rwanda's embattled capital after the 
latest attempt to launch peace talks failed. A mortar round 
slammed into the airport near the arrivals building minutes 
after a UN plane carrying food and medicine landed amid a 
barrage of small arms fire. 
  The plane was forced to take off again without unloading, 
said UN spokesman Abdul Kabia. "It looks like it was an attack 
on our plane, but things are so confused here that we are not 
sure who was targeting us," Kabia told AFP by telephone from 
Kigali. 
  Gunbattles raged all night throughout Kigali and heavy 
mortar 
fire resumed Thursday morning. "It was intensive, it was right 
through the night, and it's still going on this morning," Kabia 
said. 
  Fighting between the Hutu-led government army and the mainly 
Tutsi rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front escalated sharply Wednesday. 
Relief officials said the rebels had apparently launched what 
they intended as a final onslaught on the government forces, 
some of whom may no longer be under the control of the Army 
command. The number of casualties was unknown. 
  The United Nation's latest bid to bring the two sides to the 
negotiating table in the northern Tanzanian town of Arusha 
collapsed Wednesday night because the rebels refused to 
negotiate with the "government of killers" which they consider 
illegitimate. RPF chairman Alexis Kanyarengwe spent two days in 
Arusha, but never met government ministers who said they had 
hoped that the rebels would agree to negotiate a ceasefire. 
  The United Nations meanwhile continued negotiating with 
government forces for permission to evacuate about 300 Tutsi 
refugees pinned down for weeks at a hotel guarded by UN troops 
in a government-held area, Kabia said. Soldiers and militiamen 
armed with machetes attacked a UN convoy carrying 62 Tutsis to 
the airport Wednesday, severely wounding seven of the refugees. 
More than 100,000 Rwandans have been butchered in a month-long 
bloodbath triggered by the April 6 death of President Juvenal 
Habyarimana, a Hutu, in an alleged rocket attack on his plane. 

