BFN 

  [Text] MING PAO's statement: 
  The family members of MING PAO reporter Xi Yang were 
notified 
on 1 April that the Beijing Municipal Intermediate People's 
Court completed the first trial of Xi Yang's case on 28 March 
and sentenced Xi Yang to 12 years imprisonment. At the same 
time, Xi Yang was deprived of political rights for two years. 
The sentence was made in an unopen trial, and was notified to 
Xi Yang's family at 0600 on the fourth day after the sentence 
was made. MING PAO was grieved and extremely disappointed [yi 
han 6695 2013] at this. 
  MING PAO reporter Xi Yang was arrested by the Beijing 
Municipal State Security Bureau on 27 September on a charge of 
stealing and prying into state monetary secrets. From the 
official arrest and prosecution to the unopen trial, the 
authorities only dispatched two reports through the XINHUA News 
Agency, saying that the monetary secrets stolen by Xi Yang 
"included the plan, which had not been made public, of the 
People's Bank of China for changing the interest rates of 
deposits and loans, the confidential decision of the People's 
Bank of China on participating in international gold trading, 
and other major monetary secrets." Apart from that, the 
authorities have never made public any concrete evidence of a 
crime committed by Xi Yang. In the long period of detention 
over six months, the authorities only arranged a 30-minute 
meeting between Xi Yang and his father. They were not allowed 
to talk about the details of the case. So far, Xi Yang's 
employer, legal counsel, and other family members have not been 
allowed to contact Xi Yang personally. In this period, we tried 
many times to seek help by contacting the XINHUA Hong Kong 
Branch, the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State 
Council, the Information Office of the State Council, the 
National Association of Journalists, and some Hong Kong deputies 
to the National People's Congress and members of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference; and people in 
various circles also made innumerous appeals. However, Xi Yang 
was still given a severe sentence. 
  The Chinese authorities concerned just laid a general and 
vague charge against Xi Yang. In the period of detention, Xi 
Yang was completely separated from the outside. When he met 
with his father, they were not allowed to talk about the details 
of the case. Then came the secret trial and the stern sentence. 
All this will inevitably frustrate Hong Kong journalists who 
are trying to cover and report Chinese news objectively on the 
spot, will inevitably shake everybody's belief in Hong Kong's 
news freedom after 1997, and will inevitably do greater harm to 
China's image in the minds of Hong Kong people. China is 
striving to advance reforms and opening, to strengthen the 
system of rule of law, and to establish the market economy. 
However, the method that Chinese authorities used to handle Xi 
Yang's case obviously went against this set of correct national 
policies and the underlying spirit. 
  MING PAO will continue to make every possible effort to help 
Xi Yang's family seek legal assistance and go through appeal 
procedures. In addition, MING PAO solemnly demands that the 
authorities openly make arrangements for Xi Yang's appeal and 
make an objective and fair final judgment by allowing Xi Yang's 
family members, representatives of his employer, and his legal 
counsel to meet him. 
  MING PAO follows the principle of being objective, fair, 
authentic, and accurate in reporting news. Such editorial 
principles have never changed and will never change. Xi Yang is 
a journalist faithful to his job. The materials revealed by the 
Chinese authorities do not show that Xi Yang was engaged in any 
activities out of line with his profession as a reporter. Xi 
Yang was concerned about China's reform, opening, and economic 
development. He wrote a large number of reports about Chinese 
trends that overseas readers were concerned about. Therefore, 
we deeply feel that the 12 years imprisonment is not only Xi 
Yang's personal tragedy but also the tragedy of Hong Kong's 
journalism. However, MING PAO will always be proud of Xi Yang 
and regards him as an outstanding journalist. Even if the 
appeal fails and Xi Yang unfortunately has to serve the prison 
sentence, MING PAO will still continue to take care of Xi Yang 
and his family as before. 

