Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Duet of Anti-Communist Conspirators" -- KCNA headline] </F>
  [Text] Pyongyang, January 19 (KCNA) -- NODONG SINMUN today 
accuses the South Korean puppets and the Japanese reactionaries 
of connecting "missing of military secret document" and "export 
of a spectrum analyzer" with the DPRK in a far-fetched way. 
  It was reported in South Korea January 14 that the secret 
affairs command of the puppet Army launched an investigation, 
"assuming that the recently lost military secret document 
might be handed over to the General Association of Korean 
Residents in Japan (Chongnyon)." On the same day, reports 
provoking the DPRK and Chongnyon were set afloat in Japan, 
which said the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department was 
suspecting that a Kanagawa Prefecture-based trading company, 
specializing in deals with Pyongyang, exported a spectrum 
analyzer which can be converted to military use so that the 
DPRK may use it for missile development. 
  Commenting on this, an analyst of the paper says: 
  It is not an accidental coincidence that the South Korean 
puppets and the Japanese reactionaries launched a smear campaign 
against the DPRK and Chongnyon. It is another premeditated 
smear campaign they launched in conspiracy to spread a new 
rumour giving rise to an "international suspicion" against the 
DPRK and impair its image. 
  Although the South Korean puppets and the Japanese 
reactionaries talk about "possibility" and "suspicion," there is 
no ground to suspect the DPRK's involvement. 
  The South Korean puppets allege that a military secret 
document which was sent to Cho Sun-hwan, "national assemblyman" 
from the United People's Party, disappeared. The "assemblyman," 
however, said he did not know that such document was sent to him 
from the "Defence Ministry" and nobody told him to return the 
document. Nevertheless, the puppets say they have begun an 
investigation "on the premise that the document may be handed 
over to Chongnyon." How ridiculous they are. 
  The South Korean puppets and the Japanese reactionaries are 
trying to create a new "suspicion" against the DPRK in an 
attempt to attach "credibility" to their hitherto fuss over 
"nuclear threat" and "missile threat," bring their "danger" into 
bolder relief and put a new spoke in the wheel of the third 
round of DPRK-U.S. talks which is now on the order of the day. 
  Lurking behind their anti-communist campaign is also a 
sinister intention to impair the prestige of the dignified DPRK 
in the international arena and stretch suppression to Chongnyon, 
a dependable bulwark of the overseas Koreans movement. 
  They had better refrain from rash acts. 

