BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slovak Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik by </F>
Christine Dupre in Prague; date not given: "The Coalition 
Endangered"] 
  [Text] The defeat in the Slovak parliament of the 
draft bill that would have allowed bilingual signs in 
communities with a strong Hungarian minority marks the first 
failure of the coalition government (comprising the Communist 
Renewal, center parties, and the Christian Democrats) led by 
Josef Moravcik since the overthrow of his predecessor, Vladimir 
Meciar, last March. This 49-year-old attorney will have 
difficulty in keeping his coalition together after the early 
elections of 30 September and 1 October 1994, let alone 
preventing the return of Meciar and the nationalists. But the 
Slovak prime minister refused to dramatize the situation during 
the interview he granted to LA LIBRE BELGIQUE. 
  [Moravcik] It is true that the rejection of the bill can be 
interpreted as a failure. But I believe that today we are 
nonetheless closer to conforming with the Council of Europe 
recommendations: Both the majority and the opposition agree on 
the principle of bilingual signs in communities in which 
linguistic minorities represent at least 20 percent of the 
population. The differences in opinion relate to the names that 
should appear alongside the official Slovak names. But there is 
really only a very little way to go to obtain a consensus. This 
is a technical question, and I am convinced that we will succeed 
in mastering it. 
  [Dupre] Does this not also prove that Vladimir Meciar 
remains 
very strong? He is already campaigning in the villages in which 
the election may possibly be played out. 
  [Moravcik] The polls are in fact pointing to a fall in 
popularity of Meciar and his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 
(HZDS), with right now some 20 percent of prospective votes. I 
hope that we will succeed in convincing the electorate that 
there is another way of exercising power than the one used by 
Meciar. The economic measures that the IMF recommended to limit 
our budget deficit to 4 percent of the GDP, the VAT [value-added 
tax] raising to 25 percent on 10 percent of goods and services, 
and the fall in farm subsidies will not make our task any 
easier, but we have no choice. On the other hand, we are 
looking to revive the building industry through privatization 
money: The programs we will be launching in the regions will 
play a very important role here. 
  [Dupre] Will Slovakia be staking its future and its 
attachment to Europe on these elections? 
  [Moravcik] I do not believe these parliamentary elections 
are 
going to substantially alter the political scene. The present 
coalition has a chance of remaining in power, but its fate is, 
to a large extent, in the hands of the Party of the Democratic 
Left (the SDL or Communist Renewal, the leading party in 
government). If it maintains its image as a modern, Western, 
and European party, everything will go well (editor's note: the 
SDL base is at times suspected of preferring an alliance with 
Vladimir Meciar). Taking a long-term approach, it is to be 
hoped that the other political formations will succeed in 
sidelining the HZDS, treating it as an extremist party. If 
Meciar's party were to obtain a better-than-expected result, 
Slovakia would be slowed down on the path it has mapped out, but 
I do not believe its fundamental directions would be called into 
question. 
  [Dupre] How do you react on hearing Czech Prime Minister 
Vaclav Klaus questioning the legitimacy of the government you 
head up and refusing to meet you? Does this represent indirect 
support of Meciar? 
  [Moravcik] Mr. Klaus has two main character traits: his 
conservatism and his caution. He is waiting. An attitude that 
pretty much resembles that of West European countries. 

