CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with State Duma Deputy Yekaterina Lakhova by Anna </F>
Politkovskaya under the rubric "In the Changing World": "Sex and 
Politics. Yekaterina Lakhova, State Duma Deputy: `I Am Very Much 
Afraid of Little Men.' And From This Follows..."] 
  [Text] On that day she received an invitation to lunch with 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Kozyrev, and the next morning 
brought an attractive note with a request to "greet His 
Excellency the Ambassador..."--and so each day in the capital 
goes in meetings, hearings, lunches, and also official dinners 
and suppers. Yekaterina Filippovna Lakhova, once a Sverdlovsk 
nurse and then a physician and worker in the public health 
department, knows why she is in Moscow--she is making a 
political career here. She runs around as though on a treadmill; 
it is not easy for her mainly because she is a woman and women 
in Russia, no matter what you say, have their own strictly 
defined place. It is even very difficult for her because in the 
country now are times when even if careers are begun in a second 
they are destroyed in a minute. But she is counting on 
stability, her feminine nature itself tells her that the main 
things are equilibrium, composure, and steadfastness. 
  So she has a large men's briefcase filled with papers in her 
hands, none of these coquettish women's purses, a severe dark 
dress that ignores the trends of fashion, her hair stiff with 
spray from the hair dresser, very high heels even though she is 
tall, a statuesque figure, a purely businesslike walk with torso 
facing forward, and very pretty eyes with moderate, tasteful 
makeup--all this is Yekaterina Filippovna Lakhova, a wife, 
mother, grandmother, chairman of the Duma political faction 
Women of Russia, and a recent adviser to the president. In 
brief, as much as necessary a nomenklatura worker of the 
post-communist period of the middle of the nineties. 
Understandably, there were women like her in the domestic upper 
echelons previously as well--there was the journalist Galina 
Semenova, whom Mikhail Gorbachev made the first woman member of 
the Politburo. They too were sympathetic, businesslike, and 
well-groomed but still one could sense in them a certain strong 
sense of inferiority, which they themselves clearly recognized: 
They were allowed to be with the men who were creating policy 
but they themselves had nothing to say about it. The most they 
could hope for would be to say at a convenient moment that women 
should not have to work on the night shifts. 
  Lakhova is a new type of domestic woman who is ever more 
insistently entering the political scene and ever more 
persistently demanding to be heard as equals. Having 
deliberately chosen their path, these people will not abandon it 
but will proceed persistently to their chosen goal, without 
getting too involved in the gender problem. The Women of Russia 
faction has placed its bets on the women of Russia and speaks on 
their behalf today although, in principle, the women of Russia 
have not especially requested this. Nonetheless the deed has 
been done and we women have to take a good look at those who 
have made us their goal and their means. 
  [Politkovskaya] How do you picture the ideal man? 
  [Lakhova] First of all a man must be intelligent but he does 
not have to be attractive. I do not think that a man should be 
very short because this involves a negative complex. I am very 
wary of short men and I try not to get into conversations or 
disputes with them because this will end in nothing good--they 
are all Napoleons. It is very dangerous when a manager is a man 
who is short. Also very important to me in a man are 
responsibility and honesty. A man should be a person of his 
word: If he has said something he must do it, I do not like 
loudmouths. 
  [Politkovskaya] In your view, does your feminine 
attractiveness and your sexuality play a role in the successes 
you are achieving in parliamentary activity? 
  [Lakhova] I must agree that men evaluate women above all 
according to purely external factors and after that they listen 
to what "she" says and how she says it. Yes, in today's Russia 
external attractiveness is a considerable factor. 
  [Politkovskaya] Is there a "ceiling" on the opportunities 
for 
women politicians in Russia today? 
  [Lakhova] No, there is not, everything depends on the woman. 
I agree with the assertion that if a woman sets for herself some 
clear goal she will always achieve it. Incidentally, I have not 
even set a special goal for myself. I ended up among the 
people's deputies of the RSFSR rather by chance--the Sverdlovsk 
hospitals nominated me although I had declined twice before. But 
the doctors said that it was necessary at the level of the 
Supreme Soviet to try to get to the problems that could not be 
handled at the oblast level at all. 
  [Politkovskaya] Did your political career develop randomly? 
  [Lakhova] I did not even have a political career of any 
kind. 
  [Politkovskaya] But you are already on top. 
  [Lakhova] Where is on top!... I was in the Supreme Soviet 
and 
now I am in the Duma--both of them, in my opinion, are at the 
same level. I was an adviser to the president. I entered the 
last elections so that the experience I had gained as an adviser 
to Boris Nikolayevich regarding questions of family, maternity, 
and childhood could be applied in the new political women's 
movement. Of course, when I came to the Supreme Soviet my 
political life was no longer developing randomly. When I gave my 
consent to become an adviser to the president that was a 
thoroughly considered decision: To me it was important for the 
policy I implemented in parliament to be implemented in the 
executive organs as well. I have the same goals now, in the Duma. 
  [Politkovskaya] Have you been a leader since childhood? 
  [Lakhova] No, I was not especially a leader--either along 
party or along political lines. I was always older--first in the 
class and then in my course, and I was chairman of the local 
committee in the hospital. 
  [Politkovskaya] What do you personally like about political 
life and this battle? 
  [Lakhova] It is very difficult and I cannot say that I like 
it very much. But it is something that has to be done. We do not 
have a culture of interrelations among various political forces. 
The opposition could work more constructively and not be in 
opposition all the time. It seems to me that it is very 
important that we women have appeared in parliament and are 
trying to provide a peace-making buffer, and we think that we 
have succeeded in doing this to a certain degree during the past 
three months. 
  [Politkovskaya] Do you think that perhaps a woman will 
become 
president of Russia in the next few years? Someone like you, for 
example? 
  [Lakhova] In the next few years, I do not think so. We must 
see how prepared our society is. Although we were well supported 
in the last elections this was largely an advance. Perhaps 
everyone would like to be a Napoleon.... 
  [Politkovskaya] What do you personally lack that keeps you 
from becoming the president of our immense country? 
  [Lakhova] I have not thought about this. The people must 
determine this. If the society has such a need and if the people 
give the corresponding assessments, then it would be possible. 
At one time they gave Boris Nikolayevich the benefit of the 
doubt, after all, he did not start at the top. Moreover, while 
in the Scandinavian countries there are women presidents, and in 
Turkey and Pakistan there are women prime ministers, I do not 
think our Russian women are any worse. Perhaps our first woman 
president of Russia is growing up somewhere right now. 
  [Politkovskaya] Could such a woman as Irina Khakamada be 
president or prime minister? 
  [Lakhova] While I have sympathy for Irina I do not think 
that 
she could aspire to this role. In my opinion, she is afraid of 
women and is not aware of purely women's problems. I see that 
she is even communicating with men more and more in parliament. 
The idea she is putting forth now is a very dangerous one that 
greatly disturbs women's organizations. This is the idea of 
adopting a law that would allow women with children under six 
years of age to stay at home and receive wages for this. I am 
convinced that this would lead to dire consequences. The network 
of preschool institutions would fall apart and women's 
employment--to which European women are striving so hard--would 
decline. And not every woman today can sit at home, 14 percent 
of us are single women with children. How would they manage 
this? On the small wage that would be given for a child? That is 
simply absurd. It is impossible not to think that to sit at home 
for six hours a day would automatically mean to lose your 
skills. I have spoken about this with Irina and she understands 
everything and even the fact that the Duma might very well not 
adopt such a law. But even the failure to adopt it would be 
advantageous for Irina. And it seems to me that it is wrong to 
create your own image this way. We must really understand 
women's problems today. 
  [Politkovskaya] In your view, what are Russian women 
suffering from most today? 
  [Lakhova] How can I answer this?... Yes, everything is 
absolutely a burden on them today. Regardless of which problem 
you take, they are suffering everywhere. There is obvious 
discrimination against women. Even in politics: There, when 
decisions are made, we women are practically not represented. 
This is shown by the composition of today's government, which 
included only Ella Pamfilova, and she is no longer there. At 
recent parliamentary hearings on the budget professor of 
economics Oksana Dmitriyeva from Moscow, a deputy from the 
Yabloko faction, spoke. Simply a genius! To put it crudely, she 
is head and shoulders above all of our men. How she understands 
the budget! How remarkably she thinks! I said: Even though she 
is not in our faction, we will nominate Oksana Dmitriyeva as a 
candidate to the post of minister of finance of the Russian 
Federation. If we had managed to get women in the places where 
decisions are made--even 30 percent--these decisions would 
probably be more harmonious. 
  As for parliament, were it not for our women's movement, 
Women of Russia, only five percent would be women, and we 
immediately made it 11.3 percent. If you take the local level, 
the situation is altogether different. We were just recently in 
Novosibirsk, Omsk, and Tomsk, where elections to oblast dumas 
were held, and there is simply not a single woman in them! 
Everyone knows that 75 percent of the unemployed in Russia are 
women, but this does not change anything. Women and men have 
completely different rights when it comes to hiring and firing. 
If a woman is hired the first thing they ask is her age and the 
second thing--how many children and how old they are. Men are 
never asked these questions--they are evaluated only according 
to their professional qualities. The Union of Woman of Russia 
went with legal experts to the judicial chamber for control of 
the mass media under the president--and this is the first 
president--to have them reprimand many newspapers for the fact 
that their advertising of work is discriminatory toward women. 
For example, "We invite everyone except women to work." Or: "We 
invite women without children to work." 
  Take, for example, even the functions to which they like to 
assign us women--family, childbirth, and education. Today a 
woman cannot even normally exercise her age old reproductive 
rights because the death rate of children and mothers is very 
high and in terms of abortions we occupy second place in the 
world after Romania (for every birth we have 2.5 abortions). Is 
this not a problem? But our men today do not think there is any 
need to do anything about the abortion problem at all. They 
continue to think that this is purely a woman's problem and not 
a state problem. 
  [Politkovskaya] In what country would you personally like to 
be a woman? 
  [Lakhova] I have not visited many of them but from all the 
documents we receive from the UN, women are in the best position 
in the Scandinavian countries. Their social status is very high 
there. In the parliament of Finland about 40 percent are women. 
Are they really any worse off in Finland because of this? But I 
personally like living in Russia. I would like very much for our 
women to be aware that we too can do something, to understand 
that even what we did before the elections--we created a 
precedent for the political movement of Women of Russia and the 
corresponding voter bloc--that is a world precedent, there is no 
such thing anywhere else in the world, and now European women's 
movements are coming to study our experience. The Russian woman 
is strong, patient, and very resourceful. 
  [Politkovskaya] How close are you to the ideas of feminism? 
  [Lakhova] Everyone understands feminism in their own way and 
many disapprove of it. Defending the rights of women and 
achieving a policy of equal opportunity--this is the essence of 
feminism. And in this sense I am a feminist. 

