Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by WEN HUI BAO reporter Chen Wei (7115 1919): </F>
"Shanghai's Eight Trade Markets Advance Toward Maturity"] 
  [Text} A large setup of markets in Shanghai is gradually 
taking shape, covering the whole country and linking up the 
world. Within a period of a year and half, Shanghai has built a 
total of eight major trade markets for metal, coal, agricultural 
supplies, chemicals, petroleum, grain and edible oil, motor cars 
and building materials. During the first 11 months this year, 
the volume of business of the eight major markets exceeded 370 
billion yuan. The past practice of the state allocating the 
essential factors of production has been changed. This change 
lays a solid foundation to establish a socialist market economic 
structure in Shanghai. 
  A major standardized market is one of the distinctive 
features of the new market economy. From the very beginning, 
the eight major markets in Shanghai put to an end the abnormal 
phenomenon of linking authority with economic interests. Various 
major markets have invariably set up a mechanism of open and 
fair market competition. During business transactions, everyone 
is treated equally. All price competitions are open, whether 
customers are new or old and personal relations are close or 
not. The metal market in Shanghai sold and bought 17.73 million 
tons of metal of all types between January and November this 
year with the total volume of business exceeding 320 billion 
yuan. This has objectively reflected the demands on the domestic 
market and the changes on the international market. The metal 
market has fulfilled its targets much earlier than the spot 
markets in various localities in the country. Therefore, the 
prices on the metal market in Shanghai has replaced the prices 
set by the state for many years and become the most 
authoritative prices for the selling and buying of ferrous metal 
in the country. The standardized major markets truly reflect 
the law of value and the relations between supply and demand. 
The eight major markets implement the system of cash deposit and 
that of punishment for breach of contracts. Members and units 
that do businesses on the markets value their credit a great 
deal and the rate of fulfilling contracts on various markets is 
considerably high. The volume of business on the metal market 
exceeded 320 billion yuan, and the rate of contract fulfillment 
reached 100 percent. 
  The eight major markets in Shanghai are diversified in doing 
their businesses. The major categories of their businesses 
embrace major means of production in the three major industries 
in support of the national economy -- industry, agriculture and 
energy. Member units that are doing businesses on the eight 
major markets include "state groups," large production 
enterprises, enterprises in the realm of circulation and end-use 
units as well as newly emerging trading companies and even 
individual private-owned enterprises. As for the form of 
business, there are futures contracts like the one signed by the 
Shanghai Metal Exchange Market for No. 1 electrolytic copper, 
cash transactions and medium- and long-term contracts. Each of 
the eight major markets has its own special feature and 
attractions. Their operation is diversified, orderly and 
standardized. 
  Shanghai and the relevant ministries and commissions of the 
state have established the eight major trade markets in an 
effort to help China's economy gradually become world-oriented. 
Therefore, while trading products that are either have long been 
available on the world market, or are just beginning to appear 
on the world market, the various existing trade markets in 
Shanghai have tried hard to carry out their operations according 
to international practice in order to embark in international 
business. The metal trade market, petroleum trade market and 
the grain and edible oil trade market in Shanghai already have 
access to the REUTER IDN International high-speed network, and 
they are able to simultaneously receive the latest information 
from various large trade centers in the world. Meanwhile, they 
are also able to transmit the market information from Shanghai 
to various trade centers in the world through computer terminals 
and networks. Various trade markets in Shanghai have also 
established close connections with famous trade centers in the 
United States, Britain and other nations, and invited foreign 
experts to come to China to pass on their knowledge and train 
personnel. They also send people abroad to carry out 
investigations and studies, and draw on the experience in 
foreign countries on the development of the futures market. Some 
foreign bankers believe that these trade markets in Shanghai 
have started early and are rapidly maturing. They will have a 
far-reaching impact on the establishment and development of the 
mechanism of market economy. 

