Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kathmandu, Feb 15 (AFP) -- Nepal's main political 
opposition party has appealed to King Birendra to call an 
emergency session of parliament in a bid to stall the prime 
minister's plans to dissolve the legislative body, a party 
source said Tuesday. 
  The Nepal Communist Party-United Marxist and Leninist 
(NCP-UML) has appealed to the king in a letter signed by 25 
percent of its MPs. 
  Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala hopes his ruling Nepali 
Congress (NC) will win a comfortable majority if mid-term polls 
are held, an NC source said. 
  The NCP (UML) in its letter maintained that the monarch 
should not dissolve parliament more than two years before its 
term expires nor should he call for mid-term polls on the advice 
of the prime minister alone. 
  "We think sensitive national issues like the dissolution of 
parliament and calling of the mid-term polls should be publicly 
debated in parliament itself before Koirala advises the king," 
the communist source said. 
  The king in the meantime is believed to have asked Koirala 
if 
he enjoys support for his plan from his parliamentary party. 
  Koirala Tuesday held a meeting of NC MPs at his residence 
but 
more than 50 parliamentarians, who support party President 
Krishna Prasad Bhattarai and supreme leader of the NC Ganesh Man 
Singh, stayed away. 
  They will however, be attending at crucial meeting of the NC 
Central Working Committee (NCCWC) Wednesday at Singh's residence 
to decide the fate of the prime minister. 
  Pro-democracy students, NC MPs and party activists turned 
against Koirala after Bhattarai's defeat earlier this month in a 
by-election. 
  They blamed a statement by Koirala critical of Bhattarai for 
the polls defeat. 
  A source close to the Koirala camp said party MPs have 
suggested not holding mid-term polls and have called for unity 
between Singh, Bhattarai and Koirala, with the prime minister 
staying in office. 
  Political observers here said the king should oppose 
mid-term 
polls as elections would hamper his country's economy which has 
already suffered from devastating floods and landslides in July 
which killed more than 2,000 people. 

