Language: <F P=105>English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Parliament today unanimously condemned Pakistan's 
continuing support to terrorism and subversion in Jammu and 
Kashmir. In an identical resolution passed in both the houses, 
it said attempts from any quarter to interfere in the internal 
affairs of India will be met resolutely. The resolution 
declared that India has the will and capacity to firmly counter 
all designs against its unity, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 
  Reiterating that Jammu and Kashmir is and shall be an 
integral part of India, the resolution said attempts to separate 
the state from the rest of the country will be resisted by India 
with all necessary means. The resolution also demanded Pakistan 
to vacate the occupied areas of Jammu and Kashmir. It expressed 
concern at the pitiable conditions and violations of human 
rights and denial of democratic rights and freedom of the people 
living in those areas. 
  Noting with deep concern Pakistan's role in training 
terrorists and supply of weapons and funds to them, it said 
Islamabad's sole purpose is to create disorder, disharmony, and 
subversion in the valley. It also reiterated that the 
terrorists, including foreign mercenaries, are indulging in 
murder, loot and other various crimes against the people, taking 
them hostage and creating an atmosphere of terror. It called 
upon Pakistan to stop forthwith its support to terrorism which 
is in violation of the Simla Agreement. It said this is the 
root cause of tension between the two countries. 
  Describing Pakistan's anti-India campaign as unacceptable 
calumny and falsehood, the resolution expressed deep concern 
over the highly provocative statements from Pakistan and said it 
will only vitiate the atmosphere. The resolution reiterated 
that the Indian political and democratic structures and the 
Constitution provided for firm guarantee for protection of human 
rights of all the Indian citizens. 
  The resolution was passed with thumping of desks by all 
sections of both houses of Parliament. 

