BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Text] Prime Minister Tansu Ciller has announced that 
exports rose by 13 percent during the last month and, that for 
the first time in many years, exports and imports reached the 
same level. She also announced that as of this month, monthly 
credits of $250 million will be extended for exports. Within 
this framework, she said, credits of $61 million have been 
extended during the past six days. 
  The prime minister said: All the action is in exports. If 
you export, you emerge from this situation. 
  Ciller pointed out that everything is working as planned, 
stage by stage. 
  [Begin Ciller recording] I can say easily today that the 
current transactions deficit which stood somewhere between $6 
billion and $7 billion will be zero at the end of the year, in 
six months time. This is an extremely great success, to be able 
to eliminate totally one of two deficits, a foreign deficit, so 
quickly, in six months. We are receiving the first signs at the 
levels we estimated. [end recording] 
  Ciller stressed that the economic struggle will be waged in 
a 
decisive, and determined way, till the end, just like the 
antiterrorist struggle. She pointed out that the first results 
of the economic struggle will be received next year. We will 
restore to Turkey the health it has not had for a long time, she 
said, adding: We stand behind our promise, we are confident we 
will fulfill it. I repeat, the economy will improve no matter 
what. 
  Ciller stated that the antiterrorist struggle has been waged 
effectively especially during the past five months. The number 
of terrorists caught during that period, she said, is half as 
many as were caught during the 113 months before that. 
  The prime minister pointed out that the public is 
increasingly believing that a significant distance will be 
covered in the fight against terrorism by the end of this year. 
  Ciller stressed every measure included in the economic 
package is being implemented, and that the Treasury will reduce 
its pressure on interest rates in the coming months. 

