Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Patricia Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] Venezuela has rejected the recommendations stated in 
the OAS Inter-American Human Rights Commission [CIDH] report on 
the El Amparo case and asked that organization to convene a 
meeting to ask them to reconsider the document they drafted on 
the killing of fishermen in October 1988, according to reliable 
sources. 
  This is how the Venezuelan State responded to the CIDH on 11 
January. The government's stand calls for the report to be 
reconsidered and a meeting to be held. This last request was 
granted for 31 January or 1 February. Guido Grooscors, 
Venezuelan ambassador to the OAS, will be part of the delegation 
that will defend the country at that meeting. 
  It was learned that the Venezuelan Government has informed 
the CIDH that the Military Court has decided to reopen the case, 
in which the defunct commando Jose Antonio Paez, the Judicial 
Technical Police, and Disip [Directorate of intelligence and 
Prevention Services] were accused of having massacred 14 
fishermen whom they mistook for guerrillas of Colombia's Army of 
National Liberation in La Colorada creek, La Guasfita, Apure 
State. 
  The CIDH recommended that the Venezuelan Government impose 
sanctions against those who masterminded and covered up the 
killing, offer a just compensation to the direct relatives of 
victims, and adopt internal legal provisions. This, the 
commission added, should be done to revise and modify the 
Military Code of Justice. 
  As the report established, Venezuela had to pronounce itself 
on the recommendations contained in the document before 15 
January 1994, when the term would expire for hearing the 
measures the government would adopt at the commission's request. 
  The government rejected the recommendations, however. 
Regarding the possibility that the El Amparo case be brought 
before the court, the same has not been ruled out. We will have 
to wait until the parties--commission and Venezuela--decide what 
to do after the meeting. 
  Meanwhile, the CIDH could draft a second report, giving a 
definitive character and a new term to the recommendations. If 
Venezuela fails to fulfill the same, it will publish the 
document internationally. 

