BFN 

<F P=106> ["Sz.Sz."-signed interview with Gabor Kuncze, acting </F>
parliamentary group leader of the Alliance of Free Democrats, on 
14 June; place not given: "The Conditions for Joint Government 
Are Given"] 
  [Text] This agreement means that the sides mutually ensured 
guarantees for each other that constitute the system of 
conditions for joint governing, Gabor Kuncze, acting 
parliamentary group leader of the Alliance of Free Democrats 
[SZDSZ], told MAGYAR HIRLAP after the 14 June round of the 
coalition talks. In Kuncze's view, no one has scored a victory 
over the other with this agreement, rather, the system of 
guarantees was jointly formed with the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP]. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] According to general opinion, the issue of 
guarantees is the toughest area of the coalition talks, and if 
you manage to agree on this then the main obstacles of 
establishing an MSZP-SZDSZ coalition will be averted. Does this 
mean that the coalition can now be seen as certain after the 
agreement reached on 14 June? 
  [Kuncze] The issue of guarantees is undoubtedly a very 
important matter but we will also have to agree on other issues. 
The programs are still to be coordinated; issues relating to the 
governmental structure have to be settled; ministries have to be 
allocated, and we have to agree on the personnel. Actually, as 
far as I know, good progress has been made in the expert 
committees. If we manage to agree on all the aforementioned 
issues, then the MSZP's congress and the SZDSZ's convention will 
have to approve the coalition agreement. When this is done then 
we can take it for granted that the coalition will be formed. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Does the current agreement mean that the 
SZDSZ has received the requested guarantees on the government's 
operating mechanism? 
  [Kuncze] This agreement means that the sides mutually 
ensured guarantees for each other, guarantees that constitute 
the system of conditions for joint governing. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] According to some newspaper reports, the 
biggest debate was over the right of veto. In light of the 
events yesterday, it appears that the MSZP had given in and the 
SZDSZ's will prevailed. 
  [Kuncze] We need not interpret this agreement in this way. 
The point is that we drew up the system of guarantees together 
with the MSZP and no one has scored a victory over anyone. I 
would emphasize that in the area of guarantees, the conditions 
now exist for joint government by the two parties. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] Newspaper articles assessing the coalition's 
chances almost unanimously claim that you, as deputy prime 
minister, will likely lead the Interior Ministry. Are the 
rumors correct, and would you accept such an assignment? 
  [Kuncze] We have not discussed personnel issues, therefore I 
cannot answer questions regarding my position. Both negotiating 
sides agreed that someone is needed who represents the minority 
partner of the coalition in the government. However, we have 
not yet agreed on whether there will be a deputy prime 
ministerial post. As a matter of fact, this is not one of the 
issues of guarantees, this will have to be agreed on during the 
talks on governmental structure. It is not yet decided -- among 
other things -- whether to have one or two deputy prime 
ministers, if any, in the coalition government. It is certain 
that this position cannot be an "independent" position; the 
deputy prime minister will also have to direct the work of a 
ministry. 
  [MAGYAR HIRLAP] In a few days' time, the parliamentary group 
will have a meeting at Rackeve where, according to plans, you 
will also have to decide on personnel issues. Do the party's 
leaders have any ideas on who should lead the work of the 
parliamentary group? 
  [Kuncze] The task of the parliamentary group's weekend 
meeting is to get to know each other and formulate internal 
statutes; we would also like to find out in which parliamentary 
expert committee people would like to work. We will not make 
any personnel decisions because the final result of the 
coalition talks is not yet known and the parliamentary parties 
have not yet agreed on allocating committee positions. 
Obviously, the parliamentary group's leadership will mainly 
depend on which leaders of the SZDSZ take on a role in the 
coalition government. As an acting parliamentary group leader, 
I continue to lead the work of the group but the final decision 
will definitely be made before the parliament's inaugural 
session. 

