CSO 

  [Editorial Report] As Hungary goes through its difficult 
transition, tourism in 1993 failed to fulfill the government's 
prediction that it would become the "pace-setting" economic 
sector and would compensate for weaknesses in other parts of the 
economy, the prominent weekly HETI VILAGGAZDASAG (HVG) asserts 
in an unattributed article entitled "Tourism Assessment: Double 
or This Much" in its 19 March issue. Recent statistical data 
suggest that the National Tourism Office was under some kind of 
"illusion" when it predicted last year that tourism would 
increase significantly and that its contribution to the 
GDP--currently 8-9 percent, the same as that of the agricultural 
sector--would "double" by the year 2000, HVG asserts. 
  The apparent surge in tourism in 1993 is misleading, HVG 
says. While 41 million foreigners entered Hungary in 1993, 7 
million more than in the previous year, more than half of the 
total did not enter the country for tourism but for economic, 
political, or "existential" purposes, and almost half of the 
total number just "dashed" across the border for one day. HVG 
indicates that a "significant" number of the foreigners entering 
Hungary came from countries whose citizens are unlikely to have 
much spending power. More than half of the total came from 
Romania or the former Yugoslavia, while the number of visitorse 
arriving from the former Soviet Union more than doubled in 1993, 
to 2.7 million. There was "no significant change" in the number 
of visitors arriving from Western countries, HVG notes, although 
visitors from the united Germany increased by 23 percent in 1993 
after having declined the previous year. 
  Underlining its contention that foreigners coming to Hungary 
have not become the economic resource that Hungarians had 
expected, HVG illustrates the article with a picture of 
backpacking young people lying on the floor in a Budapest 
railroad station. The caption reads: "Resting in the station: 
Many come, but they spend little." 
  The article suggests at the same time that the picture is 
mixed. The 144 million nights that foreigners spent in Hungary 
in 1993 represented a 37-percent increase over the year before, 
and the average length of time spent in the country grew from 
5.2 nights to 6.3 nights. Those spending the longest time came 
from northern Europe and North America. While there appears to 
have been a 25-percent decline in the overall receipts of the 
tourism sector, HVG notes that the data may be misleading since 
it does not reflect the "presumable growth" in "black market" 
accommodations, which remain unreported by those who want to 
avoid taxes. 

