CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Tentacles of Crime"] </F>
  [Text] "The success of the Dragon leaders is undeniable. In 
the last few months we have been forced to face an enormous 
problem, one with which we were not equipped to deal," says a 
police inspector working on the subject. 
  The growth of Chinese mafias has been accompanied by a surge 
in illegal immigration. To smuggle large numbers of illegals 
into Spain, Chinese mafias have recourse to many techniques. 
Police suspect the Chinese crime syndicates are dispatching 
ships with holds crammed full of illegal immigrants; "cargo" is 
then off-loaded, on the high seas, into boats operated by drug 
smugglers now trafficking in human flesh. 
  Police reached this conclusion after noting the sudden 
appearance of large numbers of Chinese citizens in Galicia. 
Also, some Chinese have been arrested approaching beaches in 
southern Spain in small Moroccan fishing boats. 
  In large part, the success of Chinese mafia leaders derives 
from their unusual methods. The heads of the organizations all 
reside in Hong Kong or mainland China; their "delegations" in 
Europe keep their principal headquarters in London or Amsterdam. 
Third-level operatives are constantly on the move all over 
Europe, looking for illegal activities with the greatest profit 
potential and relocating to a new country as soon as they come 
to the notice of police. 
  In Spain, they have concentrated on four areas: exploiting 
the "slave labor" of illegal immigrants, prostitution, extortion 
targeting the resident Chinese community, and heroin trafficking. 
<H5>  Turkish Decline </H5>
  The Chinese organizations are well-structured and 
commercially sophisticated, a fact that has allowed them to 
displace other criminal syndicates. Thus there has been a 
decline in the activities of the Turkish mafia, which Spanish 
police had already been fairly successful in combatting over the 
last few years but which has lost even more ground to the 
Chinese, who distribute a better grade of heroin, "China white," 
at better prices and with reduced risk. 
  In a few short months, the Chinese mafia have carved out a 
niche for themselves in the criminal underworld, and Spanish 
police are putting together teams of experts who--with advice 
from British and Dutch specialists--are beginning to map the 
confusing tangle of Chinese illegal organizations. 
  So far, four "tentacles" have been identified in Spain. The 
biggest of the Chinese mafias is Sap Sie Kee, also know as "14 
K." The organization was born during the civil war in China in 
the 1940's, and over time it has degenerated into a criminal 
ring specializing in the heroin traffic. 
  Sap Sie Kee, believed to have more than 10,000 members 
worldwide, "commercializes" most of the heroin produced in 
Southeast Asia. 
  In Spain, it has two modus operandi. First, it operates 
behind the "cover" of various businesses that specialize in 
importation of oriental food products. Second, it hires African 
immigrants and sends them to Thailand to serve as "mules" 
transporting illegal drugs. 
  These operations sometimes leave visible traces. Several 
days 
ago, an African lost a leg after falling onto the subway tracks 
in downtown Madrid, shoved by three Chinese who took flight. 
Police theorize that he was shoved, in a dispute triggered by 
the disappearance of a heroin packet the African had promised to 
bring back from Bangkok, and that the Chinese were Sap Sie Kee 
mafiosi. 
  A second group is called Sun Yee On, whose leaders live in 
mainland China; it specializes in illegal immigration. 
  Sun Yee On recruits intending emigrants in China, loads them 
into boats in international waters near Hong Kong, and ships 
them all over the world. Depending on circumstances, emigrants 
pay between 1 and 2 million pesetas. To get them to their 
destinations, the syndicate resorts to unusual routings: In some 
cases, they are taken to airports and fly into Europe bearing 
false travel documents. In other cases, they travel hidden in 
the holds of merchant ships that drop them off on the coasts of 
Spain, France, or Italy. 
  There have been instances where illegal immigrants have 
spent 
months on these "floating prisons," waiting for a propitious 
moment to disembark on the coast or at ports in defiance of the 
authorities. 
<H5>  Oriental Women </H5>
  To make matters even more difficult for police, Sun Yee On 
in 
recent weeks has been using large numbers of false Mexican, 
Peruvian, and Bolivian passports in which false immigrant visas 
for Spain have been stamped. Once immigrants reach Barajas 
airport, the organization hides them for a short period of time, 
issues new travel documents, and then sends them onward from 
Madrid to the United States. Several weeks ago, police 
apprehended a number of Chinese immigrants using this route as 
they prepared to leave Spain for New York. 
  The third organization is Wo On Lok, which specializes in 
pornographic videos, prostitution, and trafficking in children. 
  It relocates women from the brothels of Manila and Bangkok 
and works them in Spanish bathhouses. In recent cases 
investigated by police, the women were collecting 15,000 pesetas 
from each client, were allowed to keep 1,500 for themselves, and 
turned over to their "protectors" profits that amounted to some 
700,000 pesetas per month. 
  The last of the groups working in Spain is called Dai Hoon 
and operates as a clandestine bank, providing ready cash at high 
interest rates. Illegal immigrants denied access to regular 
banks go to Dai Hoon, usually working themselves deeper and 
deeper into debt. The syndicate is also moving into "protection 
rackets" targeting the proprietors of Chinese restaurants and 
business establishments. 
  Although there is some division of labor, all four mafias 
are 
involved in every domain. 
  The organizations have an organic structure which they 
maintain with rigid military discipline. In general, each mafia 
is organized into three-person "cells," also known as "triads," 
in which one person, referred to as the "trusty," serves as 
chief and handles relations with other cells, while the other 
two are "foot-soldiers." To the latter fall the tasks of 
administering beatings, collecting debts, and murdering rivals 
when ordered to do so. 
<H5>  Sap Sie Kee (14 K) </H5>
  This is the biggest crime syndicate in the world and has a 
budget bigger than that of many national governments. It 
specializes in heroin trafficking. It distributes all the drug 
production of Southeast Asia and has close to 10,000 members 
worldwide. A major headache for police everywhere, the 
organization was built out of remnants of the Nationalist army 
after its defeat by Mao Ze Dung. 
<H5>  Sun Yee On </H5>
  Though involved in all types of criminal activity, its 
biggest money-makers are emigration and exploitation of "slave" 
labor. The organization's main headquarters are in the Chinese 
interior, in Fujian, the starting point for most clandestine 
departures. It does so much business that it no longer involves 
itself in sale of false documents. Now it transports boatloads 
of emigrants, dropping them off on the coasts of Europe and the 
United States. 
<H5>  Wo On Lok </H5>
  This syndicate has a near monopoly on prostitution, the 
pornographic film industry, and child-trafficking for 
pedophiles. Its leaders are ensconced somewhere in the bowels of 
Hong Kong's brothel districts; it is mainly a syndicate of 
pimps. Wo On Lok's European headquarters are in Amsterdam, but 
it constantly shifts women around to increase profits. In Spain, 
it often markets its girls as "Japanese." 
<H5>  Dai Hoon </H5>
  The very name of this mafia syndicate--which translates as 
"The Big Club"--suggests the image of a mutual support society. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. In reality, it is an 
illegal bank that lends money at usurious interest rates and 
ends up enslaving its clients. It acts as a clandestine bank, 
making loans for gambling purposes as well as to defray 
settling-in costs of illegal immigrants. It also extorts money 
from restaurants. 

