BFN 

  [Text] Our guest today is Albert Zafy, the president of 
Madagascar, who is making his first official visit to France 
since coming to power last year. Thierry Perret asked him 
first, of course, about the climate between Madagascar and 
France today after certain somewhat rocky periods: 
  [Begin recording] [Zafy] I think that our visit to France is 
already proof that relations between Madagascar and France are 
good, and are in the process of normalizing. It has been said 
that there have perhaps been shadows with the behavior of 
certain people, and I think this should not cast a shadow of any 
kind over relations between Madagascar and France. 
  [Perret] It seems that France and organizations like the IMF 
are on the same wavelength -- that's to say that Madagascar is 
being blamed for taking too long over economic reform, over 
opening up economically. How do you react to these accusations? 
  [Zafy] I think the World Bank and the IMF have been 
reproaching us for a long time, each time we hold discussions, 
for not having coherent programs. At one time, perhaps, this 
was more or less true. But having given mature reflection to 
the reports drawn up by the World Bank and IMF and the report 
drawn up by our own Malagasy technical experts, I think the 
disagreement lies rather over how we have determined priorities. 
  Our technical experts, with the help of the heads of 
institutions, see that such and such are the priorities for 
Madagascar. Evidently the Bretton Woods institutions see this 
differently, especially in the macroeconomic framework. For 
example, putting the civil service house in order, freezing jobs 
in the civil service, freezing salaries, and then really pushing 
the liberalization of the economy. Then there are certain 
measures on the Malagasy front: You know that this entails 
great difficulties, and also difficulties than could lead to 
social unrest if we apply them wholesale, without distinction. 
  [Perret] Isn't there disagreement on the internal front too? 
Isn't there some difficulty about getting together a majority in 
the National Assembly on political questions? Does that not 
slow down business? And in the long run is that not a threat to 
democracy in Madagascar, this political situation where the 
Assembly is badly split? 
  [Zafy] As far as the Assembly goes, I don't think that the 
absence of a coherent majority could threaten our democracy. 
All the deputies in the Assembly are, for the most part -- 
except for a few individuals -- people who have fought for the 
creation of this democracy, and I really don't see how such 
people could work to ensure that this democracy should fail. 
  [Perret] But how can you have your hands free to conduct 
policy? That is perhaps the difficulty today. 
  [Zafy] You cannot really talk today about who is really an 
opposition, as you can in the French Assembly. You cannot talk 
about an opposition. There is perhaps a group, with more or 
less divergent views, on certain questions at least, which, in 
my opinion, are not yet fundamental questions. 
  Obviously, depending on the circumstances, it is quite 
fluid. 
It is not yet a systematic opposition to counter such and such 
a group, I think. We don't have that yet. 
  [Perret] Some observers are wondering whether the prime 
minister will be able to continue his work, will continue to be 
supported. 
  [Zafy] At the moment, I think, the prime minister is not in 
danger with his government, because there are certainly also 
people who want jobs within the government. These people, 
obviously, will perhaps continue to make trouble right and left 
until they get their own people into the government. I don't 
think that this is a serious or real threat to the government at 
the moment. 
  Anyway, it was the National Assembly that passed the 
government's program by an overwhelming majority. And then, 
this government has not been at work for a year -- since 
September-October -- and you also know all the difficulties it 
has to cope with. There have been various elections, the work 
it has buckled down to, and I think you don't have to be too 
severe [sentence as heard]. [end recording] 

