BFN 

<F P=106> [By Kofi Opare-Addo] </F>
  [Text] Amid the president clamour by the leadership of the 
National Democratic Congress for the scalp of the independent 
private press, three strong political actors in the country 
yesterday [20 April] tensed their muscles for a punch-up with 
the government which may break up the country in the coming 
months. The three, Kwesi Pratt of the PPDD [People's Party for 
Democracy and Development], Johnny Hansen and B.B.D. Asamoah, 
who individually spew controversy wherever they go, collectively 
intend to sponsor and lead countrywide demonstrations from May 3 
if the government fails to meet a litany of demands. 
  Twitching with the magnitude of their frustrations with the 
government and perhaps their mission too, they told newsmen at a 
press conference that their demands include electoral reforms, 
enquiry into PNDC [Provisional National Defense Council] 
sponsored extra-judicial killings and the end to present 
attempts to muzzle the press. 
  Also close to the hearts of the three are the abolishing of 
the Serious Fraud Office, and the departure from public service 
of ex- PNDC officials who have collected their end-of-service 
benefits. But the punch-line of the warning was reserved for 
Parliament. "We promise that we will advocate a break up of the 
country...if Parliament amends the Constitution to suit the 
government" "In spite of its limitations, it is the only check 
we have on the unholy plots of the ruling clique on our lives 
and liberties". 
  The message to the President who has constantly shown his 
irritation with the people's will (the Constitution) was simple; 
"He must pack and go." 
  For the first lady who has recently stoked a public backlash 
against her, the group wondered whether she has the same 
political and constitutional powers as the president. "We are 
unsure whether the first lady...is equal to the President and 
therefore a parallel president". They said rather than the 
first couple resorting to intimidations in reaction to press 
revelations, investigations should be conducted into such finger 
pointing. 
  Interestingly, the statement from the three men makes a firm 
demand for a "full statement on Ghana's foreign and local debt 
burden". Considering their rabble-rousing nature the threat 
from the three could be treated with some raising of the brow at 
the Castle. But the threat is belied with the raggle-taggle 
credentials of the membership of the new front. All three have 
a history of several political detentions "under their belt". 
But that is as far as it goes. While Kwesi Pratt displays a 
solid background of never capitulating to Jerry Rawlings, both 
Johnny Hansen and B.B.D. Asamoah have once flirted with the 
President and were cashiered for some unexplained reasons 
though, Johnny Hansen was PNDC secretary for interior in its 
early years while B.B.D. Asamoah served as secretary to the 
PNDC. However, with tension banking across the political divide 
the latest threat by Pratt and friends could torch some 
confusion in the country. 

