BFN 

  [Text] While carrying out an inspection work in our 
province, Ren Jianxin, member of the Central Secretariat, 
secretary of the Central Commission of Political Science and 
Law, and president of the Supreme People's Court, stressed: 
Party organizations and governments at all levels must 
correctly understand and handle well relations between reform, 
development, and stability. Proceeding from the general 
situation of maintaining stability, they must properly solve 
various social contradictions. 
  According to a report by our staff reporter Li Jie, while 
carrying out an inspection tour in Chengdu on 18-20 April, Ren 
Jianxin listened to work reports made by provincial CPC 
committee, provincial government, Chendu, and provincial higher 
people's court officials. He also held discussions with 
delegates attending provincial political and judicial work 
meetings. Ren Jianxin fully affirmed the achievements made by 
our province last year. He said: Like various places in the 
country, the present political and economic situation in Sichuan 
is favorable. The overall situation of seizing on the fine 
opportunity, deepening reforms, expanding opening up, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability advocated by the CPC 
Central Committee has become a consensus of the entire party and 
people of the whole country. This year more important reform 
measures are being smoothly implemented. This is a crucial year 
for deepening reform and establishing a socialist market system. 
Deepening structural reform will touch upon and adjust 
interests of various quarters. Some new contradictions and 
problems will occur. Therefore, party organizations and 
government at all levels must correctly understand and handle 
well relations between reform, development, and stability. We 
must grasp things with two hands. We must see the favorable 
situation, and the existing problems as well. We must 
understand the importance of maintaining stability, and solve 
various social contradictions in their embryonic stage. 
  While talking about proper handling of various 
contradictions, Ren Jianxin emphasized: Leading comrades at all 
levels must go deep into the reality and grass-roots units, and 
listen to the voice of the masses to solve various problems 
related to immediate interests of the masses at all levels. It 
is necessary to exercise control over the prices of daily 
necessities needed by the masses in their daily livelihood, curb 
price hikes, deal severe blows to various kinds of criminal 
activities, and persist in the antipornography struggle, and the 
drive of eliminating the six vices to ensure that the masses 
live and work in peace and contentment. It is necessary to 
continue to profoundly carry out the struggle of opposing 
corruption, and firmly grasp the work of investigating and 
handling big and important cases. 

