CSO 

    The following news items were taken from the Tokyo 
Digitized Information Database, which translates and summarizes 
in English Japanese press reports related to Japan's 
scientific/technical industries. This material will also be 
carried in the FBIS publication JAPAN SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY. 
  NEC has developed a dry etching technique which will be 
usable in 1Gbit DRAM production. The company proved in an 
experiment that raising the percentage of carbon monoxide gas 
mixed in etching gas helps increase selectivity. It has also 
discovered that the higher the carbon content of fluorocarbon 
film, the more resistant the film is against etching gas ion 
emission. NEC thinks the technique will be practical enough to 
form contact holes as small as 0.25 micron. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 26 May 94) 
  Toshiba, IBM, and Siemens have agreed to jointly develop a 
second- generation 64Mbit DRAM chip. The three companies, which 
are cooperatively working on a 256Mbit DRAM, will combine their 
respective 64Mbit DRAM technologies with 256Mbit DRAM 
technologies under development in order to develop the 
second-generation chip. To be designed using a 0.35-micron 
process, the second-generation chip will be about 20% 
smaller 
than the first-generation chips. Joint development focus will be 
on circuit design, processing, and ion implantation techniques, 
and joint efforts will be carried out at IBM's research centers 
in New York, where the three firms will assign a maximum of 50 
engineers. Toshiba, which has already developed a 
first-generation 64Mbit chip using a 0.4-micron process, plans 
to launch volume production two to three years from now. (Tokyo 
NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 26 May 94, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 26 May 
94, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 26 May 94, NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
26 May 94) 
  JEOL has set up a dedicated team to develop a 
fully-automated 
photomask/wafer defect inspection/repair system. The 10-member 
team plans to develop a commercial system in 1996. The team will 
add functions for locally depositing and repairing silicon and 
metal film as well as automation functions to an ultra-fine 
processing evaluation system the company launched in 1992. JEOL 
will target the 64Mbit or larger LSI production and phase-shift 
photomask production processes. (Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 26 May 
94) 
  Toyo Information Systems (TIS) plans to launch a frame relay 
service on June 1 for high-speed transmission of large-volume 
data. The company has set up access points in Tokyo and Osaka, 
and plans to increase the number of access points depending on 
future demand. The service will cover an area within a radius of 
15km from each access point, and another access point will be 
set up in Nagoya in the fall. TIS will use NCR frame relay 
switches, and aims to gain 10-20 corporate users by the end of 
fiscal 1994. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 26 May 94) 
  MPT's advisory body, the Telecommunications Technology 
Council, will decide in June the closed caption system to be 
adopted for transmitting data and subtitles with communications 
satellite TV broadcasts. This will open up the way for new media 
and services, such as facsimile communications and provision of 
English subtitles, using a CS TV data channel. The system is 
expected to be put into commercial use in about May 1995. (Tokyo 
NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 26 May 94) 
  Toshiba has developed a simulator capable of simulating 
shapes of chemically amplified resist. Expected to be 
commercially feasible with 256Mbit or larger DRAM production, 
the simulator enables users to compute various simulation 
processes pertinent to chemically amplified resist, ranging from 
the formation of optical images to the generation of oxygen at 
times of exposure, the diffusion of oxygen in post exposure 
heat, the dissolution of a solution suppressor, resin 
dissolution speeds, and to development. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 31 May 94) 
  Shinmaywa Industries has introduced a single-wafer 
sputtering 
system for use in hard disk drive production. The new system is 
a cluster tool consisting of a central chamber and up to eight 
process and load-lock chambers. Compared to in-line systems, the 
new system achieves higher film quality and has an hourly 
throughput of 360 disks. The company will combine the new system 
with its existing equipment such as clean robots, assembly 
automation systems, and clean room-less systems to take orders 
for integrated HDD production lines. (Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 
31 May 94) 
  Toshiba has developed a 3.5-inch phase-change optical disk 
drive, which it plans to commercialize by 1996 when an 
international standard for phase-change optical disks is 
expected to be established. The drive uses a 690nm red 
semiconductor laser to write and read and data to and from a 
phase-change disks simultaneously and achieves a recording 
density about 50% higher than conventional 5.25-inch 
units and 
a data transfer speed of 9.1Mbit/s, four times and 20% 
faster 
than CD-ROM and magneto-optic drives, respectively. The drive 
supports 600Mbytes. When data is compressed to 1/40 the original 
size using the MPEG2 (Motion Picture Experts Group) data coding 
standard, it is possible to store video pictures for 20 minutes. 
(Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 16 May 94) 
  Canon has developed a technique for manufacturing SOI 
(silicon on insulator) substrates at a low cost. The technique 
involves five processes. (1) A wafer is processed in 
hydrofluoric acid to create a porous silicon layer on wafer 
surface. (2) A thin monocrystal silicon layer is deposited on 
the porous silicon layer. (3) The wafer is attached to another 
wafer which has an insulating layer made of silicon oxide. (4) 
The first wafer is etched from the bottom to expose the porous 
silicon layer. (5) The substrate is etched in a solution 
containing hydrofluoric acid and hydrogen peroxide. SOI 
substrates are commonly used for military and space 
equipment-use semiconductors because of high prices, but the 
company claims that the technique can help cut SOI substrate 
prices to a level about two times higher than conventional 
silicon wafers. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 16 May 94) 
  Fujitsu Laboratories has succeeded in oscillating an InP 
(indium phosphide) semiconductor laser using a current of 1.0mA. 
InP is the only semiconductor laser material capable of emitting 
1.3-micron light but has drawbacks: it has large threshold 
current, and it is susceptible to temperature changes. To lower 
threshold current the company has modified a distorted quantum 
well structure. It has discovered that the lowest level of 
threshold current is achieved when there are five quantum well 
layers, layer thickness is set at 8nm, and active layer width is 
set at 1 micron. In an experiment, the InP semiconductor laser 
could oscillate at threshold currents of 1.0mA at room 
temperature and of 3.5mA at 80 deg C. Using the semiconductor 
laser the company has developed a prototype functional 
10-channel laser array. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 17 May 94) 
  The Electrotechnical Laboratory of the Agency of Industrial 
Science &amp; Technology and Kawasaki Heavy Industry (KHI) have 
succeeded in oscillating a free electron laser inside the 
ultraviolet zone. The lab and KHI have used the lab's NIJI-IV, a 
small free electron laser ring which is 4m long and 13m wide and 
has a circumference of 29.6m, and oscillated a 353nm laser. This 
is the first time that a free electron laser has been 
successfully oscillated inside the ultraviolet zone. KHI plans 
to combine the small ring with a synchronous orbit radiation 
system and market them as a set to research institutions. (Tokyo 
NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 17 May 94, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 17 May 
94) 
  NTT has developed a heat-resistant polymer for use as an 
optical IC material. The polymer is called polysiloxane 
deuteride, made of silicon, oxygen, carbon, and deuterium, has 
silicon and oxygen atoms connected one after another like 
chains, a structure similar to that of glass, and can resist 
heat as high as 400 deg C. Silicon atoms are coupled with carbon 
atoms, which are attached to deuterium atoms. Deuterium is used 
instead of hydrogen to improve the polymer's transparency. Using 
the new material, the company has developed a prototype optical 
waveguide, a path to transmit light inside an optical IC, and 
has confirmed that 98% of light is transmitted. (Tokyo 
NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 18 May 94) 
  MITI has drafted an Enhanced Computerization Program 
designed 
both to support the Japanese government's strategy of 
computerizing public sector facilities and to provide direct 
links with the U.S.'s so-called national information 
infrastructure (NII). MITI's plan calls for designating five 
areas, such as education and research, for computerization and 
preparation of data communications networks, then providing 
direct mutual access to electronic libraries and government 
databases in Japan and the U.S. via PCs. The ministry intends to 
firm up the plan as early as the end of July and work it into 
the fiscal 1995 budget as a key item. (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 18 May 94) 
  Matsushita Electric has developed phase-change optical disk 
recording techniques for boosting recording density to 4.1Mbit 
per sq. millimeters, 4.4 times over conventional methods. The 
newly developed mark edge recording technique reduces bit 
intervals to 0.35 micron, and the land group recording technique 
treats convex land tracks as recording tracks and reduces a 
track pitch to 0.7 micron. Using the new techniques it will be 
possible to develop a 5.25-inch optical disk with a storage 
capacity of 6Gbytes. The company is aiming for the 
commercialization of such a disk two years from now. (Tokyo 
DEMPA SHIMBUN 19 May 94, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 19 May 94, 
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 19 May 94, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 
19 May 94, Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 19 May 94) 
  Toshiba has developed a NAND flash memory cell using a 
0.4-micron design rule. The NAND is the company's proprietary 
flash memory format which lines up eight cells along a bit line. 
The cell is 1.13 sq. microns, about 80% the size of 16Mbit 
flash memory cells. The company estimates that a 64Mbit chip 
will be about 120 sq. millimeters when developed using the 
process. The fine process has been made possible by the FTI 
process Toshiba has newly developed which forms an oxide film 
and then implants phosphorus to prevent a diffusion layer from 
spreading. The development of a 64Mbit flash memory chip will 
pave the way for the development of a 160Mbyte flash memory card 
for use in PCs. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 19 May 94) 
  Matsushita Electric has developed techniques for forming 
circuits on an injection-molded plastic substrate. One method is 
to create circuits on such a substrate using conductive paste, 
and the other is to expose a substrate coated with copper foil 
using a laser and eliminate the non-exposed portion through 
chemical etching. The company is working with its subsidiary to 
apply the techniques to development of automotive components. 
(Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 23 May 94) 
  NEC Cable Media, a cable TV subsidiary of NEC, has developed 
a technology that allows unused CATV channels to be used for 
about 100 telephone lines. It is the first time such technology 
has been commercialized in Japan. With the new system, CATV 
subscribers will be able to get telephone service without going 
through NTT. The technology represents a major technical step 
forward for the merging of communications and multimedia 
broadcasts. With the TDMA (time division multiple access) 
digital format, one unused cable TV channel can accommodate the 
equivalent of 96 telephone lines. (Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 23 
May 94) 
  The Nippon Sheet Glass Technical Research Laboratory and the 
Electrotechnical Laboratory of the Agency of Industrial Science 
&amp; Technology have jointly developed a non-linear optical 
material for use in optical computers. The material has cadmium 
telluride and silicon oxide layers deposited on a quartz 
substrate one after another. Cadmium telluride particles of 3nm 
in diameter are deposited over the substrate using laser 
deposition. Through plasma excitation chemical vapor deposition 
a 30nm-thick silicon oxide layer is deposited over the cadmium 
telluride layer. The deposition processes are repeated 40-50 
times to develop a 1-micron-thick, 2cm square material, which 
can convert the wavelength of light to 1/3 the original in 1ps, 
about 10 times faster than other materials. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 24 May 94) 
  NEC has developed a 64bit RISC (reduced instruction set 
computer) microprocessor based on the MIPS Technologies 
architecture. Designed using a 0.35-micron CMOS two-layer 
process, the chip runs at 200MHz and 100MHz internally and 
externally, respectively, and operates on 3.3V. Consisting of 
2.3 million transistors, the 13x16mm chip comes in two types: 
the micro PD30410/2-200 are housed in 179- and 447-pin ceramic 
PGA packages, which are compatible with the VR4400PC and the 
VR4400MC, respectively. Both are sample-priced at 200,000 yen 
($1,923.08). Sample shipment will start on May 23, and volume 
production is slated for October. NEC plans to manufacture 
10,000 units per month from January 1995. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 
24 May 94, Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIHON 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, 
Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 24 May 94) 
  Toshiba has developed a 64bit RISC (reduced instruction set 
computer) microprocessor based on the MIPS Technologies 
architecture. To be sampled from June, the TC86R4400-200 
features internal and external clock speeds of 200MHz and 
100MHz, respectively, and operates on 3.3V. Designed using a 
0.3-micron CMOS process, the chip measures 9.8x13.7mm, about 
40% smaller than the NEC chip also developed using MIPS' 
technology, and integrates 2.3 million transistors. Sample 
prices range from 310,000 yen ($2.980.77) to 400,000 yen 
($3,846.15). Toshiba plans to produce 10,000 units per month 
from September. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, 
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 
24 May 94) 
  Matsushita Electric has developed a GaAs (gallium arsenide) 
power MMIC (microwave monolithic IC) for use in digital mobile 
communications devices. Capable of operating on 3.0V, the MMIC 
consists of field effect transistors and impedance rectifier 
circuits. The gate length has been reduced from 1.0 micron to 
0.8 micron, and the distance between the source and the drain 
has been reduced by 1.5 microns to lower threshold voltage from 
1.7V to 1.2V, making it possible to operate the MMIC on 3.0V. By 
making a drain bias circuit an external circuit, a voltage loss 
has been minimized at 0.05V, down from 0.06V, and the size of 
the chip has been reduced to 1.0x1.5mm, about 60% the 
size of 
conventional MMICs. Targeting makers of personal handy phone 
systems, Matsushita intends to release a commercial version 
within the year. (Tokyo DEMPA SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIKKAN 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94, 
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94) 
  Sharp has developed a new IC, LCD photoetching production 
technique that provides continuous decomposition control of 
micro-organisms produced during the photoetching process. The 
new technique permits reductions in the size of production 
equipment, thus reducing production costs, and can also 
eliminate nitrogen, which is a cause of red tide, and surface 
active agents. A pilot plant, which has developed the new 
technique is conducting research in order to commercialize the 
technique. Sharp is aiming to introduce the new technique at its 
own LCD production centers, and is also considering providing 
the technique as well as a water monitoring technique developed 
at the same pilot plant to other companies. (Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO 
NIPPO 24 May 94) 
  MPT has decided to expand the number of channels available 
for communications satellite-based broadcasting. Twelve 
transponders are in use for CS TV broadcasts, with Space 
Communications Corp. (SCC) and Japan Satellite Systems (JSAT) 
each operating six. The plan is to increase the number by an 
additional 10 or more. Sumitomo Corp. plans to enter the CS TV 
business this year using an SCC satellite, and the ministry 
expects the number of CS TV stations to continue to grow, 
requiring more transponders. A formal decision will be made this 
fall. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 24 May 94) 
  Toshiba has developed a blue-green LED with a brightness of 
2cd. Capable of emitting a 500nm beam, the device uses a GaAs 
(gallium arsenide) substrate instead of one made of sapphire, 
and zinc selenide layers are deposited on the substrate forming 
a quantum-well structure. In an experiment, when 20mA current 
was run, the LED generated an optical output of 0.13W for more 
than 10 minutes. Since red and green LEDs use the same substrate 
as the blue-green LED, it is now possible to create red, green, 
and blue-green LEDs on the same substrate, a technology needed 
to develop a full-color display. (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 24 
May 94) 
  NTT has developed a crystal capable of recording high-speed 
video pictures. The company claims that at 7K (-266 deg C) 
europium-doped yttrium silicate can theoretically record a frame 
in 1x10-E9 second. Since it is possible to record different 
pictures on the same recording medium by changing laser beam 
frequency by 1KHz, the crystal can store 10 million still 
picture frames, the equivalent of 100 hours of black-and-white 
TV broadcasting or 30 hours of color video pictures. NTT has 
already developed a high-precision dye laser for recording and 
playing holography pictures. (Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 25 May 
94, Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 25 May 94, Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 25 May 94) 
  NEC has developed a silicon deposition technique capable of 
forming an atom-thick layer. The technique uses silicon 
dichloride gas with strong adhesive power as a material gas in 
order to control layer thickness at the atomic level. Silicon 
dichloride is chemically unstable, and therefore it can easily 
be attached to a silicon substrate. As a result, the efficiency 
in use of the material gas is boosted 1,000 times over 
conventional techniques, and film deposition has become possible 
at room temperature. NEC thinks that the technique will pave the 
way for the development of gigabit-level memory. (Tokyo NIHON 
KOGYO SHIMBUN 25 May 94) 

