BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Provincial Hookup" program] </F>
  [Text] On the morning of 6 June, the provincial party 
committee and the provincial government jointly held a telephone 
conference to implement the guidelines of the national telephone 
conference on investigating and handling major and serious cases 
of economic crime and severely punishing those who have 
committed economic crimes, and to make overall arrangements for 
launching the struggle to severely punish those who have 
committed economic crimes. 
  The telephone conference was presided over by (Ji Jiahong), 
secretary general of the provincial party committee. Fu Xishou, 
deputy secretary of the provincial party committee and Anhui 
governor, and Chen Guanglin, member of the standing committee of 
the provincial party committee and secretary of the provincial 
commission for discipline inspection, attended the conference. 
  Yang Yongliang, deputy secretary of the provincial party 
committee, made an important speech. 
  In his speech, Yang Yongliang pointed out: The provincial 
party committee and the provincial government have always 
considered the investigation and handling of major and serious 
cases and economic crimes and punishing corruption to be an 
important political task. Discipline inspection, supervision, 
and procuratorial organizations at various levels have given 
full play to their roles in the struggle. They have made 
significant achievements in investigating and handling major and 
serious cases and in cracking down on economic crimes. However, 
we must understand that at present the problem of crimes in the 
economic field is still quite serious. Therefore, leading 
comrades of concerned departments at various levels must attach 
great importance to the work of investigating and handling major 
and serious cases of economic crime, firmly correct the thinking 
that cracking down on economic crimes is antagonistic to 
developing a socialist market economy, change the negative and 
perfunctory attitude toward the anticorruption struggle, and 
overcome the fear of difficulty because of obstacles and 
interferences in investigating and handling some cases. We must 
do a solid job of investigating and handling major and serious 
cases and in launching struggles against corruption. 
  Yang Yongliang emphatically pointed out that we must in the 
coming months, especially in the third quarter, launch the 
province-wide struggle to severely punish economic crimes. We 
should stress investigating and handling cases of bribery, 
swindling, and smuggling. We should pay particular attention to 
investigating and handling crimes committed by members of party 
and government leading organs, administrative and judicial 
departments, and economic management departments. Concerned 
departments in various locales must make great efforts to tackle 
key issues and do a good job in the struggle. We must further 
mobilize the masses and encourage them to report cases of 
corruption. We should assign capable people to investigate and 
solve major and serious cases of economic crime. The chief 
procurators should personally handle those cases. We should 
enforce a responsibility system in investigating and handling 
those cases, and each level should check the work of the lower 
level. We should establish a system of supervising the progress 
in investigating and handling major and serious cases. The 
higher level should dispatch work teams to the lower level to 
help solve difficult cases which have encountered interference. 
We must thoroughly investigate and handle cases of economic 
crime. 
  In the next period, various discipline inspection and 
supervision departments as well as administrative and judicial 
departments should promptly transfer cases which have 
constituted crimes to judicial organizations . The economic 
administrative departments should actively assist judicial 
organizations in investigating and handling major and serious 
cases involving their own units. The judicial organizations 
should selected some major and serious cases, hear and prosecute 
those cases as quickly as possible, and impose heavy sentences. 
The judicial organizations at various levels should be 
resolute, prudent, and correct in hearing and adjudicating those 
cases. As for cases involving economic departments, we must 
ensure that normal production and operations will not be 
interrupted while those cases are investigated. In 
investigating and handling major and serious cases, the judicial 
organizations should actively offer suggestions and help 
concerned departments and units close loopholes in light of 
existing problems. 
  Yang Yongliang stressed that party committees and 
governments 
at various levels must help judicial units remove obstacles and 
interference in exercising laws and resolutely correct local and 
departmental protectionism in a few places. We must adopt 
measures to effective guarantee the necessary funds for 
investigating and handling major and serious cases. Committees 
on politics and law at various levels must coordinate the 
leading work of investigating and handling major and serious 
cases and must strengthen their supervision over the work. 
Various judicial units should exercise the law strictly and be 
bold in handling difficult cases. All cases which constitute 
crimes must be thoroughly investigated regardless of which 
department or person is involved. 
  In conclusion, Yang Yongliang asked units concerned at 
various levels to properly integrate the struggle against 
economic crime to ensure that the work of economic construction 
is combined with the current struggle against serious criminal 
cases. He said that it is necessary to truly attach equal 
importance to cracking down on crimes and to promoting economic 
construction. In this way, we can effectively promote the 
anticorruption struggle, maintain social and political 
stability, and ensure the sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development of the economy in this province. 

