Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "`Fairness' Is Being Profaned in London"] </F>
  [Text] Percy Cradock came under heavy fire from Chris 
Patten and his ilk not long ago simply because he said a few 
impartial words on the Hong Kong issue, taking a fair position. 
This has given us much food for thought. 
  The man who launched the attack said: Should Cradock's 
suggestion be adopted, should the British side always act upon 
whatever the Chinese side says, the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration would lose its meaning. 
  Did Cradock ever suggest "acting upon whatever the Chinese 
say?" What "words" and "advice" of the Chinese side did Cradock 
follow? That was Chris Patten's pure fabrication. On the Hong 
Kong constitutional issue, both the Chinese and the British side 
should "follow" the Sino-British Joint Declaration, the 
agreements and understanding reached between the Chinese and 
British governments, the plan stipulated in the Sino-British 
Joint Declaration, and the plan settled through negotiations 
between the two sides. That is China's consistent position. 
Should that be "acting upon whatever the other says," that is 
precisely a demonstration of safeguarding the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration as well as Hong Kong's basic interests. 
Nevertheless, Chris Patten has been running in the opposite 
direction, stubbornly pushing his "three-violation" package; he 
just would not listen to the "common understanding" reached 
between the Chinese and British governments, and would not 
follow the "plan" for insuring Hong Hong's prosperity and 
stability and stable transition, which the two sides had agreed 
to. Has not such practice made the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration lose its meaning? 
  The man who launched the attack said: It was entirely wrong 
for Cradock to criticize Chris Patten for refusing to seek the 
Chinese side's advice on the constitutional reform issue; 
although some Chinese officials believed that Chris Patten 
should obtain consent from the Chinese side before presenting 
his constitutional reform package, it did not mean to say that 
the Chinese side had the right to veto any proposal set forth by 
the British side. 
  On the constitutional reform issue, Chris Patten has always 
been unwilling to hear the Chinese side's opinions; upon his 
arrival in Hong Kong, he hastily dished up his "three-violation 
proposal." Would the Chinese side have aired its views and even 
criticized the British side, had Chris Patten not stood in Hong 
Kong, this piece of land that belongs to China, had he made some 
suggestions about British internal affairs instead of some 
principled issue that involves China's sovereignty? It was 
precisely because Chris Patten's proposals have impeded the 
stable transition and injured the basic interest of Hong Kong, 
while harming China's principle of sovereignty, that the Chinese 
have made severe criticism and adopted an attitude of negation. 
Could there be anything wrong in doing this? Would it be right 
to let Chris Patten unscrupulously negate the Sino-British Joint 
Declaration, the principle of converging with the Basic Law, and 
the agreements and understanding already reached between the two 
sides alone, while forbidding others to negate his erroneous 
policies, speeches, and actions that have endangered Hong Kong? 
How could there be such impudent logic in the world? We never 
expected that Chris Patten, who had harped on the same tune on 
resuming talks with the Chinese side, should have constantly 
thumped the table, and ferociously shouted in an occasion of a 
public hearing that "we should never concede to a scoundrel-like 
opponent" in the talks with the Chinese side over constitutional 
reform issues! What a feature of a "gambler" that has gone 
berserk in the game! What an act that showed him up completely! 
  The man who launched the attack said: With what electoral 
arrangements would Cradock reach an agreement? If the Chinese 
side had insisted on implementing a set of electoral 
institutions to reduce the opportunity of democrats being 
elected, should he have kowtowed under such circumstance? 
  That gave away his secrets: The agreement on electoral 
arrangements in Chris Patten's mind aimed to insure the 
"democrats" of his choice to be elected, but not to "reduce the 
opportunity for those democrats being elected." Here, Chris 
Patten misquoted former chief secretary Sir David Akers-Jones as 
saying: "The Chinese style is not to rig elections. But they 
do like to know the result before they're held." Sir David hit 
back at Patten, saying "It was rather a cheap joke." In fact, 
it was none other than Chris Patten himself who attempted to 
"control the elections" and "likes to know the result before the 
elections are held." Actually, he wanted more than knowing the 
result before the elections are held, but was "making 
arrangements beforehand," while masterminding schemes for the 
predetermined body and making helpful arrangements for those 
"democrats" to be elected. The word "kowtow" has been heard 
more often than not; however, its was not Chris Patten's 
invention, but passed on to him by Martin Lee Chu-ming. It is 
not true that Martin Lee Chu-ming has often told Chris Patten 
not to "kowtow" to Beijing? Chris Patten readily took the hint, 
and "followed his advice," in addition, he was lecturing others 
on that point. 
  The man who launched the attack said: Percy Cradock was not 
a Hong Kong resident, and stayed in Hong Kong for a 
comparatively short while; however, he should not have commented 
on what would be good to Hong Kong residents and what not; 
people could not help feeling strange about it. 
  Here, we could pose a string of questions, which we have no 
idea whether or not the man who launched the attack could 
answer. Chris Patten is not a Hong Kong resident; he had never 
stayed very long in Hong Kong before; however, when he first 
came to Hong Kong in 1992, he started criticizing this and 
condemning that, issuing orders right and left; was it not a 
strange thing for him to have done that? In early November last 
year, none of the three lawyers who talked volubly at a 
parliamentary witness hearing early last November were Hong Kong 
residents; probably, they had never been to Hong Kong, or at 
least, had rarely been to Hong Kong; nevertheless, they made 
irresponsible remarks about Hong Kong's constitutional system, 
and were certain that Chris Patten's "constitutional reform 
package" was not a "three-violation" one; whereas Chris Patten 
claimed such remarks to be authoritative; was not that a strange 
thing? We can draw a conclusion without any further questions: 
In the views of Chris Patten and his ilk, whether or not 
something is strange is totally determined by Chris Patten. 
  It's better to say such practice is profanity to "fairness" 
than the attack of Chris Patten and his ilk on Percy Cradock. 
Is it not tragic that such a thing should have happened in a 
self-claimed "democratic" country, and by Chris Patten, who 
personally claimed that he wanted to bestow "fairness" to 
others?! Nevertheless, there are quite a number of parliament 
members in Britain who have challenged Chris Patten by quoting 
Cradock. 

