Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Doboj, March 7 (TANJUG) -- A Muslim offensive 
against Serb positions and settlements continues in the region 
of Doboj in northern Bosnia-Herzegovina, where Serb troops have 
repelled four strong Musllim attacks, Bosnian Serb military 
sources said on Monday. 
  The Muslim offensive operations have been the strongest in 
the area of Mounts Ozren and Trebava, south of Doboj, where the 
arrival of fresh Muslim troops has been observed, the same 
sources said. 
  The Muslim side carried out three infantry attacks in the 
Mount Ozren area north-east of Zavidovici in an attempt to make 
a breakthrough and link up with Muslim troops south of Doboj. 
  Serb troops took effective action and repelled the three 
attacks and also an attempted infantry breakthrough east of 
Zavidovici, forcing the enemy to return to the starting 
positions. 
  All Serb settlements in the north-eastern part of Mount 
Ozren 
are a constant target of Muslim snipers, the Bosnian Serb 
military sources said. 
  Muslim forces kept on opening fire from infantry weapons all 
along the frontline in the area of Brcko in northern Bosnia- 
Herzegovina on the night of March 6-7. 
  Bosnian Muslim army commander Rasim Delic on Saturday said 
his troops would launch new operations against the Bosnian 
Serbs. He set out that, having signed the Washington agreement 
on a federation with the Bosnian Croats, the Muslims had one 
front less now and extra forces, the size of a few (?brigades), 
to send to the front against the Serbs. 
  Muslim forces from the region of Gorazde in eastern Bosnia- 
Herzegovina resumed attacks on Serb defence lines in the areas 
of Ustikolina and Cajnice on the night of March 6-7. 
  Although Gorazde is a U.N.-proclaimed Muslim "safe area," 
which was to be demilitarized, Muslim units from that area 
continue to engage in combat and even to try to get their 
commando-terrorist groups behind Serb lines, Bosnian Serb 
military sources said. 

