BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by John Mullin: "Mayhew Seeks To Calm Power-Sharing </F>
Fears"] 
  [Text] Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland Secretary, 
yesterday moved to allay Unionist fears over Ulster's future 
amid speculation the IRA was about to suspend its campaign of 
violence. 
  Unionists remained unconvinced, pointing to Sir Patrick's 
remarks that realism, rather than history, would shape attitudes 
in the North. 
  Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said last week 
that Dublin was seeking cross-border institutional links in 
return for dropping its constitutional claim to Northern Ireland. 
  Sir Patrick, writing in SUNDAY LIFE, based in Belfast, said 
there would be no joint authority over Northern Ireland without 
the consent of the Unionist community. "The British Government 
is not engaged in some kind of conspiracy with Dublin to 
introduce joint authority whether as a first step to a united 
Ireland or at all." 
  He recalled Mr Reynolds's comments in telling an Oxford 
Union 
audience last month that any settlement required the agreement 
of the Unionists. 
  Sir Patrick said: "That is not the talk of a government 
blind to the fears of the Unionist people who share this island 
with other Irish people. These are honest and realistic 
statements, which recognise that history has certainly shaped 
traditional attitudes, but that those of tomorrow and beyond 
must be dictated by realism. I firmly believe that a proper and 
lasting peace will come. Despite the darkness of recent weeks, 
I sense that the desire to see a permanent change for the better 
grows daily." 
  There were reports yesterday that Sir Patrick -- who also 
criticised terrorists on both sides -- may move on from Northern 
Ireland in the forthcoming cabinet reshuffle. 
  One name being touted as a replacement is Brian Mawhinney, 
the Health Minister, an Ulsterman who had already had a stint as 
a junior minister in Northern Ireland. 
  Sinn Fein officials were last night playing down reports 
that 
the IRA was poised to announce an end to violence. 
  They said a formal response to the Downing Street 
declaration 
was still a fortnight or so away. The indications are that the 
most it will offer is an initial three-month ceasefire. THE 
MAIL ON SUNDAY suggested Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, was 
seeking the agreement of all 200 hardcore IRA men before 
announcing acceptance of the declaration. 
  Republican attacks continued yesterday, although without 
injury. A mortar was fired at a Royal Ulster Constabulary 
station at Pomeroy, Co Tyrone, and a missile missed four army 
vehicles in west Belfast. 
  A soldier from the Royal Irish [RIR] Regiment was remanded 
in 
civilian custody on Saturday, charged with the murder three 
months ago of Francis Brown, aged 38, a Catholic father of four. 
  The Ulster Volunteer Force had claimed responsibility for 
the 
murder. 
  Mr Brown was killed when a booby-trapped breeze block next 
to 
his lorry exploded outside his home in Portadown, Co Armagh. 
  Neil Thomas Irwin, aged 24, a private based at Drumadd 
Barracks, Armagh City, was also accused of four attempted 
murders. 
  In one, a bomb was thrown through the window of the home of 
the mother of a former Sinn Fein councillor. 
  Private Irwin was further accused of possessing explosives, 
an improvised booby trap and an assault rifle, with intent to 
endanger life. 
  Staff Sergeant Maurice James Nicholl, aged 37, also from the 
RIR Drumadd Barracks, was charged with possessing an improvised 
booby trap and an assault rifle with intent to endanger life. 
Both denied the charges and were remanded in custody by Belfast 
magistrates until July 15. 

