Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Mary Simon] </F>
  [Text] Geneva, 2 Mar (PL) -- Today in Geneva, Cuba 
distributed a secret document drafted by the U.S. Interests 
Section in Havana that demonstrates the falseness of claims made 
by the island's so-called human rights groups. 
  The report, signed by Joseph Gerard Sullivan, chief of the 
U.S. Interests Section in Cuba, admitted that cases presented by 
leaders of such small groups fail to prove they were or are in 
fact the victims of persecution or violation. 
  The document, which was sent to the Department of State, the 
CIA, and the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) was 
circulated as Cuban Ambassador Jose Perez Novoa was responding 
to a report by Carl Johan Groth, special rapporteur of the Cuban 
Human Rights Committee (CDH). 
  After revealing ties between the CIA and such organizations, 
Sullivan called for greater cooperation between the CIA and the 
Interests Section in Havana because of the CIA's interest in the 
campaign against Cuba, which is based on the use of the human 
rights issue. 
  The number of political prisoners in Cuba is minimal, and 
after being released, they are not persecuted, discriminated 
against, or mistreated, the U.S. diplomat said. 
  The official text of the U.S. mission, which operates under 
the jurisdiction of the Swiss Embassy, states that moreover, 
most of these former prisoners request visas to escape the 
country's economic situation, not out of fear of being 
persecuted or mistreated. 
  The document, which was drafted in January under reference 
No. H/18422/693-4, admits that the Cuban Government's 
depoliticization of illegal departures from the country rendered 
the issue useless for members of those organizations. 
  It added that of the 225 cases presented to the INS during a 
visit to Havana by INS representatives in December 1993 only 47 
claimed to have participated in activities, and of those, one 
claimed to have been detained for 30 days in the past five years 
but was unable to prove it. 
  As for the other cases, the document stated that those 
involved only presented vague descriptions of their 
participation in those groups and only 19 people were admitted 
into the refugee program. 
  According to Sullivan, the activists themselves have said 
that many members of their organizations joined to obtain the 
advantages in emigrating to the United States with official U.S. 
support. 
  He specified that leaders of such groups sell apocryphal 
political guarantees [avales] to people who plan to leave the 
country. 
  Sullivan described the struggles among those groups when he 
said that: "regrettably for us, there are claims of fraud and 
discrimination among the main human rights leaders." 
  He pointed out that in view of an overall decline in the 
quality of the cases, including those involving former political 
prisoners, the office will need to work harder at identifying 
the most useful ones and at introducing additional changes to 
process them. 
  The diplomat said that to achieve this the Interests Section 
will continue to be flexible regarding cases registered so far 
even if they do not comply with all requirements, should they 
prove to be useful to U.S. interests. 

