Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Hamadan. JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI. The minister of 
construction jihad in a session introducing the new head of the 
Construction Jihad of Hamadan Province said: Of the gross 
national product [GNP], 27 percent is from the agricultural 
sector. 
  Mr. Foruzesh in this session referred to the present 
situation of the country and the various tricks of the enemies 
to weaken the revolution and, emphasizing conservation in all 
areas, said: The leader has considered the presence of the 
clerics in the jihad for the purpose of advice, encouragement, 
and guidance of jihad members very necessary and said that 
clerics representing the religious guardian must seriously avoid 
interfering in executive affairs. 
  The minister of construction jihad pointed out the 
importance 
of the agricultural sector and said: The agricultural sector 
accounts for 27 percent of the GNP, and of 13 million jobs in 
the country more than 3 million are in the agricultural sector. 
  In regards to support for domestic products, he said: Of the 
225,000 tons of projected imported meat in the Plan, less than 
70,000 tons have been imported. At the same time, in the course 
of the Plan, the meat production capacity of the country has 
increased from 520,000 tons to 625,000 tons, which is a 
19-percent growth, and it is anticipated that this figure will 
reach 750,000 tons by the end of the Second Plan. 
  He said: Also, the production of chicken has increased from 
300,000 tons to 520,000 tons, a 73-percent increase, which by 
the end of the Second Plan will reach 800,000 tons. 
  Stating that the ban on cheese imports has prevented the 
import of 20,000 tons of cheese, he called this a step toward 
support of the dairy industries and said: Rumors concerning 
domestic cheese causing disease are absolutely baseless; the 
safety of domestic cheese has been verified by related experts. 
  Mr. Foruzesh also referring to the accomplishments in 
regards 
to revitalization of natural resources and forest planting in 
the province of Hamadan, considered these actions very 
important, and stating that a significant amount of funds has 
been projected for the province of Hamadan for next year, he 
praised and thanked the governor general and other officials of 
this province for their efforts and attention. 
  In conclusion, the minister of construction jihad introduced 
Mr. Amir as the new head of the Construction Jihad of Hamadan 
Province and praised Mr. Safa'i, the previous supervisor, for 
his hard work. 
  Our correspondent's report indicates that in the 
continuation 
of this session, which was held in the presence of Mr. Sadatian, 
the deputy of the people of Hamadan in the Majles, several 
directors of the executive organization, and a large number of 
Guard Corps members of the province of Hamadan, referring to the 
potential resources of Hamadan Province, he evaluated investment 
in this province very positively and asked for more support by 
the officials for the investments in this province. 

