Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Venezuelan Defense Minister Radames Munoz Leon </F>
at a news conference with unidentified reporters at the 
Miraflores Presidential Palace in Caracas on 29 January -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] This morning the entire military High Command and I 
were called to the residence of President-elect Caldera in 
Tinajero. There we were told that the president [not further 
identified] wants to return to the tradition of the president 
choosing his ministers and the military High Command at the 
beginning of an administration and that for this reason we were 
to be changed. 
  He made some acknowledgements and appointed General Manuel 
Montero Revete as defense minister; the inspector general of the 
Armed Forces will be Air Force Gen. Maglio Montiel; Vice Admiral 
Rafael Huizi Clavier will be Armed Forces chief of staff; the 
commander of the Army is Gen. Moises Orozco Graterol; the Navy 
commander is Vice Adm. Jesus Ramos Flores; the Air Force 
commander is Gen. Otto Garcia; and Gen. Hegberto Artuza Delgado 
will be the commander of the Armed Forces of Cooperation. 
  In view of this situation, I told President Caldera that we 
are soldiers who respect civilian authority and that our last 
demonstration of obedience, subordination, and respect for the 
norms of discipline we honored during our years of service in 
the military institution, would be our compliance with that 
decision, but that I, personally, do not agree, and I do not 
agree because I think this marks the beginning of a breach in an 
institution that rescued the values of discipline, of service to 
the nation, and of respect for the democratic system above 
everything. 
  The military High Command has demonstrated clearly that it 
backs the democratic system and respects its fundamental values. 
It has demonstrated its love for Venezuela and its respect for 
the people. 
  This has been possible because we respect honor, our own 
honor. 
  Today we were humiliated. This is the kind of reward we 
receive for the personal sacrifices that the High Command has 
made for the democratic development of the country. We were 
humiliated because we were asked to explain our resignations 
with a childish excuse; and thirdly, because we were offered 
private meetings to offer us some other things and this goes 
against honor and dignity. I do not accept -- we do not accept 
-- unprincipled and merchant-like posts to hide a political 
decision. 
  We think that the values that were rescued while we held our 
posts in the Armed Forces were for the purpose of strengthening 
the institution so that it could serve the people and the 
country and not the personal interests of private individuals 
who have no sense of institutional values. 
  I do not accept flattery from people whom we do not deserve 
to receive it. I do not accept childish excuses either. In 
first place is my dignity, my family, and my people. I accept 
no humiliation of any kind from any person or for the sake of 
any institution or person in this country. My dignity is first. 
The dignity of the High Command is first. I have asked the 
president to relieve me from my post as minister on Monday or 
Tuesday, when he finds it suitable, and I have decided also to 
present by irrevocable retirement from the Armed Forces. 
  This situation has infuriated me. This cannot be the reward 
we receive for the democratic struggle we have waged within the 
Armed Forces. I am crying inside over my people because I do 
not know what will happen to the country with a precarious 
government that was elected by scarcely 8 percent of the 
population, or 16 percent of the potential voters, and whose 
first act was to strike an institution that is at the service of 
the fatherland and not of political parties, personalities, or 
economic or political interests. 
  Gentlemen: I have nothing else to say. Our posts will be 
placed at the disposal of the Presidency. We will leave 
honorably, with our heads high, through the front door, through 
which we dreamed to step out someday after our 30 years of 
institutional life. 
  Thank you. 
  [Reporter] You have said that the unity of the Armed Forces 
has been broken. Is a coup d'etat possible? 
  [Munoz] I do not think the Armed Forces are thinking about 
that. We have planted the seed of democracy and it is deep in 
the heart of the Armed Forces. They are responsible. However, 
in the face of an attitude such as this, hopelessness will enter 
the minds of many people because they will think that after 30 
years of service they still will be unsure what a political whim 
will decide for their lives. 
  [Paris AFP in Spanish at 1850 GMT on 29 January in a 
150-word, Caracas-datelined report adds: "Montero Revete will 
assume the post of acting defense minister on Monday in view of 
Defense Minister Rear Admiral Radames Munoz' decision to resign 
and to request his retirement, President Ramon J. Velasquez 
said. The president made this announcement in the company of 
Munoz at the Miraflores Presidential Palace, after Caldera 
informed both of his decision to change the entire military High 
Command."] 

