CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Clara Elvira Ospina: "The Malvinas Are </F>
Argentine"] 
  [Text] He came to Colombia with the firm intention of 
strengthening the ties between the Argentine Army, which he 
commands, and the Colombian Army. But he also arrived with a 
score of 5-0 hanging over his head. He knew that it was his duty 
and that he wanted to congratulate the Colombians on the fact 
that their soccer team had managed to kick the ball into his 
compatriots' goal five times. 
  What he did not think about was that everyone would ask him 
about the Falklands war. Wherever he appears in Colombia, 
Lieutenant General (the top rank in the Argentine military) 
Martin Antonio Balza, Army chief of staff, spends much of his 
time recalling the conflict his country waged with the United 
Kingdom in 1982. 
  Now, 12 years after the lost war, Balza insists that the 
Falkland Islands belong to Argentina. "That is unquestionable," 
he asserts. 
  "But," he points out, "that is a political problem. Our 
president has made that very clear at numerous international 
forums. The matter lies in diplomatic hands, and it is through 
those channels that we hope to recover that piece of Argentine 
territory." 
  Although he did not say whether it could be obtained 
militarily, he knows that he is a soldier, that he is obedient, 
and that if it were necessary, he would obey orders to fight a 
war on those grounds. 
  The harsh experience of the conflict keeps haunting his 
conversation. "I am not a Falklands war hero," he says. The real 
war heroes are the men, the officers, petty officers, and 
enlisted men in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and our 
Gendarmerie who remained behind as a monument to our 
sovereignty. The real heroes of the Falklands are those who were 
mutilated. I was just one more soldier who went and came back, 
after fighting for something very dear to the hearts of all 
Argentines." 
  He could not say whether there were violations of the Geneva 
Convention during the war. Although he was held prisoner for a 
month, he claims not to have been mistreated or to have had his 
rights trampled. 
  Looking back, he knows that the war was lost because the 
Argentine Armed Forces were very weak compared to those of the 
United Kingdom. "We went into the Falklands war on the basis of 
two assumptions of national or military strategy. 
  "One assumption was that the United Kingdom would not 
respond, and the other assumption or hypothesis was that the 
United States would support us or remain neutral. Neither was 
true. 
  "We went to war on an island territory without controlling 
the air or the sea. The British dominated the skies. It was a 
war in which there were acts of heroism, acts of operational 
efficiency on the tactical level, but that was not enough to win 
a conflict with those weaknesses and limitations." 
<H5>  The Experience </H5>
  It is now 12 years since that war, he says, and it is more 
prudent to live in the present. Relations with the British are 
"excellent," Balza declares. "The war is a thing of the past. We 
will never forget our dead, nor will the English; but the best 
thing we can do is to pray for our dead, and it does not matter 
if our prayers cover the English as well. That is the Christian 
spirit," he states. 
  He has not forgotten the experience the Armed Forces gained 
in that war, however. "One of the most important lessons the 
Falklands war taught the Army was never again to be forced to 
participate in activities beyond the scope of the role defined 
for us by the Constitution; never again to participate in 
politics," he says. 
  Undaunted, he claims that this experience simply brought the 
military back to its original role: obeying the Constitution and 
the law, but not intervening in politics. 
  Moments after the first question on the Falklands, however, 
he makes it clear he is interested in leaving the past behind 
and thinking of the future. Therefore, it is not a bad idea to 
ponder the possibility of a future coup d'etat. 
  Then his face hardens, and although he says that no one can 
guarantee the future, he rejects the notion that the Armed 
Forces would try to go against the constitutional order: "I will 
tell you right now: Disrupting the constitutional order in the 
Argentine Republic is definitely a thing of the past. We cannot 
reconstruct the past, but we can learn lessons from it and 
prevent the mistakes of the past from being repeated in the 
future. Argentina will never again see disruptions of the 
constitutional order. Not because of General Balza, but because 
the Armed Forces, the Security Forces, and Argentine society 
have incorporated that idea into their culture." 
  Now, he says, the Armed Forces' relations with the president 
are characterized by absolute cordiality and mutual respect. 
  General Balza could not fail to mention public order and the 
Argentine experience with violent urban guerrillas, the 
Montoneros of the 1970's. 
  "In the past, the country was the victim of a notorious 
aggression, and those were very painful years. This problem 
overwhelmed Argentine society, which did not support those who 
were threatening national values." 
  In view of his country's experience, the commander of the 
Army believes that it is possible to defeat unprincipled 
guerrillas. "It is my hope that fellow nations, in this case 
Colombia, can overcome this phenomenon." 

