Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, December 1 (CNS)--A projection by the 
central authorities indicates that by the year 2000, China will 
probably have a total of 100,000 AIDS-infected cases with people 
suffering from full-blown AIDS are put at 20,000, the Vice 
Minister of Public Health, Mr. Yin Dakui, said today. 
  China has so far been seen as having fewer cases of AIDS 
infection. By late last month, 22 provinces, autonomous regions 
and municipalities had reported a total of 1,159 cases showing 
positive in AIDS tests while the number of full-blown AIDS cases 
was 19. 
  Mr. Yin said that the figures had come only from a sample 
survey of 2.3 million people and the actual number of cases with 
the infection was far greater than that, being estimated at 
5,000 to 10,000. 
  Speaking at a function today for World AIDS Day, Mr. Yin 
said 
that should resolute measures to prevent AIDS not be adopted, 
China would become a country with a high AIDS rate by the turn 
of the century. 
  A research office under the State Council and public health 
departments as well as health experts joined hands early this 
year to study the risk of AIDS facing the country. Experts have 
estimated that the fatal disease has caused economic loss of at 
least between RMB 540 million [renminbi] and RMB 1.3 billion 
while the greater loss incurred was put at between RMB 790 
million and RMB 1.87 billion, dealing a serious blow to 
families, society and the national economy. 
  The Ministry of Public health and the World health 
Organization have recently made joint efforts in helping China 
in its preventative work against AIDS. Such work undertaken 
next year will centre on publicity regarding AIDS prevention as 
well as on active measures to deal with it. 
  Awards have been won for a number of outstanding publicity 
items on AIDS. The president of an AIDS-prevention association, 
Mr. Qian Xinzhong, said that while China still has comparatively 
few cases of AIDS, the authorities should lose no time in 
promoting education on the disease and prevent it from spreading 
while at the same time helping people to overcome unnecessary 
fears regarding AIDS. 

