Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Feature consisting of report by INTERFAX, ITAR-TASS, and </F>
own correspondent Aleksandr Chernykh, and unattributed comment: 
"Draw a Million, Friend"] 
  [Excerpts] INTERFAX: "On 25 December a criminal gang of 
six Chechnya inhabitants was arrested in St. Petersburg. Some 
20,000 counterfeit 50,000 ruble bank notes produced on a xerox 
machine with a total face value of 1 billion rubles were 
confiscated from them." 
  ITAR-TASS: "The year 1993 has been a record one in Perm 
Oblast in terms of the number of counterfeit bank notes which 
are going into circulation. The number of counterfeit notes 
confiscated was almost seven times greater than last year. The 
season was opened by Ashot Oganesyan, who already has two 
previous convictions, from whom 50,000 ruble [R] notes he had 
produced himself were confiscated. The oblast court sentenced 
the counterfeiter to eight years' imprisonment with the 
confiscation of his property. In all 10 people have been 
convicted of counterfeiting money this year." [ITAR-TASS report 
ends] 
  [Chernykh report begins] Tomsk -- There has been a mass 
dumping of counterfeit R50,000 notes in Tomsk. The local law 
enforcement organs had already recorded instances of this kind, 
but not on such a scale. [passage omitted] 
  During the investigation it emerged that the main cache was 
in Novosibirsk. The Tomsk team of investigators traveled there. 
With the aid of their local colleagues they managed to reach 
the underground storehouse. When it was opened the picture was 
very impressive: They discovered 488 counterfeit R50,000 notes, 
counterfeit plates, and blank passports and identity cards. 
[passage omitted] 
  In the opinion of V.O. Grechman, first deputy chief of the 
Tomsk Internal Affairs Administration, the dumping of 
counterfeit money in Russia is a precisely planned operation at 
the state level. On the one hand it is designed to support 
Chechnya's destroyed financial system and on the other directly 
or indirectly to undermine Russia's economy. (Let us recall the 
operations involving fake advice notes which caused us losses of 
many billions -- they came from there, from Chechnya). 
  Good preparation helped the Tomsk law enforcement organs 
halt 
the counterfeit money operations quite swiftly. After the 
"Novosibirsk cache" had been destroyed the dumping of 
counterfeit bank notes ceased. 
  But is that for long? What further inventions will the 
Caucasus bring us in the sphere of economic crime? [Chernykh 
report ends] 
  The number of criminal encroachments connected with the 
production and sale of counterfeit money has increased 350 
percent, a ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA correspondent was told at a 
Russian Internal Affairs Ministry [MVD] news conference. 
Instances of counterfeiting have been discovered in many 
regions of the country. Over the first five months of 1993 
alone counterfeit Russian bank notes with a face value of many 
tens of millions of rubles were removed from circulation. There 
has been a marked enhancement of the counterfeiters' 
organization and professionalism. In a number of cases they 
organize international links and distribute roles and spheres of 
criminal activity. 
  One of the main reasons for the growth of this type of crime 
is the lifting of restrictions on the import of modern copying 
and duplicating equipment from abroad and the repeal of 
previously established rules for its registration by the 
internal affairs organs. This act has not been compensated for 
by other forms of social control. 
  Unfortunately the newspaper editorial office cannot supply 
the reader with the specific results of the internal affairs 
organs' struggle against counterfeiting in 1993. It is not 
known why department chief N.S. Ponomarev refused to talk with a 
correspondent on the telephone. 
  Yevgeniy Tumanov, chief of the Moscow Internal Affairs Main 
Administration department for combating economic crimes, 
believes that almost all counterfeits are distinguished by one 
method of production. It cannot be said that they are all 
produced to a very high standard: Often watermarks are lacking 
and the color of the dye is lighter than on a genuine note but 
naturally you cannot discern these nuances as you go. In 
principle Russian bank notes are quite well protected but after 
all dollars are also forged. And in general we have given our 
proposals on this score to the Main Administration for 
Production of State Bank Notes, Coins, and Medals but for some 
reason they have not been taken seriously. 
  Let us add on our own behalf that recently there has been an 
increase in the number of counterfeit R50,000 notes (the 
counterfeiters do not think small). It is particularly painful 
to lose such a large sum at one go so the MVD and the Central 
Bank urge us to be vigilant. Do not accept R50,000 notes from 
people you do not know. The dye on counterfeit notes is not as 
fast -- rub a folded note to see if it comes off. And to be 
doubly sure wet it with saliva and see if the color runs. 
  Alas, so far that is all the wise fighters to preserve the 
integrity of bank notes can suggest to us. To judge by their 
recommendations all is confusion as regards money right now. It 
is far easier to buy nothing, to sell nothing, and to have no 
money at all. 

