Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lieutenant-Colonel Nikolay Astashkin and </F>
Lieutenant-Colonel Yakov Firsov, chief of the North Caucasus 
Military District press center: "Housing Problem: Number of 
Servicemen Without Apartments Not Getting Any Smaller"] 
  [Text] There is no more serious problem in the North 
Caucasus Military District than that of providing housing for 
servicemen's families. Only recently, you could count on your 
fingers the number of officers without apartments in the few 
units stationed in the district, which was jokingly called the 
health-resort district. Today the situation is different. In a 
brief period of time, units and large units from the Western 
Group of Forces, the Transcaucasus, and the Baltics have been 
withdrawn to the territory of the North Caucasus Military 
District. Troop trains continue to arrive here from the 
ex-Soviet republics and foreign countries, adding to the already 
large army of officers and warrant officers without apartments. 
Their number now exceeds 22,000. 
  Many of the officers without apartments are asking a natural 
question: Do the people "at the top"--the Ministry of Defense 
and the government--know about the housing crisis in the North 
Caucasus Military District? They not only know about it, but 
they are doing everything in their power to solve the problem. 
The district was recently visited by a group of generals and 
officers from chief administrations of the Armed Forces branches 
who are in charge of construction and quartering, led by 
Lieutenant-General Anatoliy Solomatin, chief of construction and 
quartering of the Russian Federation Armed Forces. 
  An operational conference was held right at the military 
airfield where the plane bringing the high-ranking commission 
from Moscow landed. It was attended by Colonel-General Aleksei 
Mityukhin, the district troop commander, and Viktor Anpilogov, 
first deputy administration chief and chairman of the Rostov 
Oblast government. The first community that the commission 
visited to study servicemen's housing problems was the village 
of Yegorlykskaya. The helicopter regiment stationed there was 
withdrawn from the Transcaucasus last year. And the aviators 
went from the frying pan to the fire, as they say. 
  "We were unable to bring back from the Transcaucasus 
everything we had acquired," said regiment commander 
Lieutenant-Colonel Vitaliy Makarov in a conversation with us. 
"We essentially arrived at a place where no preparations had 
been made. People are tired of living out of suitcases and tired 
of being unsettled." 
  We would like to add that most of the unit's soldiers served 
in Afghanistan, many of them more than one tour, and helped deal 
with the aftermath of the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear 
power station. Many of the officers have 20 and more calendar 
years of service. 
  Needless to say, the situation in which the aviators find 
themselves cannot be called easy. And so at a construction site 
here where three apartment buildings with 147 units are being 
built, adjustments were made in the official plan in view of the 
garrison's actual housing needs. It was decided to appropriate 
additional funds to a foreign firm that is building a housing 
compound in Rostov-na-Donu so that it can construct another 400 
apartments here. And rural construction workers, with a pro rata 
contribution from the military, will help eliminate problems 
arising in connection with the construction of a boiler house 
and treatment facilities. 
  The regiment commander said that this news, which spread 
through the aviators' compound instantaneously, will give the 
airmen and their families a more optimistic outlook. And it is 
also sure to have a positive effect on the unit's combat 
readiness. 
  In connection with the well-known events in the Caucasus, 
the 
soldiers of the North Caucasus Military District are having to 
solve the problems side by side with personnel from internal and 
border troops. This significantly complicates the already 
difficult situation with respect to providing housing and other 
accommodations for the troops. But it is characteristic that the 
soldiers, regardless of the color of their stripes, are working 
to solve the problems without red tape and on a mutually 
beneficial basis. We saw this for ourselves when we visited 
Vladikavkaz. 
  This city is the focal point of the economic, political, 
ethnic, and social (including housing) problems that undoubtedly 
require solutions. In our view, the people endowed with 
authority are not only approaching these problems in an 
effective fashion but also exhibiting a can-do attitude, 
foresight, and an ability to foresee possible developments five 
to six steps ahead. 
  Consider this concrete example. On the outskirts of 
Vladikavkaz, next to a construction site where housing is being 
put up for the garrison's soldiers, is a vacant tract of land 
belonging to the Russian Defense Ministry. The command of the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Internal Affairs internal troops 
asked the Ministry of Defense if it could station an internal 
troops brigade on the site. The commission visited the site and 
did some reconnaissance, as it were. It decided to let the 
internal troops lease the land, but not indefinitely. Who knows 
what could happen three, four, or five years from now? If the 
situation stabilizes, and let's hope it does, the internal 
troops brigade will be transferred to a new location. And if it 
is, the land and its structures built there will remain under 
the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defense. 
  During their stay in Vladikavkaz, the inspectors from Moscow 
could not, of course, fail to see its "pearl"--a housing 
compound built by the German firm Philipp Holtsman. 
  A frank conversation that Lt-Gen A. Solomatin and district 
troop commander Col-Gen A. Mityukhin held with the commanders of 
the garrison's units touched on many issues relating to 
providing accommodations for the troops and apartments for the 
servicemen's families and building social, cultural, and 
consumer-service facilities. It would seem that the 
commissioning of the closed compound with 1,500 apartments built 
by the foreign firm should solve the garrison's housing problem. 
Nevertheless, a waiting list of people without apartments has 
formed once again there. Needless to say, this problem has to be 
solved. And so the district troop commander, after announcing 
the construction of 12 apartment buildings, told the officers of 
another decision he had taken: About 60 families of servicemen 
who have been discharged into the reserves or who will be 
discharged this year and who have apartments in the compound 
will be allowed to make equivalent trades for housing that 
foreign firms are building in Krasnodar or Rostov-na-Donu. 
  "The North Caucasus District ranks first in the Armed Forces 
in terms of the gravity of the problems associated with 
providing accommodations for troops and apartments for 
servicemen's families," Lt-Gen A. Solomatin said in a 
conversation with us. "It's no accident that the housing problem 
in the district is being monitored by the defense minister. 
Military construction workers have been assigned the task of 
building 15,000 apartments here in 1994. We are prepared to 
accomplish that task. But everything will depend on financing, 
and so the last words rests with the government." 

