BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salahuddin Haider and Surender Valasai] </F>
  [Text] Karachi, May 14, A series of bomb blasts in two 
Karachi mosques and hnambargahs [shrines] shook the city on 
Saturday [14 May] morning. 
  In another incident of violence three persons, including a 
police constable, were killed in firing. 
  The bomb blasts in Masjikis and Imahagahs, just when Moharam 
is in the corner, are indicators of dreadful things to come. 
All this appeared to be a part of the design to ignite 
sectarian clashes in the city. 
  Who are the elements behind the sinister plan? The 
authorities must find the answer, and find it quickly. 
  Security agencies have been active in the city, each 
claiming 
that they have been more efficient than the other, in effects to 
restore law and order. But none of these agencies have a clue 
that who are the elements behind these blasts and what are their 
motives. 
  In fact, the police were surprisingly ignorant of the 
incidents, "We are not aware of such incidents. Reports 
appearing in the press are wrong" claimed a senior police 
officer. 
  Residents, however, said they heard the blasts in the small 
hours of Saturday. The explosions took place in Gulhan-e-Iqbal 
where the Janiat-Uloon-e-Taleemat-e-Islami was the target. A 
hand grenade was hurled at it. 
  In Gulshan-e-Iqhal, Block 4-A where most of the city 
journalists have their houses, the Masjid-e-Taqwa was the 
target. A bomb exploded in its courtyard. No injury was caused 
to anyone. The obvious exercise was to create a scare among 
residents. Syed Fariduddin, 35, District East President of the 
Sipah-e-Sababa, a religious organisation, deadly opposed to Shia 
community, was fired at. He received four bullets and was 
hospitalised. Simultaneously, agencies fed the newspaper with 
reports that secretarian clashes in Karachi and the rest of 
Sindh were imminent, and that a red alert had been sounded to 
all police and relevant establishments to deal with the 
situation. 
  In the second incident of violence in which three people 
were 
killed some unknown armed young men fired indiscriminately at 
two police constables Sultan Meumood and Badruzzaman at Alfalah 
society near Wireless gate. Sultan Ahmed was killed on the spot 
while his other colleague escaped unhurt. Both constables were 
returning after performing their guard duty at National Bank 
Branch in Alfalah. 
  In another incident, three unidentified dacoits killed a 
chowkider for Bonglow No. S-29, phase II in Defence area. The 
dacoits gunned down chowkidar after be foiled their dacoity 
attempt by resisting their entry into the house. 
  In yet another incident, unknown snipers killed Mukammad Ali 
in Landhi area this afternoon. Muhammad Javed received bullet 
injuries in Shah Faisal Colony. 

