Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondents Dmitriy Gorokhov and </F>
Boris Krivoshey] 
  [Text] Moscow March 10 TASS -- Russia is set to prevent any 
weakening of partnership established with the United States, 
specify its substance on the basis of full equality of rights 
and duties, give it maturity and strategic orientation in talks 
with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher on March 14 in 
Vladivostok, Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev said here 
today. 
  He announced this in his opening address at the meeting of 
the Council for Foreign Policy, which is due to consider 
problems of European security, relations with NATO and other 
international structures. 
  Kozyrev said it is necessary to begin joint efforts to form 
strategic partnership in building a new Europe. "President 
Yeltsin has put forth this initiative, which is now being 
considered by the leaders of Western countries". 
  According to the minister, the international community needs 
an effective mechanism of coordinating actions relating to the 
most important international problems. He praised the positive 
changes which have taken place in the movement towards new 
stability in Europe, including joint military exercises, 
exchanges of visits along the military line and interaction in 
the field of conversion. 
  He said a practical headway has been made towards making 
former enemies see friends in each other and allies in the 
perspective. The idea of cooperation with NATO has been given 
substance in the U.S. concept of Partnership for Peace, which 
opened a period of drafting and implementing programmes which 
involve all interested countries on an equal basis. 
  Russia is close to signing the relevant documents, Kozyrev 
said. 
  Along with this Kozyrev noted that "the NATO mania of 
impatient advocates of joining the alliance, and the partnership 
executed to the accompaniment of an anti-Russian hysteria can 
lead to the strengthening of the position of (ultra-nationalist) 
Zhirinovskiy and his supporters," Kozyrev warned. 
  Kozyrev said that Partnership for Peace upheld by NATO is 
pattern of military and political cooperation which cannot 
replace a wide-scale strategic interaction along all lines 
oriented towards a perspective. There is no point in 
overstressing the military-political aspects or contrasting them 
to the key task of strengthening democracy and human rights in 
all of Europe as a guarantee of its peaceful future. 
  Kozyrev rejected attempts of certain circles in the West, 
central and eastern Europe to "speculate on the Zhirinovskiy 
factor and revive the image of an enemy in the face of Russia". 
Those who insist on the thesis of Russian menace begin to 
believe it themselves. The artificially generated threat makes 
people blind and prevents them from seeing the real problems of 
security. 
  "The victory in the cold war was not won by the NATO 
military 
machine but by the democratic principles of the Conference for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe. It is the CSCE which is 
bound to win a stable democratic peace in conditions of a 
post-confrontational Europe", Kozyrev said. 

