CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Birgitt Riese: ``How Much Illness Is </F>
Environmentally Induced?''; Subheads: ``Airborne Pollutants 
Blamed for Respiratory Tract Infections and Allergies''; ``No 
Longer Industry But Automobile Traffic Now the Leading Producer 
of Pollution. Scientists at First International Congress for 
Environmental Medicine Came to This Conclusion Last Week in 
Duisberg. Frequently, however, There Are No Methods for 
Identifying Any Specific Substance As Causing Illness. 
Intensified International Cooperation Should Help Resolve Such 
Toxicology Issues.''] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 4 March 1994 -- ``A second stage of 
environmental precaution must now follow upon the environmental 
repair phase.'' These are the words that North Rhine-Westphalian 
environmental minister Klaus Matthiesen used to open the First 
International Congress for Environmental Medicine. ``The sky 
over our country is once again definitely cleaner.'' This means 
that since the mid-eighties sulfur dioxide emissions decreased 
by nearly 775,000 tons per year, nitrogen oxide emissions by 
about 361,000 tons per year and the load of dust reduced to 
approximately 10 percent. 
  Such statistics confirm that the load of mass pollutants has 
been considerably lessened. But it creates the misleading 
impression that the environment is now back in shape. Actually, 
however, the amount of pollution being discharged has only 
shifted from industry to automobile traffic. Prof. Ulrich Ranft 
from the Medicinal Institute for Environmental Hygiene in 
Duesseldorf describes the result of a study conducted in Essen 
in 1991: ``Compared with industrial waste gasses, concentrations 
of nitrogen oxides and benzenes from traffic have risen 
considerably.'' 
  Research has also demonstrated that automobile exhaust 
causes 
illness. Residents along heavily traveled roads suffer much more 
from respiratory tract infections and fall victims to allergies 
more often than those living in less polluted areas. German 
researchers are not alone in acknowledging this, as Prof. 
Hans-Werner Schlipkoeter, president of the congress, is aware. 
``In Israel, Japan and the U.S., it has been possible to 
establish a correlation between the increase in automobile 
traffic and the rise in the number of allergy-related 
illnesses.'' 
  Sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and benzene, however, are not 
the only causes for a spate of illnesses. A host of other 
substances like dioxins, heavy metals, solvents and asbestos are 
polluting the environment and are ingested via the food chain or 
the air that is breathed in. Science's goal is to analyze such 
pollutants and devise testing methods to be able possibly to 
verify their impact in provoking illnesses. 
  But researchers are often still groping in the dark. In 
Duisberg, Canice Nolan of the EU Commission tossed out for 
consideration: ``We are still nowhere near concluding the impact 
of a substance from its concentration in the environment, 
although considerable advances were made over the past decade.'' 
Appropriate methods are still missing, above all, for chemicals 
that do damage to genes. That is why in 1988 the EU initiated a 
research program involving biomonitoring, medical oversight of a 
specific group of the population exposed to genetically toxic 
chemicals. Under it, for example, the researchers are looking 
for ``biomarkers,'' that is, physical substances that 
characteristically undergo change both in their numbers and 
their structure when someone comes into contact with a specific 
substance. 
  Different methods lead to different conclusions. That is why 
there is no internationally uniform assessment of the risks from 
cancerous (carcinogenic) substances. Whereas in the U.S. and 
Russia only individual substances are classified as more or less 
carcinogenic, in Germany all substances suspected of being 
cancerous are analyzed and assessed. 
  Besides the difficulty in any event of assigning cancers to 
specific causes, an additional problem confronts German 
researchers: a lack of data. Since they consider it a threat to 
protected data, the laender have still not been able to agree on 
the introduction of a national cancer registry. In 
Schlipkoeter's words: ``The absence of a cancer registry is an 
enormous impediment to research.'' Alternatively, were data 
regarding lifestyles, jobs and previous residences available, it 
would facilitate the correlation of causes and illness. Ulrich 
Halekoh of the Medicinal Institute for Environmental Hygiene in 
Duesseldorf asks the question: ``Lung cancer can result from 
smoking, substances in the workplace and airborne pollution, but 
which factor is the cause?'' Not only that, but researchers are 
still far from being able to assess the combined effect of 
several pollutants. 
  Depending on where they live, are Germans subject in 
different ways to heavy pollution? On the basis of pollution 
involving polychlorinated biphenyls [PCB's], a study by the 
university of Erlangen-Nuremberg concluded that the 
concentration of PCB's in the blood serum did, in fact, increase 
with age but was independent of place of residence. Not all 
pollutants are distributed so evenly. The regional distribution 
for airborne substances varies widely. 
  Numerous environmental physicians are scaling a slippery 
slope. For instance: diesel soot. Up until now, the exhaust soot 
has not been classified as a carcinogen, even though the 
particles do cause lung tumors in rats. Uwe Heinrich of the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Aerosols in Hannover 
provides food for thought: ``There is no escaping the fact that 
diesel soot may contribute to the risk of lung cancer.'' But the 
automobile industry counters this with toxicological studies 
absolving diesel soot of a cancer risk. Up until now, however, 
it has not been possible for scientists to definitively arrive 
at an internationally uniform assessment. 
  Actually, if legal limiting values were adhered to, the risk 
of falling ill from breathing in a substance could be 
significantly reduced. But it cannot be entirely eliminated. In 
that case, to be sure, a substance could no longer occur at all 
in the environment. As Schlipkoeter says: ``Zero risk means zero 
dosage and that means that life could no longer go on as usual.'' 

