Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A New Nuclear Joke"] </F>
  [Text] During bilateral talks between the two countries in 
Tokyo Monday, India and Japan agreed to work together to bring 
about a non-discriminatory Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT]. It 
is not yet clear as to which country initiated the proposal but 
it is an even bet that it must have come from our nearest 
neighbours across the Wagah border. Pakistan's stand has always 
been for a regional NPT but what India is now proposing along 
with Japan is an NPT on a world basis. This is, the effect 
India's declaration that if all other countries dismantle their 
nuclear facilities, only then will India agree to do so. As far 
as India is concerned, the present treaty, which expires in 
1995, has been extremely non- discriminatory in its own behalf. 
After the demise of the Soviet Union as a superpower, the USA 
remains the only superpower in the world which is in a position 
to dictate what the nuclear programme of any country should be. 
In this respect all its dictation has been directed at Pakistan 
which has been asked to cap its programme and then roll it back 
so that this country goes back to square one in the nuclear 
field, despite its repeated protestations that it intends to use 
nuclear power only for peaceful purposes. We have even agreed 
to sign the NPT if India does so at the same time. India's 
response, on the other hand, has been persistently negative. It 
is far ahead of Pakistan, having exploded a nuclear device as 
early as 1974 and the world knows this. This, apparently is not 
where India intends to stop if its latest proposal is examined 
closely. 
  Obviously, India sees no threat to its existence from the 
USA. It lives in mortal terror of its Chinese neighbours and 
trusts Pakistan not one whit and, it repeatedly warns its people 
that an attack from this country can never be ruled out. These 
are the two basic reasons for the present ploy. It stands out 
like a sore thumb that India is endeavouring for an NPT on a 
global basis in order to buy time to stockpile nuclear arms. 
The Indian proposal has been made with a lot of check since the 
attitude of the US towards its nuclear programme is nothing 
short of an endorsement of whatever India has achieved in that 
field, which is reported to be more than considerable. The 
Indian dread of the Chinese defies comprehension. The late Field 
Marshal Ayub Khan was once asked if he thought China might 
attack India. He pooh poohed the idea with the remark, "why 
should China do that and end up having to feed India's millions 
when it is hardly in a position to feed its own?" As for 
Pakistan, the idea is similarly ludicrous. The bania 
[derogatory term for petty traders] is a crafty creature by 
nature who thrives on intrigue. The latest Indo-Japanese 
proposal needs to be shot down in favour of one that calls for 
complete annihilation of nuclear arsenal the world over in one 
fell swoop. In that case there would be no need for an NPT at 
all. The world cannot afford to give India enough time to 
become a nuclear power. 

