Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Chilean Ambassador to Moscow James Holger said 
Chilean trade with Russia might increase through the sale of 
wines to that country. The diplomat returned to the country due 
to health problems and took advantage of the opportunity to 
place his resignation at the government's disposal. Regarding 
our bilateral relations with Russia and the possibilities of 
increasing trade, Holger said prospects are good and we are 
working together with Chilean entrepreneurs in this area. Holger 
pointed out the recent signing of contracts with the Corpora 
firm for the sale of instant coffee and powdered juice, adding 
that other nontraditional industries such as the shoe industry 
also are working to enter the Russian market. Good Chilean grape 
juice also will be tried on federation tables, James Holger said: 
  [Begin recording] I had a meeting with Felipe Benavente, 
Santa Rita vineyard's sales manager, in Moscow just before 
leaving. His visit was very successful. We have very good 
chances of placing high-quality table wine in St. Petersburg and 
Moscow supermarkets and four- and five-star hotels. At a time 
markets for our wine are shrinking elsewhere, the Russian market 
offers good opportunities, not spectacularly good, but good 
nonetheless. [end recording] 
  Regarding the internal political situation, Holger said it 
is 
complex and difficult: 
  [Begin recording] The situation is in a permanent state of 
change. It is not known where things are going sometimes. The 
economic reform plan is going ahead, stumbling ahead I would 
say, but it is proceeding. I do not think there will be a return 
to the past as many people fear. What might happen is a slowing 
down of the reform process, which was perhaps implemented with 
excessive zeal. The parliamentary election was clean. Thousands 
of foreign observers saw what happened. [end recording] 
  Mistakes were made when implementing the policy to transform 
the country from a centralized economy to a market economy. 
Excessive emphasis was placed on monetary aspects, Holger said, 
adding that at present the trend is to work more on social 
programs. 

