Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Dunkel: Another Viewpoint"] </F>
  [Text] The opinion given out by some experts endorsing the 
Government's decision to accept the Dunkel proposals would 
certainly help calm the consternation caused in Parliament and 
in other circles describing the move as a sell-out that would 
seriously compromise India's sovereignty and independence. The 
bottomline by these experts too is that India could ill-afford 
to opt out to the multilateral trading system at a time when the 
rest of the world was acceding to such a global economic regime. 
That even a country like Japan with all its economic clout has 
thought it prudent to take the politically unsavoury decision of 
opening up its rice market speaks for itself. With the 
developing countries hardly in a position to present a common 
front against a global trade regime seen as favourable to the 
developed world, as also lacking the kind of economic muscle 
needed to negotiate from a position of strength at the Uruguay 
Round, India could have hardly been expected to swim against the 
tide. But even when India has no choice but to sign such a move, 
according to these experts, the Generalised Agreement on Trade 
and Tariffs would not necessarily be detrimental to India's 
interests. Thus former Union Food Minister C. Subramaniam has 
allayed fears expressed earlier that interests of the Indian 
farmers would be adversely affected by the probable increase in 
prices of inputs like seeds. Instead, he believes that the vast 
increase in productivity would more than compensate for any such 
losses. Similarly, he dismisses apprehensions expressed by 
Indian academics about being ill-prepared for competition with 
MNCs in research in genetics, and genetic engineering as being 
unfounded. His experience--and he should know, being the father 
of Green revolution in the country--has shown instead that 
Indian scientists are in no way inferior to those in the West. 
But while defending the government's decision to accept the 
Dunkel proposals and emphasising its benefits, these experts 
have not shied away from pinpointing its costs. Thus Dr Malcolm 
Adiseshiah has singled out issues relating to seeds patenting 
and the use of bio-resources of the Third World by the MNCs and 
their being brought back for sale to Third World as patented 
high-priced commodities as being some of the "very negative" 
features of the Dunkel Draft. Indeed in the light of what these 
experts have said, the government should educate the public 
about the hard realities of accepting the new global trade 
regime. Simply glossing over these unpleasant facts can hardly 
help the government to allay suspicions that it has become a 
party to the conspiracy hatched by the developed world to 
establish its hegemony over India. 

