Language: <F P=105> Hungarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bill Clinton's series of talks with the Visegrad 
country presidents and prime ministers has begun in Prague. 
First the U.S. President met the Hungarian leaders. Our Prague 
correspondent Peter Nyaradi reports. 
  [Nyaradi] The Hungarian delegation arrived at the Prague 
residence of the U.S. ambassador, where the Hungarian-U.S. 
summit meeting took place, shortly before 0900. Beside 
President Clinton sat [Hungarian President] Arpad Goncz. The 
negotiating delegations, led by [Prime Minister] Peter Boross 
and [Foreign Minister] Geza Jeszenszky , U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher, and [John] Shalikashvili, U.S. chief of 
staff, were seated opposite one another. 
  Following the talks, which lasted nearly 45 minutes, Foreign 
Affairs Spokesman Janos Herman evaluated the meeting as follows: 
  [Begin Herman recording] Due to the venue and the time, the 
central topic of the discussion, naturally, was the region's 
security policy situation. President Clinton confirmed that the 
United States followed our region with great attention, and the 
security of the region was both in the United States and NATO's 
interest. It is an important interest of the United States to 
guarantee this security. 
  The Partnership for Peace proposal was mentioned. The 
Hungarian delegation told President Clinton that Hungary 
welcomed this proposal; it can see the advantages of the idea. 
Hungary is ready to actively participate in the Partnership for 
Peace process. 
  President Clinton praised the Hungarian attitude. He 
stressed he felt Hungary had understood U.S. intentions, the 
essence of the initiative. [end recording] 
  [Nyaradi] Janos Herman also said that mostly President 
Clinton had spoken during the discussion, more than half of 
which was devoted to security policy issues. It was also 
mentioned that the United States was ready to help the region's 
-- and within that Hungary's -- economic development, and they 
were ready to examine what they could do about it. 
  The two delegations also discussed the events of the 
Yugoslav 
crisis. In the course of this discussion, the Hungarian 
delegation was able to provide valuable information, since we 
are a neighboring country. 
  The Russian domestic political situation and its possible 
international effects were also briefly raised. President 
Clinton emphasized that the United States was not naive and will 
not allow itself to be pressurized either, but the Russian's 
views had to be considered. 
  At the end of the talks, which took place in friendly 
atmosphere, Hungary was also on the agenda. Janos Herman said 
the following about it: 
  [Begin Herman recording] The U.S. side stressed that the 
stability of democracy in Hungary was highly appreciated by 
them. The smooth and quick election of the new prime minister 
was considered as a proof of this. [end recording] 
  [Nyaradi] The Hungarian delegation has split for the rest of 
their program. Arpad Goncz and Geza Jeszenszky held 
approximately 30-minute talks with their Czech counterparts 
President Vaclav Havel and Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec in 
Prague Castle. During this time, Prime Minister Peter Boross 
first visited the financial institution Interbanka, which has 
gone into majority Hungarian ownership, at Wenceslas Square, 
then he met his Czech counterpart Vaclav Klaus. 
  At the moment, all the foreign guests are having lunch with 
U.S. President Clinton and the members of the U.S. delegation at 
the ambassador's residency. Brief statements can be expected 
after the ceremonial lunch. 

