Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Listeners's Letterbox" program] </F>
  [Text] Cynthia Khan writes us from east Africa. She is 
working with the British medical team in east Africa and wants 
to know about the AIDS situation in China and how the Chinese 
Government is dealing with the problem. 
  Well, Cynthia, AIDS has become a global problem. Since the 
first case was found in the United States in 1981, the disease 
has quickly spread throughout the world, killing hundreds of 
thousands of people, and China is not immune to the spread of 
AIDS. 
  The first HIV-infection case in China was reported in 1985 
in 
the country's eastern province of Zhejiang. Four children who 
had hemophilia contracted the HIV virus because of contaminated 
blood used in transfusions. The blood plasma was imported from 
abroad. The Chinese Government banned the import of plasma 
immediately after that case. Additional HIV infections were 
found among intravenous drug users in the southern border 
province of Yunnan in 1989. Since then, China has identified 
more than 1,150 cases of HIV carriers, and 19 people have become 
afflicted with full-blown AIDS. At present, 85 percent of those 
infected with the AIDS virus in China are intravenous drug 
users. The border area with Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia is the 
most infected area because of its long history of opium trade 
and drug abuse. This area is still backward economically and 
far from urban areas. Transportation is limited. Radio and 
television sets, which can be used to warn people about the 
dangers of contracting AIDS, are rare, and medical service is 
not always available. In addition, cultural habits are 
responsible for some of the infections, as the local Dai and 
Jingpo ethnic groups believe opium is a cure for headache and 
diarrhea. 
  Planting and processing opium is banned by the government, 
but it is difficult for the small police force in the area to 
eliminate the illegal practice when the villagers plant opium in 
very small fields in the dense forests. Another problem is the 
shortage of needles, forcing many of the drug users to share 
needles. This causes the disease to spread even faster. 
  The Chinese Government has set up a clinic in Yunnan to 
monitor AIDS cases and educate the public about the dangers. 
But getting the information out is very difficult. Zhu Wei is 
working as a researcher with the AIDS surveillance center under 
the China Academy of Preventive Medicine. He has worked with 
the local teams in Yunnan Province. 
  [Begin recording; Zhu Wei is briefly heard, speaking in 
Mandarin, fading into English translation] The local people 
know little about disease that is threatening their lives. When 
talking with them, we need interpreters in Dai and Jingpo 
languages, because these people do not speak Mandarin, and most 
of them do not know how to read and write. The only thing they 
care about seems to be drugs. Every year the AIDS surveillance 
center sends a number of researchers to Yunnan to help with the 
local work and get firsthand information. I went to Yunnan last 
year. A lot of local medical workers who know the languages and 
have knowledge of AIDS went to every family with us, explaining 
the fatal disease to them. We put up a poster warning about the 
danger of AIDS in the villages. We paid special attention to 
the families that already had AIDS patients or HIV carriers. We 
talked to the family members on how to protect themselves from 
being affected. And now and then, the local medical workers 
visit these families to see how things go on. [end recording] 
  Though drug users make up the majority of AIDS victims in 
China, they are not the most dangerous factors of the spreading 
of AIDS in the country. Medical experts say the most dangerous 
factor is promiscuous sexual activity. For more than three 
decades after the founding of the PRC, Chinese successfully 
protected themselves against venereal diseases. However, while 
the opening and reform programs that began in the 1980's have 
brought prosperity to the country, they have also caused 
dramatic changes in people's ideas about morality and sex. 
Cases of prostitution are increasingly rapidly every year. The 
number of people who have sexual partners outside marriage is 
increasing, and sexual activity among young people and teenagers 
is now occurring much earlier. The number of venereal disease 
cases has increased dramatically. In 1991, sexually 
transmission accounted for 10 percent of the total number of HIV 
cases. In 1992 it was 20 percent. The rate is still growing. 
  Another high risk group is homosexuals. The first five 
victims in the world were all homosexuals, and in California, 
United States, 90 percent of HIV infections are found in gays. 
Even though right now only a small fraction of Chinese 
homosexuals are confirmed HIV carriers, medical carriers warn 
they are a prime target for the disease [as heard]. Influenced 
by Chinese traditions, most of these people have a normal 
family, but have unsafe sexual practices outside their family 
secretly. They, therefore, risk spreading the disease to their 
family who may not know there is a homosexual in their family. 
  The AIDS problem has caught the attention of the Chinese 
Government. In March 1993, the Ministry of Public Health held a 
conference on AIDS protection and cure in the city of Haikou in 
the southern island province of Hainan. The conference dealt 
with AIDS surveillance, management of HIV carriers, HIV 
test-kits, as well as public education on sexually transmitted 
diseases and AIDS. It was decided at the conference that all 
donated blood will be screened in the future, and more 
physicians will be trained in the clinical diagnosis of HIV 
infections. The conference also called on all medical personnel 
to do more research on AIDS treatment and on developing testing 
methods which are both effective and inexpensive. Qian Chunqiao, 
an expert on the disease, is also working with AIDS surveillance. 
  [Begin recording; Zhu Wei is briefly heard, speaking in 
Mandarin, fading into English translation] The government has 
allocated quite a number of funds for AIDS prevention and 
research, but as far as AIDS medicines are concerned, China lags 
far behind such developed countries as the United States and 
some European countries. For one thing, we do not have as many 
funds and specialized medical researchers. Another thing is 
that AIDS has a relatively shorter history in China, and we lack 
experience. In recent years, some Chinese researchers have been 
trying to combine traditional Chinese medicines, such as herbal 
medicine and acupuncture, with Western methods in treating the 
disease. It is difficult to say what results may come up from 
this research because AIDS is a very complicated disease, and we 
still do not know many things about this disease. But I do not 
believe AIDS is incurable. Sooner or later, humanity will find a 
way to cure themselves of the disease. [end recording] 
  On 1 December last year, the world's AIDS Day, the Ministry 
of Public Health held a symposium in Beijing. Experts suggested 
that work in 1994 should be focused on education, making people 
aware of the importance of self-protection. The symposium also 
announced the establishment of China's first special 
organization to cope with sexually transmitted diseases and 
AIDS. The China Association of Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
and AIDS Control and Prevention concentrated on AIDS and 
sexually transmitted diseases prevention and cure as well as 
information exchange. 

