Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Special Investigations Branch of the Attorney 
General's Office has uncovered a complex network that, in 
exchange for bribes, legalized operations by pilots working for 
drug traffickers. Nine officials of Civil Aeronautics took part 
in the illegal activities which ranged from forging logbooks to 
expunging drug trafficking records. 
  By way of a random sample survey, the Attorney General's 
Office found that over the past three years, officials under 
investigation issued at least 33 illegal licenses to private and 
commercial pilots. The Attorney General's Office then opened a 
formal investigation against the officials involved in the scam. 
  The Attorney General's Office also sent a copy of the file 
to 
the Prosecutor General's Office in order that it could begin 
criminal proceedings against Civil Aeronautics officials. The 
Attorney General's Office also requested an investigation of 
three private attorneys who collaborated with the network and 
who have been fully identified. It also requested an 
investigation of 33 pilots who, according to the office, 
received the forged documents and licenses. Aviation schools 
that reportedly participated in the scam also will be 
investigated. 
  The officials forged documents such as pilot licenses and 
flying records, certificates on drug trafficking records (that 
legally should be issued by the National Drug Directorate), high 
school diplomas, and even health certificates. According to 
what EL TIEMPO has been able to establish, initial 
investigations show that most of the "clients" of these Civil 
Aeronautics officials were pilots working for the mafia--pilots 
who otherwise could not legally obtain clean drug trafficking 
records. 
  The officials who are being investigated by the Attorney 
General's Office for their presumed links to the network include 
Ruben Dario Rios, former head of the Technical Control Division; 
Angel Mario Pinzon Melo, head of the Aeronautics Personnel 
Group; Hernando Barrera Astudillo, Jorge Enrique Diaz, Guillermo 
Fetecua Castiblanco, and Roberto Duarte of the Technical Control 
Division; Eva Bermudez, former head of the Auditor's Office; and 
Fabio Moyanp, a Civil Aeronautics detective. 
  Regarding the "sale of flying hours," the Attorney General's 
Office learned about one of the most obvious forging cases. The 
Special Investigations Branch examined the case of a pilot who 
only had 500 hours in his professional flying record, but, after 
paying a large amount of money, he obtained a certificate for 
1,800 flying hours. By paying a bribe, the pilot saved himself 
at least three years of work. In addition, a higher number of 
flying hours enables the pilot to take courses to operate larger 
planes. 
  A statement by an Aeronautics Control Division assistant 
confirmed that in order "to negotiate" an increase in flying 
hours, the pilot filed a complaint on the presumed theft of the 
logbook. Subsequently, the pilot, assisted by a corrupt 
official, recorded the number of hours he wanted to have in his 
new flying record. The scam could also work in reverse--that 
is, the pilots recorded the additional flying hours in their 
logs, and the official put them down in the Civil Aeronautics' 
registry. 
  The Special Investigations Branch proved that having pilots 
who do not have the experience they are supposed to have is a 
threat to the country's air safety. The Attorney General's 
Office said that reports of air accidents in Colombia show that, 
in many cases, the "human factor" of pilot error played a major 
role. In addition, the Special Investigations Branch found an 
administrative disorder in Civil Aeronautics that, coupled with 
the officials' dishonesty, left room for these irregularities. 
This is why the Attorney General's Office advised Civil 
Aeronautics to establish effective controls in the process of 
issuing licenses to pilots. 

