Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Jean-Paul Croize report: "Space Europe in Economy Class"] </F>
  [Text] The desire is there, but still no real agreement: 
Despite a marathon meeting that stretched until 2200 [2100 GMT] 
at the headquarters of the European Space Agency (ESA) in Paris 
last Tuesday, representatives of the agency's 13 member 
countries came away without concluding a detailed arrangement 
that would allow them to finance Europe's "manned flight" 
activities until the end of the century. The next meeting, 
planned for the end of the month, may make it possible to remove 
the obstacles that have caused the talks to stall for more than 
a year: The financial allocation of work which everyone agrees 
is necessary if Europe is to keep an "honorable" place in the 
area of human activities in orbit at the end of the century. 
  "We are confident. Not only did the delegates confirm their 
agreement on what must apparently be carried out, but they also 
defined the global budgets that must be allocated in 1994 and 
1995," said ESA spokesmen yesterday. They said that following 
the meeting the ESA member countries unanimously confirmed their 
approval of the two "leading" European projects in the area of 
human activities in orbit: The creation of a Columbus module 
that can be docked to the international Russian-American space 
station and an improved space capsule, which would be designed 
in two versions: one manned, and the other automatic. 
  One point was even presented as "very positive": The 
potential partners for these two projects agreed on the total 
amount to be earmarked to their implementation over the next two 
years. Following what has been called an "act in council," it 
was decided to earmark 1.9 billion French francs [Fr] for that 
period to the Columbus program. This amount, however, not only 
covers the design of a manned module, but also includes the 
financing of Euromir space flights which the ESA is to undertake 
next fall and in 1995 with the Russians on board the MIR space 
station. 
<H5>  Problem With Rates </H5>
  The space capsule program, now called the MSTP, should 
benefit from a budget of Fr1.45 billion intended to finance four 
projects: projects for the two types of planned capsules (manned 
and automatic), as well as studies on the robot arm identical to 
that on the shuttle to be built by Europe, and the spacesuit 
which ESA astronauts will need in order to carry out 
extra-vehicular missions. 
  The problem, however, is that these projects remain 
dependent 
on a display of "willingness:" "Problems with the conversion 
rates of currencies for certain partners with respect to the 
European unit of account have prevented the conclusion of an 
agreement on the proportion that each party should pay for these 
programs," said the ESA spokesman. In concrete terms, there has 
not been much of a move away from the decisionmaking level 
reached during the last ministerial summit held in Granada in 
late 1992. Even if the manned flight program has been 
approached in a more modest manner since 1987, everyone is still 
agreed on the fact that the ESA must have autonomy in this area. 
However, outside France, nobody has proven genuinely interested 
in paying for it. 
  The representatives of the ESA member countries decided to 
meet again at the end of the month. Informal talks should be 
held between now and then in an effort to try and reach an 
agreement on the respective shares for each party in these two 
programs. In the event of failure, the situation would become 
serious: "There is no longer the possibility of delaying if we 
want to move forward using genuinely coherent information at the 
next ministerial meeting planned for next year, and especially 
if we want to present in time -- i.e., by the end of the century 
-- a modern orbital capsule which the Russians and Americans 
would have a real interest in using," stressed industrial 
circles. 

