Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Texts" of the "Communique From the Slovak Republic </F>
Government Session on 1 March 1994," "The Slovak Republic 
Defense Doctrine" and "The Principles for the Slovak Republic's 
National Security," published in Bratislava by the Slovak 
Government Office Press and Information Department] 
  [Text] The Slovak Republic [SR] Government convened today 
for its 85th regular session under the chairmanship of Prime 
Minister Vladimir Meciar. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a recommendation to 
supplement SR Government Decree No. 512 of 20 July 1993 on the 
proposition to accede to the Agreement on Resolving Disputes 
Arising From Investments Between States and the Citizens of 
Other States. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a National Council 
of the Slovak Republic draft law that alters and supplements 
Slovak National Council Law No. 95/1991 on the Pro Slovakia 
State Culture Fund as amended by Slovak National Council Law No. 
495/1991 and National Council of the Slovak Republic Law No. 
562/1992. 
  The SR Government discussed and returned for finalizing the 
draft principles of a National Council of the Slovak Republic 
law on health insurance for railroad workers and the Railroad 
Health Insurance Company. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved with modifications 
a 
report on altering the statutes of the SR Government Council for 
Regional Development. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a report on 
fulfilling the plan for the SR Government's main objectives for 
the second half of 1993 during the fourth quarter of 1993. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a report on the 
expedition by the SR Government Office Department for 
Supervising the State Administration and Complaints of the 
notices, complaints, suggestions, petitions, and requests 
submitted by citizens to the SR Government Office in 1993 and a 
report on an investigation into complaints and information 
pointing to shortcomings in the management and economic 
performance of the Slovenske liecebne kupele Novy Smokovec state 
enterprise. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a report on an 
inquiry into the management of state property administered by 
select communities. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a report on the 
participation of a Slovak Republic delegation in the 37th 
session of the International Atomic Energy Agency General 
Conference in Vienna from 27 September 1993 to 1 October 1993. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved the Draft 
Principles 
for the Slovak Republic's National Security. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a report on the 
measures necessary for establishing an SR Legal Representative 
Office for proceedings before the European Commission and the 
European Court for Human Rights. 
  The SR Government discussed and agrees with the draft 
Agreement Between the SR Government and the Romanian Government 
on Cooperation in Science, Education, Culture, and Sport. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved the draft Slovak 
Republic Defense Doctrine. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a recommendation to 
permit exceptions, in accordance with Paragraph 45, Article 2 of 
Law No. 92/1991, in the conditions for transferring state 
property to other persons as amended by the changes and 
supplements enabling the Slovak Energy Enterprise Bratislava 
state enterprise to transfer free of charge 165 housing units to 
the Levice Municipal Office. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a proposal to 
augment the Supplementary Protocol to the Provisional Agreement 
on Trade and Issues Associated With Trade Between the European 
Economic Community and the European Free Trade Association and 
the CSFR of 16 December 1991 and a recommendation to amend the 
Provisional Agreement and the European Agreement on Providing 
Advantages in Mutual Trade in Fish by an exchange of letters 
between the European Union and the Slovak Republic. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved with modifications 
a 
proposal to grant remuneration to the members of the SR 
Railroads Administrative Council. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved the draft Agreement 
Between the SR Government and the United Nations Organization on 
establishing a Slovak National Center for Human Rights. 
  The SR Government agrees with the draft Agreement Between 
the 
SR Government and the Romanian Government on Preventing Dual 
Taxation and Tax Evasion in Income Tax and Property Tax. 
  The SR Government approved the draft Agreement Between the 
SR 
Government and the Romanian Government on Support for and 
Protection of Investments. 
  The SR Government made note of the following: 
  -- the results of the talks of the joint European Community- 
Slovak Republic Committee held in Bratislava on 21-22 October 
1993; 
  -- the situation in payments relations between the Slovak 
Republic and the Czech Republic on 31 December 1993; 
  -- the publication of the treaties and agreements concluded 
between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic and their 
bodies in the SR Legal Gazette; 
  -- a projection for population development in the Slovak 
Republic up to the year 2015. 
  The SR Government discussed and approved a recommendation to 
de jure recognize the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and 
to establish diplomatic relations between the Slovak Republic 
and the former Yugoslav republic. 
  Bratislava, 1 March 1994. 

<H6>    The Slovak Republic Defense Doctrine </H6>
  The Slovak Republic evolved as a modern, democratic, and 
European state. By their decision to establish an independent 
state, the citizens of the Slovak Republic also assumed the 
responsibility for defending their own interests. 
  The Slovak Republic promulgates the principles for its 
defense policy in a Defense Doctrine that expresses its 
enduring, political, legal, and methodological basis. The SR 
Defense Doctrine proceeds from the fact that the Slovak Republic 
does not perceive itself to be under an immediate threat, but 
that -- in the current military-political situation -- it 
reserves the right and capacity to defend itself against a 
possible military or nonmilitary threat. 
  The fundamental principles of the SR Defense Doctrine are: 
  1. The assertion of the Slovak Republic's national interests 
with the objective of guaranteeing its territorial integrity and 
the inviolability and unchangeability of its internationally 
recognized state borders. The Defense Doctrine proceeds from 
the sovereignty of the Slovak Republic in dealing with all the 
issues concerned with the state's determination to defend itself 
in harmony with the right to self-defense in accordance with the 
UN Charter. The Slovak Republic is not limited in its 
independence and autonomy by anything other than the sovereign 
right of other states and the commitments to which it has 
voluntarily bound itself. 
  2. The binding and non-conflictive nature of the defense 
measures executed and the policies pursued by the Slovak 
Republic with regard to the basic international legal documents 
and the principles arising from them. In particular, this 
involves the following principles: The rejection of a threat by 
force or the use of force; the obligation to seek a peaceful 
solution to problems and not to interfere in the internal 
affairs of another state; the obligation of states to cooperate 
with each other; the recognition of the equal rights and 
self-determination of all nations; the sovereign equality of 
states; and thorough adherence to adopted commitments. 
  The Slovak Republic makes no claim to greater guarantees for 
its security than it provides to other states. Under no 
circumstances will it initiate an armed conflict and it will not 
start one against another state. It has no political, 
territorial, historical, national, economic, or social reasons 
for doing so. The Slovak Republic does not possess or 
manufacture nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction and it 
will not strive to own them. It will not permit the deployment 
or storage of these weapons on its sovereign territory. 
  The Slovak Republic does not condone the propaganda of war 
and armed force, terrorism, chauvinism, fascism, racial and 
class hatred, or national and religious intolerance. 
  3. Harmony between the Slovak Republic's domestic and 
foreign policy and security and defense policy, while respecting 
the specificity of its geopolitical position. The Slovak 
Republic will assert its national interests in a coordinated 
manner with regard to the international environment in the 
interest of lasting peaceful cooperation with all democratic 
states, with emphasis on neighboring countries, and with the aim 
of becoming involved in the formation of a cooperative European 
security system that eliminates military confrontation. The 
Slovak Republic is not forfeiting its right to take part in 
guaranteeing coalition security; therefore, it will try to join 
NATO and the Western European Union [WEU]. It is also not 
forfeiting its right to participate in UN activities as a 
guarantor of peace and security, especially as far as activities 
in the sphere of preventive diplomacy are concerned. 
  4. The general civil defense of the Slovak Republic. The 
defense of the Slovak Republic corresponds to its constitutional 
system. It proceeds from the affinity between the citizens' 
rights and obligations guaranteed by the SR Constitution. The 
defense of the republic is a matter of honor for each citizen. 
Citizens are conscripted in accordance with the law, but they 
also have the right to participate in defending the interests of 
the Slovak Republic and the state's democratic order. The 
impartiality of the military authorities is an element of the 
Slovak Republic's security guarantees. Civilian supervision of 
the military authorities -- by utilizing the mechanisms of 
parliamentary democracy, which guarantees the army's detachment 
from partial political interests -- is executed in its interest. 
  5. The commensurate size of the Armed Forces corresponding 
to the principles of defensive sufficiency and the need for a 
rational deterrent. The objective of the Slovak Republic's 
defense policy is to prevent war on the basis of the optimum 
composition of the Armed Forces and the resources predestined 
for defense or, as the case may be, to ward off an attack and to 
reestablish the situation prior to the onset of foreign 
aggression. The main task of the deterrent is to attain a 
situation whereby the risks associated with aggression outweigh 
unequivocally any conceivable advantages that a potential 
attacker could gain. Our doctrine is not offensive. The Slovak 
Republic's defense begins on its own borders and provisions are 
made for it throughout its territory. The Slovak Republic will 
strictly adhere to the restrictions laid down by the 
international agreements on the numbers of personnel and main 
types of weaponry for Armed Forces. Furthermore, it will strive 
to reduce the number of personnel and conventional weapons with 
the aim of creating the prerequisites for improving stability 
and preventing the outbreak of military and non-military threats 
and conflicts. 
  6. Equilibrium between defense requirements and the 
state's economic, political, spiritual, social, and demographic 
potential. The Slovak Republic's defense needs give full 
consideration to the state's individual capabilities, which -- 
in a fundamental manner -- influence its defensive prowess, 
especially its economic potential. 
  The Slovak Republic is establishing sovereign Armed Forces 
to 
defend the state's sovereignty, its territorial integrity, and 
its democratic system. The president of the Slovak Republic is 
their supreme commander. The armed elements of the Interior 
Ministry and other public armed elements will participate -- in 
cooperation with the Slovak Army -- in fulfilling the tasks 
pertaining to Slovakia's defense. The Slovak Army is a vital 
element of the Armed Forces and is an important guarantor of the 
state's sovereignty and integrity. 
  The main role of the Slovak Army is, on the basis of 
ascertaining the preparations for a military offensive, to ward 
off a threat to the state's sovereignty by the timely adoption 
of essential defensive measures on its own territory; in the 
event of an offensive, its role is to repel an air and ground 
assault by the aggressor from whichever direction and in 
whichever part of the territory. Those forces that have 
penetrated the state's territory must be dealt with by the 
regular or mobilized forces with the aim of restoring the 
state's territorial integrity and sovereignty; at the same time, 
it is necessary to make use of the political-military support 
arising from the cooperative system of European security. In 
close collaboration with civil defense and territorial bodies, 
it is necessary to make provisions for the defense and security 
of the population and facilities important for the functioning 
of the state and also for eliminating the aftermath of 
extraordinary situations. 
  The Ground Forces, Air Force, and Air Defense Forces form 
the 
basis of the Slovak Army. The Ground Forces are made up of 
field troops, rapid deployment forces, and territorial defense 
forces. The Air Force and Air Defense Forces are made up of air 
bases with fighter, fighter bomber, transport, and helicopter 
units and air defense units. Their exclusively defensive 
character is stipulated in a set of laws on the state's defense. 
  The Slovak Army is vertically structured and centrally 
commanded. It has comprehensive logistical support at its 
disposal for defense. It can be mobilized according to need. 
  The preparation and training of Slovak Army troops is 
carried 
out on the principle of observing general legal norms and civic 
values; on the principle of developing personal responsibility; 
in the spirit of patriotism, impartiality, and the military 
regulations; and on the principle of the commanders' direct and 
indivisible responsibility. 
  In order to guarantee the comprehensive defense of the state 
and its ability to function in a war and in order to make 
provisions for the Armed Forces, a system of economic 
mobilization is employed, the Slovak Republic's state material 
reserves are generated and utilized, civil defense measures are 
implemented, and operational arrangements for the state's 
territory are carried out. 
  The principles for the SR Defense Doctrine are codified and 
detailed in National Council of the Slovak Republic legislative 
acts. 
  The SR Defense Doctrine is implemented by the bodies of 
state 
authority coordinated by the SR State Defense Council and under 
the direct supervision of the representative bodies, which 
consider or -- as the case may be -- approve the fundamental 
documents for the state's defense policy. 
  Crucial issues regarding the state's defense policy and the 
means for carrying them out are contained in the SR Government's 
policy statements. 
  The military-specialist part of the SR Defense Doctrine is 
detailed in the Strategic Concept for the Defense of the Slovak 
Republic, in documents on the structure of the Armed Forces, in 
the plans for the state's economic mobilization, and in the 
operational plans and other follow-up documents that are 
constantly actualized in harmony with the development of the 
military-political and economic situation. 
  Supervision of the implementation of the SR Defense Doctrine 
in the Armed Forces is provided by the National Council of the 
Slovak Republic via the National Council of the Slovak Republic 
Petition, Legal Protection, and Security Committee and also by 
legislation, the budget, and the supervision of executive 
authority. 
<H5>  The Principles for the Slovak Republic's National Security </H5>
  The current security situation is the consequence of the 
fundamental changes that have taken place throughout the world 
recently. The Slovak Republic considers the transition from a 
bipolar world to the new multi-polar world to be its fundamental 
characteristic feature. The change in geopolitical conditions 
in Europe and throughout the world is leading to the collapse of 
some eastern-sphere composite states and to the formation of 
nation states. International relations have thus entered into a 
complicated period to which it is difficult to give a particular 
shape and whose time frame exceeds the year 2000. In connection 
with this, the role of the variable factors in the process of 
formulating and implementing the national interests of the 
individual geopolitical protagonists has increased. These are 
factors that proceed from the processes involved in the collapse 
of the bipolar system of international relations and from their 
constant development, which is often complicated by unexpected 
changes. This fact is extraordinarily sensitive for the Central 
European region and for the new democratic states that are going 
through a complex period of radical social and economic reforms. 
The domestic political, economic, and social lability of these 
countries is augmented by the absence of external security 
guarantees. 
  It is apparent from the tenor of the international political 
situation that, first and foremost, the risks ensuing from the 
instability of the individual states and regions -- from which 
threats and risks to neighboring states and regions may also 
arise -- and not the risks stemming the end of the heterogeneous 
bipolar system of international relations are the predominant 
ones in Europe. 
  The security of the Slovak Republic is an element of the 
broader framework of European and global security. The Slovak 
Republic is reliant on its own forces; however, at the same 
time, it places emphasis on constituting new international 
relations. It is counting, first and foremost, on NATO, the 
WEU, the CSCE, and the United Nations in its objectives for 
finding more effective guarantees for its own security. 
Slovakia has a key interest in cooperation with and membership 
in NATO and the WEU in view of the fact that, at the moment, 
NATO represents a force capable of responding in time -- by 
corresponding means and resources -- to the new security risks 
and threats in Central and Eastern Europe. The Slovak Republic 
considers its active involvement in the North Atlantic 
Cooperation Council and the Partnership for Peace program, which 
operate significantly against the repeated division of Europe, 
to be an important starting point for achieving membership in 
NATO. 
  The Slovak Republic would like to contribute actively -- by 
its membership in the WEU -- to strengthening European security 
structures and to gain security guarantees of the highest 
caliber. 
  Cooperation with CSCE bodies, as well as activity within 
them, is important for the Slovak Republic from the point of 
view of its security interests. This involves an important 
Euro-Asian process, which the Slovak Republic considers to be 
the nucleus for a modern, cooperative security system. 
  The Slovak Republic accepts the United Nations as the 
supreme 
guarantor and global organization of collective security. It 
will also contribute in the future to making sure that the 
United Nations creates the conditions for averting conflicts and 
more effectively resolving local and regional conflicts. 
  The Slovak Republic considers stable, conflict-free, and 
correct relations with its immediate neighbors to be an 
important aspect for guaranteeing its national security. At the 
same time, it places a great deal of emphasis on intensifying 
and expanding economic, cultural, and humanitarian cooperation 
on the basis of the principle of "an equal with an equal" and 
non-interference in internal affairs. The development of 
regional cooperation plays a positive role in the Slovak 
Republic's security policy. It is striving to strengthen 
regional and cross-border cooperation in conjunction with this. 
It is interested in active involvement in the Visegrad Group as 
a political and economic coordinating forum for similarly 
oriented partners. It is also interested in the Central 
European Initiative, which can help to resolve many of the tasks 
of modern European cooperation. 
  In providing for the needs of its national security, the 
Slovak Republic proceeds from the need for equilibrium in its 
relations with all European states. At the moment, the Slovak 
Republic is achieving this objective especially by means of 
bilateral treaties. At the same time, it is aware of the 
positive role that the U.S. presence plays in Europe, and it is 
in favor of maintaining it. 
  The Slovak Republic is dealing with the ethnic minority 
issue 
and will deal with it on the basis of the civic principle in 
harmony with the CSCE and Council of Europe documents and the SR 
Constitution. It is, however, of the opinion that the 
tendencies toward irredentism and the internationalization of 
these issues, the casting of doubts on internationally 
recognized treaties by certain forces, and the abuse of history 
as an implement of current policy do not contribute to the 
stability of the Central European region. 
  The Slovak Republic's national security proceeds from its 
national interests. It represents a system of mutually 
complementary and cooperative elements and activities comprising 
an integrated system that creates the corresponding conditions 
for the natural economic, political, social, spiritual, and 
ecological development of the state. This system is guaranteed 
by institutions of a political, diplomatic, international-legal, 
economic, ecological, humanitarian, defense, and intrinsic 
security (police and special) nature. 
  From the point of view of safeguarding the Slovak Republic's 
external security, risks and dangers associated with the 
following are at the forefront: 
  -- the repercussions from the utilitarian assertion of the 
interests of powers in the Central European region; 
  -- the lability and ambiguity of political and economic 
development in some of the republics on the territory of the 
former Soviet Union; 
  -- the danger of the internationalization of the armed 
conflict in the Balkans; 
  -- the uncontrollable movement of weapons and military 
hardware, which is conveyed by various means to crisis regions; 
  -- the possible tendencies toward increasing the weapons 
capacity in the Central European region above the framework 
exceeding the needs of defensive sufficiency; 
  -- the manifestations of nationalism and the tendency to 
create ethnically pure states along with the attempt to revise 
the internationally legal framework for the current arrangement 
in Europe; 
  -- religious fundamentalism associated, first and foremost, 
with Islam; 
  -- international terrorism and internationally organized 
crime (drugs, money laundering, tax evasion); 
  -- the activity of foreign intelligence services targeted on 
penetrating the state's domestic political, economic, and 
military structures; 
  -- the problems developing outside Europe, especially in the 
Middle and Near East and Africa. 
  Despite the crucial role played by the external aspect of 
national security, the Slovak Republic is devoting no less 
attention to constituting the domestic dimension of its security. 
  Carrying out the defense of internal order and security 
falls, first and foremost, to the police, the Prosecutor's 
Office, and the judiciary. Other institutions, including local 
state administration bodies, community bodies, state 
enterprises, the private business sphere, and other 
organizations, including the security services, must play a more 
active role in guaranteeing this defensive function. 
  From the point of view of guaranteeing the Slovak Republic's 
internal security, risks associated with the following are at 
the forefront: 
  -- the rise in nationalism and irredentism among a certain 
part of the population with possible tendencies toward violating 
the integrity of the state's territory; 
  -- violation of the Slovak Republic's state borders in 
connection with the increased migration of the population from 
third countries; 
  -- the evolution and anti-constitutional activity of 
extremist- oriented political organizations; 
  -- the rise of organized crime and international forms of 
crime, including terrorism, blackmail, and drug-related problems; 
  -- the rise in and seriousness of crime threatening the 
lives, health, and property of physical and legal persons; 
  -- crime committed by high-risk groups with a tendency 
toward 
repeated offenses, alcoholism, drug addiction and a tendency to 
deal with such conduct by illegal means and resources; 
  -- crime committed in connection with the privatization 
process and the transition to a market economy; 
  -- the appearance of organized corruption in state bodies, 
especially in the police force, the Prosecutor's Office, and the 
judiciary as well as in local self-administration bodies; 
  -- an extraordinary situation (natural disasters, 
technological accidents and catastrophes, and the risks and 
threats to the environment caused by military activity). 
  The aim of guaranteeing the Slovak Republic's national 
security is: 
  1. To multilaterally safeguard its independence and protect 
its sovereignty and territorial integrity and the inviolability 
and unchangeability of its internationally recognized borders; 
  2. To intensify cooperation and achieve the Slovak 
Republic's 
gradual integration into the international economic, political, 
security, and cultural structures; 
  3. To bolster stability and peace with emphasis on the 
region 
of Central Europe. To make careful use of the opportunity to 
take part in peace missions, dealing with conflicts, and 
averting armed aggression; 
  4. To guarantee the state's constitutionality and internal 
stability, including respect for human rights and basic 
freedoms, the rights of the ethnic minorities, democracy, the 
functioning of a law-governed state, economic freedom, social 
justice, and responsibility toward the environment; 
  5. To achieve a standard of security for the individual and 
to protect the interests of society as a whole in a manner 
comparable with the democratic countries of Europe. 
  In guaranteeing its national security, the Slovak Republic 
proceeds from these main principles: 
  1. From undertaking responsibility for the state's overall 
viability. National security must provide guarantees for the 
Slovak Republic's general survival, its sovereignty, its 
territorial integrity and the inviolability of its 
internationally recognized borders, and the functioning of a 
democratic regime. In view of the fact that the importance of 
the political factor in guaranteeing its security is increasing, 
the Slovak Republic is interested in achieving eventual 
membership in the European Union, NATO, and the WEU. 
  2. From consistency and equilibrium between the Slovak 
Republic's national interests and regional, continental, and 
global interests. 
  The Slovak Republic supports the creation of the kind of 
cooperative security system in Europe that would offer all 
states together and individually an equal amount of certainty. 
It ascribes a significant role in this to the CSCE. 
  3. From intensifying trust and the mutual flow of 
information 
in all spheres of national security in the spirit of the Paris 
Charter for a New Europe. The Slovak Republic will contribute 
to reducing the global and local risks of the outbreak of war, 
armed conflicts or, alternatively, to precluding the use of 
force or threat by force. 
  4. From protecting the Slovak Republic's economic interests. 
The Slovak Republic will actively contribute to removing 
discriminatory barriers and will support mutually advantageous 
economic cooperation with the aim of becoming integrated into 
advanced economic structures, first and foremost, the European 
Union and the European Free Trade Association. 
  5. From the priority of preventive activity in guaranteeing 
the state's domestic security. The Slovak Republic is 
interested in creating and implementing a pan-social system of 
prevention and in determining responsibility for its planning, 
organization, and development on a nationwide, regional, and 
local level. The Slovak Republic will create the necessary 
basis for a comprehensive, systemic, and coordinated course of 
action in guaranteeing the state's internal security on the 
basis of constitutionality and legality. 
  6. From limiting the factors that lead to the pollution of 
the environment. The Slovak Republic is providing for the 
sensible exploitation of exhaustible natural resources and 
guarantees the reliable operation of its existing energy, 
especially nuclear and chemical, and other capacities. 
  Despite the fact that, at the moment, it is not easy to 
determine the hierarchy of the individual aspects of security in 
the Central European region, it is evident that military-defense 
sufficiency fulfills an important role, because, in the final 
analysis, it demonstrates the state's existence and thus also 
the possibilities for exercising influence on the other aspects 
of national security. If the Slovak Republic is unsuccessful in 
realizing its interest in becoming integrated into the European 
security structures, it will be compelled to earmark sufficient 
resources to guarantee an adequate and resolute defense so that 
the Slovak Republic is capable of facing possible risks and 
dangers. 

