BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ambassador to Washington Raul Granillo Ocampo] </F>
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] The possibility of negotiating 
a free trade zone with the United States or having access to 
NAFTA also presents Argentina with the difficulty of harmonizing 
it with integration processes in which it is already a member, 
basically ALADI [Latin American Integration Association] and 
Mercosur [Common Market of the South]. 
  The difficulties Mexico had due to Article No. 44 of the 
Montevideo Treaty are well known. This article obliges Mexico 
to extend to ALADI members the concessions negotiated within 
NAFTA. If Argentina negotiated a free trade agreement on its 
own with the United States, it also would have to request a 
waiver [preceding word in English] for Article No. 44 or 
compensate ALADI members. 
  In the case of Mercosur, the situation would be even more 
delicate if Argentina appeared alone on President Clinton's 
list. Notwithstanding, while the customs union is not perfect, 
Argentina could enter into negotiations with an eye to a free 
trade agreement with a country outside of its zone as long as it 
contains carefully written clauses of origin. If there was a 
common external tariff, then matters would become even more 
complicated. 
  Brazil's support would be necessary in order to successfully 
manage these facts. The alliance with Brazil has been and is 
one of the pillars of our foreign policy. On the other hand, 
Brazil has become our No. 1 trade partner and the main 
destination of our exports, especially those with greater added 
value. [passage omitted] 
  It is very probable there would be an even greater 
deterioration in the bilateral trade balance if there was a 
tariff reduction with the United States. This is born out by the 
fact that our levels of protection are even higher, and ours 
would be the larger concession in taking them to zero. In 
addition, a large part of the products we place on the U.S. 
market already have low tariffs (some at zero) or enter through 
the Generalized System of Preferences. If we grant a greater 
opening of our market to U.S. competition, the results could be 
very difficult to digest. This is not an argument against 
negotiations, but a warning regarding the drafting of a 
strategy: Negotiations must be very careful with respect to the 
time spans for the dismantling of tariffs barriers, including 
the safeguard mechanisms. 
  From the trade point of view, for the time being, Mercosur 
offers us better prospects given the characteristics of this 
market, which allows Argentina to export more products with 
added value. Forty percent of our exports to Mercosur countries 
are manufactured goods, while Argentine manufactured exports to 
the rest of the world amount to only 23 percent of our total 
exports. Only 14 percent of Argentine exports to Mercosur are 
agricultural products. Seventy-five percent of Argentine exports 
to the United States are food, drinks, industrial materials, and 
raw material. 
  NAFTA's most important effect is that it ensures a steady 
inflow of foreign investments. In the case of Mexico, direct 
foreign investment increased spectacularly from 1991 to 1992. 
U.S. and European investments increased 115 percent and 303 
percent, respectively, during the first months of 1992 alone in 
comparison with all of 1991 (countries like the UK, Japan, and 
Switzerland greatly contributed to this increase in investments). 
  An agreement like NAFTA will serve to consolidate the 
Argentine economic reforms of the past few years because it 
would open a horizon of stability and confidence in the future. 
  Beyond technical considerations that define the negotiations 
strategy, Argentine participation in a free trade agreement with 
the United States would, in part, be the result of the fact that 
Argentine domestic and foreign policies were and continue to be 
consistent with our moral values and national interests. 
  Bilateral relations developed with the United States that 
are 
based on common values and interests have allowed us to 
establish a more favorable framework for specific negotiations. 
In the same manner, the smooth relations we currently maintain 
with Brazil have allowed us to carry out negotiations for mutual 
benefit. 
  Within this current framework of harmony, we must continue 
making progress in our political and economic relations with our 
main partners. Beyond some difficulties in the definition of the 
common external zero tariff, Mercosur is a reality. It has 
yielded major benefits for Argentina and is still very 
promising. The possibility of access to NAFTA, although distant, 
exists and it also has a lot of potential benefits beyond the 
inconveniences it might bring us in the short term. Integration 
processes always entail some initial costs that one must be 
willing to pay in order to obtain future benefits. Argentina is 
a global trader and it must maintain relations with the whole 
world, without barring any option. 
  Although Argentina favors a free trade policy in the 
international field (our position in GATT has been fully 
consistent in this aspect), it must be recognized that despite 
the progress made, free trade is not a reality in the world. 
Even Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairperson of President Bill 
Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, has admitted it: "Let us 
be realistic; there is no free trade in the world." If the 
world is heading toward the formation of economic blocs, it will 
not be good for Argentina to be left out of the most important 
ones. 
  The fact of being included in the report by the U.S. trade 
representative is, without doubt, an acknowledgement of 
President Menem's economic reforms. The possibility of beginning 
negotiations is in President Clinton's hands. It would be 
unwise, however, to think this is an essential matter for 
Argentina. A country's destiny is built gradually by the daily 
effort of all its inhabitants. 

