BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS parliamentary correspondent Lyudmila Yermakova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 22 Apr -- Rumors about Chinese expansion in 
eastern regions of Russia have been greatly exaggerated. This 
conclusion can be drawn from the results of the trip a group of 
Federal Assembly deputies made to Amur Oblast and Khabarovsk and 
Krasnoyark Krays. "There was no confirmation of expansion as a 
Chinese state policy toward Russia," Vladimir Podoprigora, 
chairman of the International Affairs Committee of the 
Federation Council, said today at a news conference in 
parliament's upper chamber. 
  However, problems do exist in Russo-Chinese relations. This 
was confirmed by meetings which the members of the International 
Affairs Committees of the two chambers held with members of the 
public, representatives of state authorities in the region, law 
enforcement bodies, and border troops. The delegation returned 
from Khabarovsk today [22 April]. Parliamentary hearings are 
scheduled for 25 April "on problems in Russo-Chinese relations 
and prospects for resolving them." Vladimir Podoprigora told 
the correspondent that the hearings intend to coordinate common 
approaches in foreign policy toward China between the government 
and parliament and between the center and the component parts of 
the federation. 
  He pointed out that the problem of state borders falls 
within 
the provenance of the upper chamber. This question will be 
raised at the hearings. In the presence of members of the 
government, experts, and scholars there will also be discussion 
of the development of economic relations, the creation of more 
acceptable conditions for border trade, conditions to ease 
border crossings for people living in border areas, problems 
about sojourns by Chinese citizens on Russian territory, and 
Russian citizens in China. 
  The deputies' trip and the hearings are also connected with 
Viktor Chernomyrdin's upcoming visit to China, during which 
about 10 agreements of various kinds are expected to be signed. 
The deputies will draw up recommendations at the parliatemtary 
hearings, but they are unwilling to give these recommendations 
without hearing various points of view. Therefore, the deputies 
refrained from assessing the state of Russo-Chinese relations at 
the news conference. 

