Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Cairo correspondent Tula Mansour: "Juppe in the </F>
Fundamentalists' Stronghold" -- first paragraph is introduction] 
  [Text] Cairo -- Foreign Minister Alain Juppe started his 
official visit to Cairo with a private visit to Upper Egypt, for 
the sake of a bit of tourism. Indeed, this was a highly symbolic 
gesture because that region is the stronghold of the Islamic 
activists. 
  Since his arrival at the Quai d'Orsay [Foreign Affairs 
Ministry], Alain Juppe had not had the opportunity to see the 
splendors of Egyptian archaeology... Would he visit Upper 
Egypt? Yes, he dared to do so to set a good example, reassure 
the tourists, but primarily to reassure the Egyptian population. 
Juppe had set aside two days in his timetable for a private 
visit: Luxor, Aswan, Sinai. It was a direct response to the 
Muslim fundamentalists. 
  Alain Juppe described Franco-Egyptian relations as 
"excellent." "The fundamentalist violence is not capable of 
affecting our bilateral relations. In 1993, the total value of 
commercial transactions between the two countries was more than 
6 billion French francs [Fr]. Every year, Fr460 million is 
granted in annual aid. France's financial contribution will not 
be suspended," the minister stated. 
  The attack on the Semiramis hotel, which took place on the 
eve of President Mubarak's visit to Paris last November, and the 
machine-gun attack on Austrian tourists at Christmas in downtown 
Cairo during Francois Mitterrand's semiprivate visit did not 
discourage Alain Juppe from visiting Egypt. The avowed 
objective of this visit was: "To plan a meeting of several 
foreign ministers from countries bordering on the Mediterranean 
to strengthen cooperation in the framework of the five-plus-five 
dialogue." This agreement was signed in 1990 among the southern 
European countries: France, Italy, Spain, Malta, and Portugal, 
and those of the Arab Maghreb. The work was suspended because of 
the conflict with Libya and is therefore now being revived with 
the choice of a new partner: Egypt. 
  According to Alain Juppe's spokesman, a summit will be held 
in June. It will be preceded by meetings of experts and 
intellectuals from the Mediterranean countries. Eyes will be 
turned toward Algeria, which must not be allowed to topple. All 
the neighboring countries would then be contaminated. The 
mistakes made in Algeria must be avoided with Egypt. There will 
therefore be no statements about indivisible democracy, but no 
anti-Islamic propaganda either... The language of moderation is 
being spoken. This is also the aim of Alain Juppe's visit. 
  Two ambitious projects are on the agenda: The increase in 
French-speaking courses in Egyptian universities and the 
creation of bilingual classes in high schools. The "Juppe plan" 
is to penetrate the middle classes, promote dual cultures, and 
create new youth movements capable of overcoming those who are 
preaching a closed society and a policy of isolation by the 
indigenous cultures. 

