BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Tim Cohen] </F>
  [Text] Police Commissioner Johan van der Merwe has 
expressed concern that security force manpower levels will be 
inadequate unless the planned number of polling stations is 
reduced. Van der Merwe said the SAP's [South African Police] 
assessment was that the levels would suffice only for about 
7,000 stations -- 2,000 fewer than the Independent Electoral 
Commission (IEC) is planning to set up. 
  Police are responsible for security at polling stations and 
will be able to draw on members of the homeland security forces, 
the SADF [South African Defense Force] and the National 
Peacekeeping Force. But Van der Merwe said even the combined 
forces would be able to handle only 7,000 polling stations. 
  All the necessary security arrangements had been made for 
the 
stations already identified by the IEC, although the commission 
still had to identify where many of these would be situated. 
  "We can attend to these problems, if we can agree on a 
reasonable number," Van der Merwe said. 
  The number of security force members at each station would 
vary depending on the security needs, but on average only five 
security force members could be stationed permanently at each 
station during voting. 
  Van der Merwe said outbreaks of violence could affect the 
manpower requirements of the SAP. All available security force 
members, numbering about 93,000, would be used for the election, 
Van der Merwe said, though not all would be deployed at polling 
stations. 
  Of concern was the morale of the security forces in TBVC 
[Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda, Ciskei] states and some 
homelands, where he said normal policing had all but collapsed, 
placing additional strain on the SAP. "We have taken care of 
our commitments, but there are some problems on matters which we 
are not responsible for." 
  IEC members met police yesterday to review security 
arrangements -- their first meeting since the failure of 
negotiations with the Inkatha Freedom Party. IEC members have 
also expressed concern about security requirements, despite the 
additional call-up of citizen force members. Members were due 
to report for duty on Friday and will be active until next 
month, but it is understood that only a small proportion has 
reported. 

