BFN 

<F P=106> ["NODONG SINMUN Brands U.S. Defense Secretary's Visit to </F>
South Korea as Dangerous War Trip" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 19 (KCNA) -- A NODONG SINMUN 
analyst today condemns the upcoming visit to South Korea of U.S. 
Secretary of Defense William Perry as a dangerous war trip 
intended to increase military pressure on the DPRK, push the 
situation on the Korean peninsula to an extreme pitch of strain 
and unleash a war on the pretext of the "Nuclear Issue". 
  In a commentary entitled "War Trip of a Bellicose Element" 
the analyst says: 
  After his assumption of office as Secretary of Defense Perry 
raved that the North's "nuclear development" should be stopped 
even at the risk of another war on the Korean peninsula and that 
during his tour of South Korea he would not merely seek measures 
for "military sanctions" but discuss in detail when, how and why 
such military steps must be taken. 
  This tells that his visit to South Korea will be a trip for 
commanding the frontline to reorganize the wartime system for 
the execution of their already mapped-out scenario of war 
against the North and a trip for operational discussion to form 
combined forces against the North. 
  It must not go unnoticed that Perry, a boss of war fanatics, 
is coming to South Korea at a time when the U.S. imperialists 
have massed their huge aggression forces in and around South 
Korea to inflict the scourge of a nuclear war upon the Korean 
nation. 
  Perry's tour of South Korea is also a trip of plunder to 
further subjugate South Korea to the United States militarily, 
while keying up the tensions by taking issue with the North, and 
fleecing the South Korean people through the shipment of their 
stockpiled munitions. 
  Perry had once kept close contacts with big military 
industrial businesses, while taking charge of military hardware 
until some time ago since the mid-1960s. It is clear that Perry 
with such a career behind him is coming to visit South Korea 
with the aim of deliberately aggravating the situation on the 
Korean peninsula and turning South Korea into a U.S. arms 
exhibition so as to make munitions businesses rake in profits 
and further militarize the South Korean economy and with the aim 
of forcing the puppets to pay more for the maintenance of the 
U.S. forces present in South Korea. 
  There is no doubt that the bellicose U.S. military boss and 
the "civilian" warmaniacs of South Korea will have nothing to 
discuss but war when they sit face to face and peace and 
reunification of Korea will subsequently face a more grave 
threat. 
  We are following with vigilance the warmaniac's ill-boding 
trip to South Korea. 
  If the aggressors and the traitors open the fire first, they 
would have to pay dearly for it. 

