BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 20 KYODO -- The government's Tax 
Commission has begun crafting several "alternatives" for a 
comprehensive overhaul of Japan's tax system, commission chief 
Kan Kato said Friday [20 May]. But these alternatives, to be 
presented at public hearings across the nation starting June 7, 
will not indicate any certain direction of the commission's tax 
reform policy, Kato told a press conference. 
  After carefully studying the pros and cons of each 
alternative, the commission will devise a tax reform plan in 
line with the three principles put forward by former Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa in April, Kato said after emerging 
from a tax panel session. The three principles include tilting 
toward indirect taxation such as a consumption tax to ease the 
people's heavy income tax burden, establishing how to cover the 
increasing welfare-related expenses of a rapidly aging society, 
and the reorganization of Japan's fiscal status. 
  Kato voiced his personal hope that the "final option" for 
tax 
reform will be one which seeks a net tax increase in view of the 
spirit of these principles. Kato said some commission members 
have requested the final reform proposal be shown in 
quantitative terms, such as specifying the rate of a proposed 
consumption tax hike. But on this point, accord has yet to be 
reached with others who insist that rate fixing is "a highly 
political decision," he said. 
  One of the "alternatives" to be suggested by the Tax 
Commission for overhauling Japan's taxation system is a hike in 
the consumption tax from the current 3 percent, commission 
sources said. 
  The commission will recommend several possible hikes in the 
rate, centering around 7 percent, based on different economic 
outlooks, growth rates and business climates, as well as the 
duration of income tax cuts before a consumption tax hike takes 
effect, the sources said. The commission is also poised to 
recommend that the government maintain the new income tax rates, 
which are to be slashed this year, the sources said. 
  "It would be reasonable for the hike in consumption tax to 
come about three years after the income tax cuts," Kato told 
reporters. 
  Japan has sought overall reforms of its taxation system, 
partly to stimulate its economy through a reduction in income 
tax and to prepare for increasing welfare expenses in a rapidly 
aging society. 
  In order to secure funds to cover such policies, the 
government is considering the higher consumption tax or 
introduction of a new kind of tax. 
  In February, Morihiro Hosokawa, then prime minister, 
suggested the establishment of a 7-percent "national welfare 
tax." The new tax plan was shelved due to strong opposition 
among politicians who claimed the plan was proposed abruptly and 
lacked a clear vision. 

