BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 12 (XINHUA) -- China's reform and 
development of state-owned enterprises is proceeding well and 
the production and business of the enterprises have been 
improved, according to Wang Zhongyu, minister of the State 
Economic and Trade Commission. 
  Addressing the 1994 China Beijing International Summit 
Economic Forum, Minister Wang said the profits made by 
state-owned enterprises have increased remarkably and the 
percentage of enterprises with general debility has dropped. 
  Calculated in terms of comparable factors, Minister Wang 
said, the total output value of the state-owned enterprises in 
the first four months of this year was 4.7 percent more than 
that in the same period of last year. The rate of increase in 
April even reached 5 percent. It is merely hearsay that a large 
percentage of China's state-owned enterprises have stopped or 
slashed production. 
  According to a poll in 16 provinces and municipalities, 
about 
10 percent of the state-owned enterprises are idle or operating 
at under full capacity at present and only four percent have 
stopped production, Minister Wang said. 
  In areas like Beijing, he stressed, the percentage of 
enterprises which stopped production is even lower -- two 
percent. 
  He pointed out that in a big country like China, it is 
normal 
during the process of economic reform and development that a few 
enterprises are temporarily shut down or scaled back or in 
seasonal movement. Moreover, most of these enterprises are 
medium-sized or small ones and such enterprises are mainly in 
the textile and coal industries. Besides, most of the 
enterprises have fallen into such a difficult position because 
of burdens existing long before. 
  Minister Wang said that there have been various factors 
causing the enterprises to be shut down or scaled back. It is 
mainly because some industries already have a glut of products 
and their products are unwanted on the market. In addition, 
some of the enterprises have had problems in management. Some 
were shut down, or suspended operation, or were amalgamated or 
switched to the manufacture of other products according to the 
state policy on industries or because of the readjustment of the 
enterprise organizational structure, or because of needs to 
upgrade city facilities. 
  To counter the hearsay that the percentage of state-owned 
enterprises with general debility has been increasing and the 
amount of loss has risen, Minister Wang said that it is a 
misunderstanding. 
  He explained that in order to meet the needs of establishing 
a socialist market economy, state-owned enterprises started in 
last July to adopt a new accounting method under which interest 
on loans, additional wages, bonuses and other fees which used to 
be disbursed from the profits of the enterprises are now 
disbursed from the costs. Meanwhile, more funds should be used 
in technical renovation and the enterprises are allowed to raise 
the depreciation rates of their equipment. These regulations 
are beneficial to the expansion of the enterprises' power of 
self-management and to long-term development of the enterprises. 
However, the enterprises' book profits are reduced. As a 
result, some enterprises which used to make little profit have 
turned into loss-making enterprises. But the actual efficiency 
of the enterprises has been raised. 
  If calculated by the old method, Wang said, the total 
profits 
made by state-owned enterprises in the first three months of 
this year would increase by 50 percent compared with the same 
period of last year to reach 19.1 billion yuan including 11 
billion yuan of expenditure for equipment depreciation, loan 
interest, bonuses, education funds and other fees and 8.1 
billion yuan in book profits. 
  Wang also pointed out that the percentage of enterprises 
with 
general debility was calculated by the number of enterprises. 
Since most of the loss-making enterprises are small and 
medium-sized ones, the absolute amount of the output value of 
the enterprises and their amount of loss is not big. 
  He stressed that if different measures are taken for 
different enterprises, the problem of enterprises showing losses 
can be solved. For those enterprises with problems in 
management, it is necessary to deepen the reform to transform 
the management mechanism and establish a modern enterprise 
system to turn from deficits to profits. He revealed that the 
departments concerned under the State Council and governments at 
various levels are actively taking measures to solve the 
problems. 
  Wang also said that the State Council has recently 
readjusted 
the policy of credit, allowing the banks not only to support 
those state-owned enterprises with good efficiency but also to 
support the production of the marketable products of those 
enterprises with general debility. However, he stressed, it is 
not allowed to support the production of unwanted products. 
  Wang added that the banks will also offer loans to meet the 
basic needs of the daily lives of the employees of the 
enterprises at loss. However, he said, the local government 
should also offer some financial subsidies to jointly maintain 
social stability. 
  As for those enterprises which have long registered losses 
and have no prospects for recouping the losses, Wang said, they 
will go bankrupt according to the insolvency law. 

