Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tianjin, March 21 (XINHUA) -- Tianjin, the biggest 
port city in north China, will pool more than 800 million yuan 
to boost its booming transport construction this year. 
  According to a local transport construction planning 
official, Tianjin will be built into a transport hub connected 
with most of the big cities across the country and around the 
world by the end of the century. 
  So far, a fast, efficient transport system by air, land and 
sea has taken initial shape in the city, he said. 
  In 1993, the city reported a total shipping cargo throughput 
of 37 million tons, with rail transport totalling over 90 
million tons. 
  The gross export value through the port city last year added 
up to 12.5 billion U.S. dollars, and more than 33 million people 
came into China or went abroad by way of Tianjin. 
  Tianjin, open to navigation for more than 2,000 years, 
boasts 
a favorable geographic position in the development of China's 
market economy. 
  Since the founding of New China, the city has invested more 
than four billion yuan to construct and expand the port. The 
Tianjin port now has more than 130 berths, including 47 
ten-thousand-ton berths. 
  It is also a container shipping port, with the largest 
annual 
handling capacity in China. It has business ties with more than 
160 countries and regions throughout the world and has at least 
30 scheduled shipping routes. 
  Transportation on land has also been brisk, and a network of 
railways and highways has been built to link Tianjin with both 
the coastal boom cities and the inland ones. 
  In addition to the country's main railway lines passing 
through the city, there is also a length of 136 kilometers of 
local railways which joins the port to the district areas. 
  Also, seven highways of national standard and one 142-km 
expressway link Tianjin to the country's capital of Beijing and 
the Tanggu Port Area. Roads in the city add up to 4088 
kilometers in total length. 
  Now, it is only a 1.5-hour drive to get from downtown 
Tianjin 
to Beijing, a 30-minute drive to the Tianjin port and a 
10-minute drive to the airport. 
  The city's air transport has also gained momentum over the 
past few years. The Tianjin airport has opened 198 scheduled 
flights to 28 domestic cities and to many countries and regions 
around the world, including the Republic of Korea, Russia, 
Japan, Ukraine and Hong Kong. 
  It has an annual passenger transport capacity of two million 
people and a capacity for 80,000 tons in cargo. The figures are 
expected to double by the year 2000. 
  Thanks to the efforts made in developing the rural traffic 
and transport system, highways are available to more than 3,800 
villages in its suburbs. Foreign-funded companies are also 
emerging in the remote villages. 
  In addition, the city also has an underground oil pipeline 
of 
203 kilometers that helps to ease the pressure of loading and 
unloading oil tankers in the Tianjin port. 

