BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic on 1 
April publishes on pages 34-36 an approximately 3,500-word 
report from Moscow by Pavel Davidov on the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction in the breakaway republics of the 
former Soviet Union and on sales of these weapons and 
sophisticated technology to Third World and other nations. The 
report cites dangers threatening many nations as a result of the 
Soviet Republics' lack of control over their nuclear arsenal. 
It says the Russian intelligence and security agencies are 
incapable of protecting the world from the risks inherent in the 
proliferation of nuclear bombs, radioactive agents, missiles, 
and other weapons of mass destruction. 
  The magazine publishes highlights of a "secret report" 
submitted by the Russian Counterespionage Service to Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin "a few days ago." This classified 
report contains a "clear warning that it is impossible to 
prevent thefts, smuggling, and secret trade, which is on the 
rise in military plants and sensitive laboratories. The report 
also points out that the states that broke away from the Soviet 
Union are also unable to protect the dangerous installations 
they have inherited. These states are selling the installations 
to dealers who come from Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, and other 
nations, or to trade firms that specialize in gunrunning. 
Sometimes, plants are being sold, along with all their 
equipment, weapons, and experts. The report gives evidence that 
900 thefts from military and nuclear plants and 700 thefts of 
secret technology were reported only during the second half of 
1993, including nuclear weapons to Iran and Pakistan." 
  The report says that as a result of the unplanned 
reorganization of security agencies in Russia and the defects in 
the new structure of Russian security, Russian military 
institutions and plants, science institutes, and important 
laboratories have been deprived of the protection of the 
official security agencies. No special security agencies were 
established to protect those installations due to "lack of funds 
and the general deterioration in the country." 
  The report adds that what makes the situation even more 
difficult is that the newly independent republics do not know 
how to handle or get rid of the military and other plants on 
their territory. The leaders of those republics think the best 
way to remove these weapons and plants is by selling them to the 
highest bidder. 
  The report cites examples of the selling of weapons of mass 
destruction to other nations. In November 1993, a ship carrying 
40 families of Russian refugees arrived in the city of Isterkhan 
from Turkmenistan, including six families whose parents had 
worked in a secret workshop of the ammunition depot that belongs 
to the former Soviet war naval fleet. In this workshop, nuclear 
containers for torpedoes and sea mines were tested and most of 
them were sent to the Black Sea fleet. Following the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union, Turkmenistan decided that it 
did not need the containers, so the entire depot was sold within 
a year. The buyers were Iranians and Pakistanis. Also, a 
powder plant was sold in Uzbekistan when this republic saw that 
it no longer needs the plant and could not turn it into civilian 
production. The report adds: "We can give dozens of examples of 
this kind. The weapons of mass destruction spread all over the 
Third World from all the republics of the former Soviet Union 
because of the lack of control and protection exercised in the 
past by the KGB. These weapons can easily fall into the hands 
of irresponsible adventurers." 
  The report gives another example of the disappearance of a 
secret laboratory for scientific research in the area of 
chemical weapons and laser technology in a city in Kyrgyzstan. 
The buyer is unknown. 
  The report goes on to say that none of the republics of the 
former Soviet Union exercises state control over nuclear 
security, except for Russia which has a government committee to 
monitor nuclear activities. Even this committee has limited 
tasks. 
  The report devotes a chapter to the future of scientists, 
specialists in military industries, and nuclear experts. It 
discloses that "more than a third of the scientists and 
specialists in the nuclear field and highly sophisticated 
technology, who total 3,000 people that used to work in the 
Soviet Union, have left the country and now work at major 
scientific institutions in the United States, Japan, Germany, 
France, Britain, and Sweden." 

