BFN 

<F P=106> [Michael Voelker report: "Already 63 Deaths From Drugs in </F>
Vienna This Year"] 
  [Text] For some florists in Vienna and in the provinces, 
the sale of poppy straw and poppy heads to addicts is a 
profitable business. The drug squad of the Vienna Security 
Office pointed to this trend in 1984 for the first time. 
However, this semi-legal drug trade is not interesting for the 
criminal police: In view of the alarmingly rising heroin and 
cocaine trade, the use of poppy heads to gain opiate-containing 
substances can be neglected. 
  "Poppy heads are no problem," Karl Lesiak of the Vienna 
Security Office says. In particular not now when the Austrian 
capital is being swamped with cheap and high-quality heroin. 
Within the past two years, the price for one gram of heroin has 
gone down from about 3,000 to 800 shillings. The decline in the 
price of cocaine is obvious, but not yet as dramatic: One gram 
now costs 1,200 to 1,500 schillings on average; two years ago 
one could not buy it for less than 2,500 schillings. 
<H5>  Further Increase </H5>
  In Vienna, the number of deaths from drugs rose from 94 in 
1992 to 103 in 1993. This year justifies the fear of a further 
increase: By the end of May 63 people had died of drugs. During 
the same period in 1993 the number was 48. 
  According to Karl Lesiak, most deaths are due to heroin 
overdoses. For three years one can observe a shift in the 
consumption of opiates from poppy head tea and codeine to 
high-quality heroin. The largest number of drug deaths are 
still caused by the "Vienna mixture" (opiates, pharmaceuticals, 
and alcohol), but the proportion of people who used heroin 
exclusively is rising. With one restriction: As the Forensic 
Institute in Vienna has found out in a comprehensive study, 
heroin is more and more often diluted with the soporific 
Rohypnol--probably without the knowledge of the consumers--which 
intensifies the effect. 
  In the field of drug smuggling, an essential change has also 
taken place for the police: Austria's eastern neighboring 
countries are used as "depot countries," the drugs are 
increasingly brought to Austria in small amounts and at short 
notice, depending on the demand. 
  The authorities have particular problems with the so-called 
"ant trade" with Bratislava. Addicts "import" 50 to 500 grams 
of the drugs themselves and finance the amounts they need for 
themselves by partly selling off the rest. Taxi drivers are 
also often used as drug couriers. At a salary of about 2,000 
schillings, they bear the entire risk, police access to the 
people behind them is becoming increasingly difficult. 
Nevertheless, according to Lesiak, the amount of heroin and 
cocaine seized this year has "increased considerably." 

