Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Benes and Lubor Kohout: "The Viral and </F>
Bacterial Strains Stored in the Central Military Hospital Are 
Destroyed Posthaste"] 
  [Text] In CESKY DENIK on Thursday and Friday [17 and 18 
March], we reported the existence of still-maintained bacterial 
and viral strains developed for use as biological weapons. 
According to the findings by CESKY DENIK reporters, one of the 
banks of these strains was concealed in the Central Military 
Hospital in Prague-Stresovice. 
  Yesterday, Czech Defense Minister Antonin Baudys called an 
extraordinary news conference; as he phrased it, "just to calm 
down the public." 
  Antonin Baudys declared that he was first informed about the 
existence of the particularly dangerous viruses and bacteria on 
13 February of this year. Subsequently, he received more 
information from various sources on 17 February. On the basis of 
this information, an interdepartmental commission was formed, in 
which Health Ministry experts were also represented. The 
commission, according to Baudys, investigated and assessed the 
situation and also decided to liquidate the biological bank 
quickly because it was "no longer useful." The bacterial and 
viral cultures were also destroyed under extraordinary security 
measures between 24 and 25 February with the knowledge and 
instructions of Defense Minister Antonin Baudys and Army Chief 
of Staff Nekvasil. Furthermore, Baudys said that similar 
measures were also taken in the Techonin Military Research 
Institute at the beginning of March. It was precisely in this 
Institute that, according to CESKY DENIK sources, biological 
weapons for the Warsaw Pact were developed. According to claims 
by the military representatives, however, this bank of 
biological cultures was a commonplace affair, and their 
maintenance did not violate any international treaties. 
  An employee of the Techonin Military Research Institute, 
Ales 
Macela, stated that, in the facility where he works, no viral or 
bacterial strains have been cultivated for use in biological 
warfare. Moreover, he claimed that all documentation about the 
research has remained in Techonin. According to him, the 
research was conducted for defense purposes only. According to 
CESKY DENIK sources, however, the documentation was transferred 
to Prague under extraordinary security measures at the beginning 
of March. 
  Deputy Defense Minister Kalousek said that the Klinlab 
company had leased nonresidential premises in the Central 
Military Hospital building. It was precisely in the 
laboratories operated by this company that the bank of viral and 
bacterial cultures that were quickly destroyed on 25 February 
was stored. 

