BFN 

<F P=106> ["News commentary" by station commentator (Yu Xin): "To </F>
Calmly Handle the Shipwreck Incident"; from the "News and 
Current Events" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] A tragic disaster on the cruiser "Hairui" in 
Zhejiang's Qiandao Lake has led to the deaths of all the 24 
Taiwan tourists and eight mainland tour guides and crew members. 
The unfortunate incident has caused deep sorrow among 
compatriots on both sides of the strait. Relevant mainland 
departments have quickly solved the case, preliminarily 
revealing that it was an extraordinarily serious case of 
robbery, arson, and homicide. Public security organs have 
arrested three culprits who were connected to the case. 
  We believe that truths about the case and the results of 
relevant investigations and handling will be publicized very 
soon. The tragedy forcefully took away 32 compatriots' lives. 
We can understand the indignation expressed by family members 
of the victims. Relevant authorities in charge of handling the 
incident have heard their opinions and requests, and have 
rendered appropriate responses as much as possible. 
  Disasters such as robbery and murder can occur anywhere in 
the world. All governments have been striving in every possible 
way to eliminate such disasters in an effort to attain social 
stability. The Qiandao Lake shipwreck was unmistakably an 
unfortunate incident that was appalling to people on both sides 
of the strait. However, some of the authorities in Taiwan 
simply exaggerated it as a political incident. Taiwan 
independence elements also seized the opportunity to stir up 
troubles. A certain person in power in the ruling party on the 
island even attacked the Chinese communists, likening them to 
bandits. Inciting people's feelings, such extreme words have 
directly promoted Taiwan Independence's momentum on the island. 
  Because the Taiwan authorities purposely politicized the 
Qiandao Lake incident, some people in the government and 
nongovernment sectors have seized the opportunity to stir up 
troubles. They advocated stopping cross-strait exchanges. They 
decided to suspend cross-strait cultural and educational 
exchanges and to stop appraising and approving applications of 
Taiwan investments on the mainland. Beginning 1 May, travel 
agencies will stop handling people's visits to the mainland. 
  Taiwan's mass media pointed out: Taiwan does not have the 
capability [ben qian 2609 6929] to discontinue cross-strait 
exchanges. To stop handling people's visits to the mainland 
alone, some 100 travel agencies in Taibei [Taipei] City will 
lose more than 100 million New Taiwan [NT] dollars. 
  Taiwan's mass media believe: Both sides of the strait have 
carried out very comprehensive economic and trade cooperation. 
Cooperating with the mainland has been beneficial to Taiwan. 
Now that the case has been solved, the Taiwan authorities 
should rationally resume cross-strait exchanges and guide 
cross-strait relations toward a healthy track. 
  Using the Qiandao Lake incident, the Taiwan authorities have 
attempted to obstruct normal cross-strait exchanges and visits, 
to sabotage [po huai 4275 0975] the cross-strait relations that 
have been established by joint efforts of people on both sides 
of the strait in the past several years, and to hamper [sun hai 
2275 1364] the interests of people on both sides of the strait. 
People on both sides of the strait will not allow or consent to 
such activities. Developing cross-strait relations and 
materializing the reunification of the motherland people accord 
with the will of the people and the general trend of events. 
All attempts to move against the tide of history will find it 
hard to prevail. 

