Message 

<F P=102>   94P20757 </F>
<F P=103> 94P20757 </F>
<F P=104></F>

  CSO 

  [Editorial Report] At their conference in Cochabamba on 15 
April, Bolivia's bishops issued a document highlighting current 
socioeconomic and political crises affecting the nation. The 
message got favorable reactions from Vice President Hugo 
Cardenas, Congress, labor leaders, and the major dailies. 
  The La Paz daily HOY of 16 April reported that the Bolivian 
Bishops Conference (CEB) document entitled "Dignity and Hope" 
acknowledged the people's concerns over "current events which 
have convulsed the country"; their fears and uncertainties over 
the proposed laws comprising the government's reform package; 
the worsening poverty experienced by most Bolivians; the growing 
controversy over Law 1008: the Law of Special Regulations on 
Coca and Controlled Substances--which the bishops declared "must 
be reviewed and revised." The document referred to U.S. Drug 
Enforcement Administration intervention in the MIR-narco scandal 
as events that have "belittled the dignity of the nation" and 
"submitted its sovereignty to foreign interests." 
  The document, according to La Paz PRESENCIA 16 April, also 
decried corruption, which it said "has been institutionalized at 
various levels of the state administration and has endangered 
the credibility of broad sectors of the political elite." The 
bishops contended that these problems have been aggravated in 
recent days by "repeated conflicts between the government and 
the Bolivian Labor Federation (COB), students, peasants, miners, 
and teachers, creating anxiety and instability in the country." 
The daily reported that the bishops urged compromise and 
dialogue and called for spiritual "disarmament" when facing this 
conflict. 
  The same daily added that the bishops, on the other hand, 
applauded the many "signs of hope" in the country such as "new 
efforts toward modernization and educational reform"; the 
"tenacity" with which corruption cases in public administration 
have been uncovered; and the growing struggle of the people for 
their rights which "have often been forgotten or even crushed." 
  Vice President Hugo Cardenas told the 17 April PRESENCIA 
that 
he had urged Congress to "seriously consider" the Church's view 
on the need to revise Law 1008. He praised the bishops' 
awareness of the "real nature of Law 1008" and their initiative 
in pointing out its defects, one of which is that the penalties 
for contravening the law are not proportionate to the crimes. 
According to HOY of 18 April, the law denies people freedom of 
movement and communication, parole, or release on bail. 
"Therefore, human rights and constitutional precepts are 
violated," explained Deputy Ramiro Barrenechea, member of the 
Chamber of Deputies Narcotics Commission. 
  Juan Carlos Duran, president of the Senate and top leader of 
the ruling Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), referred to 
the bishops' document as "very timely" in the 18 April 
PRESENCIA DEL PAIS. He explained that, as a result, the 
government has proposed that the law be revised by the national 
Congress following the installation of the next legislature in 
August. The announcement was made 19 April by President Sanchez 
de Lozada in a press conference, according to the 22 April 
Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS. 
  HOY of 17 April praised the "spontaneous communion of views" 
between labor leaders and the Bolivian Catholic Church in the 
face of "U.S. interference in internal affairs and the social 
conflicts that are plaguing the country." Concerning the 
bishops' statement on government corruption, Oscar Salas, 
executive secretary of the COB, commented that "each and every 
one of the country's political groups has a shameful previous 
history." "Coupists, fugitives, and corrupt politicians involved 
in drug trafficking unfortunately abound in the national 
Congress," charged the leader of the teachers union of La Paz, 
Jose Luis Alvarez, "and that is one of the principal reasons 
that the politicians and the system are continuing to lose 
credibility." Commenting on Law 1008, HOY noted that labor 
leaders agreed with the Church about the need for revision of 
the law and for the "very same reasons." 
  Ernesto Machicao, Minister of Social Communication, told 17 
April HOY that the Catholic Church's pronouncements on various 
aspects of national reality are always looked upon with respect 
by the government and, thus, will be carefully studied. He told 
PRESENCIA of 18 April that after consulting with President 
Sanchez de Lozada and other ministers, the government decided to 
"follow" the exhortations in the bishops' message and try to 
solve the ongoing labor conflict with "dialogue and compromise." 
Machicao, nevertheless, characterized as "unjust" the bishops' 
accusations that the government is responsible for the 
"increasing poverty experienced by the majority of Bolivians," 
and stressed the administration's efforts to pass its four-part 
reform package in just eight months in office. 
  Finally, an editorial in 17 April HOY urged people to 
"meditate on the way shown us by the Catholic Church," which 
continues to be a "permanent institution in our country." 

