Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vyera Polyakova under the "Current Comment" </F>
rubric: "Will Russia Choose Belarus?"] 
  [Text] All of us -- both those supporting unification 
and those objected to it -- are in a state of tense suspense: 
What results will January 1994 bring? We are truly facing a 
critical moment right now. 
  The Belarusian leadership sees a stable economic union with 
Russia and the unification of currency systems as the only means 
for protecting our sovereignty and overcoming the protracted 
crisis. However, as known, this approach is not shared by all 
political circles. A feeling of relief will supposedly be 
experienced by producers and entrepreneurs, if by anybody. 
  Frankly speaking, economists and financiers think that the 
joining of the common ruble zone by Belarus is inevitable. Of 
course, it would have been much better to make such a move two 
years ago -- the cost would have been far lower. Or, perhaps, 
to adopt the direction of Baltic states. Unfortunately, the 
opportunity was missed. Excepting the economic union with 
Russia, we are rapidly and firmly following the path which 
Ukraine is desperately trying to abandon. A persistent general 
economic crisis without hope or prospects brings death to any 
country. We will be able to keep ourselves in the swim at the 
expense of high-tech production -- so-called "brain" work -- for 
about a year or two. However, if highly skilled specialists, 
depressed by petty salaries, leave their labs and workshops in 
search of better-paying places under the sun, the world will 
embrace yet another "banana republic." Then it will be 
impossible for Belarus to avoid the penetration and expansion of 
Russian capital. 
  Nobody needs to be reminded that Belarus' interests are, 
first of all and above all, in the East, in Russia, in other CIS 
countries. The experience of our independence demonstrates that 
we are not welcome guests in the West. "Rotting" continental 
and transatlantic businessmen rate Belarus as last in their 
investments priorities because of our allegedly pro-communist 
regime and the absolute lack of reform. We must face the truth: 
Our Republic is not rated high by Russia, either. This is 
testified to by the visit of the U.S. President; Bill Clinton's 
behind-closed-doors meeting with [opposition leader] Zyanon 
Paznyak also has its significance. 
  Economic union with Russia is a necessary step for us, but 
it 
is also a forced step. The Belarusian economy is on the brink 
of catastrophe. Taking into account world prices for Russian 
raw materials, customs duties, and our horrible tax policy, the 
Belarusian leadership -- to rid itself of Russian pressure -- 
has rushed toward integration with our "eastern brother," 
notwithstanding the fact that the economic union implies a 
limitation of political sovereignty. Nonetheless, it is assumed 
that this will help Belarus overcome crises and move beyond its 
current standstill. The creation of a single ruble zone with a 
single legal tender -- the Russian ruble -- and, as a result, 
the implementation of rules and methods of the more liberal 
Russian tax system, as well as the widening of markets are the 
main roads to civilization. 
  Still, these are advancements on our behalf. What can we 
propose to Russia in return? An economy in crisis and ourselves 
-- lock, stock, and barrel?! For Russia, the unification of 
currency systems is more of a political step than an economic 
one. Former Russian Prime Minister Gaydar has spoken out 
against this unification. We, just like that small boy with a 
dog on the well-known "Russia's Choice" poster, are not welcome. 

