BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Viktor Mikhaylov, Russian minister of atomic </F>
energy, by Aleksandr Khokhlov; date and place of interview not 
stated: "Russia's Chief `Hawk': Bomb Is Useful in the Economy"] 
  [Text] Viktor Nikitovich Mikhaylov is the creator of 
Russia's third generation of nuclear weapons. He is 60 years 
old and was born in the countryside. He graduated from the 
Moscow physical engineering institute. He is a doctor of 
technical sciences, a professor, and the author of over 260 
scientific works and a winner of Lenin and state prizes. He is 
the founder of the scientific school for the physics of nuclear 
explosive fission and the diagnosis of single-pulse penetrating 
radiation processes. Since March 1992 he has been Russian 
Federation minister of atomic energy. He gave his recently 
published autobiography the title I Am a `Hawk.' 
  [Khokhlov] In recent years only lazy politicians, deputies, 
and journalists have failed to attack our nuclear scientists and 
defense industry officials. You actively favor the conservation 
and development of the military-industrial complex, nuclear 
power, and nuclear weapons. Does it not seem to you that today 
this is a voice crying in the desert? 
  [Mikhaylov] No. Today a change is taking place in Russians' 
public awareness. Finally it is becoming clear to the majority 
that in a changing world Russia can be preserved only as a state 
with progressive technologies, with a powerful industry and 
modern weapons. The majority of high technologies have been 
developed and continue to be developed at the scientific centers 
of the Ministry of Atomic Energy and the State Committee for the 
Defense Industry. Why kill the goose that lays the golden eggs? 
We have had enough "revolutions!" And it is very important 
today to preserve what has already been achieved -- in the 
economy and in the military sphere. 
  [Khokhlov] But should we continue to produce nuclear 
weapons, of which Russia already has enough to destroy the world 
several times over? 
  [Mikhaylov] No one intends to destroy it. On the contrary, 
by the year 2003 Russia's nuclear arsenal will have been reduced 
tenfold. We will have 3,500 nuclear warheads left -- highly 
effective warheads capable of defending the country reliably 
against any encroachments. 
  I have believed and continue to believe that nuclear weapons 
remain the only means of maintaining global stability on earth. 
Yes, there is an alternative -- complete trust in the world. 
But is that feasible now? I doubt it.... 
  The postwar world was held up on fear of the use of nuclear 
weapons. That is bad. But would it really have been better for 
World War III to break out? The USSR has now disintegrated, 
there is no longer a Warsaw Pact, the Berlin wall has been 
dismantled for souvenirs. Has the world become more peaceful? 
No, alas, it has not. Today the new military-political map of 
the 21st century world has started to take shape. Spheres of 
influence and the strategic interests of many states and 
military-political alliances are being reviewed. The terms 
"global country" and "regional country" are becoming commonplace 
in politics. I was born in a great country and I do not want to 
see my motherland a raw-material tributary in the next century. 
That is my "hawk's song." 
  [Khokhlov] Then you probably do not greatly welcome the 
Russian-U.S. accords on the broad-scale reduction of nuclear 
arsenals? 
  [Mikhaylov] We saw long ago that there are too many weapons. 
They must be reduced. But we must have a realistic approach 
toward the pace of disarmament. 
  The dismantling of one nuclear warhead costs $100,000. And 
no one abroad will help us here. They do not have the technical 
and financial potential, they do not have the technologies. And 
what politician will allow foreign warheads to be brought into 
his country and dismantled? 
  Today Russia is spending up to 1,000 billion rubles [R] a 
year on the dismantling of the nuclear warheads to be reduced. 
Developing the scale of this undoubtedly necessary business is 
an extremely difficult problem. We need investments, enormous 
investments. And there can be no talk here of any profits 
allegedly "extracted" by Russia. The agreement with the United 
States on the processing of weapons-grade uranium over the 
course of 20 years for use as fuel for nuclear electric power 
stations is only partial compensation for the expenses we have 
already incurred by destroying the warheads of Ukraine, 
Belorussia [Belarus], and Kazakhstan. As a whole, there is 
still food for thought for the politicians and economists of the 
whole world. 
  [Khokhlov] Previously everything connected with nuclear 
problems was strictly secret. Is the Ministry of Atomic 
Energy's "iron curtain" being opened today? 
  [Mikhaylov] We are simply doomed to cooperation with the 
scientists of other countries. Russia has actively joined in 
work to create international cooperation in the field of 
scientific research and the dissemination of new technologies. 
  We have also started to use foreign investments. A number of 
developments in the Ministry of Atomic Energy's scientific 
research institutes and enterprises are financed by foreigners, 
and the results are being used jointly. In 1993 we attracted 
about $80 million by this means for additional financing for 
scientific and technological developments. 
  [Khokhlov] Will this openness not lead to the leakage of 
secret information? 
  [Mikhaylov] We show only what we want to show. 
  [Khokhlov] And no one tries to "take a peek" at anything? 
Or to bribe our scientists going abroad? 
  [Mikhaylov] I am not involved with spies. But competent 
organs assure me that there are no spies in the Ministry of 
Atomic Energy system. With an increase in the exchange of 
specialists there has indeed been an increase in the relevant 
organizations' intelligence interest in them. But I think it is 
not yet known who can "spy" more on whom.... Indeed, it is not 
my sphere of activity. 
  [Khokhlov] Not so long ago there was a noisy story about the 
attempt by a group of our nuclear scientists to leave for North 
Korea.... 
  [Mikhaylov] They did not include a single nuclear scientist. 
Another case of misinformation. There is not a single nuclear 
physicist from the weapons complex who would flee or try to flee 
Russia. As far as I know, specialists in the development of 
carriers, that is rocket specialists, intended to go to North 
Korea. 
  [Khokhlov] The Americans have now "taken up" North Korea 
very seriously. In your view, is it a case here of politics or 
has the Asian state indeed become the possessor of nuclear 
weapons? 
  [Mikhaylov] The nonproliferation of nuclear weapons is a 
very sensitive question. A large group of states is seeking to 
create nuclear weapons or already has them. 
  One can say quite confidently that India has nuclear weapons 
-- it has carried out two warhead tests. The Republic of South 
Africa has admitted that it has "military atomic energy." 
Pakistan, Iraq, Israel, and a number of other countries deny 
they have such weapons but are actively involved in creating 
them. The technological and scientific potential of many states 
now enables them to design and produce primitive nuclear devices 
which could be used for military purposes. 
  [Khokhlov] What is "primitive" for you? For instance, the 
kind of devices which the United States used in 1945 to destroy 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki? 
  [Mikhaylov] Perhaps these devices are even simpler. As for 
North Korea, I doubt that it could create nuclear warheads in 
the very near future. Its scientific potential is not high and 
its technologies are far from progressive. Perhaps there is the 
accumulation of certain quantities of uranium. 
  [Khokhlov] Bought from us? 
  [Mikhaylov] Including some bought from us. But let us treat 
this as calmly as possible, without strewing our heads with 
ashes, as is customary now. For instance, we have sold nothing 
to Pakistan but that has not prevented it from developing its 
own military nuclear program. Incidentally, West European 
companies which sold dual-purpose technologies and output helped 
Iraq very considerably in its nuclear developments. I state 
absolutely categorically that among the developed states Russia 
has the smallest contribution to the proliferation of nuclear 
technologies across the planet. 
  [Khokhlov] Viktor Nikitovich, let us turn from the 
"military" atom to the "peaceful" atom. Although since 
Chernobyl that term sounds ambivalent.... 
  [Mikhaylov] New technologies always involve risk. The 
Chernobyl tragedy taught us a lot. Questions of the safe 
operation of nuclear electric power stations are a priority now. 
But however unpleasant it is to remember Chernobyl, the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful creation is the natural path of 
mankind's progress. 
  The date of 27 June is the jubilee of nuclear power 
engineering. The world's first nuclear electric power station 
was commissioned 40 years ago in Obninsk. Today, 17 percent of 
electricity on the planet and 30 percent of electricity in 
Europe is generated at nuclear electric power stations. In our 
country the figure is 12 percent but in some countries it is up 
to 80 percent. Incidentally, the economic "miracles" of Japan, 
Germany, and South Korea are the direct consequence of those 
countries' use of the cheap energy from nuclear fission. 
Whether there will be a resurrection of Russia also depends to 
a considerable degree on our efforts today in the development of 
this type of energy. Nuclear energy is ecologically clean 
energy. There is no alternative. The combustion of large 
quantities of organic fuel leads to the emergence of the 
greenhouse effect and destroys the planet's ozone layer. 
  Rapidly developing mankind can retain a sensible compromise 
with the environment only if nuclear energy is developed. The 
main thing, of course, is to make it safe. 
  [Khokhlov] Is something being done? 
  [Mikhaylov] Russia is cooperating actively with the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The safety of 
nuclear electric power stations is a problem for all mankind and 
the developments of the scientists of any country should serve 
all people. 
  Most important in world cooperation has been work to 
increase 
the safety of existing first-generation Russian reactors. The 
United States, Britain, the FRG, and Japan are taking part in 
this work. A fundamentally new approach -- the "station" 
approach -- has been agreed for technical assistance to the 
safety of Russian nuclear electric power stations, whose 
implementation has been initiated within the framework of the 
European Union commission's budget. The "station" approach will 
be implemented directly at the Kalinin, Balakovo, Kola, 
Smolensk, Leningrad, and Beloyarsk nuclear electric power 
stations. 
  But we nonetheless regard our own developments are the 
priority ones. There are already plans for stations with their 
own natural safety. The products of fission at these stations 
in any unforeseen situations will be localized within the 
reactor block. An uncontrolled nuclear fission chain reaction is 
in principle impossible at nuclear electric power stations of 
the new generation. 
  [Khokhlov] Incidentally, about nuclear waste. Recently the 
"greens" have tried to prevent their import into Russia from 
Finland. Why should our country become the world's "nuclear 
garbage heap?" 
  [Mikhaylov] This is all idle talk: Russia is allegedly 
putting a time bomb under itself. The Soviet Union has 
constructed several nuclear electric power stations abroad and 
the waste at these stations can be stored for no more than five 
years. Under the terms of treaties with Bulgaria, Finland, 
Hungary, and the Czech Republic Russia, as the USSR's legal 
heir, is continuing to import it and process it at enterprises 
of the Ministry of Atomic Energy. 
  [Khokhlov] Where exactly? 
  [Mikhaylov] Where the fuel was produced -- near Krasnoyarsk, 
Tomsk, and Chelyabinsk. After special processing the nuclear 
electric power station waste is enclosed in glass and stored in 
concrete bunkers. That is absolutely safe for people and the 
environment. 
  [Khokhlov] A sudden earthquake? 
  [Mikhaylov] We do not expect earthquakes in the places where 
nuclear electric power station waste is stored for the next 
millenium. In 1,000 years time, is some cataclysm were to 
occur, the processed nuclear fuel will no longer present a 
danger. 
  New methods are now being developed for destroying nuclear 
waste -- its burning in special devices and its use in 
fast-neutron reactors. 
  [Khokhlov] But can you explain why then Finland is reluctant 
to bury the waste from its "Lovisa" nuclear electric power 
station somewhere in the tundra and is exporting them to us? 
  [Mikhaylov] It does not have the conditions and technology 
for processing; we do. And it is economically advantageous for 
Russia to accept waste! They pay for it, they pay very well. A 
fight is now under way on the nuclear waste market between the 
United States, France, and Britain. Russia is also taking part. 
It means big money, which we invest in, inter alia, the 
improvement of the safety of Russian nuclear electric power 
stations. Incidentally, the Finns are already considering 
whether to pay us money or to keep their waste in their own 
country. 
  [Khokhlov] Does Russia bear responsibility for the safety of 
nuclear electric power stations in CIS and Baltic states? 
  [Mikhaylov] No. Since the collapse of the USSR these have 
been domestic problems for sovereign states. Politicians treat 
this very zealously. But we Russian nuclear scientists are open 
to cooperation with everyone. Armenia has decided to resume the 
operation of its nuclear electric power station -- we are 
helping. 
  [Khokhlov] One more problem connected with the collapse of 
the USSR: An underground nuclear charge ready for explosion 
remains in Kazakhstan. What will happen to it? 
  [Mikhaylov] We are preparing to dismantle the driving 
mechanism [zabivochnoye ustroystvo] and we shall either remove 
the nuclear device or destroy it on the spot. It is small in 
terms of yield -- less than one kilotonne. It is not a military 
charge but a simulator. Anticipating a question about the 
ecology, I shall say there will be no problems. 
  [Khokhlov] On the other hand, it seems many problems are 
arising in connection with the raising of the sunken 
nuclear-powered submarine Komsomolets? 
  [Mikhaylov] The din raised over this submarine in my opinion 
is in direct proportion to the sums which certain groups of 
people could obtain for carrying out the raising operation. 
There is a very great deal of speculation surrounding the 
Komsomolets and its nuclear "stuffing...." 
  Raising a ship from such a depth and under such extreme 
conditions is impossible. I said so back in 1992. Especially 
as there is no need. There is no leakage of plutonium -- all 
the tests show that. We should leave the Komsomolets on the sea 
bed. The ship will disappear into the silt and nature itself 
will do a better job than people of neutralizing the nuclear 
weapons in it. 
  [Khokhlov] How many people are now employed in the Russian 
nuclear weapons complex? 
  [Mikhaylov] Over 100,000. These people are one of Russia's 
chief resources. Unfortunately, they are now having quite a 
difficult time living and working. The total "marketness" into 
which they have tried to push the nuclear sector, the shortage 
of funds and our utterly primitive conversion have markedly 
reduced the return from both science and industry. The sector's 
steady development can be achieved only with state economic 
regulation. Yes, we can produce the world's best saucepans which 
will be competitive on markets from Africa to America, but do we 
really need to enter the new century with saucepans? 
  In the very near future only those countries in which high 
technologies are developed will be able to live properly. I 
want Russia to be one of them. 
  [Khokhlov] In June the Russian defense industry intends to 
go on strike. Will the nuclear scientists support them? 
  [Mikhaylov] We are forbidden by law to go on strike. 
  [Khokhlov] What is the average wage in the sector now? 
  [Mikhaylov] In the industry, specialists receive an average 
of R230,000, at a nuclear electric power station they get 
R420,000. Our scientists are poorer -- the average salary is 
R150,000. It is true that we have been able to increase wages 
at the Arzamas-16 and Chelyabinsk-70 federal nuclear centers to 
R250,000. In 1993 some 6-8 percent of what were not the worst 
specialists left the Ministry of Atomic Energy for commercial 
structures. A pity. 
  But it is surprising that given the miserly salaries and the 
paltry "grants" from the state budget for the development of 
science and industry, given the fact that fixed capital is more 
than 50 percent worn out, the Ministry of Atomic Energy is 
working with an exceptional return. On many salients we are 
still "ahead of the whole planet." Research and applied work is 
under way in the field of nuclear physics, high-energy and 
superconductivity physics, thermonuclear fusion, and 
electronics.... Only patriots can work in these conditions. If 
the sector is allowed to survive now it will be of enormous 
benefit to Russia. 
  [Khokhlov] Viktor Nikitovich, no one has yet denied the 
famous formula "if you want peace, prepare for war." Our first 
atom bomb was created by Kurchatov, our first hydrogen bomb by 
Sakharov, and third-generation weapons are our "baby." Is the 
appearance of a new type of weapon in the very near future 
possible? 
  [Mikhaylov] I think so. If mankind is unable to renounce 
military atomic energy completely, then such a weapon could 
appear by the year 2000. 
  [Khokhlov] How will it differ from existing models? 
  [Mikhaylov] The nuclear warheads now available are usually 
called highly effective. The new, fourth, generation will be 
guided weapons [napravlennogo deystviya]. 
  [Khokhlov] Can you predict who the inventors of this weapon 
will be -- Russian or U.S. scientists? 
  [Mikhaylov] It is hard to say. Breakthroughs in science 
depend little on the economic or political situation in a 
country. And our scientists' brains work no worse than those of 
the Americans. 
  [Khokhlov] What does Russia's chief "hawk" dream of? 
  [Mikhaylov] Of peace. But we still have a powerful struggle 
for it. 

