Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chang Weimin: "Energy Group Eyes More Funds"] </F>
  [Text] The China Huaneng Group, a prototype for Chinese 
State-run enterprises, has launched an ambitious overseas 
expansion. 
  Wang Chuanjian, president of the $5.2-billion enterprise 
group, yesterday said his firm will try every means to attract 
funds from overseas. 
  The group needs investment equal to 100 billion yuan ($11.5 
billion) in the next eight years, Wang said. 
  Wang made the remarks in a speech at the opening session of 
a 
five-day board meeting to plan this year's work. The meeting 
started yesterday in Beijing. 
  The group, established in 1988 with support from the central 
government, has used 33 billion yuan ($3.8 billion) for projects 
in power generating, coal mining and transportation, raw 
material production and other businesses. 
  More than 30 percent of the investment came from overseas, 
mainly in terms of foreign government loans and export credits. 
  Earlier, he said the group planned to install power 
generators with a 15-million-kilowatt capacity by 2000. 
  The group also expects to produce 30 million tons of quality 
coal annually by then. 
  Wang boasted of the group's ties with many foreign firms and 
governments as well as international financial organizations, 
saying it will diversify its fundraising channels. 
  "Foreign government loans and export credits are not enough. 
The group must have more ways to get overseas funds," he said. 
  The president hoped to see more joint ventures, cooperative 
projects and leasing business with foreign partners. 
  Wang urged senior officials in the group's subsidiaries to 
kick off preparations for an investment guide as soon as 
possible. 
  Huaneng now runs more than 30 ventures with foreign firms. 
  The group produced 69 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity, 
or 8.4 percent of the country's total, and several million tons 
of quality coal, in 1993. 
  This year the group plans to produce 76 billion 
kilowatt-hours of electricity. That represents a growth of 10 
percent--higher than the country's other power generating 
enterprises. 
  An ambitious development programme for the next eight years 
has been approved by the central government, Wang said. 
  However, the president added the group's main challenge is 
raising the funds required for its goals. 
  By 1993, the group had installed 14.12 million kilowatts of 
generators, or 7.8 percent of China's total. 
  In addition, it has built facilities to produce and 
transport 
10 million tons of quality coal annually. 
  In 1993, 5 billion yuan ($575 million) was used to install 
generators to produce 1.63 million kilowatts and construct a 
large coal production base in Shaanxi Province and Inner 
Mongolia Autonomous Region. 
  Huaneng, as a result of all these achievements, is 
recognized 
in the country as a most efficient enterprise group. 
  Its operation system, flexible and adaptable to the market 
economy, is regarded as the key factor in its success over the 
past five years. 
  The group made profits of 4.9 billion yuan ($563 million) in 
1993. Of that, 3.5 billion ($402 million) were used to pay loans. 

