Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, March 25 (YONHAP) -- The U.N. 
Security Council [UNSC] on Friday circulated among its 15 member 
countries a draft resolution asking the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) to report back to the council on whether 
North Korea has fulfilled its nuclear safeguards obligations 
within one month of the resolution's adoption. 
  The U.S.-drafted resolution indirectly warns that unless 
North Korea accepts further IAEA inspections within a month of 
its adoption, the Security Council will take additional action. 
  The draft was circulated at a closed-door session held 
Friday 
afternoon local time. 
  In addition, the draft resolution states that the Security 
Council will continue to handle the North Korean nuclear 
question and will, if necessary, consider further action. 
  A source here said that most Security Council members, 
including such permanent members as the United Kingdom, France 
and Russia, support the draft. China and Pakistan are opposed, 
he said. 
  Earlier in the day, China, through individual contacts with 
other member countries, advocated adopting a statement by the 
council president instead of a resolution. 
  At the afternoon session, however, China stressed that the 
manifestation of the council's posture should be affirmative, 
objective and moderate in content, according to British 
Ambassador David Hannay. 
  Chinese Deputy Ambassador Chen Jian left halfway through the 
meeting and told reporters that the nuclear issue is very 
sensitive and should be resolved through continued negotiations 
among the parties involved. 
  Ambassador Hannay said a broad consensus had been reached on 
the draft resolution among council members. He foresaw few 
problems in its passage. 
  Russian Ambassador Yuriy Boronchev expressed support for the 
draft resolution, saying that it contained the minimum necessary 
items. 
  The resolution will likely be put to a vote toward the end 
of 
this month, Ambassador Hannay said. 
  The Security Council will meet behind closed doors again on 
March 28 to continue discussing the draft. 

