Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Dhaka, January 14 (XINHUA) -- Bangladesh President 
Abdur Rahman Biswar met a visiting eight-member delegation of 
the Communist Party of China (CPC) led by Wen Jiabao, alternate 
member of the Polit-bureau of the Central Committee of CPC, this 
afternoon at the presidential house. 
  During the meeting, the Bangladesh president spoke highly of 
the traditional friendship between the two countries. 
  He said China is now concentrating on the economic 
development and has made great achievements in all areas. The 
Bangladesh people are happy to see what the Chinese people have 
achieved. 
  Talking about the foreign policy of his country, the 
president stressed that Bangladesh follows the policy of "making 
friendship with all and non-hostile against anyone". Bangladesh 
advocates peaceful coexistence among all countries, he added. 
  In his speech, Wen described the traditional friendship 
between the two countries as a time-tested one. 
  Wen briefed the Bangladesh president on achievements of the 
opening and reform drive in China that was launched 15 years ago. 
  He said that China's efforts to continue its reform and 
opening policy and establish a socialist market economy are 
compatible to the country's specific conditions and have won 
support from all the Chinese people. 
  It is China's unchangeable basic state policy to center on 
the reform and opening drive and economic construction, he added. 
  Earlier in the afternoon, the delegation held formal talks 
with the delegation of the ruling Bangladesh Nationalist Party 
(BNP) headed by its General Secretary Abdus Salam Talukder. 
  The BNP general secretary said the strengthening of friendly 
exchanges between the two parties in the recent few years have 
paved the way for a new, broad prospect in future, which is 
helpful for further developing the friendly relationship between 
the two countries. 
  Wen hoped that the two parties will further promote mutual 
understanding and friendship and cooperate in a wider scope. 
  This morning, the CPC delegation laid a wreath in front of 
the Bangladesh monument to national martyrs and visited an 
export processing zone in the suburb of Dhaka. 
  The CPC delegation arrived in Dhaka on Thursday [13 January] 
at the invitation of the BNP. Bangladesh is the last leg of the 
delegation's three-country trip. The other two are Singapore 
and India. 

