BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Han Zhi (7281 2535), Liu Hongxing (0491 4767 </F>
2502), and Chen Yongping (7115 3057 1627): "Further Emancipate 
the Mind, and Further Accelerate Agricultural and Animal 
Husbandry Development"] 
  [Excerpt] The regional agricultural and animal husbandry 
work conference successfully concluded at the auditorium of the 
regional government on the afternoon of 21 February after a 
four-day session. 
  Wu Liji presided over the closing session. Present were 
regional leaders Wang Qun, Bai Enpei, Liu Zuohui, Zhang Tingwu, 
Zhou Weide, Bao Wenfa, and Zhang Zuocai. Alatanaoqier, member 
of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference, was also present. Wang Qun and Wu Liji 
gave important speeches. 
  The theme of Wang Qun's speech was further emancipating the 
mind and further accelerating Inner Mongolia's agricultural and 
animal husbandry development. 
  He said: The year 1993 was an unusual year, when Inner 
Mongolia was hit by frequent disasters and had great 
difficulties. Despite such a condition, we still won unusual 
achievements. This was very encouraging. The series of figures 
provide us extremely rich content which merits our great 
attention and deep thought. The per capita net income of 
peasants and herdsmen totaled 829 yuan, the per capita net 
income of herdsmen totaled 1,164 yuan, and, in particular, the 
per capita net income of the herdsmen in Xilin Gol League 
totaled 1,759 yuan. What kind of an idea these figures have 
given us? They proved that we were approaching the targets of 
the two stages and the strategic plan to "rank among the best." 
They also showed that we had bravely emancipated the mind, 
seized the favorable opportunity, and raised our growth rate. 
At this conference, good news has kept pouring in from all 
localities. Our agriculture and animal husbandry are marching 
toward high yields, good quality, and high efficiency, and the 
scattered small-scale production is marching toward intensive 
management, efficiency of scale, and modernization. This has 
resulted from our comprehensive implementation of the party's 
line, principles, and policies since the third plenary session 
of the 11th party Central Committee, and it represents a leap 
from quantitative accumulation to qualitative transformation. 
At this moment, it is very important for us to call for further 
emancipation of the mind and further acceleration of 
agricultural and animal husbandry development when doing the 
economic work in rural and pastoral areas in 1994. Why is it 
that we call for "further" work in two aspects after winning 
such great achievements? 
  First, it is because of the guidelines of the third plenary 
session of the 14th party Central Committee and communists' 
strong sense of responsibility to the people. All localities in 
the country are trying to catch up with each other. How will we 
catch up with others? We should develop agriculture and animal 
husbandry, the foundation, to catch up with others. We have 
abundant resources and vast territory. When our 14 million 
agricultural and animal husbandry population become affluent, we 
will have caught up with the steps of the country. 
  Second, it is because of demand of the masses. Peasants and 
herdsmen long for accelerating development and achieving 
affluence as soon as possible. The eighth (enlarged) plenary 
session of the fifth autonomous regional party committee put 
forward the subject of steadily increasing the per capita income 
of peasants and herdsmen for discussion. The endeavor of 
steadily increasing the per capita income of peasants and 
herdsmen has become the core of future rural and pastoral work. 
In this regard, we should adhere to the principle of achieving 
the fastest development, the highest growth rate, and the 
largest increase we possibly can. We should make sure that the 
per capita net income of Inner Mongolia's peasants and herdsmen 
increases by 100 yuan over the past year after allowing for 
price rises. 
  Third, it is because of the need in our strategic 
development. In Inner Mongolia's strategy to transform 
resources, the greatest transformation is the resources of 
agriculture and animal husbandry. Only when agriculture and 
animal husbandry are stabilized and developed, can the secondary 
and tertiary industries and other undertakings be developed 
steadily. 
  Therefore, we can say that accelerating the emancipation of 
the mind and development of agriculture and animal husbandry is 
the guiding thought for the 1994 economic work of rural and 
pastoral areas. How can we accelerate? The establishment and 
improvement of the socialist market economy system after the 
third plenary session of the 14th party Central Committee has 
provided us the best opportunity. This is the best external 
condition. Adjustments of the prices of farm, animal, and 
sideline products will bring tremendous benefits to peasants and 
herdsmen. However, we should also note that our internal 
factors have tremendous potential. In further accelerating 
agricultural and animal husbandry development, the most 
important work is adjusting the production structure and 
accelerating the integration of agriculture and animal 
husbandry. We have many good examples and very encouraging 
achievements in this work. For example, Hinggan League's "cow 
and milk project," Jirem League's Yuliangbao cattle and sheep 
breeding base, Ih Ju League's short-term sheep breeding base, 
Xilin Gol League's cattle and sheep breeding and male lamb 
breeding base, and the pig farming of Chifeng city and Jirem 
League. We also have a number of typical examples in the 
integration of farming and livestock breeding, such as the Ar 
Horqin and Bairin Right Banners of Chifeng city. Achievements 
in developing agriculture through the application of science and 
technology are even greater. Bayannur League's "construction of 
three types of farmland" and Hinggan League's export-oriented 
agriculture have provided us beneficial experiences, which we 
should value and attach importance to. As long as we work 
according to the law of the market, we will achieve the "two 
accelerations" and satisfy the masses. 
  In conclusion, Wang Qun said: Accelerating the emancipation 
of the mind and the development of agriculture and animal 
husbandry is a task for the entire party. We should embrace the 
idea of fighting a general war, win a victory in this war in 
1994, and create a new situation characterized by the 
large-scale increase of income and large-scale development of 
agriculture and animal husbandry. [passage omitted] 

