Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Arab Coordination Has Become a Strategic </F>
Necessity"] 
  [Text] Since the signing of the interim agreement between 
the PLO and Israel on 13 September, a reduction has been 
observed in the levels of coordination and consultation among 
the Arab parties participating in the peace process. Sometimes 
one has even noticed the disappearance of those contacts and 
coordination efforts, so much so that it has been left to 
coincidence and unscheduled occasions to provide some sort of 
accidental contact between the Arab parties to at least maintain 
the appearance of solidarity. 
  Following the Hebron massacre, bilateral and multilateral 
talks were suspended on all tracks. There was a conviction or 
almost agreement that the talks would not be resumed until the 
UN Security Council issues a resolution on the massacre. No 
sooner was that resolution issued than it was announced in 
Washington, not in the Arab capitals concerned, that the 
resumption of the talks was imminent. 
  Thus, inter-Arab contacts have become subject to emergency 
conditions, whereas those contacts were and remain an important 
card in the hands of Arab negotiators. Presumably, if the Arab 
side had known how to use this card, the Arab negotiating 
position would have improved a great deal. Perhaps, it would 
have been possible to avoid many of the predicaments that befell 
the Arab parties due to lack of consultation and coordination 
between them. 
  Now, with the retreats in the negotiating process on the 
various Arab tracks, without exception, and the successes 
achieved by the Israeli side due to its special and excellent 
relationship with its U.S. partner, illustrated by the recent 
U.S. abstention on a paragraph in Resolution 904 that considered 
Jerusalem to be part of the occupied territories, it seems that 
the logical solution for the Arab parties is to leave the closed 
regional circles and return to dealing jointly with the sole 
Arab cause. The Israeli and U.S. sides are not only trying to 
separate this cause, but also to exploit the division of the 
Arab negotiating tracks as a game to which they can resort 
whenever they want to exert pressure with the aim of obtaining 
more Arab concessions on this or that track. 
  The Hebron massacre repercussions and the dangerous signals 
that accompanied the issuance of the Security Council resolution 
require the acceleration of meetings and serious contacts among 
the Arab parties concerned, because now the cause has become 
above narrow regional differences and interpretations. The 
dimensions of the cause have actually extended to include the 
superior Arab strategic interest, which was and will remain 
above every transitory difference and interpretation. 

