Activities 

<F P=102>   94WS0299B Paris AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL 
in French 28 Feb 94-6 Mar 94 p 30--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94WS0299B </F>
<F P=104>  Paris AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL 
in French 28 Feb 94-6 Mar 94 p 30--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=105> French </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nicole Beauclair: "Aerospatiale and Saft Combine </F>
Their Thermal Battery Businesses"; first paragraph is AIR &amp; 
COSMOS/AVIATION MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL introduction] 
  [Text] By pooling their expertise in thermal 
batteries, the two French market leaders have boosted their 
subsidiary to number one in Europe, and number two worldwide. 
But the real goal is to capture market shares. Ariane 5 has just 
opened up a new outlet in the non-military sector. 
  The creation of ASB (Aerospatiale Batteries) brings 
Aerospatiale-Missiles' expertise in thermal batteries to the 
open market. Until now, the company had channeled its production 
exclusively into its own missiles. Meanwhile, Saft, which did 
not enter the market until the 1980s, was Matra's battery 
supplier and did 70 percent of its turnover with that company. 
By merging their thermal battery businesses into the joint 
subsidiary ASB, the two firms have given themselves the 
technical and financial wherewithal to capture new markets, 
notably in the United States, where they aim to break the 
monopoly of the American firm Eagle Picher and become a second 
suppplier for American missiles. Aerospatiale-Missiles holds 
71.8 percent of the capital of the new joint venture, and Saft 
(Alcatel group) 28.2 percent. 
  As of ASB's creation, Aerospatiale had manufactured 750,000 
batteries for its own missiles, and Saft 100,000. 
  Thermal batteries are presently used mainly as a source of 
primary energy for missiles. But they also supply energy for 
artillery shells, proximity fuses, laser-guided bombs, torpedos, 
and so on. Now that the Ariane 5 program has opted to use ASB 
thermal batteries, space has become a new application. Thermal 
batteries in rockets will supply the energy needed to position 
powder-acceleration-stage nozzles during separation, to prevent 
any risk of collision with the rocket's main body. This new 
space application--which is also ASB's first contract since its 
creation--is, according to Hugues de Galzain, a precursor of 
more diversified applications to come. The Franco-Swedish 
"Bonus" program should extend military applications to smart 
munitions. And De Galzain believes there is a non-military 
market potential as well, notably in the area of safety systems, 
including energy for aircraft backup power, ejectable seats, 
satellites, and alarm, safety, opening, and shutdown systems, 
among others. 
  Thermal batteries offer a reliable, always-available energy 
source. Unlike other types of batteries, "which run down even 
when not in use," thermal batteries can conserve their energy 
indefinitely (their specific life is about 20 years). On the 
other hand, thermals can only be used once, for three seconds to 
30 minutes, during which they provide power of 1 W to several 
dozen kW. To extend the range of thermal battery applications, 
research programs are underway to boost their maximum operating 
time from 30 minutes to 1 hour, or even 2 hours in the United 
States. 
  As with all batteries, thermal batteries employ an anode, an 
electrolyte, and a cathode. In thermal versions, however, the 
electrolyte is dry, and does not liquefy and become active until 
it is heated to over 100. Thermal batteries are made by 
stacking up electrochemical pellets interspersed with heating 
elements (in this case, paper of a specific composition), which 
are activated either electrically or chemically. 
  All competing manufacturers use this same technology, says 
Hugues de Galzain. What distinguishes them is the means they 
employ to assemble the battery, which can make for greater or 
lesser automation. Hence the value of pooling the expertise of 
Saft, with its knowledge of electrochemistry and its 
international marketing network, and that of 
Aerospatiale-Missiles, which specializes in industrial processes 
and has automated production lines that manufacture its own 
batteries using the same high standards it applies to its 
missiles. ASB thus benefits from the assets of both its parent 
companies. This is especially true with respect to production 
automation, which has cut ASB's manufacturing [time] 30 percent 
over Saft's. To achieve that kind of efficiency, Saft's 
equipment from Romainville in the Paris area was transferred to 
Bourges, the site of ASB's only production center. Four dry 
rooms were built to house the equipment after it was updated. 
ASB also acquired Aerospatiale-Missiles' equipment and 
technology, which uses so-called glovebox technique. This 
simpler technique is made possible by the missilemaker's 
assembly methods. 
  Investment in the new company, which began in 1993 and will 
continue during 1994, comes to about Fr20 million. Besides the 
dry rooms, money will be spent to enhance productivity, increase 
the size of production areas, and modernize the production tools 
transferred to Bourges. 
  About 40 people are now employed in the new factory; five of 
them opted to transfer from Romainville to Bourges. Management 
expects to hire another 30 between now and the end of the year, 
bringing total staffing to 70 by late 1994. That is the number 
needed just to meet the production needs of the "captive" French 
market, which will generate Fr80 million annually for the next 
five years. In addition to its goal of increasing sales to Fr100 
million within five years, ASB plans to boost its European 
market share from about 55 to 75 percent. To do so, however, it 
will have to stave off an offensive by the American firm Eagle 
Picher, which is establishing a foothold in the European market 
through a 50/50 joint venture with Germany's Diehl. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-EST-013L-12A>      The World Market for Thermal Batteries Is Estimated at Fr400 Million </FIG>


