Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 13 Feb (XINHUA) -- Recently, the General 
Political Department [GPD] of the People's Liberation Army [PLA] 
and the Communist Youth League [CYL] Central Committee jointly 
issued a circular, calling on all the Army's officers and men 
and the broad masses of youths across the country to learn from 
Comrade Xu Honggang, to raise the banners of patriotism and 
socialism even higher, to adhere to the party's basic line, and 
to vigorously promote the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization under the leadership of the CPC Central Committee 
and Central Military Commission [CMC] with Comrade Jiang Zemin 
as the nucleus. 
  The circular noted: Xu Honggang is the squad leader of a 
signal company of a certain regiment of the Jinan Military 
Region [JMR]. Born in Yiliang County, Yunnan Province, in March 
1971, he joined the Army in December 1990 and the party in July 
1993. On 17 August 1993, he took a bus back to his unit after a 
home leave. When the bus was traveling through the territory of 
Junlian County, Sichuan Province, four criminals extorted money 
from a female passenger and resorted to wanton insults. Xu 
Honggang stepped forward bravely to her rescue. He received 14 
stab wounds in his chest, stomach, and arms in the courageous 
struggle against the criminals and over 50 centimeters of his 
intestines dangled out of a slit in his stomach. Holding the 
dangling intestines with his sleeveless sweater, he jumped from 
the bus out of the window to chase the criminals despite acute 
pain. He passed out on the road during the chase and, after 
all-out efforts by local people and hospital to save him, took a 
turn for the better and was out of danger. 
  Xu Honggang's deed of valor, which demonstrates a readiness 
to take up the cudgels for a just cause, has evoked strong 
repercussions in and outside the Army. Recently, party and 
state leaders Jiang Zemin, Li Ruihuan, Liu Huaqing, and Hu 
Jintao, plus CMC Vice Chairman Zhang Zhen, successively received 
and commended him. They praised him as a fine son of the people 
and a hero of the PLA and called on all the people across the 
country and all the Army's officers and men to learn from him. 
On 10 January 1994, the JMR conferred the title of honor 
"Combat Hero Who Readily Takes up the Cudgels for a Just Cause" 
on him. The CYL Central Committee named him a "Young Hero Who 
Readily Takes Up the Cudgels for a Just Cause" and conferred on 
him the title of "New Long March Shock Worker of the Nation" on 
1 February 1994. 
  The circular pointed out: The heroic feat of Comrade Xu 
Honggang's courageous struggle against criminals in defiance of 
brute force as well as the touching concern and deep love shown 
by the local party and government leadership and by the local 
people for him is an ode to an era in which we endeavor to build 
socialist spiritual civilization and a song in praise of 
righteousness sung by the Army together with the people under 
the conditions of establishing and developing a socialist market 
economy. It was not by accident that Xu Honggang became a 
combat hero. Born in Wumengshan, a mountainous area through 
which the Red Army traversed on its Long March, he was nurtured 
under the gradual, uplifting influence of the Red Army 
tradition. After his enlistment, he joined a unit of the "iron 
army" which has a glorious history. He carries out the behest 
of the martyrs and carries forward the fine tradition. In 
particular, the education conducted by the unit in outlook on 
life and value laid a solid foundation for his growing up in 
recent years. He was successively commended as a "pacesetter of 
military training," an "outstanding CYL member," and a 
"pacesetter of learing from Lei Feng," and received eight 
citations. He has proved himself to be a fine descendant of the 
Red Army, an excellent fighter of our Army, and an outstanding 
representative of the youth of our times. He is the pride of 
not only the Army, but also youth and all of society. 
  The circular points out: To encourage new healthy practices; 
to safeguard social stability; to strengthen the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization; to ensure the smooth progress 
of reform, opening up, and the establishment of a socialist 
market economic structure; and to facilitate a sustained, rapid, 
healthy growth of the national economy, the GPD and the CYL 
Central Committee have decided to energetically launch an 
emulation drive around Comrade Xu Honggang and to extensively 
publicize his heroic deeds and noble ideas among all PLA troops 
and youngsters at large across the country. They should emulate 
his outstanding political quality of devoting himself to the 
party, the motherland, the people, the Army, and the 
modernization drive; his spirit of carrying forward the fine 
traditions of the party and the Army, conscientiously 
implementing the objective of serving the people wholeheartedly, 
and willingly sacrificing everything for the sake of the 
people's interests; his profound sense of responsibility in 
striving to improve his military skills for the honor of the 
Army, scrupulously performing duties, and practicing new social 
mores and customs; and his heroism of readily taking up the 
cudgels for a just cause, facing danger fearlessly, and daring 
to make a sacrifice. All Army commanders and fighters should 
also emulate the touching deeds of the local party and 
government leaders as well as the masses in caring for and 
cherishing the people's soldiers, and should conscientiously 
learn from the masses and launch more extensively activities of 
supporting the government and cherishing the people, so as to 
further strengthen unity between the Army and the government and 
between militarymen and civilians. In the course of the 
emulation drive, it is necessary to teach officers and men as 
well as youngsters to arm their minds with the theory of 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics; to foster the 
correct ideals, faith, outlook on the life, and value concepts; 
to bring into play the "five revolutionary spirits" advocated by 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping and the "64-character poineering spirit" 
proposed by Comrade Jiang Zemin; and to resist money worship, 
ultraindividualism, and the inroads of a decadent life-style. 
It is also necessary to foster a healthy atmosphere of admiring 
heroes, emulating the advanced, acting heroically, and finding 
it a pleasure to help others, so as to promote the Army's 
revolutionization, modernization, and regularization and to 
deepen the CYL's "cross-century project of youth civilization" 
and "cross-century project of young talents." Local CYL 
organizations should mobilize young volunteers to launch a 
campaign to serve heroes in order to create a lively situation 
of emulating and serving heroes. 

