CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Tokarenko, DELOVOY MIR; ``It is Better to </F>
be Clever and Rich... What is the Future of the Novosibirsk 
Akademgorodok: Intellectual Base of Civilized Entrepreneurship 
or the `Brain Center' of Criminal Syndicates?...''] 
  [Text] ...Surely for the first time the poet Andrey 
Voznesenskiy, spoiled by ``sold out'' notices, was faced with a 
hard fact: the public might not be coming to hear him. Not in 
this present-day Akademgorodok, the once freedom-loving child of 
the ``thaw.'' Some have departed for the West by permanent 
contract"; the capital of our impoverished science has 
``cleansed itself'' of others, those seeking the sole 
possibility for keeping themselves afloat: sell their apartment 
and acquire a modest corner beyond the limits of this 
prestigious region which is more in keeping with their salary. 
The once elite law-abiding Akademgorodok is today the second in 
the rate of increase in crime among the nine rayons of 
Novosibirsk with its population of 1.5 million. 
  The prediction, fortunately, did not prove to be justified. 
There were no empty seats in the hall of the House of 
Scientists. But the poet, not closing his eyes the entire night 
prior to his impending appearance, evidently himself sensed 
something, on the eve of his appearance writing in the plane: 
  Precious is the time when I visited Akademgorodok. After the 
passage of time I fly again in returning to the East. 
  Suddenly you are no more? And to what will I arrive -- Into 
the academic darkness or into the academic light? 
  I am drawn to this little city, I do not understand why. Or 
am I a paradox -- free in captivity? 
  Alas, there are more than enough paradoxes to go around. In 
a 
society in many respects ready for changes, caught up by the 
dogmas of a numbed and hypocritical system (it has been 
nicknamed ``demgorodok''), the habitat of intellectuals, of 
those in their sixties, today has literally been taken over by 
the criminal world, controlling the ``market'' in accordance 
with their criminal concepts. 
  During the incomplete last year there was a 48.7% 
increase 
in criminal activity; for heinous crimes, by 73.2%, for 
gang 
crimes, by 49.4%. The number of newly registered persons 
here 
has almost twice exceeded the number of displaced former 
residents of Akademgorodok (in other rayons these shifts were 
approximately equal). 
  Who are they who have ``closed in'' on the still not 
departing academicians and corresponding members? Data from the 
information center of the Novosibirsk Oblast police department 
also give an answer to this question: persons arriving with a 
checkered background of criminal code violations. Those who 
earlier already have committed crimes have here increased in 
numbers by an amazing 1550%. 
  And with them the very mentality of Akademgorodok also is 
gradually changing. Its world status is being degraded to a flea 
market with all the same petty hawkers, conducting their trade 
in lop-sided competitions with displays of the programs of 
international symposia. The cafe ``Pod integral'' [``Under the 
Integral'], famed for its ``suspect'' friendly evenings at the 
time of the ``flourishing of stagnation,'' has disappeared. The 
restaurants, where once at the tables discussions were continued 
by the leading lights of science, coming here from throughout 
the world, now also have other owners, including racketeers and 
``easy girls.'' And this was demonstrated by the clientele, 
mercilessly assaulting a recently respected academician who had 
been so bold as to dine at the ``Yermak''... 
  How did it happen that the scientists who both Cambridge and 
Oxford Universities have awarded the titles ``Man of the Year'' 
and ``Man of the Century'' have been forced to look each new day 
in the eye, bearing ever-increasing lack of assurance in life 
under the realities of the market? How is it that those who feed 
world science ideas (according to data of Western experts, 
together with Moscow scientists Novosibirsk scientists hold 
first place with respect to the number of citations to their 
studies) at times are basically unable to support their families? 
  As is well known, Professor Bormental from the novel ``A 
Dog's Heart,'' by Bulgakov, tried to humanize Sharikov. But he 
himself became his victim. Not finding its place in the changing 
coordinates of time and social conditions, the capital of 
Siberian science has granted to each of its inhabitants the 
``freedom'' to solve the market problem ``in their individual 
way.'' To put it more simply, to seek ways to survive. And 
become a victim not only of the chaos, but also of the clearly 
defined dangerous tendencies. 
  Here is the prediction of T. Galkina, a specialist of the 
Novosibirsk Russkoye Zarubezhye Humanitarian Center. 
  ``It would be the height of naivete to assume that the 
`brains' not used by the state have escaped the attention of the 
criminal gangs. The `conveyor of ideas,' which could create 
original industrial technologies, will be in the service of the 
criminal world. The external factors responsible for the burst 
of criminal activity (struggle of Western companies for the 
Siberian market, foreign exchange transactions, geopolitical 
situation, etc.) and the internal crisis, driving enormous 
masses of people to the brink of poverty, proved to be closely 
intertwined in Siberia. Novosibirsk, having a powerful 
industrial, financial and scientific potential, is at the center 
of formation not only of the traditional criminal elements of 
the work force, capital and valuable papers, but also, and which 
is most dangerous, shadowy intellectual elements. The recruiting 
of personnel for the criminal world will be from academic 
institutes, branch scientific research institutes, colleges and 
universities, disbanded design bureaus of industrial enterprises 
and other subdivisions. 
  It is most probable that in the very near future the state 
and power structures will run up against a very clearly 
expressed intellectualization of criminality in Siberia: that is 
the conclusion of sociologists. This links up with the warning 
of workers in public health agencies: Novosibirsk is in danger 
of becoming the center of drug traffic in the Asian-Pacific 
Ocean region. It is assumed that the heroin `picked up' here is 
in actuality the product of an underground laboratory and the 
organization of technically complex chemical production did not 
come about without drawing upon strong brainpower.'' 
  ``Are both the Siberian Department of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences and the business people of Siberia, for whom the 
portrayed prospects are identically dangerous, taking heed of 
these predictions? Alas, the vectors of their movements in 
general are pointed in different directions.'' 
  ``Only recently, at the annual meeting of the Siberian 
Department, Russian Academy of Sciences, there was a discussion 
of precisely this subject. Having ascertained that state money 
will suffice only for a modest salary and the payment for 
electricity, some speakers were distressed: if only two or three 
years ago the presidium had decided to offer national and 
foreign companies rooms for offices, land for construction... 
Today Akademgorodok would be a Siberian business center, 
attractive for investments, including for the development of the 
social infrastructure. Such an idea was advanced in his time by 
V. Parmon, corresponding member, Russian Academy of Sciences. If 
only things had been speeded up a little and the AO Sibirskaya 
Yarmarka [Siberian Fair] had been established, an exhibition 
center would have been opened for the display of new 
technologies and products with a high scientific content... And 
this possibility went out the window. However, the ``Fair'' has 
today become the third in Russia (after Moscow and St. 
Petersburg) international trade center... 
  Now only 3 of 15 have remained in our laboratory. The 
laboratory head urged them on and on: you, he says, are the true 
knights of science. Together, he says, we will `hold the fort,' 
not giving in to the market bait. But today I was shaken when I 
saw him, a doctor of sciences, a professor, sitting in the 
subway on sacks and selling sugar! Now I myself will probably 
think that over. Evidently there is no other way out.'' 
  This monologue of a specialist of an academic institute, 
receiving, incidentally, a grant from the Soros Fund, is 
extremely characteristic. But there are examples boding still 
more weighty ill consequences, both to the priorities of science 
and to the economy of the country. Reference is to an 
``intellectual racket,'' when specialists, breaking free from 
real science, establish their own work associations, then using 
for their own advantage the development work which is the 
intellectual property of entire scientific teams. These are the 
fruits of all this same indecisiveness, when the fear of losing 
``pride'' in the end results in its loss at the greatest cost... 
  Hoping to the last hour that the state would not allow 
science to wind up in a recumbent position, Academy structures 
did not seek out possibilities for befittingly adapting to the 
market. By no means under the slogan ``Everything is for sale!'' 
But from a position of partnership, cooperation which could 
prove advantageous both to science itself and to business. Now, 
judging from the funding, which is contracting, like shagreen 
leather, the academicians understood: the state does not need 
science. 
  Without question, Academician V. Koptyug, chairman of the 
Presidium, Siberian Department, Russian Academy of Sciences, was 
correct in saying: ``Sometime society will understand that 
without science and education there can be no normal state.'' 
But it is indeed not precluded that this awareness will arrive 
only when the Akademgorodok remains in ruins... Possibly it may 
be realized a little sooner that it already today is capable of 
serving entrepreneurship? Indeed, this will help in saving both 
personnel and potential and traditions. 
  But here is what is the most important. Siberian science is 
not only real ``food'' for entrepreneurship, capable, with 
advantage for the country and people, of developing and 
introducing sometimes priority development work and projects. 
The potential of the Akademgorodok institutes could provide a 
conceptual ideology of a civilized market, a prediction of its 
development (including in the highly important sphere of use of 
environmental resources), and set benchmarks for legislative 
initiative. Optimum approaches to solution of various problems 
with allowance for the trade and other infrastructure of the 
region could be suggested. 
  And how much can be learned from the history of 
entrepreneurship in Siberia! Indeed, much of that which at times 
led businessmen of the first generation into a blind alley had 
already been ``invented'' by the owners of metallurgical plants 
and landowners, grain traders and merchant dynasties of the past 
centuries... 
  But the market structures for the time being do not exhibit 
any special push toward such an alliance. However, credit must 
be given: the ``Siberian Merchants Meeting,'' the ``Siberian 
Fair,'' and the Interregional Association of Entrepreneurs were 
not sparing in their organizational expenditures for the 
scientific conference ``Siberian Entrepreneurship: Past, 
Present, Future.'' The preparations for it were made by 
scientists of the History Institute, Siberian Department, 
Russian Academy of Sciences. But the leading business figures 
were not in the half-empty hall. The scientists ``enlightened 
themselves.'' This fact, alas, is not the only one. And they, 
unfortunately, add to the pessimism of the citizens of 
Akademgorodok as to the very possibility of bringing science and 
business closer together. 
  Others with bitterness cite the example of Irkutsk, where 
scientists recently, with the support of the RF Ministry of 
Science and Technical Policy, established Siberia's first Market 
and Entrepreneurship Institute. It would seem that this 
scientific subdivision was assigned benevolent tasks: search for 
and validation of acceptable procedures for the transitional 
period, study of problems in the regional goods market, 
collaboration in the development of regional trade balances and 
research on the prospects for social development of Siberia. And 
here's what's surprising: the local entrepreneurs not only were 
not interested in contacts with the specialists, but are 
actively trying to dislodge the institute from the building 
legally belonging to it... 
  The following was heard at the already mentioned annual 
meeting of the Siberian Department, Russian Academy of Sciences: 
the only thing which can now save Akademgorodok is income from 
the development of new technologies by orders from national and 
foreign firms. Such orders from the oil- and gold-producing 
branches and the fuel-energy complex also may enable us to do 
this. With respect to ``foreign exchange'' contracts, some 
scientists fear that they may become a scientific appendage of 
the well-developed countries, may become cheap ``brains'' for 
them. 
  It was really necessary to be clever in order to choose at 
what price to become rich... 

