Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by military correspondent Eytan Rabin] </F>
  [Text] Yitzhaq Rabin, the prime minister and defense 
minister, in the past few weeks has approved the recommendations 
in a document written by the defense establishment detailing 
ways of aiding Palestinian collaborators for Israel, who have 
been living in a state of anxiety and uncertainty since the 
signing of the agreement with the PLO. 
  The document calls for the establishment of a special 
administrative unit within the Shin Bet for coordinating 
treatment of the collaborators, whose number is estimated at 
2,000. 
  The Shin Bet will receive a special budget to aid the 
collaborators. A security source told HA'ARETZ that the defense 
establishment attributes great importance to helping those who 
have aided Israel over many years, sometimes at great personal 
risk. 
  After the new administrative unit is set up, the defense 
establishment will direct it to positively review any request by 
collaborators who do not want to return to their homes in the 
territories for fear of being tried. Many collaborators are 
afraid that after the implementation of Gaza and Jericho 
withdrawal they and their families will be harmed. It was 
decided to establish the special administrative unit to help 
them deal with this problem. 
  At the same time Israel's representatives to talks with the 
PLO were directed to make the release of Palestinian prisoners 
who committed grave offenses conditional on an amnesty for the 
collaborators. 
  It was made clear, however, that terrorists convicted of 
murder are not included among those slated to be released in 
exchange for such an amnesty. 
  Sources in the defense establishment explain there must be 
mutual agreement that the PLO will pardon the collaborators, or 
at least promise they will not be harmed, while Israel will 
promise to accelerate prisoner releases. 
  In reaction, Palestinian sources yesterday said the PLO is 
firmly opposed to pardoning collaborators. 'Arafat has said in 
the past that collaborators will be tried. 

