Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Oleg Velichko] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 24 TASS -- The government plans no 
radical changes in the programme of economic reform in Russia, 
Russian First Vice-Prime Minister Oleg Soskovets said on Monday. 
  Soskovets denied mass media reports accusing the government 
of attempts to overhaul the reform plan. He said the programme 
will be corrected to make it more socially oriented. "As for the 
government, having received all levers of economic control from 
the president, it is ready to bear the responsibility for the 
transformations in the country," Soskovets said. 
  He described the current economic situation as extremely 
difficult. To exemplify his point, he said that out of 650 
enterprises in the Yekaterinburg region only 130 pay taxes. To 
make other enterprises do the same would mean to ruin them. 
Additionally, the government has only one trillion roubles in 
tax revenues, while expenditures in the first quarter of the 
year alone are excepted to reach 8.5 trillion roubles. 
  Soskovets denied reports that Academicians Leonid Abalkin 
and 
Nikolay Petrakov are preparing a new economic programme for the 
government. "There is only one programme approved by the 
government last year. It is that programme that the government 
sticks to," the vice-premier said. 
  Soskovets said the number of the members of the government 
Presidium has been reduced by five people. On January 23 Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a document on the new 
composition of the commission for operative questions. It will 
include representatives of tax inspectorates, hard currency 
organisations and bank managers. 
  He pointed out that the government's orientation to 
non-monetaristic methods of economic management means its 
"intention to link the economy with the industrial sphere." He 
ruled out "spasmodic financial injections in separate 
industries" in the future, adding that the government will 
toughen relations with enterprises. 
  Soskovets said he did not believe former Soviet Vice-Premier 
Vladimir Shcherbakov have chances of taking up the post of 
finance minister in the Russian government. 
  Speaking about the government's relations with the 
parliament, Soskovets expressed the hope that "members of the 
cabinet are set to work constructively." 

