BFN 

<F P=106> [By Mario Fiorito] </F>
  [Text] Kinshasa, June 23 (AFP) -- Rwanda's ethnic bloodbath 
has enabled Zaire's President Mobutu Sese Seko, ostracised for 
maintaining autocratic rule, to return to the international 
stage first as an African mediator and then as host a French 
military intervention. 
  The Zairean ruler, out of favour with Paris and his Belgian 
and American former allies for almost three years, was in 
mid-June chosen by his African peers to try and mediate an end 
to Rwanda's strife and this week became crucial to French plans 
for military humanitarian intervention. 
  A ceasefire was negotiated under Marshal Mobutu's auspices 
between Rwanda's Hutu majority government and the mainly Tutsi 
rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) at the annual summit 
of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) in Tunis earlier this 
month. 
  The pact did not hold, but France's decision to launch a 
humanitarian military operation from Thursday [23 June] to 
protect ethnic Tutsis at risk of massacre in government-held 
western Rwanda gave Mobutu a second chance to come to the fore. 
  In the face of opposition from the RPF, which accuses Paris 
of propping up successive Hutu regimes in Kigali, the lukewarm 
approval given Wednesday by the UN Security Council to the 
French operation, launched from Zairean territory, amounts to 
recognition of the role the elderly African ruler still has to 
play. 
  It entitles Mobutu to claim that without him as head of 
state, despite the political chaos and economic turmoil reigning 
in his country, the despatch to eastern Zaire of hundreds of 
French troops and Jaguar fighter-bombers would not have been so 
easily negotiated. 
  Paris, which had placed restrictions on Mobutu and his 
family 
and aides to increase pressure for democracy, will now find it 
more difficult to stop him "having his teeth seen to" at his 
residence in Cap-Martin in southern France, a Zairean politician 
joked Thursday. 
  After serious rioting and looting broke out in September 
1991 
in Zaire, leading to an exodus of thousands of expatriates, 
Mobutu was several times refused authorisation to go to France. 
  The radical opposition to the veteran leader, hostile to 
French intervention in Rwanda, will find in Operation Turquoise 
further grist to the mill of its criticism of France, often 
denounced as "Mobutu's accomplice." 
  Anti-French sentiment, strong among those close to Mobutu's 
main rival, Etienne Tshisekedi, who claims to be the country's 
prime minister though the head of state has sacked him, seems 
set to grow. In Kinshasa particularly, Tshisekedi is regarded as 
the charismatic head of the opposition to "dictatorship". 
  The presence of French troops in the vast central African 
nation, some Zairean politicians say in private, is proof of the 
"ambiguity" and successive changes in Paris's policy regarding 
Zaire. 
  "After denouncing Mobutu, in 1991 and in 1993 (following a 
mutiny by troops), France is behaving as if it were at home 
here," one political source said. "Who gave France the green 
light to station troops on our soil and who was asked for the 
authorisation?" 

