BFN 

  [Text] Ichiro Ozawa, representative secretary general of 
Shinseito, met with Makoto Tanabe, former chairman of the Social 
Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ]; Hirotaka Akamatsu, former SDPJ 
secretary general; and members of the "Democrats," which is a 
policy group formed by middle-of-the-roaders and rightists of 
the SDPJ, for about two hours at a hotel in Tokyo on the evening 
of 15 June. At the meeting, Ozawa called for the SDPJ's return 
to the coalition after holding consultations on political power. 
They agreed to continuously cooperate with each other in 
promoting policy meetings for the coalition's reconstruction. 
It was the first time Ozawa held a meeting with senior SDPJ 
members on the government's stability and to directly call on 
the same party for its return to the coalition. It seems that 
the agreement will have a major impact on development of the 
political situation for the time being. 
  To form a coalition with the SDPJ, Ozawa asked the 
participants to have detailed discussions. While stressing his 
intention to hold discussions with the SDPJ, he said: "We will 
join hands with anybody. If the SDPJ wants to form a coalition 
with the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP], I would say go ahead. 
Time will run out for you if you hesitate." In this way, he 
disclosed his intention to aim at acting in concert with the LDP 
if the SDPJ refuses to hold meetings with the coalition on 
jointly taking political power. 
  Moreover, on cooperation with the LDP, Ozawa said: "We 
cannot cooperate with the LDP. However, we may cooperate with 
people who seceded from the LDP." In this way, he explained a 
view that a precondition for cooperating with LDP members is for 
them to secede from the party first. 
  It was Ozawa's idea to hold the meeting. Kozo Watanabe, 
acting representative secretary general of Shinseito, and Kenji 
Yamaoka, Shinseito's lower house Dietman, attended the meeting. 
From the "Democrats," Tadayoshi Murai, who is head 
representative; Kenji Taguchi and Junsuke Iwata, who are lower 
house Dietmen; and Shoji Motooka, upper house Dietman, also 
attended. 

