Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Blocs Versus States"] </F>
  [Text] The Egyptian Parliament's decision on Monday [7 
February] to abrogate Egypt's status as a signatory to the 
agreement that created the Arab Cooperation Council (ACC) in 
January 1989 is regrettable to say the least. Needless to say, 
the move means Egypt's withdrawal from the economic and 
political alliance with Jordan, Yemen and Iraq. It is true that 
the council, formed at the height of political coordination and 
cooperation among the four member states, went into limbo after 
the August 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and reviving it now 
does not look an easy task, given the state of isolation Iraq is 
finding itself in. 
  But it is equally tragic that one of its members found it 
fit 
to quit the alliance for whatever reason at a time when the 
shifting regional and international patterns underline the 
importance of regional blocs in the developing world to get a 
better deal from the developed world. 
  Launched as an ambitious grouping to gain the benefit from a 
collective impact of the material and human resources of the 
four countries while dealing with the outside world, the ACC got 
off to a good start and was holding out promises of fruits of 
sincere cooperation and coordination when the Gulf crisis struck 
it down. Going into apportioning blame for the tragedy that 
befell the Arab world is a futile, academic exercise and will 
not serve any useful purpose and will only open old wounds. 
  But, in a wider perspective, the Egyptian decision to quit 
the ACC raises another serious and grave question: Does it mean 
that Cairo has given up hopes that Iraq would be rehabilitated 
into mainstream Arab and international politics? 
  The reality that cannot be waived aside with any gesture, 
political or economic, is that Iraq and its 18 million people 
are a part and parcel of the Arab Nation. Indeed, Jordan's 
concern had always been and remains to be an anxiety to 
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. Regardless of 
whatever anybody had said or has or will say about it, the 
Jordanian stand remains firm that Arab and international efforts 
should seek to help the people of Iraq to survive the national 
catastrophe that has befallen them and eventually their country 
should reassume the rightful role it has always played in Arab 
politics and economics. The process might take some time, but 
the wounds have to be healed and Iraq has to be and will be 
brought back into the regional and international mainstream. 
And when that happens, we, the countries of the region, Jordan, 
Egypt, Yemen and others included, would still be facing the same 
equation: Blocs vs. states in a world of cutthroat economic 
policies and markets against which we have to defend ourselves 
and protect our interests, something better served if done 
collectively. 

