Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, Jan. 11 (YONHAP) -- The Iljin Group, ordered 
by a U.S. Federal District Court to stop manufacturing 
synthetic industrial diamonds for allegedly pirating a trade 
secret of General Electric Co., joins a club of Korean companies 
wounded in fierce rows with foreign firms and inventors over 
patents. 
  According to a survey by the Korean Industrial Property 
Office (KIPO), Samsung Electronics Co., Goldstar Co., Hyundai 
Electronics Co., Daewoo Electronics Co., Goldstar Electron Co., 
and Samsung Electron Devices Co. received 220 warnings and were 
slapped with 13 lawsuits by foreign companies for patent 
violations between 1990 and 1993. 
  Among the foreign complainants, American companies such as 
IBM, Microsoft, Intel, SGS Thomson, and Texas Instruments 
account for 61.3 percent with a total of 143. 
  Patent quarrels do not end at corporations, but are 
frequently brought up by inventors like Gerome Lemelson and 
Gilbert Hyatt of America, who demand high royalties for their 
discoveries. 
  Lemelson won royalties of 21 million U.S. dollars from 
Goldstar, Samsung, and Goldstar Electron, equivalent to the 
1986-1995 exports of the three companies, last year for his 
patents on 33 technologies, including computer image analysis, 
camcorders and laser discs. 
  He is said to be now negotiating royalties with Hyundai, 
Daewoo, and Hyundai Motor Co. 
  Backed by Philips, Hyatt is seeking his patent dues for 20 
computer and semiconductor items and has sent warnings to 
Samsung, Goldstar and Daewoo to pay royalties equal to 1 percent 
of their turnover. 
  Refac Co., a U.S. agency fighting for patent rights on 
behalf 
of American clients, brings up technologies that have long been 
disregarded in the United States, according to KIPO officials. 
  Thirty cases, or 13 percent of the total complaints and 
lawsuits, were lodged by Refac. 
  Korean companies pay royalties because the inventors have no 
commercialized product in America that they can trade with their 
patented articles, officials say. 
  Corporations prefer "cross license" contracts for patent 
exchanges instead of royalties, they say. 
  American companies do not touch Japanese firms lest they be 
counter-sued with their negotiating abilities in intellectual 
property rights, they say. 

