BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed "Monitoring" report: "Documents"] </F>
  [Text] On Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin's 
instructions, a Russian Federation National Committee To Prepare 
for and Participate in the World Summit in the Interests of 
Social Development has been formed. 
  The national committee was set up in the light of the 
adoption by the UN General Assembly of a resolution on holding a 
world meeting in Copenhagen in March 1995. Vice Premier Yuriy 
Yarov was confirmed as national committee chairman. 
  The Russian president has signed an Edict "On State 
Supervision and Monitoring of Compliance With Russian Federation 
Legislation on Labor and Labor Protection." 
  Pending the adoption of a legislative act on the state labor 
inspectorate, state supervision and monitoring of compliance 
with Russian Federation legislation on labor and labor 
protection is carried out by the Federal Labor Inspectorate 
under the Russian Federation Ministry of Labor -- 
"Rostrudinspektsiya." 
  The Russian Federation Government has signed a decree "On 
the 
Partial Amendment of Rates of Export Customs Duties" as ratified 
by the 30 October 1993 decree No. 1103 of the Russian Federation 
Council of Ministers (Government), under which, in particular, 
the rate of export customs duties on zinc and items made from 
zinc is set at a level of 30 ECU [European Currency Units] per 
1,000 kilograms. 
  By decree of the Russian Federation Government, amendments 
and additions to the statute on registration taxes for 
officially registering computer programs, databases, and 
integrated circuit topologies, which was ratified by decree No. 
793 of the Russian Federation Council of Ministers (Government) 
of 12 August 1993, have been introduced. Among other things, 
the levels of registration taxes indicated in paragraphs one and 
two for the implementation of activities linked with the 
official registration of computer programs, databases, and 
integrated circuit topologies and for the implementation of 
activities linked with the registration of contracts for 
computer programs, databases, and integrated circuit topologies 
have been amended by the decree. 
  Under the government decree "On Fundamental Measures for 
State Support of the Economy of the Republic of Buryatia in 
1994-1995," 7.6 billion rubles were allocated to the Council of 
Ministers of the Republic of Buryatia in 1994 from the reserve 
fund of the Russian Government. 

