BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, May 6 (CTK) -- The Slovak Confederation 
of Trade Unions (KOS) has withdrawn from the General Agreement 
in connection with its unsuccessful meeting yesterday with the 
government and employers, the other two members of the 
"tripartite" formed to discuss economic and social policy. The 
General Agreement is concluded by the tripartite every year with 
the aim of preserving social peace. 
  KOS's departure from the general agreement could result in 
an 
outbreak of social unrest. The unionists will determine their 
further steps at an extraordinary meeting of KOS's board. The 
confederation's criticism is based on the allegation that the 
government so far has not presented a clear proposal for the 
creation of a social security fund, and was not prepared for 
yesterday's meeting. 
  The government is proposing the fund be formed from 0.1 
percent of company costs and from 0.9 percent of profit, and 
that it begin functioning on January 1, 1995. The unions, 
however, are pushing for a social security fund drawn from 1.0 
percent of company costs, and want it to begin from the first of 
July this year. 
  Despite the fact that the government already conceded the 
fund's creation from a percent of costs at the last tripartite 
meeting, it is still attempting to limit the ways that the money 
could be used. The unions insist, however, that the distribution 
of the benefits be determined in collective bargaining. 
  Talks between unions and the government were interrupted 
partly because the government began to suggest a lack of legal 
justification for the fund's establishment, citing 
contradictions in the constitution. Some contend that the 
government is intentionally prolonging the negotiations so that 
the initiation of the fund will be put off until the beginning 
of next year. 
  A further point of contention was the proposed law on 
government allowances for children. The plan of the unions, 
calling for payments to be made to families whose incomes do not 
exceed the subsistence minimum by two and a half times, would 
add 300 billion korunas (about $9 billion) to the budget 
expenditures. 
  The government agreed with the unions that KOS's viewpoint 
would be presented along with the bill when it goes to 
parliament. 

