Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 8--India and the Czech Republic have 
decided to work together in the "political sphere" in dealing 
with issues of re-fashioning of the international system in the 
wake of the collapse of the bipolar world, the visiting Czech 
president, Dr. Vaclav Havel, told a crowded press conference 
today shortly after receiving the 1993 Indira Gandhi Prize for 
Peace, Disarmament and Development. 
  During his two-day dialogue with the Indian leadership, the 
distinguished visitor--a well-known playwright, original thinker 
and statesman--met the President, Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, the 
Vice-President, Mr. K.R. Narayanan, and the Prime Minister [PM], 
Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao. 
  He made a point of telling the media that he had arrived 
here 
with the Czech Government's Deputy Prime Minister and Finance 
Minister, the Foreign Minister, and the Minister for Trade. 
  In the course of his "extensive discussions" with the Indian 
leaders, the two countries decided to continue with the 
traditional friendship that existed between India and the former 
Czechoslovakia, Dr. Havel said. 
  Global and bilateral questions were also discussed. The two 
countries already have in place an agreement on trade and on 
avoidance of double taxation, and are working on agreements on 
protection of investment, as well as culture. The one on 
protecting investments was seen as especially important, as the 
Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Ivan Kocharnek, Dr. Havel noted that 
a Czech firm, the Skoda Exports, was executing a "major 
pipeline" in India. This constitutes the single biggest Czech 
investment in this country. 
  On the possibility of the continuance of cooperation in the 
field of defence between India and the Czech republic as was the 
case with the old Czechoslovakia, Dr. Havel said his country had 
a fairly advanced armaments industry in some fields and was not 
inclined to continue defence cooperation as before with some of 
the countries with which communist Czechoslovakia had ties. 
However, this would not be the case with "democratic, peaceful 
countries." There was no reason why the Czech republic should 
not continue exporting armaments to India, he added. 
  Answering another question, the visiting dignitary said, 
"All 
the fundamentalists in the world should be locked up in a room 
together after being disarmed, and should preferably not be 
supplied any food. That would perhaps produce the best result." 
  In response to a question relating to human rights and the 
former Soviet Union, Dr. Havel said a "global minimum 
understanding on political metaculture" could serve as a basis 
for global cooperation. This should include the protection of 
human and civil rights. He hoped that soon Russia would have no 
need for any dictators, "even enlightened dictators." 
  PM to visit Prague: Dr. Havel said he had a "very 
intensive, warm and friendly" meeting with Mr. Rao who has been 
extended an invitation to visit Prague. The invitation has been 
accepted. 
  The visiting President announced that of the prize money he 
had received, some would go to a home for handicapped children 
as promised by his wife earlier in the day, $10,000 would be 
given to Mother Teresa's mission, and equal amounts to the 
Ramakrishna Mission and for the Dalai Lama's "village." The 
remaining would go to a Foundation for the benefit of the Prague 
Castle. 
  In the capital, Dr. Havel saw the Qutb Minar and Humayun's 
tomb, and is headed for Sarnath and Calcutta before returning 
home. He told newsmen. "One day I would love to come here as a 
tourist, spend a month, and not move in official motorcades. 


