Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Sandra Vergara from the "National </F>
Newscast"--passages within quotation marks recorded] 
  [Text] Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff came to cool 
tempers. He assured he committed no irregularities in terms of 
the procedures for having Cali Cartel members surrender to 
justice. He met with Attorney General Carlos Arrieta early this 
morning, and he will meet with President Cesar Gaviria later 
this afternoon. 
  The prosecutor general will meet with the president of the 
Republic in a few hours to explain his position and the 
procedures carried out so far by the Prosecutor General's Office 
regarding the policy governing the surrender of Cali Cartel 
members. 
  After meeting with the prosecutor general, the attorney 
general today admitted there had been a confrontation between 
the Prosecutor General's Office and the Attorney General's 
Office because of a lack of clarity when charges were issued 
against alleged Cali Cartel members Olmedo Ocampo, Juan Carlos 
Ramirez, and Elmer Herrera. 
  [Arrieta] "State institutions cannot quarrel among 
themselves. It does not make sense. That is what government 
officials are for; that is why we sit down and talk, and when we 
talk, we make things clear and comprehensible. This does not 
mean there are no differences. There may be differences on 
various occasions." 
  On the other hand, the prosecutor general said a preliminary 
investigation continues against the three to uncover any facts 
that may incriminate them. 
  [De Greiff] "A permit or license to act illegally cannot 
possibly be issued in Colombia. It would be monstrous if this 
were possible. You cannot arrest a person just because an 
official thinks he is a criminal, only if you have proof that 
the person is a criminal." 
  The attorney general and the prosecutor general do not rule 
out the possibility that the alleged Cali Cartel members who 
presented themselves at the Prosecutor General's Office could 
have been taking part in a scheme designed to provoke a 
confrontation between the two government institutions. 
  [Arrieta] ``We are not dealing with honest citizens or with 
common people. We are dealing with a drug cartel. When you 
negotiate with a cartel, you must start with the assumption that 
all sorts of things might happen. The state must develop the 
ability to understand, prepare itself, and avoid all of their 
tricks." 
  [De Greiff] "We are not going to let them drag us into their 
game. We are going to proceed with the law in our hands and 
with the formalities established by the law in our efforts to 
convict these people." 
  It was also stated that the process for the surrender of 
Cali 
Cartel members remains suspended. Another subject that has 
angered the prosecutor general is the rumors of an alleged 
mediation by the Prosecutor General's Office to put an end to 
the war between the Cali and Medellin Cartels. 
  [De Greiff] "Naturally, the Prosecutor General's Office 
cannot serve as mediator between criminal organizations to stop 
them from killing each other or to achieve peace between them. 
It would be atrocious if that were true. That is not the 
mission of the Prosecutor General's Office, nor would the 
Prosecutor General's Office accept such a mission." 

