CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jorma Rotko: "Estonian Government Scuttles Large </F>
Bank by Transferring State Transactions"] 
  [Text] Political disputes show in money market 
arrangements. Estonia's largest bank, Eesti Sotsiaalpank, is 
running into difficulties, since the Estonian Government decided 
to transfer the country's budget funds to other banks. 
  The handling of state funds has resulted in an annual cash 
flow for the bank of more than 5 million kroons, and about a 
third of the bank's approximately 1-billion-kroon balance sheet. 
  "Ruthless political maneuvering," commented Rein Miller, the 
bank's CEO and former Estonian finance minister. Heiki Kranich, 
the current finance minister, denies any political motives, but 
without being too convincing. 
  And from the viewpoint of the ruling right-wing Estonian 
Government, the Sotsiaalpank is a very suspect institution. It 
was founded during Gorbachev's era of perestroyka, by 
transferring functions from the Soviet state bank. 
  When the USSR collapsed, the bank was privatized and was 
changed into a corporation. Its capital stock amounted to 2.1 
million kroons in rubles. State enterprises held 98 percent of 
the shares, which at that time were controlled by Russians. 
  Since then the capital stock has increased to 51 million 
kroons. Although capital holds no national allegiance, experts 
claim that Sotsiaalpank is the financial institution where 
Russian businessmen keep their accounts. 
  And this is not all: Rein Miller and Arno Allman who manage 
the bank, were both solid communists in the past, and, in 
addition, Miller also acted as finance minister in the 
governments of Edgar Savisaar and Tiit Vahin, who are 
archenemies of the current government. 
<H5>  The Bank May Go Under </H5>
  During the last few years, a number of Estonian banks have 
failed. The largest of these was Tarto Kommertspank. 
  Contrary to what seems to be customary in Finland, the 
government does run with its money bags to the rescue of the 
banks. Not even deposits are guaranteed, and, as a general rule, 
when the banks have gone bankrupt, the depositors have lost 
every kroon they saved. This has created a wary attitude in 
Estonia. Many people are hoarding their savings at home, and 
accounts empty quickly if any suspicions are cast on a bank's 
liquidity. 
  Finance Minister Kranich vehemently denies that the 
government's intent is to bankrupt Sotsiaalpank. Not everyone 
believes, however, in the benevolence of the government. Two 
members of the parliament have questioned the government on the 
matter. 
  According to Finance Minister Kranich, the government has 
not 
yet decided on the timetable for the transfer of the state's 
funds to other banks. Originally it was to happen quickly, but 
as the bank demanded more time, the government appears to be 
willing to allow it a transition period of a few months. 
  Sotsiaalpank has proposed that it would be allowed to share 
the management of budget funds with the other banks. This 
request will probably not be granted, as the government decision 
unequivocally stipulates that state funds be transferred to 
other financial institutions. These banks are the government 
owned Pohja-Eesti Pank, Uhispank, and Hansa-Pank. 
<H5>  Where Is the Money Laundered? </H5>
  A lot of criminal money circulates in Estonia, but it moves 
in small lots. There are still no laws preventing money 
laundering, and bank secrecy is on a level equal to Switzerland. 
  Kaupo Pollisinski, head of the information department at the 
Estonian Central Bank, is of the opinion, however, that money 
belonging to major international criminals is not laundered 
through Estonia: 
  "Such money laundering starts from amounts of 10 million 
dollars. The entire Estonian economy is still so small that if 
such an amount were to emerge on the market, it would be noticed 
immediately. Smaller crooks, of course, launder their money, but 
this is not of the same scale as is usually understood by 
international money laundering." 
  Rein Miller, CEO of the Sotsiaalpank, said that the bad news 
has not affected deposits to the bank. 
  During the month of February, when the government's decision 
had already been made public, private individuals deposited a 
total of 7 million kroons in funds in the bank. In the view of 
one expert, this says something about both the bank's owners and 
its customers: Future problems have only been discussed in the 
Estonian language press, and no mention of it has been made in 
Russian newspapers. 
<H5>  Hard Struggle </H5>
  Rein Miller did not want to discuss the issue of the 
nationality of the bank's owners, but he claimed that there was 
no foreign capital invested in the bank. It is impossible to 
verify this information, as in Estonia information about 
business ownership can only be acquired through court orders. 
  Sotsiaalpank has launched a strong counterattack and is 
demanding that the issue of placing budget funds should be 
decided through competition among the banks. The bank has also 
appealed to the International Monetary Fund, which certainly is 
interested in how capital is moved around in Estonia. 
  In CEO Miller's view, the whole issue boils down to the fact 
that Sotsiaalpank is not under the control of the government's 
right-wing faction in the same fashion as the three banks to 
which budget funds are being transferred. 
  Finance Minister Kranich, on the other hand, claims that the 
government does not want to cause problems for the bank: 
  "The government decision has obviously been painful for the 
bank, and the bank management has created such public commotion 
that it could scare away depositors," said Kranich. 
  The first strike by the government was launched as early as 
last summer, when the Social Fund was removed from the 
administration of Sotsiaalpank. Through the fund, 2.1 billion 
kroons was funneled annually. However, the decision was not made 
by the government, but by the Board of Social Welfare and 
Health. 
  Economic circles in Estonia are now watching with interest 
to 
see if the "red bank" will be able to survive the next punch. If 
bankruptcy starts to rear its ugly head, no support from the 
public sector can be expected. 

