BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] The rebels in Sierra Leone must have given the 
government of that country an even bigger fright this Easter 
weekend with an attack on the north of the country. This is the 
first time that fighting has been reported between government 
and rebels in the Northern Region since they launched their 
incursion into Sierra Leone three years ago. In that time, the 
war has been concentrated in the south and southeast of the 
country. From Freetown, Victor Sylver telexed this report: 
  Details are now beginning to emerge of the first rebel 
attack 
on any target in the north of the country. According to sources 
close to the Defense Department, the RUF [Revolutionary United 
Front] rebels attacked the mining town of Masingbe at about 4:30 
on Friday [1 April] afternoon, killing at least 15 civilians and 
briefly occupying the town. They were forced out by government 
troops yesterday. Reports from the area say that the rebel 
force numbered some 60 soldiers. They also speak of a mass 
exodus of civilians from Masingbe and outlying areas and towns 
like Matotaka, Mabourka and Makeni. On the line to Makeni in 
the north of the country this afternoon, the defense 
undersecretary, Captain Komba Kambo told me that Masingbe was 
now under full government control and that government troops 
were now engaged in exercises aimed at ensuring that no such 
attack would ever occur in the area again. I was told that for 
now civilians who had fled the fighting would not be allowed 
back until the area was declared safe. 
  When I asked Capt. Kambo about reports I had been receiving 
from those coming from Makeni that government soldiers had been 
selling looted property from Masingbe, I was told this was not 
the case. Capt. Kambo said such statements could only come from 
detractors who are bent on causing mischief. One military 
officer who comes from the north thought that the marauding band 
of rebels who attacked Masingbe must have been escaping from 
Kenema District, where the government has launched offensives 
against the RUF rebels. Be that as it may, many here feel it is 
now that the government war machine was put into top gear so 
that the war can come to a close. 

