Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Moscow, 16 Jan -- "I am still on the side of the 
president and I will be supporting the president", Yegor Gaydar 
told Sunday's information-analytical program "Itogi". Today's 
resignation of the first vice premier with whose name, as 
"Itogi" noted, "people in the country and in the world associate 
the very meaning of economic reforms in Russia", was the main 
theme of the program. 
  "I fully understand the responsibility of this decision", 
Gaydar said. But, as he put it, "it is impossible to work or do 
what one has to do without having the necessary levers. In that 
case, one is not doing any real work but just going through the 
motions". "I believe that we have managed to do certain things 
in the past four months despite real difficulties which existed, 
he noted. Many decisions which we proposed have been 
implemented. 
  But at some stage, when decisions that you put forward are 
not accepted, while decisions which you regard as dangerous and 
to which you resolutely object are adopted by the government, 
then your continued membership in the government becomes 
something apparently connected with the fact that you like 
staying in your post. And this, at least as far as I personally 
am concerned, is not so." 
  Gaydar intends to become the leader of Russia's Choice 
faction in the State Duma. "I am going to concentrate on the 
work aimed at creating political structures that have to solve 
two key tasks: first, to prevent Russia from being drawn into 
another military escapade, and second, to avert social 
cataclysms and a new redistribution of property." In his words, 
Russia's Choice faction in the State Duma is going to continue 
"constructive dialogue with the government, we are going to 
support all its useful initiatives, we are not retreating into 
opposition to the government, it is just that we are clearly 
defining the range of responsibility, the range of decisions 
within which we are prepared to cooperate and share the burden 
responsibility." 
  "I fear a new wave of enthusiasm in connection with 
decisions 
on spending, a sharp increase in the amount of money in 
circulation caused by this, aggravating budgetary problems, a 
fall in the [exchange] rate [of the ruble] accelerating rate of 
inflation, attempts to beat it using administrative measures, 
recreation of certain attributes of a shortage-ridden economy, 
the undermining of the effectiveness of all market mechanisms. 
This threat is there, it is real, and one has to reckon with 
it," Gaydar warns in connection with the situation in the 
government. 
  "It was the wish to concentrate fully on work in parliament 
and dissatisfaction with the latest decisions of the government 
and with work in the government as a whole that today forced 
Gaydar to make his sensational statement," "Ostankino" Channel 
One's "Voskreseniye" program remarked. 
  Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, who is spoken of as a possible 
candidate 
to the post of first vice prime minister of the government, but 
who, in his own words, has not received such an offer, gave his 
assessment of what has happened in an interview to "Itogi": "In 
September Gaydar was invited as a figurehead to adorn the 
government for a period of very complex changes. Now the main 
political gestures have been made, the decoration can be 
changed." He assessed its prospects thus: "It will be a 
conventional Soviet government." 
  "Itogi" presenter Yevgeniy Kiselev pointed out that a high- 
ranking member of the presidential administration who had asked 
not to be named, had remarked in an interview to "Itogi" that 
Gaydar's statement on his resignation very much resembled an 
ultimatum. [passage omitted] 

