BFN 

<F P=106> [Letter from Thanat Khoman, former foreign minister, in the </F>
"Post Bag" Column] 
  [Text] SIR: Once again, the World Accuser swells his 
throat to shout accusations against Thailand when the US State 
Department alleged that cadres (narcotics) have allies in 
government offices, banks and law enforcement agencies which, 
according to that source, allowed illicit drug trade to flourish 
in Thailand. This statement reflects the accusers' own rich 
experience and practices. How? 1. The United States, or at 
least the CIA, under George Bush, used General Noriega, now 
imprisoned in Florida, as its salaried agent, to get involved in 
drug operations in Latin, and particularly South and Central 
America. When that agent became indocile, Bush sent armed 
forces to capture him and, in the process, committed a dastardly 
massacre of innumerable innocent Panamanian people. 
  2. As to drug money laundering, American officials and 
others 
know something about it. A certain Clark Clifford, who was once 
US Secretary of Defence and later became president of an 
important bank in New York, was arraigned before a law court 
there accused of involvement in drug money laundering through 
his bank collaborating with the famous BCCI. He was subjudice 
until the time when the Democrats, having won the elections, 
pulled him out of that predicament for ill-health reason. That 
was the way how justice operates in that wonderful land of super 
race and super virtuous men. 
  3. To me and, I am sure, to many Thais, the acceptance of 
the 
miserable US$2 million, for cooperation in drug matter, 
undeniably hurts our national pride. That loathsome money 
should be returned to the donors with our thanks, as they may 
need it for use elsewhere. And, the sooner the better. We will 
help raise funds to replace that insulting money, which has made 
it possible for that foreign government to send DEA [Drug 
Enfocement Agency] agents here. One of them, not long ago, 
killed a suspect without due verification. The affair was hushed 
up, and the culprit was shipped out with collusion from our 
authorities. 
  4. I hope that, after the recent accusation, the Thai side 
will review the matter and take appropriate step in the right 
direction. We should be wise enough to realise that this is a 
way to "pass the buck" and the blame upon us, to be used as the 
scapegoats, while the principal party -- namely the United 
States and a number of Western nations -- are fuelling it by 
insatiable demands as their local consumption continually 
increases, causing greater difficulties for us to curb and 
suppress production. The United States and its Western cronies 
are, in fact, directly responsible. 
  5. The question which comes to the mind of many people is 
how a government, which cannot maintain law and order in its own 
country where crime rate in its own capital city rises by some 
50 per cent to the point that its mayoress had to ask for the 
intervention of the National Guard, has the indecency to preach 
lessons and make accusations against others? It would certainly 
earn more respect and credibility by observing the elementary 
honesty and recognise its own defects and concentrate on setting 
its own house in order. 

