Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 9 (KCNA) -- A spokesman for the 
DPRK Foreign Ministry in a statement today decisively rejects 
the reckless act of the United States in accusing the DPRK of 
the fictitious "human rights problem" as a violation of its 
sovereignty prompted by a political aim to stifle its system and 
as a hostile act of interference in its internal affairs. 
  The statement says: 
  The U.S. State Department, in its "Annual Report on the 
World Human Rights Situation" published on February 1, 
groundlessly slandered our country as if there were a "human 
rights problem" in our country. This is a gross distortion of 
the reality of our country and fabrication which does not 
deserve a passing note. 
  As far as human rights are concerned, it is a matter of 
socio-political rights and economic and cultural rights 
including the dignity, sovereignty and the right to existence, 
equality and the right to development which must be guaranteed 
to man in society. 
  All these rights are fully ensured in our country. 
  Our people are genuine masters of the state and society and 
enjoy an independent and creative life all alike without any 
social and political uncertainty or any worry about their life 
under our anthropocentric socialist system. In our country 
there is not a single jobless person, nor a beggar, nor a 
vagabond, nor an illiterate, nor a drug addict. Ours is a state 
where human rights are respected and surely guaranteed. 
  This notwithstanding, the United States hurled malicious 
abuses at our country. This is part of its brazen scheme to 
tarnish the image of our Republic with the nonsensical "human 
rights problem" as it does with the fictitious "nuclear problem" 
of our country and to isolate and stifle our socialist cause. 
  What face does the United States have to criticize others 
over the "human rights issue"? 
  At present, there are in the United States more than 1.4 
million prisoners, over 9 million unemployed people, millions of 
vagabonds and 35 million people living below the poverty line. 
And it is plagued with criminal cases of murder by arms 
claiming the lives of more than 38,000 people a year and drug 
consumption which accounts for 65 percent of the world's drug 
output, and narcotic-related crimes which are quite common. 
This is inevitable and is an incurable cancer under the present 
U.S. social system. 
  The U.S. President himself could not but admit in his "State 
of the Union Address" this year to the grave phenomena 
threatening the U.S. public including violent crimes. 
  We see almost every day that the United States not only 
harshly tramples upon the human rights of its people but also 
perpetrated such inhuman acts as openly overthrowing and 
destroying sovereign states with the mobilization of its state 
Armed Forces and making havoc with their people's human rights, 
while highhandedly interfering in the internal affairs of other 
countries. 
  All these facts prove that the United States is the 
universally recognized worst graveyard of human rights and the 
kingdom of human rights abuses. 
  It is the height of impudence for the United States to talk 
about other's human rights situation, while freely violating 
human rights within and without. 
  In its "Report on Human Rights Situation" the U.S. State 
Department tried to beautify South Korea in a far-fetched way, 
claiming that the situation of human rights has been "improved" 
there. This is also the height of sarcasm. 
  The South Korean authorities under the mask of "civilian 
government" are getting frenzied in terrorism, arrest, torture 
and murder in reliance on the "National Security Law" and other 
fascist laws and repressive tools, overshadowing the successive 
military dictators. 
  And countless are cases of human rights abuses by the 
U.S. Forces present in South Korea. 
  As regards the present South Korean situation in which human 
rights abuses have been carried into extremes, however, the 
United States dare argue that "the human rights situation has 
improved" there. This is really a brazen-faced deception. 
  Whatever row the United States may raise over the "human 
rights problem" it can never impair the essential advantages and 
invincible vitality of socialism of our style to which the 
chuche idea is applied. 
  The United States would be well advised to mind its own 
business, instead of taking stock of other nations and 
instructing them, while acting "a judge of human rights" whom 
nobody recognizes. 

