National   Leadership 

<F P=102> 947WN0235A Moscow VESTNIK ROSSIYSKOY AKADEMII NAUK in 
Russian Vol 63 No 9, Sep 93 pp 795-796 </F>

<F P=103> 947WN0235A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VESTNIK ROSSIYSKOY AKADEMII NAUK </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Unsigned] </F>
  [Text] [Addressed to:] B. N. Yeltsin, president, Russian 
Federation; R. I. Khasbulatov, chairman, Supreme Soviet, Russian 
Federation; V. S. Chernomyrdin, chairman of the Council of 
Ministers -- Government of the Russian Federation 
  The members of the Russian Academy of Sciences consider it 
necessary to draw your attention to the catastrophic situation 
into which the Russian environment has fallen. The environmental 
protection system, organized over the course of many years by 
several generations of leading scientists and practical workers 
and functioning quite successfully, is now being destroyed as a 
result of disintegration processes. 
  We are losing enormous natural resources. There has been a 
sharp increase in poaching, which is resulting in the mass 
annihilation of many species of plants and animals, including 
those listed in the Red Book and which constitute a national 
treasure of Russia. A barbarous looting of the country's 
national resources is in progress. Here are only several 
examples. 
  In the Far East during the postwar years it was possible to 
increase the numbers of the Ussuri tiger with great difficulty. 
However, recently it is being intensively exterminated by 
poachers: the skin, claws and whiskers of the tiger are highly 
valued in the countries of Southeast Asia (Japan, Korea, China), 
to which they also are frequently exported. The absolute freedom 
from prosecution for poaching activity is astonishing. 
Announcements of sale are not only posted in the streets of Far 
Eastern cities, but also are being published in the local 
newspapers and broadcast by radio. If decisive measures are not 
immediately taken for preserving the tiger it will disappear 
completely. 
  The Far Eastern leopard is on the verge of extinction: its 
numbers do not exceed 20-30 specimens; there is an immediate 
need for drawing up and implementing a program for saving this 
species. Bears are being annihilated in mass numbers; the 
principal reason is the extraction of bear bile, which also has 
a high value in the markets of Southeast Asia. There has been a 
sharp increase in the poaching of the izyubr and the Siberian 
stag: they are being killed off for their velvet-covered antlers 
and these also are being criminally exported abroad. During 
recent years there has been a 50% decrease in the numbers 
of 
the musk deer, being annihilated for musk gland of the males 
(musk stream); according to available data, the exportation is 
taking place in part through Estonia. The kill of the mountain 
antelope, which has been listed in the Russian Red Book, has 
increased by several times and now its total numbers are only 
500-700 specimens. The kill of the Tatary antelope, whose horn 
is used in Tibetan medicine, has been virtually uncontrolled. 
Mutilated cadavers in the hundreds remain in the steppe. On the 
Anadyr Plateau the mountain sheep, which only recently was quite 
plentiful, has been completely annihilated. In addition to 
individual species, many unique natural territories have been 
under the threat of annihilation. 
  Under different pretexts, even within the structure of 
environmental protection agencies, numerous commercial 
organizations are being set up which are engaged in the sale and 
export of animals and unique materials for collections, the 
organization of paid-for hunts and tourism even in reserved 
territories, which always was categorically forbidden. 
  At the International Conference in Rio de Janeiro (June 
1992), held with the participation of the leaders of many 
countries, among the principal documents a Convention on 
Biological Diversity was adopted. It was written in the 
Convention that the states, having sovereign rights to their 
biological resources, bear responsibility for their maintenance 
and stable use. The Convention provides for the preparation by 
each covenanting party of a national strategy and program for 
maintaining and using biological diversity, implementing 
monitoring, adopting timely measures for the rehabilitation and 
restoration of degrading ecosystems and encouragement of 
research favoring maintenance and stable use of their biological 
heritage. A task of primary importance is ensuring the 
preservation of rare and disappearing species and ecosystems; 
their loss will be irretrievable. Russian biologists have worked 
out such a program and it should receive the status of a 
national program and be included among the programs of priority 
importance. Appropriate legislative acts for its implementation 
must be adopted within the framework of this program. 
  The scientists of the Russian Academy of Sciences feel that 
the need has long passed for establishing in Russia a unified 
national system for the protection and regulation of biological 
resources. The Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural 
Resources of the Russian Federation should be the basic 
department for the organization of such a structure. There is a 
need for bringing up to the world level the area of specially 
protected natural territories (up to four-five% of the 
entire 
area of the country), ensuring adequate funding for their 
organization and management. All measures must be adopted in 
order that there be full implementation of the Edict of the 
President of the Russian Federation dated 2 October 1992, No 
1155, "On Specially Protected Natural Territories in the Russian 
Federation" and the Law "On Environmental Protection," put into 
effect by a Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian 
Federation dated 19 December 1991, No 2061-1. 
  We are hoping for your active participation. 
  Delay is out of the question. 

