BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Maher Chmaytelli] </F>
  [Text] Cairo, April 18 (AFP)--Israel and the PLO are 
working to resolve three key issues holding up the launch of 
self-rule for Gaza and Jericho, chief Palestinian negotiator 
Nabil Sha'th said here Monday [18 April]. 
  "There are issues without which we cannot sign an agreement: 
jurisdiction, water, prisoners," he told reporters as 
negotiations resumed here. 
  The Palestine Liberation Organisation rejected an Israeli 
compromise proposal on the scope of Palestinian jurisdiction in 
the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho, Sha'th had said 
late Sunday after the latest round of talks opened. 
  Israel proposed that Palestinian jurisdiction extend to all 
non-Israelis and non-Palestinians, apart from those visiting 
Jewish settlements. 
  Sha'th said Israel also proposed that a Palestinian charged 
with a crime against an Israeli should be tried before a 
Palestinian court if he is arrested in the autonomous areas but 
otherwise before an Israeli court. 
  Israel had initially wanted to maintain jurisdiction over 
all 
foreigners as well as over any Palestinian charged with a crime 
against an Israeli. 
  Sha'th charged that Israel's position on jurisdiction was "a 
clear violation of the Declaration of Principles," referring to 
the historic autonomy accord signed on September 13 by Israel 
and the PLO. 
  "From our point of view, the only (areas) out of our 
jurisdiction are Israelis and settlements," he said. 
  The PLO has also put the question of prisoners back on the 
agenda, following an announcement by both sides last week that 
5,000 Palestinians would be released in two stages within three 
weeks of the signing of an overall accord. 
  Sha'th had said the remaining 5,000 Palestinians held in 
Israeli jails would be discussed at future negotiations on the 
autonomy for the rest of the West Bank and on elections for Gaza 
and Jericho. 
  But Muhammad Dahlan, the PLO delegate in charge of the 
prisoners' dossier, said Monday that the issue was still on the 
table. The Palestinians want the release of 8,300 prisoners, he 
said. 
  The move follows talks last week between the PLO and the 
Palestinian Islamic militant group Hamas, a fierce opponent of 
the autonomy negotiations, on coordination in the occupied 
territories. 
  Israel has turned down PLO calls for a general amnesty and 
refuses to free prisoners of militant groups such as Hamas, 
which claimed responsibility for two bomb blasts earlier this 
month that killed 12 Israelis. 
  On the question of water-sharing, the Palestinians have 
reported progress. 
  "We have the right to control the water resources of Gaza 
and 
Jericho, as well as the right to manage (its distribution)," 
said Jamil al-Tarifi, a Palestinian delegate to water talks. 
  "It's true that the Jewish settlements will not be under our 
authority but we want to know what quantities of water they will 
draw," he said, adding that the settlements had 22 of the 
deepest wells out of the total of 500 in Gaza. 
  "The Israeli positions are starting to coming nearer to 
ours, 
and we hope to reduce the differences further today," he said. 
  In Muscat, officials and experts from more than 40 countries 
and organisations held a second day of talks Monday to discuss a 
formula for water sharing in the Middle East, with delegates 
speaking of progress. 
  The talks, part of the multilateral track of Middle East 
peace talks, were attended by Israel, its Arab neighbours, 
Turkey and other parties. 

