CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Pokrovskiy under the rubric </F>
``Semi-Official'': ``The Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy Has Won Another Battle''--first paragraph is NAUKA I 
BIZNES introduction; last paragraph is NAUKA I BIZNES conclusion] 
  [Text] In the middle of February, after a two-month delay, 
the government of Russia finally settled the issue of how the 
scientific research institutes of Russia will pay for 
electricity and heat. For some of them the bills often exceed 
substantially the total amount of the budgetary assets received 
by them. 
  As Boris Saltykov stated, the trouble is that in Russian 
legislation there is no concept of a ``nonprofit organization,'' 
which, in particular, would enable institutes to pay for power 
at preferential rates, and not on the same basis as production 
enterprises. This situation at the beginning of 1993 was still 
tolerable, but after electric power rates increased by fifteen- 
to sixteenfold, while the scientific budget of Russia increased 
by only fourfold, many power-consuming experimental plants began 
to shut down. 
  In spite of a sharp decrease in power consumption, the 
Kurchatov Institute has enormous debts, as a result of which at 
times the issuing of pay is delayed there for a long time. The 
Institute of Nuclear Physics in Obninsk cannot find 400 million 
rubles [R] for these purposes. The Institute of High Energy 
Physics in Protvino has been forced to limit the experimental 
sessions on its accelerator to only two to three weeks a 
quarter. As Viktor Ageyev, deputy director of this institute, 
reported, each such session costs researchers R1.5 billion. At 
the beginning of this year due to the delay with the allocation 
of budgetary assets to the institute scientists were forced to 
settle a somewhat paradoxical dilemma: to turn on the 
accelerator and remain without pay or to receive pay, having 
deprived themselves of the opportunity to do some work on the 
accelerator. The Dubna Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 
which is connected with international obligations, is unable to 
shut down its facilities and, therefore, is accumulating 
enormous debts without the prospect to pay them. 
  Vladimir Kadyshevskiy, director of the Joint Institute for 
Nuclear Research, in December of last year got a meeting with 
then Vice Premier Yegor Gaydar and, in particular, asked him to 
help in this matter, in which he was supported by Minister of 
Science Boris Saltykov. Gaydar willingly volunteered to help and 
immediately gave his staff the corresponding orders. Contrary to 
the opinion of skeptics, who believed that this matter, as 
always, would get bogged down in bureaucratic red tape of the 
government, a tentative agreement with the Ministry of Fuel and 
Energy was reached rather quickly and on 26 December (a 
fantastically short time for our realities) should have been 
signed. The confidence in the success of the action was so great 
that Boris Saltykov publicly declared the decrease of rates for 
a number of institutes as a fete accompli. Since then the 
signing of the agreement has been postponed weekly for the most 
different reasons, which are most reminiscent of plausible 
excuses. 
  The Ministry of Fuel and Energy actively opposed the 
reduction of rates for scientific institutes. ``Apparently, we 
will be forced to agree to this,'' Vitaliy Bushuyev, deputy 
minister of fuel and energy, recently stated. True, he 
immediately added that his ministry regards such a way out of 
the situation ``anti-economic stimulation.'' This, Bushuyev 
believes, will lead to a new spiral of the increase of energy 
prices and will increase the burden, which is heavy as it is, on 
the shoulders of industrial enterprises. In his opinion, it 
would be far more correct not to demand a reduction of rates, 
but to save more stringently the energy that is being consumed 
today ``with terrible wastefulness.'' 
  The directors of 320 institutes, which had gotten on the 
list 
for the reduction of rates, awaited impatiently the end of the 
dragged out rate incident and, as Viktor Ageyev stated, linked 
with the success or failure of this action their subsequent 
attitude toward Boris Saltykov. The business reputation of the 
minister and, perhaps, his reputation were at stake, inasmuch as 
the support of the directors, which in January had played a 
substantial role in his conflict with the leadership of the RAS, 
will undoubtedly also be vitally important in the future. 
  The incident, however, is not over. In the government 
commission for operations, where the rate reduction was endorsed 
as a whole, it was decided to grant the right to pay half of the 
wholesale factory price to not more than 50 institutes. The 
remaining 270 institutes will have to seek other means. For 
example, to go with requests not to the government, but directly 
to officials of the electricity and fuel departments. As an 
executive of one such institute, who wished to remain anonymous, 
reported, this means is being used no less effectively than the 
first--Russian officials, as, probably, any others, are not like 
limitations of their rights from above, but are themselves 
inclined at times to do a favor for a poor debtor and exempt him 
from the payment of a debt. 

