Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cochabamba, 16 Feb (EL MUNDO) -- President Gonzalo 
Sanchez de Lozada said: "We disagree with the reduction of U.S. 
economic aid for interdiction and against drug trafficking. We 
believe we should have serious and permanent U.S. economic aid 
without disregarding national sovereignty. We should not be left 
alone with this problem. The United States now wants to 
concentrate more on the struggle against drug trafficking within 
its borders." 
  Sanchez de Lozada held a very confidential meeting in 
Cochabamba's El Carmen Hotel with a U.S. senator [Robert Graham] 
from Florida who is a member of a committee on appropriations 
and intelligence and with the U.S. ambassador. Sanchez said: 
"The meeting was very important to let them know we believe it 
is just and necessary to have the continuation of aid but 
without violating national sovereignty. The struggle against 
drug trafficking is a Bolivian priority; it is not imposed but 
we need support for its success." 
  Sanchez emphasized: The policy and appropriation of funds to 
fight drug trafficking depend a great deal on the U.S. 
committee. For Bolivia this is very important; there is a trend 
to cut resources for the developing countries. The U.S. 
Government also has problems with the budget deficit. 
  Sanchez, who denied reports that the U.S. officials gave 
some 
kind of ultimatum for the total eradication of coca within the 
framework of the "Zero Option" project, said this issue was not 
discussed. 
  Sanchez added: "There is nothing concrete on the `Zero 
Option' project. What we are after is a new project that would 
not leave us with the traditional mechanism of repression, 
eradication, and substitution. The `Zero Option' is still 
unknown. We are seeking a final solution, not a traumatic 
solution, to get out of this situation because that would not be 
good for anyone, for either the country, the peasants, or the 
world." 
  Sanchez also said he conveyed to the U.S. ambassador and the 
senator the firm Bolivian commitment, as a country and a 
society, to struggle against drug trafficking, and "to try to 
get out of the drug business" that is destroying youths and 
becoming very dangerous because when it is combined with armed 
groups or cartels it will create violence. 
  Sanchez indicated that this is an economic and social 
problem; it is not only a problem of repression because jobs 
also should be offered to the coca growers -- "this is why we 
are trying to carry out projects such as the Capitalization and 
Popular Participation projects. Jobs must be created in the 
coca areas and the entire country to prevent coca growing from 
being a good business because the price of coca varies according 
to the level of repression." 
  Regarding the charges made by coca growers that members of 
Direco [Coca Reduction Directorate] and Dinaco [National Coca 
Control Directorate] were eradicating coca by force on 14 
February, President Sanchez said there is no forced coca 
eradication in the country. "It is not included in the 
legislation and, according to Law No. 1008 of Coca and 
Controlled Substances, only after payments are made is it 
mandatory to eradicate the coca plantations; all the other 
eradications are still voluntary." 
  Meanwhile, coca growers have declared themselves in a state 
of emergency, suspended coca substitution, and announced a large 
meeting for today in Villa Tunari to protest the lack of 
government answers to their demands for alternative development 
and the depenalization of coca, and for the defense of coca, 
which they are sure will be eradicated by force to fulfill the 
eradication quota of 6,500 hectares by 31 March because not even 
50 percent of that quota has been fulfilled. 
  President Sanchez said: "The eradication is voluntary in 
Bolivia. The coca growers are like COB [Bolivian Labor 
Federation] members; they talk without knowing or give 
information for their benefit or distort it. But I am not 
offended; it is part of democracy." 

