Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed VDB: "Report published in SCIENCE: Flemish </F>
Researchers Force Supercomputer Breakthrough"] 
  [Text] Seven researchers, most of whom are from Flanders, 
may have achieved a breakthrough in the application of 
non-linear optics. They have found organic molecules which are 
able to cling onto light frequencies and which can convert red 
light into blue light. The molecules, derived from the retina, 
could become carriers for nonlinear photon transfer, opening up 
major new perspectives for information processing. 
  Photons, the basic carriers of light, are infinitely faster 
than the electrons that are now massively used in the world of 
information technology. The change from electrons to photons 
could usher in the new fifth generation of supercomputers. It 
could also give a whole new impetus to the artificial 
intelligence and robotics sector. 
  Andre Persoons, professor of the biological chemistry 
laboratory at the Catholic University of Leuven, announced the 
breakthrough in a speech. Yesterday's scientific journal 
SCIENCE published the paper written by Persoons and his research 
team on new organic photon-carrier materials. Persoons' 
coauthors on the paper were Koen Clays, E. Hendrickx, M. Triest, 
T. Verbiest, C. Dehu, and J.L. Bredas. 
  The research at Leuven University is carried out in 
association with Philips. Many large companies are currently 
doing research into nonlinear optics, with the realization that 
this could be the major breakthrough into the next generation of 
computers. It would represent not only a massive increase in 
data transfer speed, but also the elimination of heat 
generation. In addition to Philips, other companies such as ICI 
[Imperial Chemical Industries], Eastman Kodak, AKZO [General 
Potassium and Salt Company], Ciba- Geigy, Hoechst, IBM, Enichem, 
and Hitachi have all increased their research budgets for 
nonlinear optics. 
  Mr. Persoons claims that the discovery that certain proteins 
from the retina (bacteriorhodopsin, abbreviation bR) have this 
very special reaction to light, may represent a breakthrough in 
the application of nonlinear optics. The current mineral 
semiconductors that are used as electron carriers are very 
complex and expensive to manufacture, since the crystal 
structure of the mineral has to be physically altered. 
  The use of an organic material as carrier, in this case for 
photons, would also substantially reduce the cost to manufacture 
such elements. The chemistry is such that it is simple to 
manufacture large amounts of this organic material, such as the 
retina-based protein bR, for example, by producing analogues of 
the molecule. 

