Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Second Friday prayers sermon by President 'Ali Akbar </F>
Hashemi-Rafsanjani at Tehran University on 11 March -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] With a mere glance, today one 
can easily grasp that Israel's mode of operation has always been 
to create fear and coercion and to displace people in order to 
settle Jews from all over the world in their place. Israel has 
not changed at all since the early days of its formation. If 
the old colonialist policy had undergone the slightest change 
during the past years, then there would be no need today to 
import into Israel Jews at hefty costs from Russia and the four 
corners of the globe. 
  Clearly then, Israel has not changed at all. It has 
maintained its colonialist identity, because it can hardly be 
anything else, and the loss of such an identity will definitely 
mean the destruction of the state of Israel. After all, Israel 
is a state which is made up of a few million nonindigenous 
people. It spends hefty amounts of money on defense and 
military hardware, and the country itself is situated in a 
narrow strip of land devoid of notable resources. Furthermore, 
it is encircled by its enemies as well as by 4 million refugees 
who once fled that land with the undying intention of returning 
to their homeland. Now how can such a country stand on its own 
two feet? It can survive only when major powers stand behind 
it. But why should the major powers support a particular 
country? Why should the Americans and the British pay money to 
Israel? Because they want to safeguard their interests, and 
they need Israel for that end. 
  Any person with a basic knowledge of the alphabet of 
politics 
and government understands that accepting Israel's existence in 
the region is equal to accepting the colonialists' regional 
interests. Israelis themselves fully understand that they are a 
tool in the hands of the colonialists. However, they have the 
same interests and are in fact a part of the colonialist entity. 
They think that the present situation is the only way for their 
survival. 
  It seems that the present thesis on peace has no meaning at 
all. This is to say that one cannot imagine that a country such 
as Israel with all its peculiarities can exist in a normal way 
among all the other countries who are host to hundreds of 
thousands of refugees, countries such as Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, 
Jordan, and others. In the PLO-Israel peace plan no thought has 
been given to the refugees. If the peace plan had contained one 
single clause about the problem of the refugees, then one could 
believe that something fundamental was being done. However, the 
refugee situation remains completely unresolved. 
  Nonetheless, the situation is such that a number of Islamic 
countries are encouraging and supporting the peace plan, while 
at the same time trying to make their nations believe in the 
illusion of peace. One cannot possibly believe that the leaders 
of the Islamic countries do not understand the facts. I 
personally do not believe that these individuals who understand 
everything in this world are incapable of comprehending this 
issue. So why do they do such things? This is something that 
only they can answer. This is in fact nothing but an act of 
suicide. After all, how can one accept an entity which is 
inherently colonialistic, and its whole reason for being is to 
serve the colonialists? How can such a regime live side by side 
our countries in a peaceful manner without threatening our 
interests? How can such a thing be possible? 
  When we speak such truthful words and when we provide such 
crystal-clear analyses, we are accused of being against peace. 
If there had been real peace, then nobody would object to it. 
The point is that we do not consider the present process as 
peace. How can one make peace with someone who enters one's 
house and occupies every room -- from the kitchen to the 
bedrooms and reception rooms -- leaves only the hallways and the 
storage rooms for the host and then calls for peace and peaceful 
coexistence in the house? How can that be possible? 
  This can only be possible if one side is very weak and 
accepts whatever it has been offered. But surely this cannot be 
called peace, and such an arrangement will certainly not need an 
accord. This is the problem with the Palestinians at present. 
So long as the Palestinians think that they can regain some of 
their rights, they will continue their efforts towards that end. 
Consequently there will be no inclination towards peace on any 
side. Moreover, Israel will not be satisfied with its gains. 
If Israel was to be satisfied, then it would not be present in 
Golan and Lebanon. Some people say: Look! Israel gave the 
Sinai back to Egypt. Yes! But at what price? The price was the 
disintegration of Arab unity. Israel might grant the same to 
Syria, but the price will also be the same. This is to say that 
by returning Golan to Syria, it will get rid of that country as 
a noteworthy force, like it did with Egypt. Then in the near 
future, there will be no one to resist Israel, especially in the 
light of what has happened to Iraq -- due to the ignorance and 
foolishness of its leaders -- depriving the Arab world of any 
party which Israel can fear. All in all, one certainly cannot 
term the present process as peace. 
  The methods, also, are the same. Of course we can also 
assess some positive issues there which have occurred, but 
unfortunately the Third World fails to make proper use of them. 
[passage omitted] 
  Israel's mode of operation has put paid to much of the 
claims of the colonialists and the arrogant ones. All their 
claims have been flouted without exception. Well if they want 
to publicize human rights, where can a more severe violation of 
human rights be found outside the Palestinian occupied 
territories? Scenes that reach the media in a retouched form! 
Would the world approach such scenes in the same way had they 
happened in places like Iran or other states? It is obvious 
that those scenes is under their own supervision and they cast a 
favorable eye on them. 
  Weapons of mass destruction are the weapons of Westerners. 
Any country which seeks to provide itself with defensive or 
offensive power, they exert pressure: nuclear and chemical 
weapons. Israel has produced them all! It has nuclear arms as 
well as chemical and biological ones. They know all that. It 
has produced them with their [not further specified] money, not 
its own money. 
  Well, I have no clue as to what the slumbering Western 
world, 
their thinkers -- themselves -- think. How can they bear seeing 
their own ugly image in the mirror? On the one hand they are 
interfering in other countries for that reason and on the other 
their own puppet is producing nuclear weapons, chemical and 
biological weapons. And they announce that as well! Officially 
acknowledge that! The law throughout the world is that the 
occupier must ensure the security of the areas under his 
occupation. He has the responsibility. How well does Israel 
protect the people of that region? How can this massacre be 
justified? Those areas are called the occupied territories. You 
can see that there are still serious problems between Russia and 
Japan over a few islands -- and this after all the time that has 
passed and the formal occupations. How can so much occupied 
territory be under the control of a small country? So many 
resolutions.... [pauses] The Security Council, the UN and the 
international community have all expressed condemnation, and 
Israel does not raise an eyebrow! And its friends don't say a 
word either. Can this occur in Iran? Did this happen to Iraq, 
which did what it did to Kuwait? They brought in armies and 
drove Iraq out of Kuwait. Why doesn't this happen to Israel? 
[passage omitted] 
  Is Israel really going to remain? I want to devote the last 
chapter of my talk to this issue. In my opinion: No, it 
definitely will not remain! [Crowd chants] Thank you very much. 
This entity which is the same as a foreign particle in a living 
body cannot last for long. Of course, it may remain for a 
while, as before. Some programs for the expansion of Israel may 
also be implemented. They may go forward a bit, but it will not 
remain. And in my opinion, the path to salvation is through 
Islam. The thing that can be effective, the thing that can keep 
the people on the scene, the thing that can prolong this long 
and dangerous jihad is this very same Islam. All other 
ideologies -- patriotism, linguism [zaban dusti], cultural or 
geographical nationalism -- their legs go wobbly along the path 
when they meet difficulties -- and we have seen examples of this 
in many places. The thing that one is prepared to live for, to 
die for, to tolerate torture for, to suffer hunger and 
homelessness for, and remain steadfast, is this religious and 
Islamic spirit, and we have experienced this in Iran. Our 
experience is a very good experience. We have experienced this 
in our prisons during the shah's rule. We entered the prisons 
together with the Marxists. In those very first days of 
interrogation, the Marxists gave up and the Muslims remained. 
[passage omitted] 
  Of course, Palestine alone cannot destroy Israel. We should 
not expect the people of Palestine to defeat Israel on their 
own. This is an idealistic imagination and a bit like wishing 
for a miracle. We don't have such miracles. Islamic support 
must be offered by all the world. The problem of Algeria should 
be resolved, the problem of Egypt should be resolved, the 
problem of Iraq should be resolved. The peoples of these 
countries should be frank and sincere, as are the people of 
Iran. They should be not be scared. The Americans and the 
British should be made to make a calculation and decide to 
either lose all the world of Islam or lose Israel. When that 
day comes... [pauses] We have the way for the victory of the 
Palestinians, and it is not an impossible path to take. Of 
course, it is a tempestuous sea, a dangerous desert, the path is 
very dangerous. [passage omitted] 
  Those who think that following the signing of a peace treaty 
the Muslims will stop are wrong. I believe that this might be a 
positive development. Let the governments sign peace treaties 
and let their peoples understand that their path is different 
from those governments. [passage omitted] 

