BFN 

<F P=106> [Dmitriy Kuznets report under "Legislation" rubric: </F>
"`Superlaw' Gets Approved by All Excerpt Communists. State Duma 
Passes Part of Russian Federation Civil Code in First Reading"] 
  [Text] Yesterday, the State Duma passed in its first 
reading part of the Russian Federation Civil Code. This is the 
first "new edition" of the Civil Code since 1964. The old code 
has become obsolete over the 30 years, and in the Justice 
Ministry's admission, "it has not worked de facto for several 
years now." The document, comprising three sections and 450 
articles, encompasses all the economic, property-based, and 
other relationships of Russian Federation citizens among 
themselves and with the state. If you add to that the relations 
of the above with citizens of other countries, the new edition 
of the Civil Code is going to be a really all-inclusive act, an 
"economic constitution" of direct action. If you consider 
Article 3 of the Code, which establishes the supremacy of the 
Civil Code over the other codes (land, water, family, and other 
codes cannot contradict it under this article), the new edition 
indeed looks to be a "superlaw," as the deputies have dubbed it. 
  All the speakers -- both those advocating and opposing the 
Civil Code -- noted the need to pass a document that should be 
"economically suitable," and the impeccable legal technique of 
its Justice Ministry drafters. Indeed, the section dealing with 
ownership has been written so precisely that a law on ownership 
"appears to be absolutely unnecessary." Inheritance, 
authorship, and other relationships have received full treatment 
in the Civil Code. The deputy chairman of the Duma Legislation 
Committee, Mr. Zapolskiy, who presented -- as did the justice 
minister, Mr. Kalmykov -- a report, urged the house to pass the 
Civil Code, which would "ensure a stable economic regime in the 
country. The Code is in itself both a regulating and a 
"framework" act. There should be addenda to the Civil Code in 
the shape of mortgage, cooperation, pawnshop, etc., laws, 
whereas the Civil Code would also be a valuable working act. 
  The only Duma faction expressly against the document was the 
Communists. Valentin Martemyanov, Communist Party of the 
Russian Federation spokesman, attributed this to the fact that 
"private ownership, especially of land, would become 
disproportionate. The Communist Party of the Russian Federation 
opposes a free turnover of land ownership, which should only be 
reserved for land taken up by a house, truck garden, or orchard. 
Moreover, the Communist Party disagrees with the slighting of 
collective property by having not even mentioned it in the 
draft." In the Communists' opinion, the Civil Code should not 
be a substitute for a land code. 
  The Agrarians, too, adhered to such a view. It was, however, 
decided, at their suggestion, to establish in the second reading 
the supremacy over the Civil Code of the land code being 
currently drafted at the Ministry of Agriculture under the 
guidance of Vice Premier Zaveryukha. This entry was included in 
the Duma decree, and the Agrarians agreed to approve the Civil 
Code. An "intercommittee Duma commission" will be set to 
include representatives of the Justice Ministry to finalize the 
draft. 

