BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by political Analyst Aleksey Kiva: "We Have Been </F>
Independent for Three Years"] 
  [Text] Let us recall the starting point of the roots 
of Russian sovereignty which basically gave life to the new 
Russia. These were the last years of the Gorbachev period, when 
as a result of the glasnost and openness which had just begun, 
we Russians learned how much our communist rulers had hidden 
from us. Extremely tough questions came to the fore. Why, for 
example, were the majority of Russians so poor? Poorer than the 
inhabitants of many other republics which did not possess our 
wealth or our intellectual, scientific, and technical potential. 
Why should wealth flow out of Russia on such a scale, ending up 
in other republics and God knows where? 
  According to calculations made by the well-known economist 
Nikolay Shmelev, resources worth $50 billion were redistributed 
every year across the USSR at Russia's expense -- this was an 
inescapable fact. The "industrial giants" bypassed by 
structural perestroyka turned into museums of the early 
industrial age. Villages in the central chernozem oblasts became 
depopulated. Roads everywhere fell into disrepair. The 
incidence of infectious diseases increased. The birth rate 
fell.... 
  One question followed another. Why was the Soviet imperial 
center rapaciously exploiting Russia and literally plundering 
irreplaceable natural resources? Why were people's living 
environments being so criminally poisoned? Was it justified in 
peacetime to have such an enormous military-industrial complex 
employing at least 70 percent of the nation's potential? 
  Basically, Russia resolved to take its fate into its own 
hands through force of circumstance. Maybe many of us have 
forgotten how the question of Russia's sovereignty arose and why 
this idea met with practically universal approval in the old 
RSFSR Supreme Soviet, which was composed primarily of Communist 
deputies. It touches on the question of who started to "destroy 
the Union" and why. 
  The truth is that "great Russia" was destroyed by the 
Communists themselves; moreover they destroyed it long ago, even 
before the period of Gorbachev's perestroyka. They destroyed it 
because they tried to realize the utopia of communism. The 
August 1991 putsch merely exposed what had been rotting for a 
long time -- both the system and the empire state. 
<H5>  What Have We Achieved During the Last Three Years? </H5>
  First. It was possible to get the breakup of the 
USSR under control through the establishment of the CIS. Russia 
was thereby able to avoid a full-scale civil war. 
Let us call all these things by their names. Russia was an 
empire. But it is unlikely that any of us living in Russia now 
would interpret the "soft breakup" of the USSR as a blessing for 
Russia. Even when we contemplate the sad experience of 
Yugoslavia, where force was used to impede a similar process of 
collapse. Too many negative consequences are apparent to us 
now. This assessment is the task of future historians. 
  Second. During the years since independence 
we have been able to dismantle communism as a value 
system. For a whole series of reasons, real socialism 
proved to be more deep-rooted in its homeland than in the 
"fraternal countries" of Europe. In our country, the "farewell 
to real socialism" dragged on for almost three years. Only the 
disappearance of the soviets made the revanchist task of the 
communist and patriotic forces practically unrealizable. 
  Third. I consider the adoption of a new 
Constitution and the holding of parliamentary elections to be an 
extremely important landmark in the development of Russia as a 
new democratic state. On the one hand, a line was drawn under 
the communist system that had existed in the country. On the 
other hand, the fundamental principles of a new social 
system were established, based on the same principles which 
exist in the most prosperous countries in the world. 
  However complex the composition of the present Federal 
Assembly, particularly the State Duma, it is nevertheless not 
the former Supreme Soviet. The Duma undoubtedly has a 
constructive core of deputies, and it operates as a lawmaking 
organ. 
  Fourth. Conditions have been created to implement the 
ideas of civil accord. It is not simply a matter of 
signing or not signing the Treaty on Civil Accord. We have 
started to address a task which goes far beyond the framework of 
the powers both of the present parliament and the president 
alike. This is an all-embracing task, the solution to which 
will affect the future of our nation and our country for years 
and decades to come. It is starting right now with the 
resolution of political problems. 
  It is no secret that some people who consider themselves 
supporters of democracy have reproached President Boris Yeltsin 
with not exploiting the situation that existed after the events 
of 3-4 October 1993; they urged him to use tough methods in 
order to speed up the establishment of social, economic, and 
other preconditions for a subsequent and more robust 
acceleration of democracy. But this would have meant replacing 
the reforms model wholesale and sending the country down a 
slippery path fraught with dangers. 
  Fifth. During the past few years we have 
managed to set in motion the flywheel of market relations. 
It is possible to give a negative assessment of our embryonic 
half-wild and half-mafia market. We can lament the fact that it 
has not become civilized with a wave of a magic wand. Generally 
speaking, it is easy for us to wallow in catastrophic 
predictions and gloomy prophecies regarding our sad future. 
  But we can also approach the matter in a different way. 
First of all, we can display a sympathetic understanding of the 
country we live in, its customs and traditions, and whether we 
are prepared to embark right away on building a civilized and 
highly cultured society after 75 years of communist supremacy. 
  It would not hurt us to open our eyes a little wider in 
order 
to appreciate what has been achieved and secured in the last few 
years. Not only the rights and freedoms that are being 
implemented in practice. There is also the abundance of goods 
we have never had before. We have seen the last of the "food 
trains," "food buses," and so forth. We no longer have to waste 
time looking for carrots and sausages. Opportunities the like 
of which we never dreamed before have opened up. 
  Yes, there are plenty of ugly features in our lives. We are 
strangled by corruption. We are oppressed by bureaucracy. And 
criminals are becoming more audacious every day. Economic 
reform sometimes operates at half cock or simply idles along. 
We must correct all this, refine it, and perhaps change it 
radically. Only without panic or hysterics. 
  And finally. A new reforms course has been mapped out, 
the fight against crime is being stepped up, and the Treaty of 
Civil Accord has begun to be implemented. 
  HOWEVER, WHAT HAVE WE NOT MANAGED TO ACHIEVE over the recent 
period? First, we have been unable to avoid acutely conflictual 
social development and confrontation between the various 
branches of power, which ultimately led to the tragic events of 
October 1993. Second, we have been unable to avoid a number of 
mistakes and errors in the economic sphere, mistakes which can 
hardly be termed inevitable. Third, literally right from the 
start of the reforms the reformers have been unable to establish 
a permanent dialogue with the people, something which would have 
enabled them to secure greater understanding and support from 
the people, including amendments to the reforms course. I am 
sure the social cost of the reforms could be reduced if a more 
skillful policy were to be pursued. 
  Finally, it has not proved possible to reduce the acuteness 
of the social discomfort experienced by many Russians, their 
loss of social and moral guidelines, and even their loss of 
faith in the future. Why has this happened? In my view, 
because the new authorities have not put forward in good time an 
attractive social model to replace real socialism and have not 
proposed a new system of moral and spiritual values. The 
mistake was that it was necessary to provide an answer 
straightaway to the questions which have been worrying society 
-- "What are we building?" and "Where are we going?" 
  Who knows, under our specific conditions we may not have 
made 
the worst of starts. At any rate Russia is by no means losing 
out when viewed against the backdrop of the other former USSR 
republics. Including countries like Ukraine, Belorussia 
[Belarus], or Kazakhstan, which initially tried to introduce a 
different, profoundly centralized reform model. It has not 
worked. This means that we are on the right track, however hard 
it may be. 

