BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Hou Jie (0186 2638): "One Must Be Realistic in </F>
Resolving the Housing Problem"] 
  [Text] Practice over many years has demonstrated that it 
not feasible to negate the commodity attributes of residential 
housing, to keep it outside the market economy, and to let the 
government undertake the task of supplying housing to all 
workers. To actually solve the issue of urban residential 
housing supply, we should implement the principle of having the 
government, the employing institutions, and the individual 
workers jointly bear the costs of housing, should extensively 
raise housing construction funds, and should commercialize 
residential housing. 
  An analysis of the relevant data shows that, in many 
developed countries, people spend over 30 percent of their 
income on housing consumption, but in our country -- before the 
adjustment of the rental policy -- housing consumption accounted 
for only 1 percent of people's income. Of course, the average 
income and consumption level in our country is far lower than 
that in the developed countries, and it is unadvisable to 
unrealistically assess individuals' housing expenditures 
according to the level of those countries. The level of 
people's expenditure on housing is still too low in our country, 
however, and this is unfavorable to the settlement of the 
housing problem. We should soberly note that housing, being a 
special type of high-cost durable consumer goods, is an 
essential item of consumption. It has the common attributes of 
ordinary commodities as well as special characteristics which 
are unlike those of ordinary commodities. In the current 
conditions of our country, it is hardly possible to completely 
push housing onto the market. We should thus make arrangements 
according to the actual conditions and build different types of 
residential housing to meet the needs of people in different 
income categories. That is, there should be commodity houses, 
slightly profitable houses [wei li fang 1792 0116 2075], 
low-priced houses [ping jia fang 1627 0116 2075], and 
standard-priced houses [biao zhun fang 2871 0402 2075]. For a 
small number of people who earn a high income and who have 
strong psychological and economic tolerance, there should be 
special regulations on purchasing commodity housing, and the 
prices should be fixed according to the market conditions. A 
large number of people in the intermediate and low income 
brackets obviously cannot afford housing at the current prices, 
so our policies should arrange the construction of slightly 
profitable houses, low-priced housing, and standard-priced 
housing to meet their needs. At present, the greatest 
difficulty lies in finding a scientific way to define different 
income categories, because it is now not easy to find out 
people's actual income level. With the establishment of the 
system for people's income tax returns, this problem may be 
solved gradually. At the same time, we should also allow 
various localities to formulate their own standards for defining 
income categories according to the local people's actual income 
and consumption levels. 

