BFN 

  [Excerpts] Senior General Than Shwe, chairman of the State 
Law and Order Restoration Council [SLORC] of the Union of 
Myanmar [Burma], left Yangon [Rangoon] by special aircraft at 
0730 today for the Lao People's Democratic Republic [LPDR] for a 
goodwill visit at the invitation of Lao President Nouhak 
Phoumsavan. Sr. Gen. Than Shwe was accompanied by his wife Daw 
Kyaing Kyaing. [passage omitted on party attending departure] 
Sr. Gen. Than Shwe also was accompanied by Lieutenant General 
Khin Nyunt, SLORC secretary-1, and his wife Dr. Khin Win Shwe; 
Lt. Gen. Myint Aung, minister of agriculture; Brigadier General 
Abel, minister of national planning and economic development; U 
Ohn Gyaw, minister of foreign affairs, and wife; Brig. Gen. Myo 
Thant, minister of information; and responsible personnel from 
the SLORC office, defense ministry, and foreign ministry. 
[passage omitted] 
  A statement was issued on arrival at Vientiane airport 
concerning the visit. The statement reads: At the invitation of 
Lao President Nouhak Phoumsavan, Sr. Gen. Than Shwe and his wife 
Daw Kyaing Kyaing has arrived for a goodwill visit to the LPDR 
from 9-13 June accompanied by Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt and other 
government officials. The Myanmar delegation leader conveyed the 
goodwill greetings of the Myanmar [Burmese] people to the Lao 
people through the Lao president. There is also increased 
goodwill and cooperation between the leaders and peoples of both 
countries. There have been reciprocal visits by leaders in 
recent years and more development has been achieved after 
exchanging views on agriculture, forests, construction, and 
recreational support activities. 
  In religion, bilateral relations are on the rise with 
exchange visits of sanghas and the presentation of donations. 
Since December 1990, Myanmar and Laos have cooperated on 
narcotics issues through national commission meetings. 
Bilateral cooperation is further enhanced by the signing of the 
narcotic suppression agreement with the People's Republic of 
China, LPDR, Myanmar, and Thailand in New York on 26 October 
1993. Moreover, Lao-Myanmar-Thai ministerial meetings were held 
in Thailand on 13-14 March 1992 and in Myanmar on 9-11 February 
1994. With the supervision of the joint border commission and 
beginning in 1990, survey work on the fixed Myanmar-Lao border 
demarcation in the Mekong River has been completed and the 
Myanmar delegation hopes that the agreement can be signed during 
this goodwill visit. During the visit, the Myanmar delegation 
will hold talks and exchange views at the head of state and 
ministerial levels benefiting regional stability and 
development. Myanmar, based on goodwill and cooperative spirit, 
has been able to donate rice, grains, salt, pumps, teak, seeds, 
and other commodities to Lao while Laos donated Kyat 20,000 to 
Myanmar for Irrawaddy flood relief fund on 5 September 1991. 
[passage omitted on welcoming ceremony] 

