Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional drug seizures and arrests related to drug 
trafficking monitored through 27 February. Source is cited in 
parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  Police destroyed a marijuana plantation of some 2,500 square 
meters near the Tatama Natural Park in western Risaralda 
Department on 15 February. No one was arrested during the 
operation, according to Lieutenant Colonel Libardo Diaz Ortiz. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 16 Feb 94 p 9A) 
  Colombian drug trafficker Jaime Orejuela, one of the leading 
drug lords of the Cali Cartel, was captured by police on the 
night of 22 February, it was officially reported. Orejuela, who 
had been sought by Colombian and U.S. authorities, was captured 
while driving in downtown Cali. (Hamburg DPA in Spanish 0357 
GMT 23 Feb 94) 
  Colombian authorities officially reported today the results 
of an operation conducted this week against the Cali Cartel: 20 
persons were arrested, 20 luxury vehicles were confiscated, and 
a large quantity of precursor chemicals were confiscated. The 
operation was carried out in the southwestern departments of 
Valle del Cauca, Cauca, Putumayo, and Narino, where Cali Cartel 
drug traffickers have set up facilities to process cocaine. 
According to press reports, the leading drug lord, Gilberto 
Rodriguez, was able to escape, but the military says it was only 
a "rumor." (Hamburg DPA in Spanish 1507 GMT 25 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  Police located and destroyed several marijuana plantations 
worth some 28 million quetzales near Melchor de Mencos, Peten 
Department, on the border with Belize, according to an official 
report. A total of 74,000 plants were destroyed, but no one was 
arrested. (Guatemala PRENSA LIBRE in Spanish 21 Feb 94 p 27) 
  Guatemalan authorities arrested four Mexicans who tried to 
smuggle 108 kg of cocaine worth $2.8 million into Guatemalan 
territory through the Mexican-Guatemalan border, official 
sources reported on 25 February. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 
1511 GMT 25 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Honduras </H5>
  Narcotics police confiscated 38 kg of pure cocaine worth 5 
million lempiras in three houses on the island of Utila, Islas 
de la Bahia Department. Six people were arrested in the 
operation. (San Pedro Sula LA PRENSA in Spanish 19 Feb 94 p 6A) 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  Mexican Navy and Federal Judicial Police personnel found an 
abandoned boat containing 1.47 tons of cocaine close to the 
Mexican island of Cozumel near the tourist port of Cancun. 
Police are trying to locate the boat's owners. In addition, 
the Attorney General's Office has reported that a total of 4.5 
tons of marijuana have been confiscated in various Mexican 
states over the past week. As a result of the operations, 29 
alleged drug traffickers have been arrested and 10 vehicles used 
to transport drugs have been confiscated. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 2020 GMT 22 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Nicaragua </H5>
  The National Police broke up a drug trafficking network in 
the last few days. The network operated in various parts of the 
country, including Bluefields, Matagalpa, Tipitapa, and Managua, 
police sources reported. A source who asked to remain 
anonymous reports that Freddy Blandon Valverde, alias El Chele 
Freddy, the main cocaine supplier in Matagalpa, was arrested 
with three grams of the drug on 20 February. (Managua BARRICADA 
in Spanish 24 Feb 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Panama </H5>
  Members of the Narcotics Division of the Judicial Technical 
Police conducted an operation in the area of Paraiso, San 
Miguelito District, on 11 February and confiscated 4 kg of 
cocaine. A Colombian citizen was arrested during the operation. 
(Panama City EL SIGLO in Spanish 26 Feb 94 p 42) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  Two drug traffickers, a Venezuelan and a Colombian, were 
arrested in Paraguachon, Zulia State, in possession of $400,000. 
The money allegedly came from the sale of drugs. (Caracas EL 
UNIVERSAL in Spanish 24 Feb 94 p 4-31) 
  The National Guard dismantled a group of drug traffickers 
made up of three adults and a minor in the town of Pariaguan, 
Anzoategui. All four individuals were turned over to the 
Judicial Technical Police. (Caracas EL UNIVERSAL in Spanish 24 
Feb 94 p 4-31) 
  The Judicial Technical Police and the National Guard 
confiscated 21 kg of cocaine during an operation at the 
international airport in Maiquetia. Three Spanish citizens were 
arrested before they were able to board their Iberia Airlines 
flight to Madrid. Meanwhile, the Judicial Technical Police 
confiscated 16 kg of cocaine at the Adriatico Hotel in San 
Antonio del Tachira. The drugs were in the possession of a 
person identified as U.S. citizen Dugger Gene Allen, who fled 
before the police arrived. (Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 25 
Feb 94 p D-11) 

