Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] As a response to a question by Lower House 
Representative Akiba (Socialist Democratic Party of Japan, first 
Hiroshima ward, elected for two terms) on 1 October, the Science 
and Technology Agency (STA) revealed details about the amount of 
Japan's plutonium supply and demand. It has disclosed some 
information in the past, but this is the first time that this 
information was disclosed in full, and is in response to demands 
for disclosure both in Japan and abroad. 
  According to the written response to Representative Akiba, 
the total amount of fissionable plutonium purchased from other 
countries and extracted in Great Britain, France and the Tokai 
reprocessing plant is about 8,230 kilograms (kg). 
  Of this, the stored amount, which excludes the amount 
already 
processed as fuel, is 4,500 kg. This includes 2,900 kg that is 
owned by Japanese electric power companies and is stored in 
Great Britain and France in the form of plutonium dioxide powder 
and 1,600 kg (in the form of plutonium dioxide powder) that is 
stored in Japan, of which 540 kg (as a mixed oxide (MOX) with 
uranium in powder form) was recovered at the Tokai reprocessing 
plant in Japan and 1,060 kg was transported from France on the 
Akatsuki-Maru last year. 
  At the Tokai reprocessing plant, about 724 tons of spent 
fuel 
has been processed and 2,925 kg of plutonium has been recovered. 
  A British Nuclear Fuels Limited (BNFL) reprocessing plant 
reprocessed 1,100 tons of spent fuel from the Tokai Number 1 gas 
reactor, and recovered 1,560 kg of plutonium. 
  At the reprocessing plant of the French COGEMA, the UP-2 
plant reprocessed 150 tons and recovered 780 kg, and the UP-3 
plant reprocessed 620 tons and recovered 2,480 kg. 
  The amount transported from abroad includes 980 kg from 
Great 
Britain and 1,250 kg from France. The price of plutonium that 
was transported on the Akatsuki-Maru and that the Power Reactor 
and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation (PNC) bought from the 
Japanese electric power companies was &yen;1.13 billion. 
  Although the written response to Representative Akiba did 
not 
mention this, about 100 kg of plutonium was purchased from the 
United States and about 60 kg was purchased from the former West 
Germany. 
&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  As for use, 1,020 kg of fissionable plutonium is scheduled 
to 
be incorporated into the initial loading of core fuel by the 
fast breeder reactor "Monju." In terms of MOX, this is 6.7 tons. 
The plutonium transported by the Akatsuki-Maru is expected to be 
used in the manufacturing of replacement fuel from the summer of 
1994. 
  STA's Nuclear Fuel Division, which drew up the written 
response, maintains that STA always has disclosed as much 
information as possible and that this will not change in the 
future. 
<H3>  STA Policy Is To Release Detailed Documentation on 
Reprocessing Plant </H3>
  STA has decided to disclose the "application for approval of 
design and construction methods" for the returned waste control 
facility and the reprocessing facility, which Japan Nuclear Fuel 
is building in Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori Prefecture, to handle the 
high-level radioactive nuclear waste that is being returned to 
Japan from abroad. 
  STA and Japan Nuclear Fuel currently are coordinating on the 
disclosure site and on the handling of information that cannot 
be disclosed due to proprietary rights or protection of nuclear 
materials. They want to start the disclosure process within the 
year. 
  In June of this year, when the group of 10,000 filing action 
to prevent the nuclear fuel cycle (represented by Miyako 
Oshimoda, instructor of Hachinohe University) lodged a protest 
to STA about these two facilities, it demanded that the 
application for approval of design and construction methods be 
disclosed, on the grounds that the suit could not be filed 
without information about the content of the facility. In 
connection with nuclear power facilities, the Sendai district 
court already has ordered that the application for approval of 
construction of Tohoku Electric Power Company's Yasukawa Nuclear 
Power Plant be submitted, but this will be the first time that 
the national government has disclosed something as highly secret 
as the application for approval of design and construction 
methods. 

