Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 14 Mar (NA) -- Secretary for the 
Prevention of Drug Abuse Alberto Lestelle today said that the 
Armed Forces "should not interfere" in the antinarcotics effort 
in Argentina, because "the security organizations are 
effectively conducting this struggle." 
  Lestelle emphasized his viewpoint by comparing Argentina to 
Colombia, Bolivia, Peru, and the United States. He said 
Argentina "does not have problems as serious as theirs to 
justify the Armed Forces' participation in this struggle." 
  He also said that the Argentine Government has "fully" 
agreed 
with the United States on the need "to update Argentine laws, 
which are the legal basis for this difficult struggle." 
  Lestelle admitted, however, having received a specific 
request from Robert Gelbard, the number two man in the Drug 
Enforcement Administration [as received] in this regard, as was 
stated in an article published today in the Buenos Aires press. 
He explained that this issue has already been discussed at the 
Inter-American Commission for Drug Abuse Prevention. 
  Lestelle also asserted that there is a bill modifying the 
law 
that penalizes drug trafficking. He explained that "the only 
pending aspect of the problem is that related to informers." 
  He pointed out: "We have met with some congressmen to make 
sure that the figure of the informer is included in the law, 
thus ensuring that it includes the four elements -- the 
informer, the repentant drug trafficker, the undercover agent, 
and the court-monitored drug delivery -- and thus help justice 
to function better." 
  Lestelle favors inclusion of the "repentant drug trafficker" 
in the current laws, "as long as it has legal bases." 
  He emphasized: "With legal protection enabling the person to 
appear before the courts and report on whatever it is required, 
people will act responsibly, will not flee the country, and will 
logically not be saying just any nonsense." 
  Lestelle said this was not the case of the well-known 
"repentant drug trafficker" Andy Cruz Iglesias, who told the 
Spanish judges about Argentine connections with an international 
dollar laundering gang, which was the source of the so-called 
"Yomagate" case in Argentina. 
  "The judge deemed Andy Iglesias' remarks valid, but reality 
showed that the data reported by Iglesias were not that 
correct," Lestelle said. 
  Referring to the repercussions in Argentina of Iglesias' 
testimony, Lestelle said: "It is not necessary to tell the 
truth for a scandal to arise." He added: "The required legal 
action was adopted, and the appropriate people contacted." 
  In conclusion, Lestelle rejected demonstrations in favor of 
the legalization of drug use, and warned that "the economic 
excuses used in this regard have no foundation, because to 
legalize the drug it would be necessary to produce the drug in 
the country. To do this we would have to build drug processing 
laboratories, and these would have to be controlled by the 
central government, as occurs in the case of laboratories that 
produce medicine." 

