Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Andre Riche commentary: "The Belgians on the Front Page of </F>
Europe"] 
  [Text] Belgium is back in the headlines regarding two 
highly important European issues: the European Union (EU) 
enlargement from 12 to 16 members and the succession of Jacques 
Delors at the head of the European Commission (EC). These two 
events are apparently unrelated, except for the fact that they 
are to take place at the same time: in January 1995. A closer 
look reveals that the stakes are very similar, and will have a 
major impact on the future and nature of the EU. And when the 
nature of European integration is at stake, our country -- loyal 
to its federalist tradition -- is never slow to react. So much 
the better. 
  Belgium has always distrusted the enlargement. It made this 
known in good time: Two years ago, well before the beginning of 
negotiations with Austria, Sweden, Finland, and Norway. It 
repeated its position Tuesday [22 March], while the Twelve took 
leave of each other angry and unable to adapt their 
decisionmaking procedure to a Union that is going to expand to 
16 members. 
  The Twelve still have a chance -- albeit a slight one -- to 
defuse the crisis during their meeting next weekend in Greece. 
However, even if they manage to do that, they will not get away 
unscathed. 
  The enlargement is splitting the seams between north and 
south, as well as between Great Britain and the continent. 
Above all, it has ended up looking like an uncautious and 
relentless pursuit forward, in view of the failure to 
consolidate the institutional foundations of the European 
edifice in the Maastricht Treaty. In 1991, when they conceived 
Maastricht, the Twelve postponed the work of deepening [the 
Union] until later negotiations. These were scheduled for 1996. 
  It is true that the temptation to enlarge was strong, even 
on 
shaky foundations. It was a way of regaining prestige for the 
Union, giving it a more dynamic appearance, and concealing the 
many reasons for giving up hope in it: The economic recession, 
the mixed success of the single market, the maintenance of 
border checks, the crisis in the monetary system, diplomatic 
impotence, etc. And now the enlargement, too, is stuck in a rut! 
  The current dispute -- concerning a partial and temporary 
aspect of the institutional reform -- does not augur at all well 
for the chances of success of the 1996 conference, because, 
apart from the arithmetic extrapolation of a voting system, the 
fundamental principles are already clashing. Belgium could not 
remain silent. It stressed -- fortunately, with the support of a 
majority of the member states -- the danger of burdening the 
decisionmaking process. It also confirmed that it would not 
yield, because no matter what London's views are on the matter 
-- London calls the Belgians "dogmatic" -- it is not even a 
question of lightening the current procedures, but simply of 
extrapolating them. 
  This is worrying because, according to the formula, we 
cannot 
do good politics without good institutions. This formula is 
even more valid for the EU, because, unlike the states which 
comprise it, in only still exists through its institutions. 
  What about the successor to Jacques Delors? In 10 years, 
Jacques Delors himself has become a sort of institution. The 
Commission has always been the key institution in the European 
machine -- its driving force. The fact that two Belgians -- 
Jean-Luc Dehaene and Wilfried Martens -- are among the 
candidates for taking over from Delors cannot leave Belgium 
indifferent. Just like it is right to stand in the way of a 
botched enlargement that would threaten the nature of the Union, 
Belgium must seize the opportunity to ensure Jacques Delors' 
succession. This would also be an effective means of 
maintaining our federalist ideals. 

