Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Traditional weekly radio interview given by Eduard </F>
Shevardnadze to correspondent Nato Oniani in Tbilisi on 10 
January] 
  [Excerpts] At the request of correspondent Nato Oniani, 
Eduard Shevardnadze, chairman of the Georgian Parliament-head of 
state, began his traditional radio interview by commenting on 
the speech delivered on Georgian television by Parliament 
Speaker Vakhtang Goguadze. 
  [Shevardnadze] Vakhtang Goguadze's speech should become a 
subject of serious study. I do not think it necessary that the 
establishment of order, if we understand this in its literal 
sense, should be entrusted to Russia. We ourselves should 
establish order in our own country. A country that is unable to 
establish order does not deserve independence and will be unable 
to preserve it. It is a different matter when what is under 
discussion is the resolution of the problem in Abkhazia or 
Samachablo [South Ossetia]; if the establishment of order 
relates to these problems, it will be probably difficult and, in 
practice, impossible to resolve them without the participation 
of Russia. 
  As regards the ruble zone, I believe that no one is ready 
today to convincingly formulate his own views on this question. 
Batoni [Georgian polite form of address] Vakhtang was 
expressing one possible variant, namely that Georgia should join 
the ruble zone when other CIS member states have done the 
opposite and have encountered certain difficulties in this 
respect. Apart from Georgia, Belarus is the only country that 
has more or less determined its position regarding entry into 
the ruble zone. 
  It is impossible today to give a decisive answer to this 
question. A country that has its own national currency cannot 
state so easily that it is ready to join the ruble or any other 
zone. I said in my New Year's interview that the introduction 
of the coupon was a mistake; more precisely, it was a premature 
decision taken by the authorities at that time, including me. 
Unfortunately, it transpired that the country, in the shape of 
the Cabinet and Parliament, was not prepared to turn toward 
Russia. If we had turned toward Russia, I am convinced that we 
would have overcome the bank note crisis, we would have received 
the necessary amount, and we would have been seriously prepared 
for the introduction of a national currency. There was a 
greater desire on our part at the time to introduce as quickly 
as possible our national currency as one of the attributes of 
statehood and independence. To tell the truth, both the state 
and individual families paid quite a high price for this. 
  Therefore, I am not ready today to give an answer. I will 
need to have serious consultations with our foreign colleagues. 
I am going to visit Turkey, France, and the United States and 
meet with the heads of the IMF, the World Bank, and certain 
international economic organizations, including the UN, and, 
thereafter, I will be better qualified to give an answer as to 
what the solution is. However, it will be very difficult to find 
one without simultaneous help from some foreign power, be this 
in the form of large credits or other measures. I think that 
two or three months are needed in order to give a specific 
answer to this serious question raised by Batoni Vakhtang. 
  [Oniani] In your New Year interview, you mentioned that 1994 
will be the year of economic revival. Will it also be the year 
of political revival? 
  [Shevardnadze] When I said that 1994 would be the beginning 
of a turnabout in the economy, politics, and, as I put it, state 
thinking in general, naturally I had in mind political events. 
We have to put a stop to talk about someone preparing a coup 
and someone possibly seizing power; there should exist a legal 
way for doing everything and, in any case, the use of weapons 
must be excluded. 
  Batoni Tengiz Kitovani [former defense minister] stated 
recently: I am not planning any kind of coup; those who want to 
divert attention from social problems to some other problems are 
the ones who need to speak about a coup. Batoni Sigua's [former 
prime minister] frequent pronouncements against the authorities, 
in particular the head of state, are well known. However, 
threats of a coup have, as yet, not been heard in his speeches. 
There have been other speeches, but I do not pay very much 
attention to all this. I would like to say the following about 
these two persons: Both Batoni Sigua and Tengiz Kitovani will 
always remain as heroes regarding those events that marked the 
beginning of the expulsion of provincial fascism from Georgia [a 
reference to their role in deposing ex-President Gamsakhurdia in 
January 1992]. This is an historical process and they not only 
participated in this process but also were its leaders and will 
remain so throughout history. As for all the rest, the 
individual pronouncements and speeches, and Sigua's plans that 
he is frequently outlining and speaking about in Parliament or 
on television, I think this should be explained as human 
weakness, annoyance, anger, a lack of objectivity and knowledge, 
and, at times, something else. I repeat that all this is a 
detail; the most important thing is their service to this 
serious and historic matter. 
  I do not think that 1994 will be a year of any very great 
political cataclysms; I do not think that we should expect any 
coups and so forth as this naturally will not bring society 
anything. 
  [Oniani] To what extent are the second stage of the state 
of emergency and the curfew adopted by Parliament being 
implemented in Georgia today? 
  [Shevardnadze] I will not be exaggerating if I say that we 
are doing everything it is possible to do in such a short period 
of time following the conclusion of events in western Georgia, 
and this is being felt little by little in the country. Order 
is being restored along the highways in western Georgia, and the 
situation there is being controlled by the police as it is along 
the highway leading to the Jvari Gorge and in certain other 
directions. Order is being restored at the oil wells and fuel 
depots. Unfortunately, we needed to use internal troops there. 
In the main, order has now been restored at these 
installations. This means that, in the near future, we will be 
able to produce 200,000-300,000 tonnes of oil. Order has been 
established in Zestafoni; the operation conducted by the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs involving the participation of 
hundreds of men and a large amount of equipment is well known. 
Order has been restored in Mtskheta rayon where a fairly 
dangerous group has been isolated. [passage omitted] 
  Finally, for three days now, a very big operation has been 
underway in Kvemo Kartli where the situation has been 
unbearable. I was receiving numerous telegrams daily; I don't 
know how many delegations arrived here; I myself visited these 
rayons and met with many people. I have to say that such a 
thing cannot go on in a normal country. Up to 1,500 men have 
taken part in this operation, mainly Ministry of Internal 
Affairs internal troops who have received assistance from the 
Ministry of Security; individual subunits from the Ministry of 
Defense have also taken part in it. As far as I know, the 
results have been fairly good and convincing. These measures are 
continuing. The main thing is that, following the establishment 
of stability in western Georgia, we have been given the chance 
to get on with restoring order in all rayons. 
  I think the time has come to get more actively involved in 
establishing order in the capital and Rustavi where there are 
very many armed formations, both legal and illegal. I believe 
that the dreadful firing that occurred on New Year's Eve did not 
come only from illegal weapons. I am convinced that we probably 
need one month to take care of the capital and Rustavi. In 
Rustavi, there are several unregistered armed formations. If 
they are listening to me now, I advise them to come to Tbilisi 
tomorrow or join the state structure, or put down their weapons 
and start living a normal life. Otherwise, things will end 
badly. They should take this as a serious warning from me. I 
know that they fought where it was necessary but, no matter what 
occurred in the past, the law exists and this has to be obeyed 
by everyone. 
  [SAKARTVELOS RESPUBLIKA editorial note] At the constituent 
congress of the Abkhazian regional organization of the Union of 
Georgia's Citizens, the statutes read by the head of state had 
an optimistic ring about them. This gave rise to the following 
question: 
  [Oniani] Is the deepening of relations with Russia the 
reason for this optimism? 
  [Shevardnadze] One of the reasons is undoubtedly the 
deepening of relations with Russia and with the CIS member 
states in general since our turning toward them means, first and 
foremost, the revival of economic life and the restoration of 
economic ties. This process has already begun and it is a very 
hopeful one. I am convinced that the first half of this year 
will be a period during which very intensive negotiations will 
be conducted with various associations, departments, different 
republics, oblasts, and corresponding administrations. However, 
I think that the second half of the year will be a completely 
new stage in the economic life of Georgia; a new stage from the 
point of view that people will begin to work more intensively 
and on a large scale. I hope that the foreign firms that are 
coming here to carry out work on oil extraction have definite 
expectations and, God willing, we will find a little more oil in 
Georgia. There are also other resources, in particular our coal 
and certain other alternative sources of energy, which will 
enable us to be more prepared for next winter. Winter should 
not mean an economic freeze or the economy coming to a halt. 
Hence, I repeat that the deepening of relations with Russia 
itself and our joining the CIS means, first and foremost, the 
revival of the economy and I think that, if the economy gets 
going again and in an effective manner, people will have a 
better life. 
  There is no disputing the fact that we have to return to 
Abkhazia. How this should be done is another question. Another 
meeting is taking place in Geneva. There are definite hopes 
that the meeting will bring results and, if not, it doesn't 
matter; our return is inevitable. Furthermore, the view exists 
that our return to Abkhazia is connected with the more 
progressive and just position assumed by Russia. At the same 
time, events focused on Georgia that are taking place not only 
in Russia but also throughout the world, in particular, the 
creation of organizations and committees in support of us in 
various countries, more assistance, investments in the national 
economy, and humanitarian aid, are also important. However, the 
main thing is order. If there is order, there will be 
investment and the flow of capital from different countries 
throughout the world and, in this way, the country will be 
saved. This is what I meant when I said that 1994 should be a 
turning point. 
  [SAKARTVELOS RESPUBLIKA editorial note] The head of state 
had the following to say about the news of the death of the 
former president that was spread last week: 
  [Shevardnadze] The death of any person arouses serious 
regret in me, particularly as the ex-president no longer 
represented any kind of serious political force in Georgia today 
following those events that took place in western Georgia. His 
ideology, his world outlook, and his supporters were defeated in 
every way and from all points of view in accordance with all 
existing laws. 
  Regarding those forces that were connected in one way or 
another with provincial fascism, I do not think that we have the 
right to feel at peace. Of course, Gamsakhurdia was not alone. 
He was a politician who adhered to the most categorical and 
forward positions. However, he had supporters not only at the 
time when, as we now say, the national-liberation movement 
embraced the whole of Georgia but also later when he was moving 
on Kutaisi and Tbilisi; there were people in many political 
parties that were ready to form an alliance with him. If it is 
possible to make some kind of forecast, it should be said that 
these forces will try to create a new organization that is not 
so much radical but, nevertheless, neo-fascist or profascist in 
its orientation and if they succeed and come to power, they will 
conduct the same policies that were implemented by Gamsakhurdia. 
Therefore, we have to be careful and vigilant. 
  I do not know whether anyone has witnessed Gamsakhurdia's 
burial and we do not know where his grave is. The area in which 
it is supposed to be is, so we are told, still under the control 
of a small group of his supporters who are quite well armed. We 
do not want there to be any kind of bloodshed and, therefore, we 
are not moving in there. It has been confirmed in Groznyy that 
he indeed committed suicide. According to information brought 
by our delegation, he wife says the same thing. There is now a 
very big debate going on regarding where he should be buried or 
laid to rest. In my view, his family should decide this 
question. If, as I am being told, it is the wish of his family 
that he be definitely buried in Groznyy -- he found refuge there 
and this will be no misfortune -- we will not oppose this. If 
his family should want his grave to be in Georgia, this is also 
up to them. One thing, however, is essential: A serious 
examination of the body should be carried out with the 
participation of international experts so that all other 
versions [of his death] can be either excluded or confirmed. 
Some people are saying that he did not commit suicide, that 
certain forces close to him decided that he was no longer needed 
for anything and, as they say, settled scores with him. Perhaps 
this is gossip, perhaps it's the truth. Therefore, a legal 
medical examination should, in any case, be carried out. This 
is my view. 
  [Oniani] Today, fascism has become a serious force in 
Russia. It therefore seems paradoxical that Georgia is taking a 
serious step toward Russia precisely now.... 
  [Shevardnadze] The expression of a special solidarity with 
President Yeltsin was felt at the meeting in Ashgabat. I think 
this was precisely because there was such a real danger of 
fascism appearing on the large political arena and not only 
Georgia but also all the CIS member states specifically want and 
have to adopt the decision to help Russia's democratic forces in 
the struggle to overcome this terrible sickness. I believe that 
the same feeling exists in the West, in particular in the US 
Administration and Europe's leading and non-leading nations that 
believe that Russia's democracy needs help. If Russia's 
democracy is saved -- I believe this is how the question should 
be put: Will it be saved or not? -- then life on our planet 
will become stable and assume a normal character. So, Russia's 
internal problems are now no longer its problems alone but the 
concern of the whole world. Naturally, Georgia cannot play a 
decisive role but it can make a specific contribution to this 
matter by expressing its support for Russia's democratic forces 
and democratic administration, in particular for President 
Yeltsin. We have been doing this for a long time and we 
continue to hold this position. [passage omitted] 

