Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special to the JORDAN TIMES" by Sana' 'Atiyah] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Palestinian leaders demanding a more 
democratic decision-making process within the Palestine 
Liberation Organisation (PLO) are preparing for national 
conferences to discuss amending a draft constitution for the 
Palestinian authority in an autonomous West Bank and Gaza Strip, 
Palestinian sources said Wednesday [19 January]. 
  The conferences, due to be held in the occupied territories 
and Amman within two weeks, are expected to draw hundreds of 
Palestinian leaders representing different political factions, 
unions, chambers of industry and commerce in the West Bank and 
Gaza and experts in different fields, according to the sources. 
  The aim of the conferences, according to one of the 
organisers, Taysir 'Aruri, is to hold in-depth discussions on 
the draft constitution and come out with recommendations for 
amendements to be submitted to the PLO leadership. 
  A committee representing the reformists, headed by Haydar 
'Abd-al-Shafi, had discussed the draft constitution with PLO 
Chairman Yasir 'Arafat early this month. The reformists 
insisted on "democratising" the decision-making and delegating 
more authority to other Palestinian leaders. During four 
meetings with the PLO chairman, the committee succeeded in 
convincing Mr. 'Arafat that the draft needed amendments. 
  Mr. 'Aruri said that the leadership also agreed to publicise 
the draft, to be implemented during the interim period, and open 
it for discussion before referring it to the 107-member 
Palestine Central Council (PCC). 
  "The aim is to engage in in-depth discussions of the draft 
constitution and recommend the appropriate amendments so that it 
does become a democratic constitution," Mr. 'Aruri told the 
Jordan Times in an interview. 
  He described the document as vague and insisted that 
contradictions existed between the jurisdictions of the chairman 
of the Executive committee, the president of the elected 
Palestinian council in the autonomous areas and the president of 
the executive authority there. 
  "There are too many unclear articles in the constitution 
which need clearing up," Mr. 'Aruri stressed. 
  Another example of contradiction in the draft constitution 
which concerns Palestinian and international human rights 
organisations is in articles 11 and 59. While article 59 
stipulates that "each person has the right to life and the death 
penalty is prohibited," article 11 states that "a death penalty 
will not be carried out except after the president's 
endorsement, and all such sentences will be presented to him by 
the president of the council (government) with a 
recommendation." A footnote adds that "this article will be 
cancelled if the death penalty is cancelled." 
  The reformists--who include members of Mr. 'Arafat's 
mainstream Fatah movement, the Palestine People's Party (PPP) 
and Yasir 'Abd-Rabuh's Democratic Front (FIDA) in addition to 
independent personalities--are seeking to create a Palestinian 
constitution that would guarantee public freedoms and human 
rights. 
  "There must be no text that gives rights to any person or 
body extraordinary jurisidiction to impose exceptions on laws 
that would guarantee human rights," said Mr. 'Aruri, a member of 
the reformist follow-up committee and member of the PPP. 
  He said the reformists would attempt to come up with an 
amended version of the draft document to "guarantee a state of 
law, a modern constitution that would qualify us to enter the 
21st century." 
  The reformist movement, which began with a petititon signed 
by 116 prominent Palestinian personalities, is also seeking to 
become a permanent body that would ensure continued 
democratisation with the PLO leadership. Mr. 'Aruri said that a 
permanent committee will be elected in a secret ballot soon, 
which would act as a body that would work towards "making the 
best of the (Sept. 13) Declaration of Principles (DoP)" between 
the PLO and Israel. 
  He added that much of the movement's activity was taking 
place in the occupied territories, headed by Dr. 'Abd-al-Shafi, 
and continued to draw more people to its fold. 
  "We are currently involved in intensive contacts with many 
intellectuals and leaders from different factions inside the 
occupied territories and in the diaspora." Mr. 'Aruri said. 
"We are working towards turning what we already have into a 
permanent democratic movement, perhaps a democratic bloc, which 
we expect would become a major pillar in the political 
Palestinian map." 
  The reformists also expect to attract different leaders from 
the opposition factions. such as Hamas and the Popular and 
Democratic fronts, "who do not agree with the unrealistic 
political slogans of torpedoing the peace talks," Mr. 'Aruri 
said, adding that there were such personalities in the 
opposition who seek to "make the DoP work in the best interests 
of the Palestinian people." 
  A number of opposition members were among those who signed 
the petition demanding reform, and a substantial number do not 
share their factions' views on trying to destroy a peaceful 
settlement in the occupied territories. 

