BFN 

<F P=106> [by Geoffrey Murray] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, June 18 KYODO -- Japanese car firms that 
want to play a major role in the development of China's motor 
industry will have to demonstrate a strong commitment to the 
components sector in order to gain acceptance. 
  At the same time, it is becoming clear that the hesitancy of 
Japanese manufacturers in establishing a strong presence in 
China until the last few years is working against their 
interests, at least for now, in what is likely to emerge as a 
major market by the turn of the century. 
  The Beijing government has not yet officially unveiled its 
new industrial policy for the automobile industry, which was 
originally supposed to be announced at the end of last year but 
has been repeatedly delayed. 
  But Ye Qing, vice director of the State Planning Commission, 
has just outlined conditions for the entry of foreign car makers 
after a government-imposed freeze on new passenger car 
manufacturing operations expires at the end of next year. 
  According to Ye, "all things being equal, priority will be 
given to foreign partners who have shown good cooperation in the 
spare and components parts fields." 
  According to sources, major Japanese and American 
manufacturers now knocking on the door have been told they will 
not be able to establish assembly plants until 1996 at the very 
earliest. Toyota and Mitsubishi were among the companies 
singled out by officials for this treatment. 
  The policy reflects the concern that the Chinese components 
sector is backward and extremely fragmented. In its present 
condition, the industry is considered totally unsuitable for the 
development of a modern automotive industry, which is what the 
government wants to see in place in the next few years. 
  Thus, foreign car makers that did not show faith in China in 
the early days of the open door policy in the 1980s will now 
have to prove themselves by helping to upgrade this sector. 
  The immediate beneficiaries of the new policy are Volkswagen 
of Germany and Citroen of France. Volkswagen began producing 
Santana passenger cars and engines partly for export in Shanghai 
in 1985. A second assembly line at Changchun in the northeast 
was set up in 1991 to produce Audi and Jetta models. Volkswagen 
had many problems initially, especially in the procurement of 
Chinese-made components to meet local content targets (due to 
reach 90 percent by 1996), but the operation is now highly 
profitable. 
  In May 1992, Shenlong (Magic Dragon) Automobile Co., a joint 
venture between Citroen and China Dongfeng Auto Corp. was set up 
with work divided between factories in two central cities, Wuhan 
and Xianfeng. With financial backing from the French 
Government, the venture began producing the Citroen ZX small car 
from complete knocked-down kits, before beginning development 
with its Chinese partner of a new model. 
  The two European companies have now received their reward. 
Ye Qing confirmed Chinese press reports that Beijing will set 
up three automotive conglomerates based on Changchun, Shanghai 
and Wuhan, although it did not give any further details. 
  The official business weekly reported last month that China 
expected to consolidate its existing 120-plus automotive plants 
into "three or four giants that would enable the car industry to 
make five million cars annually." 
  A senior official of the ministry of machinery industry said 
the first stage would be the creation of six or seven 
conglomerates by the year 2000, each capable of producing 
300,000 cars a year. In the early decades of the next century, 
they would be further reshuffled into three or four giants. The 
companies would be granted preference in financing, taxation and 
the issuing of securities. 
  Applications from foreign manufacturers to assemble cars in 
China would be vetted to see how they fitted into this scheme, 
the official stressed, adding, "it is not impossible that some 
new operations will be allowed as the market develops." 
  Among Japanese manufacturers, smaller firms such as 
Daihatsu, 
Isuzu and Suzuki have modest car assembly operations with 
Chinese partners. But the major firms have for the moment 
adopted the strategy of gaining market experience through the 
less costly channel of pickup trucks, minivans and minibuses. 
Toyota, for example, makes vans with state-owned Jinbei ("Gold 
Cup") automotive in Shenyang, northeast China, while Nissan has 
joined a joint venture in Zhengzhou, central China, making 
pickup trucks. 
  There is strong logic in this, given the fact that these 
vehicles are a prime means of transport in the rural areas where 
three- quarters of the Chinese population live -- and where 
roads and after-sales service are not developed enough for 
sophisticated passenger cars. 
  "Chinese officials always tell us that we must pay a premium 
for being late in the market. They say that Volkswagen took a 
risk and has been rewarded and that we should pay extra for 
starting up now," a Japanese executive said after a high-ranking 
industry delegation visited China to be briefed on the growing 
market late last year. 
  As a result, Japanese companies are encouraging their major 
components suppliers at home to seek out potential joint venture 
partners to ensure the Chinese industry is capable of producing 
world standard high quality parts at the right price. Several 
of Nissan's prime suppliers have already established joint 
ventures in Zhengzhou. 
  In May 1993, a wholly owned subsidiary of China 
International 
Trust and Investment Corp. (CITIC) -- the state-run conglomerate 
that is emerging as a key player in China's economic 
modernization -- was established to develop a parts production 
base to support the entire automobile industry. Among the 
initial objectives of Citic Automobile was enhanced cooperation 
with Zhengzhou Nissan, in which it owns an interest. 
  The American giants General Motors and Ford have also 
stepped 
up their activities to find prospective partners for the 
production of a wide range of components. Ford has established 
several joint ventures even though it does not have any vehicle 
manufacturing presence in China yet (GM confines itself to truck 
assembly at present). 
  As a further incentive, the central government announced 
that 
foreign firms would be allowed to set up wholly owned parts 
manufacturing operations to serve the domestic market provided 
they brought in funds and advanced technology. 

