Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jose Casado] </F>
  [Text] Brazil has turned into an immense unfinished 
construction site. For example, there are 28 electric plants 
under construction with an average 10-year delay to begin 
operation. This includes cases of hydroelectric plants whose 
construction began 33 years ago, during the Juscelino Kubitschek 
administration, and are not even half finished. 
  One of the main reasons for the accumulation of the 
countless 
unfinished projects is the constant change of administrative 
direction as a result of the succession of governments in the 
presidency, states, and municipalities. 
  Recent research by the Secretariat of Planning and 
Coordination of the Presidency of the Republic (Seplan) 
determined the consequences of delays in 77 major infrastructure 
projects built in partnership with the World Bank and the 
Inter-American Development Bank. 
  They represent $21.6 billion in foreseen investments -- 
equivalent to two-thirds of the national hard currency reserves 
the country currently has. 
  Nearly half of the projects have been under construction for 
more than four years, and have cost $10.5 billion so far. Their 
costs also have doubled. 
  Most of the projects have not even gone further than plans 
on 
paper, and they already have $11.1 billion of contracted loans 
with the two aforementioned banks. Brazil is paying fines and 
interest for the delays. 
  Political interests weigh on the definition of the 
construction pace of public federal, state, or municipal 
infrastructure projects. 
  The projects were chosen based on electoral interests. They 
are funded based on the degree of influence the suppliers of 
equipment and services have on the government. The result is an 
unheard-of crumbling of unfinished projects. 
  Sao Paulo State has the largest "stock" of highway projects 
in Brazil: Two-thirds are at a standstill and cost $2.6 billion. 
  In northeastern Brazil, about 150 water reservoirs have been 
under construction for the past 12 years to provide water in 
regions where the drought is relentless. Last year, Congress 
incorporated an additional 95 reservoirs in the National 
Department of Drought Control (DNOCS) budget. 
  Three months ago, DNOCS told the National Accounting Office 
(TCU) that it totally ignores about 62 of the 197 projects it is 
financing. 
  A high price is being paid for the constant change of 
government direction on infrastructure projects. 
  That is what happened, for example, in the construction of 
one of the main hydroelectric plants in Sao Paulo State, the 
Tres Irmaos. It has been under construction for the past 10 
years and needs 60 percent more equipment to generate energy. It 
already has cost more than $2 billion. 
  Some plants have been under construction for more than two 
decades. That is the case of Cachoeira Dourada in Goias and 
Coaracy Nunes in Amapa. Construction started during the 
Kubitschek administration. According to the Seplan, these 
projects are not half-finished yet. 
  Pedra do Cavalo in Bahia has been under construction for 15 
years. The last of the general presidents, Joao Batista de 
Figueiredo, even visited it to "dedicate" the construction of 
the dam on the Paraguacu River. The dam is there. But it has not 
produced a single kilowatt yet. 
  There also exist projects that make progress only during 
election time. The Sao Paulo subway system is exemplary: The 
work sites of the 15 construction companies building this 
project worked feverishly a year ago before the elections for 
mayor. 
  Since then, the northern subway line has been paralyzed, 
waiting for more money for the engineering work and, mainly, for 
the trains ($120 million). 
  The Sao Paulo government has planned its inauguration for 
this year when elections for president, governors, senators, and 
deputies will be held. 
  In northeastern Brazil there is the case of a great 
irrigation project (Araras-Norte) on which $70 million was spent 
to send water to farmers in the interior of Ceara State in one 
of the regions most affected by the drought. Its construction 
has been paralyzed for the past five years. 
  Ninety-five percent of the projects were built. But $7 
million is necessary for their completion. The long delay has 
caused the loss of the irrigation canals before they ever sent a 
single drop of water to farmland in Araras-Norte. 
  During that period the federal government began 56 other 
water supply and irrigation projects in the northeast. They are 
all small projects, but large enough to maintain the political 
interests of the region as well as the highly profitable drought 
businesses where construction companies are building reservoirs 
overvalued by more than 300 percent, as verified by the TCU 
during its last audit of DNOCS contracts. 

