BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Vyacheslav Bantin] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo 16 May TASS -- Uzbek President Islam Karimov, 
who arrived in Japan on his first visit on Monday [16 May], is 
confident that his four-day visit to Tokyo will enable to create 
a reliable basis for the development of economic ties between 
the two countries. 
  In an interview with ITAR-TASS Karimov said that "Uzbekistan 
has tremendous resources of raw materials, and Japan, in turn, 
possesses the most advanced modern technologies. "It is in the 
interests of both countries to join our resources," Karimov said. 
  He pointed out that no bilateral political agreements would 
be signed during the visit. According to the Uzbek president, a 
joint statement would be adopted as a result of his talks with 
the Japanese Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata. The document will 
contain the main principles Japan and Uzbekistan will abide by 
in bilateral relations," the Uzbek president said. 
  Addressing representatives of Japanese business circles on 
Monday at a meeting arranged by the Uzbek-Japanese economic 
committee, Karimov laid the emphasis on the fact that Japan and 
Uzbekistan, whose trade turnover in 1993 amounted to $58 
million, have all prerequisites for the development of economic 
cooperation. 
  However, Karimov refrained from commenting on the problem of 
high taxes levied on foreign enterprises in Uzbekistan, which 
Tokyo believes to be one of the main factors impeding Japanese 
investments into the Uzbek economy. 
  In his speech the Uzbek president pointed out that Japan, 
like Uzbekistan, is an Asian country and there are many factors 
uniting the people of the two countries. "We have great 
respect for the purpose-oriented people of Japan and we want to 
learn from them," the Uzbek president said. 
  Upon completion of the meeting a ceremony of signing an 
agreement on cooperation between the Uzbek-Japanese Committee 
for Economic Cooperation and the Japanese-Uzbek Economic 
Committee was held. The document proclaims the intention of 
both sides to promote the development of economic cooperation 
between the two countries, carry out an exchange of experts and 
look for ways of resoloving problems impeding the development of 
bilateral economic relations and submit corresponding reports to 
the Government of Uzbekistan and Japan. 

