BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Olga Musafirova: "Kravchuk Speaks </F>
Russian in Odessa... and It's No Joke"] 
  [Text] During Ostankino's Kiev-Moscow radio phone-in, 
Leonid Makarovich Kravchuk, at the request of the moderator, 
told a funny story -- an inoffensive one -- about himself. And 
he noted that the mockery of the personality of the president of 
Ukraine had appreciably subsided. 
  I think that the underground political joke factory located 
somewhere on the territory of our neighboring state or perhaps 
overseas has simply stopped financing "Kravchuk stories." 
Kravchuk's own actions have begun to outstrip the humor and 
satire. 
  Let me therefore give you a pure fable: The Organization of 
Ukrainian Nationalists [OUN] has decided to take up the 
environment, and it has come out with the slogan "Protect the 
forests! We still need them..." But now for real events: A 
large OUN gathering held in Kiev has confirmed that its members 
support Kravchuk, as they regard him as the sole guarantor of a 
"cohesive, democratic, rule-of-law, national Ukrainian state." 
  If I were an inhabitant of sunny Odessa, which Leonid 
Makarovich visited the other day, I would want to kick myself on 
reading the news about the OUN, because in Odessa Kravchuk 
actually managed to please everyone. He communicated 
effortlessly with the citizens in good Russian, advocating 
official bilingualism, and said a lot of positive things about 
the advantages of a free economic zone -- the long-cherished 
dream of a free port, friendship with Russia, and also the 
dangers of national isolationism.... 
  Only an outstanding politician is capable of winning the 
favor of people with diametrically opposed views from different 
regions of the country and securing their backing when less than 
a week remains before the election. Having essentially made a 
mess of his "Five D's" program -- sovereignty, democracy, 
prosperity, and so forth [in the vernacular the five 
constituents of the program begin with the letter "d"] -- which 
constituted the promises of the last election, Leonid Kravchuk 
now highlights two other achievements of the past period. His 
achievement, like Brezhnev and Gorbachev's, of international 
prestige and of the state's full involvement [polnopravnoye 
vklyucheniye] in the European Union. And success in the domestic 
arena, where the sparks of conflict have nevertheless not 
inflamed a civil war. 
  However, amid the election fever the president's support 
group has demonstrated -- I would say -- enthusiasm in excess of 
the plan. The usual slogan "Kravchuk means peace!" has been 
augmented by the warning "And Kuchma means war!" The relations 
between the two leading contenders are no longer being concealed 
from voters. On 13 June the president's adviser on political 
questions, Nikolay Mikhalchenko, gave a long interview to 
Ukraine's World Radio Service. It would be naive to think that 
the statements were made by him without the agreement of his 
immediate boss. First, Mikhalchenko asked the Ukrainian 
population in the Crimea to consider why they are so 
underrepresented in the autonomous republic's Supreme Soviet, 
given the powerful "de facto Russian community." And he then 
gave a long and detailed expose of the Russian stooge, Leonid 
Kuchma, concluding his thesis on a high note. "I know, for 
example, that if ever any president wished to incorporate 
Ukraine in Russia as a subordinate territory and discard its 
independence, West and Central Ukraine could cause a civil war 
in Ukraine." 
  Is it being honest toward Ukraine and its people, to which 
the presidential oath swears loyalty, to set the West against 
the East, Lvov against Crimea today, and all to get your rival's 
name boldly struck out on the voting slip? Is it being honest 
to take 52 million people to the brink of disaster while 
bestowing smiles right and left or to utter, if you lose, the 
classic parting words of advice: "Don't give anyone a hard 
time!"? 
  A week has passed since Mikhalchenko's appearance on 
Ukraine's World Radio Service. The president has in no way 
repudiated his political adviser's words. 
  However, honesty for a politician bent on winning an 
election 
at any price is a mere hangover from the past. One of the state 
structures has carried out the latest republic poll to ascertain 
which of the candidates' personal qualities dominate in the 
electors' minds. The poll makes clear that inscrutability, 
secretiveness, and flexibility are the most striking features of 
the current president's image. The majority of respondents were 
unable to judge whether Leonid Makarovich possesses qualities 
such as kindness, strength, or decency and unable to determine 
the features of his political makeup -- whether he is a democrat 
or a dictator.... 

