Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The sons of the Mudiyah District in Abyan 
Governorate have issued a statement to the masses of the Yemeni 
people in which they pointed out that while the Yemeni people 
were impatiently awaiting opportunities to end the political 
crisis, which has been besetting them for more than six months, 
and while they were hopefully looking forward to a new stage as 
a result of the signing of the accord document, we were 
surprised by the serious escalations and military movements, 
including the transfer of the Unity Brigade from its camp in 
Mukalla in the Hadramaut Governorate, the transfer of a number 
of tanks and armed vehicles from the 5th Brigade in Aden, and 
the transfer of the 30th Brigade from the Shabwah Governorate. 
All of these were transported to the Abyan Governorate to kill, 
terrorize, and oppress citizens of the Abyan Governorate, 
particularly the sons of the Mudiyah District, who are being 
subjected to the ugliest massacres and the fiercest terrorist 
and inhuman actions for their courageous, nationalist positions 
and for their refusal to be drawn into the current sedition. 
These sons firmly adhere to the option of unity and democracy 
and bravely confront the advocates of division and separation. 
  The statement expresses strong surprise over and 
denunciation 
of the transmission today of a fabricated message on the second 
channel in the name of the sons of the Mudiyah District-- a 
statement which contained many mistakes and lies. This is usual 
for those who are known for such actions throughout their dark 
history. The statement announces to all our people's masses and 
to public opinion inside and outside the country that the 
message attributed to the sons of the Mudiyah District is a 
crime of forgery to be added to the series of ugly crimes 
committed by those who are forging history and facts against the 
interests of our people's sons in general and the sons of the 
Abyan Governorate [words indistinct] in particular. The 
contents of that wicked, forged, and fabricated message, worked 
out in the well-known kitchens of false information, expose the 
evil intentions of those who fabricated the message in order to 
ignite more fires of sedition among the sons of the one Yemeni 
homeland and to distract attention from the reality of the ugly 
crimes being committed against the sons of the Mudiyah District 
at the hands of the Unity Brigade forces and the party militia. 
  The brutal shelling from various heavy, medium, and light 
weapons is continuing, causing great loss of life among the 
innocent and peaceful citizens, as well as much property damage. 
The statement appeals to the masses of the Yemeni people, the 
Presidential Council, and all the political forces and national 
figures to rescue their brothers, the sons of the Mudiyah 
District, as well as other areas of the Abyan Governorate. It 
call for the end of this nightmare that threatens the future of 
their sons and families and the future of the whole homeland. 
It asks for a historic, responsible position to be taken toward 
those adventurers who are blinded by their personal interests 
and their selfishness, who are risking the homeland, and who are 
pushing the people into the furnace of a destructive war. 
  The statement urges those who have stolen the joy from our 
hearts and the smiles from our faces and destroyed the hope that 
was planted at the moment the accord document was signed to 
return to the capital of the country so that its institutions 
can shoulder their responsibilities within the framework of the 
constitutional institutions and to begin to translate the pledge 
and accord document into reality. Instead of doing so, they 
traveled from capital to capital without being asked to and 
without consulting others, ignoring all the legitimate 
institutions, the honor of the Yemeni people, the constitution, 
and all the norms and [words indistinct] in an exposed attempt 
to avoid the implementation of the accord, contain it, and make 
harmful hints that do not serve the interest of the nation, the 
people, and the homeland. 
  The sons of the Mudiyah District concluded their statement 
by 
urging everybody to face up to the challenges that are imposed 
by such irresponsible behavior and to be more alert to 
confronting all plots to undermine unity and democracy. May God 
protect dear Yemen and its unity from any harm and grant us 
success. 
  [Signed] The sons of Mudiyah District. 

