Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Anatoliy Martsynovskyy report: "The Black Surprise of </F>
Chernobyl"] 
  [Text] A few days ago, chairman of the Supreme Council 
"Chernobyl" Commission Volodymyr Yavorivskyy convened a news 
conference: Journalists met with Russian geochemist Valeriy 
Kopeykin. Over seven and a half years, the scientist has 
studied the geochemical consequences of the Chernobyl 
catastrophe. The following was stated. 
  The initial optimistic predictions on possible processes of 
dissolution of the nuclear fallout after the accident turned out 
to be erroneous, because they did not take into account the laws 
of the geochemical migration of elements, including 
radionuclides. Already in 1987, strontium-90 was revealed in 
the cooler pond; in the summer of 1989, plutonium was found in 
subsurface waters in the area of the red woods, where 
radioactive waste was buried. At present, seven and a half 
years after the accident, there appeared a new and the most 
dangerous radioactive nuclide -- americium-241. 
  It is a derivative element of plutonium-241 (which, by the 
time of the catastrophe, was produced at the fourth power unit 
of the Chernobyl Atomic Electric Power Plant [AES] in quantities 
greater than those of plutonium-238, 239, and 240 by a factor of 
55). From the medical point of view, americium is much more 
dangerous than plutonium-239, and its half-life period is 433 
years. From the geochemical point of view, it must be a good 
water migrant. By, approximately, the year 2060, the 
alpha-activity of americium-241 will become twice that of 
plutonium. 
  Thus, a question has arisen of introducing changes into 
corresponding "Chernobyl" laws of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia, 
of expanding the estrangement zone, and of taking necessary 
comprehensive measures for creating barriers that would prevent 
a further spread of dangerous radioactive elements, first and 
foremost, americium-241. 
  "We felt that Chernobyl would not `calm down' and that there 
would be `surprises,'" said Volodymyr Yavorivskyy. "Here is the 
first one." 
  Yavorivskyy called upon scientists of the world to 
cooperate: 
If somebody wants to conduct analyses on his own and see for 
himself the scope of the tragedy, let him arrive; he will be 
given such an opportunity. The Supreme Council decision on 
continuing the operation of the Chernobyl AES was criticized. 
  Meanwhile, the situation at the Chernobyl AES continues to 
deteriorate. The five-centimeter thick layer of soil around the 
plant is contaminated. The third-turn channels (that is to say, 
the fifth and the sixth power units) are constantly 
contaminated, and so is the cooler pond. According to Professor 
Kopeykin, subsurface water contamination is increasing. Due to 
the stoppage, as a result of the accident, of the numerous 
drainage systems, the level of subsurface waters has risen by 
between two and four meters, and this also causes the danger of 
spreading the radionuclides. 
  The news conference also discussed other Chernobyl-related 
questions. Volodymyr Yavorivskyy stated, in particular, that 
the Cabinet of Ministers plans to grant benefits only to 
first-category victims [of the Chernobyl catastrophe]. At the 
same time, it was pointed out that much capital goes on 
unnecessary studies and on excessively large personnel of 
scientists who work in the Chernobyl system (incidentally, 
outside the zone). Deputy Procurator General Olha Kolinska 
encouraged the audience by her decisive mood regarding the 
struggle against mass abuses in the zone. 

