BFN 

<F P=106> [Peter Scherer report: "Mafia Gangs Are Founding an </F>
Increasing Number of Cover Firms"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt/Main -- According to findings by German 
security authorities, the number of cover firms that are 
operated by international criminal organizations to cover up 
illegal activities is rising in Germany. These include, among 
others, import and export companies, travel agencies, bus 
companies, restaurants, trucking companies, used-car dealers, 
leather goods and textile shops, as well as foodstuffs and fish 
wholesale companies. 
  In their investigations police discover the establishment of 
business structures in almost one out of two cases of organized 
crime. Security experts say: "Legal business structures are 
the ideal foundation for illegal deals, including money 
laundering." 
  This is particularly true for drug trafficking: Thus, last 
year authorities noticed, for instance, that one cartel was 
selling its drugs via a "pizza service." Orders by telephone -- 
under cover names -- were filled promptly. The Italian Camorra 
prefers leather shops run by straw men to service the German 
drug market. To camouflage heroin transports from Turkey, 
Kurdish dealers are using travel agencies, companies producing 
car bodies, trucking companies, and bus companies. However, an 
"advertising company" founded in South America has also been 
used for cocaine deals. 
  Original ideas to cover up its varied and highly criminal 
activities were used by a gang of pimps, who expanded their 
commercial empire by a "security company." 
  Over the past months authorities have noticed increasing 
boldness among organizations for smuggling people, which have 
established virtual "bus passenger services." Smuggling tours 
are declared to the border authorities as "tourist trips" or 
"transports of guest workers." In the FRG it is primarily 
restaurants, laundries, cultural associations, or temples that 
are used as contact points for the man-traders. 
  Popular logistical bases for car smuggling gangs are car 
workshops and used-car companies. So as not to attract the 
attention of the authorities, the provisions of the Trade 
Inspection Office are followed and plausible tax statements are 
presented. 

