CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Petrov: "Rumors of Province's Economic </F>
Death Greatly Exaggerated: Such Is the Conclusion Drawn by the 
Government Delegation That Visited Three of the Country's 
Industrial Centers"] 
  [Text] Izhevsk, Cheboksary, Ulyanovsk--"Can you believe 
it," said my exhausted colleague in surprise, settling into his 
seat on the plane taking us from Ulyanovsk to Moscow, "in less 
than three weeks we visited two republics, one oblast, 10 
plants, a sovkhoz, and two stores, and attended just one banquet. 
  "In the old days everything was organized differently: You 
would go to the oblast with the Central Committee secretary, see 
some exemplary facility where they had spent a month putting 
everything in order, then meet with the party aktiv, hear 
reports about achievements and labor feats, hand out reprimands 
and awards, go to a banquet, and then go home." 
  Indeed, First Deputy Prime Minister O. Soskovets' trip to 
Udmurtia, Bashkiria, and Ulyanovsk Oblast did not fit the old 
scenario in terms either of the scope of work or tone of the 
discussions. And if something was absent altogether, it was the 
pompous reports and window dressing characteristic of past 
years. On the contrary, local officials used the occasion to 
deluge the first deputy prime minister of the government with 
such a multitude of general and specific problems and questions 
that it would take several newspaper pages to list them. 
  The most difficult situation, in O. Soskovets' opinion, has 
come about in Udmurtia, as a result of the republic economy's 
surfeit of military plants. Twenty of Russia's largest defense 
enterprises employ over 145,000 people, who produce more than 
three-fourths of the republic's industrial output. While the 
production decline in defense industries in the country as a 
whole in the first quarter of 1994 amounted to 35 percent of the 
figure for the same period last year, in Udmurtia the parameter 
was more than 50 percent. One of the main reasons for this is 
the state's failure to pay for military orders in 1993, the 
meager funds available for conversion, and high overhead. 
  "The government sees its mistakes and is doing everything in 
its power to rectify them," O. Soskovets said at a conference in 
Izhevsk. "We can confirm that the volume of defense orders will 
remain at last year's level. After the federal budget is 
approved, we will repay 8 trillion rubles in debts to 
enterprises of the military-industrial complex. We plan to 
significantly liberalize regulations governing arms exports in 
favor of the producer plants." 
  However, under the new conditions, in the first deputy prime 
minister's opinion, the main burden will be on local government 
bodies. They will have to learn how to make effective use of 
financial resources by implementing a selective industrial 
policy. Unfortunately, this is not happening yet. 
  For example, extremely sophisticated foreign-made equipment 
for the production of 180,000 passenger cars a year was 
installed at the Izhevsk Machinery Plant more than a year ago 
and is sitting idle. The minimal capital investments needed to 
start up production are lacking. Whose concern is this first and 
foremost? Needless to say, the enterprise management and 
republic leadership. If it is impossible to mobilize centralized 
resources, no one is standing in the way of a search for 
creditors abroad. After all, metallurgical plant directors were 
able to approach foreign banks on their own, borrow funds, and 
increase steel production by seven percent. The most important 
thing is resourcefulness and a desire to tackle the problem on 
one's own above all. 
  But lack of initiative is not the only factor that has been 
and remains the scourge of many enterprise executives. There are 
also difficulties of a more objective character. The cold winds 
of competition that have been freely blowing throughout the 
country since the fall of the economic iron curtain are chilling 
and freezing life at many enterprises whose output is in 
principle essential to the Russian market. 
  Take, for example, the Cheboksary industrial tractor plant. 
The enormous plant, with 220,000 square meters of production 
space and 20,000 employees, ran up debts of 34 billion rubles 
and ultimately shut down. 
  The causes are purely market-related: Noncompetitive prices, 
lower quality, and unsuccessful marketing eventually led to the 
loss of its market. So what do we do now--consign the plant, 
which was built by leading German firms and 60 percent of whose 
equipment consists of the best Western machine tools, to the 
bulldozer, and thus condemn ourselves to eternally buying 
equipment from the Japanese and Americans in exchange for oil 
and gas? 
  That is probably one possible solution to the solution, but 
hardly the most sensible one. "We must help our enterprises win 
markets in Russia and the CIS countries," said Oleg Soskovets. 
"The idea of protectionism for domestic industry that we talk 
about so much must be given concrete substance. I realize that 
our tractors are inferior to foreign ones in many ways, but 
unless we improve them, we will always lag behind in 
technological progress. That requires that they be used, not sit 
in warehouses." 
  Characteristically, plant directors, while complaining 
almost 
to a man about Western competitors, nevertheless understand that 
the government does not intend to close off the domestic market 
to make life easier for them. Customs barriers in the way of 
certain types of imported goods, if they are established, will 
remain in place for no more than 18 to 24 months. That should be 
enough time to modernize production facilities and prepare them 
for existence in the brutal fight for markets. 
  Competition, the fight for markets, and the priority of 
output sales over production--all these things are market 
concepts that local enterprise directors are assimilating, and 
not without success. Of course, by no means all of them are able 
to cope with the difficulties of the transition period, but 
wherever a creative and initiative-oriented approach is being 
taken, the situation is gradually stabilizing and even improving. 
  We saw quite a few examples of this during our three-day 
trip. For instance, the Izhevsk Mechanical Plant has learned how 
to make motorcycles that exhibited excellent performance 
characteristics during a marathon race to Cape Town. The plant 
is now arranging deliveries of them to African countries. 
  The Dizelprom joint-stock company in Cheboksary is 
producing, 
under German license, power units that foreign customers ordered 
as soon as they appeared. Total sales have increased to $120 
million. The workers, earning a fixed salary of $120 in ruble 
equivalent, have increased quality and production standards by a 
factor of 10. 
  The automotive plant in Ulyanovsk has raised labor 
productivity by 20 percent in the past 18 months. Thanks to more 
efficient organization, motor vehicle production has increased 
from 94,000 to 115,000 and the product line has been expanded. 
The plant is able to meet virtually any requests from buyers, up 
to and including a vehicle's color. Cooperative production is 
being established with Mercedes Benz, which will result in the 
creation of 20,000 new jobs. 
  On returning to Moscow, I asked the first deputy prime 
minister for his main impressions from the trip. 
  "Above all, I was able to see once again that enterprise 
directors are on top of the situation. They are the main 
reformers today, since they work in the real economy and produce 
real products. Most of them have adapted to life under the new 
conditions. I saw no panic, only a desire to overcome the crisis 
as quickly as possible. 
  "The only thing that local officials asked of me was clarity 
in the government's economic policy. We have finally stopped 
dividing the Cabinet into promarket and antimarket members and 
reformers and conservatives, which in itself is the main 
psychological precondition for solving all our economic problems. 
  "The trip is over, but the bulk of the work lies ahead. 
After 
analyzing and systematizing the information and studying the 
records of the conferences and meetings with plant directors, 
the government will draft the necessary decrees." 

