BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Time to clean up the dirty laundry"] </F>
  [Text] Last week in Taiwan, police broke up a heroin sales 
operation. The drugs were made in Burma, and sold in Taiwan by 
Singaporeans. The managers of the heroin ring were Hong Kong 
triad members who live in Thailand. Drugs entered Taiwan aboard 
ships of various nationality, sent mixed among other cargo by 
Bangkok transport agencies. Operations were masterminded across 
international satellite telephone connections, and profits were 
banked somewhere, although police are not yet sure where. This 
was, authorities point out, only a "small" smuggling operation 
responsible for dumping an estimated 50 kilograms of heroin per 
month on hapless addicts in Taiwan. 
  It is no wonder, then, that leaders of the international 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) were in town last week 
pushing for new laws to combat drug smuggling. National police 
forces, up against an organized foe which is both sophisticated 
and ruthless, are losing the battle against addictive drugs. 
The international scope of the narcotics business is obvious. 
It is equally plain that drug traffickers only can be combated 
through international cooperation. Thailand must consider 
accepting the call of the world community to enact new, tough 
laws against money laundering. 
  FATF is a five-year-old group with a growing membership, 
funded by the G-7, of the world's second richest nations. It is 
mainly a lobbying group, formed to convince countries and 
bankers alike that it is in their own interest to monitor huge 
flows of cash. By watching where such money goes, FATF and its 
backers argue, big time drug dealers can be identified, 
investigated and ultimately put out of business. It is a 
compelling argument to beleaguered anti-narcotics agents. FATF 
President John Gieve told our officials it also should be 
attractive to the very people involved--our bankers. "A country 
or a center which wishes to attract the top names will find it 
easier to do so if they have in place anti-money laundering 
legislation," Mr Gieve said. 
  Some read this statement as a threat. But it is, instead, a 
promise. Cash transactions with banks are becoming ever more 
tightly controlled throughout the world. Even where banking is 
traditionally secretive and protective of the customer, such as 
in Switzerland, large transfers now are routinely reported to 
the police if the banks have any suspicion about their origin. 
Banks and nations which cooperate in anti-laundering efforts 
get more international business when they enter the financial 
centers. 
  Efforts to combat drugs kingpins have more and more targeted 
their fortunes. Sales of narcotics are performed with cash for a 
variety of reasons, just as most legitimate commerce is done 
more and more with paper. Warlords have assembled armies which 
outgun most police forces, but the bosses of the drug gangs must 
convert their profits. Money laundering is aimed at converting 
"dirty money" from drugs into "legitimate money," which then can 
be used for any purpose--even for buying entire governments. 
  Anti-laundering laws are the legal version of the famous 
Watergate maxim on how to catch villains: "Follow the money." A 
huge cash deposit may be attractive to a banker. But unless he 
knows the businessman making the deposit, money-laundering laws 
require him to report the transaction to authorities. This 
opens up a new line of inquiry to authorities. If written 
carefully and enforced without favor, such laws will not affect 
honest citizens, and will enhance the reputation of banks which 
participate. 
  Clearly, no inroads will be made against major drug 
trafficking without international cooperation and effort. 
Already, neighbors such as Australia, Japan Hong Kong and 
Singapore have passed tough anti-laundering laws, without harm 
to the business of their banks nor the privacy of their people. 
Unquestionably, the Government must consider such legislation 
carefully, and seek advice both from other countries and our own 
judicial experts before acting. But action on money-laundering 
must be taken soon. 
  Because Thailand is a front-line drugs state, the Government 
must take the responsibility of acting. Drug use already harms 
our country badly in many areas, from the spread of AIDS through 
massive corruption and countless petty crimes by desperate 
addicts. Because it is close to the production centers in Burma 
and Laos, Thailand also attracts major traffickers. Our 
country, and our banks, are healthy enough to reject drugs 
money. The Thai Government should take action to make the 
country increasingly unattractive for drug traffickers. A 
careful, but tough, anti-laundering law would mark a major step 
in such an effort. 

