CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Attila Herpai: "Gyorgy Szabad has the Csucs </F>
Case"] 
  [Text] The chairman of the Assembly's Committee on Culture 
appealed to the president of the National Assembly to resolve 
the problem presented by radio Vice President Laszlo Csucs when 
he failed to answer the Committee's questions by the established 
deadline. 
  Attila Zsigmond announced at the meeting of the Cultural 
Committee that as of the day before the Committee had received 
no response to eight questionsfor Laszlo Csucs, which he was 
supposed to answer by then. The MDF [Hungarian Democratic Forum] 
chairman declared that he had learned from the press that Laszlo 
Csucs requested an extension of the deadline for responding. 
  Some of the questions asked by the Committee pertained to 
the 
issue of whether the views of the public employee council of the 
radio had been sought regarding the dismissals, whether the 
employer had proved a causal relationship supporting the 
dismissals, whether the employer had provided an opportunity for 
the dismissed persons to clarify the charges brought against 
them, and whether severance pay had been consistent with the 
violation of professional and ethical conduct criteria. The 
Culture Committee took the position that the law provided that a 
public employee may be dismissed only if no other work 
commensurate with his education could be found, or if the 
employee rejected the transfer. Based on this position, the 
Committee asked the vice president of the radio whether such an 
offer had been made. The Committee also expected to learn 
whether the dismissals constituted layoffs or firings on a 
disciplinary basis, and about the legal basis of the vice 
president's order, according to which the persons to be 
dismissed were to be prohibited from performing work without 
providing any reason for such prohibition. Based on responses to 
these questions, the Committee wanted to decide whether it would 
hear the statements by the radio's vice president. 
  Tamas Fodor, representative of the SZDSZ [Alliance of Free 
Democrats], recommended that the Committee ask National Assembly 
President Gyorgy Szabad what to do if a person fails to respond 
by a deadline set by the Committee. Attila Zsigmond expressed 
the view that this matter was clearly settled by both the 
Constitution and the house rules. 
  In response to our inquiry, SZDSZ media politician Miklos 
Haraszti expressed his view that Laszlo Csucs's request for a 
delay amounted to no more than the fact that the vice president 
of the radio had frustrated the not-too-strong intent of a 
majority of the Cultural Committee to hear Csucs during this 
session of parliament. 

