Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yuriy Horban] </F>
  [Text] I will recall the words President Meri said 
immediately after arriving on Ukrainian land: Nobody has ever 
canceled the agreement on friendship and cooperation that was 
signed between Estonia and Ukraine as early as 1921. This 
visit, the Estonian president emphasized, is a continuation of 
our friendly contacts. 
  A similar agreement was signed in 1992, and the talks that 
have recently been held have resulted in another three 
documents, including two agreements on scientific-technical and 
cultural cooperation, an agreement on travel without visas for 
people who have diplomatic passports, and a protocol on mutual 
consultations between the Ukrainian and Estonian Foreign 
Ministries. The results of the visit were summarized at a joint 
news conference held by Lennart Meri and Leonid Kravchuk. 
  [Begin recording] [Meri, in Russian] We see that there are 
very favorable conditions for improving our partnership with 
Ukraine not only in issues of security and foreign policy, but 
also in economy, which is fundamental for any country. We have 
openly discussed this with the president [Kravchuk]. The same 
issue was addressed at a meeting with the Ukrainian parliament 
and during negotiations. 
  [Kravchuk, in Russian] Documents that have just been signed 
indicate that Estonia and Ukraine are willing to deepen their 
cooperation in the main spheres of life, primarily in the 
economy, and that we have common opinions on European and global 
problems, as well as that we have agreed on our positions 
regarding international relations and have defined ways for 
finding resolutions. The visit by the Estonian president to 
Ukraine is indeed important, and it is aimed -- and I am 
convinced that this will happen -- at improvement and expansion 
of our friendship and partnership. [end recording] 
  One of the journalists' questions concerned both presidents' 
opinions on the division of representative and executive 
authorities. The Estonian president replied that the new 
Constitution regulates this issue in his country. The 
responsibilities of both the government and the parliament are 
precisely defined. Leonid Kravchuk, in this regard, said as 
follows: I want to find a common language with the new 
parliament which is to be elected soon. This, however, depends 
not only on me. If the new Supreme Council, said Leonid 
Kravchuk, approves the orientation toward a market economy and 
building of a new democratic state, I will be supportive and 
constructively cooperative with it. 
  The so-called issue of the Russian-speaking population was 
also addressed by the journalists. In this regard, Lennart Meri 
said that certain Russian politicians use the issue of 
respecting human rights in former USSR republics cynically, and 
that it is often used as a political instrument to pressure 
them. It would be better, the Estonian president said, if those 
people found the time and straightened out the issue of human 
rights in Russia. In the opinion of the Ukrainian president, 
this problem can be solved, however, only in a democratic manner. 

