Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Counselor Ma'mun al-Hudaybi, official </F>
spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood group in Egypt, by 
unidentified correspondent in Cairo; date not given] 
  [Text] [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] The Egyptian leadership has 
called for a national dialogue among political parties. How do 
you view this call, and do you expect this dialogue to succeed 
in resolving the issues currently raised on the scene? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] The picture is not yet clear, nor are the 
features of that call or the truth or nature of that dialogue. 
At any rate, the success of such a dialogue depends primarily 
on those participating in it, the issues included on its agenda, 
and the way it is run. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] What would be your opinion if the 
dialogue were held among the official political parties without 
the Muslim Brotherhood group? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] I do not believe that holding a dialogue in 
such a manner and ignoring an important group of the people can 
bring any benefit or succeed in discussing the issues included 
on the agenda. Anyhow, the start is not reassuring and is 
incompatible with the reform wish or the democratic spirit. 
Because for such a dialogue to succeed, all parties and 
tendencies without exception must be invited to it and 
participate in it. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Egypt and some Arab states are currently 
suffering from the growing violence and terrorism phenomenon. 
In your view, what are the causes of this phenomenon, 
especially as many victims have died as a result of it among the 
police and foreign tourists? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] We condemn all forms of terrorism and violence. 
We have stated this position in the past. We said that violence 
and counterviolence would not solve the problem and that the 
problem must be tackled carefully, as agreed among the majority 
of writers and thinkers. 
  We reject political violence, whether it is committed by 
groups or the authorities. Our position on how this issue 
should be tackled and handled differs from the government's. We 
insist -- and writers and thinkers share our view -- on the need 
to tackle this phenomenon and its causes. There is no way or 
urgent solution to this crisis except through political reforms 
and the establishment of a true democratic system. That road 
would completely close the door to violence and terrorism. 
Because the most dangerous thing is escalation and 
confrontation. The general agreement among thinkers is that 
relying solely on the security method is not a good remedy for 
the problem, whether now or in the future. 
  We believe that terrorism is illegal, and we urge everyone 
to 
comply with the law and the Constitution. And I believe that 
the government should hasten to make comprehensive political and 
democratic reform. If any violence takes place after that, we 
can severely punish those who deviate from the consensus. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] How would you assess the agreement 
signed last month between the Vatican and Israel, and what is 
its effect on Arab rights and the status of Jerusalem and 
al-Aqsa Mosque? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] That agreement reflects and is the result of 
current international orientations and courses. It is the 
result of policies aimed against Muslims' interests. These 
policies are driven by the ambitions and aims of big powers 
aiming to bolster the Zionist entity's domination of the region 
and to provide it with all factors of power. At the same time 
these powers are opposing the Arab and Islamic will and 
tirelessly and actively working to obstruct its growth and 
progress. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Do you believe that the agreement is a 
Jewish-Christian alliance against Islam and Muslims? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] That agreement is part of an integrated policy 
aimed against our nation, religion, and region. These states 
have politically agreed to impose certain conditions and to 
enable the Zionist entity to take control of the region and to 
provide it with all factors of power. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] What is your assessment of the current 
negotiations between Israel and some Arab states to secure peace 
agreements to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict, especially as 
two years have elapsed since their launch? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] I believe that these negotiations will not 
change existing Zionist ambitions in the region. We believe 
that the Zionist entity is working to achieve its ambitions and 
aims sometimes by force, wars, and murder and at other times by 
deception in the name of the peace negotiations. These 
negotiations will not change its ambitions, aims, and schemes. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] The Islamic world is afflicted by a 
state of concern and sadness over the ongoing fighting in 
Afghanistan and the tragedy and massacres committed by some 
leaders. There is a struggle over power. How do you explain 
these incidents? 
  [Al-Hudaybi] Without doubt conditions in Afghanistan have 
deteriorated badly, and we regret and are saddened by these 
conditions and believe that they completely contravene any 
thought, religion, or ethics. And the Afghan mojahedin must 
realize the danger of that and their damaged image, especially 
as they achieved victory against the occupation forces and the 
communist regime. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Some people believe that the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina tragedy and the savage massacres committed by 
the Serb criminals there are a reflection of the current 
international situation. They also hold the United Nations 
responsible for the continuation of this crime there. 
  [Al-Hudaybi] Without doubt, the United Nations is fully 
responsible for the tragedy and its continuation. It is a crime 
against humanity and in its name. 
  We believe that -- as usual -- the UN role has not changed. 
The United Nations with its so-called Security Council has 
become a tool in the hands of the big powers, especially the 
United States and the European states, to implement the policies 
and aims of these states. And without doubt, the United Nations 
is currently working for these states, hence it does not fulfill 
or express the interests of Muslims. The UN secretary general 
is merely an employee and a tool to implement these policies. 

