Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Geir Salvesen: "How Welcome Are We Really in </F>
the EU?"] 
  [Text] Norwegians have a tiresome tendency to exaggerate 
their own importance. When a Norwegian play is produced in 
London, or when an item about Norway is shown on U.S. 
television, many people believe -- with the help of the press -- 
that we have "conquered London" or that now the whole of the 
United States knows about Norway. 
  We can also see traces of these distortions in the debate on 
EU [European Union] membership. And here the yes camp and the 
no camp are as bad as each other. Among some yes voters there 
is a deep-rooted belief that Europe loves Norway and that there 
is hardly anything more that it wants than to have bright and 
shiny Norwegian values introduced into European cooperation. 
Among some no voters there is a widespread view that the 
Europeans love Norway because they will be able to rob us of 
fish, oil, and democratic values. 
  The truth is -- as it usually is -- considerably more 
complex. Officially Norway is being welcomed as an EU member. 
The enthusiasm, however, is not as great as many Norwegians 
believe. In addition, the reaction from some countries is more 
reminiscent of a cold, or, at best, indifferent shoulder. This 
is something that it is important to bear in mind in the final 
phase of the negotiations that we are now entering. 
  So, is it simply a case of empty words when Norwegian 
ministers on their frequent trips abroad to the EU capitals 
receive kind assurances that people take a positive view of 
Norway? No. In general there is a basically positive approach 
behind these assurances, which may of course also be sweetened 
by the necessary diplomatic phrases that are exchanged on such 
occasions. But if you go behind the facade and talk to people a 
little further down the ladder in the EU countries, it becomes 
easier to catch sight of a more complex view. 
  "Norway is welcome, but not at any price." This is a view 
that is expressed relatively often. This is another: 
  "Remember that it is Norway that is applying for membership 
of the EU, and not the other way round." 
  Treating the EU as a "bloc" -- as so often happens in the 
Norwegian debate -- is a hopeless and misleading point of 
departure when trying to understand the relationship between the 
EU and the applicant countries. All nation-states have their 
individual economic and geopolitical interests that are promoted 
with the greatest energy. 
  To the extent that it is possible to talk of deeper shared 
attitudes among the EU countries they are to do, for example, 
with the way they view the Norwegians. According to this 
"mythology," the Norwegians will be among the best when it comes 
to complying with decisions reached by the EU -- once they have 
been reached. However, before the decisions are reached people 
expect that Norway will cause trouble over points that are 
viewed as peripheral in Europe. The Norwegians will also want 
everything in writing, guarantees in minute detail. This will 
create a clash of cultures. 
  In the negotiations themselves the view is now being taken 
that all the Nordic applicant nations are as bad as each other. 
But in general the picture abroad is that the Nordic countries 
share "social democratic" values and ways of thinking -- a fair 
distribution of wealth, social equality, and an interest in 
environmental protection. 
  Let us look at the interests of the various countries in 
the EU in relation to the three Nordic applicants. 

  -  Germany is perhaps Norway's main ally among the larger 
countries. Unlike in 1972, Germany is prepared to go a long way 
in order to bring in Norway and the other Nordic countries. 
This is undoubtedly for geopolitical reasons -- so that the 
northern part of the EU will be strengthened. It also has 
something to do with economic, social, and cultural 
ties. 
  -  Britain is also basically positively disposed toward 
Norway and the Nordic area. For geopolitical, cultural, and 
historical reasons. Also, however, because it takes the view 
that Norway could help to slow down the federalist tendencies 
and keep the Union in check. 
  -  France is relatively indifferent, 
despite the fine words to Norwegian visitors. France is always 
conscious of its power and historic role, and a brace of 
quarrelsome Nordic countries could only help to water down the 
solid power France also enjoys within the EU. 
  -  Italy -- the 
weakened power to the south -- is basically positively disposed 
toward expansion to the north, in part because it believes that 
the diversity within the EU will be strengthened. But Austria is 
more interesting from Italy's viewpoint. It does not like the 
talk of a northern bloc that it fears would form an alliance 
against the interests of the south. However, it is worth noting 
that Italy has not gotten together with Spain to extract more 
contributions and regional support and in this way put a spoke 
in the wheels of enlargement. 
  -  Spain, Portugal, Greece. This 
axis of the countries on the southern flank sees a chance of 
getting more money out of the new applicant nations. For 
example, Norway will be a net contributor to the common purse. 
All these countries have fears about a shift in the center of 
political gravity of the EC toward the north. The EU 
presidency, held by Greece this spring, will have the effect of 
imposing some discipline on possible extreme solutions proposed 
by Greece in the final phase of the negotiations. The problem 
lies with the Spaniards who in this enlargement round will try 
to make up for what they did not get when they joined the EU a 
few years ago. 
  -  The Benelux countries do not have a central role 
to play and do not look as if they have any strong views apart 
from a general goodwill -- and a position that makes them the 
mediators between north and south. In other respects the 
Netherlands' view of society is closest to that of the Nordic 
countries. 

