Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Presidential Council Vice Chairman 'Ali Salim al-Bid 
received in Aden this afternoon brother Colonel Mustafa 
al-Kharrubi, member of the Revolution Command Council and 
inspector general of in the fraternal Socialist People's Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriyah. 
  Al-Kharrubi relayed to the brother vice president a message 
from his brother Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi, leader of the Libyan 1 
September revolution, on fraternal ties as well as Yemeni and 
Arab issues and developments. 
  The message emphasized the support of fraternal Libyans, 
headed by the leader of the 1 September Libyan revolution, for 
the efforts currently under way to eliminate tension and halt 
military escalation. The Libyans reaffirmed their support for 
our Yemeni people in the course of their efforts to meet the 
challenges and tackle the dangers posed to the construction and 
development endeavor in a manner that safeguards unity and 
democracy and enhances security and stability throughout Yemen. 
  Presidential Council Vice Chairman 'Ali Salim al-Bid 
expressed his thanks and appreciation for the efforts made by 
fraternal Libyans, led by Colonel Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi, in this 
regard, and also for the concern they have expressed for 
ensuring stability in our country to help create propitious 
circumstances and conditions for the implementation of the 
provisions enshrined in the accord document signed in Amman, 
given that it is a national consensus document that lays the 
groundwork for the achievement of the Yemeni people's national 
and pan-Arab objectives. 
  The Presidential Council vice chairman reviewed with the 
Libyan envoy aspects of the fraternal ties binding our country 
to the Libyan Jamahiriyah, underscoring the importance of 
promoting and enhancing these ties to promote the common 
interests of the two fraternal peoples and realize their 
pan-Arab aspirations. 
  The vice president and the Libyan envoy also reviewed 
current 
developments in light of the efforts under way to create a 
propitious climate and circumstances for implementing the accord 
document. 
  At the end of their meeting, Presidential Council Vice 
Chairman 'Ali Salim al-Bid asked his brother Mustafa al-Kharrubi 
to relay his greetings to his brother Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi, his 
wishes of continued good health and happiness to him, and his 
wishes for continued enhancement and furtherance of the 
fraternal ties between our two countries and peoples. 
  The meeting was attended by Deputy Prime Minister Muhammad 
Haydarah Masdus; Dr. 'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Dali, secretary of the 
Political Department at the Secretariat of the Yemeni Socialist 
Party Central Committee; and Muhammad Salih Qutaysh, acting 
under secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Aden. 

