BFN 

<F P=106> [Unsigned article in the "Above the Red Line" column: </F>
"Wahhabism--Call of the Devil"] 
  [Text] Mr. 'Udayy Saddam Husayn has received a letter from 
the citizen T.S.D. [as published] explaining the threat posed by 
the appearance in the country of the Wahhabist movement, which 
receives direct support from the Saudi regime. In view of this 
important issue, we publish the contents of the letter: 
  In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 
  Esteemed Mr. 'Udayy Saddam Husayn, may God's blessings and 
peace be upon you. Greetings of pride and appreciation. 
  You can readily imagine, dear sir, our predicament because 
of 
the problem which is facing our youth and even the elderly--a 
problem which is represented by the Wahhabist movement and its 
revival by the so-called Muhammad Nasir-al-Din al-Albani. We 
have known the real nature of the Wahhabist movement since we 
were children. This knowledge has been confirmed in our mind by 
articles and television reports and by the agent Saudi regime's 
position toward Iraq and the Iraqi people and leader. Indeed we 
were not deceived by this regime's attempts to befriend our 
revolution during the Iranian aggression against our struggling 
country. We are well aware of the reasons and naturally you are 
more capable of knowing them. Our apprehensions toward this 
dangerous movement cannot escape a brilliant person of your 
caliber. Following are the reasons for our apprehensions: 
  1. The Wahhabist-Albanian movement in its flagrant present 
form began with the 30-state war of aggression against Iraq. 
  2. The movement gives money to its members, most of them 
idle, and they are squandering the money left and right. 
  3. All the elements of the agent al-Da'wah [Islamic Call] 
Party and their sympathizers have become basic pillars of this 
movement, which is forming an unbelievable focus of attraction 
to them. Is it possible, dear sir, to see an individual with 
Persian origin and beliefs, renouncing the religious tenets 
which he has long held to be very sacred in order to become an 
extremist Wahhabi overnight? 
  4. Writings of the so-called Muhammad Nasir-al-Din al-Albani 
are widespread in Iraq. The revivalist of the Wahhabi movement 
is donning the clothes of a man of religion but he belongs in 
the category of the founders of the Kadianism [Ahmadiyah sect], 
Babism, Bahaism, and other destructive religious movements which 
endeavor to realize their aim by employing weird methods and 
attacking Islamic figures such as our prophet and lord Muhammad, 
God's blessings and peace upon him. 
  5. They are trying to instigate seditions, confusion and 
disturbances in mosques in defense of their aims and to promote 
their heresies, and are active in theological colleges in 
general. 
  6. Most religious scientists do not dare to confront them 
for fear of their reprisals which could end in killing. Some 
are bribed to remain silent under the guise of assistance. This 
helps their movement expand and influence increase. 
  7. They are mingling with naive youths in a suspicious 
manner and nobody is confronting them. 
  8. They are surprisingly identical in their apparel as well 
as in their movements at prayer and their beliefs. They are 
carbon copies of one another. How could they realize such 
harmony and how could they reach this unity in conduct, 
behavior, and belief? Is this merely a religious belief? We 
have been praying and worshipping for hundreds of years but we 
belong to different sects. Does not this show that their center 
of guidance is one? This proves that all the instructions are 
received from a guidance center of a political movement abroad. 
It is no use saying that this is a chance agreement, that all 
of them reached a correct course of worship. We have never 
experienced this in Iraqi mosques or in other mosques in any 
Arab country. 
  9. They have a common grudge against Iraq and are happy for 
the blockade and harm done against it. Your excellency is aware 
of the reasons. One such reason is that because of the blockade 
circumstances, a 100-dollar note can be changed into thousands 
of dinars. This is part of the assistance they are getting. We 
have heard of this assistance but did not see it although it is 
very logical and reasonable. They also hate the revolutionary 
regime in Iraq and that is why they smile and express happiness 
when they hear that the blockade has been extended or that the 
al-Rashid Hotel for instance has been bombed. 
  We do not want to take a long time explaining but these are 
only some of the legitimate questions that we would like to ask. 
We think that the party and security organs do not seem to be 
aware of this Wahhabist-Albanian activities. This also applies 
to the official and religious organs. Does this mean consent? 
If this is so then let the issue come into the open and let us 
all join this movement whose Albanian founder chose Jordan to be 
his headquarters and to facilitate his contacts with Iraq and to 
influence the Iraqis. If the opposite is true--and we are 
certain that this is so because we believe in God and in the 
principles of the Ba'thists and the intelligent Iraqi 
people--then let us put things in order and prevent this cancer 
from spreading before it is too late. 
  Sir, we have asked your help. Our only interest is our love 
for Iraq, the care for Islam, and allegiance to the Ba'th and 
Iraq. We are certain that the other offices of the state lack 
the daring, youthful, and revolutionary vision; that they rely 
on red tape, nepotism, and personal and tribal factors; and that 
at best the issue would be delegated to a committee and we do 
not know when the result would emerge. We are putting these 
questions before you and we are confident that your 
responsibility toward the youth and the Iraqis, in view of your 
high position in addition to the revolutionary characteristics 
that we know you possess, make us hopeful of getting decisive 
answers. We would like to remind your excellency that many 
sincere people frequent the mosques and we hope that others will 
not be punished for the sins committed by some. 
  May God grant you success in the service of the great Iraq 
and its people. May God's peace and blessings be upon you. 
  Observation: We have information on the centers and places 
where the Wahhabist are staying. If the security organs so 
require, we can supply the necessary information. 

