BFN 

<F P=106> [Francoise Delstanche report: "A Transition Clearly Geared </F>
to Future Membership"] 
  [Text] With the entry of Central and East European 
countries, the whole existing struture of the Community 
intervention system will have to be revised, Richard Baldwin, of 
the Center for Economic Policy Research in London, suggests in 
an essay on European integration commissioned by the European 
Commission (EC). According to Baldwin, the maintenance of the 
existing intervention system after the membership of the four 
countries of the Visegrad group (Hungary, Poland, Czech 
Republic, and Slovakia) would mean an increase of 60 percent in 
the Community budget. Moreover, this is one of the reasons 
which is prompting the southern countries, which enjoy 
structural aid, to have reservations about the entry of these 
new applicants. 
  According to Baldwin, we therefore cannot count on 
integration for two decades. This means not before these 
countries have achieved the limit of 75 percent of the level of 
average income which determines the countries eligible for 
structural funds. 
  According to the author of the essay on European 
integration, 
the extension of the Common Agricultural Policy to the Visegrad 
countries would cost $47 billion annually. In addition, he 
argues, the opening of Community borders to the workers of these 
countries could prompt the emigration of between 3 and 6 million 
people. There would be a risk of these immigrants being 
concentrated in countries like Germany and Austria, where that 
would present considerable problems. 
<H5>  Two Stages </H5>
  However, Baldwin explains, we cannot make do with 
association 
as a preparatory phase. An intermediate stage must be found 
enabling them to progress toward full integration. The author 
suggests a two-stage strategy. First, offering a kind of 
improved version of the existing association, in a multilateral 
form with a more coherent institutional infrastructure. Second, 
achieving a copy of the economic area achieved with EFTA 
[European Free Trade Association], excluding the section 
relating to immigration. 
  These suggestions partly coincide with the course envisaged 
by the EC. Brussels is also convinced that it is necessary to 
clarify an intermediate policy, if only to avoid causing 
frustration. However, this intermediate phase would be based 
primarily on full implementation of the association agreements, 
according to the EC. 
  Some commissioners, in the same way as Baldwin, seem more 
convinced that the existing bilateral structure, with the weak 
association agreements, is not satisfactory. It does not make 
it possible to step up relations among these countries. Of 
course, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia have 
concluded the Visegrad agreements which make provision for the 
establishment of a free trade area. 
  But this is not working very well, and Bulgaria and Romania, 
which also have association agreements with the European Union 
(EU), are not part of it. The main problem is that those 
responsible are very reluctant about any idea of recreating 
links among themselves, fearing that Europe might use this as a 
pretext to keep them waiting indefinitely. 
  And yet, we hear people on the EU side saying, Moscow cannot 
simply be replaced by Brussels, given that the CEMA [Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance] system functioned essentially 
between each satellite country and the USSR, and very little 
among the East European countries. 
  The advantage of a free trade area is more obvious for these 
countries, in that the foreign investor cannot really rely 
exclusively on the internal market of one country. Indeed, the 
incentives would be much greater if a whole free trade area in 
the region was opened up for the enterprise. 
<H5>  Strengthening Ties </H5>
  At the same time, the EC seems to have come round to another 
idea: During the transitional phase, it would be necessary to 
gradually adapt the aid system provided by the EU to the Central 
and East European countries. The aim would be to turn this 
system into a preparatory tool for membership. This process 
has, moreover, already started, because the Copenhagen European 
summit has decided to devote 15 percent of the PHARE [Economic 
Reconstruction Aid for Poland and Hungary] funds to the 
development of the infrastructure. But there are proposals for 
going further and using the PHARE program as a tool preparing 
for membership, by bringing it closer to the structural funds, 
by extending the suggestions of the white paper to the East 
European countries, and by expanding the European Investment 
Bank's sphere of intervention, especially to the Baltic 
countries. PHARE, the relevant commissioners also argue, should 
have funding extending over several years to enable it to 
intervene at the level of industrial and bank restructuring. 
  The PHARE program could also be concentrated on the 
harmonization of legislation, and the implementation of the 
rules of competition in force in the EU in the sphere of 
monopolies and public aid. This aspect has already been tackled 
in the association agreements. In the view of some 
commissioners, if it were taken further, it would make it 
possible to envisage the elimination of antidumping and 
protection procedures, which are all sources of tension with our 
partners. Pending the standardization of rules, these same 
commissioners suggest a preliminary consultation, before 
implementing protection procedures. But the idea is far from 
having unanimous support. 
<H5>  Political Dialogue </H5>
  It has also been suggested that the associate countries 
should be included in the second and third pillars of the 
Maastricht Treaty, relating to justice and internal affairs on 
the one hand and foreign policy on the other. Although this 
idea does not seem to be gaining ground, the Twelve should 
nonetheless give a more active place to the Central European 
countries in the discussions on these subjects. It would thus be 
possible to include on the list of sensitive subjects in these 
countries, the trans-European network, drugs, and crime. This 
should stimulate interest in the discussions and implement the 
decision made last March to conduct multilateral consultations 
at this level too. As for security questions, it would be 
particularly interesting to consult these countries on their 
perception of the situation in Russia and the former USSR. 

