Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Raul Amado-Blanco, vice president </F>
of the National Bank of Cuba, by Marianela Samper; place and 
date not given; from the "Evening Information Review" newscast 
-- recorded] 
  [Text] Cuba's total foreign debt currently amounts to 
approximately $7 billion, and since 1986 dialogue between the 
National Bank of Cuba and its creditors -- the Paris Club and 
the Bank Coordinating Group -- has not resulted in specific or 
important actions. This was pointed out to Radio Havana by Raul 
Amado-Blanco, vice president of the National Bank of Cuba. He 
also noted that in spite of this situation, progress may be made 
this year, which will prove very useful for all sides involved. 
  [Begin Amado-Blanco recording] We would like to move the 
dialogue along, so to speak. There are many issues to be 
reviewed. Our liquidity, from the viewpoint of freely 
convertible currency, as you are well aware, is not very good 
for conducting any sort of negotiations at this time. However, 
I believe an agreement can be reached if we sit down and talk 
and if, to begin with, our creditors acknowledge the efforts 
Cuba made for a number of years between 1982 and 1986 to repay 
its loans. They must also acknowledge the situation Cuba is 
currently experiencing. If we accomplish this I believe we will 
have established a solid foundation that will change our current 
status of immobility where the debt is concerned. [end 
recording] 
  As for the island's real likelihood of obtaining loans, the 
vice president of the Cuban National Bank said that some 
institutions undoubtedly lack the resolve to grant loans. 
Amado-Blanco said he has even discussed all the requirements 
for a loan and been ready for the final signature when the other 
side said the negotiations could not continue. 
  [Begin Amado-Blanco recording] In our case, since at this 
time we are working primarily with private banks, things are not 
done that way, although private banks are sometimes subjected to 
political pressure. However, I do not believe this pressure 
comes from either the IMF or the World Bank but from certain 
governments, the governments of third countries. Bank members 
may eventually hold important positions in the United States, 
and they fear jeopardizing those positions by granting loans to 
Cuba. 
  There are, unquestionably, countries with which we have 
debts, but in spite of this they have still granted loans to 
Cuba and have kept open certain lines of credit to the island. 
They are aware of our position, but they have political resolve. 
There are countries in Europe and on other continents that have 
done this and they are worthy of praise. In my opinion, their 
conduct constitutes a declaration of independence as far as 
their relations with Cuba are concerned. 
  In general, the issue of financial markets is a complicated 
one for Cuba at this time because of the many problems the 
country is facing, but we have had some success. We are trying 
our best to repay the new loans we have received. We are paying 
to the extent that we can, and we are being very careful not to 
request loans that we know we cannot repay. This, of course, 
restricts us because, as you know, our exports have decreased 
considerably. I have remained optimistic throughout 26 years at 
the bank, and I believe that as of 1994, or rather 1995, we are 
going to be quite successful in some areas. We will improve our 
overall image on the market, which is very important. Loan 
payments, first of all, are very important, and our 
possibilities and prospects are very important as they pertain 
to the analyses conducted by banking and financial institutions 
when they are considering loans for countries. [end recording] 
  To conclude, I discussed with Amado-Blanco the loan of $10 
million granted by a Chilean bank to finance the exportation of 
food products from that South American country to the island. 
Amado- Blanco said an institution takes such a step only when 
it has confidence in a country, adding that a loan will not only 
allow Cuba to import food, which is quite positive, but to 
intensify its relations with a country like Chile, with which it 
maintained excellent relations until the 1973 military coup. 

