Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Names as received] </F>
  [Text] Algiers, Feb 7 (AFP)--The radical Armed Islamic 
Group (GIA) has "executed" 70 members from a rival Algerian 
fundamentalist movement, according to a GIA statement appearing 
here on Sunday. 
  In the statement, which has not been authenticated, the GIA 
said it had carried out the executions of members of the Islamic 
Armed Movement (MIA) without giving a precise date. 
  The statement was sent by fax, headed the "State of the 
Islamic Caliphate in Algeria" and dated February 5, 1994. 
  It said the killings had been carried out according to 
Koranic law, adding that the "masters of the political decision 
are the mujahidin." 
  The GIA has accused the MIA of trying to suppress its group 
and has described MIA leader Said Mekhloufi as a "traitor, and 
agent of the government services." 
  In a previous statement the GIA said it was "against all 
truce, all dialogue and all reconciliation with the powers" in 
place and threatened anyone taking part in talks with "the worst 
of deaths." 
  Meanwhile, security forces announced Sunday that 13 armed 
Moslem militants were killed between Tuesday and Thursday in 
several regions of Algeria. 
  Six militants were killed Thursday in Oued Fregha on the 
northern border between Algeria and Tunisia, and two died in 
Mechta El Magahi 450 kilometres (279 miles) southeast of Algiers. 
  Three fundamentalists were killed in Oran in western Algeria 
on Wednesday, and two died Tuesday evening in a suburb of 
Algiers. 
  Earlier Sunday the Hilton hotel in Algiers closed its doors, 
the latest in a growing wave of foreign companies to suspend 
operations here because of continuing fundamentalist violence. 
  The hotel, which opened last August, decided to close for an 
unspecified period six days after the killing in the Casbah 
district of French cameraman Olivier Quemener, whose body was 
repatriated Sunday. 
  It also came three weeks after the assassination of an 
employee of the French consulate, Monique Afri. Both killings 
were blamed officially on Muslim fundamentalist groups. 

