Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interviews with politicians by Radio Observator on the 6 </F>
March government reshuffle; place and date not given: "A 
Government Reshuffle, But It Comes to the Same Thing"] 
  [Text] 
<H3>  Petre Roman, president of the Democratic Party 
(National Salvation Front) [PD-FSN]: "One Third of the Current 
Government Has Not Been Validated" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] What do you think about the government 
reshuffle? 
  [Roman] No one can argue a government's right to seek to 
improve its work, including by cabinet reshuffle. However, the 
way it was done gives rise to concern and even disappointment. 
  [Radio Observator] What are you referring to? 
  [Roman] First, I am referring to the fact that the result of 
this reshuffle, after the one a few months ago, done in the same 
manner, is that one third of the current government consists of 
people who have not been confirmed by Parliament. Reshuffles 
made by ignoring parliament are to the detriment of democracy 
and the Constitution. Once again we note that the Constitution 
is observed only when it is convenient. When it is not 
convenient, then it can be violated. 
  This situation causes concern. Second, there is the 
inevitable question: How does this sudden and inexplicable 
reshuffle concur with sitting down at the negotiating table with 
the political forces within the opposition? It shows the 
mistrust with which efforts are made to achieve a political 
consensus in order to get out of the economic and social 
blockage and launch economic recovery. 
  Here there is both concern and disappointment. And there is 
a certain disappointment with the removal of Lieutenant General 
Niculae Spiroiu, the man who assumed the risk and, at the same 
time, the very difficult duty to modernize the military defense 
system of establishing the military hierarchy on the principles 
of competence and reform, so as to move the Romanian Army as 
close as possible to NATO structures. 
  These are the questions raised in connection with this 
reshuffle. 
  [Radio Observator] To go back to what you said before, I 
understand you are disappointed because you are convinced that, 
while the PDSR [Social Democracy Party of Romania] was 
conferring with you, the PNTCD [National Peasant Christian 
Democratic Party] and the PSDR [Social Democratic Party of 
Romania], the government decided on the reshuffle and thus, the 
talks with you were, in a way, conducted on a parallel level, 
this being known to the PDSR. 
  [Roman] The risk is that these talks, which we view as 
fundamental and involving great responsibility, namely to get 
out of our impasse and blockage, now seem like a facade. 
  [Radio Observator] Do you think that there is any use 
continuomg the dialogue? 
  [Roman] I think we have an obligation to maintain the idea 
of a dialogue, but the way it is to take place has to be 
discussed. In this respect, I first want to consult my party 
colleagues and maybe also other political forces within the 
opposition to try to clarify why this happened, which, indeed, 
may obscure exactly what seems a ray of light in this ever 
darker period in the Romanian nation's existence. 
<H3>  Ion Solcanu, PDSR senator: "This Is Not a Pro-Forma 
Reshuffle" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] The cabinet reshuffle has earned a lot of 
criticism. Is it justified? 
  [Solcanu] You see, the presence of the two civilian figures 
at the helm of the Ministries of Interior and National Defense 
very well correspond to the recommendations made to Romania and 
this aspect also is part of the reform. From this angle, I 
could say that it surely was not a pro-forma reshuffle. To 
replace four important ministers does not mean a pro-forma 
reshuffle and the presence of only one minister coming from our 
party does not mean a consolidation of our party in the 
government team. 
  [Radio Observator] Does this government reshuffle, at a time 
when the PDSR was holding talks with the other political forces, 
not compromise the negotiations with those forces? 
  [Solcanu] I do not think the problem can be posed this way 
and I will tell you why. During our talks with the parties, 
both with the PD(FSN), Mr. Sergiu Cunescu's PSDR [Social 
Democratic Party of Romania], and with the PNTCD [National 
Peasant Christian Democratic Party], we explained that, although 
discussed as a problem, the objective of parliamentary majority 
is a question of the more distant future that should not be 
forced. 
  [Radio Observator] And a last question: Are the four newly 
appointed ministers going to be confirmed by parliament? 
  [Solcanu] Regulations do not provide for this. The 
government reshuffle is decided by the president on the proposal 
of the prime minister. The complete government team is 
confirmed by parliament when the government program is voted on 
and passed. Thus, this is another reshuffle and it is 
absolutely constitutional. 

<H3>    Gheorghe Funar, president of the Romanian National 
Unity Party [PUNR]: "We Will Support the Government If the 
Protocol Is Respected" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] Ion Diaconescu, vice president of the 
PNTCD, said at one point that the government reshuffle was done 
on purpose in order not to anger the allies of the government 
party. What is your opinion in this respect, Mr. Funar? 
  [Funar] Since there have only been replacements in four of 
the ministries where the PUNR also wanted a change of ministers, 
we hope that, from the point of view of the PUNR, this reshuffle 
will be much more comprehensive and will include at least 
three-four other ministries. 
  [Radio Observator] That is what I wanted to hear because, in 
fact, this reshuffle does not include the ministries that are 
involved in the reform process. Does this not disappoint you? 
  [Funar] We are not talking of disappointment. The 
discussions held with those who are leading the PDSR prompted 
the idea that in a future stage -- and we hope that it will not 
be too long -- there will be modifications in other ministries 
too, leading finally to a much more solid government team, 
including reshuffles at the ministries you referred to, the ones 
that are much more directly involved in the reform. 
  [Radio Observator] Well, but does the way things have 
developed not suggest, by any chance, that a future reshuffle 
would also be within the PDSR? 
  [Funar] This is also possible on condition that competent 
people are found and accept such positions as minister. Maybe 
some of them will not belong to the PDSR, but will be 
independent, just as the prime minister is; maybe they will be 
liked by the PUNR as well. 
  [Radio Observator] Mr. Funar, some observers believe that 
the PDSR is trying to strengthen its position as a single party. 
Under what conditions and how are you going to act toward the 
PDSR? 
  [Funar] I think this is a much more theoretical remark. The 
PDSR will not be able to achieve a higher percentage than that 
achieved in the elections or greater support, for that matter, 
except through negotiations with other political formations 
within the so-called government arc, which has supported the 
Vacaroiu government so far, or within the opposition. 
  [Radio Observator] Well, but these negotiations will be 
broached from a different position, because, as has been proved 
twice -- in August and now -- the reshuffle can be performed 
under one's own steam. 
  [Funar] This is possible any time but it is not enough for 
the PDSR. It needs the support of the team, particularly in 
parliament. 
  [Radio Observator] And you will continue to grant this 
support? 
  [Funar] For the time being, this support will continue, 
provided the provisions of the protocol concluded with the PDSR 
are applied. 
<H3>  Romanian President Ion Iliescu: "Before Talking About a New 
Coalition, We Have To Achieve a Common Platform of Understanding" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] Do you think that in the future, let's 
say by fall, it will be possible to form a government, including 
the opposition? 
  [Iliescu] This is another question altogether. It requires 
different steps to achieve a viable platform for a larger and 
united government team. It would not be bad to achieve such a 
thing. I have always been frank and have sought this. We have 
had such a coalition government: the Stolojan government. You 
may recall that in 1990, after the first elections, I made such 
proposals, irrespective of the fact that there was a party 
holding parliamentary majority. Even at that time I said that 
it would be useful to create a broad coalition. This idea was 
rejected at that time. Then the Stolojan coalition government 
was formed. I can say that it was an interesting and useful 
political experiment. Such a coalition would be welcome 
especially today when we do not have a majority party. This, 
however, requires a better atmosphere and platform. I want to 
see how the second round of talks is going to conclude. During 
the first round I held talks with party representatives. Now 
the second round is being held between parties, that is between 
the ruling party and the other parties from all political 
spectrums -- both from the left and the right, although this 
delineation is relative. This time around our talks may yield 
results. What I mean is that before talking about a government 
coalition we have to achieve a platform of common understanding 
that may facilitate such a coalition. 
<H3>  Teodor Mohora, vice president of the Socialist Party of 
Labor [PSM]: "We Are a Party on the Rise" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] I would like to quote one of your 
statements: "I believe that, with the current reshuffle, the 
work of this government cannot change radically. What really 
needs reshuffling is the way the entire cabinet acts and is 
involved in solving our economic and social problems." 
  [Mohora] This comment starts out from an observation that 
may be different from that of the government and ruling party. 
We, the PSM leadership, are participating in our party's county 
conferences and I can say that we have the opportunity -- in 
direct discussions with the people -- to realize that the 
country is experiencing a difficult economic and social 
situation, which has been generated by the government's 
inconsistent and incoherent actions. 
  Thus, we think that, without reconsidering the cabinet 
program and work style, this government reshuffle will not yield 
spectacular results, even if, let us say, the people who 
appointed to government positions are competent people who could 
make an increased contribution to coordinating the respective 
fields. 
  [Radio Observator] From your party's point of view, what 
direction will the talks take? 
  [Mohora] During the talks, we said clearly that we wanted to 
discuss the country's basic problems, and, of course, those of 
the government. Thus, in view of the PSM's chance of having 
access to the government, we are interested in the government 
program. In any case, what we are interested in is to clearly 
settle the relations we will continue to maintain with the 
ruling party and government through a political understanding. 
For, as you well know, since the elections of September 1992 
our situation is a paradoxical one -- and that applies not only 
to us, to our party. As a matter of fact, four parties other 
than the PDSR support a government, without a clear political 
understanding, as the provisions of the Constitution actually 
prove. 
  [Radio Observator] A last question. There is a lot of talk 
about early elections, and some people are even stirring up this 
issue like a sort of scarecrow. What is the PSM's position in 
this respect? 
  [Mohora] We think it is not positive to force early 
elections this year because we are experiencing an extremely 
difficult economic period. New elections could cost us precious 
time and a lot of money. Certainly, you might think we are 
hypocrites to see us fiercely oppose early elections, because, 
as you know, we are a party on the rise and in the event of 
elections, if there are early elections, we will win an 
increased number of mandates. 
  We are thinking, however, of the situation in our country, 
that is, of the national interest, which, we believe, does not 
need early elections. 
<H3>  Ion Diaconescu, vice president of the National Peasant 
Christian Democratic Party [PNTCD]: "The Balance of Political 
Forces in Romania Has Not Changed at all" </H3>
  [Radio Observator] Do you believe this was a genuine 
government reshuffle or just a pro-forma one? 
  [Diaconescu] It has certainly been a reshuffle, but it was 
not the reshuffle expected by the public. The public wants a 
different government; in fact, this is actually the same 
government, spruced up with two or three technocrats, who, in 
fact, are also leaning toward the PDSR. Seen in this light, I 
believe that absolutely nothing has changed in the balance of 
political forces in our country, something that spares us the 
effort to think of a reorientation from this point of view. We 
are faced with the same situation, thus we may continue the same 
position. What shocked me, however, was the fact that General 
Spiroiu was replaced at this time when he is involved in a 
scandal with Senator Corneliu Vadim Tudor [leader of Greater 
Romania Party]. The fact that he was replaced now makes one 
believe that President Iliescu was favoring Vadim Tudor given 
the fact that he was warned of measures against him, but 
continues to hold his former position, while General Spiroiu was 
replaced. 
  [Radio Observator] Why should he not favor General Spiroiu? 
After all he has been appointed ambassador to NATO in Brussels? 
  [Diaconescu] I think the position of ambassador to NATO in 
Brussels is lower than the position of minister of defense. I 
think that the ambassador in Brussels is subordinated to the 
Ministry of Defense. 
  [Radio Observator] Do you think that thus the demand by 
smaller and allied parties, namely to remove General Spiroiu, 
was met, a demand that constituted a condition for even 
participating in the negotiations?! 
  [Diaconescu] Maybe. The fact that the replaced ministers 
are, generally speaking, ministers who, of late, gave reasons 
for lots of discussions, rightly or wrongly, proves that in 
Spiroiu's case only this aspect was taken into account. The 
government continues to be a monocolor government and the change 
has taken place in such a way that former allies, who, of 
course, will continue to be the allies of the ruling party, are 
not angered. 
  [Radio Observator] How do you explain the fact that none of 
the portfolios whose holders have been replaced are in the 
economic area; thus the Vacaroiu government's economic line has 
not changed. If we are talking of change, should we not have 
expected something else, given the country's economic plight? 
  [Diaconescu] That is correct. It means that the government 
thinks that the line it has pursued so far is a positive one, 
all the government achievements are positive; but I want to ask 
you: How do you explain the current situation? It constantly 
wants to make the public believe that this whole economic 
disaster is a matter of fate, without no responsibility falling 
on the political leadership in our country, that it has not made 
any mistakes and can thus continue the same way. 

