Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 7 (YONHAP) -- North Korea plans to 
declare on April 15, the 82nd birthday of President Kim Il-song, 
that it will open up partially by launching Chinese-style 
economic reforms, reliable Chinese sources said Sunday. After 
making the declaration, Kim Il-song is expected to visit Beijing 
in May at the latest, the sources said. 
  North Korea's communist regime will undertake the measures 
to 
overcome a grave economic crisis and alleviate mounting 
dissatisfaction among its citizens, the sources noted. 
  The Pyongyang government has established a central economic 
reform ministry within the administration and is currently 
mapping out detailed plans patterned after Chinese-style 
reforms, they said. 
  Pyongyang has already informed Beijing, its only remaining 
major ally, of its plans, the sources said on condition of 
anonymity. 
  One senior North Korean official was quoted by a number of 
Chinese observers as saying that "North Korean leaders at a 
recent meeting with President Kim seriously discussed the 
question of undertaking Chinese-style reforms." 
  The leaders have decided to proceed toward partially opening 
North Korea as a separate policy from the country's nuclear 
program, which has been the biggest obstacle to such reforms, 
the official was quoted as saying. 
  The North Korean official was quoted by a number of Chinese 
entrepreneurs who have close contact with North Korean officials 
in charge of external economy, and who are well-versed with 
North Korean affairs. 
  At the meeting, the North Korean leaders shared the opinion 
that their country would be dealt a fatal blow if another war 
broke out on the Korean peninsula because of the nuclear issue, 
the sources said. 
  They thus decided to push ahead with their current 
negotiations with the United States to normalize relations and 
obtain assurances on the maintenance of the North Korean regime 
and economic assistance. 
  In the meantime, Pyongyang will pursue economic reform and a 
policy of openness separately, the sources said. The North 
Korean leadership made the decisions mainly because the 
country's economic difficulties are approaching a dangerous 
point and the people's dissatisfaction is reaching a serious 
level, they said. 
  With regard to North Korea's economic reform policy, they 
said Pyongyang will almost completely open the Rajin-Sonbong 
area in the northeastern part of the country, as well as 
Shinuiju, Nampo, Chongjin and Wonsan. 
  Pyongyang plans to liberalize investment in these areas by 
foreigners including South Koreans, they said. 
  As a second phase, the North Koreans are studying the 
possibility of allowing "select" Chinese and other business 
enterprises to advance into areas near Pyongyang, they said. 
  In this connection, China's Tumen Trading Corp. recently 
signed a contract with North Korea on setting up a 
food-processing joint venture on the outskirts of Pyongyang 
while several other Chinese companies in Guangdong Province have 
agreed to build factories in and around Pyongyang, they said. 
  As part of its economic reforms, Pyongyang intends to reform 
agricultural policy, abolishing the current "collective farm 
system" whose productivity has been declining steadily over the 
years. 
  Pyongyang also plans to give farmers the right to cultivate 
land on condition that they pay predetermined taxes, they said. 
  At the same time, officials from the newly established 
central economic reform ministry will be sent to China's free 
trade zones in Guangdong Province to study the Chinese reform 
policy, the sources said. 
  North Korea's new economic reform policy is an "open secret" 
among residents of such big cities as Pyongyang, they said. 

