CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jorma Rotko: "Estonia's Inflation Accelerates: </F>
Prices in March Rose Nearly 9 Percent"] 
  [Text] Tallinn -- A common sight last summer around Tallinn 
harbor was a happy Finnish family carrying aboard their ship 
inexpensive food purchased in Estonia. This coming summer this 
sight will perhaps not be as usual, since Estonia's economy has 
slipped into exploding inflation. 
  For all of last year inflation was 35 percent, which is 
small 
in comparison with other other former socialist countries. 
Inflation in January of this year was 5.5 percent, in February 
5.2, and in March already 8.9 percent. 
  In Estonia it is estimated that the first three months of 
this year have brought a rise in the cost-of-living index of 
around 21 percent. 
  Research Director Marje Josing of the Estonian Business 
Institute says that wages in the private sector have kept pace 
with the inflation rate. 
  "Last year in September the mean wage in Estonia was 1,168 
kroons (around 550 Finnish markkas); by February this year the 
mean wage was 1,365 kroons (around 640 markkas)." 
  Josing thinks inflation is hitting hardest retired persons 
whose pensions have not risen at the same pace as prices. 
  Josing does not believe inflation will continue at the same 
8.9-percent pace experienced in March. 
  "The great demand for food products from Russia caused the 
rise in prices in Estonia. In mid-February, Russia placed an 
average 30-percent tariff on Estonian food products, and exports 
collapsed completely. For this reason, Estonian producers are 
being forced to act on prices in order to get their products 
sold in the domestic market," Josing said. 
<H5>  Finnish Goods Still Inexpensive </H5>
  As Estonia's prices have risen, Finnish goods have become 
more competitive. Indeed, the general lifting of prices has been 
tempting merchants to raise their prices also for Finnish goods. 
  The price for good-quality Estonian cheese has risen this 
year from 15 to 25 markkas per kg, but 400 grams of a Finnish 
butter-margarine mix still gets around four markkas. The Finnish 
taxpayer subsidizes the greatest portion of this price. 
  In March, Estonia's inflation rate even exceeded that of 
Russia. Housing costs rose during March by 18.5 percent, 
services by 15.5 percent, and food by 7.5 percent. 
  The dizzying inflation has set many to pondering whether the 
Estonian kroon's firm tie to the German mark at the rate of 1:8 
will be long sustainable. The German mark is already beginning 
to be so cheap that it is becoming interesting to Estonian 
investors. 
  Kroons are beginning to be exchanged for hard currency. In 
March the Central Bank's hard currency reserves backing the 
kroon dropped for the first time since the kroon came into use, 
even though by only 1.5 percent. 

