Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, presidential </F>
candidate for the Mexican Institutional Revolutionary Party, at 
the party's national headquarters in Mexico City -- live] 
  [Text] Companion and friend, Fernando Ortiz Arana, 
distinguished president of the National Executive Committee 
[CEN] of our party, the PRI [Institutional Revolutionary Party]; 
sector leaders; members of the CEN; governors of the states in 
the republic; PRI members, all convinced of our victory: 
  With mournful spirit, but with my deepest determination and 
with my most sincere humility, I accept the serious 
responsibility that the CEN of our party grants to me. I accept 
it fully aware of the fact that the best man to take the PRI to 
victory and the country to fulfill its aspirations was, at all 
times, Luis Donaldo Colosio. [applause] 
  With him, we Mexicans were preparing to consolidate and 
extend the historic work of modernization begun by President 
Carlos Salinas de Gortari. [applause] Luis Donaldo Colosio had 
built genuine leadership in our party, and his message of hope 
was already in the hearts of all Mexicans, in all corners of the 
fatherland. Luis Donaldo Colosio was a good, self-made man who 
formed an exemplary family and knew how to earn the respect and 
appreciation of his fellow party members and of everyone who 
knew him. Luis Donaldo Colosio represented for Mexico the 
certainty of a future he dreamt about and those of us who dreamt 
with him. Luis Donaldo Colosio was the best man for Mexico. 
  I accept this responsibility knowing that we PRI members 
will 
not begin a campaign; we will continue the campaign. We know PRI 
members already have an exact diagnosis for the national 
problems, which was prepared by the foresight of Luis Donaldo 
Colosio. We know we PRI members already have a political offer 
that goes beyond any other, as far as popular support and shared 
purposes are concerned. Luis Donaldo promised to build the best 
electoral proposal and to take it to the citizens. Luis Donaldo 
kept his promise. 
  That is Luis Donaldo Colosio's generous legacy. In this 
legacy, the members of the PRI and all Mexicans will find 
guiding principles, a political platform, programmatic 
proposals, slogans, and goals. We will honor the legacy of what 
Luis Donaldo Colosio heard from our fellow Mexicans, of what 
Luis Donaldo Colosio learned from his coexistence with men, 
women, and children throughout the country. This legacy is what 
Luis Donaldo Colosio characterized as a political strategy after 
listening to the Mexican people's voices and after pledging to 
heed those voices. 
  Luis Donaldo Colosio always pledged to listen to and heed 
the 
people, and it is our duty to honor his convictions, display his 
causes, and fulfill his goals. At this hour, before those who 
shared Luis Donaldo's ideals and work, before our party comrades 
and all Mexicans, I reaffirm my unequivocal conviction that 
respect for the Constitution of the republic is our best 
political weapon. 
  I firmly believe that the political Constitution sums up the 
Mexican people's struggles and that from it flow the ideals that 
we share. The Constitution contains the principles that allow 
the state to deal with economic, social, and political problems, 
leaving in its solutions the traces of our identity as a nation. 
The Constitution goes beyond the juridical sense of its precepts 
to become an expression of our history. That is why I believe 
respect for the Constitution is a condition for preserving 
sovereignty and ensuring the free and civilized coexistence of a 
nation like ours which is rich in its plurality. 
  As a Mexican and as a PRI member, I believe the enforcement 
of the de jure state sums up the people's mandate. Thus, we must 
all respect its institutions, adhere to its legal instruments, 
and obey its ordinances. 
  Scarcely a few days ago, only a few steps away from here, 
Luis Donaldo Colosio invoked Benito Juarez's thoughts; the 
lessons learned from his work, from his great passion for 
Mexico, his struggle for national sovereignty, and his concept 
of the law as something most sacred. To live in a de jure state 
is to live with security, to have confidence and to settle our 
differences peacefully and with equality of rights. The 
enforcement of the de jure state is possible only if justice 
prevails above all else. The de jure state and the imparting of 
justice are inseparable. 
  Injustice and insecurity disrupt the state of law and 
hinder the participation and activities of the citizens. 
Consequently, I add my voice to the clamor of my fellow party 
members and the demand of society at large: We demand that the 
crime that took the life of Luis Donaldo Colosio be completely 
clarified. [applause] This is an indispensable step for 
restoring the public security that all Mexicans deserve and for 
restoring public belief in the administration of justice. This 
is a human, social, and party demand that is necessary for the 
health of the republic. Every single Mexican is demanding 
justice. 
  Before my fellow party members, today I reaffirm my PRI 
conviction. The PRI always has been and will continue to be the 
party of Mexico's sovereignty and independence; the party of the 
Mexican people's historic struggles and popular causes; the 
party of hope and trust; the party of the majority and of 
progress. This is why the PRI chose Luis Donaldo Colosio as its 
candidate to the presidency of the Republic. 
  In Luis Donaldo Colosio, we of the PRI had someone to bear 
the standard of our ideals and aspirations, to defend our values 
and principles, and to promote equality, welfare, and justice. 
He was the standard bearer of a party that came from the widest 
breadth of society and from the very depths of our history; a 
party that has contributed decisively to building a strong and 
stable nation; a party that has promoted the modernization of 
the past few years; a party that is deeply committed to 
democracy; a party that knows how to earn its legitimacy and win 
over the majority with daily actions, by identifying with the 
people, and with the work of all of its members. 
  The PRI made Luis Donaldo Colosio its candidate because he 
represented the consolidation of stability and internal peace, 
of economic growth and the multiplication of opportunities. 
Thanks to the boost given by Luis Donaldo Colosio, the PRI is 
marching toward a new stage in the political transformation of 
Mexico; toward a party that is fully prepared for political 
competition; a party that can struggle within the law, in a 
clean and correct manner, for each vote and for each victory. 
  The great work done by Luis Donaldo Colosio in the PRI was 
permanently inspired by his deep democratic convictions. Luis 
Donaldo promoted democracy in all the spheres of political life. 
Consequently, Luis Donaldo yearned for clearly democratic 
elections and for regulations that would grant full autonomy to 
and secure the impartiality of our electoral organizations. 
That is why he worked hard for the agreement for peace, 
democracy, and justice, and promoted consensus-building with 
other parties -- something that was unprecedented in Mexico's 
political history. 
  He was always the first one to seek confidence, trust, 
regularity, and clarity in the electoral process. Luis Donaldo 
Colosio knew that the building of democracy is a permanent task 
that requires everyone's participation. Democracy requires a 
continuous effort, based on a genuinely shared desire to always 
advance, always improve, and always struggle for the purest 
values of political life until the democratic aspiration of all 
Mexicans are fully realized. 
  In the past few months, Luis Donaldo Colosio toured the 
country, visited communities, approached families, and made the 
people's just and old demands, as well as old wrongs, his own. 
This is the Mexico that penetrated his conscience, the one that 
guided his campaign, and inspired his platform. This Mexico 
would take him to victory because he identified himself with the 
workers who demand well paid jobs, training, and ample social 
security for their families. In this Mexico, he identified 
himself with the poor peasants, who struggle so their productive 
capacity can make the rural medium play a decisive role in the 
country's progress. In this Mexico, Colosio testified about the 
cohesion and millenial identities of the Indian communities, 
which demand justice in exchange for believing and participating 
in the new greatness of their land. In this Mexico, Colosio 
reasserted his respect for Mexican women's equal rights and the 
place they deserve in the construction of the Mexican nation's 
future. In this Mexico, Colosio saw and understood the young 
people, who demand a quality education and opportunities to 
apply their energy, talents, eagerness, and uprightness to the 
work at hand. For all of them, Colosio represented true hope, a 
hope to participate, a chance to work and prosper. 
  For this reason, the PRI affirmed itself as the party of the 
majority through Colosio. And Colosio's party will continue to 
be the party of the majority because it offers changes with 
responsibility, a course for progress, welfare with instability. 
Colosio's leadership made the PRI the party of democratic 
transformation. Colosio called for reforming power. We of the 
PRI will abide by his words. We will reinforce the balance 
between the government branches by expanding the authority of 
the Legislative Branch and strengthening the agencies in charge 
of the administration of justice based on universal principles 
and precepts in agreement with our progress as a nation. We 
will reform power by strengthening federalism as an essential 
principle of the republican pact in recognition of municipal 
freedom and the dignity of each community and individual. 
  We will reach the end of this century with a stronger 
economy, in which stability and growth are based on healthy 
finances, competitiveness, and modernization. The role to be 
played by this economic progress should be family welfare, a 
fair distribution of wealth, and, in particular, a direct attack 
on poverty, which affects many, many millions of Mexicans. We 
will build a Mexico in which each man and woman can develop his 
or her capabilities and potential, where workers, peasants, 
professionals, teachers, employees, students, and entrepreneurs 
can share the hope and stimulus of contributing their efforts to 
participate in progress. 
  Fellow countrymen, we, the Mexican people, are living in a 
time that demands national unity. This is everyone's feeling. 
Today, tragedy has cast our party into mourning. All of Mexico 
shares our grief and a feeling of the offense inflicted. 
Throughout our history, every test and every demand of fate has 
been overcome by the unity of the Mexican people. When this did 
not happened, the homeland suffered the most. At present, we 
should extract from the tragedy a lesson of unity, strength in 
diversity, honesty in political struggle, a brother's respect 
for one another, and political civility. National unity will 
make it possible for us to advance with self-confidence, along a 
well-defined course, and with the determined participation of 
everyone. 
  The same way we PRI members have always called for national 
unity, today I call on my fellow party members to redouble the 
PRI's unity. Let us continue the task initiated by Luis Donaldo 
Colosio by carrying out our tasks, invigorating our 
organization, working and participating with enthusiasm in all 
the trenches our party offers us. 
  This is why, as a PRI member, as a Colosioist, I call on the 
party's rank and file, its organizations, its leaders, and all 
its members to close ranks around the ideals, programs, and 
actions that Luis Donaldo Colosio left us. 
  Upon accepting the responsibility that my fellow party 
members grant me, I am supported by the conviction that every 
woman and every man, each young or mature party member, has a 
place and a duty. The PRI is not an exclusive party; this is why 
it assembles the majority. PRI members can have the certainty 
that our party, your party, will continue to be the political 
institution that will give way to their aspirations, to their 
fighting spirit, to their desire for participation and progress. 
  Today all PRI members have a mission: To take Luis Donaldo 
Colosio's program to electoral victory; make reality the promise 
of that future, of well-being, equality, and justice for which 
he offered his life. We must fulfill our duty and our 
responsibility. I know that in this great task that awaits us, I 
will be able to count on the support and the work of each and 
every party member. I base my acceptance of the PRI presidential 
candidacy on this. Long live Colosio [shouts of vivas]; long 
live the PRI [shouts of vivas]; long live Mexico [shouts of 
vivas]. [applause] 

