CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S.V. Sidorenko, I.K. Lebedeva, S.I. Dyakov, V.A. </F>
Zakharov, National Antibiotics Research Center, Moscow, and 
Scientific Research Institute of Military Medicine, St. 
Petersburg] 
  [Abstract] The endemic rate of tularemia in many regions of 
the northern hemisphere, especially among rodents and even 
humans, and the resistance of Francisella tularensis 
to betalactam and other antibiotics prompted an examination of 
the inhibitory and bactericide activity of representatives of 
various antibiotics and chemical preparation classes to 
tularemia bacteria and an attempt to assess their interaction. 
The strains used in the experiment and their cultivation 
procedure, the antibiotics used, the measurement of the minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MPK), the study of the postantibiotic 
effect (PAE), a study of the bactericide activity, and 
statistical processing using the Statgrafics program are 
described in detail. Student's t-test was also used to assess 
the confidence of data. The minimum inhibitory concentration of 
the antibiotics and chemical preparations (in g/ml( relative 
to various Francisella tularensis strains, and 
interaction of the antibiotics combinations relative to various 
Francisella tularensis strains, and the antibiotics' 
bactericide activity relative to the Francisella 
tularensis are summarized, and the optical density of the 
culture after treatment with various sisomycin concentrations is 
plotted. The growth rate of the Francisella 
tularensis Schu-S4 strain after treatment with various 
antibacterial preparation concentrations (doxycyclin, 
rifampicin, sisomycin, and ciprofloxacin) is calculated for the 
0-6 and 6-24 h time intervals. The findings indicate that with 
respect to the inhibitory and bactericide action and 
post-antibiotic effect manifestation, aminoglycoside antibiotics 
and fluoridated quinolons (sisomycin and ciprofloxacin) have the 
highest activity toward tularemia bacteria while doxycyclin, 
rifampicin, and phosnodemycin have a pronounced inhibitory 
activity toward tularemia bacteria but display no bactericide 
activity; their postantibiotic effect is manifested to a lesser 
extent than that of sisomycin and ciprofloxacin. Figures 1; 
tables 4; references 13: 6 Russian, 7 Western. 


