CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Olena Malynovska, candidate of historical </F>
sciences, chief specialist of the Ministry of Nationality and 
Immigration: "Migration: Who? Where? Why?" A footnote at the 
bottom of the first column of the article states: "This article 
is taken from POLITYKA I CHAS, the journal of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, which is about to appear (published 
in abridged form)."] 
  [Text] The process of population migration has 
intensified throughout the world. Recently, Ukraine has also 
been touched by the resettlement movement. The creation of new 
independent states on the territory of the former USSR has been 
accompanied by a significant exchange of populations among them. 
Thus, in 1992, for example, 775,000 people either entered 
Ukraine from other former Soviet republics or left for other 
former republics. In the first half of 1993, this figure 
exceeded 300,000. Nearly half the immigrants are Ukrainians. 
That is, there is an evident repatriation trend in connection 
with the creation of an independent Ukrainian state. 
  Until very recently, emigration from Ukraine in the 
form that it occurs throughout the world did not exist. The 
desire to change one's country of residence was regarded as 
treason. Apart from a small, often forced, political emigration, 
most of those leaving the country were members of specific 
ethnic groups--Jews and Germans--and only then if they had close 
relatives abroad. The scale of this emigration was small. 
<H5>  An Emigration Explosion and New Trends </H5>
  As departure was liberalized, emigration began to grow 
rapidly. Compared with 1987, when the departments of visas and 
registration [VVIR's] of the Ministry of Internal Affairs issued 
only 5,400 exit visas to citizens of Ukraine, permitting them to 
take up permanent residence abroad (among them, 3,000 exit visas 
to Israel), in 1989 they issued 36,500 visas, or nearly seven 
times as many. A record number of visas was issued in 
1990--73,000 (68,000 to Israel). In addition to parents, exit 
visas were processed for 22,000 children, raising the number of 
emigrants to more than 95,000 people. 
  In 1991, emigration from Ukraine dropped somewhat. The 
number 
of exit visas (counting children) issued was 69,300 (48,500 to 
Israel). A portion of these, as well as a portion of the visas 
issued during the preceding year, were not used. Emigration 
slowed down due to the "Gulf War" and the resulting rise in 
tensions in the international situation. As before, the majority 
of emigrants--70 percent--went to Israel. However, there was a 
substantial increase in emigration to the United States (15,300 
people, counting children) and to the Federal Republic of 
Germany (2,100). 
  New trends became more evident in 1992. The number of exit 
visas issued decreased to 35,200. Counting children, this number 
totalled 44,300. Of these, less than one-third headed for 
Israel, with the overwhelming majority going to the United 
States and Germany. 
  Based on official emigration statistics for the first half 
of 
1993, it is safe to conclude that the compass has now definitely 
swung to the West. Of the 19,700 persons who left the country 
during this period of time to take up permanent residence 
abroad, 45 percent headed for the United States and 11 percent 
for Germany. 
  Kievans make up the largest number--25 percent--of our 
former 
compatriots who now live in foreign countries. In the past, 
every fifth emigrant was from Odessa. A rather significant 
percentage of emigrants come from Kharkov, Dnipropetrovsk, 
Chernivtsi, and Zhytomyr Oblasts. Kirovohrad, Ternopil, and 
Poltava Oblasts have the lowest emigration rates. 
  Inasmuch as emigration from Ukraine in recent years was 
essentially ethnic in nature, it is quite natural that most 
emigrants left from regions with traditionally large Jewish 
populations. The Chernobyl catastrophe was another important 
factor that played an obvious role in the regional distribution 
of emigration. As already stated, departures to take up 
permanent residence abroad began to decrease in 1991. However, 
this trend applied mainly to regions outside the "Chernobyl 
zone." In fact, the number of those from Kiev and Kiev Oblast 
granted exit visas actually increased as compared with the 
preceding year, both in relative and absolute terms. 
  Current emigration from Ukraine to take up permanent 
residence abroad cannot be described as large. Clearly, the peak 
has been passed. The reserves of ethnic emigration are becoming 
exhausted. On the other hand, the Western countries that have 
become the ultimate destination of emigrants are constantly 
making entry for foreigners more difficult. It is easier to 
obtain permission for a temporary stay abroad, and, 
consequently, this kind of emigration is becoming more 
widespread. 
  A greater openness to the outside world in the second half 
of 
the eighties was manifested in, apart from other things, the 
opportunity that a significant number of people had to visit 
foreign countries on so-called personal business. 
  In 1992, the number of visas issued for temporary visits 
abroad fell somewhat and amounted to 1,808,000 (76 percent of 
these visas were granted for visits to Poland). The number of 
trips to the West remained rather modest. 
  The greatest number of trips for personal reasons are made 
by 
residents of the western border oblasts, where ties with 
neighboring countries are traditional and many residents have 
relatives abroad. 
<H5>  What They Are Looking For in Distant Lands </H5>
  To determine the nature of migration, it is important to 
know 
the reason for it. A portion of those who leave for a limited 
time do so to visit relatives, see a foreign country, or take a 
holiday. The majority, however, travel to engage in trade. One 
look at the baggage of our international passengers is enough to 
attest to this. More than half of those surveyed make regular 
commercial trips, primarily to Eastern European countries. In 
addition to such "petty traders," a certain portion of those who 
leave the country temporarily fall into the category of "migrant 
workers," that is, individuals who travel from one country to 
another according to the International Labor Organization in 
order to find work. 
  There has been a sharp rise in the number of business trips 
linked primarily to the expansion of economic and cultural 
cooperation with foreign partners and the growth of the number 
of people involved in such undertakings. But this is not the 
only consequence of this growth. In sending people on long-term 
assignments, Ukrainian enterprises often serve, in effect, as 
intermediaries for job placement abroad. 
  In the absence of any other forms of cooperation in the use 
of manpower resources, Ukrainian workers, such as construction 
laborers, for example, leave to work abroad under the guise of 
being sent to perform jobs outside the country by Ukrainian 
enterprises. Commercial firms that act as intermediaries in job 
placement abroad do so under the guise of sending people for 
training. Some educational institutions engage in the same 
practice. Yet another circumstance needs to be kept in mind. 
Official business trips and training are often used to find more 
or less permanent work and to sign a contract with a foreign 
employer. They thus serve as a means of emigrating to work 
abroad. Above all, this applies to highly qualified specialists. 
In one of his speeches, the president of the Academy of Sciences 
of Ukraine stated that two-thirds of the academy's scientists 
who have gone to other countries in recent years have signed 
contracts and extended their stay abroad. To a certain extent, 
tourism is also a step towards labor emigration. 
  To some degree, the "travel fever" that seized our society 
at 
the end of the eighties and the beginning of the nineties is a 
reaction to the fact that it was impossible to leave the country 
in earlier years. But there are also deeper reasons. First and 
foremost among them--a much lower living standard than in 
neighboring countries. 
  The country's deep economic crisis threatens not only the 
welfare of the population, but also its ability to find 
employment. Political issues also play a role. Up to now, 
Ukraine has remained a relatively calm region. However, the 
conflict in the Transdniester region, the difficult problems in 
Crimea, and the clashes with Russia that grow acute 
periodically--all produce a sense of uncertainty and the desire 
to leave and wait out this difficult period elsewhere. 
  Thus, Ukraine's citizens have plenty of reasons for wanting 
to emigrate. However, the effect of these factors would be 
weakened if the public mood were optimistic and there existed a 
firm belief that the situation would improve. Unfortunately, 
there are very evident signs of disillusionment and apathy. 
  At the end of 1992, the International Migration Organization 
conducted a survey of Ukraine's migration potential. 
  Among the Ukrainian citizens polled by the IMO 
[International 
Migration Organization], 49 percent were prepared to live abroad 
for a period ranging from several months to several years (44 
percent among Russian respondents) and 13 percent would emigrate 
permanently (8 percent among Russians). The IMO's experts found 
the following reasons cited by Ukrainian citizens for 
emigration: 71 percent--existing economic conditions, 33 
percent--the effects of Chernobyl, and 26 percent--concern for 
the health of their children, which is directly linked to the 
Chernobyl tragedy. Some optimism can be derived from the fact 
that ethnic and religious motives and human rights violations 
were cited as reasons for leaving the country by only 14.2 and 9 
percent of respondents, respectively (in Russia these numbers 
were 35.3 and 16 percent, respectively). 
  The majority of those surveyed would like to emigrate to 
Western European countries, while one-third would like to go to 
the United States or Canada. Worth noting is the small (6.3 
percent) but significant category of responses: "ready to leave 
for anywhere." 
  In general, the reasons given for wanting to leave were not 
unexpected. Three-quarters of those surveyed expressed 
dissatisfaction with their material living conditions. Material 
conditions were most important to older respondents, while young 
people showed less concern for them. However, young people 
attached great importance to what they perceived as a lack of 
opportunity to realize their potential. In third place among the 
main reasons cited by respondents for wanting to emigrate was 
concern for their children's future. In choosing life in a 
foreign country for their children, people reveal an extremely 
hopeless view of the future in their native country. That the 
political situation prompts people to emigrate was the view of 
17 percent of the respondents. National discrimination was cited 
by 3.8 percent. 
<H5>  Obstacles and Projections </H5>
  At the same time, statistical data indicate that the rapid 
rise in emigration seen at the end of the eighties has halted. 
The number of emigrants, although large, remains stable, or may 
even be dropping. Clearly, the flood of emigrants that the West 
feared so much never came. 
  Why is this so? The state poses no obstacles to emigration. 
Following the passage in January 1994 of the Law on the 
Procedure for Leaving and Entering Ukraine by Citizens of 
Ukraine, freedom of movement across the state border was secured 
by law. However, the economic crisis and the decline in the 
living standard, which are the principal reasons for people 
wanting to leave, paradoxically also serve as an obstacle to 
fulfilling this desire. Of the citizens who answered our 
questionnaire, 67.7 percent stated that they lacked the 
financial means to leave the country. 
  External factors pose more serious obstacles to Ukrainians 
wishing to depart for the West. Both the authorities and the 
citizenry in the West are strongly opposed to an increase in the 
number of foreigners in their countries. 
  Taking into account both internal and external factors, 
certain assumptions can be made regarding the development of the 
process of emigration from Ukraine in the near future. The 
number of people leaving to settle permanently elsewhere will 
slowly decrease. The predominant destinations will be countries 
that have been the traditional recipients of immigrants--the 
United States, Canada, Australia, and a few others, while the 
scale of emigration will depend on the immigration policies of 
Western countries. As it loses its ethnic nature, emigration 
will assume the distinct characteristics of emigration for 
economic reasons. 
  Based on the experience of other countries, it is possible 
to 
forecast a certain scenario for the development of a labor 
emigration. During the first phase (we are in the midst of it 
now), most migrants are highly skilled specialists, scientists, 
artists, and sportsmen--in other words, mainly people with a 
higher education who have attained recognition and success in 
their professions and who range in age from 30 to 40. A second 
group is made up of young people, predominantly males without 
families, who have neither the necessary education nor skills 
that would assure them permanent employment. They are either 
enterprising and restless adventurers or individuals who find 
themselves in extremely difficult circumstances. 
  In the second phase, when the positive results of emigration 
become evident in the material circumstances of those who have 
emigrated, when Ukrainian immigrants have won a certain degree 
of respect from their employers, found their "niche" in the job 
market, have established themselves in the receiving country, 
and are able to offer support to their newly arriving 
compatriots, wider segments of the population will join the 
migratory movement. They will come from various social and age 
groups, and the proportion of women and people with families 
will grow. If no serious external and internal obstacles to 
migration for the purpose of finding work in other countries 
emerge, labor emigration will reach mass proportions. 
  There are certain factors that provide Ukrainian citizens 
with opportunities to find jobs abroad. To begin with, the 
Ukrainian labor force is quite well-trained, educated and 
cultured, and extremely cheap and undemanding. Migrants from 
Ukraine are closer to Europeans and North Americans in terms of 
cultural and religious traditions, and it is easier for them to 
integrate into Western society than, for example, for Asians or 
Africans. Of some significance is the presence in the West of a 
rather large Ukrainian diaspora. 
  Chances for finding work will be better in less developed 
and 
less rich distant lands, which need for their development not 
only specialists but also people who simply have an education. 
These may be Latin American countries, which have already shown 
their willingness under certain circumstances to admit a 
significant number of migrants from Eastern Europe to work in 
certain sectors and regions, the countries of Southeast Asia, or 
oil-producing Arab countries. 
  Substantial numbers of migrants are already working in 
countries that are neighbors to Ukraine. 
<H5>  What About the State? </H5>
  The growth of a labor emigration from Ukraine, as well as 
where these emigrants go and the results that this migration 
produces, will depend to a large extent on the state's position 
on this issue and on the development and implementation of its 
migration policy. At first glance, it may seem that any action 
taken by the state to present its citizens in the international 
job market will promote increased emigration and thus harm the 
interests of the state. This is not so, however. To be sure, 
there is a danger that migration will lead to a loss of a 
portion of our labor force, indeed the best portion--the most 
qualified, young, and enterprising individuals. At the same 
time, however, emigration can bring our country certain 
benefits. First and foremost, emigrants are a source of hard 
currency. The amount of money sent back by emigrants in some 
countries exceeds revenues from external economic activity. 
Secondly, emigration offers an opportunity to acquire valuable 
production experience, learn new technologies, and raise the 
general cultural level. Thirdly, it serves as a means of 
building better understanding between countries. Most important, 
a temporary labor emigration is a serious alternative to 
permanent emigration. The opportunity to work abroad for a 
certain period of time and to return home with some savings, 
thereby improving the material circumstances of their families, 
may help to change people's minds about leaving permanently. 
  When the emigration process intensifies, the role of the 
state as regards those of its citizens who live abroad grows. 
Our survey has shown that myths about the great opportunities 
available to migrants are still very widespread in our society. 
Of those surveyed, many (40 percent) link their hopes for 
success abroad with the opportunities offered by the receiving 
countries. Knowledge about the real state of affairs abroad is 
very limited. 
  It is up to the state to provide its citizens with accurate 
information about living conditions and job opportunities in 
foreign countries. It would make sense for the state to take on 
the function of acting as an intermediary in finding jobs for 
its citizens abroad. This would enable it to protect both the 
interests of the state and the personal interests of migrants 
and to regulate labor emigration. 
  Such measures would protect Ukrainian citizens from the very 
real danger of finding themselves at the lowest rung of the 
social and professional scale in a foreign country. Another 
important aspect of protecting Ukrainian citizens abroad is 
through the regulation of the status of emigrants on the 
international level. 
  In the course of developing and implementing its migration 
policy, Ukraine will not be able to avoid becoming a party to 
multilateral legal acts relating to migrants or avoid taking 
part in the work of the International Migration Organization. 
Another important aspect of developing a migration policy 
entails concluding bilateral agreements with respect to the 
conditions of residence and work of Ukrainian citizens in the 
countries that admit them. 
  The establishment of a reliable legal foundation on which to 
regulate migration and emigration processes is one of the 
components of state building in Ukraine. 

