CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Parkhomenko under the rubric </F>
"Impressions": "The Balkan War Through the Eyes of Amateurs: 
Russian Members of Parliament Take Lessons in Diplomacy in the 
Zone of the Yugoslav Crisis"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Mandate </H5>
  Belgrade-Pale-Sarajevo-Vukovar-Moscow--As far as I could see 
in accompanying a delegation of the State Duma on a tour of the 
region of the Balkan crisis on the last days of April, Russian 
members of parliament make only middling diplomats. Their trip 
proved odd, to say the least. And the participants in the 
journey themselves also appeared, from the viewpoint of their 
partners in the former Yugoslav republics, odd. 
  These oddities were predetermined, most likely, by the Duma 
itself. All the complaints should be laid at its door. This was 
altogether quite a priceless decision: to choose a moment when 
the protracted civil war was experiencing one of the most 
drastic exacerbations of bloody animosity throughout its history 
and to dispatch a group of deputies directly to the zone of the 
hostilities. To convince itself that the NATO command was not 
kidding in issuing the parties to the conflict one ultimatum 
after another, threatening to engage the entire colossal 
military machine--and to suggest to the members of parliament 
that they put in some practice at the art of shuttle diplomacy. 
Especially since professional diplomats of the highest skills 
had exactly the day before publicly declared that their patience 
was exhausted, confidence had been undermined, they no longer 
saw any point in efforts of this kind.... 
  The mandate extended by the lower house of the Russian 
parliament to the delegation of deputies to the Balkans was 
never recorded on paper. The mission was put together, as we 
recall, not simply in haste but in semi-hysterical fashion. The 
NATO bombing in the Goradze region, which had begun without 
full-fledged consultations with the Russian leadership, provoked 
one of the most bitter political rows experienced by the current 
corps of deputies. The row developed into a highly-strung and, 
as always in such cases, muddle-headed altercation at a plenary 
sitting. A decision was postponed--it not being entirely 
understood, meanwhile, of what it should, for that matter, 
consist--until the return of the "inspection," which was 
instructed "to meet with all the belligerents and ascertain 
everything on the spot." Only having closely studied the 
verbatim record of the debate is an approximate reconstruction 
of the meaning of this actual "everything" which was to be 
ascertained possible. 
  The deputies set out for Belgrade with, apparently, roughly 
the following assignment: 
  1) To ascertain the cause of the war going on there; 
  2) To ascertain who is guilty in this war and in what 
respect 
and who, consequently, is innocent; 
  3) To ascertain whether or not it is possible somehow to 
terminate this war; 
  4) To ascertain whether the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Russia is behaving correctly there and whether it is 
communicating the truth in response to parliament's inquiries on 
the Yugoslav problem; 
  5) To ascertain separately what "UN sanctions against 
Yugoslavia" mean and whether we are doing right in supporting 
them, and if not, how we might cease our support for them and 
what this would mean for us; 
  6) As for the rest, on the small points, get your own 
bearings on the spot.... 
  Not bad for a first experiment in parliamentary diplomacy? 
  There was, after all, really nothing more specific on the 
deputies' "travel checklist." Inasmuch as there was, we repeat, 
no travel checklist. There were airline tickets to Sofia, 
expenses for seven days, two officials from the Duma 
administrative system for assistance, $3,500 for unforeseen 
group expenses, and a promise to call the Russian Embassy in 
Belgrade and request assistance. 
<H5>  Working Model of the State Duma 1/47th Its Natural Size </H5>
  The Duma sent nine amateurs on the far-reaching diplomatic 
expedition. The list, drawn up according to the "one 
faction--one representative" principle, was filled out with 
people, the absolute majority of whom were incidental. The 
considerations that guided the leaders of the factions in 
suggesting candidates for the trip are totally unclear. As the 
members of the delegation themselves acknowledged, one of them 
"thought about it a bit and asked in," another "had not been 
abroad for a long time," a third was "seated near the aisle in 
the hall and caught someone's eye at the wrong time." 
  This was the result: Major General Nikolay Bezborodov (in 
the 
recent past, chief of a flying school, from Kurgan), head of the 
delegation--Communist Party of the Russian Federation and, as 
ascertained on the spot, Russia's Way; Vladimir Averchev 
(counselor at the Embassy of the Russian Federation in the 
United States)--Yabloko; Mariya Gaydash (deputy chief of the 
administration, from Nizhniy)--Women of Russia; Grigoriy 
Dyudyayev (distinguished kolkhoz member, Kemerovo 
Oblast)--Agrarian Party of Russia; Konstantin Zatulin 
(entrepreneur, from Moscow)--Party of Russian Unity and Accord; 
Vyacheslav Marychev (director of a plant clubhouse, from 
Petersburg)--Liberal Democratic Party of Russia; Adrian 
Puzanovskiy (lecturer at an agricultural institute, from 
Kostroma)--New Regional Policy; Aleksey Sarychev (judge, from 
Barnaul)--Russia's Choice; Viktor Talanov ("not currently 
employed," nor is his place of residence indicated in the 
reference book)--Democratic Party of Russia. 
  Anything you like, only not a diplomatic mission.... 
  Only Vladimir Averchev has practical experience of foreign 
policy service: two years at the embassy in Washington under 
Vladimir Lukin plus work as an official of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee in the last parliament and membership of the same 
committee of the State Duma, as a deputy this time. He alone, it 
would seem, could in the situation that had come about in the 
Balkans as a result of the three-year war get his bearings 
relatively easily. A further two or three persons had, perhaps, 
some idea of the heart of the matter in general outline, if only 
at the level of daily newspaper reports. The rest, alas.... 
  It cannot be claimed that the delegation had not, prior to 
departure, received any briefing from the professionals. Vitaliy 
Churkin paid a visit to the Duma in the evening of the day 
before departure. Subsequently the deputies, stunned by the 
information that had been rained down on them all at once, 
paraphrased these instructions thus: "Churkin said: Convey to 
the Serbs that there will be no more games; convey to them that 
they will now be hit hard and that we will, finally, support the 
NATO people...." 
  The absolute majority of members of the delegation were 
learning for themselves at this moment, let us speak plainly, a 
tremendous amount of what was new and interesting, about which 
they had hitherto heard, at best, just something or other. That, 
for example, there are today on the map of the former 
Yugoslavia, apparently, a whole three Serbias: Serbia proper as 
part of the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia]; the Republic 
of Serb Krajina (RSK), which is cut in two and which occupies in 
toto approximately one-third of the territory of Croatia; the 
Serb Republic (RS), which controls approximately 64 percent of 
the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  They learned that all three Serbias are in a state of war 
with Croatia. But that in 1993 active hostilities around the RSK 
gradually subsided and that the front stabilized. There was an 
intensification, on the other hand, of the clashes between the 
Serb Republic and the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
who relatively recently declared their readiness to form a 
federation and join Croatia in a "soft" confederative union. 
Nonetheless, even at its present stage the Balkan war continues 
to be considered tripartite. Two ethnic communities are 
essentially uniting against a third. 
  They learned that as of February 1992, when the UN Security 
Council voted to send to the Balkans the first "blue helmet" 
contingents, a fourth party to the drama--the UNPROFOR (SOONO in 
its Russian version) multinational force--appeared also. By the 
end of last year the personnel of the British, French, Canadian, 
Egyptian, Russian, Ukrainian, Dutch, Danish, Norwegian, and 
other military units deployed here already totaled more than 
25,000. 
  Generally, only here was it ascertained that "all parties," 
whose arguments were to be heard, were not two ("Serbs" and 
"Muslims," as has traditionally been heard in all parliamentary 
debates and in the majority of reports supplied by the Foreign 
Ministry also) but a minimum of four. The time for learning 
everything about everything was, as before, a week. 
  An adventure, in short? Not at all, why so? More the 
traditional approach to matters: A rush job is announced, and it 
is proposed making up for the lack of time, lack of resources, 
lack of organization, lack of qualifications, for all that is 
missing, making good the shortage thanks to the enthusiasm and 
conscientiousness of the citizens. 
  Nor is it all that simple when it comes to conscientiousness 
either, for that matter. The idea akin to that of a 
jury--entrusting the function of arbiters to people whose view 
is free of preconceived notions and prejudices and whose 
perception of events is patently not overburdened by 
stratifications of secondary (and, consequently, inevitably 
distorted) information--would be elegant even. Were the 
potential arbiters truly impartial and prepared to renounce 
their customary affections and traditional taboos. If, in our 
case, they did not sympathize so ardently and sincerely with one 
of the sides. The Serbs, of course. 
  We should one day, probably, in a more tranquil atmosphere, 
try to ascertain why it came about that a 100 percent pro-Serb 
interpretation of the Yugoslav conflict became in Russia an 
obligatory attribute of a "serious, responsible policy," his own 
involvement in which any public figure concerned for his 
reputation considers himself duty bound to prove and defend. In 
the most general outline the heart of the matter is perfectly 
comprehensible: The December elections demonstrated the 
propaganda value and the "high profitableness" (in the sense of 
the return support of the electorate) of patriotic slogans. The 
upheaval caused by the success of the nationalist radicals of 
the LDPR provoked the almost instinctive reaction of democratic 
circles and, simultaneously, of the ruling Russian elite: "We 
will not cede our patriotism to all these riff-raff! We 
ourselves will be patriots also!" 
  But the proclamation of patriotic values as the core of 
Russia's domestic policy, which is attended by unpleasant 
national problems, is a troublesome, risky business. And should 
it come to be a question, say, of the policy of the Russian 
Federation in the former space of the Union, even costly also, 
in the direct, financial, and economic sense, inasmuch as it 
immediately creates additional obligations of the country to 
compatriots abroad. On the foreign policy market, on the other 
hand, "state patriotism" is proving to be a far more profitable 
commodity insofar as it does not, seemingly, require direct 
outlays, if only at the initial stage: The Slav peoples, 
Orthodoxy, historical fraternity, cultural kinship, similarity 
of national characters--all this comes, after all, free of 
charge, virtually.... The result: "Russia will never betray 
Serbia!..." 
  Whatever the case, the spectrum of opinions of the members 
of 
the Duma delegation to the Balkans corresponded precisely to the 
traditional apportionment of forces that is revealed each time 
that the chamber has by vote to define its attitude toward the 
latest resolution on the defense of human rights in the former 
Yugoslavia, international sanctions against the FRY, or the 
official policy of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.... 
Namely, all factions more or less unanimously express sympathy 
with the Serbian side, Choice vacillates, Yabloko tries to steer 
a middle course, and Women have no clear position. The Balkan 
mission was cause for the creation of a model of the State Duma 
of the Russian Federation 1/47th of its natural size. A working 
model, what is more. 
  One of the first Yugoslav leaders to receive the delegation 
in Belgrade--Zeljko Simic, deputy prime minister of the 
Government of the FRY--began the negotiations with words to the 
effect that "the Russian parliament is the unique political 
institution that has never been seen to be adopting a one-sided, 
partial interpretation of the role of party to the conflict." A 
statement that is extraordinarily flattering, of course, but 
very far from the truth. And Mr. Simic, who has the reputation 
of a rising star of Serbian politics: Although young, he is 
already a resourceful, subtle, and very well-informed tactician, 
could not have failed to have understood that seated in front of 
him were people of whom two or three, perhaps, would abstain, 
had they to vote for any resolution in support of Serbia, the 
rest, however, would assuredly vote "aye." 
<H5>  Professionalism for Nonprofessionals </H5>
  The "model" did not resemble the full-scale version of the 
Duma in just one respect, perhaps: It was far more likable--in 
purely human terms. 
  Counting the road across the Bulgarian border to Belgrade 
and 
back, the parliamentary expedition covered in a week almost 
2,000 km by bus and motor vehicle. For nine adult people, who 
were barely acquainted with one another prior to this and who 
were, by definition, different (if we are speaking of their 
philosophy, temperament, experience of life, and "pre-deputy" 
social position, finally), this was a difficult assignment: hour 
after hour--together. 
  The training for compatibility, for "harmonizability," as 
vivisectionists from some institute for medical and biological 
problems would say, in itself appeared unusually instructive. 
There arose in the detached observer (like the author of these 
notes, who traveled the whole route with the delegation) from 
time to time all kinds of radiant illusions as regards the fact 
that it is on such trips that the foundations may most naturally 
be laid for the mutual understanding and mutual respect of even 
irreconcilable political adversaries and that a proper and even 
benevolent style of parliamentary relations may be cultivated. I 
began to feel at times: To hell with it, Yugoslavia, however 
this trip might end, it will produce a far-reaching result--nine 
persons capable of reaching an understanding on whatever you 
like will appear in the Duma. A kind of super-effective 
conciliation commission. Normal people, really, it is obvious. 
And selected in purely accidental fashion. Perhaps the rest 
could be sent to a hellhole somewhere in the same way--in small 
groups. And then you could get laws adopted.... 
  Whiling away the journey, the deputies were able to exchange 
barbs good-naturedly and astonishingly wittily for hours on the 
most risky political grounds. They could guffaw at the 
embarrassed and frightened emissary of the liberal democrats, 
who had injudiciously blurted out--literally--that "the LDPR was 
altogether a party of madmen." They could suddenly yield to a 
sentimental impulse and, despite interfactional disagreements, 
set off to lay flowers on the grave of Rodzyanko at the old 
Belgrade cemetery. The communist Bezborodov could suddenly on a 
nighttime bus ride break remarkably tunefully and with great 
feeling into "The morning paints with gentle light...," and the 
democrat Sarychev, join in as best he could. 
  But the entire idyll falls apart instantly as soon as a 
television camera or microphone appears in the members of 
parliament's field of vision. The deputy Marychev, with eyes 
glazed with commitment and zeal, immediately began to convey to 
the Serb community "the position of the Liberal Democratic Party 
and its chairman, Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovskiy, personally." 
The deputy Dyudyayev, writhing in a cruel grip, gave himself 
over to inarticulate imprecations against the "aggressive policy 
of the NATO bloc and the pro-American position of the Russian 
leadership".... 
  It was with good reason, for that matter, that we employed 
somewhat earlier the word "conscientiousness." For the Russian 
deputies this is, apparently, a monstrously loose concept. And 
it could be seen repeatedly that, aside from the experience and 
practice of diplomatic work (which to an almost equal extent was 
catastrophically lacking in all the participants in the 
delegation), the success of such a mission largely depends on 
some base qualities essential to the member of parliament. I am 
talking about political professionalism, in the most general 
sense of the word. And, specifically, about receptivity to a 
large volume of new information and about the ability to analyze 
it promptly and dispassionately. About the capacity for looking, 
and seeing. Listening, and hearing. 
  General Bezborodov, leader of the delegation, comported 
himself with exceptional dignity in this respect. There is no 
doubt with which side his sympathies lay. But for some reason or 
other he considered himself duty bound time after time to take 
it upon himself to drum into his colleagues who had overstepped 
all bounds at the negotiations not proper behavior exactly, but 
simple decency: The delegation has been sent by the State Duma 
to the conflict zone by no means to express solidarity with 
anyone at all or to approve of some people or other here but to 
hold some people up to shame for something or other. "No one 
ever entrusted the role of judge to our delegation," he declared 
at a meeting with a leader of Serbia. "Time alone will be your 
judge. We are interested merely in presenting to the Duma the 
fullest possible information necessary for a balanced decision." 
And whatever singes the heart of the convinced communist, the 
deputy Bezborodov gave no one cause to rebuke him for partiality. 
  But the head of the delegation's ideas as to what, in fact, 
should constitute the dignity of a member of parliament of a 
great power who has suddenly--and involuntarily almost--found 
himself a diplomat were not shared by many. We will name 
Averchev, Gaydash, Zatulin, and Sarychev here. The others were 
regularly and irrepressibly carried away. 
  Adrian Puzanovskiy, for instance, considered it entirely 
appropriate to proclaim in the middle of the negotiations with 
the leadership of the Bosnian Serbs in Pale: "We have come to 
support the Serbian people in their just struggle and want to 
know only how we may be of further assistance to them...." So 
this, apparently, is what it is all about. 
  That same Vyacheslav Marychev evidently derived particular 
pleasure when, causing a furor among Serbian journalists, he 
brandished in front of the television camera, for example, a 
sheaf of papers that he had just received from Radovan Karadzic 
and proclaimed: "We have just witnessed the most important event 
for our delegation! We have been handed this folder, which 
contains the whole truth about the Yugoslav war and about the 
crimes of the Muslims!..." It was of no consequence to the 
ardent liberal democrat that the delegation had not at that time 
fulfilled even one-third of the scheduled program and that the 
next day it had to make its way to the Muslim side of Sarajevo, 
where meetings with the leaders of Bosnia were planned. 
  And several days later, during a visit to Serb Krajina, he 
thought nothing of provoking a most veritable row. In Vukovar 
the delegation had to split into two groups, one of which 
quickly flew on a UN aircraft to Zagreb. Mr. Marychev saw off 
his colleagues with a public toast "to loyalty" raised at an 
official reception: Look, Serbian comrades, he said, "your true 
friends are staying behind with you, the traitors are flying off 
to bend the knee to your enemies".... And what were the others 
supposed to do here? Spit with irritation? Give him no further 
assistance? It was a good thing that the trip to Vukovar was at 
least right at the very end of the program. 
  But we are getting ahead of ourselves, I believe. 
<H5>  War in Paradise </H5>
  The delegation achieved nothing in regard to point one of 
the 
mandate given its representatives by the Duma (in the form in 
which we have attempted to imagine this mandate). Sorting out 
the causes of the present Balkan war, inconceivable in its 
brutality and obduracy, is not the task of a week's journey. 
  It is said that civil wars are always accompanied by the 
warring peoples' mass infatuation with their own history. The 
present war in the Balkans is no exception: This maniacal 
passion for historical digressions, for the most detailed 
expositions of more or less pseudo-scientific theories as to the 
causes and consequences of medieval ethnic migrations, and for 
an exegesis of the subtlest details of intrigues and political 
interests, which have time after time set European powers 
against one another in the Balkans, is revealed immediately in 
any conversational partner, regardless of his citizenship, 
nationality, religious belief, or social position. 
  One motif, the most striking, perhaps, is easily noticeably 
in this entire historical-method complex. The war in the former 
Yugoslavia undoubtedly did not begin at the moment when the 
Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia, orphaned without 
Marshal Tito, formally ceased to exist. This is by no means a 
"discrete," "independent" war but a continuation of some 
other--of far larger scale. Of a war by no means settled, as has 
thus far mistakenly been believed, but merely asleep. And with 
whoever you talk now--in Belgrade or Zagreb, Sarajevo, Pale, or 
Vukovar--it sooner or later appears, all the same, that the 
argument is about only one thing: the kind of war that is being 
continued.... 
  In Belgrade you are necessarily reminded of the history of 
the Ottoman conquest of Southeast Europe. The line on the map 
delineating the two civilizations--Christian and Islamic--where 
the invasion was halted is shown on the map. Nowadays this line 
almost coincides with Croatia's southern border: Serbs, becoming 
something akin to European Cossacks, growing into the image of 
warrior-people, and getting used to living in the eternal 
semi-siege conditions of a "buffer zone," are scattered along 
its horseshoe. These territories now belong to Croatia and 
Bosnia, but it is here that the RSK and the RS have arisen. 
  It is 1937 that is mentioned primarily in Zagreb and 
Sarajevo. The peak of the development of the prewar Serbian 
nationalist movement. The first plans for ethnic purges in 
Kosovo. The birth of the idea of a Greater Serbia: It is to this 
that the present Milosevic regime aspires, they say. It is to 
this that the plans for the wresting away of Krajina and Eastern 
Hercegovina lead. 
  Belgrade historians have collected and published a gigantic 
amount of material devoted to the genocide of the Serbian people 
in the years of World War II. Reference books, white papers, 
atlases, and collections of photographs are all awaiting 
presentation to an unknown international tribunal that will 
someday condemn the crimes of the Croatian Ustasa. Croatia's 
Ante Pavelic was Germany's loyal ally in the war. Some 600,000 
Serbs were exterminated in Croatia's concentration camps. 
  Zagreb is ready with a response. The morbid epic of the 
Serbian Chetniks, who were a dependable support of the 
Italo-German occupation of Croatia closer to the end of the war. 
  And so on ad infinitum. 
  But among the sundry opinions there is one according to 
which 
the preconditions of the tragedy should be sought far closer in 
time. December 1964 is marked especially in the chronology of 
the Yugoslav crisis compiled by the Belgrade European Studies 
Institute: "The national affiliation of the chosen members of 
the party leadership was read out at the Eighth League of 
Communists of Yugoslavia Congress in order for republic and 
regional parity within the federal party leadership to be 
introduced at the next, ninth, congress (March 1969).... At the 
eighth congress J. Broz Tito for the first time publicly 
declared himself to be a Croat...." 
  Perhaps this really is where the whole problem lies: The 
communist chiefs, even though they knew that they were building 
their federation on a huge ethnic mine, themselves set the 
timing mechanism. This was the official ideology they had 
chosen: It was ordained that everyone firmly remember each 
minute his national affiliation. Although they had hit on point 
five on the passport and on each trifling piece of paper, the 
Stalinist ideologues still preferred to stop somewhere half-way. 
  Socialist Federated Yugoslavia survived Tito by 10 years. It 
then exploded: The charge had been primed ahead of time. Some 
people, it would seem, are still hoping to put the scattered 
fragments back together again and are for the sake of this 
prepared to saturate this land with blood a meter deep. This is, 
most likely, the case. Why, otherwise, this carnage? 
  It is impossible to put credence in the "struggle for living 
space" and the suffering from "suffocating closeness" version. A 
week of journeying around the former Yugoslav republics 
compelled the belief that this war is being fought directly in 
paradise. And if paradise has its own, "inner" Eden, it was this 
that had to become the arena of the most savage and most 
destructive slaughter, what is more. There are more modest 
places here--the monotonous and flat Vojvodina, for example. All 
is quiet there. There, at least, fortunately. 
  But Bosnia is an unimaginable, luxuriant beauty. Mighty 
mountains, and at the same time ones that have been inhabited 
and built up by man down the ages. Spacious and fruitful 
valleys. Full rivers. Succulent pastures. Very rich mineral 
resources. The solidity and sturdy sufficiency of cities and 
villages. Splendid roads. A developed industry that has not, 
however strange, deformed the environment. How many more people 
could this land keep in sufficiency and prosperity? Who was 
cramped here? For what devil was all this not enough? 
  Something does not square with the widely discussed 
religious 
underpinnings of the hostility either. The localities of the 
traditional preponderance of Muslim and Orthodox here curiously 
interlay one another. Dozens of villages along the roadsides, 
and not a single mosque. Churches come into view from time to 
time, but far less frequently than in the Russian heartland, 
say. By no means above each large village do you find a cross. 
It is said that both warring armies are destroying the other's 
places of worship in planned fashion--but there would then have 
to be extant ruins, at least.... They are not to be seen. Homes 
destroyed, thousands, but churches and mosques, no. Muslim 
families eat pork in large quantities and with pleasure. On the 
Orthodox table the most customary and traditional dish consists 
of little pieces of meat: lyulya kebab it is usually called. 
What could be more dispassionate and true evidence than the 
cuisine? 
  The arbitrary nature of the "Muslim" concept is no secret in 
the former Yugoslavia, incidentally. Back at the start of the 
1970's a list of the ethnic communities living in the Socialist 
Federated Republic of Yugoslavia was enshrined legislatively. 
Two unique innovations pertain to that moment: the nationality 
"Yugoslav," for indeterminate citizens born of mixed marriages, 
more often than not, and the nationality "Muslim." Nationality, 
precisely, by no means implying obligatory religious affiliation 
but indicating merely the area of habitation. 
  Over what the war was being fought in paradise simply 
remained an unsolved puzzle for the Duma researchers. Within the 
framework of normal human logic it is, most likely, insoluble in 
principle, for that matter. 
  But one further observation was made here, on the other 
hand: 
If this is indeed paradise, it is for everyone. The military 
included. From all the signs, combat operations in these 
mountains could be conducted eternally, particularly if the 
methods of guerrilla warfare are employed. The mountains are 
sufficiently high and extensive as to render ineffective the use 
of modern military equipment, aviation particularly, and to 
reduce to nothing all efforts to bring the territory under 
dependable control. At the same time, on the other hand, they 
are just so high as not to create additional difficulties in 
movement for small mobile subunits and flying squads, simply 
put, gangs. And the well-developed infrastructure of roads and 
supply lines ensures altogether comfortable conditions for 
guerrilla operations. 
<H5>  The Innocent and the Guilty </H5>
  Now the "innocent" and the "guilty." There are neither in 
the 
Balkan war, of course. It is perfectly certain, in any event, 
that there are no longer any "innocent" here. At the very first 
moment of armed confrontation, perhaps, one party might have 
been considered the victim, the other, the aggressor, but no one 
will ever prove this now. Because in the three years of war too 
much hatred has accumulated in this country. Each successive 
killing is now revenge for a previous one. And that alone. All 
the rest is immaterial. And the devastated and plundered 
villages, whose population was massacred to a man, appear 
absolutely identical and fill the heart of the passerby with an 
identical horror. Whether these villages are Muslim, Croat, or 
Serb. 
  Since May 1991 everyone here has, it seems, fought with 
everyone else and everyone has come to hate everyone else. At 
first the multinational Yugoslav People's Army attempted to 
perform its "constitutional duty to defend the territorial 
integrity of the Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia," 
counterposing force of arms to Slovenia's declaration of 
independence. It then, considerably more decisively and 
aggressively, opposed the plans for Croatia's conversion into an 
independent state. Subsequently the clashes switched, formally, 
to purely ethnic soil. Croats fought Serbs. The Bosnian Croats, 
the Bosnian Muslims. The Muslims, among themselves. Some Serbs, 
against other Serbs. Now the united forces of Croats and 
Muslims, against the Serbs. 
  To ascertain the degree of guilt and innocence of the 
parties 
to any conflict, world diplomacy makes active use of a method 
that is essentially naive and astonishingly ineffective: It 
affords the quarreling leaders an opportunity to have their say 
and dispatches its representatives to hear them out. No adequate 
substitute for this procedure has been devised: The use of 
neutral observers produces only crumbs of fragmentary 
information. And diplomatic emissaries are forced to endlessly 
filter through interim protocols, declarations, and communiques 
those same long-known arguments, inevitable in their depressing 
predictability. It is necessary more often than not to be a 
virtuoso professional to be able to extract from the pile of 
negotiating dross the subtlest nuance: a change of position, an 
initiative, a concession, a hint at a readiness to compromise. 
  It would be foolish to expect that an untrained crew of 
deputies would with its bare hands latch onto some large 
diplomatic nugget. But enough of negotiating work and to spare 
fell to the lot of the Russian Duma members in Yugoslavia. 
  Let us make clear for fairness' sake that the Serbian side 
was represented in the program considerably more fully and that 
its leaders had incomparably more favorable opportunities for 
setting forth their viewpoint. In five days the Russian 
delegation was received altogether by the top leaders of the FRY 
(Bozovic, speaker of the lower house of parliament, Prime 
Minister Kontic, his deputy Simic, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Jovanovic, and Minister of Defense Bulatovic), Milosevic, 
president of Serbia, top leaders of the Serb Republic (President 
Karadzic, Prime Minister Lukic, and Kraisnik, head of 
parliament), and the leaders of Serb Krajina (Mikelic, chairman 
of the government, and Bojnica, chairman of the Skupstina). And 
the deputies spent only a day--and, as already mentioned, only a 
small part of the delegation even at that--in the capital of 
Croatia, although even here they met with Valentic, chairman of 
the government, and Mesic, chairman of the House of 
Representatives. The visitors spent only a matter of hours on 
the Muslim side of Sarajevo, on the other hand, confining 
themselves to quite a brief conversation with Silajdzic, prime 
minister of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Lazovic, speaker of the 
Bosnian parliament. 
  The distortion was compensated somewhat, come to that, by 
meetings with high-ranking officials of the United Nations and 
the Red Cross and with representatives of the UNPROFOR Command, 
including officers from the Russian "blue helmets" contingent. 
In addition, a particular part in the work of the parliamentary 
mission was played by staff of the Embassies of Russia in the 
FRY and Croatia. 
  It would, generally, be appropriate mentioning here that it 
is certainly not often that a team of diplomats of the class of 
that which operates at the Russian mission in Belgrade is 
selected. A member of the delegation once observed that the 
personnel of the Russian Embassy in Belgrade "knows the 
situation in somewhat greater depth even than diplomats have the 
right to know it." In fact, the many years of service (and there 
are in the embassy many career diplomats who are on not their 
first long-term assignment here and who have been working since 
the end and even from the middle of the 1980's here) have made 
the Russian representatives specialists of the highest class 
with a magnificent grasp of the stratagems of the Balkan 
political and military situation, the history of the former 
Yugoslav republics and their social and economic problems, and 
the subtleties of national mentality. There is no doubt that 
without their assistance the parliamentary mission would have 
had few chances of coping with the unchecked flow of arguments 
which was rained down on them in the quarreling capitals. 
  Although it very soon became obvious that these arguments 
could not be distinguished by any particular diversity. The 
Serbian leaders concentrated primarily on refuting the widely 
known charges leveled at them as the sole culprits of the 
aggressive attacks and savage bombardments resumed again and 
again around the "security zones" in Bosnia. 
  In justification of its actions, the Serbian leadership 
refers on each occasion to the fact that the "security zones" 
(the UNPROFOR force has as of this time organized six: around 
Sarajevo, Bihac, Goradze, Zepce, Srebrenica, and Tuzla) in fact 
afford no one any security inasmuch as the UN troops have not 
succeeded in demilitarizing them. UN observers, as also the 
diplomats permanently at the scene, confirm the justice of such 
complaints. Too many arms, they say, have been stockpiled in 
these areas, and it is not always possible to take control even 
of the heavy artillery systems and mortars. Small arms, of which 
each home is full, even less: It is not even a question of 
confiscating from the public, even registering them is 
impossible. 
  The Bosnian Muslims and the Croats are enjoying great 
success 
here in taking advantage of the UN cover in these zones for the 
concentration, recreation, and training of their troops. Viktor 
Andreyev, coordinator of the UN force for civilian affairs in 
Bosnia, recalled in this connection a recently published report 
of Butrus-Ghali, which set forth these facts in detail. Yasushi 
Akashi, special representative of the UN secretary general, also 
spoke with the Russian deputies about the same thing. 
  The "security zones" are becoming a convenient springboard 
for sudden attacks on the Serbian positions, after which the 
attackers safely pull back once again behind the backs of the 
"blue helmets." It is widely held in the world that the reports 
of a "Muslim spring offensive" were merely a clumsy propaganda 
ruse organized by the Karadzic regime. But officers of the 
peacekeeping force in Sarajevo confidently confirmed in response 
to the deputies' questions that an attempt at an offensive in 
the middle and toward the end of March really was made, and on a 
broad front. This Bosnian Army action was not crowned with big 
successes, and Serbs beat back the attack, but the offensive 
cannot, nonetheless, be seen other than as a large-scale 
provocation. The siege of Goradze, which was ended only at the 
price of a decisive show of force by NATO aircraft, was begun in 
response to the Muslims' actions. 
  The Muslim commanders, in the opinion of those same 
officers, 
have altogether shown themselves to be past masters at 
provocations. A colonel from the Ukrainian "blue helmets" 
contingent, Mikhail Tsinchenko, deputy UNPROFOR commander in the 
Sarajevo sector, reported that Muslim mortar batteries had 
repeatedly been installed and had begun to operate directly 
beneath the windows of his headquarters--in the hope of a 
response from the Serbian side. He affirms with certainty the 
truthfulness of the information on the deployment by the army of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina of machine guns, mortars, and even field guns 
in proximity to humanitarian facilities or directly inside 
them--in hospitals, where refugees are concentrated, and so 
forth. And the Serbs quite often respond--with incredible 
ferocity and savagery. 
  Practically all witnesses to the conflict are prepared to 
acknowledge that in the majority of instances the Serb forces 
are actually counteracting and that the initiative of active 
combat operations usually comes from their enemy. But the 
inappropriate power of the Serbian "retribution" and the immense 
number of casualties among the peaceful population resulting 
from their "counterattacks" cannot be justified. And realistic 
estimates are needed here also, for that matter. The recent 
sensational AFP report from Goradze, against which the blockade 
had just been raised, on Muslim informants' multiple 
exaggeration of the details of those killed and wounded 
demonstrated that there are propaganda dodges here also. 
  But propaganda in this war is another matter, of exceptional 
importance in itself. 
<H5>  Information Catastrophe </H5>
  The Serbian leaders are today speaking with despair almost 
about the propaganda war, which they have conclusively lost. But 
there is no one to blame for this but themselves. If the 
atavisms of communist ideology characteristic of the ruling 
Serbian elite had to manifest themselves somewhere, they had to 
have done so sooner and more fully than anywhere else precisely 
in relations with the press. From the very start of the war the 
Serbian leadership adopted a demonstratively imperious and 
sharply worded tone in its dealings with journalists. 
  The Serbian political press is quite candid and 
unconstrained 
in its opinions. But only as long as this does not concern the 
progress of the war and relations with its Balkan neighbors. As 
far as foreign journalists are concerned, the Belgrade 
authorities have forced them to operate under extraordinarily 
difficult conditions. Strict censorship and the regular 
application of repressive measures: denial of right of access to 
the zones of combat operations, deprivation of accreditation, 
prohibitions on the transmission of reports to their editorial 
offices, expulsion from the country--all this has become routine 
practice here. The latest purge of foreign journalists occurred 
during the visit of the Russian delegation. Four correspondents 
of AFP (the whole of the Belgrade office), three reporters from 
CNN, and one each from the Sky News European television service 
and Radio Free Europe, and correspondents of LE MONDE, EL PAIS, 
DIE PRESSE, and THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR lost their 
accreditation in the FRY. 
  The leaders of Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, on the other 
hand, have made special efforts to establish the most cordial 
and businesslike relations possible with the world press. The 
tactics of information warfare for which they have opted have 
been extraordinarily profitable and effective. The most 
auspicious working conditions that the laws of wartime permit 
have been created for the journalists of Western television 
companies, newspapers, and press agencies. It is sufficient to 
observe that the sole hotel in the Muslim part of Sarajevo that 
was relatively unscathed during the artillery shelling--the 
celebrated Holiday Inn--was set aside not for some army staff, 
ministry, or hospital even but for the accommodation of a 
colossal number of correspondent centers of the world's 
electronic and written press. Journalists are guaranteed a 
reasonable level of safety as they move around the territories 
of the warring republics and have been provided with transport, 
provisions, and, what is particularly valuable for any reporter, 
means of communication for transmitting his information. The 
UNPROFOR Command, which is also located in Zagreb, incidentally, 
has streamlined the issue of accreditation for permanent and 
temporary correspondents in the conflict zone. 
  As a result the vast majority of journalists covering the 
Balkan crisis are physically based on the Muslim-Croat side of 
the front. From a purely practical viewpoint this is far more 
convenient and rational than in the areas controlled by the 
Serbs, and for this reason you encounter practically no one 
there. But the result is that any shell exploding in direct 
proximity to the journalists' observation points is one that has 
come from the Serbian side. "Two dozen Western cameramen 
immediately rush to shoot any crater from the explosion of a 
Serbian shell," an officer of the headquarters of the Russian 
peacekeeping battalion in Sarajevo says, "and two dozen 
journalists ascertain the name of the person who was a casualty 
of this explosion. But no one sees exactly the same crater from 
a Muslim shell in a Serbian village. There is simply no one to 
come to inspect it...." 
  We repeat, the Serbian leaders have themselves created all 
the conditions for the manifest imbalance in the coverage of the 
events of the war. But journalists' true professionalism should, 
obviously, have consisted of preserving objectivity in spite of 
all the unpropitious circumstances. The world press was duty 
bound to display far more perseverance for the collection of 
full information adequate to the actual state of affairs in both 
hostile camps. The present situation, however, testifies to the 
defeat that has been sustained here by the international 
journalist community. 
<H5>  Leopard Skins </H5>
  The hopeless defeat on the information front is, perhaps, 
the 
sole setback of such a scale for the Serbs in the Balkan 
conflict. As far as the military aspect proper is concerned, 
their successes are impressive to any specialist. UN observers 
agree that the Serbian Army has been making almost ideal use of 
all the advantages conferred by the nature of the terrain, the 
type of combat operations, the numbers and training of the 
personnel, and the possibilities of modern arms. 
  The professional skill of the Serbian Army has compelled the 
appreciation not only of its direct adversary in the protracted 
war but of the UNPROFOR Command also. The world press has as of 
late been saying a great deal about a kind of duel by default 
that has been under way for several months now between General 
Rose, commander of the UN force in Bosnia, and General Mladic, 
commander of the army of the Serb Republic. The brilliant 
British officer Rose, a veteran of the Falklands War, is 
markedly inferior in this single combat. 
  A dispiriting impression was made on military specialists, 
for instance, by the Serb operation in the Goradze region. 
General Rose's staff was absolutely convinced that the zone of 
the latest stirring of the Serb forces would be the surrounds of 
Tuzla. Mladic, meanwhile, succeeded in breaking away from the 
hounding by UN observers, pulling back part of his army from 
Sarajevo, and then in just 24 hours transferring a 16,000-strong 
corps--together with heavy equipment, auxiliary subunits, field 
kitchens, the supply train, and everything else--to an entirely 
different part of the front zone, at the approaches to Goradze, 
where not long prior to this the Muslims had concentrated an 
armed contingent in a strength of almost 10,000 men. The 
appearance here of powerful Serb forces came as a complete 
surprise both to the enemy and to UNPROFOR. It actually became 
known only at the moment when the Serbs organized the 
concentrated shelling of the city and launched an assault. 
  How serious a lesson the "blue helmets" learned from this 
defeat, only the future will tell. But even now it is becoming 
increasingly apparent that the establishment of dependable 
control over the areas of combat operations and the effective 
and swift disarmament of the opposed armies by the efforts of 
the UN troops are hardly to be seriously expected. The 
peacekeeping contingents will not stop the animosity in the 
Balkans by force of will, even if their numbers are increased 
many times over. 
  In addition, the experience of the use of international 
peacekeeping forces on various continents shows that the 
intensiveness of their involvement in active combat operations 
cannot grow for any period of time longer than public opinion in 
the countries that have sent army units to the zones of 
bloodshed permits. "Neither your country nor any other has sent 
its children to die in another's war" was the reminder with 
which General Rose began his conversation with the Russian 
members of parliament at UNPROFOR's Sarajevo headquarters. His 
statements to the effect that the UN force "does not intend to 
take its place in the Muslim trenches and fight in place of the 
army of Bosnia-Herzegovina" became known several days later. 
  There are, evidently, no purely military ways of settling 
the 
conflict. Negotiating methods remain. The Serbian side is 
demonstrating here, at first sight, far more assertive 
initiative. There was no perception of a lack of statements 
concerning "the Serbian people's ardent aspiration to a complete 
and conclusive end to the hostility on the soil of Yugoslavia" 
in a single one of the speeches of high-ranking officials heard 
by the Russian delegation in Belgrade, Pale, and Vukovar. 
  But it has to be recognized that such statements are being 
made by the Serbs today from a position of strength. In the 
estimation of military experts, the Serbian Army has, in fact, 
accomplished all its most important combat missions and now 
firmly holds sway throughout the region of the conflict. It is 
not even a question of the extent of the territories which it 
has taken under control but of the quality of these territories. 
Strategically key heights, roads, bridges, and industrial 
facilities are now, for the most part, in the hands of the 
authorities of the Serb Republic. The military-political 
situation established around Serb Krajina is entirely favorable 
to it also. 
  This is why the Serb side can permit itself to look down on 
all diplomatic projects and plans offered it from outside. All 
these plans amount essentially to numerous versions of the 
"leopard's skin" drawing on geographical maps of the Balkans, to 
a fancifully painted mosaic of zones and territories to be 
secured under the control of the Serb, Croat, and Muslim 
authorities, under a UN protectorate. 
  The Vance-Owen Plan is such. As is the Owen-Stoltenberg 
Plan. 
And the Vance-Owen Plan once again, but as amended by 
Izetbegovic. And the plan of proposals of the Muslim-Croat 
Federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. None of them evokes even the 
least enthusiasm among the Serbs. None, to be honest, appears 
really viable: There are no states that have been chopped into 
such tiny noodles. Such states would not live long. Especially 
after a most savage three-year war. 
  It would be odd to accuse the delegation of Russian members 
of parliament of not having fulfilled the most important point 
of the Duma mandate. The deputies did not bring to Moscow any 
miraculous prescription for a resolution of the Balkan crisis. 
It simply does not exist in nature. 
  Not yet. And it remains to believe, it seems, those who 
maintain that the time of the birth of the lifesaving idea that 
will one day restore hope of peace to all who are participating 
in the bloody Yugoslav drama has not yet come. It is dreadful to 
have to say this, but people have not had their fill of fighting 
here yet. Yugoslavia has been ravaged and deformed by war, but 
has not yet been exhausted, evidently, to the extent that 
revulsion and horror at what has been done have forced its 
leaders and its peoples to solicit peace. Not from one another. 
Not, more precisely, enemy from enemy. Among themselves. 

