BFN 

  [Text] Lhasa, May 17 (CNS) -- Chairman of the Tibet 
Autonomous Region Mr. Gyaincain Norbu disclosed at the second 
session of the 6th Autonomous Region's People' Congress that the 
Region planned to have its Gross National Product reach RMB 4.01 
billion [renminbi] this year and to maintain 8 percent economic 
growth. 
  With the deepening of reform and opening to the outside 
world 
there, the region's economy has showed fast development in 
recent years with the GNP of the region last year increasing by 
8.1 percent than that of the year before. To achieve the goal 
of continuous, rapid and healthy development set for this year's 
economic sector, Mr. Gyaincain Norbu called for authorities at 
various levels of the region to put their emphases on the 
following economic works: 
  The increase in income of farmers and herdsmen should be 
taken as the core of the work, and economic development in 
farming and pastoral areas should speed up. Investment in 
farming and animal husbandry would be increased with production 
funds offered by the regional government this year expected to 
increase by 13.7 percent over last year's budget. The 
developing programs such as "one river, two tributaries" have 
had funds of RMB 120 million in place. Township enterprises and 
diversified businesses there should be also greatly developed. 
  Various kinds of enterprises should enhance their beneficial 
results to realize increase of production, marketing and profits 
at the same pace based on market. Natural resources there as 
well as animal husbandry products, forest products and mineral 
products should be fully exploited. 
  Foreign trade and tourism in the region should also be 
further developed with exports expanded and border trade boosted. 
  Market construction should be speeded up to cultivate 
unified 
and open market system. Primary commodity fairs in counties and 
towns and a financial market with bank funding as its core 
should be greatly developed. So should be with individually- 
and privately-owned economy. [sentence as received] 

