BFN 

  [Text] Myanmar [Burma] Economic Holding Co, a private 
holding company of the Burmese Government, has agreed to 
cooperate with Loxley Plc in a first step to turn the country's 
economy toward free-market policies. 
  The move was suggested by the Asian Development Bank in 
Manila. 
  Burmese National Planning and Economic Development Minister 
Brig- Gen [Brigadier General) D.O. Abel said during the signing 
of a memorandum in Bangkok yesterday that the Burmese military 
rulers had liberalised the country's economy since 1988, making 
it more market- oriented in line with international business 
practices. 
  His government, through the holding company, is holding 
talks 
with Bangkok Bank, Thai Farmers Bank and Thai Military Bank to 
become correspondent banks with the state bank in Burma. 
  The Burmese bank, which has been allowed to operate foreign 
exchange and offshore banking businesses, has such correspondent 
bank agreements with banks in Japan, Switzerland, Singapore and 
South Korea. 
  The holding company's business includes trading, 
construction, general business and services. 
  It has industrial joint ventures with companies in South 
Korea, Hong Kong, Germany and soon with the United States. 
  Phuangkeao Phochanpanit, executive vice-president of Loxley, 
said cooperation with her company would include Loxley's 
distribution of jewellery from Burma. Loxley would distribute 
consumer, telecommunications and related products in Burma. 
  The memorandum would be a basis of cooperation for each 
party 
to buy and distribute the other's products and to exchange 
information on products, markets and technical training. 
  Loxley director Wichian Watanakun said his company made a 
feasibility study of running a business in Burma before setting 
up Loxley Myanmar Co in Rangoon in January. 
  Brig-Gen Abel described the cooperation between the holding 
company and Loxley as a model for regional cooperation. 
  Two Thai companies have applied to run authorised timber 
businesses in Burma, he said. 
  The Burmese administration has to consider environmental 
protection and the scope of timber plantations among other 
things, before giving a final decision on whether both companies 
can be awarded contracts. 
  "End-users should invest in Burma for the timber business," 
he said. 
  He said that before 1988 the military rulers had 100 percent 
control of the Burmese economy. But now about 72 percent of 
Burma's GDP growth was contributed by the private sector. 
  Burmese government figures showed that Burma's GDP growth 
last year was 10.9 percent and was expected to be 5.6 percent 
this year, he said. 

