Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Pavel Kuznetsov] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, January 5 (TASS) -- Independent deputies of 
Russia's new parliament warned on Wednesday that large election 
blocs are seeking to gain control of the State Duma. 
  A statement issued by the Inter-regional Association of 
Independent Deputies of the Lower House of the Federal Assembly 
today suggests reforming the house factions not only by the 
principle of their party orientation, but also by other 
principles. It also proposes forming ruling bodies of the house 
on a parity basis. The deputies believe that every candidate 
should be elected by secret ballot. 
  The number of deputies of the State Duma chairman should be 
determined by the following principle: one deputy from the 
election blocs and one from individual constituencies. 
  The statement stressed that the house procedural regulations 
should be based not on a party principle, but on the principle 
of multi-factionalism which takes into account the interests of 
the whole deputy corps. As for the procedural regulations they 
should not violate the constitution or contradict the voters's 
will, the deputies said. 
  Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said that the 
government will support any faction which will work for the 
benefit of the country. 
  Speaking at a meeting with members of the Inter-regional 
Association of Independent Deputies of the Lower House of the 
Federal Assembly in Moscow on Wednesday, Chernomyrdin said "for 
me the meeting with you, representatives of the people, is very 
important. The government must know the position of independent 
deputies in the State Duma." 
  The prime minister called on the deputies to stick to the 
centrist position to develop close cooperation between the 
government and the parliament. He pledged support for a 
constructive dialogue between the two branches of power. "If the 
need be, I will go to you and bring the whole government along," 
he said. 

