Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with General Klaus Naumann, inspector general of </F>
the Bundeswehr, by Mikhail Zheglov; place and date not given: 
"In Future Russian and German Peacemakers Could Work Together, 
Bundeswehr Inspector General Believes"] 
  [Text] General Klaus Naumann, inspector general of the 
Bundeswehr, is on an official visit to our country. On 
completing his talks with Russia's military leadership he gave 
an exclusive interview to KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 
  [Zheglov] Herr General, on the eve of your visit it was 
announced that, in addition to military-political questions, you 
intended to discuss purely military issues in Moscow. What 
specifically did that mean? 
  [Naumann] I discussed the main areas of Russian-German 
cooperation for the current year with Colonel General Mikhail 
Kolesnikov, chief of the General Staff. Basically this plan 
envisages organizing 20 bilateral events. By these I 
principally mean visits, meetings between servicemen from the 
two armies, and familiarization with the system of training in 
military-training institutions. The program also envisages an 
exchange of opinions on the issue of military budgets. All 
these measures, in our view, should help people in uniform to 
find out as much as possible about each other. 
  [Zheglov] You are the first Bundeswehr representative to 
visit our 27th Motorized Infantry Division. Why are you 
interested in this combined unit? 
  [Naumann] The host side is not only giving me the 
opportunity to familiarize myself with Russia's Ground Forces 
but also to visit Missile Forces, Air Force, and Air Defense 
Forces units. My visit to a Strategic Missile Forces 
installation, for example, has been interesting because during 
this era of openness I am getting the opportunity to look at 
things which for years were carefully concealed. My being 
allowed to look at missiles is proof of how much trust has grown 
up between us. However, the same can be said for my visits to 
the Moscow Air Defense District and the Kubinka Air Base. With 
regard to the 27th Motorized Infantry Division, I am glad of the 
opportunity to visit this combined unit which is actively 
preparing to participate in peacekeeping operations under UN 
auspices. It is also interesting because in the course of time 
joint actions by Russian and German servicemen in these sorts of 
operations are not being ruled out. Nor is it an accident that 
during my talk with the chief of the Russian General Staff I 
spoke about the need to further strengthen cooperation between 
states and armed forces engaged in peacekeeping activity. 
  [Zheglov] How do you assess the current situation in former 
Yugoslavia, where the largest UN peacekeeping operation in 
history is being conducted? 
  [Naumann] Recent events in this region have tested the 
effectiveness of Europe's security institutions to keep the 
peace. We must call a halt to this situation. In my opinion 
both Russia and Germany are keen to do this. It is time to put 
a stop to a situation in which the Paris Charter is essentially 
being flouted in Europe. Specifically, we must stop 
unilaterally laying the blame on one of the parties in the 
conflict. We must also make every effort to stop the crazy 
destruction of the innocent civilian population. This is the 
end toward which all NATO's actions are directed. I hope that 
all the parties to the conflict realize this and will put their 
heavy weapons under UN control or withdraw to a distance of 20 
km from Sarajevo. 
  [Zheglov] If a decision is eventually made to bomb Bosnian 
Serb positions, will FRG Air Force planes take part in the air 
operations? 
  [Naumann] Chancellor Kohl has made a firm and unequivocal 
statement on this matter: Not a single German serviceman will 
take part in this sort of operation. 
  [Zheglov] Events in former Yugoslavia are influencing the 
processes of establishing and strengthening common European 
security systems. What role can and should Russia and Germany 
play in this process? 
  [Naumann] In my opinion, Russia and Germany play a important 
if not decisive role in the process of establishing a European 
security system. Russia is the largest country in Europe, it 
also has significant interests in Asia. With its population of 
80 million Germany is certainly not puny in the economic sense, 
and it thereby makes its contribution to European stability. In 
this sense both our countries should strive to cooperate. Of 
course our approaches to various problems may not coincide. But 
in any case we need to look for ways ahead that lead not to new 
lines of confrontation but to mutual trust. For example, as far 
as I can understand following my talks with your defense 
minister, Russia regards the "Partnership for Peace" program 
somewhat differently from the East European countries. But in 
any case we are approaching the day when there will be no 
confrontation in Europe. 
  As a phrase, European security is indivisible sounds 
wonderful. However, the current state of affairs is such that 
people in Sarajevo, for example, regard it as empty talk. 
Unfortunately, therefore, it is a wish rather than a reality. 

