Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Column by Ertugrul Ozkok: "The Days That Will Decide the </F>
PKK's Fate"] 
  [Excerpt] Internal Affairs Minister Nahit Mentese will 
leave for Syria in the next few days. Police Director General 
Mehmet Agar was supposed to visit that country two weeks ago. 
However, it was decided that Mentese should visit Damascus 
instead. The visit will be important for Turkey and Syria 
because relations between the two countries have reached a 
crucial point. Turkey and Syria previously promised to help 
each other on security matters. It is now time to implement 
what has been promised. 
<H5>  PKK Leader Ocalan's Press Conference </H5>
  Turkey recently received unconfirmed reports from Syria that 
indicate that Workers Party of Kurdistan [PKK] leader Abdullah 
Ocalan is under some kind of custody. Meanwhile, it is common 
knowledge that Kemal Burkay, secretary general of the Kurdistan 
Socialist Party, who is in northern Iraq, has not been able to 
secure a visa from Damascus to visit Syria. A more interesting 
report is that Damascus has prevented Semdin Sakik, one of PKK's 
most important militants in Turkey, from holding talks with 
Abdullah Ocalan in Syria. 
  All this indicates that Ocalan's freedom has been restricted 
and that the state of affairs has placed the PKK in a difficult 
position. Two weeks ago, it was announced that Abdullah Ocalan 
would hold a press conference, but he has not done so in the 
last two weeks. 
  Ocalan will not find it easy to hold a press conference 
because Turkish intelligence units are watching his activities 
closely. He will find it difficult to maintain his security 
when he leaves his hideout. In view of that, he can only hold a 
press conference under Syria's protection. 
  Reports were received some time ago that Ocalan planned to 
hold a press conference in northern Iraq, but northern Iraq is 
not a safe place for him. This is a fact. For Ocalan, only 
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan leader Jalal Talabani is a friendly 
force in northern Iraq. It is common knowledge that Democratic 
Party of Kurdistan leader Mas'ud Barzani and his supporters are 
not friendly with Ocalan. In view of that, it would be 
difficult for Ocalan to cross into northern Iraq to hold a press 
conference. 
<H5>  The Ciller-Clinton-al-Asad Triangle </H5>
  Nahit Mentese's visit to Damascus will take place at a 
critical time. Turkey wants to be informed about Ocalan's 
situation. 
  Prime Minister Tansu Ciller said last week that her 
government may resume the shuttle diplomacy between Turkey and 
Syria. This indicates that special envoys may be dispatched to 
Damascus. 
  Meanwhile, a statement by the prime minister and the 
officials around her has generated attention. They said that 
"the Ocalan problem will definitely be resolved." What has made 
them feel so confident that the Ocalan problem will be resolved? 
Regardless of how the matter is viewed, it is a fact that 
certain developments are taking place behind the scenes. 
  The Ciller government has an important diplomatic program. 
If all goes well, Nahit Mentese is expected to visit Damascus 
this week. He will return with firsthand information. 
Meanwhile, Ciller will leave for Brussels to attend the NATO 
summit on 9 January. She will hold talks with President Clinton 
in Brussels. It should be recalled that U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher held talks with President al-Asad in Damascus 
some time ago. Ciller will discuss the situation of the PKK and 
Abdullah Ocalan in light of the information Warren Christopher 
and Nahit Mentese received in Syria. 
<H5>  Al-Asad's Letter of Intent </H5>
  President Clinton will hold talks with President al-Asad a 
few days later. Their meeting is probably the first high-level 
contact al-Asad has had with the United States since he came to 
power. In other words, President al-Asad's meeting with 
President Clinton can be viewed as his letter of intent to the 
Western world. 
  Prime Minister Ciller is trying to convince President 
Clinton 
to discuss the PKK problem with al-Asad. She will most probably 
succeed in doing so. This meeting will be the most important 
thus far in terms of the future of the PKK and Abdullah Ocalan. 
  In short, the talks that will start in Damascus and continue 
in Brussels and Geneva may lead to developments that will mark 
the end of the PKK. Meanwhile, the tripartite talks between 
Turkey, Germany, and Britain must also be taken into 
consideration. Obviously, Germany and Britain will be involved 
in the developments. Consequently, the struggle against the PKK 
will be strengthened. 
  It must be agreed that the efforts to isolate the PKK that 
Ciller made during her visits to Germany and the United States 
are yielding very effective results. [passage omitted] 

