BFN 

  [Text] The United States, Japan, and the ROK have suggested 
that the UN Security Council hold urgent discussions over the 
issue of imposing sanctions against the DPRK. 
  Our station commentator (Grichevsky) has written the 
following: 
  The situation surrounding Korea's nuclear facilities is 
worsening. It has been directly caused by the following: 
  At the moment, North Korean experts are quickly removing 
nuclear material used at the atomic reactor in Yongbyon. 
  If this work proceeds at such a pace, the International 
Atomic Energy Agency inspectors will lose all chances of 
(?inspections) and will not be able to guarantee that the DPRK 
has not diverted nuclear materials for military purposes. 
Therefore, the issue of imposing sanctions against the DPRK has 
been raised again. 
  The United States, Japan, and the ROK are calling for an 
immediate imposition of sanctions. Also joining them are other 
countries such as Australia and France. 
  By the way, another storm surrounding the DPRK's nuclear 
facilities seems to be largely connected with another factor, 
that is, Russia's position. This position was (?expressed) 
during the Russia-ROK summit held not long ago. 
  President Yeltsin said Russia would join in the imposition 
of 
sanctions only in the extreme case that all possibility for 
talks was completely gone and that the DPRK withdrew from the 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. President Yeltsin's remark has 
already been distorted by many mass media as an agreement to the 
imposition of sanctions. 
  The solution to the Korean peninsula nuclear issue depends a 
lot on Russia. Some people even emphasize that Russia has the 
key to the very solution of the issue and knows how to use such 
a key. 
  Nothing can be said about that mysterious key but, as far as 
Moscow's position is concerned, we can definitely state that 
Moscow is going to find a peaceful, steady solution to the 
issue. We would like to point out that only in an extreme case 
would Russia join in the imposition of sanctions. 
  In fact, as all possibilities have now been used, Russia has 
put forth a proposal for holding an international conference 
over this issue, a matter of concern of many countries. 
  The ROK agrees to the holding of an international 
conference. 
  U.S. President Clinton has emphasized that it is good to 
hold 
such a conference (?at an early date). The expression is very 
vague, and a question is arising soon as to whether the time 
will come when sanctions will be imposed on the DPRK. 
  Beijing is also very concerned about the situation on the 
Korean peninsula. But, the remarks by Chinese leaders express 
the hope that Korea's nuclear issue will be peacefully settled. 
  China's support to Russia's proposal for an international 
conference will undoubtedly be able to play an important 
stabilizing role. 
  It surprises us that Pyongyang is rejecting the idea of 
holding an international conference. They are also calling for 
talks between the DPRK and the United States, while saying that 
they are trying to settle the dispute by way of talks. The 
United States does not agree to this. 
  Therefore, the prospect for a peaceful settlement of the 
situation of the Korean peninsula is that the situation is going 
further into a deadlock. It is needless to say how dangerous 
this is to the whole Asian and Pacific region. 

