Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The police has released 47 of the rioters arrested 
in Yafo. Twenty people remain under arrest. Chief 
Superintendent Ya'aqov Peretz, the commander of the Yafo police, 
told our correspondent Shim'on Vilna'i that if quiet was 
maintained, all the detainees would be released. 
  Clashes are currently taking place in the center of Nazareth 
between the police and local residents. The police were pelted 
with rocks and are now using clubs to disperse the rioters. The 
municipality's attempts to calm the atmosphere proved 
unsuccessful. Our correspondent Yo'av Aviv reports that in the 
village of Mashhad, near Nazareth, an army vehicle was torched 
and its windows were smashed. There were no casualties. The 
police is stopping Egged buses from travelling through large 
Arab towns in northern Israel to ward off any clashes with Arab 
residents. 
  Our correspondent Yafa Glick reports that this morning, 
dozens of youths barricaded the entrance to Kafr Qasim. They 
fired slingshots at the police but missed. 
  Our correspondent Nisim Qeynan reports that the funeral 
procession of the Rahat resident killed yesterday has left his 
home and is now traveling on the Bet Qama-Mishmar Hanegev road, 
which has been closed to traffic. Thousands of people are 
attending the funeral and the atmosphere is tense. 
  Curfews remain in force in most of the Arab towns and 
refugee 
camps in the Gaza Strip. This is also the case in all the large 
towns in Judaea and Samaria and the adjacent refugee camps. 
Approximately 1.25 million people in the territories are under 
curfew. 
  The delegation of Palestinian notables from East Jerusalem 
which set out on a condolence visit to Hebron has decided to 
return to Jerusalem after the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
stopped it from reaching its destination. Our correspondent 
Moti Amir reports that the convoy was detained at an IDF 
roadblock near the al-'Arrub refugee camp and only four 
notables, including Faysal al-Husayni, were permitted to enter 
Hebron. In reaction, all the Palestinian notables decided to 
return to Jerusalem. Faysal al-Husayni told Qol Yisra'el that 
the Army had not changed its ways despite the fact that the 
Civil Administration was in favor of the delegation's condolence 
visit to Hebron. 
  At an IDF roadblock in the 'Etzyon Bloc, the family of a 
Palestinian killed in the Hebron massacre is being prevented 
from returning to their home in town. The five family members 
returned from visiting their wounded son, also injured in the 
Hebron attack, who is hospitalized in East Jerusalem. The 
family presented their Hebron identity cards but the soldiers at 
the roadblock are not allowing them to return home. 

