BFN 

  [Text] New York, April 29 (XINHUA) -- An American 
industrial leader said here today that the U.S. Administration 
should renew China's most-favored-nation (MFN) status without 
any conditions. 
  Meeting a group of visiting correspondents from New York at 
the Otis Elevator headquarters in Farmington, Connecticut, here 
this afternoon, J.P. van Rooy, president of the company, also 
said that he and his company had been very supportive to the 
renewal of the preferential trade status. 
  "We will continue to make efforts to win the renewal," he 
said, adding that "neither the United States nor China can 
afford the loss of the status." 
  Otis, the world leader in manufacturing elevators for many 
years, has established close business ties with China in the 
last 10 years. In 1984 it launched the China Tianjin Otis 
Elevator Company (CTOEC) in Tianjin with a local elevator 
manufacturer and in the last two years it started three more 
joint ventures with the country operating in Beijing, Guangzhou 
and Shanghai respectively. 
  Van Rooy believed that human right issue is an internal 
affair of a country, and it had never affected his company's 
cooperation with China. 
  China enjoyed political stability, he said, and had 
decentralized its powers, thus providing a sound environment for 
foreign investments in the country. 
  "We are proud of our cooperation with China," he said, "and 
the Tianjin Otis has set a fine example for business cooperation 
between Chinese and foreign companies." 
  Last month, the U.S. Otis announced in Beijing its 12.3 
million U.S. dollars additional investment in the CTOEC, raising 
its share to 40 million U.S. dollars and its stake from 44 to 51 
percent. 
  "China is extremely important to Otis," he said. "And by the 
year 2000, the Chinese market is projected to be among the top 
three worldwide -- possibly even the largest or the second 
largest in the world." 
  His next plan, he said, was to have the four Otis joint 
ventures in China to form an Otis group, thus putting Otis in a 
much better position for the market competition in China and in 
other parts of the world. 

