BFN 

<F P=106> [By Billy Wong Wai-Yuk] </F>
  [Text] A controversial film about China's laogai or labour 
camps which Television Broadcasts (TVB) bought six months ago 
has yet to be screened, and legislators are criticising the 
delay as an act of self-censorship which betrays the rights of 
the public. The legislative councillors yesterday even 
expressed alarm over what they called increasing media 
self-censorship. 
  Pro-democracy activist Lau San-ching said he would challenge 
TVB by showing the film in public in the same way protesters 
showed another BBC film, Chairman Mao, The Last Emperor after 
TVB similarly refused to show it. 
  The movie about the laogai, filmed by BBC reporters with 
secret cameras in China's northwestern province of Xinjiang, is 
said to show footages of prisoners marching into factory 
buildings and tilling fields, and unmarked prisoners' graves in 
the desert. 
  American congressmen watched the film last week as they 
debated whether or not to renew China's Most Favoured Nation 
(MFN) trading status. 
  Legislator Emily Lau said TVB's decision not to show the 
film 
indicated an increasing self-censorship in the media. "The Mao 
film and the laogai film are just two examples. As we face the 
change-over of sovereignty, the self-censorship problem will 
increase," she said. "It is understood that media owners don't 
want to anger the mainland authorities for the sake of their 
businesses. But this trend is worrying." 
  Legislator Frederick Fung said that not screening the film 
would deprive Hong Kong people of the right to see the real 
situation in China. "If TVB thinks (the film is) too sensitive 
to show before the MFN decision, it can show it afterward," he 
said. 
  Another legislator, James To, said TVB owed the public an 
explanation for not doing so. 
  But TVB's external affairs controller Lily Chan said 
politics 
had nothing to do with the acquisition of the laogai film. 
"We've bought a lot of films from different broadcast networks 
throughout the years, but we might not necessarily put all of 
them on screen. The laogai film is just one of the documentaries 
we've bought, and we do not have a schedule for it yet," she 
said. Asked if TVB would show the film in response to public 
clamour, she replied: "We will always consider the market 
demand and the interests of audiences." 
  Lau San-ching said he would screen the laogai film publicly 
as he had done with the Mao documentary if he got hold of it. 
"I'm really angry and disappointed to hear of the repeat of 
such an act by TVB. It further indicates TVB's motivation for 
the suspension of the Mao film, that it wanted to give the 
Chinese authorities a big gift," he said. 

