BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Yuriy Razgulyayev: "Gas, Water, and...Hurt"] </F>
  [Text] Residents of many cities in Kirghizia [Kyrgyzstan] 
are anxiously turning their gas cookers on and off to see if 
there is still gas. Once again they face the threat of "blue 
fuel" cuts. The threat comes from Uzbekistan, the main supplier, 
for failing to pay for gas already received. 
  Compared with the previous debts, the sum is not too large 
-- 
some $10 million. Politics lends the sum a special weight, 
however. Experts think Uzbekistan's stance has toughened 
considerably in the wake of A. Akayev's visit to Western Europe. 
Its neighbors, especially President I. Karimov, did not much 
like A. Akayev's statements to the effect that Kirghizia is the 
only country in the region that is following the correct 
democratic path and that the som is the most stable currency in 
Central Asia. 
  Whether these guesses are right or not, a fuel blockade 
carries the threat of very serious jolts for the Republic. 
Indeed, they do not only use gas in homes there. It is used by 
many heating systems and by industrial enterprises for 
manufacturing purposes. To all appearances, now they will be 
obliged to look for alternative sources of energy. Even if 
Uzbekistan does not turn off the valve, the price of gas will 
grow all the same, and most of the customers will just not be 
able to afford it. 
  The government has already recommended urgently converting 
social and production facilities to the use of electricity for 
the winter. But this is easier said than done, since it is 
tantamount to a new electrification of the entire republic. 
Material expenditure apart, the deadline is simply unrealistic. 
The plan would take many years, rather than months, of 
sustained and very expensive work. 
  However, a cornered Kirghizia is prepared to make a no less 
weighty move. Uzbekistan's key strategic asset -- cotton -- is 
highly dependent on water from the Naryn. The water has long 
been flowing freely. In its path there stands the Toktogul 
hydroelectric power station that belongs to Kirghizia. Should 
the spillways be closed, the Fergana Valley plantations would 
have a hard time. 

