BFN 

<F P=106> [Golo Schmidt report: "The Rightist Scene Works `According </F>
to Plan'"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- Last year, the right-wing extremist scene 
further intensified its efforts to establish organizational 
links. 
  This is concluded by the Federal Office for the Protection 
of 
the Constitution (BfV) in its 1993 annual report, following an 
analysis of neo-Nazi and xenophobic riots. The report was 
handed over to the Interior Ministry in Bonn last week, which 
will, however, take time until the summer for "detailed 
coordination" and publication. 
  According to the report, the BfV noticed an increasing trend 
toward establishing networks in the right-wing extremist scene, 
which, however, is under way not so much between individual 
organizations but, above all, between individual persons from 
various groups. Corresponding beginnings were noticed in 1992 
for the first time. Indications of increased organization since 
then have also been given by the fact that several xenophobic 
attacks were "prepared according to plan." 
  The BfV has also noticed an expansion of structures among 
the 
"Anti-Antifa" [anti-antifascist], a right-wing extremist group 
against leftists. In the right-wing extremist scene, this has 
been accepted as a "promising approach for broader 
cooperation," it is said. 
  Regardless of this development, Interior Minister Manfred 
Kanther currently does not see any reason to ban any more 
right-wing extremist organizations, nor are any further orders 
to watch right-wing extremist parties in the offing at the 
moment. According to a spokesman, such steps are, however, 
"constantly examined." At the end of 1992, Rudolf Seiters, 
Kanther's predecessor, banned the right-wing extremist 
organizations "National front" (NF), "German Alternative" (DA), 
and "National Offensive" (NO). In mid-1993, Kanther applied for 
a ban of the "Liberia German Workers Party" (FAP). The Federal 
Constitutional Court has not yet discussed the matter. Because 
of the great number of pending proceedings, it cannot be ruled 
out that a decision will be made as late as 1995, it was said in 
Karlsruhe. 
  The BfV views such bans with mixed feelings. Such bans do 
make work more difficult for the affected organizations, but 
since substitute groups develop and the fascist grass roots hold 
their meeting in secret, observation is made more difficult for 
the BfV, stated the BfV. 
  The number of crimes with proved or suspected anti-Semitic 
background has tripled since 1990. According to preliminary 
information by the BfV, last year 577 of such crimes were 
registered, including 46 acts of violence committed against 
Jews. Three years before, the total of such crimes was 206. In 
1992, the record so far was reached with 620 crimes. 
  After the attack on the synagogue in Luebeck, security 
circles fear that this deed will be imitated by others. Experts 
point out that this phenomenon was observed after the xenophobic 
arson attacks in Moelln and Solingen. Yesterday, the 
investigating public prosecutor's office was not able to provide 
any more specified findings about the attack in Luebeck. Expert 
circles have meanwhile pointed out that the arson attack on the 
synagogue in Hamberg in 1960 was not clarified, either. 

