BFN 

<F P=106> ["Open Agenda" program with host Antonio Resillez and guests </F>
Daniel Cordoniu and Gilberto Salazar from the Nuclear Affairs 
Executive Secretariat, SEAN -- live] 
  [Text] [Resillez] Given the postponement of the Juragua 
Nuclear Plant project in Cienfuegos, many people were under the 
impression that in effect, the Cuban nuclear program was being 
axed. This postponement was announced by Commander in Chief 
Fidel Castro in September 1992. It has been 18 months since 
then. Tonight, we will discuss this issue of great interest to 
our people. 
  In the latest issue of the specialized magazine NUCLEOS, Dr. 
Daniel Codorniu, deputy secretary of the Cuban Nuclear Affairs 
Executive Secretariat [SEAN] states: The nuclear program is not 
only alive, it beats at the same rate as the great challenges 
our nation faces today. Dr. Codorniu is here with us. We also 
have engineer Gilberto Salazar, vice president of SEAN. Doctor, 
what is the main focus of SEAN today? 
  [Codorniu] First, I want to thank this program for giving us 
the opportunity to explain these issues to our people. I would 
like to begin by saying that in general, the doubts you 
mentioned arise from the fact that when people hear, "nuclear 
program," they think only of the nuclear plant. Although 
electricity generation is the main application of this 
technology, it is not the only one. There are numerous uses of 
atomic power worldwide, ranging from electricity generation to 
cancer treatment and the use of radiation to fight agricultural 
pests. 
  The Cuban nuclear program, from its onset several years ago, 
was conceived as a multifold and multilateral program. Our 
program was never tied only to the nuclear plant, although the 
plant was its centerpiece. Our program always included two main 
areas: electricity production -- nuclear energy. We are still 
working on this because the Juragua plant project has been 
postponed, but not killed. We can discuss this further on. 
  Another important area is the the use of radioisotopes and 
radiation in a variety of sectors nationwide. In this area, we 
are working in four [as heard] main sectors: The use of this 
technology in the nation's most important programs, like 
biotechnology; the pharmaceutical industry; health; the food 
program; support to primary industries in terms of efficiency, 
like the nickel, oil, and sugar industries. There is also a 
program related to the environment and its ties to tourism. 
  Perhaps, we ought to clarify what we mean by radioisotopes 
and radiation. This jargon is well known to many, but it is wise 
to explain that radioisotopes are a specific variety of unstable 
chemical elements, not the common ones with which we are all 
familiar. This instability results in the emission of 
high-energy particles leading to their disintegration into other 
elements. This is what is known as radiation. These unstable 
elements are the radioactive isotopes. Why are they important? 
Why do they have so many uses? First of all, because by emitting 
radioactive particles, we can register the process with 
equipment; we can tell where they are. It is similar to a race 
in the dark, with the runner carrying a torch. This is what 
happens with the isotopes. A radioactive isotope can be injected 
into a patient or into industrial pipes and its progress can be 
monitored. These are called radioactive tracers. They have many 
uses. The radiation that isotopes emit affects and modifies 
specific targets. This is why it can be used to modify a 
cancerous tumor, improve the properties of a material, or induce 
genetic changes in plants. Thus, the importance of its 
applications. 
  [Resillez] I believe later on we can discuss in detail these 
programs in which SEAN is participating. I would like now to 
discuss the 1993 SEAN assessment report. I read this report and 
I have seen that it emphasizes, and I quote: During this period, 
work has been conducted [passage indistinct]. Further on, the 
report affirms that the scientific accomplishments for 1993 are 
far greater than in previous years. 
  What is meant by the statement in the report that you had 
serious financial and material limitations? 
  [Codorniu] I believe this is not a problem specific to SEAN. 
It is somewhat a reflection of the ongoing national situation, 
the special period. This has also significantly affected our 
work. 
  Our program, as is well known, was closely linked to the 
former USSR and the now-dismantled socialist bloc. Many of the 
resources came from there. We had important cooperation. We have 
also had the normal limitations with energy resources. Last 
year, we worked with 38 percent of the fuel and 39 percent of 
the electricity we used in 1990. 
  Well, I do not think this is a special situation, but a 
situation affecting most institutions. I can add that the 
country continued making tremendous efforts in providing 
resources in some areas closely related to these programs we are 
discussing. This activity, for instance, has received important 
support. 
  [Resillez] Dr. Codorniu, isn't there some contradiction 
between these severe limitations and what you are achieving; 
that is, better results than in the previous years, as stated in 
the final report? 
  [Codorniu] Well, I do not believe that achieving better 
results with fewer resources is specific or unique to our 
(?area). I would rather say that this is due to the forward 
steps our country is taking in the scientific field. I believe 
that if we were to make an analysis of the many scientific 
institutions in our country, we would find a similar situation. 
Here we must begin with the fact that scientific activity was 
consolidated in one single year. We are talking about 
crystallizing a series of activities in which we have been 
working for many years. 
  In the 1980's, the country made a tremendous effort to 
provide resources and train personnel for this activity, and I 
think we are now reaping the fruits. I must add that our own 
limitations have helped change the mentality of our researchers, 
our experts, and our cadres, in the sense of working much more 
in concrete programs, in programs which will be able to answer 
the country's most important needs. Above all, we have also 
learned to overcome the prevailing contradiction between work at 
laboratory level and work in the factory, the achievement of a 
product. What was achieved today I attribute essentially to 
this: We have achieved more with fewer resources. But I wish to 
repeat that this is not something characteristic of our work 
alone. 
  [Resillez] Cordorniu, what achievements are mentioned in the 
report? That is, what basic achievements can you mention? 
  [Codorniu] Well, I can mention some of the most important 
results of our scientific-technical activity in 1993 because it 
would be impossible to discuss everything. I am going to refer 
to the most important ones, beginning with those that are 
perhaps closer to the viewers' concerns. For instance, in the 
agricultural area we have been able to expand the production of 
three different varieties of rice through radiation. These 
varieties are obtained by the effects of radiation on the seed. 
This is something our experts, together with experts in the 
agriculture field, carried out for years. Thus, three varieties 
of rice have been obtained with better properties in the grain 
quality and the possibility of working with them under 
conditions needing less water. 
  Another important result is related to the assembly and 
tuning of equipment with the use of a radioactive source that 
helps to exactly determine the limit between water and petroleum 
in a petroleum well. This, of course, has had great importance 
to all petroleum research activities. 
  I also wish to mention the result obtained by our colleagues 
from the territorial delegation of Holguin, related to the 
installation and tuning of another radioactive system which 
helps systematically determine the density of nickel carbonate 
pulp [pulpa] at the Benito Che Guevara Company in Moa. This 
prevents stoppages -- which are often very costly -- for not 
having these guidelines well under control, especially in this 
industry which is so important to the country. 
  I can also mention a method developed this year that allows 
the use of devices for open-heart surgery, cardiovascular 
surgeries. These devices are imported and sterilized by 
radiation, but this sterilization has an expiration date. We 
managed to make this sterilization work in the country. I could 
add that the first applications of this work by the end of 1993 
have helped the country save more than $90,000 during the first 
stage alone. This can be extended to many other areas. 
  As you can see, these are concrete achievements of the 
national effort. We are talking about rice, petroleum, nickel, 
and health levels. This year we also have a very important 
result, obtained by the Radiation Protection Center, in 
coordination with the three territorial delegations we have in 
Holguin, Cienfuegos, and Camaguey, related to the study of the 
Environmental Radioactive Fund of the Republic of Cuba. This is 
an important result because it helps detect levels of 
radioactive elements in the environment. There are always small 
amounts of radioactive elements in the environment. These must 
be known and kept under control; especially, for instance, if 
the Juragua Plant begins operating. We must be aware of any 
variation in the radioactive level or detect any abnormality 
that could take place in neighboring countries so as to adopt 
the appropriate measures. We already have this. It has also 
helped us discover that radiation levels in our environment are 
low. This study was also carried out in zones with tourism 
prospects and on some beaches on the northern coast of the 
island. We can say that our beaches can be attractive to 
tourists not only because of their natural beauty or the quality 
of the sand, but also because the presence of natural 
radioactive elements is very low, which is not so in all 
developed nations. 
  [Resillez] Can I deduce that the last achievement you 
mentioned is something like a protective shield for the country? 
I think it can help us detect any possible radioactive spread, 
regardless of where it comes from. 
  [Cordoniu] Of course. And I would like to add that this is 
the result of a study carried out for years. We are talking 
about studies conducted for eight or ten years, and the use of a 
lot of working equipment. We can thus say that this is not the 
result from 1993 alone, but from many years. 
  [Resillez] Engineer Salazar, what is meant by SEAN's own 
production? 
  [Salazar] Well, to conduct a nuclear program successfully, 
there are four essential elements that must be fulfilled: 
qualified personnel, updated literature on scientific and 
technical information, regular and efficient supplies of 
radioactive sources, and adequate equipment to measure them. 
SEAN has been successful in the latter two aspects, and these 
are SEAN's own achievements. That is, SEAN has managed to 
supply, in a regular, efficient, and stable manner, the 
radioactive sources and the equipment adequate to measure them. 
  Three radiopharmaceutical products are already being 
produced 
at the Center for Isotopes, which is temporarily headquartered 
at [name indistinct]. These radiopharmaceutical products are 
normally used in heart treatments. They are (Ipuran), which is 
linked to renal research; pyrophosphate, which is used in 
research on brain activities; and DTPA [expansion unknown], 
which also has to do with heart, brain, and renal research. 
These are compound elements that used to be imported, but which 
we have now succeeded in producing in a stable manner, thereby 
replacing imports in increasingly larger amounts. 
  A isotope center is now under construction in La Victoria 
Valley on the national highway at km 14.5, where these elements 
can be produced in a staggered manner. We intend to increase, 
this year and in the coming years, the production of these 
elements. This is a great and important project which will also 
have important economic repercussions for the country. With the 
production of these radiopharmaceutical products in 1993, the 
country spent some $65,300; but if these products were to be 
imported, they would have cost some $177,400. This means this 
production has saved a little more than $112,000 for the 
country. That is, it also has an important economic reward for 
the country. 
  We have also been working on the production line of some 
equipment that helps measure radiation. They are, for instance, 
the radiometers -- a total of 60 have already been produced in 
the country -- and other equipment that helps measure surface 
contaminations, which are important for any nuclear program. 
Some companies have monopolized this production. Also, as a 
consequence of the blockade, it is becoming increasingly more 
difficult for us to have access to that technology. Moreover, we 
have managed to progress in this field and to produce these 
elements at a much lower cost, ranging between 30 and 50 percent 
of the price of this equipment on the international market. This 
also allows us to sever our dependency, a dependency that 
implies the need to guarantee repairs and maintenance of this 
equipment. 
  [Resillez] Engineer, this aspect you are outlining is 
certainly very important, and what Dr. Codorniu reported is also 
very important. But I am suddenly overwhelmed by a serious 
concern. I have the impression that these 27 minutes of the 
program are insufficient, especially for giving a visual picture 
of what SEAN is doing in the nuclear field. Before continuing 
this dialogue, an idea suddenly comes to mind, and I hope it 
will not disturb you, because the idea I have is to resume this 
dialogue next Tuesday. But I want to resume this discussion in a 
way that will give a better visual report to our viewers of 
these most interesting achievements. Some 48 hours ago, I had 
the opportunity to visit with Engineer Salazar and Dr. Codorniu 
at all of these places and to see how interesting and 
well-trained these people are. They are developing a very 
complex, but agreeable technology in all repects. I would like 
to know whether you would agree to resume these discussions next 
Tuesday with a more visual report of all these things. Do you 
agree with this idea? 
  [Codorniu] Yes, we agree. I think it will be an opportunity 
to expand this report and to show some pictures of the 
achievements of our experts. 
  [Resillez] Thank you very much. I will take your word that 
you agree to return next Tuesday. Engineer, in Cuba there are 
192 installations working with radiological or nuclear 
substances. In the same report mentioned at the beginning of 
this program concerning an assessment of this year's work, I 
suddenly remember that there are 192 installations in the 
country, but that only 91 have licenses that provide security 
for this type of work. Does this percentage -- which I consider 
low -- imply that there could be some risk for one or many 
people in the country? 
  [Salazar] By no means, Resillez. It is true that there are 
192 institutions using radioactive substances. But of these 192 
institutions, only 116 must submit to a licensing process, while 
the remaining 76, because of the activity they are conducting, 
must only be registered. One of SEAN's responsibilities is to 
control all the work being carried out in this area, both 
radiological and nuclear activity. The National Center for 
Nuclear Safety, where these experts are working, is in charge of 
inspecting all those institutions, especially those that need 
only be registered. They are inspected every two years to see 
the conditions under which they are working. There are 91 
institutions that need to have a license, while 25 are in the 
process of obtaining their licenses. 
  [Resillez] Thank you, Engineer. Dr. Codorniu, you are a 
deputy of the National Assembly [of the People's Government, 
ANPP] and vice president of one of the working subcommissions. 
We understand that the ANPP is in favor of maintaining the 
nuclear option as a certain possibility for the country in the 
future. We would like to know SEAN's opinion on this and how is 
it working. And by the way, many viewers have been asking during 
the program what news is there about (?nuclear energy). 
  [Resillez] Well, I think this is a very interesting 
question. 
We feel that nuclear energy is an important alternative for the 
country's future, and we are not saying this just because of our 
recommendations, but because we have analyzed the elements 
[pauses], of course the country is looking for a short- term 
solution to the energy problem by using natural resources, the 
bagasse, the Cuban crude oil, etc. But in the long- and 
medium-terms, we must also consider the nuclear option as an 
alternative, and not the only one. Of course, we already have 
Juragua. We can say that the conservation plan has been 
fulfilled. Our Minbas [Ministry of Basic Industry] colleagues, 
who are our current investors, have made a tremendous effort. So 
far, all installations are satisfactory. This allows us to carry 
on when conditions permit. 
  In addition to this, we are intensely working for our 
government and for our colleagues from Minbas, seeking 
alternatives to continue this project because of its importance 
for the country. That is, we already have this, and we also have 
a scientific-technical structure. We have achieved some 
experience in this field, and if we analyze the world situation 
concerning nuclear energy, which, regardless of its detractors 
and some setbacks such as the Chernobyl accident and others, is 
still one of the essential alternatives in the world's energy 
development. There are more than 400 electricity-producing 
nuclear plants throughout the world, and 17 percent of 
electricity generated is of nuclear origin. We must also 
consider the fact that this is a developing technology. So some 
progress has been achieved in this field, and we think -- not 
only because we want to stick to this idea, but because of the 
analysis we have made -- that this is an alternative that should 
be taken under consideration. We must also begin from the point 
that what we might do in the future will depend on what the 
experts are capable of doing. We already have an important 
contingent of Cuban experts working with our own force and our 
own intelligence. 
  [Resillez] Thank you very much, Dr. Codorniu and Engineer 
Salazar, for participating in this Open Agenda program, during 
which we have been discussing the Cuban nuclear program. 

