BFN 

<F P=106> ["for" report: "Spring Report: World Trade Gaining </F>
Dynamism This Year"] 
  [Text] Bonn -- A revival of the economic development on a 
broad basis is in the offing at the international level. 
According to the assessment of the six leading economic 
research institutes, which presented their spring report on 
Tuesday [26 April], important stimuli are provided by monetary 
and financial policy incentives in the important industrial 
nations. Decisive stimuli will be provided by the United 
States, the experts say. There the upswing will increase and 
cause an "import suction." A further upward movement is 
expected in the East European reform states. 
  Initiated by the vivid economic development in the United 
States and strong stimuli of demand in the Southeast Asian 
threshold countries, world trade will gain dynamism this year, 
in the experts' view. The positive trend will increase hand in 
hand with the economic revival in West Europe. Japanese imports 
will increase considerably, at first because of the revaluation, 
later on also for economic reasons. In the Latin American 
countries, an increase in output and imports is expected as a 
result of the overcoming of the debt crisis. 
  The reform states in Central Europe, in particular Poland, 
Hungary, and the Czech Republic, will also increase their 
purchases. A decline in imports is expected in the petroleum 
exporting developing countries and in the CIS countries because 
of lower export revenues. In general, the volume of world trade 
will increase by 5 to 6 percent this year, the expert report 
says. In 1995 one can expect a stronger increase, and the speed 
of expansion will be as high as during the second half of the 
1980's. According to the experts' analysis, the agreements of 
the latest GATT round will not yet have any effect worth 
mentioning. Rather, they have the effect of a medium-term 
growth reserve. 
  In addition to the United States (estimated growth for 1004: 
plus 3.5 percent), Canada (plus 3 percent), Norway (plus 3 
percent), and Great Britain (plus 2.5 percent) will also provide 
important stimuli for growth, in the view of the experts. In 
the Western industrial states, apart from eastern Germany (4 
percent), Italy (4 percent), and Spain (4.5 percent), the 
inflation rate will not exceed the 3-percent threshold. 
Inflation is expected to be as low as after the slump in oil 
prices in the mid-1980's. In the scientists' view, unemployment 
will continue to increase in the most European countries and in 
Japan for the time being. 
  The institutes predict a clearly diverging development for 
the region of Central and East Europe. Here Poland, Hungary, 
and the Czech Republic will gain economic importance. Output is 
increasing, inflation is relatively low (Poland 30, Czech 
Republic 10, Hungary 20 percent). In the Slovak Republic, 
Romania, Bulgaria, and, above all, in the CIS countries, on the 
other hand, the slump is not yet over. So far, the market 
economy structures are hardly consolidated, the recessive 
influences are strong, and the inflation rate is high (Bulgaria 
50, Romania 200 percent). In the experts' view, the development 
in the CIS states will be determined by a strong decline in 
output and continuing hyperinflation (Ukraine 4,000 percent, 
Belarus 2,000 percent). 
  In none of the East European reform countries has it been 
possible so far to establish preconditions for a satisfying 
growth, the expert report says. Investments are insufficient, 
company profits are low because of the strongly rising wages, 
the problem of old debts is largely unsolved, and the capital 
markets are not working properly. In the experts' view, 
unemployment will increase further, in particular in Romania, 
Bulgaria, and in Slovakia. In the CIS countries, employment is 
currently maintained at an excessive level through subsidies, 
because there are no social safeguards for jobless people. 

