BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press communique" issued by the Royal Government </F>
Spokesman's Office in Phnom Penh on 5 April -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] A cabinet plenary session was held on the morning of 
4 April at the Cabinet Office under the chairmanship of His 
Royal Highness Prince Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh, first prime 
minister of the Royal Government of Cambodia [RGC], and Second 
Prime Minister Samdech Hun Sen. The session examined a bill on 
the press code, a bill on the organization and operation of the 
cabinet, and a bill on urbanization and the infrastructure. 
  1. The bill on the press code: 
  Following thorough discussion, the cabinet approved this 
bill, which has four chapters and 20 articles on freedom of the 
press and publication as defined in Article 41 of the Kingdom of 
Cambodia [KOC] Constitution and Article 19 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, stipulating the freedoms and 
responsibilities of the press in a multiparty liberal democratic 
society. 
  Although the KOC has just achieved peace and political 
stability, and even though the RGC has yet to solve many 
difficult and complex problems involving national rehabilitation 
and reconstruction, the cabinet was very pleased with its 
approval of this bill, which provides greater freedom than other 
countries in the world that have a long tradition of the press. 
  The cabinet also expressed its firm conviction that by 
approving this bill, the Royal Government will certainly receive 
more active and effective cooperation from press organizations 
in the restoration and development of Cambodia, in the process 
of strengthening peace and political stability, and in promoting 
democracy and respect for human rights. 
  2. The bill on the organization and operation of the 
cabinet: 
  The cabinet thoroughly examined, discussed, and approved the 
bill on the organization and operation of the cabinet, which has 
six chapters and 38 articles. Its aim is to improve the 
administrative structure in line with the KOC Constitution, 
which stipulates the need for a clear separation of executive, 
legislative, and judicial organizations. This law also serves 
as a very important basis for use by various ministries, 
departments, and state institutions as a legal criterion in 
arranging their organizational structures and determining their 
roles and tasks. 
  3. The bill on urbanization and construction: 
  The cabinet also discussed and approved this bill, which 
consists of four chapters and 25 articles. With the current 
situation in the KOC, this is a very essential and necessary law 
for promoting urban and rural restructuring and ensuring a 
harmonious development effort in the spirit of respecting 
collective interests, individual rights and interests, and the 
legal regulations governing construction. It will also ensure 
development aimed at securing a balance between the cities and 
the rural areas based on the prevailing situation and 
peculiarities of each area, while ensuring protection for and 
increasing the value of natural and cultural assets and engaging 
in the development of tourism by preserving environmental 
quality. 
  The cabinet concluded its session in a spirit of unity and 
with a high sense of responsibility. 
  [Dated] Phnom Penh, 5 April 1994 

