Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Supreme Soviet Chairman Stanislav Shushkevich </F>
in Minsk on 31 December: "On Unification of Belarusian and 
Russian Monetary Systems" -- first paragraph is ZVYAZDA 
introduction] 
  [Text] On the eve of the new year, Belarusian Supreme 
Soviet Chairman S. Shushkevich met with the staff of our 
newspaper and answered numerous questions. Mr. Shuskevich 
concentrated on the issue of creating the ruble zone. What is 
his assessment of this move by the Belarusian parliament? What 
implications will it have for Belarusian citizens? When should 
the unification be expected? Here is what Stanislav Shushkevich 
told journalists. 
  [Shushkevich] I abstained from voting on the issue of 
unification of the monetary systems because this is not the only 
way to solve this problem. Even when Russia, for political 
reasons, accepts the losses it would incur by the merger, our 
life will continue to depend on the way we manage our economy. 
No one is going to take care of us all the time. But what 
kinds of situations might this move create? For example, 
salaries may not be paid out because a Russian bank did not 
release the cash. (Incidentally, it would be a wise thing to do 
-- one should shrewdly conduct business.) Thus, all this can 
give rise to populist politicians who want to capitalize on this 
move. Let us see what advantages it will bring for the 
Belarusian economy? Take our tractor plant, for instance. 
Suppose the price for one tractor is about 1 million Russian 
rubles [R]. For this money, the plant can receive 4 million 
"hares" [nickname for Belarusian national currency] at the 
official exchange rate. The purchasing power of our currency, 
as far as foodstuffs are concerned, is almost the same as that 
of the Russian ruble. So what do we get? A rank-and-file 
worker gains by exchanging the "hare" for the ruble. However, 
it is like a shot out of the blue for the manager of the tractor 
plant. Now, with the plant's funds in Russia, he is able to 
settle there accounts for raw materials and components, while 
here he has to pay using the one-to-four exchange rate. 
  By the way, Fedorov and Gerashchenko no longer have anything 
against this idea. Only their deputies continue to press for 
the one-to-two rate. A political decision certainly depends on 
Russia's highest leadership. 
  I believe that different prices for energy sources is the 
key 
issue in our relations with Russia today. This undermines our 
economy. Experts estimate that energy consumption accounts for 
4 percent of the production cost of the world's best tractors. 
The figure for Belarusian tractors is almost twice as big. If 
this tendency continues, energy consumption might jump to 15 
percent this year. In this case, we will pay 40 ECU more for 
oil than Russia, greatly reducing the competitiveness of our 
products. This puts our economy at the edge of an abyss. 
  Among consequences that we could see from the merger of our 
currencies is the removal of all custom duties. However, one 
should be completely frank here. When the OPEC countries gather 
for their meetings, they do not decide what price they should 
sell oil to Germany or France. They set just one common price. 
Russia is a kind of OPEC for us. What happened? It set 
different prices for Belarus, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and 
Uzbekistan. Even though we behaved ourselves, we pay 40 ECU 
more for their oil than clients inside Russia. We should be 
outspoken about this if we consider ourselves honest 
politicians. What kind of political union it is supposed to be 
when it makes our economy a mess. I think it tightens the noose 
around our neck, which is in the interests of Russia. I believe 
that in this situation, Russia should make some concessions to 
us and cancel all customs payments. And when we manage to merge 
our monetary systems along decent and fair lines, I think a lot 
of government members, bank chairmen, and many other officials 
will lose their jobs. It is going to be a time for tough 
monetary policies, which many politicians are not able to accept 
because of their market-hostile mentality. 

