Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xiao Liu: "Open Mart Operations To Start in Shanghai"] </F>
  [Text] The People's Bank of China, the nation's central 
bank, will start its open market operations this year in 
Shanghai, according to its Vice-Governor Zhu Xiaohua. 
  Such operations are among the bank's activities designed to 
regulate the money supply. The operations, involving the 
purchase and sale of government securities, can effectively 
expand or contract the supply of money in the banking system. 
This, in turn, alters bank reserves, causing a multiplier 
effect on the supply of credit and, therefore, on economic 
activity in general. 
  The Shanghai Securities Exchange has been selected by the 
People's Bank of China and the Ministry of Finance to be the 
base on which the issuing, trading and clearing of treasury 
bonds will be established, according to the China Securities 
newspaper. 
  All the 2,600 trading seats in the Shanghai Securities 
Exchange can apply for opening trading of treasury bonds. A 
special trading hall for the treasury bonds has also been 
prepared. 
  Meanwhile, the Shanghai Securities Exchange will soon be 
connected by computer with securities trading centres in 
Guangzhou, Shenyang, Chengdu and Haikou. Thus two-way trading 
between the Shanghai Securities Exchange and these centres can 
be expected. 
  Capital clearing will be conducted through the central 
bank's 
computer system, which links most of the bank's branches across 
the country, and the clearing systems of the Shanghai Securities 
Exchange and the country's major banks, securities companies and 
trust and investment companies. 
  Zhu said the key to the open market operations is setting 
reasonable interest rates for treasury bonds, which should be 
adaptable to changes in the market. 
  He said the treasury bonds must carry interest rates higher 
than that of bank deposits of the same term but lower than that 
of bank loans of the same term. 
  Only then will treasury bonds be attractive to investors, 
while at the same time banks can prevent improper applications 
for loans to buy treasury bonds. 
  Zhu said that with the beginning of the open market 
operations, the central bank will regulate the money supply 
through the purchase and sale of treasury bonds and financial 
bonds in the open market and foreign exchange in foreign 
exchange markets. 

