BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Wu Hengquan (0702 1854 2938) and </F>
XINHUA reporters Yin Xuecheng (3009 1331 2052) and Zhou Lixian 
(0719 4539 2009)] 
  [Text] Suzhou, 11 Jun (XINHUA) -- The national conference 
on the comprehensive management work on public security in rural 
areas closed in Wujiang city, Jiangsu Province, today. 
  Wen Jiabao, alternate member of the Political Bureau and 
member of the Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, pointed 
out in his speech to the meeting: At present and for a period 
to come, we should focus efforts on the development of rural 
productive forces and should strive to attain the objective of 
making rural areas fairly well-off. While deepening reforms and 
developing the economy, we should strengthen democracy and the 
legal system in rural areas, bring into full play the role of 
grass-roots organizations, let every family share in the 
comprehensive efforts to improve law and order in rural areas, 
and gradually turn those areas into a new, prosperous, 
democratic, civilized, and modern socialist countryside. 
  Wen Jiabao said: China is a big agricultural country with 
the great majority of its population in rural areas. The state 
of rural public security will have an impact not only on the 
reform, development, and stability of the rural areas but also 
on the reform, development, and stability of the whole country. 
He said: Doing a good job in the comprehensive management of 
public security in rural areas is important to keeping to the 
socialist orientation and to upholding the people's democratic 
dictatorship in rural areas. It is also an important condition 
to enable us to concentrate on rural reform and rural 
modernization. 
  Wen Jiabao emphasized: To fundamentally solve the rural 
public security problem, we must pay great attention to economic 
construction -- the central task -- and accelerate rural 
economic development. At the same time, we must mobilize and 
organize the strength of the entire society, and use various 
means and make comprehensive efforts to deal with the problem. 
Only in this way can we fundamentally prevent and reduce crimes 
and maintain law and order in rural areas. 
  Wen Jiabao pointed out: We should basically rely on 
democracy and the legal system to ensure a good comprehensive 
management of rural public security and to maintain rural 
stability. In particular, we should know how to solve problems 
using the law and using education. For this reason, we should 
pay great attention to educating the broad masses of the 
peasants in a socialist democratic and legal system. We should 
spread legal knowledge, enhance the peasants' awareness of the 
legal system, make them understand the law, and arm them with a 
legal weapon. We should mobilize the masses to formulate 
village rules and regulations, govern villages according to the 
law, and promote democratic village administration. 

    Wen Jiabao said that the key to doing a good job in the 
comprehensive management of public security in rural areas lies 
in enhancing party leadership and in energetically implementing 
various measures on the comprehensive management of public 
security. He called for giving full play to the roles of 
grass-roots party branches as a leadership core and as a 
fighting bastion. Only with strong and effective party branches 
can we expect to forcefully implement the party's basic line and 
the party's policies for rural areas, to educate and guide the 
farmers to follow discipline and to abide by laws, to 
voluntarily help maintain social order, to fight criminal 
elements, to genuinely implement comprehensive management 
measures down to every household, and to bring about social 
stability in rural areas. 
  Ren Jianxin, member of the CPC Central Committee Secretariat 
and chairman of the Central Committee for the Comprehensive 
Management of Public Security, delivered a summary of the 
meeting. In the present struggle to comprehensively improve 
public security in rural areas, he called for developing the 
excellent tradition of integrating the specialized organs' work 
with the mass line. He also called for the constant creation of 
new experiences, and for relying on and mobilizing the masses to 
enrich and develop new ingredients for the comprehensive 
management of public security work, so that they will play an 
even bigger role in helping maintain public security in urban 
and rural areas. He also spoke of the need to promote the 
implementation of the leadership responsibility system as well 
as the personal responsibility system in the comprehensive 
management of public security through the present drive to 
manage public security in rural areas; and to guarantee the 
smooth progress of the present struggle through the 
implementation of the leadership responsibility system and the 
personal responsibility system in the comprehensive management 
of public security. 
  Luo Gan, state councillor and vice chairman of the Central 
Committee for the Comprehensive Management of Public Security; 
and Zhang Siqing, vice chairman of the Central Committee for the 
Comprehensive Management of Public Security and procurator 
general of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, attended today's 
meeting. 

