Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional drug seizures and arrests related to drug 
trafficking monitored through 31 January. Source is cited in 
parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  The authorities destroyed about 600,000 poppy plants in 
Piedra Ancha Municipality, Narino Department, and seized 150 
grams of opium latex and 100 kg of poppy seeds, the largest 
shipment ever in Narino. One person was arrested. Police 
operations in northern Narino Department have apparently 
prompted poppy growers to move to mountainous areas in the 
south. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in 
Spanish 0000 GMT 27 Jan 94) 
  The Administrative Department of Security seized 700 kg of 
marijuana in Cartagena that was being shipped to Central 
American and U.S. markets. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision 
Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0130 GMT 30 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Ecuador </H5>
  Guayaquil's EL UNIVERSO newspaper on 24 January reported 
that 
17 Ecuadoran policemen are presumably linked to a drug 
trafficking gang operating in Ecuador, Mexico, and the United 
States. Colombian Humberto Montenegro, leader of the gang, was 
arrested in Mexico. The newspaper cites Lieutenant Wilson 
Salgado, who accused 15 of his colleagues of having ties with 
the gang. Lt. Hugo Jativa worked with Salgado, and together 
they hid the drug at Quito's Mariscal Sucre International 
Airport. Salgado named Lts. Hector and Hugo Jativa, Patricio 
Lasso, Manolo Iniguez, Danilo Goyes, Galo Perez, Alan Luna, 
Cesar Zapata, and Fausto Caicedo and officers Fabian Machado, 
Patricio Ochoa, Patricio Navarro, Patricio Vinueza, Ivan 
Custode, and Jorge Cevallos. The band reportedly had ties to 
the Cali Cartel. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2126 GMT 26 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Nicaragua </H5>
  Security agents at Augusto C. Sandino International Airport 
seized 1 kg of cocaine hidden inside a shipment of hammocks 
bound for Key West, Florida. Another search uncovered 1 kg of 
angel dust. In addition, Police and Sandinist People's Army 
personnel discovered 80,000 marijuana plants and arrested 
Francisco and Daniel Jarquin in Waslala, Northern Atlantic 
Region. (Managua BARRICADA in Spanish 27 Jan 94 pp 1, 12) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  National Guard agents arrested Venezuelans Jose Tolosa and 
Rosa Ramirez, who had swallowed 144 packages containing 2 kg of 
heroin at San Antonio de Tachira International Airport. 
(Caracas EL DIARIO DE CARACAS in Spanish 25 Jan 94 p D-10) 
  Penal judge Arnoldo Echegaray said on 26 January that arrest 
warrants have been issued for three of the seven people arrested 
in possession of 67 kg of cocaine. The other four people were 
released for lack of evidence. Arrest warrants were issued for 
Ismael Jose Castejar, Oscar Alan Sanchez, and Alexis Ascanio. 
(Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 27 Jan 94 p D-7) 

