Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special to the JORDAN TIMES" by Rana al-Husayni] </F>
  [Text] Amman--A German man was stabbed in the back early 
Sunday in downtown Amman by a woman who was enraged by the 
massacre of more than 69 Palestinians in her West Bank hometown 
of Hebron a police report said. 
  The attack took place when Klaus Eichen, 23, his wife and 
son 
were visiting the Roman amphithreatre in the busy al-Hashimiyah 
Squar area. 
  According to the report, Mr. Eichen and his family arrived 
in 
Jordan on Saturday. 
  Mr. Eichen told police he was leaving the amphitheatre when 
a 
woman attacked him with a knife. 
  The woman, a 27-year-old who was identified only as N.N.K., 
stabbed Mr. Eichen in the back, then she tried to attack his 
wife. Bystanders intervened to restrain the attacker who was 
arrested by police. 
  In her testimony N.N.K. said she attacked the tourists to 
avenge the victims of the Hebron massacre. 
  The stabbing attack is the second such incident reported in 
the two days following the terrorist assault in Hebron. [see 
previous Terrorism Report for report on 25 March stabbing] 
  After the announcement of the massacre on Friday, an angry 
Hebron native stabbed a 77-year-old British tourist, Howard 
Long, in the same area. A medical report had said that Mr. 
Long's injuries were not serious. 
  A hospital official at King Husayn Medical Centre, where Mr. 
Eichen was being treated, told the JORDAN TIMES that the young 
German man suffered minor injuries in the back, and that he was 
released from hospital the same day. 
  The official said the Eichen family, who were on a two-day 
stopover in Jordan, left the Kingdom that same evening for India 
to continue their tour. 
  Details were unavailable on the background of the assailant. 
  Ingrid Liedgens, the head of the press and cultural section 
at the German embassy in Amman, told the JORDAN TIMES that the 
attack was an unfortunate incident, but luckily it was not fatal. 
  She said the embassy has warned all German tourists and 
citizens residing in Jordan to take extra precautions and to 
avoid going to the downtown Amman area until the situation has 
calmed down. 
  "As long as there are no new reported incidents in the 
Kingdom, everything will be normal," Ms. Liedgens said. 
  Several Western embassies had earlier advised their 
nationals 
to exercise caution while moving about or visiting places in the 
next few days. 
  This attack comes one day following His Majesty King 
Husayn's 
call for calm among the public. 

