Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special Article" by Ju Mengjun (0215 1322 6511): "The </F>
Trend of Russia's Domestic and Foreign Policies as Viewed From 
Yeltsin's Address on the National Situation"] 
  [Text] In his lengthy address on the national situation 
recently delivered to the new parliament, Russian President 
Yeltsin expounded on the situation at home and Russia's domestic 
and foreign policies. Observers believe that the address 
reflects to a certain extent the trend of Russia's domestic and 
foreign policies this year. 
  Since the new Russian Parliament was established last 
December, some changes have taken place in Russia's political 
situation. The "democrats," represented by Gaydar, who 
supported Yeltsin, withdrew from the government, the radical 
economic reform characterized by "shock therapy" that was 
implemented over the past two years failed, and the Agriculture 
Party, Liberal Democratic Party, and Russian Communist Party -- 
formerly opposition parties -- took a predominant position in 
the new parliament. To address the new situation, the Russian 
authorities had to readjust their domestic and foreign policies. 
It was under these circumstances that Yeltsin delivered his 
address on the national situation. 
  How will Russia proceed with economic reform? This is a 
major question of common concern. Although Yeltsin did not 
clearly state in the address on the national situation the 
failure of the radical economic reform which he backed, he had 
to acknowledge that "the cost of reform was high." He said that 
the serious mistakes in reform "not only damaged Russia's 
economic structure but also seriously harmed its political 
system." Hence, Yeltsin on the one hand proposed that "the 
speed of reform must not slow down" and on the other hand called 
for "alleviating the heavy burden brought to society by market 
reform." Yeltsin put forward the new idea of "establishing a 
market economic regulation mechanism." In other words, future 
reforms will change the liberal market economic pattern and will 
put in place a market economic system which can be regulated by 
the state. This shows that the radical economic reform policy 
advocated by former First Deputy Prime Minister Gaydar has been 
abolished. 
  Strengthening social protection for inhabitants so as to 
avoid social unrest constitutes an important element of 
Yeltsin's address as well as a pressing and arduous task facing 
Russia this year. To date, one-third of Russia's inhabitants 
remain below the poverty line. This is a major factor which 
could trigger social unrest. Hence, Yeltsin called for 
strengthening social protection measures to ensure the stability 
of the people's livelihood. To increase the people's sense of 
security, Yeltsin also regarded the struggle against criminal 
offenses as one of this year's urgent tasks. He believed that 
criminal offenses "constituted a threat" to state security. It 
seems that tackling poverty and crime is an important 
requirement for easing popular discontent and stabilizing the 
political situation. 
  Yeltsin is now holding high the banner of comprehensively 
protecting Russia's national interests. Due to the turbulent 
political situation and economic crisis at home following the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union, Russia's status as a major 
power has continued to decline. The pride of the Russians has 
been injured and those abroad have a sense of inferiority. 
Russians are discriminated against and even driven away from 
the territory of the former Soviet Union. Long ago, the people 
urged the authorities to strengthen the policy of revitalizing 
the Russian nation. We can see from the address on the national 
situation that Yeltsin considers the safeguarding of Russia's 
national interests as the main condition for developing 
relations with the newly independent nations of the former 
Soviet Union. The Russian authorities have recently made 
efforts to strive for dual nationality for Russians abroad. At 
the same time, the Russian Army has attempted to permanently 
station armed forces in the CIS in order to maintain Russia's 
"special interests" in the region. 
  The readjustment of Russia's foreign policy is also obvious. 
Following its independence, Russia has basically implemented a 
foreign policy which caters to the West, solely seeking 
"coordination" with the West. Instead of obtaining fitting 
economic interests in turn, the move evoked more popular 
discontent against the authorities. Yeltsin admitted in his 
address that Russia's foreign policy "lacked vigorous and 
creative initiative spirit" and stressed that Russia will no 
longer make any unilateral concessions. Apparently, Russia will 
pursue an independent foreign policy and will try to resume its 
status as a major player in the international arena. 
  Russia's domestic political situation and diplomacy are 
facing many complicated problems. Hence, it will be difficult 
to make a final conclusion as to whether the goal and tasks set 
in Yeltsin's address can be turned into reality. 

