Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By unidentifed JORDAN TIMES staff reporter] </F>
  [Text] Amman--His Majesty King Husayn is scheduled to meet 
with U.S. President Bill Clinton on Jan. 21 for talks on issues 
ranging from the Middle East peace process to American-Jordanian 
relations, officials here and in Washington said. 
  The King, who left for London last week for a short stay in 
Britain, is expected to head for Rochester, Minnesota, soon for 
medical checkups at the Mayo Clinic. Following the check-up, the 
King will spend a few days in the state of Colorado on a private 
visit before proceeding to Washington to meet Mr. Clinton. 
  Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali and several members 
of 
his Cabinet are expected to head for Washington this week to 
join the King in his talks with Mr. Clinton. 
  It will be the second White House meeting between the King 
and Mr. Clinton. The two leaders met first in June. 
  Among the issues that are expected to be discussed between 
the King and President Clinton are the course of the peace 
process, U.S.-Jordan economic cooperation and military ties, 
officials said. 
  The king will brief the president on the progress of 
negotiations between Jordan and Israel, and reiterate that there 
cannot be any signing of a peace agreement separate from an 
overall accord addressing all the four tracks of the 
Arab-Israeli negotiations launched in Madrid in October 1991. 
  All indications are that Sunday's summit in Geneva between 
President Clinton and Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad could 
produce a major breakthrough to lift the logjam in the 
Syrian-Israeli track of negotiations, and, by extension, advance 
the Lebanese-Israeli peace talks. 
  As such, analysts say, the King's meeting with President 
Clinton comes at a crucial stage in the quest for peace in the 
Middle East in that he would have known by then the result of 
the U.S.-Syrian summit by Jan. 21 and could formulate Jordan's 
next steps accordingly. 
  King Husayn was in touch with President al-Asad over the 
phone on Thursday. Reports from Damascus said the two leaders 
exchanged views on the current moves in the peace process and 
means to advance the Arab-Israeli negotiations. In the 
meantime, it was reported from Washington that the next round of 
Arab-Israeli peace talks would begin there on Jan. 24. 
  On the bilateral front, the King and President Clinton are 
expected to review the work of a joint 
Jordanian-American-Israeli economic working group and ideas and 
proposals discussed during the Middle East visit in December of 
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher. 
  The conclusion of an agreement on reopening Jordanian 
commerical banks in the occupied territories is the only 
concrete result so far of the work of the group. Negotiations 
on the accord had started alsmost one year before the group was 
formed during a visit by His Royal Highness Crown Prince Hasan 
to Washington in October. 
  Proposals for joint projects and American suggestions of 
"confidence-building measures" between Jordan and Israel are 
also expected to be reviewed by King Husayn and President 
Clinton. 
  Prime Minister al-Majali, who delayed his departure for 
Washington for a few days so that he could meet with visiting 
U.S. Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown on Monday, told reporters 
last week that Jordan hoped "for continuous support of the 
Jordanian economy and defence forces as well as debt reduction." 
  President Clinton has pledged to help Jordan in addressing 
its foreign debts, and diplomats say that one of the measures 
under consideration could be a write-off of part of the 
Kingdom's debts to the U.S. 
  Amman owes Washington $946 million, including $380 million 
in 
military debts incurred during the 1980s, when Jordan depended 
solely on the U.S. to equip its armed forces. In 1987, Jordan 
turned to the then Soviet Union for its needs of a defensive 
missile system after the Reagan administration flatly turned 
down a $1.8 billion arms package for the Kingdom. 
  Jordanian-American military ties have been renewed since 
then. Armed forces of the two sides held at least three joint 
military exercises in the southern desert and the Red Sea after 
the end of the Gulf war over Kuwait in 1991. 
  General Joseph Hoar, head of the U.S. Central Command, was 
in 
Jordan last week on his third visit to the Kingdom after 
assuming office in 1991. 
  His Royal Highness Prince Muhammad, the Regent, and Dr. 
al-Majali, who is also defence minister, held talks with Gen. 
Hoar. Ideas discussed during the meeting are expected to be 
explored during the King's summit with President Clinton. 
  Official and informed sources say that despite President 
Clinton's pledge in October, even the release of up to $35 
million in aid to Jordan has been held up. 
  The administration issued a certification to release the aid 
on Sept. 15, one day after Jordan and Israel signed an agenda 
outlining the basis for negotiations and a peace agreement. 
  Also expected to be raised during the White House meeting 
are 
Jordan's concerns over the de facto blockade of al-'Aqabah as 
part of the enforcement of the international sanctions against 
Iraq and what officials here describe as stalling at the U.N. 
over Jordan's requests for permission for exports of 
sanction-exempt food and medicine to Iraq. 

