Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Guard Lieutenant Colonel Volodymyr </F>
Korkodym, editor of VIYSKO UKRAYINY, by Serhiy Kulida in New 
York; date not given: "Ukraine's Likely Enemy -- Russia"] 
  [Text] [Kulida] Lieutenant Colonel, Sir, Ukraine's 
military doctrine was the main topic of the speech you delivered 
in New York. I would like you to at least outline the essence of 
your speech. 
  [Korkodym] Ukraine's military doctrine anticipates that a 
state, which includes claims against Ukraine as part of its 
official policy, will be considered by Ukraine as an enemy, and 
Ukraine will be forced to defend itself. We have openly stated 
in our magazine that Russia is Ukraine's likely enemy. Our 
scientists who work on strategic research have confirmed this 
statement. According to their studies, Poland, Romania, and 
Hungary can also become our possible enemies. I do not believe, 
however, that a conflict with any of these countries is possible 
in the near future. Nevertheless, if we do not take care of our 
security, problems may appear. 
  Russia's military doctrine, no matter with what words it is 
camouflaged, remains imperial in nature, and we understand this 
very well. Ukraine's military doctrine, on the contrary, is 
peaceful. It is a policy of a neutral country which wants to 
live peacefully with its neighbors, even those who are currently 
making territorial claims against it. 
  [Kulida] I believe that you have in mind our "elder 
brother," or more precisely "elder sister," Russia.... Your 
statement is not groundless, since Russia is very cleverly using 
national conflicts which have recently erupted in the former 
USSR. 
  [Korkodym] Exactly. For example, Moldova... or 
Transcaucasus, where two Russian battalions were deployed and, 
clad in Abkhazian fatigues, fought on the Georgian front. It 
can be said that this is one of the reasons that forced the 
Georgian Government to sit at the negotiating table and 
eventually return to the CIS. With Ukraine, the same thing will 
be harder to achieve. 
  There is another example: While withdrawing its regiments 
and divisions from East Europe, Russia is deploying them on the 
borders with Ukraine and Belarus. The 46th division was 
withdrawn from Czechoslovakia in this manner. Two motorized 
regiments were deployed in Kharkiv Oblast -- which were later 
subordinated to the Ukrainian National Guard -- and two heavy 
artillery regiments and a tank regiment were deployed on Russian 
territory near the Ukrainian border. Although Russia's military 
power is significant, the Russian Army is demoralized. Russia 
is not ready for a military action against Ukraine. 
  [Kulida] This, however, should not tranquilize us. There is 
still the problem of the Black Sea Fleet. 
  [Korkodym] This problem is extremely complex.... This is a 
question of the far-sighted imperial policy of Russia. The 
Black Sea Fleet is the main threat to a free Ukraine. We 
committed a very serious error by not removing Admiral Kasatonov 
from command, giving him instead the opportunity to freely 
command the fleet that is deployed on Ukrainian territory. This 
issue was forced into a corner, and it was not resolved in time. 
The situation is not improving currently, and a conflict can 
erupt just in the Crimea, in Sevastopol. For example, when we 
sent our draftees, the Ukrainian boys were not admitted on Navy 
vessels, and they [Russians] secretly brought in Russian seamen 
from Novorosiysk. 
  Although we have only a few naval ships today, new ones are 
being built in Mykolayiv, Kherson, and Kiev. Every year, 10 
completed vessels will be launched. The morale of our sailors 
who serve in the Navy is very high, and this is very important, 
because, I am not afraid to say this, they are surrounded by our 
potential enemies, and in case of emergency, they will have to 
resist the first blow of the enemy. 
  [Kulida] By the way, have not they lost their heart in 
connection with the transfer of nuclear weapons, which is very 
strange, taking into account postulates of Ukraine's military 
doctrine toward Russia. 
  [Korkodym] I believe that we are not giving up our nuclear 
weapons today. We gave them up before, when we allowed 
medium-range missiles be transferred to Russia. These were the 
most modern and mobile missiles, and in case of emergency, they 
were able to defend Ukraine. We retained strategic missiles 
targeted at the United States, whose levers of command remain in 
Moscow anyway. Ukraine, of course, will never wage a war 
against the United States. Russia acted more decisively, and 
the medium-range missiles were simply stolen. I blame this on 
the inexperience of the Ukrainian Armed Forces and their 
leadership. 
  [Kulida] Since we have already touched upon nuclear weapons, 
how do you assess the signing of the tripartite agreement among 
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk, U.S. President Bill 
Clinton, and Russian President Boris Yeltsin? 
  [Korkodym] The Ukrainian president let the world know that 
the Ukrainian state is peaceful, and it acts according to the 
norms of international relations. It is very hard to withstand 
someone's position among such giants as the United States and 
Russia, even because of the current economic situation in 
Ukraine. Therefore, this was another forced, and probably 
necessary, step made by the Ukrainian president. We, 
servicemen, should not despair however. 
  [Kulida] Let us return to military and state issues. To 
what extent, in your opinion, is Ukraine protected against 
interference in its internal affairs? 
  [Korkodym] We have almost 600,000 servicemen in the 
Ukrainian Armed Forces, 20,000 troops in the National Guard, and 
a slight lower number of soldiers serve in the Border Troops. 
As of today, the National Guard and the Border Troops protect 
the borders with Russia and Belarus. Previously, they assumed 
protection over our Western borders. There are already 
checkpoints and customs houses. These units were also deployed 
on the Moldovan border when a conflict erupted in that country, 
and they prevented the conflict from spreading to Ukraine. This 
was an initial form of combat training, or sorts. 
  Of course, the Army and the state are tightly connected. We 
also have economic problems. 
  It must be said that there was a problem with transforming 
the Soviet Army, or more precisely a part of it, into the 
Ukrainian one until quite recently. This attitude was, however, 
wrong. This was also admitted by Defense Minister General 
Radetskyy, and even the Supreme Council session addressed this 
issue. Now, this question is formulated differently, as not 
transforming but establishing the Ukrainian Armed Forces on a 
new ideological basis and new values. There is another question 
that bothers me a lot. A precise program for establishing a 
modern and professional army has not yet been worked out. 
  [Kulida] In young countries, and Ukraine as a state is just 
being formed, success in establishing a military system as well 
as a state one depends on the military. What is the mood among 
Ukrainian officers? 
  [Korkodym] I will frankly say that not all the officers who 
have taken the oath of allegiance to Ukraine, and who are 
predominantly Russians who came to serve here in the times of 
the USSR, are convinced that they will protect the interests of 
Ukraine. They have taken the oath only because they have 
obtained housing here, since it is in short supply in Russia. 
We have conducted research and found out that there are many 
such officers. These people are currently returning to Russia, 
they are being relieved from their oath, and nobody is 
disturbing them. Only officers who are dedicated patriots 
remain with us. This is the main precondition for the reliable 
protection of Ukraine. 
  [Kulida] Let us address another extremely important issue -- 
youth and the Army. 
  [Korkodym] This issue is both important and painful. We 
have inherited all the troubles that existed in the Soviet Army. 
First of all, this is the bullying of conscripts. The Defense 
Ministry has work our a program for combating this phenomenon. 
However, it will be impossible to overcome it without 
ideological education of youth according to traditions of 
Ukrainian history and literature, and on examples of famous sons 
and daughters of Ukraine. This task relates not only to the 
Army. This is, first of all, a task for the family, school, and 
state. 

