BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bayrado Arce Castano, member of the </F>
Sandinist National Liberation Front, FSLN, National Directorate, 
by Radio Sandino Program Director Ada Luz Monterrey in Managua; 
broadcast in progress -- live] 
  [Text] [Monterrey] ...after two days of deliberations, 
what's your political evaluation of the Special Congress? 
  [Arce] I would say that it has been a very positive exercise 
with significant benefits for the FSLN. I believe that to date 
we have lived up to the expectations of the FSLN grassroots and 
the Nicaraguan people in general. On the one hand, despite many 
predictions, we have been able to handle contradictions and 
opposing views both constructively and positively. We have also 
been able to do it very democratically, to the detriment of the 
right wing, as the recent edition of LA PRENSA indicates. We 
believe that they anticipated bullets and who knows what else 
during the congress. We have been able to hold this important 
debate in a friendly and revolutionary manner that will allow us 
to define precisely the identity of Sandinism. 
  [Monterrey] In this respect, please allow me to interrupt. I 
would like you to expand on this issue. An editorial in today's 
edition of LA PRENSA raises the media issue -- whether it is 
advisable for some FSLN leaders to broadcast their views via the 
right-wing media. Other sectors believe that this is a positive 
sign and that the fact that the FSLN, an opposition party, has 
opened its congress to all representatives of the media should 
be seen as a triumph. As a communications expert, what are your 
comments? 
  [Arce] Before answering I would like to say that -- to the 
right wing's chagrin, as LA PRENSA points out -- we believe that 
far-reaching decisions on the party's democratization and 
transformation are being made here. Nearly half of the members 
of the Sandinist Assembly, the party's leading body, will be 
elected from throughout the country. Women will at a minimum 
make up 30 percent of the party's decisionmaking bodies. There 
are other significant changes: For example, the National 
Directorate will now be elected from within the Sandinist 
Assembly and that mandate [words indistinct] can now be revoked 
by the Sandinist Assembly. The Assembly will also be responsible 
for filling the executive positions not elected by the Congress. 
  This all represents changes in a new, renovated, and 
transformed party. This is the objective of all Sandinists, 
regardless of which side we supported, even among those who 
abstained from involvement with either side. 
  Now, there has been some reference to what is evidently a 
right-wing radio station. I would like to point out the last 
two paragraphs of LA PRENSA's editorial, which are practically 
[word indistinct], nearly childish when they say that it's a lie 
that they are the biggest party, that it's a lie that they are 
going to win in 1996. This sounds like a child's temper tantrum. 
  Now, I believe that the decision to allow the media in 
depends on circumstances. Events like this are open to coverage 
by the right wing. They can cover this because we are very 
open, yet they adopt very arbitrary positions like this one. 
But on other occasions we may find they have very constructive 
opinions. I believe this has a lot to do with the person who 
covers the event, the editor, and on many occasions the 
political angle in covering the story. 
  I will give you an example. Recently several members of the 
Directorate readily agreed to an interview by LA PRENSA's 
Cristiana Chamorro and Ariel Montoya. We assumed that it would 
be a very professional interview. But it turned out not to be 
objective coverage because they did not respect the actual 
content of the interview. Instead they decided to base their 
work on comments that they added; they even misquoted us. I 
recall that I was quoted as saying that efforts for renovation 
were premature and untimely. That is absolute nonsense. I was 
even prompted into calling Cristiana and asking what happened to 
her interview and to remind her that it was very unprofessional. 
I spoke to her as a colleague and as president of BARRICADA. I 
told her that I had assumed that it was going to be a 
professional and mature interview. She gave me some kind of 
explanation. 
  So as you can see, sometimes one decides not to agree to 
interviews because some reporters are very unprofessional or 
highly politicized. Agreeing to an interview is like playing 
their game. But sometimes the reporter seems very professional, 
and we relent, only to end up having our statements misquoted. 
  [Arce] On several occasions statements and positions are 
not only disseminated by one media source but by several, and 
the people are thus made aware of exactly what the interviewee 
said. That specific media that tend to always misquote only end 
up losing credibility in the people's eyes. 
  [Monterrey] To conclude, it is being said that a proposal is 
being prepared by [words indistinct] in the sense of allowing 
the Sandinist Assembly to appoint the directors and editorial 
boards of the Sandinist media. As president of BARRICADA's 
board of directors and president of Radio Sandino's board of 
directors, please give your us opinion on this issue. 
  [Arce] I am not aware that any such proposal has been 
prepared. I am aware that a resolution was approved at the 
Managua consultative assembly proposing that the Sandinist 
Assembly be allowed to elect the editorial boards and boards of 
directors. I believe this initiative is very inadequate and 
does not respond to any logic whatsoever. When the time comes I 
am going to express my opposition. I believe that the most 
logical thing would be to... [pauses] 
  In the past the National Directorate was responsible for 
appointing the editorial boards and the newspaper presidents. I 
believe that this is how it should be. As an executive organ, 
the National Directorate should continue making executive 
appointments. I believe that now more than ever the National 
Directorate must make these appointments, realizing that it is 
not making political appointments but that it is [three-second 
break in reception]. While it may be true that the appointments 
do have some political value, in the final analysis these are 
newspaper enterprises. As such, any appointment must go through 
the logic and framework of a newspaper activity, and the 
criterion that applies is not the same as if a political 
appointment is being made for just a political or party task. 
  [Monterrey] Thank you, Commander Bayardo Arce. 

