BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 0800 GMT on 2 May within its 
regular 9-minute newscast carries several reports on the 
situation in the republic. 
  In his report on the situation in the Brcko region, Hamiz 
Deronjic says that "by bringing in reinforcement over several 
past days, as well as last night, the Serbian aggressor has 
carried out the strongest concentration of combat potential on 
the Brcko region since the beginning of the war. The 
Bijeljina-Brcko-Pelagicevo line has been simply (?clogged) with 
enemy tanks, transporters, [word indistinct], trucks, buses, 
vans, and (?luxurious) trains. The Serbian-Montenegrin 
aggressor has been transferring tanks, heavy artillery pieces, 
and blooded chetnik units [word indistinct] that took part in 
the barbarian attack on heroic Gorazde, to the (?key) point of 
the northern corridor before the free Brcko territory, which has 
not been protected by international resolutions." Further on in 
the report, Deronjic says that "in the last 24 hours, the 
shelling of the Brcko defense lines has intensified. The 
aggressor has been using recoilless guns, mortars, and Praga and 
Bofors weapons. The regions of Poderiste, Tulmovici, and the 
Omerbegovaca-Vranovaca line were exposed to the most intensive 
enemy fire yesterday evening." 
  Mirza Sadikovic reports that "in the past 24 hours, the 
joint 
aggressors failed to essentially change their activity on the 
Bihac region. They continued attacking and provoking attacks at 
almost all lines of separation in the zones covered by the 5th 
Corps of the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Headquarters of 
the Croatian Defense Council [HVO]. Karadzic's terrorists were 
unselectively shelling the defense lines, particularly on the 
Bihac section of the front and they also shelled the suburbs 
there. On the Grmusko-Srbljanski Height, they acted with 
antiaircraft and anti-armor weapons. They shelled defense lines 
as well as civilian districts on the free Bosanska Krupa 
territory and (Buzim) region. Sniper activity was intensified 
on all lines. The members of the Kladusa [Fikret Abdic's] 
private paramilitary have, all the time, been firing mortars and 
mountain guns from the strongholds in Donja (Lucka), (Trska), 
and Golubovici, thus attacking Todorovo, the general region of 
Krivaja, (Tesigrad), and Liskovac in the Cazin Commune. 
Reliable reconnaissance reports forecast preparations for new 
attacks both from the Kladusa Commune and the region of the 
so-called Serbian autonomous region of Krajina." 
  Abdulah (Vitanovic) reports on "fierce chetnik artillery 
attacks on the front lines and deep into the free Kalesija 
territory continued yesterday and last night. They acted from 
all strongholds and with all available weapons. They launched 
more than 100 destructive projectiles, whereby one person was 
seriously wounded and several houses completely destroyed." 
Further on, (Vitanovic) says that "during last night, the enemy 
continued occasional artillery attacks and early this morning 
the region of Donji (Krajinci) was exposed to fierce attacks 
with Bofors weapon (?from Vis). Later this morning, shelling of 
the outskirts of the commune and occasional attacks with 
machine-guns and antiaircraft weapons along the entire front 
line has continued. At the end of this report from Kalesija, 
let me say that, apart from offensive artillery-infantry 
attacks, the enemy is also carrying out a regrouping of manpower 
and bringing military hardware, particularly to the regions of 
(Vis) and (Visocek)." 
  A report by the Information Service of the 4th Corps says 
that "while trying to cross the dam of the Mostar Hydroelectric 
Power Plant over to the side controlled by the Army of the 
Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina, two Italian journalists were 
killed and one seriously wounded when they stepped on a mine 
field. No details of this tragic event, which took place on the 
territory controlled by the HVO, are known. By the way, the 
zone covered by the 4th Corps was calm and without the usual 
combat operations." 

