BFN 

  [Text] Under the former regime there were defects in our 
Republic's foreign policy and our country faced a number of 
problems because a balanced policy was not developed on 
relations with neighboring and far away countries. After 
Azerbaijani President Geydar Aliyev came to power, concrete 
steps were taken to forge good relations with the most developed 
countries, particularly neighboring states. 
  As a result, now Azerbaijan's just voice is being heard more 
clearly in the world and foreign countries are taking reciprocal 
steps to establish bilateral and multilateral ties with our 
Republic. 
  A number of countries are closely following the conflict in 
Nagorno-Karabakh and are condemning the forced occupation of 
Azerbaijani territory, calling for the full and unconditional 
withdrawal of the Armenian occupationist forces. 
  Egypt is one of these friendly countries. 
  Recently, Egyptian President Husni Mubarak invited the 
Azerbaijani president to visit his country whenever convenient. 
  Azerbaijani Foreign Minister Gasan Gasanov is leaving for 
Egypt today at the invitation of the Egyptian foreign minister. 
The purpose of the visit is to broaden the ties between the 
foreign ministries of the two countries and to examine the 
possibilities of formalizing relations. 
  [Begin recording] [Correspondent Akif Mecidoglu] Honorable 
minister, what is Egypt's place in the foreign policy of the 
newly independent Azerbaijan? 
  [Gasanov] Egypt is one of the states that first recognized 
Azerbaijan. A large Egyptian delegation arrived here soon after 
Azerbaijan gained its independence. All this time, Egypt was 
one of those states that supported and showed an interest in 
Azerbaijan. This is not our first visit there; The Azerbaijani 
foreign minister paid a visit to Egypt during which a number of 
agreements were concluded. It is believed that there is a need 
for this visit to reconfirm and ensure the continuation of these 
agreements. 
  Egypt also very firmly supports Azerbaijan at the United 
Nations in a number of areas and once issued important 
statements on the Azerbaijani-Armenian conflict. All this shows 
that this visit will be the logical conclusion to these efforts. 
  Our aim is to define clear lines in Azerbaijani foreign 
policy, such as the one on members of the UN Security Council, 
CIS countries, and European states. This is a new line being 
forged: Azerbaijan's policy towards Arab states, or Islamic 
states. We will hold very serious talks there and exchange 
views. Husni Mubarak invited Azerbaijani President Geydar 
Aliyev to pay a visit to Egypt in the near future. Mubarak's 
letter was made public. During my talks we will also prepare 
the groundwork regarding which problems to discuss during 
Aliyev's visit to Egypt and in what (?ways) to further our 
relations. 
  [Mecidoglu] I wish you success. 
  [Gasanov] Thank you. 

