Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Cees Zoon: "Mafia Exploits East European Drugs </F>
Market"] 
  [Text] Prague -- The money changers who once made the 
famous St. Wencelas Square in Prague unsafe have long found a 
new trade. The words "Wechseln?" or "Change?" no longer pass 
their lips, even though a tradition continues in their working 
methods. Passers-by who let themselves be led along to a dark 
passage or porch are not offered local money, but pure heroin or 
amphetamines. 
  The Czech capital has built up a serious drugs scene. Prague 
is home to most of the addicts in the Czech Republic, who 
according to reliable estimates have grown to number around 
30,000 people. The great majority of them use stuff made in 
local laboratories, like "brown," which contains codeine, or 
"ceko," which is sometimes called "the crack of the East." 
  But the biggest growth is to be found in the number of 
regular users of heroin and cocaine, substances which could not 
be found in communist times, but now are widely available. 
Prague is not exceptional in this respect. The same applies to 
Warsaw, where the drugs mafia is also working the market with 
verve. In Poland the number of hard drug addicts has increased 
to 40,000. 
  The fall of communism and the opening of the East European 
borders has not only created a market for Western industry, but 
also for the international mafia. Eastern Europe has become the 
most important transit region for drugs into Western Europe and 
at the same time a market with phenomenal perspectives. 
  The underworld has put down showy roots in Prague and 
Warsaw. 
The Prague police think that more than 3,000 mafiosi from 
Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, the former Yugoslavia and now Colombia 
have started to compete with local organized crime. 
  However, the Chinese (whom the police call the most 
dangerous 
group) and the camorra are increasingly reported. The Home 
Affairs Ministry said that last autumn the Italian and Russian 
mafia set up a joint venture in Prague, with the Italians 
providing the brains (specialists in laundering drugs money) and 
the Russians providing the muscles (Afghanistan veterans as 
killers). 
  The drugs route from east to west has shifted from the 
Balkans to central Europe. Yugoslavia was traditionally the 
transit route, but when war broke out the transporters found an 
alternative route. They were helped in their choice by the 
defective legislation and police equipment in countries like 
Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Poland. 
  The greater part of the drugs following this route come from 
the golden triangle in south-east Asia and the Asiatic republics 
which until recently were part of the Soviet Union. But the 
Colombian cartels also see the usefulness of a detour, as 
witnessed by the recent catches in Polish harbors. 
  The number of drugs shipments intercepted is increasing 
rapidly in every East European country. The Hungarian police 
seized 692 kg of cocaine and heroin last year, nearly 10 times 
more than the previous year. The same picture can be seen 
throughout all of eastern Europe. 
  Of course this is only a minimal part of the quantities 
which 
are passing through all the borders and reaching Western Europe. 
According to the International Drug Control Bureau in Vienna, 
just how much the supply to Western Europe is increasing can be 
seen more clearly from the market situation there: The quality 
of heroin is increasing and the price dropping significantly. 
  However, the mafia no longer sees the region as a 
straightforward transit station, but is working hard at creating 
a new market. The result is that in Prague, heroin is offered 
at a "promotion price" of around 2,500 crowns (160 guilders) per 
gram. 
  This sort of strategy will certainly encourage drug tourism. 
In nearby Bavaria, for example, five times more is paid for a 
gram of heroin. In the Bulgarian capital Sofia, users can buy a 
gram of heroin for between 800 and 2,000 leva (between 50 and 
125 guilders). In Slovakia, the police have seen dealers giving 
away their goods free of charge to secondary school pupils. 
  The Czech Republic and Poland are simultaneously producers 
and exporters of synthetic drugs. While local drug addicts 
prefer the switch to heroin and cocaine, 75 percent of the 
amphetamines consumed on the Berlin drugs scene come from 
laboratories in the Czech Republic and Poland in particular, for 
example. 
  Legislation is a problem everywhere. In most countries drug 
dealing is illegal, but the "possession of small quantities for 
personal use" is not. 
  The law is to be changed in Poland and the Czech Republic, 
but it remains questionable whether that will alter much. The 
customs authorities and police are fairly powerless against the 
gangs who deal with supply and distribution. Recently a series 
of treaties were signed by East European countries among 
themselves and with international organizations like Interpol. 
  The police in the whole region are currently no match for 
the 
mafia, which is better organized and equipped. It has the most 
modern communication equipment and a pool of fast cars. The 
police has to make do with telephone lines which hardly work and 
ramshackle cars. 
  Up to now the Polish Smuggle computer program, specially 
developed for the Central Customs Council, had no separate drugs 
category: Drugs smuggling came under the category of "others." 
It was only this month that a new program started to be used 
which includes the new headings "drugs" and "arms." 
  The police in Bulgaria, next to the border with Turkey, are 
at the forefront in the fight against drugs. But here too there 
are problems. To cut expenditure, only 240 liters of petrol is 
available every month for each police car. Once it has been 
used, the car stays in the garage. 

