Statements   by China's finance minister at the National People's 
Congress (NPC) session held in Beijing from 10 to 22 March 
reinforced recent media signals that local leaders have won 
concessions in their resistance to provisional tax reform 
policies imposed by the central government late last year.  While 
continuing to state firmly that localities must follow new tax 
rules formulated by Beijing, many of which appear to be inimical 
to provincial interests, Minister of Finance Liu Zhongli hinted 
in his 11 March budget address that the rules themselves are 
subject to interpretation based on the needs of local areas.  Liu 
said that the "design" of the tax reform plan "will necessarily 
differ" from "the actual situation" and that "readjustments" and 
"improvements" will be required "in the course of implementation" 
(Xinhua, 23 March). 
   Initial signs that central authorities might compromise on some 
reforms approved by a party plenum last November had appeared in 
a speech delivered by Politburo Standing Committee member Zhu 
Rongji at a national conference on propaganda and ideological 
work in January.  At the conference Zhu stated that "no pre- 
designed reform program" is "perfect" and quoted paramount leader 
Deng Xiaoping as exhorting the leadership to "make readjustments 
as problems arise" and "adapt according to the actual conditions" 
(Xinhua, 28 January).  In particular, PRC media have indicated 
that Beijing may lower the tax rate on capital gains from real 
estate transactions because of pressure from local leaders 
concerned about the impact of the tax on foreign investment.  A 
24 March report in the PRC-affiliated, Hong Kong-based wire 
service Zhongguo Tongxun She speculated that the regulations for 
implementation of the land tax, which have not yet appeared in 
PRC media, will be "more liberal" than the "interim" regulations 
of the tax publicized by Xinhua late last year (14 December 
1993).  Specifically, the report stated that the tax cap on 
capital gains will be reduced from 60 percent to 50 percent. 
   (AUTHOR:  VOSS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/HEBBEL JEG 12/2326Z APR 

