BFN 

  [Text] Managers throughout the Caribbean charged with the 
responsibility of developing programs aimed at reducing the 
spread of the deadly AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] 
pandemic are meeting in Antigua this week. The purpose of the 
meeting is to formulate more effective ways of managing AIDS 
programs in the respective countries. The national AIDS program 
meeting got off to an official start yesterday. As we hear in 
this dispatch from Debbie Francis, the meeting was declared open 
by Antigua's Health Minister Hilroy Humphreys. 
  [Begin recording] [Francis] Health Minister Hilroy Humphreys 
has underscored the need for continued educational programs 
about the killer disease, AIDS. He says there is still a large 
number of persons who need to be sensitized on how the HIV virus 
is transmitted. Mr. Humphreys also revealed the number of AIDS 
cases, which are reported up to the 15th of May: 
  [Humphreys] Enormous strides have been made in our knowledge 
of the infection. This knowledge seems not to be reaching the 
most vulnerable groups in our society. The rate of infection 
continues unabated. I understand that the most recent estimated 
rate of HIV is 5,000 per day. Here in Antigua, up to the 15th of 
May, we have 97 cases. I may be so presumptuous to multiply that 
by four because we are talking about husbands, we are talking 
about wives, we are talking about [words indistinct], we are 
talking about deputies -- and the Caribbean people know what I 
am talking about. That is indeed very serious. 
  [Francis] AIDS program monitor (Felicity Aima) outlined the 
main purpose of the management course. 
  [(Aima)] The purpose of the course is to improve the 
management of national AIDS programs through a process of 
increasing knowledge and developing skills necessary for 
management of national AIDS programs. It is designed for policy 
and decision makers concerned or associated with education and 
planning, health education, prevention and health care, and 
persons with primary responsibility for coordinating and 
implementing national AIDS programs. 
  [Francis] Meanwhile, a representative of the Global Program 
on AIDS in Geneva also spoke after the function. 
  [Geneva representative] The Global Program on AIDS has three 
major tasks: Its task is to reduce HIV transmission; try to 
reduce the personal and social impact of HIV; and its third, and 
possibly most important, task now is to mobilize global 
resources in response to HIV AIDS. To this end, the Global 
Program on AIDS has been recently reorganized to render it more 
effective. 
  [Francis] Also addressing the opening session was the 
coordinator of AIDS and [words indistinct] program in 
Washington, Dr. Fernando Zacharia, and the chief medical 
officer, Dr. Carlos Mulroon. I'm Debbie Francis reporting. [end 
recording] 

