Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aila Kayhty: "The Woodpecker's Nest Tree and the </F>
Gnarly Pine Are Still Standing"] 
  [Text] Savonlinna -- An ever-strengthening hum followed the 
group walking in the deep snow when the line of people got on to 
Iso-Kankainen Island. "Has any wood at all been harvested here?" 
the Forest Association men asked jokingly. 
  Everybody knew well that, during the summer of 1993, 830 
cubic meters of wood had been harvested from 7.4 hectares of 
this Lake Pihlajavesi island containing the summer cabin of 
Savonlinna resident, Timo Auvinen. Two clear-cut sites of less 
than 1 hectare had been hid into the interior of the island. The 
alders on the shores had been left entirely untouched. The 
logger, Pekka Mielonen, had left the woodpecker's nest tree and 
the gnarly pine standing. 
  Timo Auvinen was thankful for this environmental deed of the 
logging crew. In this way the forestry principles of his father, 
who died a couple of years ago, were respected. The Forest 
Association leaders praised Mielonen, who has the skill to 
harvest wood from the forest neatly and without harming the 
environment. 
  Mielonen confessed to having worked in the same manner as he 
did when working for the corporation for 20 years. "But only now 
am I starting to get recognition." 
  Auvinen's forest tract had been selected in an internal 
Forest Association contest as the target harvest tract for the 
year. Choosing a privately owned forest for the harvest sent out 
the message that an effort is being made to teach also the 
private forest owners friendliness toward the environment. 
Nowadays every seller of stumpage, the timber or pulpwood from 
the forest, is offered a harvesting plan in which the 
environment is taken into consideration. 
  The majority of stumpage sellers have regarded the offer in 
a 
positive way, said Juhani Hongisto, regional chief of the Forest 
Association's Southeast Finland Harvest Region. 
  In the Savonlinna Harvesting District 150 loggers were 
trained last year to regard the little dells and rills in a new 
way. In the managing of its own forests the Forest Association 
has followed environmentally sound instructions since already in 
1986. Already prior to that operators of machinery were ordered 
to take care of waste oil. 
  According to Hongisto, the Greenpeace writings about Finnish 
destruction of forests forced those with forest interests to 
promote the current style of harvesting. 
<H5>  Training for Loggers Almost Complete </H5>
  The big forest products firms -- Kymmene, Inc., 
Enso-Gutzeit, 
Inc., United Paper Manufacturers, Inc., and the Forest 
Association -- are eagerly promoting the guidelines for the new, 
environmentally friendly harvesting methods. The guidelines have 
been drafted cooperatively by the Forest Service, the industry 
and organizations with interests in the field. The 
easy-to-understand, picture book-like publications lead the 
reader to forest scenes where the ants and flying squirrels live 
happily even after the logger has finished his job. 
  The key people to contact are the loggers and forest 
machinery operators. Most loggers are already trained, and 
training is continuing in some companies this year. 
  Enso-Gutzeit has earned bonus points for promising to 
protect 
marble seal waters from forest harvests and fishing. A decision 
has been made to relocate the blue-winged ridge butterfly from 
Satakunta to its former habitat in Ruokolahti. Only 
biodegradable oils will be permitted in forest machinery from 
this year on. 
  One should never belittle the impact of impressions. Erkki 
Nieminen, Enso-Gutzeit environmental chief, who has just 
returned from work in Germany, knows that the Central European 
tourist forms his impressions of the Finnish forests from behind 
a car steering wheel. 

