BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] Amman -- Jordan will not attend the signing in Cairo 
on Wednesday of an agreement between the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation (PLO) and Israel to implement Palestinian self-rule 
in the Israeli-occupied territories, officials said Monday. A 
senior Jordanian official told the JORDAN TIMES that the Kingdom 
had "apologised and will not send anyone to the signing 
ceremony." 
  Representatives of around 40 countries are expected to 
attend 
the signing of the self-rule agreement by PLO Chairman Yasir 
'Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzaq Rabin. 
  The official, who asked for anonymity, would not elaborate 
on 
the reasons for Jordan's absence from the Cairo ceremony, but 
analysts believed it was to underline Jordan's displeasure at 
the lack of coordination with the PLO. 
  Other political sources, however, said they believed that 
the 
Jordanian decision was largely dictated by its declared policy 
of keeping a low profile in the Middle East peace negotiations 
until the Kingdom's demand for an end to the interception of 
al-'Aqabah-bound ships is met. 
  But other sources also maintain that Jordan is "displeased 
at 
being marginalised in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, and 
some of the points in the agreemnt have implications on Jordan 
without its taking part in any of the decisions reached." 
  After Israel and the PLO signed the Declaration of 
Principles 
on the White House lawn Sept. 13, King Husayn had said the 
Kingdom "will not be party to an agreement involving Jordan 
without having a role" in the negotiations. Jordan has also 
often criticised the PLO for not coordinating its position with 
the Kingdom before reaching agreements with Israel. 
  Jordan has abstained from an active role in the Middle East 
peace process until the Kingdom's demand for an end to the 
interception of al-'Aqabah-bound vessels is satisfactorily met. 
  This week, the Kingdom sent a lone observer to the 
multilateral working group on disarmament in Qatar and earlier 
this month Jordan sent only an observer to a meeting of the 
multilateral working group on water in Oman. 
  U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, after a meeting 
with King Husayn in London last Monday, announced that "subject 
to fine-tuning" Washington has accepted a Jordanian proposal 
under which Lloyds Register in London will be in charge of a 
sanction-verification regime at al-'Aqabah port. 
  Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani told the JORDAN TIMES 
then that despite the fact that Washington's acceptance "removed 
a major obstacle" from the way of renewed Jordanian 
participating in negotiations, the Kingdom was awaiting final 
agreement and implementation of the al-'Aqabah arrangement 
before assuming its role in the talks. 
  Other senior officials have since then said that the Kingdom 
needs to be reassured that its sovereignty and territorial 
integrity would not be brought into question in any proposed 
modality for the sanctions-verifications procedures. They said 
Jordan had certain "reservations and firm positions" in the 
modalities and mechanism of the proposed arrangement. 
  AFP adds from Cairo: Syria will not attend the signing of 
the 
Palestinian autonomy accord, Egyptian Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa 
said Monday. "I do not think Syria's Foreign Minister (Faruq 
al-Shar') will attend the ceremony," Mr. Musa told reporters. 
  Damascus has criticised the PLO-Israeli deal on limited 
autonomy as a "separate deal" undermining Arab solidarity and 
Syria's quest for "global peace." 
  In Tunis, Palestinian officials said PLO Political 
Department 
chief Faruq Qaddumi had also turned down an invitation from 
Egypt to attend the ceremony. 
  Mr. Qaddumi, who has expressed reservations over the deal, 
refused to attend the historic Sept. 13 ceremony at the White 
House, when the PLO and Israel signed the declaration of 
principles opening the way for autonomy. 
  In total 50 Palestinian officials were invited to the 
ceremony, including former chief negotiator Haydar 'Abd al-Shafi 
and spokeswoman Hanan 'Ashrawi, Palestinian officials said. An 
Egyptian diplomat, said many Arab officials had agreed to 
attend, including the foreign ministers of Morocco, Qatar, 
Tunisia and Oman. 

