Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The paper TRABAJADORES, on some of whose articles we 
have reported today, calls on everyone to focus discussions on 
the efficiency of each workplace. That is the title of an 
article in which TRABAJADORES announces that as of today, the 
Parliament in the Workplace is being held throughout the nation. 
Numerous such assemblies were held as trial runs throughout the 
month of January. 
  The most important aspect of this process, which is to 
continue until 15 March -- the most strategic and most 
potentially profitable for the nation -- is the analysis of the 
economic efficiency of each body, i.e., how to produce more with 
fewer expenses, thereby increasing profitability. Exactly this 
was at the center of the discussions of the recent seventh 
plenum of the National Committee of the CTC [Cuban Workers 
Federation], of which journalist Rosa Maria Godoy has details: 
  [Godoy] How to be more efficient, economizing human and 
material resources, was the prevailing concern during the 
seventh plenum of the CTC's National Committee while discussing 
the status of the domestic economy. At this event, held at the 
(Ernest Telman) Hall of the CTC national headquarters, the 
policy of reducing personnel rolls was also emphasized. In this 
connection, Carlos Lage pointed out that in order to carry out 
this rationalization, we must rely on the unions and must 
relocate, to other tasks or other work groups, those workers who 
may be unneeded. 
  Also discussed was the unfolding of the assemblies, the 
Parliament in the Workplace, which Lage called an unprecedented 
political process: 
  [Begin Lage recording] It is a real process, quite deep and 
significant. I think it is truly something of exceptional value, 
of exceptional significance and political importance; and it 
would also be good for us to be able to convey to the workers 
that the nation is facing a very difficult situation at present, 
and that it is taking whatever measures it has to take along 
with the workers, with their participation, and is following a 
process such as this one that has been begun, a process that we 
really expect will have a great impact: first, by creating 
awareness on everyone's part of the need for whatever measures 
will, in the final analysis, be taken; and, second, in that they 
are going to render whatever measures may be taken down the road 
much more effective and greatly reduce the margin of error that 
could result from the great wealth of opinions, judgments, and 
views that have come out of this process. 
  With this, I want to tell you that there is today a great 
responsibility, a great economic chore weighing on the CTC, on 
the unions: this political process, a process which -- I repeat 
-- is unprecedented and is something that, I would say, gives 
the Revolution a great deal of certainty as regards the measures 
that will have to be taken in the future, based on what has been 
said and explained here, what you people have been discussing. 
[end recording] 
  The CTC plenum approved the progress report on the extent to 
which the agreements and resolutions of the 16th CTC Congress 
have been fulfilled; in addition, the report presented by Daniel 
Fajardo, vice minister of agriculture [title as heard], was 
discussed. Fajardo reported on the progress of the Basic 
Cooperative Production Units in the agriculture sector and on 
the possibilities for increasing production levels of tubers and 
vegetables this year. 

