Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Ayman al-Safadi] </F>
  [Excerpt] Amman--The Lower House of Parliament Saturday 
strongly condemned "the ugly massacre committed by the Zionist 
authorities through its settlers" against Palestinian worshipers 
in the Cave of Patriarchs in Hebron on Friday and urged 
international protection for Palestinians in the occupied 
territories. 
  "As it condemns this crime and the conspiracy of the Israeli 
occupation forces with the settlers as well as the conspiracy of 
the hegemonous forces with the occupation, the (House) declares 
that it is time for Arab awakening," the deputies said. 
  "Statements of condemnations will not relieve the nation of 
its duty," the House said in a statement issued hours after the 
end of a special session held to discuss what House Speaker 
Tahir al-Masri called a serious event and a huge massacre. 
  "Statements of condemnations have become abundant and so 
have 
international decisions...but the Zionist enemy continues to 
shed Palestinian blood," the statement said. 
  The House urged the Arab and Muslim nations "to confront the 
aggression, overcome their differences and unify their stands 
because (all Arab countries) are targetted." 
  In the statement, which was drafted by the House's permanent 
office, deputies urged Arab and Muslim countries to move on the 
international level and at the U.N. Security Council to have the 
international community stand up to the "aggression and demand 
that Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab territories and 
provide protection to the Palestinians until the pullout is 
completed." 
  The House called on Arab and international parliaments to 
condemn the continuous Israeli crimes against the Palestinians 
and guarantee their rights, mainly their right to 
self-determination. 
  While expressing appreciation of the immediate steps the 
government took in reaction to the massacre, the deputies urged 
the executive authority to increase its efforts to guarantee 
Arab, Muslim and international support for the Palestinians. 
  During the session, lawmakers said the massacre emphasises 
the necessity of concrete measures to protect Palestinian 
civilians in the occupied territories but differed on how it 
should affect the Arab-Israeli peace talks. 
  The 16-member Islamic Action Front (IAF) bloc said the House 
should demand that the government withdraw from the negotiations 
but failed to get a House vote on its bid after other deputies 
argued its constitutionality. 
  The House must call on the government "to abandon the 
bilateral and multilateral negotiations and move towards 
preparing the people to support our armed forces in the coming 
battle of honour," deputy Hamzah Mansur said in a speech on 
behalf of the IAF bloc. 
  "The criminal act has proven the correctness of the position 
of the IAF and other national, pan-Arab and Islamic forces... 
that it is impossible to coexist with the Jewish enemy and that 
(the peace process) consolidates the occupation of our lands and 
holy places," the IAF said. 
  Mr. al-Masri argued against putting the IAF bid to vote on 
the grounds that such an important decision should not be taken 
after a "hasty and superficial discussion," pointing out that 
the session was specifically called to discuss the massacre and 
not the policies of the government. [passage omitted] 

