Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Rehn Is Now Advance Favorite"] </F>
  [Text] The SDP's [Social Democratic Party] Martti Ahtisaari 
defeated the RKP's [Swedish People's Party] Elisabeth Rehn in 
the first round of balloting in the presidential elections, but 
Rehn is nonetheless starting out on the second round as the 
advance favorite. Rehn got about 700,000 votes, only 125,000 
fewer than Ahtisaari, and forced Paavo Vayrynen and Raimo 
Ilaskivi to drop out of the race. The number of votes for Rehn 
is sensational for a representative of the RKP and for a woman 
candidate. At least in the first round, she broke through the 
traditional barriers of language and sex. 
  As a nonsocialist and representative of the government, 
politically Rehn has a better chance of gaining more support 
from those who voted for Vayrynen and Ilaskivi. These 
approximately 1.1 million voters will constitute the jackpot in 
the second round. The one who captures a majority of them will 
probably be the new president -- assuming that the same people 
vote in the second round. 
  Ahtisaari and Rehn are the same kinds of candidates: Neither 
can be characterized as a dyed-in-the-wool politician; evidently 
that is just why they came up winners in the elections. It is 
also hard to imagine them violently clashing in the debate. More 
likely is the danger that the election campaign will put people 
to sleep as they embrace each other unarmed. 
  There are few substantial differences between them as to 
policy lines. Both are, for example, supporters of membership in 
the EU [European Union]. The most important difference involves 
economic policy, and Ahtisaari plans to emphasize that in his 
campaign. But will it influence the outcome? The economy did not 
give Ilaskivi a boost, nor did factual issues otherwise decide 
the elections, as the amazingly small number of opponents of the 
EU shows. The appeal of the person and the image was much 
greater. 
  Rehn was the only candidate to pick up votes across party 
lines. Of the top four candidates, Ahtisaari and Ilaskivi were 
below the limit of support for their parties and Vayrynen only 
barely exceeded it. Rehn's popularity is over four times as 
great as typical support for the RKP. 
  In accordance with a decision made in advance, the Left 
Alliance will support Ahtisaari in the second round of 
balloting, but offhand it is hard for him to count on other 
important vote shifts as being in the bag. The combined votes of 
the Left Alliance are not enough for him to win. Ahtisaari would 
need more votes from the right of the political centerline, but 
he is in danger of being labeled a Left Alliance candidate. 
Right now Rehn evidently better meets the conditions for public 
acceptability. 
  Since the forecasts have been completely reversed during the 
campaign, nothing will be for sure for three weeks to come. Rehn 
received some of her support for tactical reasons: People voted 
for her so that Vayrynen and Ilaskivi would not be able to 
continue the race. Will these tactical voters continue to back 
Rehn? And how will the fact that only one of the three big 
parties got its candidate into the final round affect the 
outcome? Will it lower active participation in the vote? 
  In addition to Rehn, the other sensation in the elections 
was 
the fate of Vayrynen. He obviously campaigned more fiercely than 
anyone ever did before in Finland, but it did not get him into 
the final round. Vayrynen was tripped up by Keijo Korhonen. 
Relatively and absolutely, Vayrynen garnered fewer votes than he 
did in 1988. The fact that the post of president may have 
finally floated out of reach for him adds to the bitterness of 
his defeat. At least he can no longer regard himself as the 
Center Party's logical candidate for the presidency. 

