BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Peng Jianfei, secretary of the </F>
Yunnan Provincial Drug Enforcement Commission, by correspondents 
Na Jiahua (4780 1367 7520) and Li Yirong (2621 1355 5816) on 
Seventh International No-Drug Day; place not given: "Plug the 
Sources and Stop the Flow, the Situation Is Grim -- Peng Jianfei 
(1756 1696 7378) on Drug Enforcement in Yunnan"] 
  [Text] Kunming 24 Jun (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- Peng 
Jianfei, secretary of the Yunnan Provincial Drug Enforcement 
Commission, gave an interview on the eve of the Seventh 
International No-Drug Day. 
  Peng Jianfei said: The "Golden Triangle" lying outside 
Yunnan Province is one of the world's key narcotics-producing 
areas. A narcotics production base close to Yunnan's border 
accounts for over 60 percent of the "Golden Triangle's" entire 
output. The source lies outside Yunnan and drug traffickers 
cross into the province to ply their trade. Drug proliferation 
in Yunnan is very serious. 
  Peng Jianfei said: Yunnan's border is some 4,000 km long and 
completely devoid of any natural barrier. With very busy border 
travel, it is ideal for drug smuggling. In the early 1980's, 
there were about 20,000 drug addicts from along Yunnan's 
borders, all of them opium-smokers. By 1990, drug addicts 
throughout the province had increased to some 57,000, most of 
them smoking highly concentrated heroin instead of opium. These 
drug addicts are spending all their money on drugs, their health 
is gone, and most of them are completely unscrupulous. Over 70 
percent of them have committed crimes of various sorts, such as 
theft, prostitution, burglary, and murder, which pose a great 
threat to society. Society as a whole is deeply troubled by 
this phenomenon. State President Jiang Zemin pointed out in all 
seriousness that in a sense, the problem of drug abuse and drug 
trafficking is threatening the prosperity of the whole Chinese 
people, and he warned that this was no alarmist talk. 
  Peng Jianfei told us that Yunnan has been strengthening its 
power to fight against narcotics over last 10 years or so, and 
especially in the past few years, and has scored increasingly 
outstanding results. By 1993, the province's drug population 
had been put under control. Annual drug cases solved rose from 
hundreds to thousands, and drugs seized were measured in tonnes 
instead of grams. From January to May this year, the province 
solved 1,955 drug cases, seizing 2,118.6 kg of heroin, opium, 
and other drugs, and 13.16 million yuan in drug money; and 
arresting 2,808 drug criminals. It also seized 21 guns of 
various kinds, as well as large quantities of stolen goods. The 
number of cases solved, the number of arrests, and the amount of 
heroin seized rose 29, 15, and 27 percent, respectively. 
  Peng Jianfei continued: Drug crime over the last few years 
has acquired a number of new characteristics: More and more 
such crimes are committed by gangs; criminals are becoming more 
professional; more crimes are being committed outside the 
borders; and the means of crime are becoming more covert, 
secretive, and modernized. There has been a sharp increase in 
bribery involving huge amounts of money, arms trafficking, and 
violent resistance of inspections. A total of some 40 such 
cases have been reported since last year. The Yunnan police are 
targeting these criminals, cracking down on them mercilessly, 
and meting out just punishments. 
  Secretary Peng stressed that narcotics will remain a problem 
unless their supply is cut. Aimed at the problem of drugs 
filtering through its borders, the Chinese Government and police 
have held talks on many different levels with the governments 
and police authorities of its neighboring countries concerning 
drug enforcement. Statements were issued from these border 
meetings that anyone breaking Chinese drug laws will be subject 
to punishment by Chinese law! Meanwhile, international 
cooperation in drug enforcement has made progress. On 24 May, 
China, Burma, and the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs held a 
meeting in Kunming, where they reached consensus and achieved 
substantive results in the areas of pooling information, joint 
investigation of cases, and substitute crops. The meeting will 
prove a motive force for future drug enforcement. 
  Peng Jianfei said: Yunnan's efforts against narcotics have 
caught the world's attention. In recent years, senior 
government officials from many countries, delegates from 
international organizations, and domestic and foreign reporters 
have come to Yunnan to take a personal look at the province's 
antidrug achievements. The trip sharpened their originally dim 
understanding, and they all agreed that Yunnan's antidrug work 
had made an important contribution to the international 
community. It was even truer when the visitors were visibly 
touched by the loyalty of the police officers when they saw them 
camping in the rough and manning their posts under extremely 
difficult onditions. On a fact-finding tour of Kunming early 
this year, Robert Gelbard, U.S. assistant secretary of state for 
international narcotics matters, said that "the Yunnan police 
are on the frontline of the international drug fight," 
expressing his hope for close cooperation with China in drug 
enforcement. Visiting officials suggested promoting China's 
antidrug experience all over the world. 
  In conclusion, Peng Jianfei stated that the antidrug effort 
will not stop for a moment as long as drugs are still around. 
It is the sacred duty of the Yunnan police to stem the tide and 
plug sources of supply, eliminate drugs, and stop them from 
harming China and the world. 

