CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eduard Kondratov, IZVESTIYA: "A House Purchased </F>
With Your Own Savings. In Samara, They Know How To Solve the 
Housing Problem"] 
  [Text] Samara--The Samara Oblast Directorate of 
Statistics has published sensational data. In the environment of 
inflation, nonpayments, and an overall economic recession, the 
construction workers of the oblast have increased the volume of 
output. Last year they built two times (!) more schools than in 
1992, almost twice as many polyclinics, and considerably more 
day care centers. Regarding housing, they added 1,500 
apartments. 
  The demanding, voracious construction market is prompting 
the 
workers to apply themselves with far greater diligence than the 
erstwhile socialist commitments and party instructions. By now, 
as many as one-half of the apartments for residents of Samara 
are provided by private construction cooperatives and companies. 
Their number is nearing 2,000. 
  Three years ago the oblast administration told its 
construction monsters, which were falling apart: You are all 
free, convert to joint-stock operations, split up, look for 
investors with our assistance, and build and sell apartments. At 
first there was shock, but it wore off quickly. Setting 
construction personnel free, the oblast saved itself. Now the 
construction department gives no commands; the strategy for 
carrying out oblast programs and the choice of the most 
advantageous ways to use the taxpayers' money are its business. 
  There is always a selection on the market, especially now 
that the notion of contracts, which was so intrinsic in the life 
of Samara, has resurfaced from oblivion. There was a time when 
construction trusts avoided orders for housing and cultural and 
service facilities like the plague, especially in rural areas. 
At present, all of them are able and willing. 
  The creation of a contract market and regular tenders are 
the 
cherished objective of the local authorities. They select those 
who build cheaper, faster, and offer better quality. They 
persuade the construction industry: "We will come up with 
investment, just keep building." Twenty investment companies 
have already appeared. There will be some appearing in every 
city. 
  Opting for the strategy of market dictate has helped the 
oblast to solve a problem that has forever tormented the 
construction sector--the supply of materials. There was the 
distributive principle--allocations, quotas, schedules of 
orders. They began to forget the cheerless refrain of "we would 
build it, just give us something to build it with" after it was 
proposed that enterprises in need of housing look for 
construction materials themselves. Let us consider bricks, which 
were always in short supply. For example, in 1990 the oblast got 
only 0.5 billion, with demand being 1.2 billion. They had to 
hustle. Some plants took out credit and invested the funds in 
developing old brick plants; others bought or built new ones for 
themselves. At present, the industrial giants of Tolyatti, 
Novokuybyshevsk, and Samara have their own brick plants with 
capacities of 20-50 million bricks. Twelve large brick plants 
which started operating to meet the needs of the population were 
like a life-giving potion healing the old ills of the 
construction industry. 
  They build a lot in Samara, but housing prices are out of 
sight, just like everywhere else. Downtown, each square meter 
costs upward of 800,000 rubles [R], and in the suburbs--about 
R600,000. However, this is what the market is all about. Demand 
is high, and this is why it is expensive. Oilmen, the military, 
and entrepreneurs buy housing at such prices. 
  So far the percentage of those with deep pockets who are 
capable of ordering or buying an apartment is infinitesimal 
here. What is to be done about the 117,000 people on waiting 
lists for housing in Samara alone? It is virtually useless to 
wait for the state to allocate it free of charge. 
  In Samara they saw the following way out of the crisis: 
build 
housing with the funds of the city residents themselves. In the 
summer of 1993 the Samarastroyinvest joint-stock company was 
established in Samara, and its program was granted citywide 
status. Having outrun the locomotive and lacking a legal 
foundation at the time, Samara, jointly with the Housing 
Initiative corporation from Moscow, had begun to courageously 
implement the ideas built into the edict of 24 December 1993 
several months before the appearance of the edict of the 
president of Russia on the development and implementation of 
off-budget financing in the housing sector. Specifically, Samara 
had begun to introduce a mortgage system for extending credit to 
housing construction and to create a housing investment market. 
Construction sites had been selected, contracts signed, and 
special-purpose family accumulation accounts opened. 
  Seven mortgage systems which the city began to implement 
through its joint-stock company offered an overwhelming majority 
of city residents in need of improving their housing conditions 
an opportunity to acquire housing. These were people with 
varying degrees of affluence and varying needs--from those 
ordering luxury chambers to those yearning to eliminate the 
torturous overcrowding that has lasted for years. 
  Nikolay Prokhodtsev, an assistant instructor of the Samara 
Institute of Medicine, who lives with his wife and two children 
in a one-room apartment, said: "My family has finally gotten a 
chance to live in human conditions. All we will have to do is 
work more, and I am confident that we will pay for the new 
housing." 
  The Samarastroyinvest joint-stock company suggested that he 
mortgage his apartment at a mortgage bank at the commercial 
price toward the payment for the future, two-room apartment. The 
difference will be paid in during the number of years specified 
in the contract by obtaining a loan from the bank on credit, 
that is to say, by living in a larger apartment (even the 
building is already known, it is being completed) and working to 
pay for it instead of making money to pay a lump sum for it, 
say, until they are old. 
  The introduction of the mortgage system has produced 
movement 
on the frozen waiting lists at enterprises. The waiting lists 
themselves are being revised, "chains" are being built depending 
on needs. For example, a person who buys a three-room apartment 
pays a proportion of its cost by mortgaging his two-room 
apartment, which is bought by a "one-room" contender. The next 
one in line buys his dwelling. 
  One new apartment sold under a mortgage makes it possible to 
change housing conditions for several people on the waiting list 
at once. Those who do not have housing at all can open family 
accumulation accounts at the bank. The time will come when they, 
taking out a loan, will buy apartments and begin to diligently 
work to pay for them. The plant and insurance companies protect 
them from surprises. 
  Vyacheslav Stepukhin, head of Samarastroyinvest, said: "What 
we are doing is merely a manifestation of local initiative built 
on contracts and by no means a reflection of the actual policy 
of the state." 
  The credit the government has been generously extending to 
this day to raise wages will inevitably inflate the money 
supply, which will drive up prices and exacerbate inflation. Our 
people, fearful of inflation, have stopped saving money--they 
spend it as fast as possible. A state program for housing 
construction under mortgages could tie up enormous amounts of 
funds which are burning holes in the pockets. It would not occur 
to someone to buy a third TV set if everyone is able to invest 
money in his child's future apartment, if a real opportunity to 
live under normal conditions in one's younger years, too, 
appears. 
  Apparently in Samara they thought about this before others. 
The check investment fund Skif has already become involved in 
mortgage banking. Parcels of land are allocated for housing on 
credit and on a noncompetitive basis. Contracts are signed with 
insurance companies. Nonetheless, it is very hard to keep pace 
with the times if the commanders could not care less about this. 

