Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Julie Wolf report: "Brittan Veers From UK Line on Union"] </F>
  [Text] Brussels -- Sir Leon Brittan, the European Union 
[EU] trade commissioner, has distanced himself from the British 
Government line by pressing for trade union rights to be 
contained in future international trade agreements. 
  The stance will be taken by some European politicians as a 
sign that the former Conservative cabinet minister wants to 
underline his independence from Britain as part of his campaign 
to succeed Jacques Delors as European Commission president. 
  A strategy paper drawn up by Sir Leon says the EU should 
"make clear its willingness to include the trade-related aspects 
of human and social rights" in the World Trade Organisation 
being set up under the GATT Uruguay Round. The paper, which is 
to be put to the full European Commission for adoption in coming 
weeks, specifically lists trade union rights, forced labour and 
prison Iabour as subjects to be pursued by the EU. "The 
institutions of the EU must enunciate more clearly the social 
commitment entrenched in the Maastricht Treaty, and must explain 
more clearly to the citizens of Europe how in the past these 
principles have already been carried into practice as well as 
what more can be done," Sir Leon's paper says. 
  Incorporating labour issues into the world organisation 
could 
open the way for the withdrawal of trade advantages to 
developing countries that fail to respect internationally agreed 
rights. The commissioner's position runs counter to the British 
Government's contention that there is no place for social issues 
in world trade negotiations. British officials believe there 
could be a dangerous impact on trade if the organisation is 
given the mandate to deal with social issues. 
  The Government could be embarrassed by Sir Leon's call for a 
strengthening of the International Labour Organisation [ILO] 
including the possible imposition of sanctions against countries 
that fail to live up to ILO conventions. Britain has faced 
repeated criticism from the ILO, in particular for its trade 
union ban at GCHQ [Government Communications Headquarters]. 
  Sir Leon's stance also marks a shift from his initial 
hostility to recent suggestions from the Clinton Administration 
that labour issues be brought into the world trade arena after 
next month's signing of the GATT deal in Marrakesh. 
  Washington argues that developing countries should not be 
able to gain competitive advantage on world markets because of 
poor working conditions. 
  The paper puts Sir Leon closer to the views of Europe's 
Christian Democratic parties, which strongly support efforts to 
improve working conditions in Europe and elsewhere in the world. 
Unlike the Tories, the Christian Democrats are closely linked 
to trade union movements. 
  Sir Leon's initiative is likely to be broadly welcomed by 
the 
European and international trade union movements, which have 
been pressing for some time for a social clause in GATT. 

