BFN 

<F P=106> [Andrey Aderekhin report: "Kuban Governor N. Yegorov </F>
Replaces S. Shakhray"] 
  [Text] Krasnodar -- Nikolay Yegorov, former governor of 
Kuban, has been appointed Russian Federation minister for 
nationalities affairs and regional policy. 
  Yegorov said in an interview with the newspaper KUBANSKIYE 
NOVOSTI on the eve of his appointment that the president had 
made the offer to him 6 May and proposed that he start acting as 
minister for nationalities affairs and regional policy after the 
public holidays. The governor accepted that proposal. 
  Yegorov has shown himself to be a very thrifty politician in 
Krasnodar Kray. As much as five years ago he was chairman of 
the "Rodina" Collective Farm in Labinskiy Rayon. After August 
1991 he became the deputy of V. Dyakonov, the first governor of 
Kuban. Some time later, however, he moved to the opposition, to 
the kray soviet, and took Dyakonov's place after his removal 
from power. At the time of last fall's events Yegorov broke off 
relations with the kray soviet, which had supported the White 
House. He was elected a deputy of the Federation Council. At 
the beginning of this year the administration head finally 
abandoned his former friendship with the soviets, decreeing the 
termination of the kray soviet's powers and the abolition of its 
apparatus. 
  Yegorov has never been a fervent supporter of Boris Yeltsin, 
although he has been sufficiently cautious in his public 
pronouncements. People in the governor's entourage liked to 
repeat that all this political fighting was happening in Moscow, 
while in Kuban it was necessary to get on with their own 
business -- not politics but economics. Premier V. Chernomyrdin 
repeatedly made approving remarks about Yegorov's business 
qualities, describing him as a strong leader and economic 
planner who constantly pestered the government with his regional 
problems. 
  The question of Yegorov's move to the Russian Federation 
Government had evidently been long in preparation. Back in 
March, after Yeltsin's meetings in Sochi with the kray's 
governor, people in the administration told journalists that 
Yegorov's efforts to shape new relations between the center and 
the region had been evaluated positively by the president. They 
were referring to the president's and the premier's consent to 
the signing of an agreement on the delimitation of powers 
between the center and the kray. The specific provisions of the 
document were not reported, although it was announced that this 
agreement would make it possible to realize in practice the 
principle enshrined in the new Russian Federation Constitution 
of equal rights for the components of the Federation. 
  In the opinion of some observers, Yegorov's appointment as a 
minister will significantly strengthen the positions of the 
Federation Council, which is headed by Vladimir Shumeyko, who 
also comes from Krasnodar Kray, in influencing the shaping of 
regional policy. 

