Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Eldar Zeynalov: "The Partisans Are Coming Down </F>
From the Hills: Azerbaijan En Route to a Regular Army"] 
  [Text] An obligatory attribute of any state laying 
claim to independence, especially one with hostile neighbors, is 
a regular army. It has to be acknowledged that Azerbaijan lacks 
this attribute as yet. Its armed forces are helpless before the 
sallies of the Karabakh separatists and their allies, who have 
occupied a good one-fourth of the territory of the republic. And 
all this despite the fact that the area is not short of 
resources and that Azerbaijan obtained an entirely sufficient 
inheritance from the former Soviet Army. 
  What, then, is the problem? The fact that unlearned lessons 
of history condemn a society to repeat them. Did not the history 
of the Bolsheviks show that neither internal sedition nor 
outside intervention can be overcome with a volunteer, 
semi-partisan army? Did not the military campaign of 1941 show 
that only iron discipline turns a mob into an army? Should the 
future of the state have been endangered for truisms to be put 
to the test all over again? But the Azerbaijan Popular Front, 
whose position has in recent years largely determined the 
political climate in the republic, regarded the army primarily 
as an instrument of the winning of political power and made 
efforts to get hold of weapons. 
  The first appeal for the formation of volunteer squads was 
heard in Baku at a demonstration in Baku on 13 January 1990, 
when, in the period of heavy fighting in Khanlarskiy Rayon, the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front formed the National Defense Committee 
headed by Elchibey. I recall how in the academy institute where 
I was working at that time the registration of volunteers, which 
was earnestly supported by the Communist Party organization and 
even the chief of the Special Department (a KGB man, that is), 
began. This immediately put me on my guard, especially since no 
one was given weapons, and the lists of the most active and 
resolute members of the opposition who had registered were not 
kept secret. The underlying motives for the provocation became 
clear when, a week later, Soviet forces entered the city under 
the cover of a furor concerning "thousands of Popular Front 
combatants." 
  The volunteer movement subsequently once again made its 
presence known following Azerbaijan's proclamation of 
independence in the fall of 1991. Under the conditions of the 
disintegration of the USSR and the Soviet Army and the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front's uncompromising campaign to oust the 
Communists it was a matter of fundamental importance into whose 
hands the weapons being sold off by the "father-commanders" of 
the 4th Army would fall. President Ayaz Mutalibov, who 
recognized this danger, adopted an edict on the depoliticization 
of the power structures even before the official commencement of 
the formation of an army and prior to the self-dissolution of 
the local Communist Party. 
  Both then and, at times, now also Mutalibov is reproached 
with being reluctant to form a national army. I believe, 
however, that he did want to, but by no means just any army. 
Thus the "Fronter" Fakhmin Gadzhiyev, whom he had appointed 
deputy minister of defense, pulled back one unit from its 
positions in Karabakh in January 1992 and brought it to 
Baku--"the boys need to wash, they say." And in March the 
"Fronter" Ragim Gaziyev, commandant of Shusha, whom the 
opposition had strenuously pushed as defense minister, 
threatened from the parliamentary rostrum, with a portable radio 
in his hand, that he would bring his fighters from Shusha and 
arrange a repetition of the Tbilisi events in Baku. The defense 
measures of the "red" government, weakened by the loss of the 
"flower" of the presidential team in the helicopter shot down 
over Karabakh in November 1991, were censured in the opposition 
press. The exploits of the leaders of the volunteer campaign, 
among whom the above-mentioned Ragim Gaziyev (a mathematician by 
education) had progressed particularly, were simultaneously 
being lauded to the skies. After all this, is it any wonder that 
the army of sovereign Azerbaijan officially numbered by the 
spring of 1992 some 150 fighters--half as many as the members of 
parliament? The rest of the fighting force consisted of 
volunteers--members of the Azerbaijan Popular Front or those in 
sympathy with this organization. 
  The surrender to the Armenians, scandalous and bordering on 
treachery and still not thoroughly investigated, of the cities 
of Khodzhaly--in February 1992 (under Tair Aliyev)--and Shusha 
and Lachin--in May 1992 (under Ragim Gaziyev)--occurred at the 
time of Azerbaijan Popular Front member defense ministers. 
  Attempting to find the "culprit," the guilty party, the 
Azerbaijan Popular Front regime took punitive action against 
many of yesterday's "heroes" of the volunteer campaign (Gatyr 
Mamed in Agdam, Mekhraliyev in Agdash, Bakhramov in Dzhalilabad, 
Alyamshakh in Badra, S. Guseynov in Ganja, and others), 
simultaneously attempting to do some things in respect to the 
formation of a regular army. Thus illegal armed formations were 
banned, and a draft spanning 10 successive draft-year age groups 
was announced also (reduced to nothing by the corruption of the 
military registration and recruitment offices). 
  But time had already been lost, and the growing opposition 
was scoring points with each new defeat at the front. What was 
most dangerous was that the army also, in which by the end of 
their rule the "Fronters" had repressed six out of 10 generals 
and one-eighth of the officer corps, had slipped out of control. 
And the Azerbaijan Popular Front then turned once again to the 
tried-and-tested weapon--volunteer squads, whose formation was 
announced, with the tacit approval of President Elchibey (and in 
violation of his edict) at a meeting of the Azerbaijan Popular 
Front in February 1993 in Baku. A state of emergency was imposed 
in April, and it was announced that the Azerbaijan Popular Front 
was "prepared not to shrink from bloodshed." This was 
demonstrated at the time of the events of June 1993 in Ganja, 
which culminated, however, unexpectedly for the organizers in 
the victory of a leader of the volunteer campaign who had 
suffered repression--Suret Guseynov. The circle was thus closed, 
and the regime fell apart in a clash with its own creation. 
  The struggle against the volunteer anarchist chaos was a 
principal direction of the activity of Geydar Aliyev, who came 
to power. The unprofessional proteges of the Popular Front were 
methodically "smoked out" of their positions in the power 
ministries, approximately 30 battalions, composed of 50 percent 
"dead souls" and 50 percent former volunteers, were disbanded, 
and Ragim Gaziyev and a number of other Azerbaijan Popular Front 
figures, against whom charges of the negligent discharge of 
their official duties in the army, theft of property, and such 
were brought, were arrested. The press was given the "go-ahead" 
for descriptions of the gangster adventures of a number of 
"chieftains," which had earlier been shamefully hushed up from 
patriotic considerations. 
  At the present time the volunteer squads persist only in the 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, where several areas remain 
under the control of the Azerbaijan Popular Front. They are 
headed here by one T. Guseynov, who proposed in August the 
formation of a Nakhichevan Defense Council to confront possible 
Armenian aggression against this Azerbaijani autonomy. 
  The ring around the fugitive ex-President Elchibey is 
tightening. The detachment of interior forces loyal to him has 
been disarmed, and 12 officers and the chief himself (lacking, 
according to the tradition of recent times, special education) 
have been dismissed from the district police department in his 
native Ordubadskiy Rayon. An attempt to seize the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous Republic MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs] on 29 
October was foiled and led to the arrest of the most active 
"Fronters." Elchibey's cousin--Aydyn Gasymov, against whom a 
Turkish fanatic, a "gray wolf," arrested on 1 October 
testified--was arrested and charged with preparing an act of 
terrorism. 
  G. Aliyev has left his predecessor two ways out--to fully 
disarm (physically and ideologically) and submit to him as 
president or, relying on the volunteer-combatants, to continue 
the desperate, but doomed struggle to the end. In the first case 
Elchibey would be left without even the illusory hope of once 
again seating himself in the presidential chair. In the second 
there is a chance that he could escape to friends in Turkey 
wearing a martyr's crown and even form a "government in exile" 
from the CIS-devant of his circle. 
  Whatever the case, it is obvious that Azerbaijan has gotten 
over the volunteer campaign. Individual squads or terrorists are 
no longer calling the tune in policy, and the formation of a 
regular army has been the priority concern of domestic policy 
and serves as the basis of the mutual understanding in the 
President Aliyev-Prime Minister Guseynov tandem. Following the 
punishment of several military commissars, mobilization is 
finally under way. Deserters are being caught, and military 
tribunals, who have in the year examined hundreds of cases, are 
operating. The day when quantity switches to quality is not far 
off. Especially since following the failure of the efforts of 
the CSCE and the four UN Security Council resolutions on the 
liberation of the occupied territories, which have been ignored 
by the Armenians, the Azerbaijani leadership is left with no 
choice, evidently. 

