BFN 

<F P=106> [Column by Gungor Mengi: "Let's Go to Bosnia"] </F>
  [Text] Europe is experiencing an era similar to medieval 
times, when people were brutally tortured to death for their 
religious beliefs. 
  Due to their helplessness and dependence on foreign 
countries, the Muslims have been merely watching the Serbian 
genocidal spectacle for the past two years. Meanwhile, the 
Christians also have been watching the developments in that 
country in an ignoble and merciless way, because they do not 
wish to have an Islamic country in Europe. 
<H5>  When Will This Tragic Situation End? </H5>
  If the present developments are allowed to continue, the 
tragic situation in Bosnia will end when the tragedy of the 
innocent Bosnian people turns the entire world into a ball of 
fire and forces humanity to pay for the crimes committed against 
that country. Worries in that regard are not unreasonable. 
  Some 65,000 Bosnians live in Gorazde, which is 55 km 
southeast of Sarajevo. The Serbian attack on that city is an 
indication of the serious threat now facing the world. 
  The massacre in Sarajevo in February created a wave of 
indignation even in the Western countries. That prompted the UN 
to authorize NATO to take military action to intervene. NATO's 
ultimatum to the Serbs resulted in a shaky peace in Sarajevo. 
  The situation in Gorazde two days ago answered the question 
of why NATO's deterrent umbrella has not been extended to the 
other cities in Bosnia. 
<H5>  Spit in the Face of the World! </H5>
  NATO's ultimatum failed to conceal the ugly face of the 
injustice that has been done to the Bosnians. While they were 
asked to surrender their arms, the Serbians were told to 
withdraw their heavy weapons 20 km from Sarajevo. The tragic 
reports we received from Gorazde yesterday showed us where the 
Serbs took their arms. 
  The Turkish Government must adopt a clearer approach in UN 
forums. Turkey must not hesitate to openly blame the officials 
and countries responsible for the shameful situation in Bosnia. 
  The Serbs have not suddenly attacked Gorazde; they openly 
advanced on that city and attacked it. The UN declared Gorazde 
a "security zone." That meant an international guarantee for 
that city. 
  The Serbs, who are responsible for acts of genocide, not 
only 
attacked Gorazde and killed innocent people but they also spit 
in the faces of the UN and NATO officials and all those who 
defend or seem to defend human rights and freedoms, including 
President Clinton. 
<H5>  Struggle Against Butrus-Ghali </H5>
  Innocent and oppressed peoples have begun to regard UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali, who has failed to heed 
Gorazde's call for urgent aid, as a scorpion. As far as world 
peace is concerned, he is an unfortunate factor. 
  Butrus-Ghali may owe the position he holds to his hostility 
to Islamic peoples. Considering that, the Turkish diplomats 
must move to openly launch a struggle to rid the UN of that 
villain. Diplomatic courtesy cannot be considered when innocent 
people are being killed; and a tragic situation gradually 
creates a wave of devastating hatred and drags humanity toward 
the verge of religious schisms. 
  Will the effort by Turkish diplomats move the Western 
countries to take action? No one can say otherwise. For 
example, Germany feels free to expel the Workers Party of 
Kurdistan [PKK] members who demonstrate in that country. 
However, it has not hesitated to impose an arms embargo on 
Turkey, which is indirect support for the armed PKK militants 
who kill innocent people in Turkey. Does Germany wish to 
protect the Kurds? No, that is not the case, because the PKK 
militants are killing people of Kurdish origin in Turkey. The 
German officials are aware of that state of affairs. 
<H5>  Bosnians Do Not Have Time </H5>
  Turkey must address itself to Western public opinion. 
Although the Western capitals have been captivated by outdated 
and separatist trends, the people's conscience is strong against 
the dark ideologies. 
  Turkey's effort may also succeed in awakening the people of 
the oil-producing Arab countries, which have surrendered their 
dignity, resources, and independence to the Western countries 
for petty gains. However, the Bosnian people do not have much 
time. 
  Tens of thousands of people rallied in Taksim Square in 
Istanbul to voice their support for the Bosnian people 
yesterday. No preparation was made for this demonstration. 
Considering that, some 10,000 fighters could be prepared with 
the same spirit and emotional feeling in a week. They could be 
dispatched to Bosnia to help the Bosnians, who have been left to 
die because they are an Islamic community. There must be 
someone in Turkey to organize such a humanitarian mission. 
  Meanwhile, the Turkish Government must move to see to it 
that 
NATO's authority to intervene, an authority limited to Sarajevo, 
is broadened to cover all the other "security zones." 
Furthermore, it must dispatch the Turkish military contingent 
designated for the UN Peacekeeping Force in Bosnia as soon as 
possible. 

