CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. Randers: "First Professional Official Starts </F>
Working for State] 
  [Text] Today marks one week since the Cabinet of 
Ministers confirmed the position of the first professional 
official -- INDULIS TUPESIS was named State Civil Service 
Administration Chief. In January, he moved from the United 
States to live in Latvia permanently, and will be the person 
who, within the so-called reform program for officials, will 
organize the certification of all officials (approximately 30 
thousand, in total) -- the first step toward the creation of a 
staff of professional officials, because, until now, it seems 
that the officials employed here have only been amateurs. 
  At present, the new Chief of the Civil Service is compiling 
a 
list of positions for all state ministry officials, which will 
then be reviewed and confirmed by the Cabinet of Ministers. As 
soon as the Saeima adopts the law "On the State Civil Service" 
(at present, it has only been adopted in the first reading), the 
commission set up by I. Tupesis and confirmed by the Cabinet of 
Ministers will start the certification of Latvia's officials. 
  The very first to be certified will be the state secretaries 
of the ministries (for example, the State Secretary of the 
Ministry of Agriculture is J. Lapse). Those who pass the 
certification examination (first, a questionnaire to determine 
whether the applicant meets the requirements as prescribed by 
law, second, an essay, and third, a conversation or "interview") 
will be granted a standing as candidate for official, which will 
give them the right to receive an increase in salary. In order 
for a candidate to become a professional official, the applicant 
will have to complete several years of studies at the newly 
established State Administrative School. 
  The State Civil Service Board reports to the Ministry of 
Reforms. As I. Gailis, the Minister of Reforms told LAUKU AVIZE, 
I. Tupesis was named chief of the board as a result of a 
competition held by the Ministry. While I. Tupesis, as a 
Latvian from exile, has one drawback -- a temporarily poor 
understanding of local conditions -- with his knowledge and 
experience (for 20 years, he has worked in the Civil Service of 
the United States in America, Europe and Japan), he has still 
managed to surpass the local applicants for this responsible 
position. 
  I. Tupesis is 43 years old. He came to Latvia for the first 
time in October of last year, and at that time decided to 
relocate here permanently. He is a dual citizen of Latvia and 
the United States of America. His last place of employment in 
the United States was Director of Contracts for the Naval 
Regional Contract Center in Washington. He has received his 
education from the Munster Latvian High School, the universities 
of Wisconsin and California, the Kennedy School of Government, 
the United States civil service administration's higher 
education institute in Virginia (the main topic of studies -- 
how to deal with staffs of officials in a democratic country). 
He is fluent in English and Latvian, and has some knowledge of 
German and Italian. 
  In contrast to his brother, Saeima deputy Janis Tupesis (he 
has another brother, who works in the United States civil 
service, and a sister, who teaches English in Poland), Indulis 
is not considering a political career in Latvia. The civil 
service law will contain the regulation that an official cannot 
be a member of any party, work in a side position, accept a post 
in a state or private business organization, -- and the first 
professional official in the state must set the example. 
  I. Randers A. Jermaks, photo. 

