Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] About a year ago, Japan aroused international 
controversy by shipping reprocessed plutonium from France. Now 
the nation is about to join the ranks of plutonium users, with a 
fast-breeder reactor in western Japan scheduled to reach 
criticality early next year. 
  It is against this backdrop that Japan faces the idea of 
placing plutonium storage and use under international control. 
  Of all nuclear-energy sources, plutonium is feared because 
of 
its potential use in nuclear weapons. Even where a nation 
intends to use the substance for peaceful purposes only, it is 
important to make the utilization process sufficiently open to 
leave no room for international suspicions. 
  Another effective way to curb nuclear proliferation is for 
user countries to refrain from holding more plutonium than is 
necessary for power generation and other non-military uses. 
  Worldwide plutonium stocks are estimated by Japan's Atomic 
Energy Commission at 911 metric tons, 257 tons for military 
purposes and 654 tons for civilian. Of the civilian-use 
holdings, 532 tons are in the form of spent fuel, while 
reprocessed plutonium accounts for 72 tons. Japan holds 1.6 tons 
of the reprocessed variety. 
  At a time when the world's supply of reprocessed plutonium 
is 
already high, the scrapping of nuclear arms suggests a growing 
surplus. Particularly worrisome is a possible outflow of the 
substance from the nuclear arsenal of the former Soviet Union. 
  It is time to give serious consideration to the concept of 
internationally organized supervision of plutonium use and 
storage. Japan stands to benefit from such a global framework as 
it moves into the next, practical phase of its plutonium program. 
  The idea of putting plutonium under some form of 
international custody is nothing new. The issue was debated by a 
panel of experts at the International Atomic Energy Agency from 
1978 through 1982, with the results submitted for consideration 
by the IAEA board. The initiative got nowhere, however, because 
it was too difficult to reconcile conflicts of national 
interests while the Cold War was still going strong. 
  Global circumstances have undergone a sea change since then, 
and the possibility of reaching international nuclear accords 
has improved significantly. This has prompted moves inside the 
IAEA, albeit unofficial, to look at international plutonium 
control in a fresh light. 
  The issue needs to be approached from a variety of 
perspectives: Should control extend to all plutonium or just to 
surplus stockpiles? How should military-use plutonium be dealt 
with? What criteria should be followed in allowing a country to 
use the substance? These and other questions are bound to expose 
considerable differences among countries and touch off heated 
debate. 
  Japan is the only plutonium-using nation that has no nuclear 
weapons. It is also the only nation that has every fallen victim 
to nuclear bombing. These conditions uniquely qualify the 
country to actively advocate an international system to tame the 
potentially lethal material, rather than passively follow the 
lead of others. 
  In order to play such a role, Japan must not allow itself to 
be blinded by narrow national interests, and must exhibit a 
clear vision of what exactly international control of plutonium 
means for world peace and energy demand. Tokyo also must have 
the courage to stand up to the brazen pursuit of self-interest 
by the nuclear powers, such as was seen during efforts to 
enhance the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 

