CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lev Anikin: "Russian Columbuses Needed: The Lost </F>
Island of Foreign Trade"] 
  [Text] Rumor is, there is this unknown country--Cuba. 
This is not at all the namesake republic we knew in the old 
times in the former USSR. In this country, land belongs to those 
who work on it, and doors are open to foreign investors, 
including emigres. Foreign currency is freely accepted here; 
entrepreneurship encouraged. And it goes without saying that in 
business relations they are guided by regular commercial utility 
rather than ideological opinion. 
  True, in the opinion of some stern observers, there is no 
other Cuba. They only pretend on this island of revolution that 
they have commenced fantastic transformations. Life made them do 
it. The disintegration of the socialist camp, the lack of 
friendly subsidies, and the final collapse of the inefficient 
economic system have presented them with the need to establish 
relations with the world community, which wants a partner to 
have a proper image. Cuban leaders have not drawn proper 
conclusions from the events in East Europe, such observers 
believe. In the design of its initiators, portable capitalism 
here should serve only as salvation straw during hard times, and 
then help to resurrect socialism. With all relevant consequences 
for the same gullible investors. 
  Cuban reformers, however, have their own interpretation of 
change. And they want to be understood correctly. They believe 
that what stood in the way until now is an almost complete 
information blockade regarding today's Cuba. "The Soviet Union 
lost Cuba, and Russia has not yet discovered it," said the 
republic's Consul General Felix Leon Carballo at a meeting with 
St. Petersburg journalists. For the third year now, the little 
country is learning how to live under the conditions of the 
harshest economic crisis in its history, having lost overnight 
almost all of its trading partners, 85 percent of whom had been 
allies from the former socialist camp. They have to economize on 
everything. Nevertheless, problems are gradually being resolved. 
Exports--the main source of income--are growing; increasingly 
more companies invest capital in Cuban industry. By the 
beginning of this year, more than 5,000 representative foreign 
companies and 112 joint ventures were operating in the country. 
Twenty-eight of them are busy developing the tourism industry. 
Trips to the exotic island are relatively cheap and are in 
demand. Among investors in a variety of economic sectors are 
countries of West Europe, North and South America, and the 
Caribbean. China is showing an interest in cooperation. All of 
this is not accidental. The Cuban Government provided the 
necessary guarantees for free movement of capital; associations 
have been given the right to distribute property; they are 
exempt from taxes on gross income and only pay 30 percent of the 
net profit. 
  Russia so far is absent in this popular new market, however. 
It also has neglected the old one: Equipment rusts without spare 
parts; unfinished Soviet enterprises under construction turn to 
dust; billions worth of investment in the former Cuban economy 
are going to waste, while additional potential market for idling 
Russian enterprises is being lost. Only late last year were 
several intergovernment agreements signed on trade and 
scientific-technical cooperation. But the axiom "better late 
than never" does not apply here. In economics, late most often 
means never. Competition does not wait. And even these few 
agreements remain on paper. Trips of Russian commercial 
Columbuses do not materialize. The same goes for a tentative 
partnership with the governments of St. Petersburg and oblast. 
No one disagrees that there are good prospects in cooperation 
and mutually profitable exchange in the area of developing 
tourism, the sugar industry, and production of high- quality 
medications for which Cuban specialists have always been famous, 
and other projects--but this is where it ends. 
  One of the possible reasons is the shadows of ideological 
prejudice, which manifest themselves one way or the other in the 
debates on the substance of changes in Cuba. Whatever they are, 
however, commercial and merely vital interests of the people 
have their own logic, which will put everything in its proper 
place. 

