BFN 

  [Text] His Majesty King Husayn has said that the homeland's 
higher interests impose on all of us further awareness to 
confront the challenges facing us and to safeguard national 
unity and awakening, particularly at this delicate stage through 
which the homeland and nation are passing. 
  During a meeting at the Royal Hashemite Court today with 
officials in charge of media and press institutions, his majesty 
stressed the constants of Jordan's stand on the peace process, 
represented by the efforts to achieve a comprehensive and just 
peace in the region, and to provide all support and backing for 
the Palestinian brothers in harmony with the Rabat summit 
resolutions of 1974, which stressed that the PLO is the sole and 
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. 
  His majesty stressed the need for the Palestinian brothers' 
cohesion at this critical stage of the Palestine question. 
  His Majesty King Husayn also stressed the need to promote 
coordination among the Arab parties participating in the peace 
process within a framework of frankness, clarity, and mutual 
trust. 
  His majesty acquainted the media and press family with the 
latest developments in fraternal Yemen, stressing that the 
Jordanian stand toward this issue is based on adherence to 
Yemeni legitimacy and unity. He also briefed them on the 
efforts Jordan has made since the beginning of the crisis in 
fraternal Yemen and the signing of the pledge and accord 
document by all the Yemeni parties in Amman, to avoid explosion 
of the conflict and to safeguard fraternal Yemen's achievements 
of unity and democracy. 
  During the meeting, His Majesty King Husayn reviewed the 
latest developments regarding the lifting of the blockade on 
al-'Aqabah Port and the Jordanian decision not to return to the 
peace negotiations until after this issue is settled and after 
the blockade is lifted. His majesty noted that it has recently 
been agreed that the neutral British company, Lloyds, in 
coordination with the United Nations, be entrusted with the task 
of supervising imports of goods and materials to al-'Aqabah. 
  His majesty also reviewed various national and regional 
issues, stressing the need for continuous meetings and contacts 
on all levels to exchange views on latest developments. 
  At the end of the meeting, Information Minister Dr. Jawad 
al-'Anani expressed the media and press family's thanks and 
appreciation to his majesty for providing this chance to meet 
with his majesty and for briefing them on various developments 
and national and international issues. 
  Attending the meeting were al-Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir, chief 
of the Royal Hashemite Court, Marwan al-Qasim, political adviser 
to his majesty, and Dr. Khalid al-Karaki, his majesty's adviser. 

