BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by New York-based correspondent Kim Sung-yong from </F>
the column "Reporter's Memo Book"] 
  [Text] We feel that the stance taken by the foreign policy 
authorities of the ROK and the United States over the last year 
and three months in dealing with the crisis of the North Korean 
nuclear issue has often been the captive of "subjective 
expectations." When the U.S. CIA made an analysis around the 
end of last year that North Korea may have already completed 
producing one or two nuclear warheads, the foreign policy 
authorities of the ROK and the United States dismissed it, 
saying, "It is a hypothetical scenario assuming the worst 
situation." Then, since last spring, the tone has changed in 
that this analysis could be true. When North Korea began to 
replace the fuel rods last month, the U.S. authorities, thinking 
that North Korea has only one "robot arm" for the replacement of 
fuel rods, said that it would take two to three months for North 
Korea to replace all the fuel rods. However, they were taken by 
surprise when North Korea swiftly replaced the fuel rods in a 
few weeks. Different from the U.S. assessment, North Korea had 
two robot arms. 
  If North Korea reprocesses the fuel rods it has taken out, 
it 
will be able to extract plutonium for four to five nuclear 
warheads by the end of this year. From the large-size reactor 
it will complete as early as next year, North Korea will be able 
to produce plutonium for 10 to 12 nuclear warheads annually in a 
few years. During the inspection last March, it was confirmed 
that new reprocessing facilities were being built in North Korea 
in addition to those in operation. 
  The positions of the ROK and U.S. foreign policy authorities 
as to this situation have been quite relaxed. During his visit 
to New York last February, Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu 
stressed dialogue saying, "It will take three to four more years 
for North Korea to pose a practical nuclear threat equipping 
itself with all the detonating devices and delivery means." 
While the North Korean nuclear capability's swiftness has been 
confirmed and North Korea is threatening to withdraw from the 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, the ROK diplomats are repeating 
the statement that "North Korea is promising to allow all the 
inspections of its nuclear processing in the future." The ROK 
and the United States--which did not mention until recently the 
measures in case sanctions are taken--are raising their voice 
about sanctions after North Korea replaced the fuel rods. It is 
doubtful how much the ROK and the United States are prepared for 
the crisis to be created by the sanctions because the two 
countries had so much optimistic hopes in negotiations for the 
past 15 months. 
  The ROK diplomats, who visited the United Nations recently 
say, "The development toward sanctions resulted from the 
consistent policy we have pursued." However, the present 
development being as horrible as it is, no one will agree to or 
be impressed by the interpretation that the ROK diplomacy has 
been consistent. 

