Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Roundtable discussion between Sachio Uehara (SU), division </F>
manager, Technical Research Division; Toru Yamashita (TY), 
chairman, Defense Technology Foundation; Izumi Tomita (IT), 
director, Defense Technology Foundation; and Yasuo Imai (YI), 
executive director, Defense Technology Foundation] 
  [Text] TY: There seems to be a trend taking 
place worldwide due to the end of the cold war for countries to 
cut back on military spending. A review of Japan's mid-term 
defense budget would seem to suggest that the end of the cold 
war has also had a major impact on the defense industry in Japan 
such as can be seen in the reduction of attack weapons. 
Recently, two roundtable forums, each headed up by the chief of 
the Bureau of Equipment, were formed to discuss defense arms 
purchases and defense industry technologies. The two groups will 
be exchanging views on the future of the defense industry and 
defense technologies with knowledgeable people from both inside 
and outside the Defense Agency. I really feel that the timing in 
forming these two groups could not have come at a better time. 
  In that context, I wonder if we could begin our discussion 
by 
looking at what the real advantages are in doing R&amp;D and 
developing our own technologies in Japan. With that in mind, I 
would like to begin by asking Mr. Uehara to give us his views on 
the future trends in technology, particularly as it pertains to 
defense-related technologies. Would you first start by giving us 
an overview of the Technical Research and Development Institute 
(TRDI), its organizational structure, staffing, average age, 
level of education, and number of exchange students from Japan 
and elsewhere, and so forth. 
  SU: As far as our current organizational structure 
is concerned, there is a general affairs department that handles 
overall administration of the entire division, a planning 
department that handles R&amp;D planning and technical surveys, 
and 
a technical research department. In addition to these, there are 
four other development departments that have been established as 
implementation structures for ``ground,'' ``sea,'' ``air,'' and 
``guided weapons.'' There are a total of five research 
institutes, the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th research institutes, 
that oversee element research, and also two branch offices, one 
in Iioka and the other in Kawasaki. The TRDI also has five test 
labs which are located in Sapporo, Shimokita, Tsuchiura, 
Niijima, and Gifu and are used to test and evaluate new 
technologies. 
  The staff is divided according to whether they are 
technical, 
administrative, or self-defense force personnel. R&amp;D related 
personnel include 564 research specialists and another 242 key 
self-defense force people. R&amp;D support personnel total 1,185. 
That number includes 52 people working in either self-defense or 
administrative posts, and 327 people in management, so that 
means that 70%-75% of the personnel working at 
headquarters 
consist of R&amp;D personnel. When we look at the individual 
R&amp;D 
departments, we find that more than half the staff are assigned 
to one of either two departments, namely, telecommunication 
(34%) or machinery (24%). The remainder are 
employed in either 
the aeronautics (11%), physics (9%), chemistry 
(5%), or 
marine (5%) departments. 


<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007LC-25A>           Pie Chart Showing Current Staffing By R&amp;D field </FIG>



  As of 1 June this year, the average age of an administrative 
employee was 40.04, and that of a research specialist was 41.06. 
That figure has been gradually decreasing over the past few 
years as the institute has sought to hire younger employees. In 
terms of academic qualifications, excluding Self-Defense Force 
officers, there are 93 people who hold doctorate degrees and 
another 227 people with master's degrees. 
  In terms of the staff taking part in exchange programs from 
inside Japan and elsewhere, there are at the present time six 
foreigners here doing doctoral work and another two who are part 
of an organizational exchange program. With 14 people pursuing 
doctorate degrees and another 10 seeking master's degrees, there 
has also been a noticeable increase in the number of people from 
within Japan who are taking part in exchange programs. 
  TY: Next, let's shift our attention to budget 
matters including R&amp;D expenses, payroll, and general 
overhead of 
the facility. I know this will be an important issue in the 
future, so I would like to ask what your plans are for 
recruiting recent college graduates and training these people? 
  SU: Before we talk about that, let's look at the 
number of research papers that have been published outside the 
institute. There were 90 papers published in 1989, 113 in 1990, 
107 in 1991, 118 in 1992. That figure has averaged more than 100 
papers a year. It is somewhat less than the figure for national 
research institutes which average about 134.7 papers a year, but 
I do feel we have done pretty well. 
  TY: I've heard that certain academic groups are 
refusing to publish papers from the TRDI, so I would like to ask 
you which academic groups are publishing your research papers. 
  SU: Well, first of all, there is the aeronautics 
group and the telecommunication group, and recently more and 
more papers are being published by foreign academic groups. This 
has resulted in the registration of industrial property rights 
including both patents and utility models. There were 152 
applications filed in 1989 and 68 of these were registered. In 
1992, 89 out of 97 applications were registered. It seemed at 
the time as if almost every application would be registered. I 
think that the future looks rather bright when viewed from this 
perspective. 
  Now, in terms of the TRDI budget, the budget has been 
growing 
at an annual rate of 10%-20%. It went from 
&yen;92.1 billion 
in 1989 to &yen;136.0 billion in 1993. The greatest part of that 
increase was R&amp;D expenses which climbed from &yen;82.8 
billion 
in 1989 to &yen;123.8 billion in 1993. Overhead expenses also 
rose from &yen;1.8 billion in 1989 to &yen;3.0 billion in 1993. 
I think that this strongly suggests how much more emphasis has 
been placed on the TRDI than on other military facilities. 
  In terms of hiring, the TRDI hired only 13 people in 1989, 
22 
in 1990, 17 in 1991, 23 in 1992, and 23 in 1993. The TRDI has 
been hiring at the rate of more than 20 new people each year. 
  [Main Test and Research Equipment at TRDI: missile 
simulator, 
precision guidance simulator, flight simulator, torpedo 
simulator, domed launch range, explosion-proof rocket firing 
test equipment, fixed ground site for testing armored vehicles, 
high-speed shock equipment, electronic war-games simulator, 
aerodynamic propulsion research facility, and electronic testing 
facility] 
<H5>  Attempts To Internationalize Institute </H5>
  TY: Does the same rule still apply about 
maintaining minimum hiring? 
  SU: It does, but the staff increases since 1992 
have been greater than the staff reductions, and in fact, have 
shown a slight upward tendency. And we are trying to figure out 
the best way to train these new staff members. One of the 
problems is management training. This is because as soon as they 
are hired they are subjected to NPA (National Personnel 
Authority) training, internal bureau training, and TRDI 
training. In the case of TRDI training, a new employee must 
first undergo four days of training by the NPA, then a month of 
initial training for I-type employees, and this is followed by 2 
1/2 months of TRDI training. The TRDI is also being 
internationalized, so a month of training was added last year to 
help develop English conversational skills. This is a privately 
run English conversation school in which new employees enroll. 
We have already started to see some good results from this 
program. 
  TY: I think that's a good idea and we should try 
and see if we can do a better job in advertising that fact. 
  SU: We also train our administrative staff. 
Somewhere between the 6th and 8th year after coming to work for 
the Defense Agency, supervisor level employees must take part in 
a three-week training program sponsored by the NPA, and 
somewhere between the 12th and 15th year, lab directors and 
assistant managers must take part in two weeks of research and 
training. Also, I-type employees at the TRDI with 8-10 years of 
service must go through a three-month management training 
program. In addition to these, we are also offering general 
courses and specialized training at the National Institute for 
Defense Studies for those seeking master's or doctoral degrees. 
We are also sending people to the National Defense Academy for 
postgraduate studies in science and technology, and to the 
National Defense Medical College for postgraduate studies in 
medicine, as well as sending people to corporations for 
training. In the case of staff being sent to corporations, we 
usually send young engineers when we are about to launch a new 
project in order to have them study designs and so forth. As far 
as overseas studies, there are age restrictions (under 30 years 
of age) and candidates have to be screened. The TRDI also has a 
program in which it sends employees with PhDs who are 45 years 
or younger for training at overseas research institutes. These 
employees are more independent, so they can write their papers 
while discussing relevant issues with researchers in overseas 
countries. The benefits of this are that the papers that are 
published in Japan receive recognition and inducements from 
overseas universities. 
  TY: I think that presents an accurate picture, but 
there are some organizational problems in this area as well. 
There are a lot of cases where researchers with PhDs cannot get 
their papers published no matter how hard they try. 
  SU: Recently, though, we have been seeing more and 
more papers being published overseas. I think that this bodes 
well for the future. There is also the chance that we will hear 
nothing from these overseas universities. 
  IT: Are you talking about regular universities or 
military institutes? 
  SU: I'm mainly talking about regular universities 
in the United States. We have nothing going on with military 
institutes. There will be some joint research in the future, 
however, so we may eventually do something with those institutes 
as well. 
  YI: There are some people from the TRDI who are 
taking part in some program at an institute in Canada called the 
National Research Council, aren't there? I believe that the 
Canadian government has provided the institute with money to 
attract top researchers from around the world to come and do 
post-doctoral research. I have also heard of a similar type 
scholarship program in Europe. I believe that having younger 
people from the TRDI taking part in international programs such 
as these will go a long way to making the TRDI more 
international. 
  IT: It wasn't that long ago that we were thinking 
about inviting foreign researchers to the TRDI for one year of 
research, but that project never got off the ground because it 
cost so much money. 
  SU: I think that the cost of taking care of these 
researchers while in Japan is too expensive, and we need to look 
at better ways of doing this. 
  TY: I heard about one case involving a foreign 
researcher who was part of an exchange program at the National 
Defense Academy. The NDA looked at the idea of putting this 
person up in a guest house, but this was too expensive, so they 
used a private apartment instead and made it a short-term 
intensive course. 
  IT: I think it would be nice if the Defense 
Technology Foundation could absorb some of those expenses. By 
the way, what do you think lies ahead for the TRDI in light of 
the end of the cold war, the break-up of the Soviet Union, the 
Persian Gulf War, and the trends in Asia? 
  SU: The effect that the end of the cold war had is 
obvious. I think the Persian Gulf War taught us the following: 
  (1) The importance of continuing to ensure and maintain 
high-quality of defense-related hardware and equipment, that is, 
maintaining technological superiority. 
  (2) The importance of building and regularly using a 
C[.sup]3[/]I system that is able to organically integrate and 
deploy sensors, information, and various types of weapons. 
  (3) The importance of having land, air, and sea transport 
capabilities that enable large quantities of troops and 
equipment to be transported quickly to places in Japan in times 
of emergency, and if possible, organizing this according to 
geographical regions. 
  We are also paying special attention to Asian countries, 
especially as it pertains to the removal of U.S. military 
forces, increases in national defense spending starting with 
China and North Korea, and the progress they are making in 
modernizing arms. I think one of the areas where we ought to be 
paying special attention to is in starting to emphasize R&amp;D 
for 
maintaining technological superiority even in the face of 
military reductions by advanced European countries and the 
United States. On the other hand, we are looking to join up with 
international technical associations in order to compensate for 
the cutbacks in national defense spending and still meet our 
R&amp;D 
goals. I think that this would enable us to share the risks and 
costs, marshal our technologies, and strengthen the bonds with 
those organizations. Under those circumstances, Japan must adopt 
policies that are based, and essentially preserve, the 
U.S.-Japan Security Treaty. It must try to do more in the way of 
providing host nation support, conducting joint training 
exercises between the United States and Japan, and bolstering 
the alliance through technical cooperation including joint 
R&amp;D. 
  Looking at the policies adopted in the current mid-term 
defense plans of the TRDI, we can see the effect that this line 
of thinking has had in the section entitled ``Outline of Defense 
Spending'' regarding main weapons in which it talks about 
``innovating and modernizing equipment based mainly on achieving 
stipulated levels, ...and seeking to further beef up 
behind-the-scenes areas such as technical R&amp;D,'' and also in 
another place in which it mentions ``perfecting advanced 
elementary technologies.'' Therefore, I think we must generally 
keep the following things in mind when planning R&amp;D: 
  (1) That our highest priority, in addition to being in 
charge 
of R&amp;D for the SDF, is taking R&amp;D requests made by 
military 
operations. 
  (2) That we must make improvements and refinements so that 
we 
can modernize existing military equipment to keep up with the 
advances made in technology and the changes in the military 
environment. 
  (3) That R&amp;D on advanced elementary technologies be 
done with 
foresight based on advances in technology. 
  IT: What are the main R&amp;D items that the TRDI will 
be engaged in the future? 
  SU: In the area of aviation, we're working on the 
prototype (4th) of an FS-X next-generation support fighter. This 
is the largest prototype that we have built so far, and we 
expect to be able to do a maiden flight by 1995. Next, we're 
working on a prototype (1st) of a new miniature observation 
helicopter. As a successor to the OH-6D, it will be used by 
either anti-tank helicopter units or division flying units to do 
reconnaissance work, issue warnings, or aerial command and 
control, and will be the first helicopter developed by the TRDI. 
Another project involves the research and prototyping (2nd) of a 
combustion wind tunnel. The tunnel is being built in Higashi 
Chitose and will be used to test the ramjet engines used for 
guided missiles, and to test ducted rockets. The tunnel will 
enable us to ascertain the high-velocity aerodynamic properties 
of items such as the base-bleed shell while being fired inside 
the tunnel. Then, we are engaged in the research and prototyping 
(1st) of a device to test engine performance at high altitudes. 
  YI: When do you think each of these projects will 
be completed? 
  SU: I think in perhaps seven or eight years, but 
when we take into account all the facilities that have to be 
built, it will probably take more time than that. Next, in 
guided weapons-related research, we are prototyping (3rd) a new 
guided fighter missile. The conventional infrared guided missile 
systems used in the Sidewinder and AAM-3 track their targets by 
points, but this new guided missile system will be the first to 
use an image-based guidance system to track its targets. These 
things are incomparably faster than the older antitank missiles 
and short SAM missiles. In other words, both we and the enemy 
are both moving, so the CCD signal processing presents really 
serious problems. It looks like we will be quite hard-pressed in 
developing these technologies. 
  In firearms and military vehicle matters, we are working on 
a 
new fuse for use in mortars. We cannot get a release on the VT 
fuse technology from Great Britain under which the new mortar 
shell is licensed, so we'll have to develop this item on our 
own. The next item involves the research and prototyping (1st) 
of a ground-based robot which is used for land mine processing. 
This is a robot that can skillfully get around different types 
of obstacles. The U.S. and other countries have been working 
exclusively on vehicle-type robots, but the TRDI has been 
working on its own to develop a robot that can perform dangerous 
jobs. This research has also gotten a lot of support from 
various corporations. 
  IT: Do you mean this robot will have the 
capability to detect land mines? 
  SU: The research on land mine detection is being 
done separately. We are looking into ways in which land mines 
can be detected by either infrared radiation, milliwaves, or 
different types of radio waves. 
  IT: Is this part of the joint research work 
between the United States and Japan that the TRDI has been 
involved in? 
  SU: No, it isn't. The robots favored by the United 
States are either self-piloted or auto-loading type robots, so I 
do not know whether the United States has any interest in 
Japanese robot technology or not. It may be that they feel that 
they do not want any of Japan's good technologies, or they may 
feel that their own technology is superior. Now, in warship and 
underwater weapons related matters, we are engaged in the 
research and prototyping (3rd) of the main elements configuring 
a future naval escort. In the area of electronic equipment, we 
are involved in research on sonar for surface ships. Another 
interesting item we are working on is a self-propelled target 
that operates on water. The target is hoisted off a ship by 
helicopter and lowered into the ocean. After being lowered into 
the water, it runs according to a preset program and becomes a 
target for bombs or machine guns from Air Self-Defense Force 
aircraft. The target can be recovered and reused, and is 
programmed so that it can be scuttled. This project is scheduled 
to be ready by 1993. 
<H5>  Japanese Defense Technologies Thin in Many Areas </H5>
  TY: By the way, Mr. Uehara, you mentioned earlier 
about the level of Japanese technology in U.S.-Japan joint 
research. I would like to hear your views about how Japanese 
defense technology stacks up against both European and the U.S. 
defense technology. 
  SU: We are talking here about a variety of 
different technical areas, but taken as a whole, I think that 
U.S. defense technology could be equated to a densely populated 
forest, European defense technology to a regular forest, and 
Japanese defense technology to a sparsely populated forest. I 
think the area where Japan is further ahead is in civilian 
technologies such as semiconductors, composite materials, 
superconductors, and ceramics. The defense-related technologies 
in these areas are quite advanced, and are in no way less 
superior than those in Europe or the United States. When we look 
at each area more closely, however, we see in aircraft, for 
example, that Japan is at about the same level as Europe and the 
United States as far as fast subsonic aircraft go, but Japan is 
no match when it comes to supersonic aircraft. I think that the 
FS-X that Japan is developing will more than hold its own 
against the European EFA (next-generation European fighter) or 
Ruffle. One of the problems, however, is that Japan lacks the 
technologies to develop and manufacture the engines for these 
type of planes, and will more than likely never reach the level 
of the F-22 next-generation fighter used by the U.S. Air Force. 
  IT: Didn't that used to be the advanced-technology 
fighter called the ATF? 
  SU: That's right. I think that this is the top of 
the line as far as high-performance aircraft. The thing that 
stands out most about this plane is its stealth characteristics, 
the generous use of advanced composite materials throughout the 
airframe, aerodynamics, and across-the-board systems such as 
avionics. There is no such system like that in Japan that 
combines all these technologies. There is no question that we 
have outstanding advanced technologies, therefore, I believe 
that we must create as many opportunities as we can to develop 
and nurture our technical strengths. The problem is we run into 
cost problems. The chance to develop defense technologies in 
Japan has been quite limited due to small production quantities. 
Japan is at a distinct disadvantage to Europe and the United 
States in this area. I think that cost will become a more and 
more important issue in the development of different kinds of 
aircraft in the future. 
  In the area of missiles, I think that Japan is on an equal 
footing with Europe and the United States in terms of element 
technologies. In fact, when it comes to propellants and sensors, 
Japan has the better technology. In terms of performance, Japan 
is probably equal to or ahead of Europe and the United States 
when it comes to antitank missiles, antiship missiles, 
short-range air-to-air missiles (AAM), and short-range 
surface-to-air missiles (SAM), for example. We cannot compare in 
the area of medium-range AAMs or medium-range SAMs because we 
have no experience developing these, but I think that Japan 
would compare quite favorably if it were to vigorously apply the 
technologies it has developed and the experiences gained from 
developing prototypes for defense purposes. Japan doesn't know 
much about survivability, however, when it comes to coordinating 
the operations of numerous missiles. As we see by looking back 
at the Rowland vs. short-range SAM debate that caused such a 
stir in the Diet, there is still only a thin understanding of 
the concept of survivability. We could probably attribute this 
to a lack of actual war experience. This is an area where we are 
going to have to get feedback from the troops in the field as we 
conduct military exercises employing missile systems. We feel it 
is important that we gain as much experience as we can in this 
area. The recent reports on the problem of intercepting 
anti-ballistic missiles are true in that Japan has no 
capabilities in this area whatsoever. Therefore, I think that it 
is important that we begin doing some type of research in this 
area. 
  IT: Is this something Japan is really going to get 
involved in? 
  SU: I think that Japan will develop this on its 
own independent of GPALS. In the event that the United States 
asks Japan to do this with GPALS, I think they will request that 
Japan take on areas in which it has expertise, but when they say 
that, we really do not have anything at this point to say back 
in defense of that. 
  IT: Well, if that's the case, do you think that 
they will come back again and request that we take part in GPALS? 
  SU: That is a possibility. If that should happen, 
it would most likely be a political matter that would have to be 
addressed as a whole, not by us, but rather by the Defense 
Agency and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Even if we should 
actually get the go-ahead, Japan still lacks the technical 
capability to take this on. If it becomes necessary, I think 
that we will have to develop it in the future. In specific 
terms, the VT tube of the missile is reported to be no good. In 
other words, it is ineffective unless the warhead splits up with 
a direct hit. Which is to say that because the warhead is big, 
that even if part of the airframe is destroyed, the warhead will 
still be alive and come in and explode and will have the very 
same effect. For that reason, I believe that Japan must have the 
technology for accurately hitting the warhead. 
  TY: With WESTPAC (Western Pacific Missile Defense 
Plan) and GPALS (Limited Anti-Ballistic Missile Defense System), 
this is something that private industry is involved with on 
their own, and that means that the Defense Agency has nothing to 
do with it. 
  SU: The TRDI must be ready to act so that it can 
handle situations when technology becomes necessary as 
technology. 
  Next, in the warship-related area, I think that Japan is 
about at the same level in terms of shipbuilding. However, it is 
behind when it comes to stealth technology and the technology 
for minimizing wave disturbances in the construction of ships. 
Not much has been said about the stealth warship that the United 
States recently made public. The technologies for both designing 
and building an integrated combat command system or aegis system 
are still not developed, but we have started research on a 
combat direction system and things are proceeding smoothly. As 
far as an aegis warships, we are now working on the technologies 
for this by using the technologies introduced with FMS. In terms 
of weapon systems, we are still importing CIWSs and short-range 
SAMs from abroad, but I think we are getting ready to replace 
these with our own technology. In underwater weapons-related 
technology, I think that if the GRX-4 torpedo we're developing 
is successful that this torpedo will be as good as any in the 
world for this type of weapon. We are also getting good reports 
on new ideas in sonar technology at the National Institute for 
Defense Studies. Researchers, for example, are looking into a 
neurochip circuit that can accurately distinguish the sound of 
one target from that of another. 
  Japanese technologies are superior to that of Europe and the 
United States when it comes to electronic equipment, radar, 
computers, and optical fiber. If we were to apply these 
technologies to defense hardware, Japan would immediately be 
able to catch up with the rest of the world. Examples of this 
include the FCS in tanks, the homing devices in missiles, and 
aircraft avionics. Armored vehicle technology is now at the same 
level as that found in Europe and the United States. Japan is 
now first in the world when it comes to hydraulic/pneumatic 
spanning equipment, auto-loading equipment, and especially the 
technology for firing while underway in which FCS stations are 
controlled in an integrated manner. 
  One area where Japan lags behind the West is in ammunition. 
Europe is way ahead of Japan in this area. This is because the 
amount of money invested in this field at the TRDI has been 
extremely small. R&amp;D outlays for ammunition, though, have 
slowly 
started increasing over the past few years. As far as testing 
and evaluation facilities, we just finished work on a domed 
firing range and soft recovery system, and also built a facility 
at the Tsuchiura Research Institute for observing high-speed 
impacts between various phenomena, and continue to build more 
research and testing facilities. We had no choice but to bring 
the 155mm base-bleed shell to the United States to have it 
tested. Much to our surprise, the technical people there seemed 
to be taken aback by the way in which we collected data on the 
projectile. This was because we had the data transmitted by 
radio wave from the fired shell, and the Mach number and drag 
coefficient were displayed instantly in real time under the 
high-impact and high speed conditions. I think that we are a 
good deal ahead of the West in these kinds of technologies. When 
people hear stories such as that, however, they often take it to 
mean that we are much further ahead in ammunition technologies, 
but the truth of the matter is that these are just blips on the 
screen and we still have a lot of catching up to do. 
  TY: I think that one of the reasons why Japan has 
gotten off to such a slow start in this area has to do with the 
fact that there are no modern facilities in Japan where we can 
conduct tests that meet the minimal standards for testing 
ammunition. Another reason for the slow start may be due to the 
fact that we did not create a solid foundation in our initial 
research with simulators at the lab and this kept our research 
from moving to the next stage. I would really like to make sure 
that this problem never happens again. Ammunition technology is 
a little bit different from other advanced technologies as far 
as the relation with manufacturers goes. In other words, since 
there are no dual uses for ammunition, companies are not able to 
invest in this ahead of time and are forced to rely on 
government as a backup. 
<H5>  R&amp;D on Key Basic Technologies </H5>
  SU: Now, with respect to developing defense 
technologies in Japan, I basically feel that there will be no 
change in the current policy of the TRDI being the main party 
responsible for R&amp;D on SDF military hardware. Military 
equipment 
also becomes outdated, so the TRDI is always thinking about ways 
to modernize and improve military hardware. In other words, the 
TRDI will no longer develop things in the way that it always 
has, that is, based on unilateral requests from the military 
operations, but will move toward a system in which it develops 
future generations of hardware that will not have to be upgraded 
or improved for 10 or 20 years. There will be technical advances 
made during that time and these will be incorporated as we go 
along. For that reason, I think that the TRDI must come up with 
new ideas for applying the results from R&amp;D on basic 
technologies that look into the future of military hardware 
based on requests from military operations. 
  TY: In my earlier years, we would have the troops 
in the field test weapons that we had developed. We would then 
get feedback on how well the weapons performed, and this 
information would then be used for making improvements or 
developing new models. We would then consult with the technical 
engineers from military operations or exchange communication 
with them, but this practice did not last very long. What 
happened was that when a problem from the field was relayed to 
higher levels, it would tend to get stuck at that higher level. 
  SU: Well, if something like that is occurring, the 
TRDI should show some willingness to get involved. We have been 
working on that system. 
  TY: Take aircraft, for example, we never have a 
formal version of an airplane. There are always new systems 
being developed to make improvements. Even as the equipment is 
being used, we will make a modification if we run into a problem 
or find new components that employ new technologies. To have a 
formal version of an aircraft is important. Being an age where 
rapid progress is being made in technology, if we try to adopt 
too many new technologies, we delay upgrades to equipment and 
fall behind other countries. 
  TY: You are getting to ECPs (engineering change 
proposals), aren't you? 
  SU: You mentioned it earlier, but we have to 
increase our research on basic technologies in the future. 
Another area where we need to focus our attention is 
internationalizing the institute. It goes without saying that we 
will have to expand the present level of joint R&amp;D between 
the 
United States and Japan. Moreover, we have been getting a lot of 
requests from different people in European and ASEAN countries 
who want to come see the TRDI, and are asking us if there aren't 
areas where we could work jointly in developing technologies. 
The problem with this is that there are already certain 
established channels between the United States and Japan 
regarding technology, and Japan is actually prevented from 
working jointly with countries other than the United States in 
weapons technology related work by the three-point policy 
governing weapons exports. Therefore, I think we have to look 
more deeply into this in order to see if there is some way where 
technical cooperation could be possible. 
  TY: In the 21st century, ASEAN countries will form 
one of the most important political and economic blocks in the 
world, so we must not forget about them. Next, what do you think 
about the private sector role of the TRDI? 
  SU: I do not think we will see much change in the 
private sector role played by the TRDI. That means the TRDI 
intends to keep borrowing on the knowledge and experience of the 
private sector that enable it to do R&amp;D on advanced 
technologies. In comparison, it would be almost unthinkable for 
this to be done under civilian leadership. If private industry 
comes up with something new and interesting, I think that we can 
have it presented to the government, and the government then 
turn it into an R&amp;D project. The TRDI lacks the design and 
manufacturing technologies to handle those types of things, so 
it has to rely on private industry across the board. It is very 
difficult for private companies to maintain large expensive test 
facilities, so I think that the government should be the one to 
maintain such facilities and let them be used by private 
corporations. 
  TY: What do you think the TRDI's role should be 
with regard to basic research? 
  SU: With respect to basic research, we should 
quickly seize on any ideas that the academic community may have, 
but I do not feel that this is the type of work that the TRDI 
should be getting involved with. I think that this is something 
that should be left to universities, and that we have to 
consider basic technologies in the context of long-term research 
and how it is applied to military hardware. Some examples of 
this include the conformal antenna, the IR-CCD, liquid 
propellants, robot technology, and neurochip applications in 
signal processing. Basic technologies may provide the best route 
for developing applications for advanced technologies such as 
these. 
<H5>  Prototypes Plus </H5>
  IT: There has been a lot of talk recently about 
``R&amp;D not predicated on equipment.'' What are your thoughts 
about doing R&amp;D without it being predicated on equipment? 
  SU: This expression has caused a lot of 
misunderstanding. These words were spoken a lot during a recent 
roundtable discussion on defense industry technology and really 
caused a great deal of misunderstanding. If we think about this 
in terms of real problems, when we started doing research on 
future fighter planes and future guided missiles, that research 
did not have a direct link to hardware, but the research was 
conducted anyhow because it was believed that down the road that 
it would be helpful in making later developments possible. This 
is still going on right now. We feel that by doing this we 
reduce the technical risks in developing new items in the 
future. If we receive a proposal to take part in joint R&amp;D, 
it 
gives us some bargaining power to say that we have such and such 
a thing, or we can develop such and such a thing. In order to do 
this, we are talking first about making prototypes of aircraft, 
naval vessels, armored vehicles, and other hardware so that we 
can test the technology. In some cases, this may mean preparing 
one firing unit (one squadron if we're talking about aircraft). 
  TY: In the case of the Ground Self-Defense Force, 
are you talking about something on a scale used in 
non-commissioned officer schools? 
  SU: This is just my opinion, but we should go 
ahead and do something at that level and equip the units in the 
field with it and conduct field tests. I think we can use the 
feedback from that if necessary to put the item into production. 
The chance to develop items from scratch has been diminishing. 
In that regard, I think that we will be OK if we can maintain 
the technology for that, make it possible for the field units to 
become aware of this again, and evaluate it, and come up with 
development configurations. 
  IT: We'll have to make some modifications in the 
R&amp;D directives then, won't we? 
  YI: Well, technology is going to keep improving, 
so even if the military side knows what system it wants, a 
decision cannot be made without data. Therefore, I think at the 
demonstration model stage that we will have to make a certain 
number of units. 
  IT: You're referring to prototype plus, aren't you? 
  YI: Making a lot of prototypes gives us a lot more 
leeway in responding to different demands. Until recently, most 
people thought prototyping was a sort of trial manufacture 
before an item went into production. 
  IT: This is because manufacturers believe that 
they cannot do R&amp;D without it being predicated on a specific 
item. I think what they were concerned about is amortizing their 
R&amp;D costs, but there are other ways of looking at this 
besides 
that. In other words, by revising the system and doing things 
the way that Mr. Uemura recommended earlier, it would not be 
that much different from doing R&amp;D not predicated on specific 
equipment. We also have to consider what the Office of Technical 
Assessment (OTA) in the United States has been saying about the 
era of producing large amounts of military hardware coming to an 
end, and countries having to start thinking about ways to 
cultivate their most important core technologies. In the case of 
Japan, the approach has always been to receive a request from 
military headquarters, and then develop, demonstrate, and test 
that piece of equipment. I think that we have to be able to say, 
even when the request comes from military operations, that we're 
not going to put an item into mass-production, but we're going 
to cut off production as soon as the testing is done. I think 
that we have to consider doing it that way, or another way in 
which the testing and reporting of military hardware proposed by 
the TRDI is tested and reported on by military operations. 
  TY: When it comes to how the United States pays, 
our understanding is that they make full payments at each stage. 
  IT: No, I don't think that is true. The United 
States has been saying the same thing. They used to pay for 
mass-production, but they say that one of the problems they have 
now is that they can no longer do this. 
  TY: Advanced countries have settlement methods 
based on weapons exports, but that is not possible for Japan, so 
it is tougher. 
  SU: The thing that is interesting about the United 
States, for example, is that despite having decided on an 
initial number of B-1B to manufacture, they were suddenly able 
to cut that number midway through production. The problem with 
that type of system, however, is that money is being paid to 
maintain production facilities. What I mean is even when they 
put private industry on hold, they still come up with the 
necessary money. So, if the need ever arises, they can 
immediately increase the quantity in the system. That type of 
thinking is completely alien in Japan. In Japan, whenever the 
pitch of production is dropped, there are no policies about what 
to do with the production equipment. This is a cause of great 
concern. 
  IT: Even the United States has said that it will 
have to revise part of its system in order to adopt the 
prototype-plus approach. I don't know in what areas this will 
happen, but it will involve some new regulations. In that sense, 
I feel that we should come to some type of conclusion in this 
discussion regarding what approach Japan should take in revising 
its system. 
  YI: The U.S. is studying ways of using limited 
budgets, but if things proceed with the military taking the 
initiative based on conventional spin-offs, it benefits private 
industry because it improves their technology, but now this 
philosophy is being somewhat modified. The idea now seems to be 
dual use, that is, to include spin-ons as well. If things go in 
the direction of spin-ons, I think that it will lead to private 
industry looking ahead to the future, the government providing 
the funding, and the equipment and research. In the past, the 
intense competition between companies in the Japanese electronic 
industry created a high technological level in that industry, 
and even threatened the technological superiority of the United 
States, but now the United States is moving in the direction of 
doing all it can to support industry, and this may force Japan 
once again into an era in which it will have to weather intense 
competition. The United States is moving toward a national 
policy of encouraging independent R&amp;D (IR&amp;D), and is 
trying to 
provide funding to companies for R&amp;D if it can be used for 
future defense purposes. This is similar to the subsidy system 
used by MITI (Ministry of International Trade and Industry) here 
in Japan. The Department of Defense is reportedly taking part in 
this project. We have no such system in the defense area in 
Japan, and it would be very hard for Japanese companies to adopt 
such a system because of their independence. 
  SU: I think if we are going to try and attract 
talent from private industry that we will have to come up with 
ways to raise the level of money budgeted for departmental and 
internal research while at the same time increasing the R&amp;D 
budget of the TRDI. 
  Now, about incentives, the TRDI started a special research 
program in 1992. One of the purposes of the program is research 
on future defense hardware. The program budgets between &yen;20 
and &yen;30 million a year on developing promising new 
technologies. Last year there were eight projects, and this year 
an additional five has been added. We have seen an all-out 
effort by younger researchers in this project who have set 
themselves very ambitious goals even at a cost of failure. 
  TY: When Mr. Moriya was the head of the Technical 
Research Division, we attempted a special research program that 
was later called the proposition research program. Does this 
special research program have the same goals as that? 
  SU: It includes both projects that the TRDI is 
working on independently, and projects that involve 
corporations. As far as independent research, it is amazing how 
many unique ideas we are receiving on various types of research. 
It is hard to tell at this point whether we can immediately 
build incentives into this research or not. There has to be an 
environment in which the germ can grow. I think that we should 
design the system so that we can combine the talents of 
companies in the private industry, too. 
  IT: Are you talking about contracts with 
individual companies? 
  SU: It would have to be based mainly on TRDI 
engineers working independently, so the research would only be 
partially supported by corporations. 
<H5>  FS-X Training/TRDI Prospects </H5>
  IT: There was some mention in the newspapers and 
magazines, but could you mind saying something about the current 
status of the FS-X, and something about the first international 
joint development exercises. Would you also say something about 
the five joint U.S.-Japan joint research projects. 
  SU: As far as the status of the FS-X is concerned, 
we were running about two years behind our original schedule, 
but are doing fine now. Late last year, we moved the fighter 
line from General Dynamics (GD) to Lockheed (LFWC). We were 
worried about what effect this would have on the timeline, but 
the chairman (Tellep) promised us there would be no delays. The 
FY93 prototyping budget, which has a contractual base of 
&yen;96.5 billion, is the largest it has ever been. We are 
making steady progress toward developing the first plane by 
1995. The lessons here, in terms of how to apportion demand 
specifications, equipment, costs, and risks, is to adjust for 
the differences in ways of thinking, ideas, and ways of 
processing (technology transfers, development agreements, etc.) 
unique to each country (government, private corporation). This 
took much longer than we thought it would. It was a really 
difficult problem to resolve at the administrative level. 
  In the area of joint research (proposed projects), we're 
doing research on promising technologies that are not directly 
linked to equipment. These include the following six research 
projects: 
  (1) Ducted rocket engines 
  (2) Advanced steel technology 
  (3) Ceramic engines for armored vehicles 
  (4) Milliwave-infrared complex seekers 
  (5) Closed-loop demagnetization technology for steel ships 
  (6) Eye-safe laser 
  We are also looking into whether we can do joint research at 
the practical business level (JWG). If an agreement can be 
reached concerning the allocation of research items, scheduling, 
expenses, it will constitute an item for joint research. If an 
agreement can be reached, a SOW (scope of work) is set up. If we 
can come to terms on how the agreement for joint research will 
move forward, we will conclude an MOU followed by implementation 
of the research. I would like to tell you where we are at with 
regard to each of the research projects mentioned above. In the 
ducted rocket engine research project, we concluded an MOU and 
have already begun doing research. In the advanced steel, 
ceramic engine, milliwave/infrared, and demagnetization 
projects, we are in the midst of studying the research findings. 
In the eyesafe laser project, we are studying the feasibility of 
joint research. 
  Next, I would like to say something about the basic position 
of the U.S.-Japan relationship in particular, and how it should 
be handled? Technical cooperation is one of the links for 
strengthening the U.S.-Japan security arrangement. The flow of 
requests between the two countries has been shifting from a 
one-sided one in which most of the demands come from the United 
States to one that is more two-sided. We are also promoting 
technology transfers based on R&amp;D findings. After this was 
debated, a major prerequisite was an agreement on which way to 
proceed. It is especially necessary for Japan to try and perfect 
basic technologies on its own so that it will have something to 
offer when it comes time to discuss joint research. 
  TY: Our time is running out, so would you say 
something about the recent trend in the United States toward 
isolating itself, technologically. 
  SU: The United States has first-rate technology, 
and it is a matter of personal pride to use that technology for 
rescuing other countries around the world. I think that this 
will continue in the future. 
  Defense technology has a nationality in a certain sense. The 
standing orders of the military is to try and maintain 
technological superiority over other countries. In the case of 
joint R&amp;D with other countries, the United States wants to 
acquire the technologies of other countries without letting go 
of its own technology. It is not so much isolation, but stopping 
the outflow of technology. An example of that type of thinking 
is when Japan asked the United States for a license for MLRS and 
did not get a reply. I do not think that anything can be done 
about this. Therefore, Japan's only way is to quickly achieve a 
comparable level on its own without having to import the 
technology. If Japan is asked by the United States to take part 
in joint research on a defense technology, I think that in some 
cases that it would be determinative to say that we've developed 
such and such a technology. 
  TY: That only goes to show how important and 
critical it is to have bargaining power when it comes to 
technology. I want to thank you very much for taking the time to 
take part in this discussion. (6 June 1993) 
Bibliography 
  Sachio Uehara was born in Okayama Prefecture on 10 November 
1932. In March 1956, he graduated from Tokyo University with a 
BS degree in aeronautics. In April of the same year, he went to 
work for Fuji Heavy Industries where he was in charge of T-1 
maneuverability and aerodynamic design. In February 1960, he 
joined the Defense Agency where he was assigned to the 4th 
Development Corps under the TRDI R&amp;D Officer where he oversaw 
guided weapons. While serving here, he conducted research on 
ways of designing missile systems. In September 1963, he 
received his master's degree from the California Institute of 
Technology. In the following year, he returned to Japan. 
  In August 1966, Mr. Uehara resumed work at the Defense 
Agency 
in the Aircraft Division in the Bureau of Equipment. During that 
time, he was put in charge of R&amp;D, procurement, supply, 
maintenance, and management of aircraft in the Maritime 
Self-Defense Force, and was the person responsible for handling 
accidents and upkeep involving Self-Defense Force equipment. 
Later, he was put in charge of the Air Self-Defense Force. In 
April 1968, he was assigned to the 1st Development Corps under 
the Technical Development Officer in the TRDI as the chief 
researcher in charge of aircraft. While serving here, he had a 
hand in developing the T-2, and was also in charge of 
aerodynamics, construction, reliability, and upkeep. In 
September 1971, he returned again to the California Institute of 
Technology to pursue his doctorate degree. In June 1949, he 
received a PhD in aeronautics and then returned to Japan. 
  In October 1974, he became the head researcher in the 3rd 
Development Corps of the TRDI. During that time, he was in 
charge of developing the F-1, developing applications for PASPA 
and carbon-based composite materials as part of future aircraft 
research, and planning the T2-CCV. In September 1977, Mr. Uehara 
enrolled and later completed courses at the National Institute 
for Defense Studies. In August 1978, he was appointed head of 
one of the research labs (4th) in the TRDI No. 3 Research 
Institute, Airframe Department. While serving in this capacity, 
he conducted in-house tests on the P2V-VSA and flight tests on 
the PS-1ATS. In December of the same year, he was appointed head 
of the Guided Weapons Lab in the Aircraft Division of the Bureau 
of Equipment. Here, he developed the domestic AIM-7F and AIM-9L, 
organized development of the ASM-1, took part in Diet debates 
over the adoption of the short-range SAM, and designed ways to 
improve the short-range SAM. 
  In December 1981, Mr. Uehara became the special assistant 
for 
research and development in the Bureau of Equipment. While 
serving in this position, he took part in discussions between 
the United States and Japan regarding technical cooperation and 
third party weapons export, and participated in the 3rd, 4th, 
and 5th S&amp;TF conferences. In May 1984, he was appointed to 
director of the TRDI No. 3 Research Institute. While serving in 
this position, he supervised mechanical and fatigue strength 
tests on the T-4, and structural tests on the composite 
materials used between the main wing spars. In March 1986, he 
became head of the Technology Department in the TRDI. Here, he 
was commissioned to do applied research on AI servicing 
equipment. In April 1987, he became the head of the Planning 
Department in the TRDI. In this capacity, he established 64 
long-term projects, and proposed various topics for joint 
research between the United States and Japan. In April 1989, he 
was appointed director of the TRDI No. 3 Research Institute. 
While holding this position, he installed a flight simulator, 
and reported the research findings on the structure of composite 
materials at a high-level meeting of the executive board. In 
November 1990, he was appointed counselor of the Defense Agency, 
which put him in charge of technology. While holding this 
position, he served as a Japanese delegate, and as Japanese 
chairman in the S&amp;TF executive level council. In December 
1992, 
he assumed his present position as director of the TRDI. 

