BFN 

<F P=106> [Ivan Pavlov report in the "Parliament" column: "The Duma </F>
Voted by Secret Ballot. The Idea of Imperative Mandate Has 
Again Been Rejected"] 
  [Text] The State Duma yesterday yet again met a request 
from the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia [LDPR] leader and 
decided to vote on an amendment moved by the party's Duma 
faction to the law on the status of deputies to the Federal 
Assembly on the so-called imperative mandate. Under this 
amendment, the powers of a deputy elected on a party slate, 
except for some of the provisions enumerated in the law, are 
also terminated when a particular deputy leaves his faction 
without its consent or when he is expelled. Furthermore, his 
powers are terminated in the event that he is struck off the 
party slate on the decision of the supreme party body. 
  Vladimir Zhirinovskiy made a speech again, drawing attention 
to the obscure status of those deputies who, if they have left 
their faction, find themselves in a strange position: They will 
have neither a territorial nor a federal constituency. Mr. 
Zhirinovskiy stated that the Duma has no need for "dead souls," 
describing the actions of such deputies as "treachery, pure and 
simple:" He has received a mandate from his party and then 
walked out on it. Vladimir Borzyuk, a former member of the LDPR 
faction, objected to his former boss to the effect that he is 
the last man who should talk about honor and dignity because he 
himself has violated party rules, having forced a recent party 
congress to recognize him as a single and omnipotent leader. 
  On a Russia's Choice proposal, voting on the imperative 
mandate amendment was by secret ballot. Only 150 deputies voted 
in favor, with 173 against and 11 abstentions. It could be 
supposed that along with the LDPR, the idea of imperative 
mandate was supported by part of the communists and agrarians 
who are not particularly worried by the problem of "internal 
serfdom" -- so far they do not have even potential fugitives -- 
and also, possibly, by part of Russia's Choice. It was not 
accidental that the day before yesterday this faction's session 
was attended by an LDPR envoy, calling for the imperative 
mandate provision to be approved. It is not ruled out that this 
appeal fell on fertile soil because Russia's Choice regional 
chapters were somewhat angry at Gennadiy Burbulis, who left 
their faction the same day. 

