BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Yuriy Grachev] </F>
  [Text] Vladivostok, 22 Apr (ITAR-TASS) -- Following an item 
published in TOKYO SHIMBUN newspaper, Pacific Fleet commander 
Admiral Georgiy Gurinov denied reports about the danger of 
radiation from broken-down Russian submarines. "Clearly, certain 
circles in Japan have felt the need to whip up passions over the 
problems involved in burying radioactive waste," the admiral 
declared in an interview with an ITAR-TASS correspondent after 
hearing of a recent item in the Japanese newspaper claiming that 
the Pacific Fleet is keeping four nuclear submarines laid up "in 
an extremely dangerous state, since the nuclear fuel has not 
been removed from them owing to accidents and faults that 
occurred during their activities as part of the Russian Pacific 
Fleet." 
  We thank the Japanese paper, the admiral remarked, not 
without irony, for displaying its concern for Russian citizens. 
But Japan has enough problems of its own. It too discharges 
liquid radioactive waste into the sea. Yet no one creates any 
particular fuss about it on the islands. 
  But it is not only our neighbors, Georgiy Gurinov said, but 
also specialists in the United States, France, Britain, and 
other developed countries who are struggling, so far 
unsuccessfully, to solve the problem of what to do with the 
harmful waste. Like us, they too either discharge it into the 
sea or bury it in the ground. 
  As for the "four submarines", the admiral commented, first 
the figure is exaggerated, and second they are being reliably 
monitored and constitute no danger to the inhabitants of the 
Primorye and even less to the Japanese. The vessels have been 
withdrawn from the Pacific Fleet's complement of vessels, the 
reactors are idle, and, in time, they will be broken up. 
  The whipping up of passions, Georgiy Gurinov stressed, is a 
tried and tested device of some politicians. In order to 
achieve their aims, they even fail to notice the obvious fact 
that the recent tripartite expedition of the scientific research 
vessel Okean, which toured the radioactive waste dumping sites, 
convinced world opinion that the radioactive background in the 
Sea of Japan is within normal limits. 
  "I can state authoritatively," the Pacific Fleet commander 
assured the correspondent, "that there is no danger to anyone 
from the submarines in question, and, if no means of processing 
the radioactive waste on shore is found, life itself will force 
us to discharge it into the sea again." 

