BFN 

  [Text] Paris, 19 May (NOTIMEX) -- On 18 May, Mexico became 
the 25th OECD member and the first Latin American country to be 
admitted into this organization, which includes the world's most 
highly industrialized nations, the OECD has reported. 
  In a communique released on 18 May, the OECD reported that 
the Mexican Government had submitted the necessary instruments 
for its admittance after completing the internal legal 
requirements demanded by the Mexican Constitution. "As of this 
date, Mexico officially is a member of the organization," the 
communique said. 
  According to OECD statutes, Mexico will be governed by the 
same economic policies applicable to the other members, the 
world's most highly developed countries. Now that Mexico has 
joined the so-called Industrialized Nations Club, Mexico will 
cease to receive assistance funds for development from the group. 
  The OECD does not establish regulations on or provide loans 
to member countries. The OECD's function is to establish 
standards, regulations, parameters, and continuity levels of 
economic development. Not long ago, the OECD also pledged to 
defend the world commercial agreements' benefits for developing 
nations, particularly within the framework of the GATT Uruguay 
Round. 
  In April, during the closing of the GATT international trade 
negotiations held in Marrakesh, Morocco, it was agreed to create 
the World Trade Organization. 
  The OECD was founded in Paris on 14 December 1960 to 
stimulate the adoption of policies aimed at improving living 
standards in member countries, attaining sustained growth, 
reducing the unemployment rate to its minimum, and ensuring 
financial stability. Other purposes are to establish policies 
for the expansion of international trade with undiscriminating 
multilateral bases, supported by international obligations with 
organizations such as the World Bank and the IMF. 
  The OECD was founded by the 12 European Union member states, 
five member countries of the European Free Trade Association, 
Turkey, Canada, and the United States. With Mexico's entry into 
the organization, the three NAFTA member countries are the only 
countries of the American continent to become OECD members. 
  The OECD member countries in Europe are: Spain, France, 
Great 
Britain, Ireland, Italy, Denmark, Germany, Belgium, The 
Netherlands, Luxembourg, Portugal, Greece, Switzerland, Sweden, 
Norway, Finland, Iceland, and Austria. Members from Asia and 
Oceania are Japan, Turkey, Australia, and New Zealand. Japan 
was admitted in 1964 and Finland in 1969. New Zealand, the 
country that joined before Mexico, was admitted in 1973. 
  Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and ROK, among others, have 
expressed interest in joining, but membership is possible only 
by invitation. Of the countries that have requested admission, 
only the ROK is being considered by OECD. The organization has 
established a number of "political preconditions" to accept a 
country as a member. Such requirements include that the country 
have a democratic government and a market economy. According to 
the organization's regulations, however, the essential 
requirement is the consensus of all member states regarding the 
"guest." 
  In 1991, Mexico expressed interest in joining the OECD and 
increased its presence as an observer to the various OECD 
committees. Mexico received the official invitation on 14 April 
and on 18 May it became a full-fledged member with the duty to 
follow the standards established for the most highly 
industrialized countries. 
  A few days ago, Mexican Foreign Secretary Manuel Tello said: 
"Mexico's admission does not mean that the country will become 
rich overnight." Nevertheless, Mexico's incorporation into the 
OECD is expected to have an influence on the flow of foreign 
capital and the investors' decisions. 
  Finally, OECD economist Jean Pierre Garcon has said: "The 
fact that Mexico has been accepted with the consensus of the 
member states means that Mexico is regarded as a partner that 
can participate on an equal footing in the activities of the 
world's most highly developed countries." 

