BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 16 Apr (PL) -- GRANMA today reports that 
reactionary and right-wing groups in Miami have made threats 
against the Cuban people, its leaders, and those Cuban 
immigrants seeking to normalize ties with the island. 
  Saturday's edition of the official paper of the Communist 
Party of Cuba mentions the use of several Spanish-language radio 
stations to broadcast lies and insults against the population 
and members of the Cuban community abroad who do not support 
their campaign, and instead respect the accomplishments of the 
country's social system. 
  As an example, GRANMA cites the radio commentaries of 
journalist Agustin Camargo who recently asked for "a three-day 
license to kill in Cuba when the Revolution falls." 
  Commenting on what it calls savagery, the GRANMA article 
signed by Juan Marrero, compares that segment of immigrants to 
the most well-known fascists in the world. 
  "Neither hatred nor thirst for vengeance against Cuba have 
been laid to rest by these people," the article states, while it 
describes as just the Cuban Government's decision to exclude 
elements with these characteristics from the upcoming meeting of 
the emigre community. 
  Regarding this, GRANMA emphasizes that on the eve of "The 
Nation and the Emigre Community" conference to be held next week 
in Havana, "messages of deep-rooted hatred toward the 
revolution" have intensified in Miami. 
  In this sense, the article mentions the threats issued by 
the 
Alpha 66 terrorist group, which has declared among its "military 
objectives" all persons who visit Cuba, speak with its 
authorities, or give the country direct or indirect support, 
regardless of their nationality or the kind of support, warning 
that they "will suffer the consequences, inside or outside of 
Cuba." 
  In conclusion, GRANMA condemns those groups who "only want 
to 
maintain the privileges they obtained at the expense of U.S. 
Government funds, or to increase those privileges if they can 
convert Cuba into a territory free for looting and pillaging." 
  Other sources also have indicated that these rightist groups 
are making threats against members of the Cuban community abroad 
who have been invited to speak with the Cuban authorities. 

