BFN 

  [Text] Michio Watanabe, who is chairman of the Watanabe 
faction in the opposition Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] and 
former deputy prime minister, presented Ichiro Ozawa, secretary 
general of Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], on 18 June with a 
draft policy agreement and a blueprint for "a new coalition 
government to be formed mainly by conservatives and centrists." 
This has been disclosed by several members of the ruling 
coalition parties and a senior member of the Watanabe faction. 
The draft policy agreement and the blueprint for a new 
coalition government are that the LDP and Shinseito will reach a 
policy agreement, including the reform of the current tax 
system, to form a new coalition government, with the Japan New 
Party [JNP] and Komeito [Clean Government Party] participating 
in the new coalition government. The ruling coalition parties, 
former Prime Minister Nakasone, Watanabe, and some LDP members 
are making moves to forge a "conservative-conservative 
coalition," but, this is the first time that the specific 
blueprint for forming a new coalition government has come to 
light. Differences still remain between Watanabe and the ruling 
coalition parties over Watanabe's secession from the LDP, and it 
remains unclear whether the Watanabe-proposed blueprint will win 
much support or not. 
  As for Japan's diplomacy and security, the draft policy 
agreement notes that Japan should make aggressive contributions 
to UN peacekeeping operations (PKO) on the "basis of 
international pacifism." As for domestic policy, the draft 
policy agreement stresses the need to reform the current tax 
system as "one of the aggressive measures to prepare Japan for a 
society of senior citizens." 
  The blueprint for a new coalition government notes that: 1) 
The LDP and Shinseito will form a new coalition government with 
other parties that share their political beliefs and policies; 
2) the JNP and other parties which agree with their policies are 
urged to participate in the new coalition government; 3) the LDP 
and Shinseito will choose a candidate for prime minister; and 4) 
the coordination of views among parties for selecting candidates 
to run under the single-seat constituency system will be 
withheld for the time being. The blueprint does not mention the 
opposition Social Democratic Party of Japan. 
  Ozawa has a history of strongly backing Watanabe as a 
politician to succeed Hosokawa as prime minister. Meanwhile, 
Nakasone has advocated the need to "rally conservative parties 
and centrist forces." Ozawa and Nakasone are said to have met 
secretly in late May to agree in principle on the need to rally 
the conservative parties and centrist forces, although they have 
denied that the secret meeting took place. 

