Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Ahmad Muwaffaq Zaydan] </F>
  [Text] Peshawar--Reliable sources with connections to the 
Tajik opposition told AL-HAYAH yesterday that the leaders of the 
opposition have offered a detailed plan to the Pakistani 
Government to settle the conflict in Tajikistan. 
  These sources added that the settlement formula was offered 
by Turadzhonzoda, the former chief qadi of Tajikistan who is the 
military commander of the [Islamic] Revival Party, the strongest 
of the Tajik parties, and by Davlat Usmon, the prime minister 
before the Communists took over the regime. 
  The formula, which the two leaders laid out in a meeting 
with 
Pakistani Foreign Minister Sardar Asif Ali at the end of last 
month in the Pakistani capital, will be included in a conference 
in which the Tajik opposition, the government, and 
representatives from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, Saudi Arabia, 
and the Islamic Conference Organization will participate. During 
it, a neutral government will be formed to run the country for a 
limited time after which general elections would be held. The 
conference will possibly be held in March in the Pakistani city 
of Lahore. 
  Sources near Turadzhonzoda told AL-HAYAH yesterday that the 
latter suggested putting peacekeeping forces in place from Iran, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan to take the arms out of Tajikistan and 
work to establish security in the country. The sources conveyed 
Turadzhonzoda's fear that a failure to disarm will lead to 
bloody civil wars, especially since vengeance is deeply rooted 
in the Tajik mind and may turn the situation there into another 
Afghanistan. 
  An informed source says that all sides agreed on the plan 
and 
Asif Ali Khan had presented it this month to the Asian republics. 
  Uzbekistan, (the big brother) of the Asian republics, 
aspires 
to play a prominent role in solving the Tajik conflict, fearing 
that it will extend to its territory. Some 25 percent of the 
population of Tajikistan is Uzbek, and there are a million 
Tajiks in Uzbekistan. For this reason, Uzbekistan is attempting 
to impose its own counsel on these republics. Uzbekistan also 
does not hide its discomfort with the presumptuous Russian role 
in Tajikistan, which has issued its own currency to replace the 
ruble. 

