Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [All figures as published] </F>
  [Text] Bangalore -- India will continue to develop its 
nuclear energy programme, especially in the field of fast 
breeder reactors in the overall interest of development and 
improving the quality of life of the citizenry Atomic Energy 
Commission Chairman R. Chidambaram asserted here on Monday [10 
Jan]. 
  Inaugurating a four-week residential course on "An 
integrated 
approach to knowledge, and information" at the National 
Institute of Advanced Studies. Chidambaram pointed out that 
there were many dimensions to nuclear energy, the generation of 
electricity being only one facet of the country's nuclear 
programme. 
  Over the years the spin-off from nuclear research had 
enriched industry, helped medical sciences and boosted 
agriculture. BARC [Bhaba Atomic Research Center] for example 
had played a vital role in the agriculture sector by creating 
new pulse varieties. In Maharashtra farmers who cultivated 
BARC-developed pulse varieties 31000 hectares in 1989 had been 
so impressed with the yield that they increased their sowing 
area to 2,00,000 hectares by 1993. 
  He said nuclear energy would be increasingly used in the 
country in the 21st century as conservationists were up in arms 
against mega hydel projects and the heavily polluting thermal 
projects. 
  Chidambaram pointed out that efforts were on to make use of 
India's vast reserves of thorium which were five times more that 
the uranium reserves. "Our pressurised heavy water reactors use 
uranium, hence work is on to make greater use of thorium. At 
Kakrappa, in Gujara we have made a beginning. But much more 
needs to be done," he said. 
  Chidambaram said that India's safety record in the running 
of 
its nuclear power plants had been very good. "The truth is that 
the dangers of radiation are more pronounced at radiology 
departments and at X-ray units where proper precautions are not 
taken. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was studying ways and 
means to reduce the danger posed to patients, he said. 
  Later, participating in the Foundation Day celebration of 
the 
Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE) he called upon the 
scientists to make use of the synergistic strengths of various 
research organisations across the country to contribute to the 
growth and development of the nation. 

