Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anton Buteyko, Ukrainian presidential </F>
adviser, by Francoise Delstanche in Brussels on 18 January: 
``Kiev Expresses its Faith in the Face of the Agreement on 
Denuclearization''; first four paragraphs are L'ECHO 
introduction] 
  [Text] Anton Buteyko believes that the West is focussing 
too much attention on nuclear affairs. Moderately optimistic 
about the nuclear agreement for the future since, according to 
him, the president has met Parliament's demands, Kravtchuk's 
adviser sees no progress being made on the dossier regarding the 
Black Sea fleet. 
  The tripartite agreement between the United States, Russia, 
and Ukraine, signed last Friday in Moscow, was saluted yesterday 
by the European Union as ``an important contribution to 
international security and stability,'' albeit on condition that 
it be implemented rapidly, failing which any delay would be 
considered with great anxiety. 
  The practical implementation of the agreement effectively 
depends on the backing of the Ukrainian Parliament in Kiev. Not 
directly, but with respect to the conditions that it imposed on 
the ratification of the Start I agreement on the reduction of 
strategic nuclear arms, and on the ratification of the treaty on 
nuclear nonproliferation, both of which Washington had laid down 
as preconditions. However, the Ukrainian leaders are proving 
relatively confident on these points. That is what was 
explained to us yesterday by Anton Buteyko in an interview given 
while passing through Brussels. However, he believes that the 
West is focussing too much attention on the nuclear problem and 
forgetting that other elements are emerging as definitely just 
as important. Consequently, he argues, the development of equal 
relations with the European Union would contribute to the 
stability of the region. 
  Moreover, in his opinion, only Ukraine can check the 
pressure 
in Russia caused by new political forces like that of 
Zhirinovskiy. For, in his view, the renaissance of these fascist 
movements is a menace not only to Ukraine, but also to Europe as 
a whole. 
  Delstanche: Do you think it will be easy to obtain 
the Ukrainian Parliament's support for the tripartite agreement 
on denuclearization? 
  Buteyko: The agreement does not formally require 
ratification. On the other hand, when Parliament ratified the 
Start I treaty, it voiced a certain number of reservations, in 
particular concerning the security guarantee for Ukraine, and 
the provision of technological and financial assistance in the 
context of disarmament. In fact, it must be clear that when 
Start I was negotiated, all the arms to be destroyed had to be 
eliminated using the combined economic resources of the USSR as 
a whole, whereas now we would have to destroy them using our own 
resources. That, however, is impossible in view of the economic 
crisis ravaging our country. Furthermore, the destruction of 
this arsenal will benefit the Western nations at which the arms 
in question were aimed. Therefore, it is logical that they 
should contribute to that process, for we are contributing to 
their security. Then again, Parliament has asked for 
compensation for the material contained in the tactical and 
strategic arms handed over to Russia. 
  In addition, it must be remembered that the negotiations 
were 
launched at the initiative of Ukraine, but that neither the 
United States nor Russia took our interests into account. It 
was Parliament's decision regarding the Start I treaty that 
provided a positive impulse in the negotiations. All the more 
so since we also understood that it was impossible to resolve 
certain matters on a bilateral basis. 
  Delstanche: So what is the next stage in the 
implementation of this agreement? 
  Buteyko: The president could now come to the 
Parliament and explain that he has met the conditions laid down 
when Start I was ratified, and that this treaty can now take 
effect. It will then be up to Parliament to approve the 
president's arguments, or not. 
  We think that Parliament will give us the green light, and 
we 
are going to work toward that. Admittedly, the approach of the 
March elections could lead some members of Parliament to exploit 
this to further their own personal interests, but despite all 
that I am continuing to hope that the ``ayes'' will have it. 
  Delstanche: And do you imagine achieving this 
during the present legislative period, which will end next March? 
  Buteyko: It is still our intention to achieve 
Parliament's backing, but if we do not, then we will be back in 
charge under the next Parliament. 
  Delstanche: A debate flared up last September 
between Kiev and Moscow regarding an agreement on the sale of 
the Ukrainian share of the Black Sea fleet to Russia in return 
for the cancellation of the bilateral debt. What stage have the 
talks on this subject reached? 
  Buteyko: At the end of the meeting on 3 September 
1993, a joint press release stipulated that the two delegations 
had to draw up recommendations over the following months on all 
the decisions made within that context, while taking account of 
all the ideas expressed and the specific agreements already 
concluded at that meeting. Since then, there have been two 
rounds of talks, but the Russians intend to consider only their 
own proposals. 
  Meanwhile, we have said that Ukraine would agree to divide 
the fleet in two, but not the associated elements of 
infrastructure. The Russians can by all means pay for using 
those. 
  Delstanche: And what about the bilateral debt? Is 
the fate of this debt still in abeyance? 
  Buteyko: Everyone in the West forgets that in 
September 1992 the heads of state of the CIS agreed to share out 
the property of the former USSR among the new states. Under the 
terms of this agreement, Ukraine should have received 16 percent 
of the assets of the old state, as well as gold and diamond 
reserves. However, Moscow never implemented this agreement. If 
our energy debt is compared with the Russian failure to return 
these assets to Ukraine, then it is Russia which is indebted to 
us, not the other way round. 
  Having said that, the tripartite agreement included the 
provision that compensation for the material contained in the 
arms will more or less cover the bilateral debt. The experts 
must now decide on the value of this material. 
  Delstanche: There are some people in Ukraine who 
seem to think that this agreement constitutes a victory for 
Russia above all... 
  Buteyko: This trilateral agreement opens up the 
way to the destruction of the nuclear monster, and the whole 
world will gain from this. However, even more specifically, it 
is Ukraine which insisted on continuing the negotiations on 
guarantees and compensation, and that is the reason why things 
have now been resolved. 
  So you can judge who the victor is. Which does not mean to 
say that Russia and the United States are also gaining from it. 
  Delstanche: Can Ukraine have faith in the Russian 
commitments regarding its security? 
  Buteyko: This aspect of the agreement still 
depends on the Ukrainian Parliament's ratification of the treaty 
on nuclear nonproliferation. However, if that is the case, then 
the two countries, the United States and Russia, undertake to 
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine as 
well as the inviolability of its borders. In the past, this had 
never been recognized in any document coming from Moscow. 
Admittedly, in the past, many agreements have not been 
implemented, but now the United States is a party to the 
agreement, which gives us cause to hope that it will be 
respected. 

