Faced      with continuing budget cuts and low morale, the Russian 
military has turned to the electronic media in an effort to build 
greater public support for the Armed Forces and military 
spending.  Apparently convinced that electronic media are more 
effective means for influencing public opinion than traditional 
print media, the Ministry of Defense has expanded its television 
and radio production capabilities while substantially reducing 
the number of ministry-sponsored newspapers, magazines, and 
journals.  As a result, radio and television programming written 
and produced at the Ministry of Defense has begun appearing 
regularly on the national radio and television networks.  While 
it is too soon to tell if the effort is having the desired 
effect, defense ministry programming, which often plays to 
Russians' sense of injured national pride, could end up 
strengthening Russian nationalism. 

The Central Television and Radio Broadcasting Studio of the 
Ministry of Defense ("VoyenTV") was created less than two years 
ago as a broadcasting service aimed mainly at servicemen, but the 
ministry now appears to have enlarged its mission, using it as a 
tool to influence public opinion at large on problems facing the 
armed forces: 

-- When the ministry announced the creation of its own television 
and radio studio in September 1992, studio chief Aleksandr 
Yakubovskiy said the studio would "inform the Russian and foreign 
public" of developments within the armed forces, but suggested 
that its main mission was to broadcast to military personnel and 
to coordinate the work of smaller military radio and TV studios 
operating in military units around the country.  According to 
Yakubovskiy, the intent was to facilitate the "normal activities 
of military personnel," and to "promote the revival of military 
traditions, cultural enlightenment of soldiers and officers, and 
the preparation of draftees for service in the armed forces." 
Yakubovskiy added that the studio had arranged to broadcast its 
programs through the Russian Radio and Television Broadcasting 
Company (RTV) and stressed that the ministry studio was "a 
component part" of RTV (ITAR-TASS, 23 September 1992). 

-- Over the next 18 months, studio officials began describing the 
studio's mission in broader terms and its programming expanded 
rapidly into the civilian electronic media, suggesting that the 
Defense Ministry is placing increased emphasis on communicating 
through such media and targeting its communications at the 
general public.  Perhaps reflecting an enhanced estimation within 
the ministry of the importance of electronic media, Yakubovskiy 
said in a 27 April 1993 interview that radio and television are 
"where the future lies; it is the future of all mass information 
media" (Ostankino TV).  In a 23 October 1993 interview with 
Krasnaya Zvezda, deputy studio chief Vladimir Borovyak described 
the studio's mission as to help implement "Russia's military 
policy," foster an "understanding of the problems of war and 
peace," provide "correct information" about life in the army and 
navy, and assist in the "struggle against unbridled pacifism." 
Radio and television reports produced by the ministry studio have 
been carried not only on RTV but on the Ostankino Radio and 
Television Broadcasting Company (OTV) (See Note 1) as well as 
regional and local broadcasting outlets.  According to Borovyak, 
ministry-produced reports are included on "Vesti" and "Novosti"- 
-the main news programs of RTV and OTV, respectively--and full- 
length specials produced at the ministry were appearing on 
national and regional networks (Krasnaya Zvezda, 23 October 
1993).  In addition, the studio's radio reports are now being 
aired regularly by Radio Mayak (which is part of OTV), Radio 
Rossii (which is part of RTV), and Moscow Radio International 
Service, in addition to the ministry's own frequencies, which are 
aimed at Moscow, the Baltics, the.Caucasus, and Central Asia 
(Radio Mayak, 23 July 1993; Radio Rossii, 30 October 1993; Moscow 
Radio International Service, 23 November 1993). 

(Note 1) RTV and OTV are the only national radio/television 
networks in Russia.  Both are government owned and are overseen 
by the Federal Television and Radio Broadcasting Service, headed 
by Aleksandr Yakovlev. 

Defense Ministry television products, which are often identified 
onscreen by the "VoyenTV" or "Radar-TV" (See Note 2) logos, 
consist of background video footage provided in support of 
military-related news, audio-visual reports that are carried as 
part of regular newscasts, and prepackaged programs of varying 
length that are broadcast periodically.  In addition to "Vesti" 
and "Novosti," military television contributes to the morning 
program "Utro" (OTV), the weekly military-affairs programs 
"Poligon" and "Military Review" (OTV), and reportedly to the "Man 
and Law" (OTV), "Far from Moscow" (RTV), and "Key to the Start" 
(network affiliation unknown) programs.  Military television also 
produces at least two weekly programs of its own-- "Military 
Courier," which airs on RTV, and "VoyenTV On The Air," which airs 
on the "Northern Crown" regional network--and has reportedly 
produced documentaries on the arms trade, the Russian 
contribution to the 1993 Le Bourget air show, and the airborne 
troops, each of which, according to military TV chief Borovyak, 
aired first on OTV and then in some cases was repeated on 
regional channels. (See Note 3) 

(Note 2) The "Radar-TV" logo represents the Television and Radio 
Society, also called "Radar," which was inaugurated in February 
1991 under sponsorship of the then-USSR Ministry of Defense. 
"Radar" appears to have survived the USSR's breakup primarily as 
a producer of relatively in-depth radio and television programs 
sometimes in conjunction with the ministry's Central Radio and 
Television Broadcasting Studio.  While the exact relationship 
between Radar-TV and VoyenTV is unclear, their missions seem to 
be the same.  Radar-TV's original director, Col. Valeriy 
Voloshin, said in 1991 that the goal of the Radar studio would be 
"to raise the prestige of the armed forces, to strengthen the 
unity of the army and people, and to promote army reforms" 
(Moscow Radio Domestic Service, 13 December 1990; Pravda, 22 
February 1991). 

(Note 3) The information on military TV's contributions to the 
"Man and Law," "Far from Moscow," and "Key to the Start" programs 
and its documentary productions comes from Borovyak's 23 October 
1993 interview with Krasnaya Zvezda.  The information on its 
production of "Military Courier," "VoyenTV On The Air," and its 
contributions to "Vesti," "Novosti," "Utro," "Military Review," 
and "Poligon" comes from the Borovyak interview, program videos 
displaying the "VoyenTV" or "Radar-TV" logos, and television 
listings in Sem Dney, Krasnaya Zvezda, Moskovskaya Pravda, and 
Moskovskiy Komsomolets. 

The Information War 

The expansion of military TV and radio programming is in part an 
effort to counter what the military portrays as inaccurate or 
biased coverage of military issues by the civilian media.  In a 
17 February Krasnaya Zvezda article, Maj. Gen. Yevgeniy 
Korotchenko, a professor at the General Staff Academy and a 
frequent commentator on military affairs, suggested that unnamed 
forces are deliberately engaged in a war of disinformation to 
exploit Russia's weakened state.  Characterizing information as a 
"weapon," Korotchenko chided the "public mass media" for 
"falsification and manipulation of facts," adding that 
television, in particular, can be "an agent for social 
degradation."  Korotchenko suggested that the military address 
the problem by aggressively rebutting such misinformation through 
"television and radio appeals, direct contacts, press 
conferences, and briefings."  Korotchenko noted the "special 
role" of television in influencing the populace and said TV "is 
becoming the predominant means of information in the armed 
services." 

Allegations that civilian media misinform the public about the 
armed forces and calls for the military to take corrective action 
have been a consistent theme in the military media since the 
Russian Armed Forces were created two years ago: 

-- The May 1992 edition of Armiya carried an article asserting 
that an "information vacuum" about the armed services was being 
filled by large-circulation civilian publications, such as 
Komsomolskaya Pravda and Izvestiya, which provide only "an 
extremely approximate depiction" of military life, with the 
result that "people have begun to fear military service." 

-- In an interview published by Krasnaya Zvezda on 11 September 
1992, then-chief of the Defense Ministry Press Service Valeriy 
Chirvin said the ministry wanted to establish "a partnership" 
with the news media to counter "hearsay, unverified information, 
and sometimes outright lies." 

-- More recently, Chief of the General Staff Col. Gen. Mikhail 
Kolesnikov condemned "pseudosensationalistic stories, unconfirmed 
facts, rumors, conjecture, and sometimes even barefaced lies" in 
the civilian news media, adding that the military should "stop 
being always on the defensive" and more assertively combat "liars 
and spreaders of disinformation and calumny" (Krasnaya Zvezda, 16 
March).  (See Box for information on military efforts to suppress 
critics of defense ministry policies in the independent press and 
electronic media.) 

Until recently, the ministry appeared pleased with the results of 
its effort to reach the public through television.  In October 
1993--a year after the studio was created--Krasnaya Zvezda 
correspondent Igor Yadykin praised military TV, asserting that it 
has "already managed to sear us" with the "harsh truth of 
soldiers' gray daily routines" and claiming that military TV "is 
beginning to win prestige among viewers" (23 October 1993).  In a 
similarly upbeat comment in the same article, Borovyak said the 
studio is planning new programs, including "news and analysis and 
topic-related programs," has established relationships with 
civilian production studios for production of specials on 
military topics, and hopes to inaugurate "educational programs 
for cable television and satellite television." 

More recently, however, the ministry's Central Television and 
Radio Studio has reportedly been subjected to severe criticism 
within the ministry, possibly because some in the ministry 
thought that the studio did not do enough to aid the military's 
effort to increase the 1994 defense budget.  According to 
Komsomolskaya Pravda (26 May), Gen. Vladimir Kosarev, the chief 
of the ministry's Information and Press Directorate, which 
oversees the studio, "came down like a ton of bricks" on the 
studio for failure to "give wide and full representation . . . of 
the process of developing the Russian army" and accused the 
studio of "financial irregularities" and "nepotism."  In an 
indication that he continues to support the ministry's efforts at 
publicizing the army via television and radio, Kosarev reportedly 
called for replacing the studio leadership with "more experienced 
cadres." 
Military Journalists' Unacknowledged Roles 

In addition to placing programs produced at the Ministry of 
Defense studio on civilian television, some VoyenTV 
correspondents also report on military affairs for civilian news 
and military-affairs programs without acknowledging their ties to 
the Defense Ministry, thus further expanding the military's 
influence over programming on military and security issues: 

-- Aleksandr Ostrovskiy, a correspondent and director for VoyenTV 
productions, is also a frequent contributor to OTV programs, 
including Novosti, Utro, and Itogi, even though his connection 
with VoyenTV is often not acknowledged (OTV, 19 January 1993, 18 
July 1993, 17 November 1993, 9 January, 2 February).  In his 
unattributed reports, Ostrovskiy often deals with military- 
funding problems, placing the blame for these problems in typical 
VoyenTV fashion on the Ministry of Finance or the government in 
general while avoiding criticism of Defense Ministry officials or 
policies (OTV, 21 April 1993, 15 May 1993, 26 June 1993, 9 
January, 2 May). 

-  While Ostrovskiy is associated mainly with OTV, his VoyenTV 
colleague Igor Krondo has provided similarly uncritical military 
news for RTV as a reporter for Vesti without acknowledgement of 
his military links (RTV, 3 October 1993, 14 October 1993, 31 
October 1993, 6 November 1993).  In early 1994, the Defense 
Ministry announced that Krondo would host VoyenTV's new "Military 
Courier" program, and since then he has not been observed to have 
appeared on Vesti (Krasnaya Zvezda, 22 January). 

-- Other VoyenTV correspondents who have doubled as reporters for 
civilian TV without always acknowledging their VoyenTV connection 
include Mikhail Zverev (Vesti and Novosti), Aleksandr Ilyin 
(Vesti and Novosti) and Viktor Tkachenko (Vesti and Novosti) 
(RTV, 14 July 1993, 13 November 1993, 22 April 1994, 28 April 
1994; OTV, 21 April 1993, 26 April 1993, 27 July 1993, 18 
November 1993). 

Military Television:  The Message 

The cumulative effect of military television programming has been 
to juxtapose Russia's potential as a great power with the reality 
of the country's current political and economic decline.  This 
effect derives from three themes that surface often in military 
TV programming:  the high technological achievements of Russia's 
military-industrial complex, the deleterious effect of budget 
cuts on armed forces research and development, and the plight of 
the average serviceman--especially low pay and lack of housing. 
Examples abound: 

-- Military television reports on Russian military-technological 
achievements are usually rife with hyperbole and comparisons with 
allegedly inferior Western efforts.  A segment on the weekly 
VoyenTV program "Military Courier" extoled the new SU-34 bomber 
as a machine that "has its own features, its own bearing, its own 
fighting spirit, and its own purely Russian unpredictability.  It 
was created for us, for our spirit, for the defense of Russia" 
(RTV, 20 January).  A newly developed combat helicopter, the KA- 
SO "Black Shark," was described as "one of the best combat 
machines of the future" whose aerodynamic qualities are" 
unrivaled." A new troop transport vehicle was heralded as 
"unparalleled in the world," and a new multiple rocket launcher 
was championed as "unique" and "superior" to American models 
(Military Courier, RTV, 28 January, 11 February, 11 March). 

-- Military TV reporting on the effect of military budget cuts 
are often linked to the prospect of Russia losing its superpower 
status.  On 25 April 1993, a VoyenTV segment on OTV's weekly 
"Military Review" program criticized a government order blocking 
further development of the MiG-29M "superfighter," which the 
program characterized as unsurpassed in aerial combat.  "Clearly 
we are once again making a mistake here," the correspondent said, 
adding, "surely it is not necessary to go to such unreasonable 
lengths" to cut defense spending.  During a 9 January segment on 
OTV's "Poligon" program, VoyenTV correspondents praised Russia's 
Typhoon-class ballistic missile submarines as the "pride and joy" 
of the Russian Navy and unequaled in the world, only to add 
gloomily that budget problems threaten not only the Typhoon but 
"the very future of the Russian Navy" (9 January).  More 
recently, VoyenTV has addressed the recent battle over the 
defense budget in even blunter terms.  For example, a 27 May 
segment on "Military Courier" (RTV) claimed that continued 
production of the Russian SS-25 mobile ICBM--"our latest and most 
powerful missile"--might have to be "substantially curtailed" 
because of the shortage of finance, thus "impairing" the missile 
force's "combat readiness."  In a direct challenge to the 
legislators, correspondent Tkachenko asked rhetorically, "Will 
Russia continue to be a great power, or will it turn into a 
banana republic?  Today this does not depend on the missile 
troops but on the politicians." 

-- Military television portrays the average serviceman as 
increasingly despondent over the lack of social and material 
support.  A 1992 documentary produced by Radar-TV painted a 
disturbing picture of the strategic missile forces, citing 
mounting social tension" and "thousands of officers with no 
housing, officers who have lost all hope that they will ever be 
able to live in normal conditions" (OTV, 22 November 1992).  A 27 
April 1993 VoyenTV report on "Utro" described the severe housing 
shortage for reserve officers, highlighting an interview with the 
weeping wife of a reserve officer about to be evicted (OTV).  On 
another VoyenTV report, the commander of the airborne troops 
complained of a shortage of food and housing at some garrisons, 
adding that "not a single soldier being withdrawn [from former 
Soviet republics and Eastern Europe] has an apartment" (Moscow 
Central TV, 1 August 1993).  More recently, according to a 
VoyenTV report, the lack of housing and pay delays of up to three 
months contribute to "a very depressing picture" for servicemen 
(OTV, 23 February). 

Military Radio 

Although perhaps lacking the impact of television, radio 
programming attributed to the Ministry of Defense has expanded 
even faster, enjoys more airtime, and covers a wider scope of 
subjects than military TV.  The ministry inaugurated a 25-minute 
program, "Radio Slavyanka," over Mayak Radio (which is part of 
OTV) in July 1993.  "Radio Slavyanka" has since begun daily 30- 
minute broadcasts aimed at Russian troops in Tajikistan (August 
1993), daily two-hour shortwave broadcasts to the Baltics, the 
Caucasus, and Central Asia (October 1993), and apparently 
continuous broadcasts on its own frequency to the Moscow area 
(January 1994).  "Radio Slavyanka" also began broadcasting over 
Radio Rossii (a part of RTV) in January 1994, announcing that it 
had arranged to provide 1O-minute newscasts three mornings a week 
plus a 35-minute program every three weeks (Mayak Radio, 23 July 
1993, 6 August 1993, and 1 February; Radio Rossii, 1 November 
1993 and 16 January 1994). 

While military radio covers many of the same topics as military 
television, the medium appears also to serve as a forum for top 
military officials.  Statements by or interviews with Defense 
Minister Pavel Grachev, Chief of Staff Kolesnikov, deputy defense 
ministers, and chiefs of the armed forces branches are aired more 
frequently on military radio than on military TV.  For example, 
Grachev used military radio on numerous occasions during and 
after the 3-4 October 1993 crisis to praise the performance of 
the military and to assure listeners that the military was under 
control.  Military radio also carries more "straight" news 
reporting on a wider variety of topics, including CIS and foreign 
affairs, than military TV.  "Radar" radio--the broadcasting 
cousin of Radio Slavyanka--mainly airs interviews on defense- 
related issues with leading officials, but has not been observed 
to have aired since 3O December 1993, suggesting that the "Radar" 
radio studio is being phased out or integrated into Slavyanka 
(Mayak Radio, 27 September 1993, 30 December 1993; Radio Rossii, 
6 October 1993, 12 October 1993, 16 January, 20 February; Moscow 
Radio, 21 April). 

"Optimizing" the Military Press 

The expansion of Russian military involvement in the electronic 
media appears in part to be an effort to compensate for the 
reduced influence of military newspapers, magazines, and 
journals, which have suffered in recent years from declining 
subscriptions and rising costs. (See Note 4)  As early as May 
1992, the military journal Armiya was mourning the falling 
prestige and subscription rates of military publications, 
recalling that before the breakup of the Soviet Union, well- 
funded military publications catered to a broad range of readers 
"and enabled Russia's military-political leadership to exert an 
appropriate degree of influence upon the public mind" (No. 9, May 
1992).  In August 1992, the Defense Ministry newspaper Krasnaya 
Zvezda, noting the "disastrous rise" in production costs, said 
that the armed forces' reduced ability to reach military 
pensioners and other constituents was impeding-their ability "to 
influence [the] solution" of military problems  (1 August 1992). 

(Note 4) According to the May 1992 edition of the journal Armiya, 
not a single military publication printed then at the Krasnaya 
Zvezda printing plant was profitable.  The journal reported that 
1992 subscriptions to Armiya, Krasnaya Zvezda, and "the 15 or so" 
national military magazines had dropped by SO percent from 1991, 
while the cost of subscribing to these and other national armed 
forces periodicals increased on average by a factor of 10 to 12 
during the first half of 1992.   According to print-run data 
published in each edition of Krasnaya Zvezda, for example, 
1,059,353 copies of the newspaper were printed on 31 October 
1991--before the breakup of the Soviet Union; 650,651 copies were 
printed on 3O June 1992--six months after the union's collapse; 
and only 160,000 copies were printed on 20 April 1994.  According 
to Maj. Gen. Kosarev, chief of the ministry's Information and 
Press Department, in 1993 the army published a total of 102 
periodicals (national and regional), at a cost of slightly over 1 
billion rubles (ITAR-TASS, 11 February 1994). 

In response to the financial crisis, the ministry announced in 
February that it would reduce the number of newspapers and 
magazines, eliminating some and consolidating others (ITAR-TASS, 
11 February). (See Note 5)  Maj. Gen. Kosarev, chief of the 
ministry's Information and Press Department, cited financial 
problems, the overall reduction in the numerical strength of the 
armed forces, and the existence of "unnecessary" military 
newspapers as reasons for the cutbacks.  Those that remain, he 
added, will be "optimised"--meaning they will be upgraded with 
improved equipment.  Kosarev said the changes, when combined with 
increased television and radio output, "will allow us to make the 
Defense Ministry's mass media more compact, to make effective use 
of the authority of the military press, and to increase its 
influence on our society and on the army." 

(Note 5) According to a 13 March RTV report, five journals- 
-Aviatsiya I Kosmonavtika (Aviation and Space), Vestnik 
Protivovozdushnoy Oborony (The Air Defense Herald),  Voyennyy 
Vestnik (The Military Herald), Voyenno-Ekonomicheskiy Zhurnal 
(The Military-Economic Journal, until recently called The Armed 
Forces Rear Services), and Teknika I Vooruzheniye (Equipment and 
Arms)--will be combined into one--Armeyskiy Sbornik (The Army 
Collection).  In addition, three educational-analytical journals- 
-Armiya (Army), Sobesednik Voyna (The Soldier's Interlocutor), 
and Argument (Argument)--will be consolidated into a journal to 
be called Oriyentir (The Orientator), which is scheduled to begin 
publishing in July 1994.  Other accounts say that Syn Otechestva 
(Son of the Fatherland), a weekly newspaper that was first 
published in 1812, is to be closed (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 2 
February; Obshchaya Gazeta, 11-17 February). 

Implications 

The ministry's effort to use civilian radio and television 
programming to publicize the achievements of and difficulties 
faced by the armed forces probably represents its assessment that 
propagating what it considers to be an accurate picture of 
military life will increase public support for the armed forces. 
The effort could, however, have other effects on public opinion. 
By contrasting past achievements with the depressing economic 
realities in Russia today, it is likely to reinforce a sense of 
wounded national pride, which could fuel Russian nationalism.  As 
the ministry's media activities increase--and they are supported 
by a new bureaucracy reportedly significantly larger than that 
which existed under the USSR Ministry of Defense--and if 
alternative views of the military are stifled, the effect could 
be to reinforce a sense of loss of national prestige among the 
Russian people, strengthen the appeal of authoritarian forces in 
society, and weaken the forces of democratization. 

Box 

       Ministry of Defense Efforts to Suppress Media Criticism 

In addition to its effort to provide the mass media with 
information that supports its interests, the Russian Ministry of 
Defense has also shown a willingness to use pressure tactics to 
try to suppress critics of the ministry in the print and 
electronic media.  While most of the ministry's efforts have not 
succeeded in removing its critics, evidence suggests that it has 
succeeded in toning down the criticism: 

-- In November 1992, Grachev reportedly tried to have the 
occasionally irreverent RTV military-affairs program "Aty-Baty" 
taken off the air and replaced by a Defense Ministry production. 
According to Interfax (25 November 1992), Grachev said he had 
convinced President Boris Yeltsin to instruct then-Minister of 
the Press and Information Mikhail Poltoranin "to consider the 
expediency" of continuing the program.  Grachev, according to 
Interfax, complained that "Aty-Baty" had a "clear anti-army 
bias."  Although "Aty-Baty" remains on the air with a contract 
reportedly extending through 1994, program director Igor 
Serebryakov later acknowledged that the program's "objective 
position" causes "anger and resentment among very many forces" 
and that "a very powerful pressure has been applied to our 
journalists since the creation of the company and it continues 
even now" (RTV, 31 July 1993).  In fact, "Aty-Baty" programming 
since Grachev's attack has lacked the feisty irreverence of 
earlier programs, which probed such issues as the sudden 
resignations of reform-minded advisers to Grachev (31 October 
1992) and carried interviews with members of officers' assemblies 
critical of ministry policies (6 December 1992).  More common now 
are relatively bland programs on topics such as military training 
institutes (19 December 1993, 9 January 1994, 6 March 1994) or 
interviews with Duma members who offer only guarded criticism of 
the ministry (20 February 1994).  The change in tone did not go 
unnoticed by Pravda, which reported on 11 June 1993 that "Aty- 
Baty," fearful of losing its contract, had decided to "fawn up" 
to Grachev. 

-- In December 1992, Lt. Col. Aleksandr Zhilin, the reformist 
editor-in-chief of the military affairs weekly Armiya Rossii,* 
was dismissed from the army, reportedly on Grachev's personal 
orders (Izvestiya, 14 January 1993).  Officially dismissed for 
participation in a commercial publication," many observers 
believe Zhilin was fired for publishing criticism of the Defense 
Ministry in Armiya Rossii (Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 29 January 1993; 
Kuranty, 11 February 1993).  Zhilin himself said in an interview 
that Grachev was "alarmed" by Armiya Rossii articles blaming the 
Defense Ministry for corruption in the armed forces and alleging 
that the army was nearing "a social explosion" (OTV, 12 February 
1993).  The newspaper continued publishing through at least March 
1993, after which it was no longer observed, and since then 
Zhilin has continued his criticism of the ministry as a 
commentator for Moskovskiye Novosti (19 May 1993, 21 November 
1993, 2 February 1994). 

-- In a 25 November 1993 article, Komsomolskaya Pravda military 
correspondent Igor Chernyak, whose "Military Review" column 
occasionally criticized Grachev, wrote that Komsomolskaya Pravda 
had been "crossed off the list" of newspapers invited to a 
Defense Ministry briefing.  Chernyak suggested that the the paper 
was excluded because it published complaints from army officers 
that, "to put it mildly, do not flatter the military department." 
Three months later, the Defense Ministry newspaper Krasnaya 
Zvezda carried a blistering attack on Chernyak in an 
unattributed, front-page article.  The military newspaper accused 
Chernyak of "repeatedly publishing unverified facts or 
information known to be false."  Krasnaya Zvezda labeled one 
Chernyak report--on the alleged resignation of Army Chief of 
Staff Kolesnikov--as "an attempt to sow enmity . . . and thus 
weaken one of the most stable of state institutions--the Russian 
Armed Forces" (19 February).  Although Chernyak continues to 
write about the armed forces in Komsomolskaya Pravda, another 
journalist, Aleksandr Khokhlov, has authored the "Military 
Review" column since 1 March.  Thus far, Khokhlov's articles have 
avoided the kind of personal barbs that Chernyak occasionally 
aimed at ministry leaders.  The switch to Khokhlov--a veteran 
Komsomolskaya Pravda writer whose service on the paper predates 
the breakup of the USSR--may have been intended to molify the 
Defense Ministry and regain access to ministry briefings, which 
Khokhlov evidently is allowed to attend (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1 
March, 22 March, 13 April, 27 April, 1 May). 

*The newspaper was reportedly cofounded by the Russian 
Information Agency (RIA), the independent military-affairs 
information agency MARS, and the Committee for the Social 
Provision for Servicemen of the Russian Ministry of Defense 
(Radio Rossii, 22 November 1992; Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 29 January 
1993; Kuranty, 11 February 1993).  See FBIS Foreign Media Note FB 
PN 93-085, "Defense Ministry Slammed for Firing 'Armiya Rossii' 
Editor, Other 'Dissident' Groups," 26 February 1993, for more 
details surrounding the firing of Zhilin. 

End Box 

(AUTHOR:  ROBERTON.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 
ENEAG/BLOUGH/SDJ 22/1910Z Jun 

