Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The president of the Republic, Lieutenant 
General 'Umar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir, has confirmed that the 
expulsion of the British ambassador in Khartoum was in response 
to his interference in the internal affairs of the country at a 
time when the Sudanese people were celebrating the passing of 38 
years since Sudan received its independence and since the 
expulsion of the British colonialists. Within this framework, 
ladies and gentlemen, revolves the radio commentary on the news, 
written and read by our colleague Abd al-Amin Awad. 
  [Begin Al-Amin Awad recording] Through the treatment and 
[word indistinct] in the British media of the question of the 
expulsion by the Sudanese authorities of the British ambassador 
in Khartoum, and the reactions which followed here and there, it 
will appear to any observer of this intensive media interest 
that the British Government aims at transforming Sudan's request 
into a diplomatic crisis and perhaps to sever relations 
[qati'ah] with Sudan. This is a baffling matter for many 
reasons, including the fact that when Sudan presented its 
legitimate demand to the British Government it did not commit a 
prohibited act but was exercising its natural right, which it 
has earned by reason of its sovereignty and its affiliation to 
the civilized world as well as the treaties, regulations, and 
laws which regulate that affiliation accepted by members of the 
international community, including Britain. [passage omitted] 
  With an objective understanding of the expulsion decision, 
the British message to Sudan, which speaks about the need for 
Sudan to reconsider the expulsion of its ambassador in Khartoum, 
appears as a waste of time without any benefit. 
  Indeed the British Government reached the level of insolence 
and triviality when it fixed a 4-day period for receiving a 
reply from the Sudanese Government on the reconsideration of its 
decisions. This is a naked challenge revealing the extent of 
arrogance and vanity with which the empire wants to deal with 
its colonies over which the sun has already set. The British 
ambassador in Khartoum (?thinks himself) in the position of the 
British high commissioner of those far-off days. 
  It is incumbent upon the British Government to realize that 
the Sudanese decision was not a hasty decision and has no direct 
link to the visit of the archbishop of Canterbury to Sudan even 
though the matters relating to the visit were the last straw 
that broke the camel's back. Sudan has shown a great deal of 
patience concerning the reckless practices and [word indistinct] 
behavior of Mr. Peter Streams, the British ambassador, monitored 
by the security services. They were practices and behavior that 
Britain would not accept in terms of the level of its relations 
with Sudan, neither would Sudan accept them in its relations 
with the British Government and people. [passage omitted] 
  We look forward to the British Government's dealing with the 
Sudanese decision with (?wisdom) far from convulsive reaction to 
Sudan. It should think carefully before proceeding to take a 
silly step making things even worse by increasing its 
estrangement with Khartoum, particularly as relations were, in 
fact, lukewarm if not tense between the two countries. [end 
recording] 

