Regulation 

<F P=102>   94CE0367A Beijing GUANLI SHIJIE [MANAGEMENT WORLD] in 
Chinese No 1, 24 Jan 94 pp 54-59 </F>

<F P=103> 94CE0367A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUANLI SHIJIE [MANAGEMENT WORLD] </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Qiu Xiaohua (6726 2556 5478) of the State </F>
Statistical Bureau; edited by Jiang Dongsheng (5592 2639 3932): 
"The Current State of the Economy and the Next Stage of 
Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Countermeasures"] 
  [Text] As 1993 is history and 1994 is here, a review of 
China's economic operations over the past year leads to the 
general conclusion that our economy is operating on a sustained 
high-speed track, with our 1993 GDP up about 13 percent from 
1992; our macroeconomic regulation and control has begun to 
bring results, with some improvement of the excessive chaos in 
our economic order, and the overall situation developing in a 
positive direction. But existing problems remain glaring, and 
we are still waiting for the arrival of a good economic cycle. 
In the next stage, we will need to pay attention to 
controlling our macroeconomic regulation and control dynamics, 
by continuing to adjust and optimize our economic structure, 
striving for development in the midst of intensified reform, and 
solving existing problems while developing, in an effort to keep 
our national economy developing both quickly and soundly. 
<H5>  I. Our Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Brought </H5>
Positive Results, With Our National Economy Continuing To Grow 
Rapidly 
  In 1993, the Chinese economy went through an operating 
process of sharp change, with our macroeconomic climate 
gradually easing up, and the situation tending to stabilize. 
  At the beginning of 1993, all parties were full of 
enthusiasm 
for seizing opportunities, starting projects, and striving for 
speed, with a great amount of construction going on, and 
accelerated economic growth. In the first quarter, our GDP was 
up 14.1 percent from the same period in 1992, with all 
reproduction links showing strong growth momentum. Meanwhile, 
our macroeconomic climate was showing signs of being too tight, 
with the overall assessment of our prosperity being that we had 
entered a "red-light" zone, our finance, banking, commodities, 
and foreign exchange all showing signs of being out of balance, 
and all parties beginning to worry about whether our economy was 
too booming. 
  By the second quarter, pushed by high investment and a large 
money supply, our economic fever did not subside, forming a 
climate of getting going and going all out, with all of our key 
economic indicators in a skyrocketing state. By June, our 
industrial production growth rate had reached 30.2 percent, with 
our fixed assets investment growth rate at 76.7 percent, our 
retail commodity sales growth rate at 28.4 percent, and our 
money supply growth rate at 54.1 percent, all at peak values for 
the economic cycle, and the overall assessment of our prosperity 
being a continued flashing of the "red light." Meanwhile, 
inflationary pressures began to be released faster, with market 
price rises entering the 10-percent warning zone, and all 
parties beginning to feel that our economic operations had begun 
to deviate from a basically normal track. 
But by the third quarter, the center took a series of steps to 
tighten macroeconomic regulation and control, beginning to 
produce certain results in economic activities, which could be 
seen mainly in the following three areas: 
<H5>  A. Our Economic Disorder Definitely Improved, With Our </H5>
Macroeconomic Climate Gradually Stabilizing, and All 
Investment Components Restrained Somewhat. 
  1. Our financial order improved, with our financial 
situation 
tending to stabilize, which could be seen in a clear rise in 
savings deposits, and in the curbing of arbitrary lending, 
fundraising, and establishment of financial institutions. 
Starting in May, savings deposits grew more each month than in 
the same months in 1992. They grew 20.8 billion yuan in May, 
33.2 billion yuan in June, 40.5 billion yuan in July, 36.2 
billion yuan in August, and 31.1 billion yuan in September. By 
July, overall savings deposits had begun to reverse their state 
that had appeared for a time since the beginning of the year of 
less growth than in the same period in 1992. From June through 
September, they grew 141 billion yuan, 80.3 billion yuan more 
than in the third quarter of 1992, growing again in October and 
November 36.4 billion yuan and 33.6 billion yuan respectively, 
for respective growth higher than in the same months of 1992 of 
20 billion yuan and 19.7 billion yuan. This played a very 
crucial role in changing the conflict of the overall shortage of 
bank fund sources. For the first half, bank loans increased 
slowly, due mainly to the appearance in our economic activities 
of "a plate with no funds," exactly opposite to 1992's "funds 
with no basket." And then in the two months of July and August, 
we had to implement the spirit of recouping loaned funds, so 
that until 15 August, our whole banking system was essentially 
controlling quite tightly the granting of loans. By the end of 
August, our banking system's net loan-fund balance was only 55.2 
billion yuan, which had been 105.9 billion yuan at the beginning 
of the year. But by the end of October, as our overall 
specialized-bank provision-fund-rate had picked back up to over 
10 percent, higher than normal, with banks equipped with the 
possible terms to maintain stable credit-fund growth, our 
financial situation had tended to improve. Meanwhile, on our 
foreign exchange conversion market, the exchange rate of the RMB 
to the U.S. dollar had stabilized at a more rational position of 
8.7:1. 
  2. Our tax-revenue order improved, with progress in 
increasing revenues. On one hand, we had overfulfilled our 
treasury-bill sales, bringing 30.5 billion yuan into the 
treasury by August, with tax revenues clearly up. Our revenues 
for the third quarter were up 27.3 percent from the same period 
in 1992, changing the situation of high economic growth with low 
revenue growth, with our overall revenue growth up from the 
first half's 1.4 percent to 11.4 percent for the first three 
quarters. By the fourth quarter, with the approach of 
tax-sharing reform, state revenue for October and November grew 
at a sustained rate of over 40 percent. State revenues were up 
for the first 11 months 18.3 percent from the same period in 
1992. Of course, in our revenues, certain localities did a 
crash job of storage to expand their revenue bases, resulting in 
some false components. 
  3. Our circulation order began to improve, with capital 
goods prices down but stable, and our overall capital goods 
supply and demand having undergone a great change, in which the 
phenomenon of profiteering and speculating in capital goods was 
clearly restrained, with prices back down. Construction-use 
rolled steel prices are now back down from June's 4,100 yuan a 
ton to 3,050 yuan, and are in a sustained decline. 
  4. Our stock market, futures market, real estate, and 
development zone order improved, beginning to get onto a more 
standardized control track. In our eight coastal provinces, 
autonomous regions, and municipalities, the number of 
development zones was down from 1,200 to only a little over 200, 
with others still being inventoried. Our real estate also 
cooled down, with real estate prices in the coastal zone back 
down about 20 percent, now in a basically stable state. Our 
futures and stock markets grew stably, with our overall economic 
order beginning to improve, and speculation clearly down. 
<H5>  B. Our Economy That Had Been Overheated for a Time Began To </H5>
Cool Down, While Generally Still Maintaining a High Growth Rate. 
  1. Our excessively high industrial growth rate receded 
somewhat. Our industrial growth rate dropped from June's 30.2 
percent to 25.2 percent for July, 23.4 percent for August, only 
19.1 percent for September, and down to 16.4 percent by October. 
Later, as the state eased credit, the enterprise fund-shortage 
conflict improved somewhat, with production growth halting its 
drop to rebound to 18.9 percent by November, for growth of 22.7 
percent for the first 11 months. 
  2. Investment expansion was controlled somewhat. Our 
national investment rate peaked in June at investment growth of 
76.7 percent for state units, then dropping to 71.3 percent for 
July, 58.1 percent for August, and further to 56.5 percent by 
September. 
  New project starts were also definitely controlled, down by 
3,300 for the third quarter. In October and November, 
state-unit investment growth basically stabilized, for an 
average growth rate of about 56 percent, with investment for the 
frst 11 months at 552.7 billion yuan, up 63.9 percent from the 
same period in 1992. Meanwhile, national priority construction 
certainly increased, with sharply increased investment in the 
transportation and post and telecommunications industries in 
particular, where growth for the first 11 months was more than 
double that for the same period in 1992, to top 20 percent of 
overall investment for the first time. 
  3. Markets were brisk but stable. Consumer goods markets 
grew more stable by the month, with consumer purchasing 
intentions changing from the first half's buying of 
basically expensive, high-quality commodities as a hedge 
against inflation to more normal consumption starting in July, 
when the prices of expensive, high-quality commodities clearly 
fell back to stabilize the overall consumer goods market. Our 
retail commodity sales growth rate of 28.4 percent for June and 
26.5 percent for July dropped to 23.8 percent for August and 
further to 21.6 percent by September. And while it was 21.1 
percent in October and 22.9 percent for November, for a certain 
pickup, it was up only 22.3 percent for the first 11 months as 
compared to the same period in 1992 and, when adjusted for 
inflation, the last half's consumer goods purchases were down, 
showing that consumption had cooled somewhat. This was more 
evident in group consumption, where the first half's high growth 
of more than 30 percent dropped back to a little over 20 percent 
for August and September, and further to under 20 percent by 
October and November. In capital goods markets, the sales drop 
was even more obvious, with the first half's capital goods sales 
growth of almost 50 percent back down to 27.3 percent by the 
third quarter, including a sharp drop of 3.6 percent for 
September, with some capital goods changing to oversupply, which 
was more evident particularly in the motor vehicle market. 
  4. Government spending was controlled somewhat, with 
spending 
growth for the first half at 12.5 percent, but only 1.3 percent 
for July through September, bringing the growth down to 7.3 
percent for the first three quarters, for a definite change in 
the high growth of spending. But in October and November, 
stimulated by tax-sharing reform and affected by the peak 
spending period, spending grew at a sustained high rate of over 
30 percent, bringing growth for the first 11 months to 13.9 
percent. 
  5. Our money supply growth rate was clearly down. As to the 
available M[.sub]1[/] that reflects the money supply (in the 
narrow sense), the M[.sub]1[/] growth rate was basically 
normal for July, at 19.7 percent for August, 20.4 percent for 
September, and also basically stable at about 20 percent for 
October and November. This shows that potential inflationary 
pressures had begun to weaken. For the third quarter, 19.2 
billion yuan less currency was put into circulation than in the 
same period in 1992 and, while this figure rose somewhat in 
October and November over the previous months, it was still 
lower than for the same period in 1992. This monetary state 
shows that the fastest results achieved in this macroeconomic 
regulation and control were a clear control of overall monetary 
demand, the response to which in economic activities will show 
up gradually. 
  As our economy cooled down, the tight relations between 
supply and demand began to improve with the gap down nearly four 
points from the first half. Our macroeconomic-monitoring 
index-system shows that our overall economic operations have 
dropped back from the middle and upper limits of the "red-light" 
zone to the upper limit of the "yellow-light" zone. 
<H5>  C. Our Reform and Opening Intensified Steadily. </H5>
  1. A high tide of reform was surging, with macroeconomic 
reform plans about to go into effect throughout China, overall 
national market reforms making clear progress, and the 
enterprise mechanism-conversion having begun. Our 
market-regulation role is now growing sharply, with 
regulation-establishment in intense progress. 
  2. Our opening to the outside world was vigorous but stable. 
(a) We spent more foreign investment. For the first four to 
five months, foreign investment in China was brisker, with our 
signed foreign-investment agreement amounts and actual spending 
of foreign investment both essentially doubling and redoubling. 
In the first 10 months, we actually spent over $17 billion in 
foreign investment. (b) Our foreign trade grew steadily, 
grossing $164.2 billion for the first 11 months, up 16.5 percent 
from the same period in 1992 which, in light of the overall 
international situation, was not bad. (c) Our international 
tourism maintained its good momentum, with the numbers of 
visitors to China and foreign exchange earnings both growing 
faster. 
<H5>  II. The Problems Facing Us Remained Quite Glaring, Which </H5>
Could Be Seen in Three Areas: 
  A. Market Prices Rose Sharply, Making 1993 the Third Year 
Since Reform in Which They Rose More Than 10 Percent. 
  In the first 11 months of 1993, our national retail prices 
rose 12.4 percent, with cost-of-living prices up 13.9 percent, 
of which new price-rise factors made up over 80 percent. Prices 
rose more than 10 percent in all 30 provinces throughout China. 
Urban prices rose even more, with employee cost-of-living 
prices for the first 11 months in the 35 large and medium-sized 
cities up 19.3 percent from the same period in 1992. Glaring 
price problems remained prevalent. But why was our economy 
cooling down while prices remained high? And why were over 90 
percent of our consumer goods markets in long supply or 
basically balanced as to supply and demand while market prices 
were still rising sharply? My personal view is that the 
contrast or lack of synchronization between high price rises and 
a cooling economy was due mainly to: 
  1) As prices are a lagging indicator, the high prices were 
an 
aggregate lagging reflection of previous high economic growth, a 
loose money-supply policy, and sharp price-reform dynamics. As 
to economic growth, price levels are tied to economic 
prosperity, which phenonenon exists not only in developing 
countries, but also in developed ones where, every time economic 
growth accelerates, inflation worsens. In 1992, once we began to 
enter a stage of high-speed growth, prices also rose faster, 
with 1992 price rises picking up to 5.4 percent, reaching 6.8 
percent by December. In 1993, prices rose 8.4 percent in 
January, 10.2 percent in March, 10.9 percent in April, 12.5 
percent in May, 13.9 percent in June, 14.9 percent in July, 15.1 
percent in August, and 14.5 percent in September, which was tied 
to the previous sustained high-speed economic development. As 
to the money supply, 1988 growth of the money supply in the 
narrow sense, M[.sub]1[/], fell below 10 percent, bringing 
correspondingly lower prices. But beginning in 1992, 
M[.sub]1[/] accelerated to 20-30 percent, reaching a high of 
41 percent by April, bringing corresponding price rises. But as 
M[.sub]1[/] growth for August 1992 was down to 19.7 percent, 
it is estimated that this began to impact 1993 prices in the 
second quarter. Of course, supposing that fourth-quarter 
M[.sub]1[/] growth did not rebound too sharply, to jump to 
about 30 percent, with prices not falling, then the linkage 
between M[.sub]1[/] and prices was even tighter. As to 
reform dynamics, by the end of 1992, our prices were market 
regulated for over 90 percent of our overall market consumer 
goods, about 80 percent of our capital goods, and around 95 
percent of our foreign-trade commodities. As over 80 percent of 
our whole market commodity prices were market regulated, it 
could be said that our commodity price-reform was basically 
completed. Such a large reform dynamic was bound to impact 
future prices. But as the price-reform dynamic weakens, the 
lagging effect will also abate, bringing less market price 
pressures. 
  2) The difference between market prices and commodity 
consumption elasticity and consumption structure was linked to 
the resulting difference in the commodity price-rise structure. 
On one hand, consumer goods consumption elasticity differed, 
bringing varying price rises. When consumption elasticity is 
large, rising prices lower purchasing volume, but when 
consumption elasticity is small, prices rises do not bring sharp 
changes in purchasing volume, as demand remains relatively 
stable (basically constant). Most of the faster rising prices 
were for commodities or services with less consumption 
elasticity which, whether supply and demand were balanced, rose 
as much as state policy-rises. For instance, as grain, water and 
power, and gas were all indispensable to daily life or 
replaceable only on a small scale, once the government raised 
prices, their prices went up too. In the first three quarters, 
basic-necessity prices rose about 20 percent, with the impact of 
price rises for food commodities alone accounting for over 50 
percent of overall price rises. Just the opposite, price rises 
were lower for commodities with greater flexibility, including 
popular goods of dependable quality, such as ordinary clothing 
and articles for daily use, for which price rises were mostly 
under 8 percent, with some even falling. Let this be a warning 
to policymakers that basic-necessity prices must not be 
decontrolled, in order to prevent constant market price rises 
that would affect livelihood stability. 
  On the other hand, consumption-structure differences also 
affected prices. As incomes rose, consumption grades also went 
up, with attention to watching higher market price rises for 
expensive commodities, new products, new designs, and new 
styles, such as name-brand color TVs and dress fashions, showing 
the impact of high consumption by the high-income strata, making 
one feel that prices were changing and rising sharply. These 
two factors reflected cost-drive as well as demand-pull. 
  3) The RMB was sharply devalued. The exchange rate to the 
U.S. dollar was only a little more than 7 yuan at the beginning 
of 1993, but had reached 11 yuan by June, and has now stabilized 
at about 8.8 yuan. This devaluation was also a factor in higher 
price rises. With import costs up sharply, the lack of 
confidence in the RMB brought market instability and price 
rises. As these price rises involved both normal and abnormal 
factors, they need a conscientious and detailed analysis. 
<H5>  B. Our Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Remained </H5>
Subject to Unresolved Problems, Conspicuously in the Following 
Four Areas: 
  1) Funds were tight and shortages large. After June 1993, 
enterprise deposits fell monthly, down 73.3 billion yuan for 
June through August. By the end of August, enterprise deposit 
growth was at 4.1 percent, nearing the danger point. And while 
enterprise deposits rose somewhat after October, their growth 
remained at only a little over 5 percent. This fund shortage was 
caused by: (a) The overall structure was stil too large. 
Accumulated investment growth was over 60 percent, with 
industrial growth above 20 percent, still too high, with fund 
demand also too high. (b) The fund-orientation structure was 
irrational. All sorts of rebates turned some funds into consumer 
funds, "losing a piece"; finished-product funds increased, 
"tying up a piece"; enterprise bankruptcies and losses "wasted a 
piece." (c) Large price rises (with enterprise purchasing price 
rises of 35.5 percent in the first three quarters for raw 
materials and power) "ate up a piece." (d) While side doors were 
closed, main doors were not opened promptly, bringing slow 
results, with overall supply "down a piece." Lending growth 
was nearly 40 billion yuan less for the first eight months. 
This included a working-capital-loan ratio of only 33.7 
percent, one half normal. In September, conditions improved 
somewhat, with the working capital loan ratio up clearly, which 
was estimated to have eased the enterprise fund shortage. 
  2) Production was divorced from sales, with additional 
arrears. By the end of November, the accounts-due balance for 
budgeted state enterprises throughout China had topped 220 
billion yuan, up more than 50 billion yuan from the same period 
in 1992. Enterprise mutual arrears once again grew conspicuous. 
And funds tied up in finished products also rose quickly, up 
18.4 percent from the same period in 1992. 
  3) Production stoppages or semi-stoppages increased. Not 
only were large and medium-sized state enterprises operating 
under capacity, but certain small enterprises were also having 
trouble operating at full capacity. Not only was the 
manufacturing industry seeing limited production, but the raw 
materials industry also had unused production capacity. Not 
only heavy, but also light industry, was suffering from 
underproduction. 
  4) Efficiency was down. The realized profits of budgeted 
state industrial enterprises dropped 22.1 percent from July to 
August, more than 10 percent from August to September, and 
another 20+ percent from September to October. By the end of 
November, losing enterprises had expanded further to 37.3 
percent. Our overall efficiency improvement was clearly 
falling, with increasing losses. While this was caused partly 
by new financial systems in certain enterprises, as well as by 
other factors, the weakening of the "speed" and "price-rise" 
type efficiency was also a key factor. 
<H5>  C. Our Economic-Development Imbalances Remained Glaring, </H5>
With No Clear Structural-Adjustment Progress. 
  1) Our regional-development imbalance further sharpened, 
with 
our eastern region's production, construction, consumption, and 
income growth clearly higher than in our midwest region, and the 
coastal-interior gap continuing to widen. For the first three 
quarters, coastal-zone production, construction, and consumption 
growth accounted for over 60 percent of our national growth. 
  2) Our industrial-development imbalance remained glaring. 
While we reaped better agricultural harvests, with grain and 
edible oil output setting new records, the enterprise lack of 
stamina did not improve, with the imbalance between industry and 
agriculture still existing, still no great improvement in our 
supply shortages of transportation, power, and key raw 
materials, and "bottleneck"-industry limitations still troubling 
national economic development. 
  3) Our urban-rural income-distribution imbalance grew more 
severe. While rural incomes grew slowly, with rural 
market-realization remaining low, our urban residents had not 
yet broken free from the "big-pottism" setting, so were 
continuing to eat out of the "two big pots" of the state and 
enterprises, taking advantage of all sorts of dexterous means to 
squeeze out public interests, which gave them sustained high 
income growth to sharpen the gap with rural residents. 
  4) Our international payments imbalance sharpened. Exports 
grew slowly on one hand, while imports increased quickly on the 
other, making our trade imbalance more evident, and making 1993 
our first year of trade deficit since 1990. Our trade deficit 
for the first 11 months of 1993 topped $7 billion and, without 
effective control, will increase further. Meanwhile, our 
export-earnings rate was low, with our import-payments rate 
high, reducing the amount of foreign exchange that the state 
could amass, and posing a new threat to our maintenance of the 
necessary foreign exchange reserves. 
  These many imbalances show that our economic system and 
operating forces remain obviously irrational. While these 
imbalances may not have a sharp short-term impact on our overall 
economic development, they are still a hidden peril that might 
touch off national economic instability. So if we do not 
eliminate them promptly, but rather let them grow, they are 
likely to have an adverse impact on China's economic 
development, as well as having a negative effect on our social 
stability. 
<H5>  III. Thoughts on Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Policy </H5>
Measures for the Next Stage 
  As to the current state of our economic operations, we need 
to pay attention to preventing two deviations: (a) Impatience to 
make our high economic growth and price rises fall back, by 
taking steps to increase our overall regulation and control 
dynamic, instead of making a structural monetary adjustment, 
which might cause our economy to cool down too quickly, and lose 
us the chance for stable growth. (b) Overemphasis on enterprise 
problems, instead of an appropriate easing of our overall 
regulation and control dynamic, particularly by making credit 
too easy, which might affect our economic "soft landing," to set 
off another economic overheating. So we hold that our general 
1994 economic principles should be to consolidate our overall 
regulation and control successes, expand our 
structural-adjustment dynamic, sharply raise our economic 
efficiency, continue to rectify our economic order, and go all 
out to intensify all reforms. Our overall 1994 economic plans 
should remain as set forth in 1993 in Central Document #6: GDP 
growth rate and price rises both under 10 percent, with a 
corresponding fixed assets investment scale of 1.4 trillion 
yuan, up about 20 percent from 1993's estimated figure (with the 
rough growth of real work volume at about 8 percent); retail 
consumer goods sales growth remaining around 20 percent; loan 
scale controlled at 500 billion yuan, currency issue controlled 
at 150 billion yuan, and money supply in the narrow sense 
(M[.sub]1[/]) growth rate controlled at about 25 percent; 
export growth maintained at approximately 10 percent, 
essentially balanced with imports; the ratio between overall 
supply and demand controlled at under 5 percent. In order to 
keep our economy growing at an appropriate rate while further 
controlling inflation, we hold that our macroeconomic regulation 
and control in the next stage should pay attention to grasping 
the following areas: 
  1. We need to appropriately grasp our regulation and 
control dynamics. Generally, while the three+ months of 
macroeconomic regulation and control of our economy since July 
1993 have essentially stabilized our macroeconomic operations, 
bringing some improvement to our overall relations between 
supply and demand, we are still not on an essentially normal 
track, with our 1993 ratio of demand exceeding supply probably 
still higher than the rational level of 5 percent. Meanwhile, 
our microeconomic problems are growing. So we need to pay great 
attention to grasping the macroeconomic regulation and control 
dynamic, focusing our energies on our structure. 
Quantitatively, the key will be to control money-supply 
channels, by tightening control of fixed assets investment, and 
strictly controlling new-project starts. As to fund 
orientation, we need to tighten ordinary-assets investment, 
while easing basic-industry investment and working-capital 
loans. We suggest maintaining our 1994 ratio of working 
capital to all new loans at about 50 percent, while raising our 
basic-industry investment-loan ratio up to approximately 20 
percent. 
  2. We need to continue to rectify our economic order 
and improve our macroeconomic management. Rather than 
saying that the most glaring problem in our previous economic 
operations was "overheating," we had best say that it was "too 
much chaos." While our previous rectification has somewhat 
improved our current economic order, the source of the "chaos" 
has not yet been rooted out, so that the chaos is stil likely to 
recur once control is eased. Our current priorities for 
further clearing up and rectification are: (a) We need to 
genuinely and thoroughly dislink banks from the entities that 
they are running, in order to keep them from remaining actually 
connected. (b) Along with an appropriate easing of credit, we 
need to firmly stop bank funds from infiltrating through various 
means into large "bubble-economy" fields, such as stocks and 
real estate, while continuing to recoup all illegally loaned 
funds; (c) We need to tighten tax-collection management, to stop 
up tax "flight, fraud, dripping, and avoidance," with the 
priorities being to better control enterprise value-added taxes 
and individual income taxes. (d) We need to tighten our foreign 
trade management, in order to maintain stable export growth, in 
an attempt to basically balance or keep a slight surplus in our 
international payments, to maintain the necessary foreign 
exchange reserves. (e) We need to tighten our market pricing 
control, with our priorities being to strengthen our policy 
guidance of basic daily necessity prices, by curbing arbitrary 
price rises and fee collections, so that living standards are 
not affected sharply. 
  3. We need to intensify our structural adjustment, by 
investing more in basic industries. Incrementally, we could 
consider at least the following three ways to ensure that basic 
industry gains: (a) We could appropriately pool finances to 
raise the percentage of spending on basic-industry investment, 
which should now be raised gradually to more than 10 percent. 
(b) We could issue special bonds with preferential interest 
rates, and intensify shareholding-system reform or set up 
special funds, to provide long-term and stable fund sources for 
basic industrial development. (c) In line with our banking 
system reform, we could speed up our establishment of a policy 
bank with the main function of raising funds for basic industry. 
As to reserves, we should mainly use enterprise operating-forces 
conversion and property-rights system reform to activate asset 
reserves, in order to achieve the optimum disposition of public 
resources. 
  4. We need to continue to stabilize our agricultural 
production to increase peasant income. (a) After the 
central rural-work conference, we need to conduct an overall 
one-time investigation of pertinent rural-work principles and 
policies, in order to better implement all steps to stabilize 
and strengthen agriculture. (b) We need to increase the fund 
investment in agricultural production by governments at all 
levels, making a determination to go forward with the building 
of key water conservancy facilities on farmland. (c) We need to 
pass on to peasants as soon as possible the signals about higher 
purchasing prices for farm and sideline products, in order to 
stimulate peasant development and production initiative, so that 
they can make all advance preparations to rationally adjust 
their cultivation intentions. (d) Based on stable agricultural 
production, we need to continue to vigorously develop township 
enterprises, in order to accelerate the shift of the surplus 
agricultural workforce to nonfarm industry. 
  5. We need to do a conscientious job of all pre-reform 
preparations, in order to advance all reforms actively and 
reliably. While our current tighter macroeconomic 
regulation and control has already created a favorable climate 
for further reform progress, the problems exposed through 
regulation and control are also calling for as early reforms as 
possible. Our overall reform thinking has now been essentially 
clarified, with the priorities being to do a good job of all 
early-stage preparatory work: (a) We need to do a good job of 
overall work related to reform timing, pace, and all aspects, in 
order to ensure orderly reform progress. (b) We need to do a 
good job of all media-orientation work, in order to create a 
suitable social climate. (c) We need to study the psychological 
and economic sustainability of all parties for reform actions, 
by grasping the rational dynamic to reduce social repercussions. 
(d) We need to do a good job of preventing conflicts and errors 
that might arise in the course of reform-plan implementation, by 
drawing up the necessary contingency plans in preparation for 
implementation mishaps. (e) We need to do a very good job of 
combining reform with growth, in order to promote reform, while 
maintaining the appropriate economic growth rates. (f) We need 
to combine reform with anti-corruption and advocacy for honesty, 
in order to ensure public support for reform, by eliminating the 
disruptive impact of corruption on reform. (g) We need to 
combine reform with a sound legal system, by developing legal 
institutions to promote smooth reform implementation, in order 
to put reform and opening on a legal track to prevent reform 
mistakes. (h) We need to combine reform-plan uniformity with 
regional-development imbalances, paying attention to dealing 
with each case on its merits, to ensure that reform actions take 
real effect to become the voluntary behavior of all areas. (i) 
We need to better combine macroeconomic reform with 
microeconomic reform, by ensuring that macroeconomic reform 
truly becomes a motivation for intensified microeconomic reform, 
in order to pave the way for further stimulation of our 
productive forces. (j) We need to better combine reform with 
opening, by pushing China's economic system to operate better 
according to international practice, in order to pave the way 
for the Chinese economy to more smoothly enter the international 
market. 

