CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Abdallah Hammudah: "Yemen: The Blood of Abyan </F>
Is Splattering All Over the Pledge and Accord Document"] 
  [Text] The latest events in the Governorate of Abyan, in 
southern Yemen, have stirred up numerous inquiries concerning 
unification of the two Yemens. The questions asked by observers 
from abroad concern whether or not Yemen would continue to be 
united or, in case it ends up being split up, what would be the 
type of relationship between the two Yemens that used to be 
separate and perhaps will be so in the future as well? 
  The Yemenis themselves are still avoiding asking this 
question and are restricting their discussions to what could be 
the final form of the nation they are attempting to build. 
  In Zinjibar, the capital of the governorate, and in Mudiyah 
and Lawdar, armed clashes took place between northern and 
southern forces. There were many reasons for these armed 
clashes, according to the points of view of the various Yemeni 
political parties and the two main parties, the General People's 
Congress [GPC] and the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], in 
particular. 
  These clashes are considered to be the most dangerous 
developments to Yemeni unity that have occurred so far since 
unification was officially declared on 22 May 1990. Also, they 
constitute the third armed confrontation that has taken place 
between northern and southern forces during the last 22 years. 
<H5>  Reasons for the Danger </H5>
  However, there are four main factors that make the latest 
confrontation different from the previous two clashes that 
occurred in 1972 and 1979: 
  1. It is the first confrontation of this type that has 
happened within the framework of the unified nation, although 
the mobilized forces participating on each side are evidence of 
the degree of fragility of the institutions that represent the 
structure of the state and the likelihood that this state has no 
future if matters continue to be as they are right now. 
  2. The confrontation is occurring during the time when a 
newly-appointed governor is assuming his duties of office. This 
governor is Muhammad 'Ali Ahmad, one of the top men of 'Ali 
Nasir Muhammad, the former president of South Yemen. The 
fighting is happening in the midst of a dispute concerning the 
legality of appointing him by means of a decision made by the 
prime minister, as a prelude to having the Presidential Council 
later on issue a decree appointing him to this position. Some 
people--especially those in the YSP--say that the fighting began 
in order to prevent him from arriving in the governorate to 
assume the duties of his office. 
  3. The fighting has happened in a governorate that--since 
the 
events of 13 January 1986 that put an end to the rule of 'Ali 
Nasir--has maintained its stance of (silent) opposition to rule 
by the YSP in its present form in South Yemen, and the situation 
remained the same even after unification because the YSP 
continues to have its influence in the South. From the strategic 
point of view of the northern forces, it was considered to be an 
important event in the series of efforts aimed at crushing the 
attempt to revive the southern regime in Aden, because 
dominating the governorate of Abyan would furnish the missing 
link in the series of military positions necessary to encircle 
the "unified nation's economic and business capital" from the 
east. This would make it easy to isolate the Governorates of 
Aden and Lahij in the west from the Governorates of Shabwah, 
Hadramawt, and al-Mahrah in the east, where the sources of 
petroleum wealth are. 
  A related issue here is the fact that this confrontation, 
from the point of view of the North, had the objective of: 
preventing a reconciliation between the wing of the YSP that is 
currently part of the power structure in the unified state and 
the wing that split off with 'Ali Nasir during the events of 
January 1986, the popular base of which is considered to be 
Abyan; and picturing the battle as being fought between the 
natives of Abyan, who supported the northern forces (the 
al-'Amaliqah [Giants] Brigade) against the southern YSP forces, 
which include the YSP militia formations known as the Madram 
Brigade, and the 5th Armored Brigade, which came from Aden to 
support it. 
  One thing that helped to highlight the idea of this "old 
feeling of revenge" and the attempt to use this opportunity to 
exploit it is the fact that the al-Wahdah [Unity] Brigade, which 
participated in the fighting after being transferred from 
Hadramawt to Abyan, was the unit that, after the events during 
January [of 1986], restored the situation in the governorate so 
that it would favor the wing of the YSP that is currently in 
power. Both local and northern elements accuse it of having 
committed horrible atrocities as it undertook its task. 
  4. The fourth factor is the participation of some of the 
"Arab Afghans" who are headquartered in the al-Maraqishah 
mountains. Reports say that an estimated three brigades of 
soldiers from the Yemeni Reform Grouping (YRG) militias also 
participated in the skirmishes--in civilian clothes--together 
with the southern forces in an attempt to portray the 
confrontation as being one between civilians who are natives of 
the governorate and "remnants of the former communist regime in 
the south who refuse to be incorporated into the unified state 
and are trying to regain their dominance, even if this would be 
at the expense of the future of the unified state." 
  Some observers are suggesting that it is dangerous to rely 
on 
extremist militias, which are not known for being disciplined, 
to decide a political struggle being waged within the framework 
of the state. They point out Egypt's experience in this regard, 
when president Anwar Sadat encouraged a trend such as this one 
in order to contain Nasirite and Marxist elements. Not only did 
this effort end with him being assassinated by them. The result 
was also an aggravation of the problem posed by the extremist 
Islamic groups at the present time. 
<H5>  A Rocky Road </H5>
  Whatever the losses were as a result of the events in 
Abyan--some local reports insist that as many as dozens or 
hundreds of people were killed and wounded, whereas politicians 
from the various Yemeni political factions maintain that no more 
than six persons were killed and a few dozen were injured, 
because the "skirmishes were within the framework of Yemeni 
traditions which follow the practice of firing into the 
air"--the fact remains that they constitute a step on the rocky 
road toward unity. There are apprehensions that they may lead to 
a relapse or end up being a case of "fleeing toward the front," 
which would postpone any real effort to deal with the problem, 
like what happened in the years 1972 and 1979. 
  The problem is that the latest skirmishes occurred last 20 
February. This is the same date that many people thought would 
be the day of a "serious attempt" to solve the Yemeni crisis, 
that is, the day of the signing of the Pledge and Accord 
Document in the Jordanian capital of Amman after it had been 
signed by the members of the Political Forces Dialogue Committee 
who had arrived at an agreed upon formula after more than two 
months of consultations and after they had initialed it last 18 
January. 
  Yemeni political forces consider the document to be the 
culmination of the unity agreements, and that it is no less 
important than they are. But the road toward Yemeni unity is 
littered with agreements that were not implemented. The parties 
who signed them have merely used them as a way out of some 
particular crisis. This happened in the cases that preceded the 
unification of the two parts of the country. But it seems that a 
contradiction of interests under the system of a unified country 
is the cause of the state of alert and mobilization for war at 
the present time which, if not settled in rational fashion, will 
blow up the new-born nation. 
<H5>  First Conflict </H5>
  The first armed conflict between the PDRP [Peoples 
Democratic 
Republic of Yemen] and the YAR [Yemen Arab Republic] began, in 
the summer of 1972, with the parties involved resorting to a 
reconciliation--under the slogan of unity--which was embodied in 
the Cairo Agreement of 28 October and then the Tripoli 
Declaration of 28 November of the same year. But a year later 
tension returned between Sanaa and Aden, and work toward 
unification came to a halt because there was internal conflicts 
within both Yemens also, until Lt. Col. Ibrahim al-Hamdi took 
over the presidency of North Yemen on 13 June 1974 and began the 
dialogue once again between the two parties. 
  But this new attempt at unification ended with the murder of 
al-Hamdi on 11 October 1977, the day before he was to leave to 
sign the unity agreement in Aden, and relations continued to be 
tense. The media battle escalated during the administration of 
Lt. Col. Ahmad Husayn al-Ghashmi, who became president after 
al-Hamdi. Al-Ghashmi, in turn, was assassinated in the famous 
briefcase explosion incident which occurred in June of 1978--a 
suicide mission carried out by a South Yemeni by the name of 
al-Hajj Tafarish. This led to deep cracks in the ranks of the 
YSP, and ended with the overthrow of President Salim Rabi' 
Salimayn and his execution. 
  The situation only calmed down with the holding of the 
summit 
meeting in Kuwait between 'Abd-al-Fattah Isma'il, the secretary 
general of the YSP in South Yemen, and Col. 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih, president of North Yemen, during the period 28-30 March 
1979, after armed clashes had begun between the two parties on 
24 February of that same year. 
  The summit meeting ended with an agreement to resume the 
dialogue concerning unification, and a committee was formed to 
finish setting up the unified nation's constitution and then to 
prepare to form a ministerial committee to conduct a plebscite 
concerning unity. All of this was to take place within a maximum 
period of six months. 
<H5>  The Problem of Political Niches </H5>
  From the above it is clear that unification, which was the 
basis of the legitimacy of both regimes before it was 
implemented, has now become the source of legitimacy for all of 
the Yemeni political parties after implementation. The issue has 
been transformed from a dispute or an agreement between two 
different systems, both of which have adopted totalitarianism on 
a different basis (Marxist and internationalist in South Yemen, 
and Arabist and nationalist in North Yemen), into the inability 
to provide mature political niches in the unified nation, which 
has decided to adopted a multiparty system. 
  Hardly had unity been achieved on 22 May 1990 when one of 
the 
first things the Presidential Council decided to do was to grant 
the freedom to form political parties and organizations. Right 
away about 45 political parties and organizations sprang up. 
Some of these were under the umbrella of the ruling party in the 
North (the GPC), such as the YRG and the Ba'th Party. Others 
were opposition groups abroad or in either the North or the 
South, such as the Sons of Yemen Association (RA'Y), the Yemeni 
Unionist Grouping Party, the group of Nasirite parties, and the 
Truth [al-Haqq] Party. Other parties small in size and of little 
importance also arose, and they were dubbed the "fledgeling 
parties." 
  These "fledgeling" parties were mostly wings of the two main 
ruling parties (the GPC and the YSP), and were relied on for 
financing and organizational support and to carry out certain 
tasks in the political arena of maneuver during the hazy phase 
that predominated during the transitional period. At the present 
time this game has been revealed, and all of the parties have 
discovered what their real weight results from the elections of 
last April. However, some of the parties with a history behind 
them were not sufficiently fortunate, either because of 
fragmentation of votes or because of procedural problems in the 
electoral process. Accusations of vote fraud were made after the 
elections against the three parties and their independent allies 
that won more than three-fourths of the seats in the Chamber of 
Deputies (301 seats). 
  The problem of the political niches existed because it was 
difficult to find a means of grouping the Yemeni parties 
together after the elections, and the political maneuvering led 
to a type of division among them. The "National Congress of 
Political Parties and Organizations" ended up opposing the 
"Congress of Political Parties and Organizations, Grass Roots 
Organizations, and Professional and Creative Unions." But some 
of the parties objected to the domination in the National 
Congress by the two parties in power during the transitional 
period (the GPC and the YSP), and demanded that the unions also 
be represented, in spite of the dispute concerning their 
political capacity. Some made an appeal to have the their 
activities restricted to their professional realm and to looking 
after the affairs of their members. 
  During this period also the GPC and the YSP were subjected 
to 
lots of criticism because they shared power among themselves 
after unification, even on the level of minor positions such as 
office manager, and because many people were deprived of the 
opportunity to participate in managing the affairs of their 
country during this important phase of its history. This 
happened because the consideration of loyalty to one of the two 
parties was, in the eyes of the leadership of these two parties, 
more important than capability and experience. They hoped that 
the situation would improve after the elections. 
<H5>  Absence of Democracy </H5>
  There was much criticism in the Yemeni political arena 
concerning how democracy was being put into practice. Many 
people said that it was merely the heavyweights balancing and 
squaring off against each other, with the basic principle being 
that of dividing power between two parties--the GPC and the 
YSP--during the transitional period preceding the parliamentary 
elections. The same criticism was made, particularly by the 
opposition parties, after the YRG participated in the ruling 
coalition with the other two parties. The point was that all 
citizens did not get to participate in the making of decisions 
concerning their lives. However, the truth of the matter is that 
there is no totalitarian system in unified Yemen, and this has 
provided lots of opportunity for Yemeni citizens to freely 
express themselves. But it is still true that their absence of 
participation in the decisionmaking, the nation's state of 
paralysis, and a [general] inability to make decisions, have 
been an obvious manifestation of life in Yemen since the 
unification. 
  This paralysis has also allowed the centers of power 
associated with the main parties to fulfill their role of 
maintaining their influence and achieving gains by means of 
their influence, because there has been an absence of respect 
for the nation's regime and its influence, and they have 
utilized this absence to the detriment of the public interest. 
With the laxness in security, we have seen things such as the 
"'Aqlan al-Rashidi" phenomenon, the reference being to a 
prominent merchant, a member of the Hashid tribe, who has been 
accused by the YSP of engaging in counterfeiting money, 
smuggling, dealing in narcotics, murder, etc. 
  Accusations have also been made against the big shots in the 
various parties to the effect that they have exploited the 
apparatus of the government for their own interests, and it has 
been said that military commanders have moved their units 
without orders from the Ministry of Defense or the chief of 
staff. 
  President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih has denied any knowledge of 
his military police forces stopping the procession of Engineer 
Haydar Abu-Bakr al-'Attas, the prime minister, during his return 
from Aden to Sanaa, although al-'Attas assures everyone that he 
had informed all the authorities concerned about his movement 
and the itinerary of his procession. 
  Some opposition parties are currently saying that the 
division of power and influence into two parts during the 
transitional period became a three-way division after the 
parliamentary elections of 27 April last year, when the YRG 
joined the ruling coalition. 
  But sources who support the YSP still feel that the division 
of power is a division into two parts because, although the YRG 
has emerged from under the umbrella of the GPC, there is still a 
clear division of roles between them with regard to the adoption 
of positions for the purpose of pursuing definite and particular 
goals in their confrontation with the YSP and the opposition 
groups allied with it. 
<H5>  Probabilities of a Confrontation </H5>
  Before he died, Muhammad 'Ali Haytham, South Yemen's first 
prime minister and the former minister of social security, told 
AL-MAJALLAH that military battles nearly broke out between the 
northern and southern forces shortly before the elections. He 
died eight months ago, and his secrets went to the grave with 
him. However, political observers have reported that 
undemocratic electoral practices were the cause, and people in 
the opposition accused the three victorious parties of having 
attempted to break previously-made agreements to divide 
electoral districts among themselves, then some of them [again] 
tried to violate those agreements, and the struggle almost 
reached the point of being an explosion. But all the coalition 
parties insistently deny this. 
  From the time of the confrontation, which did not end up 
taking place during the election period, until the time of the 
confrontation, which did occur on the day of the signing of the 
Pledge and Accord Document in Amman, Yemeni citizens have not 
felt any great degree of confidence that the unified nation of 
Yemen will survive. In fact, some of them have even begun to 
"open up" lines that were previously shut down, because they are 
afraid of what fate might have in store for them after the 
events in Abyan have shown that the pledge and accord constitute 
something found only in the pages of the document, because of 
which the struggle broke out even before the ink of the 
signatures on the document was dry. 
<H5>  Historical Sequence of the Yemeni Crisis </H5>
  September 1991: The killing of Engineer Hasan al-Haribi was 
considered to be the first of a series of assassination attempts 
made against the leaders of the YSP and other organizations 
associated with it. So far, this has resulted in the deaths of 
about 155 persons. 
  April-June 1992: First act of seclusion in Aden by 
Vice-President 'Ali Salim al-Bid, secretary general of the YSP. 
  9-11 December 1992: Wave of demonstrations in Yemen's major 
cities, protesting the economic crisis and corruption, results 
in more than 10 killed and about 30 wounded, and 300 persons are 
arrested on charges of rioting and looting. 
  February 1993: The catastrophe of floods in Aden, and then 
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih is received with protest 
demonstrations because of the "deliberate neglect" of the city 
after unification. 
  Spring of 1993: Al-Bid's second act of seclusion in Aden and 
Hadramawt, which ended after the agreement, and the date of the 
first multiparty elections in unified Yemen is 27 April 1993, 
after they had been postponed twice from October 1992 and 
February 1993. 
  August 1993: Al-Bid's third act of seclusion in Aden, in 
protest of the "lack of seriousness in implementing the 
unification agreements." 
  December 1993: Decline in the value of the Yemeni riyal from 
about 52 riyals to the dollar to more than 65 riyals to the 
dollar. The exchange rates had improved 15 percent after the 
Pledge and Accord Document was initialed on 18 January. But then 
these rates went down once again and fluctuated because of the 
continuation of the crisis, and this led to small, scattered 
demonstrations in Sanaa and Ta'izz. 
  December 1993: Mobilization of large military forces at the 
[former] borders of northern and southern Yemen, including the 
deployment of principal units to reinforce the front lines of 
the confrontation. 
  20 February 1994: Outbreak of skirmishes between the 
northern 
al-'Amaliqah Brigade and the southern Madram Brigade (party 
militias) in the two cities of Zinjibar and Mudiyah in the 
Governorate of Abyan on the day of the signing of the Pledge and 
Accord Document in Amman, then the skirmishes spread to the 
Lawdar area and Arab Afghan soldiers enter the fray. 
  Most Significant Obstacles Facing Yemeni National Unity 
  I. Structural Obstacles 
  1. Type of State: Points of view differ as to whether to 
adopt the system of a unified state of the type that 
predominates today or to have a federal system or a 
confederation. 
  The GPC and the YRG (the two northern partners in the 
current 
ruling coalition) adhere to the idea of a unified state, and 
feel that "the only alternative is a plan to split up." The YSP 
(the southern partner), however, rejects this, and feels that it 
amounts to a "process of subjugation, a curbing of the process 
of development in Yemen, and a refusal to create a model in the 
South which could be adopted by the North in a subsequent stage." 
  2. Presidency of the Nation: The GPC and the YRG adhere to a 
presidential system based on election of a president who then 
appoints his vice president and possesses extensive powers. 
  The YSP demands that there be a Presidential Council during 
the current stage, until the Constitution is modified and 
stipulates that both the president and vice president be elected 
either together or separately, with the vice president being 
allotted definite powers. 
  3. System of Executive Authority: The GPC and the YRG demand 
a system that is a combination of the presidential and 
parliamentary system, in which the president divides authority 
with the government. 
  The YSP, however, insists that the system be a parliamentary 
one, including a strong government that assumes the task of 
carrying out the executive powers and shares some of the 
president's sovereign powers, in a way that would be determined 
by the Constitution after it is modified. 
  4. Type of Legislative Authority: The GPC agreed to the 
establishment of another parliamentary council, called the 
Consultative Council, in which two-thirds of the members would 
be elected and one-third would be appointed and they would be 
persons possessing expertise and qualifications. This council 
would share legislative power with the Chamber of Deputies. The 
18 governorates would have equal representation in it. This 
proposal was made by the YSP. But the YRG rejected this, but 
then accepted it with reservations, setting the condition that 
the legislative spheres of authority of the Consultative Council 
be limited. Some people say that the YRG feels that this council 
would be competing with the Chamber of Deputies, the head of 
which is Shaykh 'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar, head of the 
Higher Committee of the YRG. 
  II. Legislative Obstacles 
  1. Education Law: Although this law was established before 
the 27 April 1993 elections, the YRG still feels committed to 
change it because it rejects the merging of the educational 
institutes of the religious type into the system of public 
education and considers this to be an attack on the very basis 
of the system of religious education. 
  Informed sources told AL-MAJALLAH that the reason that the 
YRG has been so quiet about this point so far is the fact that 
it has received 1.3 billion riyals from the state, in accordance 
with a promise from the GPC and the YSP, to be used as a budget 
for financing the religious institutes--even though 
administration of these institutes is supposed to be the job of 
the public education apparatus--so that the YRG not feel that it 
has lost its influence entirely. The sources added that this was 
part of the deal for having the YRG enter the ruling coalition 
in Yemen. 
  2. Local Rule Law: The local rule law is still a matter of 
dispute. The YSP demands that the governors and the heads of the 
directorates and local councils be elected, whereas the YRG 
wants election only of the governors, at the present stage, and 
the local councils, but wishes to see the heads of the 
directorates and their subordinates appointed, with the 
provision that they be elected at a subsequent stage. 
  III. Procedural Obstacles 
  1. Unification of the Armed Forces: Although numerous plans 
have been submitted for merging the armed forces of the two 
previous Yemens, each party has rejected the plans of the other 
party, and the northern and southern units have remained 
separated from each other. 
  One failed plan was that of merging the units on a 
fifty-fifty basis, because the GPC (northern Yemen) says that 
southern Yemen's population is only between 2.5 and 3 million 
and this does not justify the size of the armed forces that the 
YSP has. It rejects the merge on this basis also because it 
would create an open field for the possibility of bringing the 
armed struggle inside the units. 
  The YSP demands the dismissal of military commanders who are 
relatives of persons who occupy the principal positions in the 
government (such as the president's brother), whereas the GPC 
responds with the demand to disband the units that mostly 
consist of troops from a particular directorate or governorate. 
  The process of unification of the armed forces is one that 
is 
being subjected to political bargaining because the YSP is 
keeping its armed forces as a card to play until its demands are 
met concerning modification of the type of state and achievement 
of separation between the presidency of the state, in its 
present form, and the military establishment, but the GPC sees 
this rejection as a type of implicit rebellion. 
  2. Security Problem: This is considered to be one of the 
most 
important issues that the YSP feels is an obstacle to stability 
and the process of building a modern state. The reason for this 
is that the fact that its leaders are being subjected to 
assassination attempts has, for them, transformed the issue from 
merely being one concerning the particular form according to 
which the state is to be constructed to being one of "life and 
death." This is why all of the YSP's main leaders have left 
Sanaa and gone back to Aden. 
  Another matter that complicates this issue is that the YSP 
accuses the leaders in the government who belong to the other 
two parties in the ruling coalition (the GPC and YRG) of 
protecting and sheltering persons who commit assassinations and 
operate outside the law, for the purpose of obstructing the 
pursuance of the YSP's demands and forcing the YSP to put itself 
within the framework of the system that existed in the north 
before unification took place. 
<H5>  Blow of Revenge </H5>
  Political observers interpret the blow that was dealt 
against 
the 5th Brigade--one of the military units subordinate to 'Ali 
Nasir Muhammad, the former president of South Yemen, which 
currently has been merged into the the northern Yemeni 
formations and is part of the 1st Armored Division, which is 
commanded by Col. 'Ali Muhsin al-Ahmar, the president's 
half-brother--as an act of revenge because it was described as 
being a unit that brings together the YSP and dissidents who had 
previously split off from it. 
  During the middle of last February, the members of the 
brigade had refused to remove their comnmander, Colonel 
'Abdallah Shulayl, and accept the appointment, in his place, of 
Col. Taymas, based on a decision by the (northern) chief of 
staff. In this matter, they were supported by the (southern) 
minister of defense, Brigadier General Haytham Qasim Tahir, who 
is curently in Aden. 
  The members of this brigade have a history of protesting 
what they have seen as lack of interest in them by both northern 
and southern commanders. They have said that they are treated as 
"third class" military personnel, and that supplies and food 
always come late to them. In addition to this, they see a lack 
of interest in providing them with light weapons; they say that 
the weapons they get are of poor quality, and they say that 
their training programs are neglected. 
<H5>  Old Forms! </H5>
  A leading official in the YSP has responded to the 
accusation 
of "separatism," which was based on the publication of the death 
certificate of the journalist Muhammad Sa'id Shamsan al-Sharafi, 
in the Sanaa newspaper AL-THAWRAH, from the Hospital of the 
Republic in Aden, which bore the number 66319 and was on a form 
bearing the name "People's Democratic Republic of Yemen." He 
said: "We have many old forms, and usually the official removes 
the old name and writes in longhand, in its place, `The Republic 
of Yemen.' In this case he may have forgotten to do this because 
of the circumstances of the death." 
  One of the GPC leaders had made this accusation, within the 
context of a larger implicit accusation, when referring to the 
journalist's death "in mysterious circumstances," when he went 
to Aden to spend his new year's holiday there. He pointed out 
that "this happened, even though al-Sharafi was a member of the 
YSP." 
  The YSP official pointed out that the use of old forms also 
occurs in Sanaa as well as in Aden. He said that the reason for 
this is the lack of availability of funds for printing new forms 
that would bear the name "The Republic of Yemen." He said that 
this was like the case involving the delay in the printing of 
the "unified riyals" and the delay in other procedures involving 
the building of the new state. 

