BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Richard Schulz: "Bonn Intends To Speed Up </F>
Transrapid Construction -- Opportunities for Lodging Objections 
To Planning and Route Will Be Restricted"] 
  [Text] The planning and construction of the Transrapid line 
between Hamburg and Berlin will be speeded up by law. The 
cabinet in Bonn will discuss a Transport Ministry bill to this 
effect at the end of the current month. It follows in the wake 
of the transport route acceleration act, which is already in 
force and which restricts opportunities for those affected to 
lodge objections. 
  The bill provides that opposition proceedings against a 
planning decision or planning license will not delay the 
building of the magnetic levitation railway. To date, it has 
only been possible to build transport routes in western Germany 
after all the complaints, for example those lodged by people 
living close to the proposed route, have been heard. 
  Objections to the project or route lodged after the deadline 
will not be taken into consideration at all, whether they be 
justified or not. Substantial shortcomings in the weighing-up 
process or a failure to observe procedural or formal rules will 
only give rise to the revocation of the planning decisions "if 
they cannot be remedied by amending the plans or by recourse to 
a complementary procedure." 
  Authorities involved in the building of the Transrapid line 
will be obliged to work more quickly. They must file their 
comments with the Federal Railways Office within three months at 
the latest. The office will act as both planning and 
adjudicating authority. 
  Local authorities will lay the building plans open to public 
inspection within three weeks of receiving them. The 
adjudicating body musty conclude its deliberations within three 
months of the deadline for lodging objections. 
  As the bill has already been examined for compliance with 
legal formalities, and as the other federal ministers are in 
agreement, it is considered a foregone conclusion that the 
cabinet will pass the bill. There is no need for the Bundesrat 
to give its consent. 

