BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Murat Demirel and Emin Demirel: "Identity of an </F>
IMO Terrorist Established"] 
  [Text] Istanbul--Teams of the antiterror department have 
established that Irfan Cagrici was the person who killed Cetin 
Emec and Turan Dursun. Cagrici, who heads the Islamic Movement 
Organization [IMO] in Istanbul, was the hit man in the two 
incidents. The teams also established that he has been known by 
his alias "Mesut" and has used forged identification 
certificates in the names of Mustafa Kayacan and Hasan Aksoy. 
  The teams arrested Irfan Cagrici's brother, Ridvan Cagrici, 
in Istanbul some time ago. He provided information to the IMO. 
The directorates of police in the provinces and the immigration 
officials in the border gates, airports, and seaports have been 
instructed to arrest Irfan Cagrici. 
  The police carried out an operation against the IMO 
militants 
in Izmir after they kidnapped an Italian child for ransom some 
time ago. Acting in the light of the revelations made by the 
arrested militants, the police shifted their operations against 
the organization to Istanbul. They established that the forged 
identification certificates the militants carried were prepared 
in an IMO cell-house in Yenibosna. The police units stormed the 
house and arrested Ridvan Cagrici. He revealed during his 
interrogation that he was among the founders of the IMO. He was 
placed in custody for being involved in 1984 robberies aimed at 
providing funds for the organization. Ridvan Cagrici was 
released from prison in 1992. He revealed that his elder 
brother, Irfan Cagrici, is the leading member of the 
organization in Istanbul. He also brought to light a point that 
has remained in the dark until now. He disclosed that Irfan 
Cagrici was the IMO hit man who has killed several people, 
including journalist Cetin Emec. 
  The officials have established that Irfan Cagrici, alias 
"Mesut," is the leading IMO member in Istanbul. He is 
responsible for the activities of the IMO "operations teams" and 
has helped the IMO terrorists to train in Iran. Irfan Cagrici 
has used forged identification certificates drawn up in the 
names of Mustafa Kayacan and Hasan Aksoy. 

