BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Tashkent, 19 Apr -- The development of relations 
between China and the countries of Central Asia will not be to 
the detriment of its ties with the other CIS countries, 
including Russia. This was stated today by PRC State Council 
Prime Minister Li Peng following the talks which took place with 
Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov this morning at the Palace of 
Friendship. 
  "We hope," said the Chinese prime minister, "that the CIS 
states will maintain friendly relations among themselves and 
will cooperate for the sake of regional stability and 
development." 
  The head of the Chinese Government is in Uzbekistan on an 
official visit. Tashkent is his first port of call on his 
marathon tour around the neighboring countries in the course of 
which he is to visit Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and 
Mongolia as well. 
  Today an agreement was concluded on granting a Chinese loan 
to Uzbekistan, but the amount is not known. The package of 
intergovernmental documents signed also included an agreement on 
air traffic, a protocol on granting material and technical aid 
to Uzbekistan gratuitously, and an agreement on cooperation 
between the Chinese Committee for the Promotion of International 
Trade and the Ministry of Foreign Economic Ties of Uzbekistan. 
  A representative of the Chinese delegation reported to 
journalists that Islam Karimov and Li Peng discussed a wide 
range of bilateral, regional, and international problems. In 
the opinion of Islam Karimov, Central Asia represents an 
extensive market with enormous potential. The expansion of 
Uzbek-Chinese cooperation, he stressed, corresponds to the 
fundamental interests of the two peoples and also favors 
regional stability and prosperity. 
  In his turn Li Peng noted the personal contribution of the 
president of Uzbekistan to the development of relations between 
the two countries. Speaking of trade and economic ties, he 
called the successful activity of the Uzbek-Chinese joint 
enterprises already operating "just a beginning" and invited 
Uzbek entrepreneurs to go to China to study experience and 
expand business contacts. 
  The Chinese prime minister noted that that there are no 
fundamental contradictions between the interests of China and 
Uzbekistan, and cooperation between them can develop on a 
mutually advantageous basis. He stressed the willingness of 
China to maintain a regular exchange of views with Uzbekistan 
and hold consultations on regional and international issues for 
the purpose of strengthening mutual understanding and trust. 
  On behalf of PRC President Jiang Zemin, Li Peng invited 
Islam 
Karimov to visit China in the second half of this year. The 
leader of Uzbekistan previously visited the PRC in March 1992. 
  The entrepreneurs accompanying Li Peng also concluded a 
number of deals with Uzbek partners in the sphere of the 
petroleum industry, construction, metallurgy, the textile and 
paper industries, and electronics. It has been decided, for 
example, to build a joint enterprise for the production of 
paper. China will also deliver a line for the assembly of 
domestic electrical appliances. 

