BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Colonel General Mikhail Kolesnikov, chief of </F>
general staff of the Russian Federation Armed Forces: "Problems 
of Flanks and Future of Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces"] 
  [Text] It will soon be two years since the Treaty on 
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) entered into force, 
laying the foundation to real disarmament in Europe. The 
results of the first stage of the treaty's implementation attest 
graphically to the serious attitude of the Russian Federation 
and other signatory states to the fulfillment of the commitments 
they have undertaken. As of 15 April 1994 some 7,886 tanks, 
over 9,300 armored combat vehicles, and 3,458 artillery systems, 
about 900 combat aircraft and 240 strike helicopters had been 
reduced in Europe. Of this quantity Russia had reduced 5,155 
weapons and items of equipment (about one quarter). 
  All this confirms the treaty's vitality. At the same time 
new political and military-strategic realities which have now 
taken shape in Europe and the world demand a certain adaptation 
of its positions to the situation's present conditions. 
  Let us recall that the treaty was elaborated under the 
conditions of fierce antagonism between the two systems and 
their confrontation and the armed opposition of military blocs 
-- the Warsaw Pact and NATO. It is not surprising that it 
included provisions on the regional division and flank 
restrictions of weapons and equipment. 
  The main idea of the treaty with regard to regional division 
was to reduce the dangerous concentration of arms on the line 
where the groupings of the Warsaw Pact and NATO armed forces 
were in contact, primarily in Central Europe, and also to 
restrict the quantity of arms in the region next to Central 
Europe, known as "expanded Central Europe." In accordance with 
this idea the regions' borders were determined. For the 
majority of countries they coincided with state borders. But 
for the USSR, considering the size of its territory and the 
contours of its regions, these borders were determined by the 
borders of the military districts. 
  As a whole, the principle of regional division enshrined in 
the treaty and providing for the "decanting" of weapons from the 
line of contact to deep positions (the so-called "lock gate" 
principle) under the conditions of confrontation between the two 
blocs justified itself. Similar aims were served by the 
establishment of strictly fixed and relatively low levels of 
weapons for the flank regions and also the restriction on depot 
stocks of arms here. 
  At the time for the Soviet Union -- a single state with 
powerful armed forces -- the limitation on flank forces 
determined by the CFE treaty was acceptable. It ensured the 
USSR the building of a reliable defense both in the North and in 
the South. But with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the 
Soviet Union the military-political situation in Europe changed 
drastically. Some of the treaty's provisions were 
correspondingly in need of certain amendments. Some of these 
amendments have been made. The territory of the three Baltic 
states (Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia) was excluded from the 
treaty's region of operation. Russia, Belorussia [Belarus], 
Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Moldavia [Moldova], and 
Kazakhstan became the USSR's successors as signatories of the 
CFE Treaty. Overall, arms levels established for the Soviet 
Union and regional levels were shared among them. Here the 
flank water level was shared only between six successor-states 
(Belorussia and Kazakhstan are not in the flank region). 
  If at the time it was signed the treaty set a specific 
balance of regional forces, then with the collapse of the Soviet 
Union and the redistribution of its levels among the independent 
states that arose on its basis, this balance was violated. It 
was for that reason that the flank problem arose for Russia. 
Its thrust is as follows. 
  First, under the CFE Treaty the Soviet Union in the flank 
region including the Leningrad Military District, the North 
Caucasus Military District, the Transcaucasus Military District, 
and the Odessa Military District, had the right to deploy 1,850 
tanks and 1,800 armored vehicles, and 2,776 artillery systems 
with a caliber of 100 mm and above. But after the distribution 
of the arms allowed in this region between the states which were 
the USSR's successors, Russia acquired the right to have in 
regular units on its flanks (the Leningrad Military District and 
the North Caucasus Military District) just 700 tanks, 580 
armored vehicles, and 1,280 artillery systems. Considering that 
these two districts occupy over half Russia's European territory 
and considering their geopolitical importance, these levels are 
obviously inadequate for the Russian Armed forces for creating a 
defense grouping. Essentially conditions have arisen in which 
the troops in these districts must manage without the necessary 
quantity of heavy weapons. And I think there is no need to 
explain what an army is without modern weapons. It must also be 
considered that the levels authorized by the treaty include 
weapons and equipment not only of the Leningrad and North 
Caucasus military districts but also of some naval components -- 
the coastal defense and marine forces which perform specific 
functions. These restrictions also include tanks and armored 
combat vehicles at repair enterprises -- and they come here from 
virtually the entire territory of Russia. Considering all this 
it is not hard to conclude that the personnel of our ground 
forces units deployed in the flank region could remain virtually 
without armored cover and defense. 
  Second, the redistribution of the commitments of the former 
USSR has entailed a fundamental change in the correlation of 
arms levels stemming from the treaty for Russia in the region of 
"expanded Central Europe" and in the "flank region." As a 
result, of the overall level for the Russian Federation (6,400 
tanks, 11,480 armored combat vehicles, and 6,415 artillery 
systems), in the regular units on the territory of Kaliningrad 
Oblast (in all 15,000 square kilometers or less than 0.5 percent 
of the European part of Russia) six times more tanks and 15 
times more armored combat vehicles can be deployed than in the 
entire flank region (Leningrad Military District and North 
Caucasus Military District taken together). 
  That means that the flank restrictions push Russia toward 
concentrating its conventional armed forces on the territory of 
Kaliningrad Oblast and along the borders with Belorussia and 
Ukraine. Essentially this leads to the restoration of the 
confrontation of Cold War times along the West-East line, which 
runs counter to the treaty's aims and to Europe's desire to 
create a new security system. 
  The situation which is taking shape is strange, to put it 
mildly. The conservation of the flank restrictions structure 
determined by the treaty leads to a situation where some people 
can in the interests of national security deploy troops where 
they consider it necessary while others cannot. Here the 
discriminatory orientation of this provision is manifested only 
with regard to Russia and Ukraine. It is these two states which 
cannot deploy their armed forces on their national territory as 
they see fit. Thus the treaty's provisions on flank 
restrictions, which do not accord with present-day realities, 
essentially reinforce the position of Russia and Ukraine, which 
does not give them the same rights as other signatories. The 
real interests of these two states' security under present 
conditions are not considered. 
  For Russia the state of affairs is further aggravated by the 
fact that in the very near future the withdrawal of troops from 
the territory of Germany and also from the Baltic countries, the 
Dniester region, and other regions of the former USSR is to be 
completed. The tough framework of the flank restrictions 
compels us to withdraw the troops either to the territory of the 
Moscow Military District, where the troop level has reached the 
limit, or to the rear region -- the Volga and Ural military 
districts, where the relevant infrastructure does not exist. 
And that when conditions are more suitable in Pskov, Novgorod, 
and Vologda Oblasts, for instance, which belong to the Leningrad 
Military District, and in the North Caucasus Military District. 
  Third, considering the geopolitical changes which have 
occurred in the post-Soviet area, the concept of flanks itself 
has also changed. This has affected most of all the southern 
part of Russia's flank region. Previously, before the treaty 
was signed, the North Caucasus Military District was seen in the 
USSR Armed Forces as a rear region. This was correspondingly 
reflected in the district's tasks, its structure, staffing, and 
the direction of its training. The situation has now changed 
drastically -- the district has become a border one. 
  We must also consider the overall situation which has taken 
shape in this direction. The situation here remains 
exceptionally tense, which requires an adequate military 
presence from Russia. That is important not only from the 
viewpoint of ensuring internal security but also for the 
stabilization of the situation in Europe as a whole. Of course 
we rule out Russian military intervention in the internal 
affairs of the states of these regions but it is after all 
possible that Russian Armed Forces formations will be brought in 
to conduct operations to restore and maintain peace, naturally 
with a consideration for our domestic legislation and 
international law. 
  Fourth, the flank restrictions cause serious complications 
of 
an economic and social nature for Russia. As has already been 
noted, we are continuing the withdrawal of troops from the 
territory of other states. These troops are deployed in regions 
where more favorable conditions exist. The erection of the 
necessary establishments for the troops in new, undeveloped 
places given the present state of the Russian economy is a task 
beyond our state's powers. 
  A special place here for all our other commitments is 
occupied by the social aspects of the problem. Behind all the 
figures and plans for structural changes and movements of troops 
in accordance with the military reform and the fulfillment of 
the CFE Treaty commitments there stand living people -- officers 
and ensigns with their families and personnel on compulsory 
service. Concern for them is our duty and sacred obligation. 
  Thus the military, economic, and sociopolitical aspects of 
the problem connected with flank restrictions have acquired an 
exceptionally acute nature for Russia. They directly affect the 
interests of the state's security. 
  As we know, the right to choose one's own ways of ensuring 
security and guarantees of security is one inalienable element 
of state sovereignty. We can see clearly enough how this right 
looks for Russia in the context of the flank restrictions 
stemming from the CFE Treaty. It is perfectly obvious that with 
the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the collapse of the USSR and 
the formation of new independent states on its territory these 
restrictions have lost their political and [passage illegible]. 
That is why the Russian Federation is so persistently raising 
the question of resolving the problem of flank restrictions in a 
way acceptable to all the treaty's signatories. 
  In September last year Russian Federation President Boris 
Yeltsin sent the heads of state and government of a number of 
CFE Treaty signatory countries a special message clearly setting 
forth our position on the flanks problem. Following this the 
Russian delegation submitted in the Joint Consultative Group 
(created with a view to promoting the implementation of the CFE 
Treaty) the proposal to suspend the operation of the treaty's 
article concerning flank restrictions and to embark on a joint 
search of ways of resolving the problem. Other possible 
measures were also set forth. 
  The representatives of the majority of the treaty's 
signatory 
states express understanding for our concerns. But they are 
going no further than noting this and are continuing to insist 
that the treaty be kept unchanged. Their main argument is that 
the introduction of any amendment to the treaty will cause "a 
chain reaction" of amendments as a result of which it will 
allegedly cease to work. 
  In our view the treaty could be overturned not by an 
"avalanche" of amendments and amplifications but by the 
increasingly obvious contradiction between its individual 
provisions and the new situation. It is here that we see the 
real danger to the fate of the treaty. Unless steps are taken 
promptly to adapt it to modern conditions and the relevant 
amendments are made -- amendments dictated by the course of life 
itself -- then the treaty [passage illegible]. Unfortunately, 
in response we hear only general arguments about the treaty's 
unshakable, balanced nature, and its importance for the aims of 
pan-European security. But for some reason no specific 
proposals are to be heard for resolving the problem which has 
arisen. 
  It is perfectly obvious that we cannot delay a decision 
until 
later. We need complete clarity right now to choose the optimum 
defense potential configuration for Russia and to prepare the 
relevant infrastructure for the provision of amenities for the 
troops. The progress of military reform and the rates of 
withdrawal of Russian troops to national territory and other 
very important aspects of the Russian Federation armed forces' 
activity and organizational development. 
  Russia remains a convinced support of the CFE Treaty and is 
conscientiously fulfilling all its commitments. Just as we are 
reducing conventional weapons and equipment so we shall reduce 
them until we reach the maximum levels set for Russia. Just as 
we accept inspections to monitor the treaty's fulfillment so in 
the future we shall promote the monitoring in full. At the same 
time we count on the mutual understanding of our partners in the 
treaty in the search for a solution to the flanks problem. 
  Here we are also firmly convinced that deploying troops on 
its own territory in accordance with the state's views of the 
tasks of defense and the safeguarding of its own security 
interests is the inalienable right of every sovereign state. It 
contradicts neither the terms of the treaty nor article 51 of 
the UN Charter. 

