Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On the afternoon of 2 March, Haitian deputies passed 
a resolution approving a U.S.- and UN-backed plan for settling 
the Haitian crisis, a plan supported by the United States and 
the United Nations. The compromise plan -- which provides for 
the early retirement of General Raoul Cedras, head of the Army, 
before the new prime minister takes office and which does not 
set a date for exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's return 
-- was approved without difficulty, by a vote of 35 out of 45. 
  Several deputies affiliated to the National Front for Change 
and Democracy, FNCD -- which backs President Aristide -- voted 
in favor of this plan. A number of FNCD parliamentarians, 
however, preferred to absent themselves from the discussions and 
the vote. 
  This plan presented by Haitian parliamentarians representing 
the main political tendencies in the Port-au-Prince parliament 
was backed by the United States and UN Secretary General Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali. 
  The 11-point plan approved by the deputies provides for, 
among other things: President Aristide's choosing and appointing 
a new prime minister in compliance with the Constitution; the 
passing of the amnesty law by the parliament's two chambers; the 
signing and promulgation of the amnesty law by President 
Aristide; the early retirement of General Cedras, a retirement 
already accepted by the head of state; the appointing of a new 
head of the Army by the head of state, in conformity with the 
Constitution; the ratification of the new prime minister by the 
Chamber of Deputies and of the new head of the Army chief by the 
Senate [as heard]; a vote of confidence for the new prime 
minister's statement of general policy from the two legislative 
chambers; and the suspension of all international sanctions 
imposed by the UN and the OAS. 
  The plan provides for Gen. Cedras to step down as head of 
the 
Army before the new government is appointed, while obtaining his 
main guarantee, which is the amnesty law. For his part, 
President Aristide obtains Gen. Cedras' early retirement before 
the establishment of the new government. 
  The vote on the law creating the new police force will take 
place after a new government takes office because -- say the 
deputies -- in keeping with the Constitution, only the executive 
can define such a law. 

