BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 16 (BTA) -- Today parliament continued 
its second reading of texts of the Judicial Power Act which were 
returned for discussions in the Legislative Committee. The MP's 
of the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) were present and voted. 
In late May they declared a boycott of parliament's plenary 
sittings in protest against the failure of Prof. Berov's cabinet 
to resign after its proposed reshuffle was rejected by 
parliament. However, a week ago they decided to return for the 
debates on the Judicial Power Act. 
  According to the SDS, the requirements for membership in the 
Supreme Judicial Council contradict the constitutional rights of 
the citizens. It is the duty of the deputies to be in the 
debating chamber when the Constitution is being violated, SDS 
leader Filip Dimitrov commented on the decision to return to 
parliament. Parliament did not approve the amendments proposed 
by the SDS providing for lawyers and jurisconsults to have the 
right to participate in supreme judicial bodies without the 
requirement of a five-year length of service as judges, 
prosecutors and investigators. Thus the MP's proved their firm 
intention to let arbitrariness reign supreme in Bulgaria, 
Dimitrov said, addressing the debating chamber. According to 
the SDS, in its present form this act reveals possibilities for 
political cleansing. 
  The Organized Crime Control Service should remain a central 
service, the Parliamentary National Security Committee decided 
today, debating a bill on the service. It heard representatives 
of different services of the Ministry of the Interior, who set 
forth different opinions protecting their professional areas but 
finally the Committee decided in favour of the idea for a 
central organized crime control service. The deputies addressed 
an interpellation to Defence Minister Valentin Aleksandrov in 
connection with numerous complaints to the committee of 
discharge of academic-rank experts from the army in violation of 
the Academic Rank Persons Act. The problem will be discussed at 
the next session of the committee due to official engagements of 
the defence minister. 
  Grain export will become imperative because of the expected 
1-1.5 -million-tonne surplus after this year's harvest, MP's of 
the Parliamentary Agriculture Committee agreed at their session 
today. A profit of 110 million leva (about $2 million) could 
have been made from last year's harvest, Lyubomir Draganov, 
chairman of the state-owned Zurno Ltd. said. The government has 
been submitted a concept for reorganizing the company with U.S. 
assistance, Draganov added. The committee also acquainted itself 
with the progress of the land reform in Bulgaria. 
  National Radio and National Television should organize broad 
public debates on the problems of culture and above all on the 
programme proposed by the Ministry of Culture for reducing the 
number of cultural institutions. This was decided at today's 
session of the Parliamentary Radio and Television Committee. The 
programme for reform in culture, which provides for the closing 
down of many theatres, galleries, cinemas, etc., was sharply 
criticized by the members of the committee. 
  The Parliamentary Budget and Finance Committee today 
approved 
a bill ratifying the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage, the Joint Protocol on its implementation and the 
Paris Convention on Civil Liability in Nuclear Power. By 
ratifying the Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol Bulgaria 
will accede to international legal regulations facilitating 
trade in nuclear equipment and services. 

