BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature: Correspondents </F>
Igor Porshnev, Vitaliy Trubetskoy, and others] 
  [Text] Moscow does not see any serious problems in 
relations with Turkey. "Individual anti-Russian statements by 
Turkish representatives should be viewed as a reflection of the 
inner political game," director of the Russian Foreign 
Ministry's 4th Asian Department Valeriy Yegoshkin told Interfax. 
  He said that the recent statement by Chief of the Turkish 
General Staff Dogan Gyuresh to the effect that Russia continued 
to pursue an imperial policy in the region must not be perceived 
as a symptom of cooling in Russian-Turkish relations. 
  To quote Yegoshkin, this statement was made in a complicated 
inner political context and was intended for inner use. Anti- 
Russian statements had been made in Turkey before. However, the 
statement in question went far beyond the limits of the 
admissible, which caused a sharp response in Russia, he said. 
  The Ankara officials have isolated themselves from this 
statement. General Gyuresh also asserts that he was 
misunderstood, he continued. In his opinion, Russia and Turkey 
had good prospects for cooperation. Although various Turkish 
quarters have a different attitude to Russian-Turkish 
rapprochement, it is early yet to talk about the deterioration 
of bilateral relations, he said. 
  Yegoshkin doubts that a serious clash may occur between the 
Russian and Turkish interests during the division of spheres of 
influence in the Black Sea region and the Turkic republics of 
the former Soviet Union. "The Turkish representatives we are 
dealing with try to isolate themselves from the pan-Turkic 
moods. They say that Ankara recognizes Russia's legitimate 
interests in the Turkic world and does not try to assume a 
dominating role. We have no reasons for treating them with 
misgiving," he said. 
  Speaking about free navigation through Bosporus and 
Dardanelles which Turkey is trying to limit, Yegoshkin expressed 
hope that Ankara will not disregard the opinion of the world 
community. "If it does, it may find itself in complete 
isolation. Not a single country has supported the introduction 
of new rules. Moreover, Turkey's strongest critics are its 
neighbors, who are against barriers complicating the passage of 
their ships through Bosporus and Dardanelles, he said. 
  Commenting on the utilization of the resources of the 
Caspian 
Sea by all countries of the region, Yegoshkin said the position 
of Azerbaijan created certain problems. 
  The countries of the Caspian region have equal access to the 
Caspian Sea which not divided into territorial waters or 
economic zones, he said. 
  To quote Yegoshkin, Baku has a different opinion. Azerbaijan 
would like to own a large part of the Caspian Sea and attract 
foreign companies for developing the Caspian oil deposits. 
Azerbaijan's unilateral moves may damage the interests of other 
Caspian countries. Such problems must be tackled at a 
negotiating table by all the countries concerned, he said. 

