BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 19 Apr (PL) -- According to a GRANMA article 
titled "The Best Recommendation: ...Click," the anti-Cuban TV 
station known as Marti will continue to be unable to broadcast 
its signal to Cuba even if it changes its frequency and channels. 
  GRANMA has denied the success of a recommendation made to 
the 
station by a U.S. congressional panel to switch its VHF 
frequency to UHF in its fruitless attempts to reach the Cuban 
audience thanks to a Cuban Government-sponsored interference 
system that blocks out illegal broadcasting. 
  The newspaper indicates that U.S. technicians and 
specialists 
are aware of this, but are fraudulently not admitting to the 
public that the TV station has failed to achieve its objectives. 
This is a hostile action at a time when the possibility of 
reaching a bilateral agreement on communications is being 
debated. 
  The text specifies that this also coincides with the 
commemoration in this capital of a meeting between Havana's 
government and sectors representing Cuban emigres overseas, 
[words indistinct] to which switching frequency does not make 
that TV station less illegal. Marti also uses the deceitful 
argument of offering Cubans "uncensored information," which 
really means information that suits U.S. interests. GRANMA adds 
that an average of 1,043 radio hours per week originating in the 
United States are part of a war that is overloading the Cuban 
dial. 
  GRANMA says that this argument does not stand up to 
analysis. 
And if this wasn't enough, they would have to admit that a high 
percentage of entertainment programming on Cuban TV is produced 
in the United States, as are some TV news services. 
  The idea is to smuggle anti-Cuban "propaganda," not 
"information without censorship," with which they seek to 
demoralize, discourage, and divide Cubans and to criticize the 
Cuban economy which they are sabotaging daily with their 
blockade legislation and other harassment measures, the 
newspaper argues. 
  The commentary warns also that if the anti-Cuban television 
does not want to trip on the same stone (failure) twice, 
something that could happen to the adminsitration of President 
William Clinton, it would be worth its while to listen to the 
(onomatopoeic, succinct, and direct) advice of millions of 
Cubans: "Click" (meaning, turning off their television sets). 

