BFN 

<F P=106> [By China Editor Cary Huang] </F>
  [Text] More than 70 percent of overseas-funded enterprises 
in Guangdong province have abused workers' rights or violated 
Chinese labour laws and regulations, an official survey has 
found. 
  Seventy-one of 100 foreign ventures surveyed in the province 
were found to be in breach of the labour rights protection law, 
Chinese sources quoted a provincial labour authority's report as 
saying. 
  Guangdong is home to about two-thirds of more than 200,000 
foreign-funded enterprises in China, of which about two-thirds 
are owned by Hong Kong businessmen. 
  There has been an increasing number of labour rights abuse 
cases in China recently, and the issue has become a matter of 
concern for labour authorities and trade unions. 
  The survey, by the Guangdong Provincial Labour Bureau and 
the 
Provincial Association of Trade Unions, found many company 
regulations in the foreign-funded, labour-intensive 
manufacturing sector were not in line with Chinese laws 
regarding workers' rights. 
  The report says many factory rules and disciplinary actions 
imposed by employers violated China's Enterprises Law and the 
Regulations on Award and Punishment of Enterprise Employees 
stipulated by the State Council, China's cabinet. 
  The survey of foreign-funded ventures in the Pearl River 
delta area, including Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Zhuhai, Dongguan, and 
Baoan county, was prepared for the provincial legislature to 
devise concrete and specific regulations for the administration 
of foreign-funded ventures and for the protection of workers' 
rights. 
  The survey found that a large proportion of ventures 
required 
workers to work much longer hours than was stipulated in the law. 
  Many firms fined workers if they were found to be in 
violation of company rules. Some foreign employers required 
workers to surrender their identity cards on arrival at work and 
that cards were returned only when workers were allowed to leave 
work, having fulfilled the required work quota. 
  Some factory rules stipulated physical punishment for 
workers 
if they were found to be seriously defying factory rules. 
  "Workers are required to sign a contract that includes terms 
to accept such illegal and inhuman factory rules before they are 
hired," the report says. 

