Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The tree was the ancient home of mankind, the 
continuity of life depended on it, that was its first function 
and a million years later it has not changed in the slightest; 
the map has changed, the map of forests is not nearly the same. 
  It must have been a green planet and it no longer is; the 
five continents have giant areas of desert that are constantly 
growing; then not only forests are in danger, life is, too. 
  As an example, and at the same time a question: when will 
the 
forest where we used to play as children disappear? We did not 
even notice when the forest disappeared, and now we have to 
travel farther to hear the ``cries'' of the forest. 
  And so, as no one notices, 350,000 hectares of forest 
disappear in Ecuador each year, according to the ecological 
foundations. Esmeraldas is one of the provinces most affected. 
At first glance, it is not noticeable. Traveling along the 
Santiago and the Cayapas Rivers, everything seems perfect and 
Esmeraldas richly deserves its title of green province. 
  The foundations' position is credible. They have identified 
the problem, and if it were not for them, the situation of the 
forests would be worse. Nevertheless, officials at the Ministry 
of Agriculture believe that they exaggerate when they say that 
350,000 hectares are deforested each year. The Institute of 
Agriculture-Livestock Strategies says that the figure is 
200,000, but the Institute for Reforestation (Inefan) says it is 
barely 171,000. 
  What is happening in Esmeraldas is incomprehensible. There 
are trees wherever you look. Still, there are hundreds and 
thousands of pieces of timber all along the sides of the roads 
waiting to be loaded. 
  Many would not believe what is happening, what deforestation 
are they talking about, they would ask, if pachacos and 
terminalias--trees from the Amazon region planted in the 
tropics--are populating Esmeraldas in their thousands. 
  Someone who is profiting from all this said that nothing is 
happening here. As you can see we have planted 400 hectares 
of...800 hectares of..., and as if giving the lie to this truth, 
from the distance came the noise of a power saw, louder than the 
trilling of the birds at six in the evening, more powerful than 
the wind.... 
  There are an estimated 10-12,000 power saws like this in the 
country, cutting off life in the midst of the forest to supply 
the needs of an ever larger and more demanding society. 
  Borbon is ``the capital of the lumber market.'' That is no 
exaggeration. The banks of the river are covered with trees. 
Then the description we once gave it in these pages was, in 
fact, accurate: ``Borbon, the Potosi [silver producing center in 
Bolivia, legendary for the wealth it produced] of timber.'' 
  The last chanules, cedars, and laurel trees arrive by river 
from the heart of the forest. Man's intervention is plundering 
the green patrimony. This is happening in Pedro Vicente 
Maldonado, in Quininde, in San Lorenzo, but in Playa de Oro it 
is worse, they say that only the stubble of the forest remains 
there. During the trip we took with the Inefan officials, the 
magnitude of the deforestation problem was not evident. The 
settlers said that we would have to travel four hours upriver to 
see that. But in Borbon we can get an idea of what is happening. 
  There are giant cranes that take the timber from the river 
and place it on trucks that then take it to Quito, Guayaquil, 
and Cuenca, or by sea to some Colombian port where it can be 
sold more profitably. 
  These days, a tree in the forest is worth 60,000 sucres, but 
in Quito, the same tree is worth 100,000 sucres, including the 
cost of transportation, and it is worth twice that in Colombia. 
  Borbon lives from lumber, without it ``everyone would 
leave.'' There is no denying this; the exploitation of the 
forest provides the livelihood for hundreds of families in the 
area. It is a respectable activity as long as the exploitation 
of the forests is carried out in a responsible way according to 
the principles of conservation. Otherwise the losers over the 
long term will be those who are benefiting today. 
  It is not a matter of being a pure environmentalist who 
wants 
to maintain the forest patrimony intact, as National Forestry 
Director Luis Valverde said. The forest is obviously there to be 
used, but for each tree cut down, 10 or more should be planted. 
  The conflict between timber men and lands is taking place in 
the upper Cayapas and in Onzole, according to a representative 
of the Cayapa community in Santa Maria. A whole arsenal of 
implements--picks, machetes, manual chippers, power saws, 
tractors--is creating great environmental gaps. ``The trilling 
of the birds has given way to that of the power saws, and there 
is no one to stop it.'' 
  Seeing the timber, like gigantic rafts, move slowly along 
the 
rivers in search of a buyer, it becomes clear that someone is 
responsible for the destruction to the forests: the four 
companies operating there--Plywood, Endesa, Foresa, and Codesa. 
The companies claim that they are managing their operations so 
as not to deplete the forests and say that the worst despoilers 
are the settlers. The settlers say that the four companies 
exploit 80 percent of the forest, and they exploit only 20 
percent, while the natives blame the timber companies and the 
settlers...no one is to be believed. 
  This is not an attempt to make the timber companies or the 
settlers seem more responsible for one of the worst chapters in 
Ecuadoran ecology. The problem is that the forests were never 
renewed, the protection and reforestation laws never observed, 
and successive governments watched passively while bit by bit 
the green vanished. 
  Trees are a renewable resource and reforestation programs 
should have been started years ago. These programs would serve 
today as contributors of forest reserves to maintain the timber 
industry, without having to issue increasingly frequent calls 
for environmental help. 
  It was thought that the forests would last forever. This was 
not the case, and the dreams of those who thought that one day 
timber could be the main support for the economy are further 
from realization. 
  Large and small companies complain about waves of settlers 
who, from time to time, arrive with their implements in search 
of land. When they do not find a place close to a community, 
they cut down a section of forest and plant coffee, banana, and 
cacao. 
  Inhabitants of these areas say that there are no longer any 
great expanses of forest, ``there are only small portions on 
farms.'' 
  The problem of the Esmeraldas forest goes back to 1965, when 
the state, through the forestry program, granted concessions to 
the industries that built bridges, opened roads, and brought in 
transport to carry out their work. Access whetted the appetites 
and the needs of the people, and the forest was parceled out. 
  Valverde said that aggressive colonization took place during 
the government of Jaime Roldos and deforestation was total. ``We 
realized then that there was nothing to be done to stop 
colonization. Colonization is overwhelming.'' 
  After so many speeches and forestry programs, the only truth 
is that trees are the livelihood of today, and they will be 
tomorrow if we protect them now. 
<H5>  The Country Loses </H5>
  There are many ways of understanding development, but for 
the 
Cayapas of Esmeraldas Province, when natural resources are 
destroyed, there is no basis for the creation of sustained and 
lasting prosperity. 
  Because of that belief, they demand greater responsibility 
from the timber companies and the settlers in exploiting native 
forests. There are four companies in Esmeraldas, the oldest of 
which is Plywood, which has been operating in the Quininde for 
28 years. 
  There is no doubt that the companies have been growing at 
the 
expense of the natural forest that stretches from the valley of 
Guayllabamba to Cande. In exchange, the four companies have 
reforested 4,000 hectares with pachaco, laurel, mascaray, 
terminalias, and jacaranda. 
  Exactly how many hectares have been deforested is unknown. 
The kindest estimates speak of 200,000 in 30 years and assume 
that there remain 1.504 million hectares to be deforested. 
  The problem is very complicated, as there are very few firms 
that recognize their responsibility to reforest. The others say: 
``How am I going to reforest. If they occupy my land, the forest 
is no longer mine.'' After so many unanswered questions, it 
turns out that one of the elements of the problem we are 
discussing is land ownership. 
  How much time is left for what remains of the forest? 
Perhaps 
very little, if the companies do not begin to implement a 
forestry plan. Only Plywood has carried out reforestation in the 
area. Marco Gandara, the company's administrator in Quininde, 
says that forest management is being practiced. 
  Together with deforestation, another problem is the 
cultivation of the African palm. Wherever one goes, the roads 
are private and the palm groves are so vast that one can go for 
hours without finding the exit. 
  The palm growers purchase the land from the settlers. The 
palm is a tree that requires nutrients, especially nitrogen. The 
growing of African palm is prohibited in all countries, except 
Ecuador, where it is grown even knowing that afterward these 
lands will be a desert. 
<H5>  The Forest, Subject of Discord </H5>
  Now that the problem has been identified and it has been 
determined that 60 percent of deforested land can be utilized 
for raising livestock, Inefan officials have launched a Program 
To Encourage Forest Replanting (Planfor). 
  Planfor contemplates the reforestation of 600,000 hectares 
in 
20 years, the creation of 50,000 new jobs as a direct result of 
Planfor, and about 250,000 jobs as an indirect result. 
  This entails getting the peasants to ``fall in love'' with 
planting trees, said Luis Valverde, national forestry director, 
so that money from the forest returns to the forest.... 
  During the trip to Esmeraldas with officials of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Minister Mario Gonzalez spoke of the need to 
preserve the province as a forestry zone. 
  Ecological tourism is an enormous field. Galapagos is the 
prime example, and Esmeraldas has just as much beauty to offer. 
  This statement runs counter to the differences among 
Chachis, 
and between blacks and Chachis. At this very moment there is a 
dispute in progress because a group of communities wants to 
lease more than 20,000 hectares to a timber company for 
exploitation. 
  There is opposition among members of the community. The 
blacks threaten that on the day the forest is leased, there will 
be total war. It is foretold (is this an alert?). 
  Eliseo Medina, president of the Zonal Organization of Upper 
Cayapa, is in favor of an agreement to divide the land between 
the Chachis and the blacks. ``We want the land to be shared, we 
are two ethnic peoples, we should get along, but we will not 
allow the forest to be fragmented.'' 
  Luis Pinchiche, representative of the Chachis, charged that 
the timber company will pay 16,500 sucres for a tree, when the 
real cost is 160,000. This is how the subject of the forests in 
Esmeraldas is discussed these days, between interlocutors 
without a sensible dialogue or clear objectives. 

