SUMMARY 

                            In an effort to address popular discontent over increases in 
power outages, the Cuban Minister of Basic Industry recently 
appeared on television to deliver an unusual defense of the 
regime's management of  the country's deteriorating electrical 
system.  While the minister's exposition may have answered 
Cubans' questions about the reasons for recently increased 
outages, it is unlikely that the presentation erased popular 
skepticism over official forecasts of economic recovery. 

                       END SUMMARY 

   The high-profile discussion of Cuba's energy problems by Basic 
Industry Minister Marcos Portal on 16 April suggests that the 
Castro regime was trying to defuse resentment over its inability 
to provide relief from increased power outages by showing Cubans 
that it pays close attention to their questions and concerns. 
Thus, Cuban television broadcast the minister's two-hour, 
detailed exposition of current and longer term energy problems 
after the media had made several brief announcements indicating 
that the need for power plant maintenance made it impossible for 
Havana to curtail unscheduled outages.(SEE NOTE 1)  For example, 
Radio Reloj on 13 April reported that the additional "cuts" in 
electricity will only "diminish little by little" as the 
"maintenance program" is carried out. 
   (NOTE 1) According to Havana media reporting, electricity cuts in 
April have consistently "exceeded" the "national schedule of 
outages" (Radio Rebelde, 1 April; Radio Reloj, 15 April). 
Indicating that extensive outages would continue into May, Radio 
Rebelde on 29 April reported that the "pattern" of lengthy 
outages will continue "next week." 
   In contrast, Havana's response to popular discontent last summer 
over extended blackouts was relatively low-key, perhaps because, 
at that time, the regime had sufficient reserves of oil to 
curtail unscheduled outages.  Accordingly, in early August of 
last year, some three weeks prior to an announcement of increased 
availability of domestic-produced oil, the deputy director of the 
national electrical enterprise spoke for just six minutes on the 
power situation during a regularly scheduled newscast (Radio 
Rebelde, 5 August 1993). 

   Explaining Plant Breakdowns 

   Portal used much of his presentation to explain the reasons for 
frequent power plant maintenance, apparently in an effort to 
disabuse Cubans of the notion that Havana's use of corrosive 
domestic crude oil was the major cause of equipment breakdowns. 
Responding to what he called "the people's concern" and 
"confusion" over the use of high-sulfur domestic crude--which he 
said some Cubans think is "destroying" power plants--Portal 
explained that backlogs in power plant maintenance are the 
primary reason for equipment failure.  Portal attributed the 
delays in maintenance to the shortage of spare parts from the 
former Czechoslovakia and Soviet Union--Cuba's main suppliers of 
power-generating equipment.  Portal said that needed supplies 
from these sources "stopped three years ago" and explained that 
Cuba's "difficult financial situation"--caused primarily by the 
drop in sugar and nickel earnings--made it difficult for Havana 
to obtain equipment from new sources. 

Reassurances on Economic Recovery 

   Portal also used his presentation to argue that increased power 
shortages did not signal a further deterioration of the economy- 
-which the regime has suggested will begin a gradual recovery 
this year.(SEE NOTE 2)  For example, in response to a question 
about the electrical system's impact on Cuba's "economic 
recovery," Portal's "categorical" answer was that the low 
"generating capacity" of the electrical system would "not put a 
brake on development." 
   (NOTE 2) For example, Radio Rebelde on 14 March reported that 
1994 was showing "symptoms of economic reactivation." 
   Suggesting, however, that Portal realized that his detailed 
discussion of Cuba's energy problems could in fact raise doubts 
about the country's economic future, he tried to portray as yet 
unresolved problems in the brightest light possible: 
   -- Although Portal admitted that he could not "confirm" that 
business "negotiations" with Russian and Czech officials to 
obtain needed power plant equipment would be successful, he 
maintained that the "relative newness" of Czech and Russian 
equipment provided Cuba with a "sense of sureness in overcoming 
the special [austerity] period." 
   -- While, at one point, Portal stated that the country "must be 
prepared . . . to face any difficulty" with regard to fuel 
supplies, at another point in his presentation he noted that this 
year "difficulties [in fuel availability] are being 
overcome."(SEE NOTE 3) 
   (NOTE 3) Although the deal has yet to be initialed, in several 
recent media reports Havana has suggested that it will soon be 
able to purchase small amounts of oil from Colombia.  For 
example, Radio Rebelde on 19 March reported that the Colombian 
Minister of Mines and Energy "reiterated" his government's 
"decision" to sell Cuba 15,000 to 20,000 barrels of oil daily- 
-approximately 20 percent of estimated daily consumption.  The 
report did not indicate how long the deliveries, for which 
financial "guarantees" have yet to be made, would last. 

Background 

   Judging by an unusually frank Radio Rebelde discussion of 
discontent over the increased outages on 12 April, a few days 
before Portal's presentation, the minister's exposition of Cuba's 
energy situation was probably prompted by complaints about 
sketchy information on the blackouts and worry over Cuba's 
prospects for economic recovery.  Journalists on the "Straight 
Talk" program--which often discusses everyday concerns about 
economic issues--said that the "dry, brief notes" issued by the 
national electrical enterprise under Portal's direction were 
"unacceptable" and declared that Cubans needed "better and more 
detailed" information on the reasons for the blackouts.  The 
journalists stressed that people "deserve" an explanation of the 
"economic situation," since for "many" Cubans the "the increased 
number of blackouts" could "create the false notion that the 
economy is regressing again." 
   Several Cuban media reports also suggest that Portal's address 
was prompted in particular by complaints from Havana residents. 
For example, a Radio Rebelde commentary noted that Portal's 
"detailed explanation" should have satisfied all "questions, 
doubts, criticism, and complaints" about power cuts "particularly 
in Havana City" (16 April).   While Havana residents were 
apparently annoyed over outages that at times lasted up to 20 
hours (Prensa Latina, 13 April), the 12 April "Straight Talk" 
program indicated that in addition, residents of the capital were 
"excessively irritated" over the fact that power "is turned off" 
in some neighborhoods but "not in others."  In his television 
address, Portal flatly denied the existence of "privileges or 
anything like that" with regard to outages, stating that people 
should "banish the idea."  While the minister acknowledged that 
approximately 3O percent" of Havana residences "practically 
never" experience outages, he explained that this is because they 
are in close proximity to hospitals or economically important 
tourist facilities, or, in the case of "Old Havana," because of 
"technological" considerations. (SEE NOTE 4) 
   (NOTE 4) Radio Reloj on 6 August 1993 reported that frequent 
outages in "Old Havana" and central Havana would "damage" the 
aged underground lines in those areas. 

Implications 

   The Castro regime's high-profile media response to popular 
resentment over recent increases in power outages suggests that 
as Cubans endure their third year of economic hardship, Havana is 
making an increasingly greater effort to show the population that 
it is responsive to their concerns and that it is handling the 
energy shortage competently.  Presumably, Havana is hoping that 
such efforts will improve its standing with the population and 
buy it more time to find solutions to the nation's economic 
crisis.  In the meantime, by placing top government officials out 
front to address popular complaints, presumably they, and not 
Cuban President Fidel Castro, will be associated with--and held 
accountable for--unpopular austerity measures. 
   The fact that Havana this year appears to have no solution to 
unplanned power outages other than a public relations effort 
contrasts with its ability last year to boost power output by 
using domestic oil and may indicate that power-generating 
capabilities have been reduced to a greater extent than admitted 
by the regime. 
   (AUTHOR:  ROLLINS.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, EUROPE/LATIN AMERICA GROUP, (703) 733-6120.) 
ELAG/GILISON/cs 12/0132z may 

