Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Deana Knezevic: "Head of Out of the Sand"] </F>
  [Text] If there is still anyone who wants to argue that 
Croatia will not have sanctions imposed on it and that this is 
yet another round of pressure under way, then he should support 
this view by putting his name to it and then perhaps somebody 
might believe him. However, there are no such political 
statements, just as there is no objective assessment of the 
reasons and motives for the imposition of sanctions and of the 
consequences that such a move would cause for the citizens of 
Croatia. 
  The threat of sanctions has been swinging like a pendulum, 
at 
times very close, at times on the opposite side; however, the 
pendulum has never stopped swinging. If it was at its furthest 
when U.S. Ambassador to the UN Madeleine Albright announced 
sanctions in the event of direct Croatian involvement in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, then it started to move with seemingly 
marginal details such as the open participation of the deputies 
from the Croatian Parliament in HVO [Croatian Defense Council] 
formations. The deaths of three Italian journalists in Mostar 
had a great influence on international public opinion. The 
assessments by foreign observers about the activities of 
military formations in Bosnia-Herzegovina have been analyzed 
more thoroughly in the foreign than in the domestic press. The 
fact that the Croatian Foreign Ministry and even the foreign 
minister himself must all too often put right the results of 
foreign affairs blunders committed by other ministries, thus, 
taking away the time and credibility needed to interprete the 
essence of Croatia's interests and policy, itself indicates how 
this threat has been underestimated. Why was Dr. Mate Granic 
put in a situation in which he had to discuss the mobilization 
of the editor of [the satirical newspaper] FERAL TRIBUNE in the 
Council of Europe? 
  Regardless of the nature of Croatia's engagement in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, it would pay to estimate what the sanctions would 
bring. The Serbian economy has been wrecked although it had 
many elements of resistance to sanctions that Croatia does not 
have. This was, primarily, the structure of the economy, in 
which the export sector is poorly represented. The agricultural 
population forms a considerable segment of the demographic 
structure of that country. Serbia did not need to care about 
the views of the West because it had the support on the other 
side, which for a long time permitted it to keep the borders to 
the east permeable for oil and other goods. Besides, when it 
started its conquests, it had considerably larger foreign 
currency reserves that Croatia has now. 
  In what state would the sanctions befall Croatia? In normal 
relations with the world, it is to Croatia's advantage that it 
has an open economy in which imports constitute over half the 
estimated GNP and exports slightly less than that. Left without 
foreign markets, it could not rely on its rural population. In 
the West it borders countries that could not compromise their 
own international position and reputation by violating 
sanctions. The economic disintegration that has taken place in 
Serbia would be considerably more rapid in Croatia. 
  Against all these points one should emphasize at least one 
infallible argument for which sanctions are worth the risk. 
Even if it is true that the Croatian side bears no guilt and 
the sanctions are merely an excuse for the West to distance 
itself from the Balkan crisis, it would pay to avoid even the 
slightest motives. Namely, if we are exposed to all this risk 
because of the sheer desire to help the Croatian people in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, then the situation is truly absurd: Croatia 
under sanctions could not even help itself! 

