Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "U.S. View Unacceptable, Says </F>
Congress"] 
  [Text] New Delhi, Oct. 30. The Congress(I) today officially 
said the U.S. view, as reflected in the remarks of a senior 
State Department official made known yesterday, questioning the 
accession of Kashmir to India in 1947 was "incomprehensible and 
totally unacceptable." 
  But the Congress reaction released to the media by its 
spokesman, Mr. Chandulal Chandrakar, also pointed out that 
India's reaction would be "balanced" as "we are a mature 
country." 
  The Congress release said the kind of statement that had 
been 
made in Washington adversely affects Indo-U.S. bilateral 
relations and was "best avoided." 
  The following is the text of the two-paragraph Congress 
statement: 
  "It is a matter of profound regret that a senior official of 
the State Department of the U.S. should have questioned the 
accession of Kashmir to India in 1947. We find this attitude 
incomprehensible and totally unacceptable. 
  "We hope that the latest pronouncement reflects the views of 
an individual and not the U.S. Government. We are a mature 
country and our response will be balanced. At the same time we 
cannot but point out that statements of this nature adversely 
affect Indo-U.S. bilateral relations and are best avoided." 
  While the ruling party has kept to a middle-of-the 
road-formulation in a relatively adverse situation, senior 
members of the union Cabinet have noted that the latest 
developments in relation to Kashmir have not been brought before 
the highest council of the Government. 
  The U.S. Government statement on Kashmir, which has caused 
consternation all round in the country, was available here 
yesterday morning, but was not even referred to in the Cabinet 
meeting held at 7 p.m. 
  Nor for that matter was the interim order of a division 
bench 
of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court asking the Government to 
allow food inside Hazratbal, and restore water and electricity 
to the shrine. The Court's direction tends to negate the very 
logic of the siege of Hazratbal laid by the Army to flush out 
armed terrorists, including foreign mercenaries. 
  Cabinet sources said individual Ministers were not always 
expected to have details of every new development that might 
have occurred in the course of a day, especially in a 
pre-election situation. 

