BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The Burmese Border Situation"] </F>
  [Text] Thailand must keep a close watch on all 
developments in connection with the ongoing fighting between the 
Burmese Government troops and the Shan force under the 
leadership of the world infamous drug kingpin Khun Sa or Chang 
Sifu. This is to avoid falling into any undesirable situation, 
like the case of the fighting in Cambodia -- accusations from 
Cambodian leaders. 
  Latest reports indicate that Khun Sa's multiethnic force, 
comprising heavily of armed Shan, Chinese Haw, and Karen 
soldiers, successfully captured the major government's 
stronghold in Kengtung on 28 May after the 20-hours of fierce 
battle that erupted the day before. 
  It is believed that some 7,000 well-equipped men under Khun 
Sa's command have now gained full control of Kengtung after 
having slain 160 Burmese soldiers and wounded 310 others, while 
2,000 others fled their bases in disarray. 
  Kengtung is situated some 120 kilometers north of the border 
district of Mae Sai, Chiang Rai Province. At present, some 
1,200 Burmese civilians are seeking refuge in the district and 
the number is expected to increase. 
  U.S. narcotics suppression officials have estimated the 
total 
opium production in the areas under Khun Sa's control in 1992 at 
2,280 tons, with the output expected to rise in later years. 
  It should be noted that the route traffickers used to ship 
heroin and opium from the Golden Triangle and nearby areas to 
the world market in the past five years has been shifted from 
Thailand to China. The success of the narcotics suppression 
operation in Thailand has shifted this severe problem into China. 
  It is possible that Khun Sa has been able to sell more 
heroin 
and opium to the world market in the past few years. 
Subsequently, he has been able to improve the efficiency of his 
army in terms of both manpower and equipment. We notice that 
Khun Sa's men easily defeated the Burmese troops in recent 
battles. 
  In any event, Thailand should be aware of problems it can 
have with Burma, a neighboring country like Cambodia. Frequent 
victories by Khun Sa's army over the Burmese Government troops 
can spark off suspicion on part of the Burmese Government as 
Cambodian leaders have always blamed Thailand for every defeat 
their troops have suffered from the Khmer Rouge. 

