Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 10 KYODO -- Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher and Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata agreed Thursday 
[10 March] that the United States and Japan should make efforts 
to prevent existing tension from escalating and try to solve 
problems through negotiations, Foreign Ministry officials said. 
  During a two-hour meeting at the Foreign Ministry, Hata told 
Christopher that there is "tension" between Japan and the U.S. 
over economic problems. 
  Christopher was quoted as saying the economic row should not 
affect security and political relations between the two nations, 
the officials said. 
  The secretary of state told Hata the U.S. wants to watch 
closely what the Japanese Government will hammer out as a 
market-opening package and then decide on what to do with the 
collapsed bilateral "framework" talks. 
  The officials said Hata and Christopher did not discuss 
specific economic problems. 
  They did not take up the U.S. Government's reinstatement 
last week of a trade law known as Super 301, which gives the 
administration power to impose sanctions against countries it 
determines guilty of unfair trade practices, they said. 
  Japanese officials believe the action is aimed at pressing 
Japan into opening its markets and reducing its trade surplus. 
  Hata told Christopher the "tension" between Tokyo and 
Washington is unlikely to immediately have a bad influence on 
the entire bilateral relationship. But the foreign minister 
noted that the two nations should not underestimate the tension, 
the officials said. 
  He was quoted as saying it is important to keep Japan-U.S. 
ties in good form from a global point of view because Asia, 
Europe and the rest of the world are keeping their eyes on the 
two. 
  The Tokyo-Washington ties took a turn for the worse last 
month when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Bill 
Clinton announced the collapse of trade framework negotiations 
aimed at redressing Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S. 
which totaled some 60 billion dollars last year according to 
U.S. figures. 
  Christopher and Hata agreed Japan and the U.S. have 
commitments to their alliance relations based on a bilateral 
security pact and that both countries have joint 
responsibilities for maintaining peace and prosperity throughout 
the world, they said. 
  Christopher expressed worries about possible deterioration 
of 
the relationship of trust between Japan and the U.S., noting 
voices in the U.S. that Tokyo is not sufficiently making 
efforts to reduce its current account surplus or to boost 
imports while the U.S. is fulfilling its responsibilities to 
reduce its fiscal deficit and strengthen competitiveness, the 
officials said. 
  The two men agreed that Tokyo and Washington should both try 
to offer ideas to seek a solution, they said. 
  Christopher, who arrived in Japan late Wednesday night for a 
three-day visit, called for "tangible" results, adding the U.S. 
does not want "ambiguities" or just procedures, they said. 
  Hata told Christopher that Japan is making "voluntary" 
efforts and is compiling a package of market-opening measures, 
such as deregulation and import-promotion steps. He added Japan 
is making such efforts not only for the sake of relations with 
other countries but for the improvement of its own people's 
lives. 
  Earlier in the day, Christopher told reporters that Japan, 
in 
the course of its reforms, could benefit from advice from the 
U.S. 
  "I think there is a change and reform taking place in Japan 
and, if they'll permit an outsider to be heard, it may be 
helpful to express our views about the importance of the 
relationship we have with Japan," Christopher said. He 
mentioned security, diplomacy and economy as areas in which the 
bilateral relationship has particular importance. 
  Christopher cited "the need to strengthen our economic 
relationship so that there is a balance in our overall 
relationship." 
  He denied that he is trying to take his "message" directly 
to 
the Japanese people because the U.S. has failed to get it 
through to them via talks with the Japanese Government. "I 
think it's always desirable to communicate directly, when one 
can, to the people of a country," he said, adding that the U.S. 
message "can be strengthened if we convey it ourselves, not 
because it's been misrepresented." 
  The coalition government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa 
has undertaken political reform and financial deregulation since 
coming to office last August. 
  Christopher, who leaves Japan on Friday after a three-day 
stay, made the comments after a meeting with Cambodian 
Co-Premiers Prince Norodom Ranariddh and Hun Sen, who are in 
Tokyo for a conference on aid to Cambodia. 

