BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 11 Apr (MENA) -- Prime Minister Dr. 'Atif 
Sidqi has stated that the emergency law will be applied within a 
strictly regulated legal framework and will be subject in all 
cases to judicial supervision. He explained that the powers 
that this law confers on the executive branch will be used 
within the narrowest limits, in accordance with public security 
requirements, and will not infringe on the lawful expression of 
opinion. 
  In a statement to the People's Assembly today, the prime 
minister said that the government will promptly terminate the 
state of emergency as soon as the causes that made it necessary 
disappear. 
  Dr. Sidqi recalled that the government had formerly 
submitted 
to the People's Assembly several reports about the dangers 
threatening the country as a result of extremist, corrupt 
ideologies, and the terrorism organized by lowly, dishonorable 
terrorist groups whose only objective is to sabotage the 
country, spread confusion, and kill innocent people. 
  Sidqi emphasized that the determined battle against 
terrorism 
and extremism will continue unabated until terrorism is 
completely eradicated so that the country's political, economic, 
and social progress can be safeguarded. 
  He explained that this suspect terrorist faction has taken 
the liberty of plundering people's possessions, honor, and lives 
and made free with matters made taboo by God, perpetrating vile 
and ignorant acts, spreading corruption in the world, calling 
society infidel, and separating husband from wife under the 
guise of religion. He declared that true Islam eschews such 
acts. 
  Sidqi said: We must distinguish between piety and terrorist 
extremism. Piety must be encouraged and purified of all 
erroneous and misleading ideologies because religious piety is a 
basic component of the Egyptian citizen's character. A sound 
society capable of development and progress is a society that 
adheres to religious values and codes of conduct that renounce 
violence and terrorism. 
  He pointed out that extremists and terrorists seek to impose 
their custodianship on society through a hardline ideology that 
is contrary to religious teachings or through armed violence and 
bloodshed. He asserted that these acts must be confronted and 
exposed as totally unconnected with religion. 
  Sidqi told the People's Assembly that the government has 
made 
great strides in its campaign to encircle the terrorists, 
extremist rings, and their leaders. He said the security 
services' successful preemptive strikes against them have 
reduced their influence, penetrated their ranks, exposed their 
conspiracies, and destroyed many of their organizational 
structures. 
  He announced that the terrorists and extremists will not 
succeed through their criminal acts in achieving their 
objectives because Egypt is a strong country with a democratic 
system, founded on constitutional provisions and the sovereignty 
of the law. He said Egypt is the home of the venerable 
institution of al-Azhar and its people are committed to their 
values and moderate religion, renounce fanaticism and extremism, 
and are willing to make sacrifices to purge their country from 
the terrorists' vileness and corruption. 
  He explained that the government's policy in combating 
terrorism is firm, courageous, and clear and that it adheres, 
despite the terrorists' excesses, to legality and the 
sovereignty of the law. He added that the government is seeking 
to promote stability and to strengthen and develop the security 
services to enable them to maintain the initiative against 
extremist activity. He explained that the authorities are 
continuing their timely surveillance of the extremists' plans 
and are arresting their leaders and fugitive members, both at 
home and abroad. Sidqi explained that this is being done via 
coordination and cooperation with the concerned departments in 
friendly countries, in line with international and bilateral 
agreements. 
  The prime minister said that emergency laws are primarily 
concerned with enabling the state, in extraordinary 
circumstances, to adopt quick and necessary measures to defend 
security, stability, human life, utilities, and vital 
installations. 
  He continued: There is a need to maintain the state of 
emergency in view of the regrettable terrorist acts in the 
country, including attacks on tourists, assassination of 
officials, bombing of banks, and the treacherous killing of 
innocent citizens, police officers and police commanders. 
  Dr. Sidqi asserted that enforcing the emergency law is not 
an 
aim in itself but an option made necessary by events in order to 
protect our installations, utilities, public order, and homeland 
from those who would wreak destruction on them. 
  He pointed out that Egypt is not alone in applying an 
emergency law and that most other countries have constitutional 
provisions that organize states of emergency and set regulations 
for combating terrorism and extremism. He referred to the UK's 
annual extension of the emergency antiterrorism law in Northern 
Ireland since 1974 by an act of Parliament. He said other 
countries, including France, Italy, and Germany apply such laws 
to fight terrorism when necessary. 
  The prime minister explained to the People's Assembly that 
the state of emergency in Egypt has been in force since 1981 to 
defend important installations and to deter terrorists and 
hostile foreign conspiracies that seek to undermine Egypt's 
stability in concert with local terrorists. He added that it is 
difficult to handle such matters with normal laws whereas 
emergency regulations are designed for such contingencies in 
order to defend the homeland. 
  He reiterated that the extraordinary powers provided by the 
emergency law have not been used in Egypt except within the 
narrowest boundaries, in line with a strictly regulated legal 
framework, and under judicial supervision. He said they have 
never been used to infringe on people expressing lawful views 
and there has not been a single violation of this policy. He 
pointed out that, on the contrary, the government has sometimes 
refrained from using these powers out of confidence in the 
loyalty of the Egyptian public, who will not remain silent about 
any violation of our values, traditions, and morals. 
  Sidqi said this became evident recently when the citizens 
started helping the security forces pursue terrorists and 
extremists. He noted that there is an increasing popular anger 
with the terrorists. 
  In his statement Prime Minister Sidqi affirmed that the 
government has made a pledge to itself and to the People's 
Assembly that it will place the homeland's interest above any 
other consideration and that Egypt's stability and security is 
the first and foremost aim behind the extension of the state of 
emergency. He added that in light of the government's reports to 
the People's Assembly on the security situation, which highlight 
that this problem will remain as long these abnormal ideas exist 
in the minds of some people with limited knowledge and 
experience, presidential Decision No. 116 for 1994 extending the 
state of emergency for another period effective 1 June must be 
approved. 
  Prime Minister Sidqi explained that there are three 
principles that the government has affirmed each time it has 
asked the People's Assembly to extend the emergency law. These 
principles are that the state of emergency will be applied 
strictly in accordance with the law, that the law will be used 
in the narrowest limits, and that the government will not 
hesitate to end the state of emergency once the reasons for it 
no longer exist. 
  Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi then delivered a statement 
before the People's Assembly on the extension of the emergency 
law. He expressed the opinion that although the emergency law 
is directly linked to the issue of freedoms, it is at the same 
time also linked to grave events, dangers, and threats which are 
fully clear to the whole nation. He said the succession of 
events in the last few months has underlined the size and extent 
of the terrorist threat. In seeking the application of the 
emergency law, the government is fully committed to implementing 
it within the narrowest limits and according the requirements of 
the security situation. He added that facts have imposed 
themselves on the whole nation. It is not only the homeland's 
stability that is being threatened; the homeland's very 
existence and foundations are also being threatened. He 
explained that terrorism is no longer a phenomenon that can be 
dealt with on various integrated levels. Terrorism has become a 
serious challenge to the people's rights and aspirations and an 
overt conspiracy against their destiny. 
  In his statement before the People's Assembly, al-Alfi said 
that the powers entailed in the emergency law have given the 
security authorities an important area for quick and early 
action to confront terrorist schemes. These powers, to which 
there are no alternatives, have boosted the security efforts. 
  Al-Alfi stressed that the terrorist conspiracy aims to push 
the country toward complete chaos by striking at its economic 
interests, assassinating its executive and legislative leaders, 
and attempting to cause sectarian sedition. He explained that 
the terrorist plan in the past few years has resulted in 14 
bombings in densely populated areas, indiscriminate terrorist 
operations that resulted in the death of 97 citizens and the 
wounding of 292 others, and terrorist operations against 35 
tourism targets that led to the death of 12 tourists and the 
wounding of 50 others. This has paralyzed tourism, considerably 
hurt the national income, and deprived thousands of citizens of 
legitimate means of livelihood. He added that matters have 
developed into attempts to target the banking sector. Eight 
bombings have occurred in front of some banks. This plan has 
been contained and most of its elements have been apprehended. 
  Al-Alfi noted that 37 police officers have been killed so 
far, the last of whom was Maj. Gen. Ra'uf Khayrat the day before 
yesterday. A total of 98 policemen have also been killed and 
129 others wounded. 
  Al-Alfi explained that the statistics that he gave affirm 
the 
need to continue with the emergency law. He noted that the 
People's Assembly's approval of the extension of the emergency 
law in the past few years is considered an expression of the 
people's will, a full realization of the dimensions and gravity 
of the situation, and an awareness that some persons' betrayal 
of their homeland has opened the door for foreign designs 
against the country's supreme national interests. 
  Al-Alfi said the current phase of all-out national 
confrontation of this threat is an interim one between the phase 
of seizing the initiative and the phase of full control over the 
dimensions of the terrorist design. He warned that any 
weakening of the powers available for the confrontation elements 
might lead to negative and unfavorable results. He added that 
the security services' confrontation of terrorism is based on a 
conviction that they are authorized by the people to defend 
their ideals and aspirations and to uphold the law. He 
explained that the apprehension of the terrorist groups and the 
discovery of their hideouts are the best testimony that the 
security authorities are determined to confront terrorism to the 
end and without hesitation. He said that whoever believes that 
terrorism can intimidate the people is imagining things. 
  Addressing those opposed to extending the emergency law, 
al-Alfi affirmed that exceptional powers to face exceptional 
circumstances cannot justify the violation of legitimacy and law 
or violating the guarantees and rights of the freedom of 
expression. He also affirmed that not one single measure was or 
will be taken against any view or any political action. 
  The interior minister explained that, despite all the 
guarantees stipulated in the law concerning the extraordinary 
measures granted by the emergency law, the law has not been used 
as a substitute for any judicial measure or for a fair trial of 
any suspect. He said all Egyptian citizens are responsible for 
the nation's stability and defense. He added that the 
government's programs and policy do not discount any serious 
work at political, economic, and social levels in confronting 
terrorism. 
  In his address to the People's Assembly today, al-Alfi said 
the security action with its effectiveness and normal legal 
measures represents a cornerstone in achieving goals and that 
the emergency law is applied only in necessary cases. He 
emphasized that an effective, continuous security action is one 
of the guarantees of adhering to the emergency law in the 
narrowest sense to avert haphazard or unplanned measures. 
  He referred to the guarantees stipulated in Law No. 162 of 
1958, amended by Law No. 50 of 1982 on the regulation of the 
emergency situation. He said the amendments provided in Law No. 
97 of 1992 aimed to criminalize some acts and introduce stricter 
punishment for other punishable crimes. All these amendments, 
he added, did not make any changes to preventive measures and 
arrangements that should be adopted when necessary. He noted 
that the emergency law is the only alternative available in the 
exceptional circumstances we are facing. 
  Al-Alfi affirmed in his address to the People's Assembly 
that 
the powers granted by the emergency law still represent 
significant support in confronting the growing drug trafficking 
activity and illegal trade in weapons and explosives, and in 
criminal activities. 
  He noted that 428 people who were on record as drug 
traffickers have been arrested in the last three years and that 
3,183 others were arrested in the same period in cases involving 
robberies, hooliganism, morals, public property, and vendetta 
rivalries. He said that tightening the grip on criminal 
activities is not separate from stepping up measures to face 
terrorists acts. 
  He stressed that the extension of the emergency law for 
three 
more years is necessary and said that submitting this request to 
the People's Assembly is a necessity required by duty not to 
give up our efforts in the face of a momentous challenge. 
  People's Assembly Speaker Dr. Fathi Surur referred the 
statements of the prime minister and the minister of interior to 
the assembly's General Committee for discussion. 
  President Muhammad Husni Mubarak had referred the 
presidential decree No. 116 of 1994 on extending the emergency 
law to the People's Assembly. The decree stipulates that the 
emergency law be extended from 1 June (?1994) till 31 May 1997. 
  Dr. Surur passed the decree on to the assembly's General 
Committee, which is to discuss it and compile a report to be 
forwarded to the assembly in its next session. 
  Dr. Surur decided to hold an urgent meeting of the General 
Committee at the end of today's session to discuss the 
presidential decree. 

