Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lahore (APP) -- Pakistan Muslim League (N) 
[PML-Nawaz] chief and leader of the opposition in the National 
Assembly Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif said here Wednesday [22 
December] that Pak-India talks in the prevailing situation would 
cause irreparable damage to the liberation struggle of Kashmiri 
mujahideen. 
  He said talks with New Delhi on the Kashmir issue could be 
meaningful only after the withdrawal of Indian forces from the 
held valley. 
  He pleaded that the Kashmiri mujahideen must be made a party 
in the dialogue. 
  Addressing a press conference here at his residence 
Wednesday 
evening, he said there was no justification for holding these 
talks at a time when Indian troops were shedding the blood of 
Kashmiris, their womenfolk were being gang-raped, houses were 
being burnt and their able bodied people were being put behind 
bars. 
  He said the secretary level talks with India was an attempt 
to sabotage the Kashmir Jehad. The Kashmiris were neither 
interested in these talks nor were they prepared to abide by the 
decision of such talks, he said. In such a situation, he said, 
this dialogue would be a futile attempt. 
  Nawaz said that while the Kashmiris were offering great 
sacrifices to liberate themselves from Indian slavery, the 
Pakistan government had withdrawn its resolution on Kashmir from 
the United Nations. 
  He alleged that the prime minister, Benazir Bhutto lacked 
commitment with the Kashmir issue and Pakistan's nuclear 
programme. He said the joint session of the parliament was held 
to discuss the Kashmir situation but during the week long 
session, the prime minister did not speak a single word on the 
issue nor was she present in the house during his (Nawaz's) 
speech. 
  He, however, said that no government could afford to ignore 
the sentiments of the masses on important national issues 
including that of Kashmir and the nuclear programme. 
  He said that whereas Pakistan was keen for these talks, 
Indian occupation troops in held Kashmir had stepped up their 
brutalities. He said the government must prevail upon New Delhi 
to stop the repression in held Kashmir before entering into 
dialogue. 
  Replying to a question, the PML chief said, any attempt to 
topple the present Azad Kashmir government at this juncture 
would be against the just cause of liberation of Kashmir. He 
said PML (N) would resist any such move with full force. 

