Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 1 Dec -- A news conference on the outcome of 
the autumn session of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation 
Parliamentary Assembly has taken place in the sitting hall of 
the Supreme Council of Ukraine. Replying to a question by a 
correspondent from DER SPIEGEL magazine (Germany), Ivan 
Plyushch, chairman of the Supreme Council of Ukraine, reported 
that Leonid Kravchuk sees his task as explaining to the world 
community the content of the reservations made by the Ukrainian 
parliament when ratifying the START I Treaty. However, Ivan 
Plyushch noted that Leonid Kravchuk "as president of Ukraine and 
as a human being can either accept or not accept the content of 
the reservations," and has the full right to turn to the 
parliament of Ukraine for explanations. The chairman of the 
Supreme Council called the statement of the Russian Government 
concerning Ukraine's stance on START "brutal in form and 
distorted in content." He noted that the reservations of the 
Supreme Council of Ukraine to START ratification do not touch 
Russia's interests and do not violate a single norm of the 
treaty. 
  In connection with reports that China and Turkey "have an 
understanding attitude" to Ukraine's stance and reservations to 
START, a question was addressed to the chairman of the Supreme 
Council: Who specifically supports Ukraine's stance or at least 
has an understanding attitude to it? Ivan Plyushch did not 
reply to the question, while Mr. Cindoruk, president of the 
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Parliamentary Assembly and 
chairman of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, proposed that 
journalists get the answer to this question at the next assembly 
of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Parliamentary Assembly, 
which will take place next spring. 
  People's Deputy Anatoliy Kasyanenko, the newly appointed 
ambassador of Ukraine to Georgia, believes that Mr. Cindoruk 
avoided answering the question from an UNIAR correspondent 
because he had received instructions from Washington to change 
his stance (it is well known that Turkey is the only NATO 
country to support Ukraine's position during ratification of the 
START treaty). 

