BFN 

  [Text] National Commission for Atomic Energy (CNEA) sources 
have estimated that the Atucha-2 nuclear power plant, which has 
been under construction since 1982, will become fully 
operational in 1997, and not next year, as CNEA Chairman Manuel 
Mondino announced recently in a news conference. 
  The Atucha-2 reactor was forged in Japan and welded in 
Germany. The 1,000 metric ton reactor was manufactured of fine 
steel and a manganese-molybdenum-nickel alloy. The 14-meter 
high reactor has been stored for seven years in a warehouse 200 
meters from the area where it will be finally installed. 
  During German Research and Technology Minister Paul 
Krueger's 
visit to Atucha-2 on 4 May, many spiderwebs on the reactor's 
support base were noticed. A heart crossed by an arrow, drawn 
with chalk on the reactor's metallic structure, was also 
noticed. The CNEA sources admitted that "no date has been set 
for the installation" of the reactor. CNEA sources involved in 
the project's management emphasized that the engine room and the 
engineering work have nearly been completed, but admitted that 
the assembly stage is stuck. Atucha-2's estimated cost totals 
about $3 billion. 
  The sources said that the project, which is under 
construction a few meters from the Atucha-1 nuclear power plant 
near the Parana de las Palmas River in Buenos Aires Province, 
has been delayed "considerably." The sources estimated this 
delay at "four to five years." In the sources' opinion, 
Atucha-2's construction problems arose from the Malvinas war, 
when the international loans that had been agreed for its 
financing were discontinued, and later from budget constraints 
and the hyperinflation of 1989. 
  The sources said that Atucha-2 "was a result of the maximum 
use of Atucha-1." The sources explained that the new reactor 
"is 20 percent larger" than Atucha-1, but will produce "more 
than double the energy of Atucha-1." While Atucha-1 has an 
output of 350 megawatts, using natural uranium and heavy water 
with 233 fuel elements, Atucha-2 will use the same system but 
will produce 745 megawatts with 451 fuel elements. 

