Language: <F P=105> Indonesian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Widi Yarmanto, Yuli Ismartono, Ivan Haris, Kukuh </F>
Karsadi, and Rihad Wiranto] 
  [Text] The persistent press reports on the proliferation of 
narcotics in our country have inspired our police to work hard. 
They have now successfully arrested two Dutch and two U.S. 
nationals believed to be involved in trafficking Ecstasy (XTC) 
pills. Police are also investigating whether the arrest is 
related to the case of Ria Irawan [Jakarta actress whose friend 
died of a drug overdose in her house]. 
  Addressing the parliament's Commission I [Roman numeral 
one], 
Police Major General M. Hindarto, head of Jakarta Metropolitan 
Police, said the suspects were apprehended at the Borobudur 
Hotel on Sunday night [13 February] last week. A total of 7,575 
Ecstasy pills were seized from them. 
  The two Dutch nationals are Christian van den Bosch and 
Leonard Jacobus. They have been detained at the Jakarta 
Metropolitan Police headquarters since last Thursday. The two 
other suspects are Americans, namely Steven Joseph Bryner, 25, 
and Peter Michael Karajin, 25. They are not diplomats, but Air 
Force sergeants in charge of the postal service or Army Post 
Office [APO, three preceding words in English] who are accorded 
diplomatic status at the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta. 
  The two Americans are in charge of handling packages and 
letters to and from the United States via U.S. military 
aircraft. The U.S. Embassy dismissed reports that the two had 
received the dangerous pills through the APO facility and 
claimed that the pills had been sent through the regular postal 
service. 
  Before the Indonesian Government declared the two Americans 
undesirable persons, the U.S. Embassy hurriedly sent them home 
on Thursday night [17 February] last week. The two sergeants 
will reportedly be handed over to the U.S. authorities to face a 
court-martial. 
  Regardless of the issue of whether it is proper for the 
suspects to be tried there, the U.S. authorities apparently want 
to show their gratitude by sending several DEA officers based in 
a certain Asian country to Jakarta to work together with the 
Indonesian counterparts to break up the drug syndicate. 
  However, Sabam Sirait, a member of Parliament's Commission 
I, 
expressed regret for the repatriation of the two U.S. nationals. 
"They should have been tried in Indonesia," he said. Another 
TEMPO source said: "If this had taken place in Singapore or 
Malaysia, they would have faced the gallows." 
  The suspects admitted that thousands of such dangerous pills 
had been imported from the Netherlands. They had also been in 
operation since 1992. In Jakarta, they used to sell these pills 
to foreigners or yuppies [preceding word in English]. One pill 
costs between 60,000 to 200,000 rupiah. It is not surprising 
that there is a surge in the use of narcotics in Jakarta. This 
was disclosed by Maj. Gen. Hindarto to parliament, adding that 
there was a 93-percent increase in 1993 compared to the previous 
year. 
  As for the two Dutch nationals, it is not yet clear whether 
they will be charged under the Narcotics or the Health Act. "If 
it turns out that the pills do not contain addictive substances, 
they will be charged under the Health Act, which bans the import 
of dangerous medicine without the health minister's permit," 
said a police officer. 
  The Health Act No. 23/1992 bans the production or 
distribution of unlicensed medicine or medicinal ingredients. 
Offenders face a maximum imprisonment of 15 years or 
300-million-rupiah fine. 
  How intensive is our police's knowledge of the drug 
distribution network in Indonesia? Both Lieutenant Colonel A. 
Latief Rabar, chief of the Jakarta Metropolitan Police's 
Information Service, and Colonel Hari Sutanto, chief of the 
Police Headqaurters' Information Service, admit they know little 
about it. 
  However, a TEMPO source, a student who often buys Inex 
[expansion unknown] pills said firmly that Christian van den 
Bosch was the distributor of the pills. The network had one 
Eurasian assistant, but after the arrival of Sergeant Steve, it 
became more effective and coordinated. The pills were stored in 
his house in the Kebayoran Baru area. 
  The pills were mailed in neat packages from the Netherlands, 
and they safely arrived at the address of two foreigners who 
worked at a prominent English-language school in Kebayoran Baru, 
South Jakarta. The pills were then distributed, with some being 
delivered to fashion models, homosexual and lesbian groups, and 
company executives. In this money-soaked business, there are 
rules to be observed: For example, fellow distributors cannot 
cheat one another. There are also ethical rules: A distributor 
cannot be a consumer, otherwise he will be heavily indebted to 
the main distributor. For example, a man called Nonon owed 
Christian about 40 million rupiah. As he is unable to pay the 
debt, Nonon has now "disapppeared." It is not clear whether he 
is hiding or if he has been finished off in line with the law of 
the jungle in this business. 
  Besides the Christian-Steve syndicate, there is also the 
Johnson group. This Caucasian man often shuttles the 
Jakarta-Bali route. In Jakarta, he often operates in several 
nightclubs. Johnson is believed to be distributing not only 
Ecstasy pills, but also hashish, ganja sticks, and cocaine. A 
TEMPO source said: "Johnson is certainly involved in the 
Colombian connection". 
  With the assistance of the DEA, our police are expected to 
get to the root of the problem, which has caused great distress 
to society. 

