Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Duan Jianzhou (3008 1696 3166), Wu Quanhai (0702 0356 </F>
3189): "Henan Provincial Branch of Bank of China Strengthens 
Management of Funds Involving Foreign-Funded Enterprises, Five 
Cases of Financial Fraud Detected and Blocked"] 
  [Text] Bank of China Henan Branch handles business 
strictly according to laws, regulations, and customary 
international practices, and it is strengthening the management 
of funds involving foreign-funded enterprises. In 1993, it 
effectively blocked five cases of financial fraud involving 
foreign-funded enterprises and prevented losses of $45 million 
to the state. 
  While conducting international financial business, Bank of 
China Henan Branch discovered that in recent years cases of 
financial fraud involving foreign-funded firms had developed 
from the past pattern of using lost, stolen, and altered foreign 
banknotes, travelers' checks, and credit cards to the current 
pattern of forging payment vouchers or credit documents 
involving large amounts of money, that the amounts of money 
involved in fraud became larger, and that the objects of fraud 
had changed from a small number of foreign-related shops and 
individuals to state enterprises and units, government organs, 
and even specialized banks. These illegal activities have 
seriously disrupted the financial order and economic environment. 
  Last June, a person named Song, who was chairman of the 
board 
of directors of a certain company in Hong Kong, met some 
personnel who worked in certain units in Zhengzhou and was 
introduced to others by a woman who said she worked in Shenzhen. 
He said he had gathered world-renowned consortia and banks to 
invest in Henan. They suggested that the provincial branch of 
the Bank of China should issue a long-term letter of credit, 
which should be valid for 180 days and amount to $20 million. 
They said that for each dollar of the letter of credit, they 
would be willing to pledge 9.6 yuan as security, and that they 
would use a certificate of ownership of real estate in Zhengzhou 
as a mortgage for the uncovered portion. Bank of China Henan 
Branch carried out an investigation and discovered that this 
Hong Kong company had pledged a mortgage of 148 million yuan at 
the Henan Province branch of the People's Construction Bank of 
China,in return for two letters of credit amounting to $15 
million. Because the mortgage money was not specified as a 
mortgage when it was handed over to the Henan Provincial Branch 
of the People's Construction Bank of China, the Hong Kong 
company wanted to use the loophole and withdraw the mortgage 
money, which it wanted to use as a mortgage at the Bank of China 
Henan Branch. These people carried out frequent activities in 
the relevant provincial government departments, and some 
influential provincial government officials even went to the 
provincial branch of the Bank of China to lobby for them. Bank 
of China Henan Branch thought that in light of such a situation, 
it should do business strictly according to regulations all the 
more. Bank of China Henan Branch proposed four ideas according 
to customary practice in the international community. One of 
these was for a foreign trade enterprise recognized by the Bank 
of China to serve as a guarantor, or for the company to deposit 
an amount of foreign exchange equalling the amount of the letter 
of credit as security, but these four ideas were rejected by the 
company. Eventually, it was verified that it was a case of 
fraud involving the use of long-term checks to cash money for 
use as investment funds. Bank of China Henan Branch promptly 
notified other branches and its headquarters, so blocking this 
serious case of foreign-related financial fraud. 
  The other four cases of foreign-related financial fraud 
detected and blocked by Bank of China Henan Branch all involved 
cashing money for use as investment funds. Last April, a Hong 
Kong businessman said that he wanted to pool funds with the 
Zhengzhou Zhongyuan Steel Rolling Mill with a long-term credit 
of $5 million, which he said was available to the mill if it 
would pay several tens of thousands of yuan in handling costs 
and which he said could be cashed at any bank for several tens 
of millions of yuan. Bank of China Henan Branch inquired about 
the case through the Luxembourg branch of Bank of China, as well 
as the Los Angeles Branch of Daiwa Bank, only to discover that 
it was a plan by the Hong Kong businessman to practice fraud 
with a counterfeit bill of exchange. Before this, Bank of China 
Henan branch also helped Luoyang's China Savings Company, the 
Sanmen Gorge branch of the Bank of China, and Zhengzhou Diantong 
Company to detect false drafts used by foreigners for fraud, 
which amounted to $25 million in these four cases. 

