Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Wu Bingyan (0702 0014 3508): "Hunan Sends </F>
10,000 Cadres to Rural Areas To Crack Down on Local Ruffians"] 
  [Text] Hunan provincial CPC committee and provincial 
government decided to launch a province-wide general campaign 
for rectifying the public order in rural areas, concentrating on 
punishing local ruffians. So far, over 10,000 cadres have been 
transferred to rural areas all over the province to participate 
in this operation. By 3 January, the first battle had been 
started in various localities in which 13,415 local ruffians and 
other lawless people were arrested, 8,641 criminal cases of all 
kinds were solved, and 1,572 criminal gangs were smashed, of 
which 6,233 members were pulled out of organized crime. 
  The authorities in Hunan Province have been very determined 
and quick in conducting this general campaign for rectifying the 
public order in rural areas. The chief leaders of party members 
at all levels commanded this operation in person, and 
procuratorial and judicial organs played central roles. Wang 
Maolin, secretary of the provincial party committee, took a 
direct part in organization and planning, contributed to 
discussion and formulation of operation proposals, and 
specifically helped procuratorial and judicial departments solve 
such practical problems as shortages of funds for handling the 
crimes. The authorities of all prefectures, cities, and 
counties set up operation leadership groups headed by the chief 
leaders of party committees and governments and composed of 
personnel from relevant departments. The public security, 
procuratorial, and judicial organs at all levels in the 
province, under the unified leadership of party committees and 
governments, and with close cooperation of relevant departments, 
followed the 13 key targets established in the "Proposal for 
Rectifying Public Order in Rural Areas" transmitted by the 
provincial party committee and provincial government and adopted 
such methods as integrating open investigation with secret 
investigation, integrating information gathering from files with 
solicitation of information from the public, and integrating key 
actions with routine investigations. They conducted in-depth 
investigations and scored good results. 
  In order to consolidate the achievements of the 
rectification 
and strengthen basic work at the grass-roots level, all 
localities in Hunan, in accordance with the requirements of the 
provincial party committee and government, are stepping up the 
selection of public security, procuratorial, and judicial 
cadres, who are in the prime of life, to take up the posts of 
deputy party committee secretaries in townships and towns along 
the railway lines, national highways, and where public security 
is problematic. So far, 300 officers have been picked out and 
put in these posts in the whole province. 

