Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 14 KYODO -- Police searched a small 
Yokohama-based machinery trading company on Friday [14 January] 
and questioned its officials on the firm's suspected exporting 
of military-related high-tech devices to North Korea, police 
sources said. 
  Police suspect the trading firm, specializing in deals 
between Tokyo and Pyongyang, violated the foreign exchange and 
foreign trade control law by exporting spectrum analyzers which 
can be converted to military use. 
  The company, Yokohama Machinery Trading Co., is also 
suspected of having applied to the Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry (MITI) for permission to export the analyzers 
using false information, the sources said. 
  Since a spectrum analyzer is a precision device used to 
measure the character of an electric wave, a high-efficiency one 
can be used to improve the aiming precision of weapons. 
  Exports of the device are therefore regulated by the 
Paris-based Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export 
Controls (Cocom), which controls the sales of strategically 
important goods to communist countries. 
  The analyzers, priced at about 3 million yen, were 
manufactured by an electronics maker based in Tokyo and 
allegedly exported to Pyongyang through the trading firm around 
in 1989. 
  But the maker was not informed to which country the analyzer 
would be sent and for what purpose it would be used, the sources 
said. 
  MITI Minister Hiroshi Kumagai told a press conference that 
he 
has already instructed ministry officials to investigate the 
case and deal with the situation. 
  Japan prohibits exports of weapons to the communist bloc and 
countries engaged in military strife. It is also necessary to 
receive authorization from the MITI minister before exporting 
weapons abroad. 
  Military analysts said it is possible that North Korea might 
have used the analyzers to develop the intermediate-range 
missile called "Nodong-1." 
  North Korea last May successfully test-launched a Nodong-1 
missile, estimated to have a range of 1,000 kilometers and 
therefore being capable of reaching most parts of Japan. 
  In May 1987, an Osaka-based trading firm was found to have 
illegally exported to North Korea integrated circuits and 
equipment to measure electric waves. 
  Officials of the electronics maker that manufactured the 
analyzers told reporters Friday that the firm is not to blame 
for the incident, saying the export impinges on the contract. 
  At a press conference held at its head office, an executive 
said the company sold the analyzers, set to be exported to 
China, to the trading firm in 1989. 
  The manufacturer's official in charge of trading received a 
document from the trading house that promised it would not 
violate Cocom regulations and confirmed the Chinese company 
issued the order on the analyzers, the executive said. 
  The maker, which believed the devices would go to China, is 
a 
"victim" of the plot, the executive said. 
  A Japanese Government source, meanwhile, said the analyzers 
would not have been used in the Nodong-1 missile, which the 
source said has an unsophisticated guidance system. 

