Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major-General of Aviation Ya. Yanakov under the </F>
rubric "Military Reform and Higher Educational Institutions": 
"The Five-Year Plan--Pluses and Minuses"] 
  [Text] The higher military aviation schools for 
pilots and navigators of the Air Forces will shift to a 
five-year course of study for cadets starting with the 1993/94 
academic year, by order of the Minister of Defense of the 
Russian Federation. This is expected to make it possible to give 
the graduates a basic higher professional education at the level 
of contemporary world standards. 
  The realization of the new system for training aviation 
cadres also entails the appearance of a number of problems whose 
resolution frequently goes beyond the bounds of the jurisdiction 
and capabilities of not only the leadership of the military 
schools, but also the bodies for their immediate administration. 
The editors, in giving the floor to today's author, are counting 
on an interested and attentive attitude toward the issues raised 
by him on the part of the corresponding directorates and 
services of the Air Forces high command. We hope that the 
discussion thus started will be continued by the readers, and 
first and foremost by those who have a direct relationship to 
this topic--the commanders, professors, instructor and training 
personnel, cadets and attendees of the schools and academies of 
the Air Forces. 
  The training of a pilot costs the state hundreds of millions 
of rubles. There are scientific-research centers in some 
countries that specialize in working on problems of reducing the 
cost and improving the quality of the training of aviation 
personnel. The "2000" program has now been adopted in the United 
States; it envisages the creation of efficient training 
complexes that permit a significant optimization of this 
process. We have also approached the solution of this problem in 
earnest in our country, owing to the cutbacks that have begun in 
the armed forces. 
  It has become obvious that the staffing levels of Air Forces 
military-educational institutions are intolerably large (more 
than 35 percent of the overall size of the Air Forces). The way 
out of this situation would seem to be a simple one--several of 
the schools need to be closed. But more intent study of the 
question shows that a mechanical reduction in them could lead to 
a repetition of the mistakes that were made in 1959 by the 
country's leadership, which caused an acute scarcity of aviation 
personnel several years later. They soon had to resurrect the 
pilots' schools that had been abolished (the Borisoglebsk and 
Barnaul VVAULs [Higher Military Aviation Schools for Pilots]), 
and catch up for the omission for even longer than that. 
  The leadership of the Air Forces higher-educational 
institutions has been conducting research over the last three 
years to make the training of flight cadres more efficient. It 
has made it possible to conclude that it is essential to take 
radical steps that would fundamentally improve the educational 
process and raise the quality of training of the cadets to the 
required level with a decrease in the amount of permanent 
staffing of the higher-educational institutions (by 30 percent). 
  This conceptual framework for the training of flight cadres, 
it seems to me, is organically inherent in re-organizing the 
planned composition of the aviation group on the territory of 
Russia, and facilitates overcoming the shortage of specialists 
along with a further rise in the fighting ability of aviation 
units. Some 10--15 years are planned for its realization--a 
deadline that makes it possible to accomplish what is conceived 
without haste. 
  Our assumptions are supported by the Minister of Defense and 
the Commander-in-Chief of the Air Forces. The flight 
higher-educational institutions have been converted to five-year 
study, and the development of new curriculums and programs has 
begun. The first step on the road to reform has been taken. The 
question is whether others will follow. I do not ask this by 
accident, since even today the incarnation of our ideas has been 
called into question. The increased course of study of the 
pilots, of course, will not solve the problem in and of itself. 
It can provide results only as part of other measures that are, 
by the way, not included in the program for the overall 
re-organization of the system of training for aviation personnel. 
  By considering the training of pilots in light of the 
re-organization of the Air Forces of Russia being pursued and 
the Law on the Reform of Higher Education, we should determine 
first of all just what sort of specialist we need, and then give 
answers to the following questions: 
  --do the education and professional training of graduates 
correspond to the level of technical complexity of the new 
aircraft systems entering service with the Air Forces, and what 
are the prospects for their further improvement? 
  --is the intellectual cultivation of the personality ensured 
in training at an aviation higher-educational institution, so as 
to correspond to the social changes in society and the 
development trends of statehood in Russia? 
  --is the future pilot ready for service under contract, 
under 
which he can change the nature of his activity under certain 
conditions in a way that is painless for him and society? 
  The contemporary combat aircraft system is a kind of 
"minifactory." But its on-board computers and other complex 
systems that have absorbed the advanced achievements of science 
and technology and, aside from everything else, are developing 
constantly, are all inert without the participation of the 
person. The training of specialists should prove to be, at a 
minimum, an order of magnitude ahead of scientific and technical 
progress. 
  Let us analyze what we have been teaching the cadets at the 
schools to this point. Almost a third of study time, starting in 
the second year of training, they are in practical flight 
activities. To speak of any rise in the level of their 
theoretical training during this period is to engage in 
self-deception. And it is conducted, bluntly speaking, with one 
aim anyway--to meet formally the norms for the hours of classes 
stipulated for higher schooling. You will thus agree that the 
training of specialists with higher education within the former 
framework is impossible in the face of the new requirements. 
Cadets at the flight higher-educational institutions, you may 
recall, year after year studied only the minimum number of 
disciplines whose assimilation was necessary before basic 
practical flight activity. The whole educational process was 
linked with that, and naturally did not permit the observance of 
elementary principles and methods of teaching. What is more, 
there was not enough time for a profound study even of the 
special sciences necessary to the future pilot. Need it be said 
that the fundamental (general-theoretical) portion of the 
schooling, owing to its small volume and the break-up of the 
program into semesters, did not provide the requisite level of 
mastery of special disciplines by the cadets. They were thus 
never trained for operations under special conditions, and 
little attention was devoted to physical fitness. And we wonder 
why more than half of all flight accidents are connected with 
the human factor here. What scientific institution and who can 
answer the question of how much we would save if we were able to 
increase the professional longevity of the pilot an average of 
at least three years? 
  The volume and content of the current programs at the 
schools 
in the humanities are moreover so poor that we cannot speak of 
any intellectual education of the individual worthy of our 
country. We openly admit that the flight schools are still 
oriented more toward the "trade" than toward education. There 
are still a host of shortcomings here as well. Everyone would 
agree, for instance, that it is extremely inefficient and 
irrational to use the teaching time allocated under the old 
standards for practical flight work. Its quite large volume is 
determined not by norms for flight time per cadet, but rather a 
calendar time frame within which one may organize flights with 
them. It thus frequently turns out that the flights of the 
training group (air squadron) are conducted while a certain 
portion of the cadets in them do not become active, owing to 
shortages of aircraft or the overloaded airspace, among other 
things. So it obtains that instead of 5--6 hours a week, the 
cadet at, say, the frontal-aviation schools flies an average of 
half, and at helicopter schools one third, of the norms. The 
losses of training time owing to this absurdity are enormous 
over the training cycle. 
  The required flight commitments are not ensured with the 
proportion of training regiments and airfields existing at the 
schools today, and that means that the loss of training time is 
apparent. The situation can and must be rectified by decreasing 
the number of cadets planned for flights. It would moreover be 
expedient to conduct practical flight work in only two years, 
rather than three. 
  There is another nuance here as well. Flights exclusively 
during the summer months lead to six-month layoffs, which force 
more than a third of the flying time envisaged under the program 
to be spent on restoring lost skills of piloting technique. The 
requirements for the training of cadets in advanced types of 
flights (weapons delivery in pairs, by day with IFR, at night) 
are not able to be fully realized. The higher-educational 
institutions, with quite a few aircraft and airfields, use them 
for the training of cadets only five or six months out of the 
year, which not only reduces the operational efficiency of the 
physical plant for training, but also leads to a considerable 
increase in the cost of training the flight cadres. About half 
(!) of the yearly flying time both at the schools and at the 
aviation training centers falls to the share of the permanent 
staff, who have openly low qualifications. 
  A rise in the professional level of training and a reduction 
in the turnover of instructor pilots is possible only via 
raising status and pay levels. Only then can we get started with 
an 18--24 percent reduction in their numbers. The financial 
resources released thereby, according to our calculations, will 
be entirely enough for material incentives for the activity of 
the instructors. The Air Forces command and the Ministry of 
Defense have the last word on this issue. 
  The pilot currently completes three stages in his training: 
flight school--aviation training center (UATs)--line unit. It is 
entirely obvious that his emergence as an aerial warrior must be 
considered through the prism of training at all stages. Only in 
that case can we evaluate the degree of perfection of the system 
for personnel training. 
  The cadet completes theoretical training and a program of 
training on a trainer aircraft with flying time 220--230 hours 
at the school over four years. The graduates, over 10--11 months 
at the UATs, master the type of combat aircraft on which they 
will be flying later, and receive the qualification of military 
pilot 3rd class. They train for another three-four years after 
arriving in the line unit so as to become a pilot 1st class, 
that is, become full-fledged aerial warriors, as they say. You 
will agree, should the line units really be engaged in the final 
training of the pilots? But that is just one aspect of the 
issue. Another is whether it is rational to drag out their 
training for seven or eight years. The principal share of the 
accompanying material expenses, after all, go for the practical 
assimilation of the combat aircraft, with one hour of flying 
time on it 5--10 times (depending on the type) more expensive 
than on a trainer. It has been demonstrated in practice that the 
flying time required for the training of the future pilot 
depends largely on the cadet's level of assimilation of the 
trainer aircraft. Whence a conclusion suggest itself--conduct 
the flights with the cadets without a break for a span of 15 
months, eliminating the month's break, instead of practical 
flight work drawn out over three years. The graduate could in 
that case already have reached the 2nd-class level inside the 
walls of the higher-educational institution, automatically 
predetermining his success in mastering a combat aircraft in the 
future without increasing flying time or the time frame for the 
conduct of practical flight work. It would only remain for the 
line unit to train the young pilots for a year and a half or two 
years for combat operations in the full amount. The period of 
emergence of the pilot in the "school--UATs--line unit" system 
could thus be reduced to four or five years. Tempting, is it not? 
  We will be realists. The physical plant of the 
higher-educational institutions, the level of training of the 
professors and instructors, the program support for the cadet 
training process and the degree of perfection of the training 
complex all do not permit the full realization of the new ideas 
at once. This means that they must be implemented gradually, to 
the extent of the creation of the conditions for converting to 
training in the corresponding directions. The gradual 
reformation of the system for pilot training would be 
intelligent on this plane. 
  The first stage envisages the conversion of the 
schools to a five-year term of study with the realization of the 
new requirements for higher education, with a focus on flight 
training for cadets in the later years depending on the 
individual abilities of each, along with changes in the 
composition and structure of the higher-educational 
institutions. It is also essential to provide, in conjunction 
with this, for the development of new curriculums and programs, 
improvement of the work of professors and instructors and the 
conversion to practical flight work at base airfields. Two or 
three flight schools would then suffice entirely for Russia, 
instead of the existing five. The first stage could possibly be 
realized before 1995--1997. 
  The second stage is the further development of the 
physical plant of the most promising schools, allowing an 
increase in the number of attendees at them from 600--800 to 
1,500--2,000, along with the creation of a refined 
infrastructure for the higher educational institution. The 
improvement of the curriculums and programs will make it 
possible to move to training the graduates for all flight fields 
and specializations and to adopt a contract training system. The 
conclusion of that work, including the technical refitting of 
the flight higher-educational institutions, is possible by 
2003--2005. 
  The third stage envisages completion of the 
transition to flight training for cadets at a new training 
complex manufactured domestically, and to the training of pilots 
according to the "higher-educational institution (theoretical 
training for the second level of higher education with the 
awarding of a bachelor of science degree)--flight school 
(assimilation of training aircraft)--UATs (flight training on a 
combat aircraft)" model. Such fundamental changes, however, are 
possible only provided the programs providing comprehensive 
support of the training process are realized, and first and 
foremost positive social changes in the life and status of the 
officer in society. 
  The number of training institutions will be reduced by two 
or 
three times under conditions of a sharp reduction in the 
quantity of aviation personnel needed for all branches of the 
armed forces. The further development of higher educational 
aviation science, improvement of the training process with a 
regard for the optimization of the mix of military-educational 
institutions, coordination of work among them and accomplishment 
of a transition to the training of aviation personnel under 
contract all become topical in this regard. That is 
unfortunately still difficult to achieve. A program to develop 
the physical plant of the higher-educational institutions, 
called upon to be the foundation for intensifying the training 
process, has yet to be approved, for example. 
  The absence of a long-term program for the development of 
the 
higher-educational institutions during the period of cutbacks in 
the Air Forces could cost us dearly in the near future. The 
situation is aggravated by the fact that many of the officials 
on whom the making of decisions depends, either owing to a lack 
of time or frequently even desire and patience to get to the 
heart of the problem, are not receptive to the idea of pursuing 
profound reform of education at the educational institutions of 
the Air Forces. They are misinforming the leadership of the Air 
Forces and the Ministry of Defense, without looking at the heart 
of the matter, with their incompetent and superficial judgments, 
and are impeding the adoption of progressive programs for the 
development of the higher-educational institutions and the 
training of cadres. 
  I am not laying it on too thick. A real threat has arisen 
not 
only of the disruption of educational reform at Air Forces 
higher-educational institutions, but also their ability to train 
the necessary quantity of highly skilled aviation specialists in 
the future as well. The guarantee of the fact that mistakes will 
not be made in re-organizing the military-educational 
institutions and pursuing the reform of education are the 
comprehensive and public discussion and affirmation of the 
conceptual framework for the development of the 
higher-educational institutions and the adoption of promising 
long-term programs for them. The leadership of the branches of 
the armed forces, without repudiating in general the idea of 
uniting the aviation schools, are in fact slowing up the 
reforms. This is also being facilitated by the latest "reforms." 
Two of our helicopter schools have thus been transferred to the 
ground forces. But the Air Forces continue to train the aviation 
engineers and technicians, specialists in rear support, 
communications and pilots in transport aviation for those same 
ground forces, and they in turn train helicopter pilots for the 
Air Forces and other branches of the armed forces. The same 
situation has also taken shape in the "mutual relations" of the 
Air Forces with the PVO [Air-Defense Troops] and the Navy. 
Everything is mixed up. The artificial disunification of kindred 
educational institutions is having a negative effect as a whole 
on the development and improvement of the 
scientific-methodological work of the higher-educational 
institutions and the training of professors, instructors and the 
future pilots. The need for training institutions as part of the 
Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation is increasing, 
owing to the impossibility of ensuring the optimal utilization 
for the Air Forces higher-educational institutions under 
conditions of redundancy in the training of aviation specialists 
by the branches of the armed forces, which leads to an increase 
in expenditures for training. 
  It has become obvious by now that one cannot do everything 
in 
a day. Work is needed in the future to improve the system of 
training of aviation cadres, change the supervisory style of the 
military-educational institutions and coordinate 
scientific-methodological work inside their walls. These tasks 
can be accomplished only through joint efforts. So what is the 
matter?! 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

