Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["ETA News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Tallinn, February 3 -- No agreements were concluded 
in the 16th round of Estonian-Russian inter-state negotiations 
on February 1 and 2 in Moscow, Ago Tiiman, secretary of the 
Estonian delegation and head of the military working group told 
a news conference on Thursday [3 February], while Rein Helme, 
head of the parliament's defence committee claims Russia intends 
to drag on the negotiations deliberately. 
  Tiiman said that the round discussed traditional issues of 
military, economic, border and humanitarian spheres. The 
military group dealt as usually with agreements on Russian troop 
withdrawal, retired military social security measures and 
dismantling of nuclear training base at Paldiski. 
  Tiiman said that the agreement of withdrawal of forces was 
principally ready, only bilateral compensations demands had to 
be still decided upon. All other articles of the agreement were 
coordinated, including the troop pullout deadline of August 31, 
1994, which should not be touched upon any more. 
  As it was announced yesterday Russia did not present a 
detailed timetable of withdrawal of its forces from Estonia, as 
it had repeatedly promised. The fact that the Russian 
delegation failed to present the timetable proved that "our 
eastern neighbour searched pretext to drag on the negotiations," 
head of Riigikogu [parliament] state defence committee Rein 
Helme told ETA on Thursday. Vassili Svirin, the chief Russian 
negotiator said Russia did not present the timetable because of 
Estonia's rejection of a Moscow proposal on retired military 
social guarantees. Helme said that the argument was a "searched 
pretext", showing that Russia used its responsibilities before 
its citizens to "shake Estonian political stability" and Russia 
was not interested in successful finishing of the negotiations. 
  Tiiman said that the agreement on military pensioners social 
securities was in a difficult situation although all questions 
that did not demand changes in the other side's laws were 
solved. Russia pays (military) retirement fees to 10,570 
persons residing in Estonia, 850 of whom are reserve officers, 
Tiiman said, adding that he doubted Vassili Svirin's words that 
former military personnel officers who are 55 or 60 years old at 
present were no danger to Estonian security. 
  Tiiman said that the last round of negotiations was, 
however, 
not to be regarded as an entire failure. Work has been most 
constructive on the issue of liquidation of the Paldiski nuclear 
training base. The head of the Paldiski working group Mark 
Sinisoo told a press conference, on Thursday, that the Russian 
side had given its final consent to international experts 
participation at the dismantling of the nuclear reactors, 
stating, however, that no international or Estonian experts 
could be present at the dismantling before the "secret 
components" were taken out of Estonia. Russian delegation also 
said that by September 1 the whole infrastructure of Paldiski, 
still a Russian military town, will be handed over to Estonia. 
  Tiiman said that the greatest number of agreements were 
prepared in the economic working group, but Russia was not 
interested in concluding them, e.g. the investments' protection 
agreement was ready already in June 1993, but Russia "simply 
does not want to conclude it", the same being true about the 
question of dividing former USSR property. Tiiman said that all 
this pointed to an old Russian Supreme Soviet decision according 
to which Russia will not regulate economic questions with 
Estonia before all other demands i.e. concerning the retired 
military and humanitarian issues, were not fulfilled. 

