BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Reg Rummey] </F>
  [Text] Co-ordinator of the ANC's Reconstruction and 
Development Programme [RDP] in the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, 
Vereeniging] region Ben Turok believes resources should be 
redirected from white suburbs towards black townships. If that 
means whites will have to suffer a rise in rates and service 
charges to pay for what they have become accustomed to, so be 
it. "People must pay for the resources they receive." 
  Turok, one of the framers of the Freedom Charter, is best 
known for his uncompromisingly critical stance towards 
international finance. He believes that apartheid biased the 
economy towards whites and that it has to be reshaped. "Luxury" 
and "lop-sided" are two words that recur often as he speaks. 
Turok cites a November 1993 World Bank study, Paths to Economic 
Growth: "Public investment should not be directed to 
infrastructure in white areas." 
  Apartheid distorted the economy and investment, so that the 
focus must now fall on the townships. Further, the urban areas 
have sufficient capacity to reduce backlogs "without recourse to 
additional revenue from central government." 
  This, says Turok, fits in with his theme that South Africa 
has a "skyscraper economy surrounded by shanty towns." Turok 
believes whites receive hidden subsidies compared to township 
residents. He has one example. Businesses pay 9c [cents] a 
kilowatt hour (kWh) in central Johannesburg for electricity, 
while blacks pay 18c per kWh in Soweto. 
  "It is inconceivable poor people should pay double what 
businesses pay," Turok says. "White South Africa has had a 
cushioned life on the basis of political power. Apartheid meant 
the white minority not only has a high income but also 
subsidised services," he believes. He adds: "There needs to be 
a lot of research to examine the phenomenon." 
  What will the political effect be of township residents 
continuing their non-payment for rents and services? "The whole 
strategy of the RDP is based on payment," says Turok. "If we 
are not able to get cost recovery in the townships then the 
whole strategy will be under pressure." By the same token, if 
they do pay the equity argument is strengthened. 
  "We are not in the business of killing the golden goose," he 
adds, noting that foreign investors would like a pleasant, 
secure environment and a good lifestyle. "But we cannot 
maintain a colonial system, where a small elite live a very easy 
lifestyle with cheap services when most of the people live in 
poverty. It's untenable." 
  In line with this, the economy itself has to be reshaped. 
The first priority is to establish a township economy, 
including African-style markets. Turok says any analysis of the 
manufacturing sector acknowledges that mass consumption goods 
has not been its priority. There has, he says, been a bias 
towards manufacture of goods for upper-income people as against 
basic needs commodities. 
  Many African countries, he says, have established production 
-- or at least assembly -- of cheap radios or radio-cassette 
players. "To my knowledge radio-cassette players are not 
manufactured in South Africa. They are not even assembled 
here." Cheap bicycles may be made in South Africa, but their 
production is not pushed, he says. "They are not made on a big 
scale. In most Third World countries people use scooters to go 
to work." Here, he says, the duties on imported scooters make 
them prohibitive. 
  Turok recognises the argument that it might be better to 
export, say, Mercedes Benz cars and import bicycles from China 
where big economies of scale make the cost of manufacture 
competitive. But he says it is important to build an all-round 
industry so that you have a larger base. "If you depend on 
hi-tech exports you are in danger of creating a lop-sided 
economy." The economy must have a local base, Turok argues, and 
an economy without mass-based production is unhealthy. 
  Turok has the impression from visiting local supermarkets in 
the rural areas that such production as there is of cheap goods 
is shoddy. Goods such as clothing and footwear sold to people 
in rural areas, he says, "is cheap and of appalling quality." 
  What will the provincial powers do to redress what Turok 
sees 
as the skewness of the economy? 
  Turok says the RDP will set up parallel businesses rather 
than forcing existing business to follow orders. He says the 
steering group of the RDP has decided the main thrust of RDP 
industrial policy should be to establish a number of productive 
enterprises in and around the townships to produce basic goods. 
  Asked how the RDP planners know whether there is demand for 
such goods, Turok replies: "We do know there is demand. Any 
survey of township needs indicates people come in to town to do 
their shopping." 
  The Small Business Development Corporation, Turok considers, 
has not done enough, and has mainly given loans to whites. Big 
business, questioned about why there are no retail outlets in 
the township, describes the environment as unfriendly, says 
Turok. But he finds it difficult to understand why, for 
instance, banks do not set up more branches in Soweto, which has 
two-million residents. 
  The whole service sector is very badly served, he says, and 
the RDP must address this legacy. A pure market approach will 
not work. Finance for these projects will come from a variety of 
sources, including white and black business, foreign aid, and 
community resources such as stokvels [township fund-raising 
agreements]. 
  How much power do Turok and his team have? Turok says those 
in charge of the RDP in the PWV have substantial power to mould 
the programme. They have the power to pass legislation within 
the 29 competencies given by the constitution, including roads 
and health. 
  A draft of the RDP for the PWV was published last week. 
Experts from many areas, including business and development, 
have been invited to discuss the plan. Clearly, it is not cast 
in stone. Turok invites anyone with a planning background and 
knowledge of development who would like to make a contribution 
to the adaptation of the RDP to contact him. 

