Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Directive of the Georgian Head of State on the State </F>
Commission for Legal Reform" issued in Tbilisi on 26 December] 
  [Text] The construction of a Georgian democratic and legal 
state, the protection of human rights and freedoms, the 
development of a free economy, and the implementation of justice 
are essentially dependent upon the elaboration of legislative 
acts that will regulate anew the most important social relations 
taking into account contemporary legal thinking, the 
achievements of legal practice in developed countries, and 
national traditions. 
  In recent years, the Georgian Parliament commissions, state 
bodies, and scientific establishments have not prepared a single 
legislative act that has been of vital importance for the 
political, economic, and social development of the country. At 
the same time, legislative activity is lagging behind the 
demands of contemporary life; many spheres of social relations 
are being regulated in accordance with old legal norms 
pertaining to other social and political systems; the 
development of new social relations is being hindered by the 
corresponding legal disorder; new civil, criminal, labor, 
administrative, and prison codes and a code of civil procedure 
should be elaborated without which the systematic development of 
current legislation is impossible. It is necessary to organize 
anew the protection of the law, investigations, the Procurator's 
Office, and the courts and the principles governing these 
activities. 
  Proceeding from this: 
  1. With the aim of preparing draft basic legislative acts, 
codes, and other acts in the fundamental branches of the law, a 
state commission on legal reform is to be created that will be 
attached to the Republic of Georgia Ministry of Justice. It 
will be composed of the following persons: 
  Tevdore Ninidze -- Republic of Georgia Minister of 
Justice (commission chairman); 
  Mindia Ugrekhelidze -- chairman of the Republic 
of Georgia Supreme Court (cochairman); 
  Jamlet Bibiliashvili -- acting Republic of Georgia 
procurator general (cochairman); 
  Shota Kviria -- Republic of Georgia minister of 
internal affairs (cochairman); 
  Igor Giorgadze -- Republic of Georgia minister of 
security (cochairman); 
  Tengiz Liluashvili -- director of the Academy of 
Sciences State and Law Institute (cochairman, chairman of the 
Commission for Legislation on Civil Procedure); 
  Sergo Jorbenadze -- holder of the chair of civil 
law and civil procedure in the Law Faculty at Tbilisi State 
University (chairman of the Commission for Civil Legislation); 
  Giorgi Tqeshelidze -- holder of the chair of 
criminal law in the Law Faculty at Tbilisi State University 
(chairman of the Commission for Legislation on Criminal Law); 
  Iakob Putkaradze -- head of the Department of 
State and International Law at the Georgian Academy of Sciences 
State and Law Institute (chairman of the Commission for 
Constitutional Legislation); 
  Apolon Paliashvili -- holder of the chair of 
justice and supervision by the Procurator's Office at Tbilisi 
State University (chairman of the Commission for Legislation on 
Criminal Procedure); 
  Valeri Loria -- holder of the chair of the 
principles of the law and legal education at Tbilisi State 
University (chairman of the Commission for Administrative 
Legislation); 
  Gia Meparishvilvi -- associate professor in the 
Law Faculty at Tbilisi State University (chairman of the 
Commission for the Organization of Activities To Protect the 
Law); 
  Lado Chanturia -- associate professor in the Law 
Faculty at Tbilisi State University (chairman of the Commission 
for Agrarian Legislation); 
  Roland Giligashvili -- Republic of Georgia deputy 
procurator general (chairman of the Commission for Prison 
Legislation). 
  2. The statutes of the State Commission for Legal Reform, 
the composition of branch commissions, and the plan for 
preparing draft legislative acts are to be approved by the 
chairman of the state commission. 
  3. The Republic of Georgia Cabinet of Ministers is to 
approve the composition and [budget] estimate of the State 
Commission for Legal Reform on the basis of proposals submitted 
by the chairman of the State Commission for Legal Reform. 
  4. The working period of the State Commission for Legal 
Reform is to be 1994-95. 
  5. The State Commission for Legal Reform is to deliver 
periodically a report on the work it has carried out to the 
Georgian head of state. 
  [Signed] E. Shevardnadze 
  [Dated]Tbilisi, 26 December 1993 

