BFN 

  [Text] Al-Sulaymaniyah, northern Iraq, 1 Jun 
(INA)--Fighting between the agent gangs in Iraqi Kurdistan has 
continued despite the cease-fire agreement reached the day 
before yesterday between the groups of the two agents, Mas'ud 
Barzani and Jalal Talabani. 
  The failure of the agreement, which was signed on 30 May in 
the town of Silopi on Turkish territory, is considered a 
political disaster for the two agent gangs after two months of 
fighting. 
  Citing eyewitnesses today, AL-JUMHURIYAH said that no sooner 
had the Barzanis and Talabanis signed their agreement in the 
presence of a Turkish Foreign Ministry representative than 
intensive and large- scale battles began in Irbil, which had 
been free of clashes over the previous month of military 
operations. The paper said that the fighting began in Hamlah 
(Sitafan), [parenthesis as received], which is the area where 
the Barzanis hold their conferences and conspiratorial meetings. 
The fighting then extended to Saydarah, al-Iskan al-Jumhuri, 
Azadi, Zanyari, Tayruh, Shurash, Mustawfa, al-'Arab, Ta'jil, 
Shawari', al-Salmubata, Salah al-Din, Shihallah, Fatkawah, and 
Aynkawah crossing. [all placenames as received] 
  Both light and heavy weapons were used and random shelling 
reached all areas near Irbil. The battles resulted in the 
occupation by the agent Talabani forces of the main offices of 
BARAYAHTI [name as received] newspaper which is issued by the 
Kurdistan Democratic Party, who took control of the offices of 
the KDP's second local committee. 
  On the other hand, the Barzani forces took over the 
committee 
6, 8, and 9 [as received] and the offices of the KURDISTANI TOY 
newspaper and part of the offices of the Barzani group on the 
'Aynkawah road. 
  AL-JUMHURIYAH cites eyewitnesses as saying that hospitals 
under the control of Barzani and Talabani did not receive the 
wounded, despite their great number, and the citizens could not 
treat the injured as a result of fighting and random shelling. 
The fighting forced thousands to leave their homes for safer 
places. 
  The paper said that Irbil and the adjoining areas are living 
in anarchy, fear, and great tension. 

