Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katsuki Yamashita] </F>
  [Text] 1997 Is Deadline for Electric Car Development; Goal 
is Ni-MH Battery But Lead Is Realistic 
  Automakers have begun concentrated efforts to develop 
electric vehicles in time for their fall 1997 product 
announcement. This is in response to new emissions regulations 
in the state of California in the United States that will begin 
in 1998. There is less than four years until that deadline. 
Manufacturers of batteries, semiconductors and motors will be 
involved. A serious problem for the automakers is the secondary 
battery. They want an advanced type of battery with high energy 
density. The top candidate is a nickel-hydrogen battery, but 
there are a mountain of problems to overcome to develop a 
practical model. It is likely that they will start with a lead 
battery, which has low energy density but has a record of safety 
and reliability. There is also hope for an Li-based battery in 
the 21st Century. 
  The deadline for developing electric vehicles is the fall of 
1997. Not much time is left. In the state of California in the 
United States, the new emissions regulation bill (the new clean 
air law) will go into effect in 1998. This regulation obligates 
each manufacturer to ensure that 2% of the total number of 
vehicles it sells are ``zero emission cars,'' and realistically 
speaking, these are electric vehicles (see Figure 1). Automakers 
probably will unveil electric vehicles responding to this 
regulation in the fall of 1997. 


  This regulation will apply to automakers that sold 35,000 
vehicles per year in California. That means that each 
manufacturer must sell a minimum of 700 electric vehicles. 
Automakers that do not meet this regulation will penalized 
heavily. Under the bill that was in force in 1992, the penalty 
was only a fine of $5,000 for each vehicle under the 2% 
minimum. The penalty was changed as a result of a review of the 
1992 law, however, and now, automakers that cannot meet the 
regulation will not be able to sell any gasoline vehicles in 
California for the next year. 
  Furthermore, this action will not stop with California 
alone. 
It is expected to expand to the eastern states in the future. 
For this reason, automakers are forced to make concentrated 
efforts to develop electric vehicles. They also are obligated to 
sell hybrid cars that jointly use internal combustion engines 
and motors (see Figure 1). 
  Normally, automakers take four to five years to develop a 
new 
gasoline vehicle. They cannot meet the deadline if the basic 
design is not already firmed up. At the 30th Tokyo Motor Show, 
automakers displayed not only electric vehicles that were 
converted from gasoline vehicles, but also electric and hybrid 
vehicles that were newly designed from the chassis on up (see 
Figure 2 [omitted]). 
  However, everyone involved with electric vehicles says, 
``The 
electric vehicles that will be presented in the fall of 1997 
will be different from this exhibition.'' According to Honda 
Motor Company, ``Development of electric vehicles to be sold in 
California in 1998 is being done in earnest apart from those 
exhibited here.'' Beneath the surface, tension is growing in the 
development of electric vehicles that actually will be sold. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007LC-56A>  Figure 1. Electric Vehicle Introduction Schedule Under California's Clean Air Law </FIG>

<H5>  Storage Battery Breakthrough Essential </H5>
  Electronics manufacturers play a big role in the development 
of electric vehicles. This is because the secondary battery 
(storage battery) and semiconductors for motor and power use are 
important technologies that make up the electric vehicle. 
Automakers have brought in manufacturers of batteries, 
semiconductors and motors to begin developing electric vehicles. 
  Of these technologies, the storage battery is a serious 
bottleneck to popularization of the electric vehicle. According 
to a major battery manufacturer, ``A number of electric vehicle 
storage battery development projects are in progress in 
partnership with automakers.'' 
  This is because storage battery performance decides a 
vehicle's basic performance, including acceleration and the 
distance the vehicle can travel on one charge. If a high energy 
density storage battery is developed, it will increase the 
distance traveled per charge. If output density (maximum power 
per unit weight that can be extracted instantaneously from the 
battery) can be raised, acceleration performance will improve. 
The automakers' minimum requirements are 70Wh/kg weight energy 
density, 130 W/kg output density and a cycle life of over 1,000 
cycles (see Table 1). 


  In addition, the safety condition of ensuring that shock to 
the battery will not cause an outbreak of fire is indispensable. 
Problems with reliability, such as battery capacity decreasing 
as a result of over-charging, also must be resolved. Eliminating 
the need for maintenance work, such as electrolytic solution 
replenishment, also is an important point. 
<H5>  MITI Standardizes Five Items </H5>
  High cost is another factor that hinders popular use of 
electric vehicles. To promote cost reduction, MITI has compiled 
five standard specifications for batteries and chargers. 
  First, concerning lead (Pb) batteries: Dimensions and 
nominal 
voltage are not set. What has been standardized is voltage 
regulation, which has been set at 80 - 140% of nominal 
voltage. 
  Second, concerning communication protocol between charge 
stand and electric vehicle: When the charger is inserted, seven 
control signals are to be sent from the electric vehicle to the 
charger. They include signals to start or stop charging, whether 
the charger connector is connected properly, etc. 
  Third, concerning the charger connector: At this time, 
contact type connection has been made the standard. The method 
of charging without contact by using electromagnetic guidance, 
as proposed by General Motors Corporation of the United States, 
has not been addressed. It is possible that both methods will 
become standard in the United States. 
  MITI also set standards for charger and charge stand, but 
the 
details have not been released. The Japan Electric Vehicle 
Association plans to compile the standards in a book that will 
be published in January 1994. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007LC-57A>           Table 1: Candidates for Electric Vehicle Storage Battery </FIG>

<H5>  Closed Type Pb Battery Most Likely for Fall 1997 </H5>
  At present, the open type Pb batteries installed in electric 
vehicles that are converted gasoline vehicles need maintenance 
such as electrolytic solution replenishment. ``We cannot ask the 
general consumer to use the vehicle under such conditions,'' 
says the Japan Storage Battery Company. Battery manufacturers 
are working to develop a closed type Pb battery, and already 
have mounted one in an electric vehicle for experimental 
purposes. 
  Many battery manufacturers think that this closed type Pb 
battery is ``the most likely candidate for the electric vehicle 
battery that will appear in the fall of 1997.'' This is because, 
while its weight energy density of about 30 to 35 Wh/kg is low 
and its cycle life of around 400 cycles is short, it is a 
``balanced battery'' with high safety and reliability, according 
to the Japan Storage Battery Company. 
  Nevertheless, since this energy density limits the use of 
electric vehicles, it is not good enough to keep up with the 
California regulation. 
  The distance traveled per charge of the existing closed type 
Pb battery, when loaded with about 200 kg and operated over 40 
km of level ground, is about 75 km. At this rate, it can only be 
used when the distance to be traveled per day is known in 
advance, such as by dispatched freight delivery vehicles, trash 
collection vehicles, or vehicles used for commuting when one way 
is under 30 km. Says Matsushita Battery Industrial Company, 
``The 2% minimum probably can be met by using the close 
type Pb 
storage battery in the first year under the new regulation, 
1998, by selling to a limited market. From 1999 and thereafter, 
however, sales beyond those to a limited market will be needed, 
and that would be tough to do with the closed type Pb battery. 
The automakers say they want the distance traveled per charge to 
be at least 160 km.'' 
  That is why development is underway to improve energy 
density 
and cycle life. Goals for improvement by 1997 are 45 Wh/kg 
weight energy density and a cycle life of 1,000 cycles. 
<H5>  Hopes Pinned to Ni-MH Battery </H5>
  However, even if these goals are achieved, the closed type 
Pb 
battery will not reach the energy density required by the 
automakers. 
  That is why work is being done to develop advanced batteries 
with higher energy density than the closed type Pb battery. 
There are many candidates. These include the Ni-based Ni-Cd 
battery and nickel-hydrogen battery, the Li-based lithium ion 
battery that has started to be used recently in portable 
equipment, and Na-based batteries. All the advanced batteries 
carry unresolved problems, however, and none can be put to 
practical use right away. 
  The most hope is being pinned on the Ni-based battery. Even 
now, its weight energy density is about 60 Wh/kg, about double 
that of the closed type Pb battery, and it meets the 
requirements of the automakers in output density and cycle life 
as well. 
  Expectations are especially strong in the United States. The 
United States Advanced Battery Consortium (USABC), formed mainly 
by U.S. automakers, is concentrating research on the 
nickel-hydrogen battery with a view toward 1997. The battery 
will be developed by the Ovonic Battery Company of the United 
States (see Figure 3 [omitted]). In Japan, research is being 
done by the Furukawa Battery Company, Matsushita Battery 
Industrial Company and Sanyo Electric Company. 
  However, battery manufacturers who cite the closed type Pb 
battery as the best candidate for the vehicle to be presented in 
1997 cite the high cost of the nickel-hydrogen battery as a 
problem. Says a certain battery manufacturer, ``It may be almost 
double the weight energy density as the Pb battery, but it is 
three to four times the cost.'' It also has problems with 
reliability. Temperature rises in the battery during charging 
and discharging, which shortens its charge/discharge cycle life. 
``Research on suppressing heat is needed. It does not meet the 
requirements fully yet,'' says Matsushita Battery. 
<H5>  The Ideal Li-Based Battery in 10 Years </H5>
  Battery manufacturers that see the close type Pb battery as 
the best with which to start also see the Li-based battery as 
the advanced battery that will replace the closed type Pb 
battery. Manufacturers that see the nickel-hydrogen battery as 
promising also predict that the Li-based battery will succeed 
the nickel-hydrogen battery. 
  The attraction of the Li-based battery is its high energy 
density. There is no other material that can be used for a 
secondary battery that would raise energy density higher than 
lithium. It can raise weight energy density to about 180 Wh/kg. 
Calculated in terms of distance traveled per charge, this is 340 
km. When realized, it can be expected to perform on a par with a 
gasoline vehicle. 
  It will be well into the future before actual use of the 
Li-based battery. ``It probably will be realized in 10 years, 
not in this century,'' says Thomas W. Evernham, senior vice 
president of the U.S. firm Delco Electronics, which is 
responsible for the motor and battery used in the electric car 
``Impact'' that was developed by the General Motors Corporation 
of the United States. Many Japanese battery manufacturers share 
that view. Japanese research on the Li-based battery began in 
FY92 in the ``dispersion type battery power storage technology'' 
project, a 10-year project under the New Sunshine Project. The 
Li-based battery is a long-term R&amp;D them for USABC as well. 
<H5>  A Mountain of Problems with Li-Based Battery </H5>
  R&amp;D has only just begun on the Li-based battery and 
there are 
a mountain of problems. First, serial/parallel connection of 
multiple cells is difficult. When multiple cells with dispersed 
capacity are connected, some cells become over-charged or 
over-discharged. As a result, the battery electrolyte, an 
organic solvent, may leak out and ignite. 
  It is said that in the future, the electric vehicle will 
need 
around 200 to 300V output voltage. If lithium ion secondary 
batteries with 3.6V output are used, this would mean a serial 
connection of almost 100 cells. Parallel connection will be 
necessary to gain capacity. At present, only three parallel 
connections of three-cell serial connections has been achieved 
even for portable equipment. Moreover, large cells with multiple 
A capacity have yet to be manufactured. 
  Work is being done to develop a lithium secondary battery 
that uses a solid electrolyte instead of an organic solvent 
electrolytic solution in order to avoid the danger of fire or 
explosion. Use of a solid electrolyte will increase safety. 
However, this makes it difficult to achieve large capacity, and 
it also has less output density. 
<H5>  Specific Uses of Na-S Battery Possible </H5>
  R&amp;D also is proceeding on advanced batteries other than 
nickel-hydrogen and Li-based batteries. Each one has serious 
problems in practical application, however, and would have 
difficulty in replacing the Pb battery as the most popular 
battery. 
  The Na-based battery is under intense development in 
Germany. 
Because its operating temperature is high (350C), it must 
be heated before use. Once it cools down, it takes time before 
it is heated up again. ``It is not for the Sunday driver who 
drives only once a week, but it probably can be used for 
vehicles that run every day and can maintain the necessary 
temperature, such as delivery vehicles,'' says the Yuasa 
Corporation. Another problem is that experiments cannot be 
conducted on this battery in Japan. There is a legal restriction 
in the Fire Services Law that prohibits the loading of sodium 
and sulfur together over a specified quantity. 
  However, an advantage of the Na-based battery, according to 
the Yuasa Corporation, is that ``The 350C operating 
temperature ensures that there will be no output density drops 
or deterioration of life of the battery due to the cold.'' 
Furthermore, the weight energy density of the Na-S battery is 
100 Wh/kg, almost triple that of the Pb battery. Resources are 
abundant, also. Thus the Swiss firm Asea Brown Boveri (ABB) is 
working on the Na-S battery and AEG Anglo America AG, with the 
backing of the German firm Daimler-Benz, is working on an 
Na-NiCl battery (the zebra battery). Daimler-Benz, BMW 
(Bayerische Motoren Werke) and Volkswagen already have test 
manufactured electric vehicles in which these batteries have 
been installed, and have tested them on public roads. 
  As for the Ni-Cd battery, which is widely used for portable 
equipment, limited cadmium resources is a problem. Deposits 
contain only enough cadmium for about 30 million electric 
vehicles. 
  Other Ni-based batteries are the Ni-Fe and Ni-Zn-based 
batteries. Both have serious problems. The Ni-Fe battery cannot 
be sealed and therefore requires electrolyte replenishment and 
other maintenance. The Ni-Zn battery has high energy density, 
but is short-lived. 
<H5>  Regulation To Be Reviewed in 1994 </H5>
  ``The current situation resembles the one in 1973,'' says a 
major storage battery maker. In 1973, legislation that 
strengthened emissions regulations was promulgated in 
California, and automakers were forced to respond. Japanese 
automakers met these regulations, but U.S. automakers were 
unable to do so, and enforcement was postponed for one year. It 
is possible that this time as well, enforcement may be postponed 
if advanced batteries cannot be developed by 1998. It also is 
possible that the many hybrid cars that were exhibited at the 
recent Tokyo Motor Show may initially be approved in place of 
non-polluting vehicles. The recent legislation is reviewed every 
two years, and the next review will be in 1994. 
Bibliography 
  Takano; ``Electric Vehicle Development Accelerated, from 
Experimental to Era of Practical Use,'' NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 11 
Nov 91, No. 540, pp 213-219. 

