Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by He Guanghui (6320 0342 6540), vice minister of </F>
the State Commission for Restructuring Economic System: "1994: 
China's Reform Tasks"] 
  [Text] The year 1994 will be the first year for 
implementing the "Decision" taken at the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee. It will also be a crucial 
year for realizing overall progress and key breakthroughs in 
economic structural reform. We must put efforts into 
indomitable and progress-making struggle. This year, the key 
task for economic structural reform is: With the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system and the promoting of 
reform of the macroeconomic regulatory and control system as the 
focal points, and in coordination with the establishment of a 
market system with a production factors market as its main part, 
to speedily promote the reform of the social welfare and housing 
systems, and do well in reforms in other respects. 
<H3>  I. With the Transformation of the Enterprise Operational 
Mechanism as the Focal Point, Exploring Effective Avenues for 
Establishing a Modern Enterprise System </H3>
  The putting forward of the need to establish a modern 
enterprise system is a scientific summation of enterprise reform 
practice over the last few years. All enterprises must put 
efforts into moving in this direction. 
  Establishing a modern enterprise system is an arduous and 
complex task. It involves essential transformations of the 
nature, position, roles and activities of enterprises, and will 
actually be a restructuring of the entire enterprise system. 
Thus, when exploring ways to establish a modern enterprise 
system, our avenues of thought should be a bit broader and our 
standpoint should be a little higher. In our work, we must be 
meticulous in our arrangements, be strict in our standards, 
actively explore, and gradually push reform forward. We must do 
everything possible to avoid simplification and rushing headlong 
into mass action. 
  We must grasp firmly and do well in the various 
elements of basic work in establishing a modern enterprise 
system. We must continue to seriously implement the 
"Enterprise Law" and the "Regulations on Transforming the 
Operational Mechanism of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the 
Whole People." We must also further implement the various types 
of operational autonomy in enterprises, speed up the pace at 
which the operational mechanism of state-owned enterprises is 
transformed and the organizational structure is readjusted, and 
continue to deepen the reform of the labor, personnel and 
distribution systems within enterprises. At the same time, it 
is necessary to implement the "Regulations on the Supervision 
and Management of the Assets of State-Owned Enterprises," 
strengthen supervision over the assets of state-owned 
enterprises, guard against the erosion of state-owned assets, 
and guarantee and increase the value of enterprises' state-owned 
assets. It is necessary to continue to implement the "Rules on 
Enterprise Financial Affairs" and "Enterprise Accounting 
Standards," so as to accelerate the transition toward enterprise 
financial and accounting systems which are scientific and in 
accord with international practices. We must gradually sort out 
and appraise assets, clearly set down property rights divisions, 
sort out and clarify creditors' rights and liabilities, appraise 
assets and verify the volume of enterprise corporate assets. 
  We must put efforts into exploring organizational forms 
for the assets structure of state-owned enterprises 
  -- Beginning with enterprises in which the operational 
situation are good, it is necessary to gradually carry out 
reorganization in accordance with the company system. That 
small number of medium- sized and large enterprises which make 
good profits, have high management efficiency and are in accord 
with the orientation of industrial policies can be directly 
reorganized as limited stock companies in which the state has a 
controlling or participatory shareholding. The majority of 
competitive-type industrial enterprises which are in accord with 
the industrial policies can be reorganized as limited liability 
companies or limited stock companies in which both the state and 
other corporate entities contribute funds. Enterprises in 
special industries can be reorganized as limited liability 
companies funded solely by the state. 
  -- Enterprises with the conditions can pool funds with 
foreign businesses and establish limited liability companies or 
limited stock companies. The foreign funds can be directly 
invested or be inputted through capital stock financing. Newly 
organized joint ventures using Chinese and foreign investment 
must all operate in accordance with the new structure. 
  -- We must further expand the mergers and alliances between 
enterprises. In accordance with the different situations of 
enterprises, forms such as merger through the provision of funds 
or partial purchase can be adopted. If both sides are 
state-owned enterprises, then with the agreement of the managing 
departments, and on the basis of voluntary participation, the 
form of noncompensated merger can be adopted. However, 
regardless of which form is adopted, in all cases they must 
handle appropriately and well the liability burdens of the 
original enterprises and arrangements for staff and workers. 
-- Those state-owned enterprises which have superiorities in 
terms of land resources and which should not be located in city 
centers can, through transferal transformation or transformation 
involving change of business, establish new enterprises with new 
mechanisms. 
  -- In respect of small-scale state-owned enterprises, we can 
carry out reform through adopting forms such as leased 
operation, contracted operation, sale or combined leasing and 
sale. It is also possible to implement a shareholding 
cooperative system. In selling such operations it is necessary 
to draw in the mechanism of competition, and to adopt the method 
of tendering or auction. For those enterprises which do not have 
the conditions, and for which the only option is to realize a 
sale through agreement, the agreed price must be set through 
certain procedures. It is possible to sell an enterprise 
outright, or else first lease it and then sell it. That is, 
first the state will recover the circulating funds, and levy use 
charges for the fixed assets, and subsequently, when the 
conditions are ripe, it will sell off the fixed assets. 
  -- Those state-owned enterprises which have long operated 
poorly, the products of which cannot be sold, whose assets 
cannot meet their liabilities, and which cannot be reorganized 
or transformed through other avenues should be declared bankrupt 
in accordance with the law. 
  -- All newly commenced industrial construction projects 
should be organized as enterprises in accordance with the new 
standards and should set down new enterprise mechanisms. All 
projects which involve productive operations can first establish 
companies and then start on construction. In setting up the 
project, they must as quickly as possible establish a company in 
which property rights relations are clear, responsibilities are 
clear and there is separation between government and enterprise 
functions. New enterprises must be established in accordance 
with the "Company Law." 
  In accordance with the demands of a modern enterprise 
system, it is necessary to actively engage in the renewal of the 
non-state- owned enterprise system. Establishing a modern 
enterprise system is not only a reform task for state-owned 
enterprises, but also a major issue faced by other types of 
enterprises including urban collective enterprises, township and 
town enterprises, and nongovernment high-tech enterprises. They 
must all, through diverse types of exploration, achieve clarity 
of property rights, and gradually change themselves into 
shareholding cooperative enterprises. Some can be changed into 
shareholding companies. In respect of privately operated 
enterprises, we must encourage them to reorganize into 
standardized companies, so that their activities can be guided 
toward rationality. 
  If state-owned enterprises are to realize a 
transformation of mechanism and a change of track, they must 
make full plans to resolve the problem of heavy burdens left by 
history. First, it is necessary to rationally deal with 
enterprises' debt burdens. Second, it is necessary to deal with 
the problem whereby the social insurance accumulation of veteran 
staff members and workers is insufficient. Third, it is 
necessary for enterprises to gradually move away from 
nonproductive undertakings, and resolve the problem of 
enterprises "running society." Fourth, we must gradually 
resolve the problem of excess personnel in old enterprises. 
  It is necessary to guard against the phenomenon whereby only 
the nameplate is changed and there is no real transformation of 
mechanism. The limited shareholding companies and limited 
liability companies which have already been established must, in 
accordance with relevant laws and regulations, establish 
complete internal organizational structures, achieve scientific, 
high-efficiency management and put efforts into changing the 
operational mechanism. When drawing in foreign funds to 
transform old enterprises, it is necessary to pay attention to 
the following: 1) It is necessary to avoid the phenomenon 
whereby there is just a change of nameplate, but no change of 
mechanism, and avoid situations where in name there is a 
joint-fund enterprise, but where in fact the foreign funds do 
not arrive. 2) When workshops, departments or projects engage 
in joint-fund operations with foreign partners, we must avoid 
situations where the workshops, departments and projects which 
are operating well are turned into joint-fund operations, while 
the ones which are operating poorly are left to the state. 
<H3>  II. With Reform of the Revenue, Financial and Investment 
Structures as the Focal Points, Accelerating the Building of 
Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Systems, and Changing the 
Role of the Government in Managing the Economy </H3>
  In 1994, major steps will be taken in reforming the revenue, 
financial and investment structures. This is an extremely 
timely and correct decision taken by the party Central Committee 
and the State Council, and it has decisive significance in 
accelerating the establishment of a new structure. 
  1. On reform of the financial revenue structure 
  In accordance with the demands of the socialist market 
economy, a financial system whereby there is revenue-sharing 
will be established. This is one of the key tasks in this 
year's reform of the macroeconomic management structure. 
  In implementing the revenue-sharing reforms, it is first 
necessary to scientifically and rationally divide the 
administrative jurisdictions of the central and local 
governments, and on this basis divide the scope of financial 
expenditures at the various levels. Second, on the basis of 
rationally dividing jurisdictions, the various tax types should 
be divided between central financial revenue and local financial 
revenue, and there should be an appropriate increase in the 
proportion of central financial revenue. Third, there should be 
rational local financial income and expenditure base figures set 
down, and a scientific expenditure system should be established 
whereby the central financial administration returns tax revenue 
and transfers expenditure to the localities. Fourth, in 
coordination with the implementation of the revenue-sharing 
system, the two levels of state tax bureaus and local tax 
bureaus should be established. Fifth, in accordance with the 
principles and requirements put forward in the new financial 
plan for the central and provincial levels, the provinces (as 
well as the autonomous regions and directly administered 
municipalities) should correspondingly formulate and implement, 
in respect of their subordinate city and county financial 
administrations, specific revenue-sharing measures. 
  The reform of the revenue system should be carried out in 
accordance with the the principles of "unified tax laws, fair 
burdens, a simplified tax system, and rational 
decentralization." The reform of the circulation tax system 
mainly involves the abolition of the former product tax and the 
former unified industrial and commercial tax levied on the three 
types of enterprises which are partly or wholly foreign-funded. 
These will be changed into a value-added tax, the scope over 
which the value-added tax is levied will be expanded, the 
value-added tax rates will be simplified and merged, the method 
for levying the value-added tax will be improved, and a system 
will be implemented whereby tax is recorded on goods dispatch 
notes and the taxation is withheld. In respect of some special 
consumer products, a further consumption tax will be levied. In 
respect of operational industries, excluding commercial 
establishments which are mainly part of tertiary industry and 
which are not subject to value-added tax, operational tax will 
continue to be levied. In respect of the reform of income tax: 
1) The income tax for domestically funded enterprises will be 
unified. The former method where different tax rates were levied 
on enterprises depending on their ownership nature will be 
changed, and a unified income tax rate of 33 percent will be 
levied. In accordance with their actual situations, it will be 
possible to adopt some transitional allowance measures for some 
enterprises and, at the same time, to abolish the state-owned 
enterprise regulatory tax. 2) A unified personal tax system 
will be implemented. Our country's "Personal Income Tax Law" 
has already been promulgated and it came into formal effect on 1 
January this year. We must seriously implement it. 
  The reforms of the financial revenue system this year will 
affect the financial contract system and the enterprise contract 
system. They are quite big steps and it is necessary to carry 
out all sorts of linkage and coordinating work. It is necessary 
to adopt various types of effective measures to safeguard and 
motivate the enthusiasm of the localities and enterprises. It 
is also necessary to guard against the occurrence of various 
types of leaks during the intense changes, which would lead to 
the erosion of financial revenue. In this way we will guarantee 
the smooth implementation of these reform measures and will 
achieve a smooth transition. 
  After the financial revenue reforms, great changes will 
occur 
in the financial relationship between the central authorities 
and the localities. The major change will be a reduction in 
revenue from the tax types levied directly at levels below the 
provincial level. The various types of tax revenue to be 
returned to the localities, including the portion of the tax 
reductions and exemptions over the next two years being returned 
to relevant accounts, will all be returned to the 
provincial-level financial administration. A major principle of 
this financial reform is to firmly continue the trend toward 
rational decentralization. The central government is not 
centralizing powers, but rather is mainly strengthening 
macroeconomic regulation and control, and appropriately 
balancing the expenditure capacities of the various regional 
financial administrations. After provincial-level financial 
strengths are appropriately centralized, all provinces should, 
in accordance with the principle of this reform, arrange for 
most operating expenditure to be by the basic-level governments. 
This will be more in accord with the realities of each 
locality, and will satisfy the demands of the local people. The 
provincial-level governments should also appropriately balance 
the financial expenditure capacities of the various basic-level 
governments, and promote balanced socioeconomic development. 
This raises the question of how the province is to divide the 
income from the various tax types among the subordinate 
governments, how it will share revenue and how it will 
rationally transfer disbursements. This work is extremely 
important and extremely onerous. The economic restructuring 
departments in all areas must, on the basis of serious 
investigation and research, in accordance with the guiding 
principles of the central authorities and under the guidance of 
the various levels of government, coordinate the various 
departments in doing well in this work. 
  2. On reform of the financial structure 
  First, the People's Bank of China will be turned into a true 
central bank, and a central bank macroregulatory and control 
system which independently implements monetary policy will be 
established. The final goal of monetary policy should be a 
stable currency value. The intermediate goals and operational 
goals of monetary policy are to control the money supply, the 
total volume of credit, interbank borrowing interest rates and 
bank reserve provision rates. The power to handle basic money 
and regulate the scale of credit should be taken back by the 
headquarters of the People's Bank of China. Under the 
precondition of fully considering stability during the period of 
transition, the existing quota management of credit funds should 
be changed to assets risk management and assets-liability ratio 
management. The supervision and management of the various types 
of financial organs by the central People's Bank should be 
strengthened, so as to safeguard normal financial order. 
  Second, policy-nature banks will be established. A 
separation will be realized between policy-nature financial 
business and commercial-nature financial business. This is a 
precondition for the changing of specialized banks into 
commercial banks. It is also an objective requirement for 
cutting the direct links between policy-nature credit and basic 
money and for guaranteeing the initiative of the People's Bank 
in regulating and controlling basic money. The policy-nature 
banks will, under the guidance of state industrial policies and 
plans, make their own operational decisions, shoulder their own 
risks, and firmly uphold the principle of operations which 
guarantee capital and a little profit. They will not engage in 
commercial financial business. The policy-nature banks will 
comprise the State Development Bank, the Import-Export Credit 
Bank, and the China Agricultural Development Bank. These will 
form a complete policy-nature investment and financing system, 
and will mainly take on the policy-nature investment and 
financing business in various economic spheres. 
  Third, the current specialized state banks will be changed 
into true commercial banks. After policy-nature financial 
business is separated out, the existing specialized state banks, 
that is the China Industrial and Commercial Bank, the China 
Agricultural Bank, the Bank of China and the People's 
Construction Bank of China, will gradually make the transition 
to state-owned commercial banks. They will operate in 
accordance with the operational mechanism of modern commercial 
banks, will truly decide on their own operations, will take sole 
responsibility for their own profits and losses, will bear risks 
and will practice self-restraint. In the process of 
track-changing, the state-owned commercial banks should pay 
attention to readjusting their own organizational structures. 
Overlapping between the businesses of the state-owned 
commercial banks will be allowed, so as to form a mechanism of 
competition. However, abnormal competition will be restricted. 
The other current national and regional banks should also carry 
out transformation in accordance with the relevant laws and 
regulations which will soon appear. At the same time, on the 
basis of the urban and rural credit cooperatives, we should 
actively and safely develop a cooperative bank system to serve 
agriculture, small and medium-sized enterprises and regional 
economies. The cooperative bank system will be formed by rural 
cooperative banks and urban cooperative banks. Urban 
cooperative banks will set up two levels of branches -- city 
branches and basic-level branches. All will have independent 
corporate status. Regardless of whether we speak of specialized 
state banks being changed into commercial banks or urban and 
rural credit cooperatives being turned into cooperative banks, 
the changes must be carried out in a gradual and planned way. 
At present, the various localities have high enthusiasm for 
developing local and regional commercial banks, but there is 
insufficient understanding of the operational mechanisms and 
possible risks of commercial banks. This situation is greatly 
deserving of attention. Commercial banks are not a second 
financial administration for the government, and cannot 
arbitrarily expand the scale of credit. They are actually 
financial enterprises and must be operated as enterprises. For 
commercial banks, especially small and medium-sized commercial 
banks, strengthening asset-liability management is more 
important. If a tight money situation occurs and it is 
difficult to meet payments, it could lead to the bank going 
bankrupt, and the repercussions of this would be very strong. 
In this respect, it is necessary to have a very clear 
understanding, and matters must be handled very carefully. 
  3. On reform of the investment structure 
  The focal points of the reform of the investment structure 
in 
1994 will be: 1) Gradually establishing corporate investment 
and bank credit risk responsibility. On this basis, eventually 
investment and financing for competitive-type projects will be 
pushed toward the market, and the enterprises will make their 
own decisions and will take on the risks. The decisions on 
credit provision will be taken by the commercial bank, and the 
bank will take responsibility for profits or losses. A project 
registration and report system will replace the current 
administrative examination and approval system, and the 
government will influence this investment mainly by 
strengthening industrial policy guidance and information 
guidance. 2) The investment and financing channels for basic 
projects and key construction projects will be broadened, and 
all sides will be encouraged to participate in investment. Funds 
will be raised, for example, through the shareholding system, 
auction of enterprises, leasing, and property rights transfer. 
At the same time, this will be coordinated with the 
implementation of the revenue-sharing system, which will 
strengthen the capacity and the responsibility of local 
governments to invest in basic projects and key construction 
projects. 3) Newly commenced industrial projects and projects 
in progress will actively promote a company corporate 
responsibility system. 4) Policy-nature financing and 
commercial-nature financing will be separated, and a central 
policy-nature investment and financing system will be 
established. 
  4. On transforming government functions, reforming 
government organs and establishing intermediary 
organizations 
  Transforming government functions and reforming government 
organs are pressing requirements in establishing a socialist 
market economy structure. This is also something which 
enterprises and society have indicated is a quite major issue. 
If determined efforts are not put into resolving this problem, 
it will be difficult to achieve success in transforming the 
operational mechanism of enterprises. 
  In 1994, in accordance with unified deployments by the 
central authorities, it is necessary to continue and to strive 
to complete, at an early date, the reform of central government 
organs, and to actively push forward reform of local government 
organs. In reform of both central government organs and local 
government organs, the changing of government functions should 
be taken as the focal point. At present, in changing government 
functions, we need to do well in three areas of work: 1) 
Functions which fall within the scope of enterprise operational 
autonomy should truly be returned to enterprises. 2) The 
resource deployment functions should be transferred to the 
market. 3) In economic activities, social service functions and 
quite a proportion of supervisory functions should be 
transferred to intermediary organizations. Intermediary organs, 
as links between government and enterprise, enterprise and 
enterprise, and government and society, will have service, 
linkage, notarizing and supervisory functions which cannot be 
replaced by government administrative management. In accordance 
with the requirements of the market economy operation, stress 
must be placed on developing and improving accountant, auditor 
and lawyer offices as well as property and credit appraisal 
organs and so on. In coordination with the reform of government 
organs, there should be organized, on the basis of need and in 
accordance with the law, industry associations, guilds, chambers 
of commerce and other such organizations, which will assist the 
government in carrying out socioeconomic management. The 
intermediary organs must, through adherence to the law and 
maintenance of standards, form self-coordinating, 
self-protective and self-restraining mechanisms. The market 
intermediary organs will create between them a mechanism of 
competition, whereby the superior succeed and the inferior are 
weeded out. The intermediary organs must also assume 
corresponding legal and economic responsibility for the results 
of their actions, and accept the management and supervision of 
relevant government departments. 
<H3>  III. With the Fostering of Production Factor Markets as the 
Focal Point, Continuing To Promote Price Reform and the 
Fostering of a Unified, Open Market System </H3>
  1. Strongly developing commodity markets and 
continuing to deepen the reform of the circulation structure 
  In the production centers, sales centers and distribution 
centers for major commodities, it is necessary to continue to 
actively develop and perfect a large number of wholesale markets 
for agricultural products, industrial consumption products and 
means of production. Also, market information functions will be 
improved, trading measures will be improved, the efficiency of 
trading will be raised and the range of such markets will be 
expanded. There will be strict standardization of the commodity 
futures market experimental points, and there will be 
reappraisal and reregistration of existing futures exchanges and 
futures brokering companies. At the same time, the pace of 
futures legislation will be accelerated. The reform of the 
goods and materials ordering fairs system will be continued, 
while systems of state ordering of goods and long-term contracts 
will be explored. New modes for linking producers with users 
such as coordinated provision of goods and materials will be 
expanded, so as to gradually replace the system of mandatory 
planned distribution, while the circulation channels for means 
of production will be put in order. Various types of brokerage 
companies and broker organs will be stably developed, while 
legislation to cover brokers will be stepped up so as to 
standardize the activities of brokers. The reform of the 
large-volume agricultural product circulation systems will be 
continued and pushed forward. In areas where grain prices have 
still not been freed, the adoption of decentralized 
decisionmaking will be continued, so as to gradually realize 
freeing of prices. In places where prices have already been 
freed, it is necessary to do well in the various aspects of 
related reform work following the freeing of grain prices, 
further perfect the system of graded stores and the grain 
regulatory fund system, and use the market mechanism to 
strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control of grain. There 
is a need to actively create conditions under which to stably 
push forward the reform of the system of purchase and sale of 
cotton and silkworm cocoons, so that this is brought onto the 
market track. It is necessary to consolidate and improve the 
circulation system for agricultural products such as meat, 
sugar, eggs, fruit and vegetables, which are already basically 
subject to market regulation, so as to speed the establishment 
of a risk regulation and control mechanism. 
  2. Further deepening price reform 
  Pushing price reform forward is still a major task this 
year. 
We must, as swiftly as possible, achieve the merging of the 
dual-track pricing system for means of production. We must 
select an opportunity to merge into a single price the high and 
the low prices for crude petroleum within the plan. At the same 
time we should raise the price levels. Those prices which have 
already been freed should continue to be subject to the market. 
When the conditions are ripe, we should then merge the prices 
for crude petroleum. The prices for state monopoly coal should 
be completely freed. Under the precondition of not affecting 
the overall stability of prices, there should be an appropriate 
readjustment of the price of electricity. There will be an 
appropriate increase in the guaranteed price of grain and the 
price of cotton. This year, the reform tasks are very onerous 
and they will affect every household and may affect social 
stability. All areas must make meticulous arrangements, 
strengthen supervision and control and guarantee the smooth 
carrying out of reform. 
  3. Actively developing production factor markets, 
including the financial market, the land market and the labor 
market 
  Further opening up the financial market. In 1994, 
we must take positive and stable steps in marketizing interest 
rates. We need to develop standardized interbank-borrowing and 
bill-discounting markets, and strengthen management of the money 
market. We must cut the direct links between the money market 
and the funds market, and guard against funds from the 
interborrowing market flowing into the securities market and the 
real estate market. We must further put in order the 
relationship between deposit interest rates, credit interest 
rates and negotiable securities interest rates. The various 
types of interest rates must reflect differences in time 
periods, costs and risks, and rational interest rate 
differentials must be maintained, so as to reflect supply-demand 
relationships in the market. 
  In the negotiable securities market, the scale of the issue 
of various types of bonds must continue to be expanded in a 
planned way. Bond issue organs and bond and credit rating 
organs will have to be established, so as to promote the healthy 
development of the bond market. On the basis of improving the 
government bond market, state-owned commercial banks and other 
financial organs, as well as post office savings organs and 
social security funds, should be required to hold a certain 
proportion of their balances in government bonds. The national 
commercial financial organs will be able to use this as security 
when obtaining financing from the People's Bank. This will 
create conditions for the central bank to engage in open market 
business. 
  The scale of public issue of shares will be expanded in a 
planned way. The secondary securities market will continue to 
be developed and perfected. A number of cooperative investment 
funds will be developed in a step-by-step way, and these will be 
commissioned by small and medium-sized investors to engage in 
investment in securities. This will reduce the risk of 
investment in securities. Market management of stock exchanges 
will be strengthened and effective measures will be adopted to 
strike at activities whereby major operators control share 
prices from behind the scenes. The construction of a nationwide 
securities network price-quoting system will be continued. On 
the basis of summing up experiences in terms of internal 
circulation and trade of corporate shares, the scale of 
corporate share trading will be expanded, so as to promote the 
normal circulation of corporate shares. The "Securities Law" 
will be promulgated as quickly as possible, and then the issue 
and sale of shares will be standardized strictly in accordance 
with the "Securities Law" and the "Provisional Regulations for 
Managing the Issue and Trading of Shares." The management of 
securities exchanges and trading systems will also be improved. 
  In reforming the foreign exchange management structure, 
efforts will be made to achieve the merger of the exchange rates 
and to establish a managed floating exchange rate system which 
is based on the market. The system of foreign exchange quotas 
and retained proportions will be abolished and an exchange 
settlement system will be instituted. The system of planned 
examination and approval for the foreign exchange used for 
normal foreign trade, labor cooperation, technology imports and 
such current account expenditure will be abolished, and there 
will be conditional convertibility for renminbi in current 
accounts. A unified national interbank foreign exchange market 
will be established, to replace the current foreign exchange 
swap centers. At the same time, foreign currency bid prices and 
foreign currency circulation will be strictly prohibited. 
  Correctly guiding the healthy development of the land 
market. It is necessary to establish a primary-level, 
standardized state- monopoly urban land-use market, and expand 
the range of land-use system reforms. In respect of the sale of 
commercial land-use rights, the modes of calling for tenders and 
auction can be adopted, so as to raise the economic efficiency 
of land use. The compensated transfer of land-use rights must 
manifest the principles of openness, justness and fairness. The 
price arrived at in negotiated leasing of land must be fair to 
society. The sale of use rights and development of large pieces 
of land must be handled carefully. On the basis of truly 
safeguarding agricultural land and strictly controlling the 
transfer of agricultural land to nonagricultural purposes, we 
must do well in the experimental points for reform of the rural 
land-use system. 
  It is necessary to uphold the principle of giving equal 
importance to resources and to asset management. There is also 
a need to strengthen land registration and appraisal work. Tax 
will not be levied on income from the leasing of land in the 
primary market, but such income must be handled within the 
financial budget. On the basis of the primary-level, 
state-monopoly, urban land market, we should free up and enliven 
the secondary land market. The secondary market must establish a 
regular land-use rights transfer price-formation mechanism and, 
through levying and readjusting real estate taxation and other 
measures, guard against the obtaining of super-profits in real 
estate transactions and the erosion of state earnings. 
  Macroregulation and control over land development and use 
must be strengthened, and it is necessary to uphold unified 
government management of planning, development, sale and 
earnings distribution from land. Financial taxation, pricing 
and legal measures should be used to regulate and control the 
land supply-demand relationship, and to standardize the land 
market. Actively fostering the labor market. On 
the basis of gradually readjusting the enterprises' 
organizational structure, and reforming the labor employment 
system and the system where graduates are assigned to jobs, we 
should gradually reduce the planned allocation of labor and the 
scope of such arrangements. We must put efforts into developing 
a labor market and draw the mechanism of competition into the 
employment sphere. At present, we should stress the development 
of a human resources and skills interflow market, expand the 
scope of dual-directional choice in employment and promote the 
rational flow of labor. We must put great efforts into social 
labor employment intermediary organizations for job 
introduction, employment training and labor arbitration and 
mediation. We must strengthen the information interflow in the 
labor market, so as to guide the rational transfer of labor. We 
must actively encourage enterprises and the various levels of 
government to put efforts into developing tertiary industry, to 
expand avenues and to create more employment opportunities. In 
respect of the flow of surplus labor from the rural areas, we 
must do well in guidance and service work, so as to prevent 
various types of negative influences. Through coordinated 
reforms in various respects, we must gradually form various 
types of labor market systems at the state, local and enterprise 
levels, and provide labor with better opportunities for equal 
competition, so as to more fully bring into play the role of the 
market mechanism in the rational deployment of labor resources. 
4. Further improving market order, improving market 
regulations, and putting efforts into developing market 
relations 
  It is necessary to tightly grasp the work of formulating 
laws 
and regulations for safeguarding market order, standardizing the 
activities of market entities and cleaning up the market 
environment, so as to guarantee that market activities are 
carried out in a just, fair and open way. It is also necessary 
to set up and perfect corresponding market supervisory organs 
and enforcement systems. We must adopt effective measures to 
eliminate the phenomena of regional blockades and departmental 
regimes which still exist to a serious degree, and to remove all 
restrictions which are not in accord with the requirements of a 
market economy and which obstruct the formation of a unified, 
open market system. Here it must be especially pointed out that 
in the process of promoting the development of markets, 
government departments must place stress on developing market 
relations which are in accord with the demands of the socialist 
market economy, and guarantee the basic role of the market 
mechanism in resource deployment. Stress must be placed on 
promoting and safeguarding fair competition, improving market 
regulations, and standardizing trading activities. The 
practices which exist in market construction at present, whereby 
localities proceed from their own interests, ignore conditions, 
do not concern themselves with needs, are greatly avaricious, 
blindly compete, blockade each other, and just rebuild venues 
and set up desks, are completely incompatible with market 
economy principles. 
<H3>  IV. Accelerating the Pace of Reforms of the Social Welfare 
System and the Housing System </H3>
  Based on the spirit of the "Decision" of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, in carrying out 
reform of the social welfare system, it is important to grasp 
the following principles: 
  The first is that the level and pattern of the system must 
be 
in accord with the level of economic development. Proceeding 
from the national conditions, the state and the enterprises 
cannot take on too much, and even in respect of basic welfare 
such as care of the elderly and medical services, the individual 
must pay some fees. 
  The second is that there must be a difference between urban 
and rural areas. At the present stage, there exist very great 
differences between the urban and rural areas in our country in 
terms of level of production, employment structure and income 
level, and the modernization and socialization of the rural 
economy will require a long process over time. The broad rural 
areas will not in the near term possess the conditions for a 
compulsory social welfare system governed by unified national 
legislation. We cannot just copy the methods of the urban 
enterprises. The broad number of rural residents should 
continue to uphold the good traditional practices of looking 
after the elderly at home and helping their neighbors. In 
wealthier areas, on the basis of voluntary participation by the 
peasants, an old-age insurance system involving personal saving 
accumulation can be instituted. 
  The third is that there must be a separation between social 
insurance and commercial insurance. 
  The fourth is that the social welfare management organs must 
be unified and the management must be governed by legislation. 
  The focal point in 1994 is to further improve the old-age 
pension and medical insurance systems for urban staff and 
workers. The orientation is that the old-age pension and 
medical funds should be jointly provided by units and 
individuals. A new method should be implemented whereby social 
funds and personal accounts are combined. At the same time, the 
unemployment insurance system should be further improved. 
  In accordance with this reform orientation, the basic line 
of 
thought for the reform of the old-age pension system for urban 
staff and workers is that individual old-age pension accounts 
will be established, and the old-age pension fees will comprise 
a certain proportion of wages and will be jointly contributed by 
the employing unit and the individual staff member or worker. 
The amounts will be recorded in the individual account. In 
future, at the same time as realizing the monetization of wages, 
the proportion to be contributed by the individual staff members 
and workers and the proportion to be contributed by the 
employing unit should be gradually brought to an equal level. 
If individual laborers participate in the old-age pension 
scheme, the costs will be borne entirely by the individuals. 
When promoting the reform of the property rights system, 
engaging in the reorganization, transfer and clearing up of 
assets, and arranging joint ventures with foreign funds, in all 
cases it is necessary to consider the raising of social welfare 
funds and the sources for guaranteeing social welfare funds. 
  The medical and health system reforms will be focused on 
reform of the current publicly funded and labor insurance 
medical and health system, and establishing a county- and 
city-level medical and health insurance system in which 
individual medical and health accounts are combined with social 
insurance funds for major illnesses. The basic line of thought 
is to divide the funds used for the existing labor insurance 
medical treatment and publicly funded medical treatment into two 
segments. Part of this will be used to establish an overall 
social insurance fund for major illnesses, which will be 
centralized and will be used as a regulator, and the monies from 
which will be expended to cover major illnesses of staff members 
and workers. The other part will be used to establish medical 
and health accounts for individuals. Further, individual staff 
and workers will, at set intervals, pay in a certain amount of 
their wages to supplement the individual medical and health 
accounts, and these will be used for general medical and health 
expenditure. The reform of the medical and health system will 
be quite complex, and quite difficult. All areas must actively 
develop forecasting and formulate specific plans. We will, 
together with relevant departments, select several cities as 
trial points in which to carry out experimental reforms. 
  Unemployment insurance will mainly involve putting into 
effect the State Council's whole-people ownership staff and 
workers unemployment insurance implementation measures, 
expanding the scope of unemployment insurance, and reforming the 
methods of calculation and issue of unemployment insurance. We 
must establish a unified unemployment insurance system which 
covers the staff and workers in state-owned, collective and 
private ownership enterprises and the Chinese side of joint 
ventures. Industrial injury insurance for enterprises will, on 
the basis of trials at experimental points, be gradually 
expanded in coverage and the management modes will be reformed. 
  Of course, our country is huge in territory, and the 
economic 
development of various regions is very unbalanced. Thus, the 
various types of insurance noted above, and especially urban 
old-age pensions, cannot be implemented to the same degree 
across the country. Thus, the various areas should be allowed, 
under the guidance of unified national policies and principles, 
to have different forms, ranges and degrees of pensions. 
  As to the reform of the housing system, at the Third 
National 
Housing Reform Work Conference held from 30 November to 3 
December last year, the State Council put forward the principles 
and orientation of reform and set down specific deployments for 
housing reform work this year. All areas must seriously and 
fully implement the measures in accordance with the spirit of 
the conference. 
<H3>  V. Earnestly Grasping Well the Various Reforms in Other 
Spheres </H3>
  1. Continuing to deepen reform in the rural areas 
  The responsibility system which has the household 
output-linked contracts as its main part, and the dual-level 
operational structure which combines centralization and 
decentralization, are basic systems in our country's rural 
economy. They must be stably maintained for a long period and 
be continually improved. In order to stabilize the land 
contract relationships so as to encourage peasants to increase 
their investment and raise land-use efficiency, it is necessary 
to extend the contract periods for cultivated land. Under the 
precondition of upholding the collective ownership of land and 
not changing the use of land, with the agreement of the 
contractor, we should allow the compensated transfer of land-use 
rights in accordance with the law within the period of the 
contract. In a small number of economically quite developed 
areas, in accordance with the principle of voluntary 
participation by the masses, we can allow some modes such as 
transfer of contracts and shareholdings, in order to develop 
operations of an appropriate scale. 
  Rural collective economic organizations should actively 
develop service-nature economic entities, to provide services to 
household operators. It is necessary to actively develop 
various sorts of specialized service organizations, so that the 
dispersed small-scale operations of rural households are closely 
linked with the daily developing market, and to promote the 
development of agriculture in the direction of commoditization, 
specialization and modernization. 
  Township and town enterprises are new market entities which 
have sprung up during the development of the rural commodity 
economy. These will in future play an increasingly great role in 
handling the transfer of surplus labor from the villages, in 
guaranteeing the stable development of agriculture, in 
increasing the incomes of rural people, in bringing prosperity 
to the rural economy and in speeding industrialization and 
modernization of the rural areas. It is necessary to further 
deepen reform of the township and town enterprises, improve the 
various forms of contracted operation responsibility system, 
improve internal operational mechanisms and management 
structures, and reduce administrative intervention. In 
accordance with the principles of active support, correct 
guidance, continual improvement and gradual standardization, on 
the basis of clarifying property rights, we should adopt various 
forms including lateral participatory shareholdings, asset stock 
splitting and joint shareholdings by peasants, so as to actively 
and safely develop a shareholding cooperative system. However, 
we must certainly not engage in administrative matchmaking. 
Much effort must be put into developing various kinds of 
economic and technological alliances and cooperation. Using 
backbone enterprises or famous products as the center, and on 
the basis of voluntary participation, we must encourage the 
formation of enterprise groups through mergers or alliances, and 
link the further development of township and town enterprises 
with the construction of towns. It is necessary to strengthen 
planning and guide the appropriate centralization of township 
and town enterprises, fully utilize and transform the existing 
towns and build new towns. On this basis, we can speed the 
development of tertiary industry in the rural areas, readjust 
the industrial structure of township and town enterprises and 
strengthen the capacity of township and town enterprises to 
absorb the surplus labor in the rural areas. To this end, we 
should explore the reform of the household registration 
management system in townships and towns, and allow the peasants 
to enter the towns, so that more surplus rural labor can be 
locally absorbed. 
  The government's support for agricultural production and 
protection of the peasants' rights and interests will be 
strengthened. A regulatory storage system and market risk fund 
for grain and other basic agricultural products will be 
established and built upon and a guaranteed price procurement 
system will be implemented to guard against excessive 
fluctuations in market prices. Standardized and legally 
stipulated management will be implemented in respect of the 
charges and the labor duties borne by the peasants, so as to 
truly safeguard the economic interests of the peasants. 
  2. Deepening reform of the foreign trade structure, 
further expanding opening up to the outside 
  We must implement operational autonomy in an overall way for 
foreign trade enterprises and, in accordance with the demands of 
a modern enterprise system, develop externally oriented 
enterprise groups. It is necessary to improve foreign trade 
macromanagement, further reform the import management system, 
reduce administrative examination and approval, strengthen 
organizational coordination through chambers of commerce and 
regulation and control through economic measures, and gradually 
establish a system of open tenders and auctions for quotas and 
licenses. This year, we can first select some commodities to 
carry out some experiments. We must further simplify 
examination and approval links, so that production enterprises, 
scientific and technological enterprises and circulation 
enterprises can enjoy foreign trade operation rights. We must 
speed foreign trade legislation, and gradually establish a quite 
complete foreign trade legislation system. 
  We must grasp the opportunity, further increase the breadth 
and depth of opening up, expand the areas and spheres of opening 
up, and actively do well in the work of drawing in foreign 
funds. The existing policy of open zones (including special 
zones, development zones, open cities, bonded zones and so on) 
will not change. However, it is required that the management of 
open zones be raised in grade, and be carried out in accordance 
with a new mechanism. It is necessary to raise the level of 
management, promote economic development, and realize the 
various functions stipulated for open areas. On the basis of 
continuing to do well in opening up in coastal areas and 
riverine and border regions, opening up should be expanded to 
areas along major communications routes and major electricity 
trunk lines. The spheres of opening up should be expanded to 
tertiary industry. There should be planned and gradual 
expansion of open spheres. 
  There is a need to actively do well in the work of drawing 
in 
foreign funds and expanding the degree of industrial policy 
slanting, and to gradually change the mechanism by which foreign 
funds are drawn in from the existing preferential policies to 
providing a good investment environment and a legislative base. 
The focus of the work of drawing in foreign funds is to 
increase the proportion of foreign businesses involved in basic 
facilities, basic industries, and high- and new-technology 
projects, to accelerate the pace at which foreign funds are used 
in the technological transformation of medium-sized and large 
state enterprises, and to encourage large multinational 
companies to invest in China. At the same time as continuing to 
stress the two basic forms of foreign fund import constituted by 
direct investment by foreign businesses and foreign borrowing, 
at the current stage it is important to especially stress the 
expansion of share capital financing and securities financing. 
It is necessary to clearly distinguish the functions of the 
various relevant government departments in respect of drawing in 
foreign funds, and further simplify the examination and approval 
procedures for foreign-funded projects. It is necessary to 
actively encourage the Central and Western regions to draw in 
foreign funds to develop their resources and enliven their 
economies. 
  3. Accelerating the pace of reform of the science and 
technology structure 
  In accordance with the principle of "maintaining overall 
stability while allowing freedoms," the scientific and 
technological system will have to carry out structural 
readjustment and achieve a transformation of mechanism and 
interflow of skilled personnel. Technological development-type 
organs must enter the market, develop all sorts of links and 
cooperation with enterprises, and build up scientific and 
technological vanguard enterprises and enterprise groups. It is 
necessary to speed the pace at which development-type scientific 
and technological research institutes are turned into 
enterprises, and to encourage scientific and technological 
personnel to run nongovernment scientific and technological 
enterprises, in accordance with the principles of "self-raised 
funds, voluntary organization, autonomous operations and sole 
responsibility for profits and losses." 
  It is necessary to speed the pace of reform of the 
educational system. In accordance with the requirements of the 
"China Education Reform and Development Program" decided on by 
the Third Plenary Session, the most important component of the 
reform of the education structure is to change the situation 
whereby the government runs all schooling, and to form a new 
structure where the main element is government-run schools, but 
whereby various circles in society all participate in the 
running of schools. Secondary and tertiary polytechnic 
institutions and universities must gradually implement a system 
whereby students pay fees to attend school, but where there are 
also scholarships and student loans available. Compulsory 
education should mainly be funded and run by the government. At 
the same time, we should encourage the raising of funds in 
society through many channels and many forms in order to fund 
nongovernment educational institutions. It is necessary to 
improve the structure of education, and put great efforts into 
developing professional education and adult education, so as to 
accord with the demands of the socialist market economy. In 
respect of the educational systems of schools, we need to 
gradually change the situation of departmental and regional 
divisions. While taking into account different situations, we 
need to gradually make the transition to a system where there 
are two levels, comprising schools run by the central 
authorities and schools run by the local authorities, and 
whereby the schools system is mainly planned and managed by the 
localities. 
  4. In accordance with the principle of combining 
reform decisions and legislative decisions, strengthening reform 
of legislative work 
  In accordance with the demands of reform and opening up and 
the degree to which legislative conditions are ripe, this year 
the state will put forward a company law, a securities law, a 
budget law, a labor law, a foreign trade law, a central bank 
law, a commercial bank law, a negotiable instrument law, an 
insurance law, a futures trading law, a registered accountants 
law, and other laws and related regulations. 
<H3>  VI. Solidly Carrying Forward the Various Elements of 
Advance Experimental-Point Work For the Establishment of a New 
Structure </H3>
  Establishing a socialist market economy structure is an 
unprecedented creative enterprise. In this sense, all of our 
reform practice is exploration and experimentation. Thus, at 
the same time as continuing to push forward the overall reforms, 
we should select a number of areas, industries and enterprises 
in which to establish comprehensive or single-item trial points 
for carrying out experiments in the establishment of a new 
structure. 
  Actively and stably carrying out experiments in 
enterprise mechanism transformation and track-changing. In 
order to actively explore the avenues for establishing a modern 
enterprise system, the State Council has decided to select 100 
enterprises which have a large scale, possess over three years 
of stable operational results, have a unified leading group and 
have a quite strong reform consciousness as trial points in 
experiments to establish a modern enterprise system. The main 
contents of the experiments will be: Putting in order the 
property rights relations of state-owned enterprises, 
establishing an enterprise corporate assets system, implementing 
separation of government and enterprise functions, establishing 
a diversified enterprise organizational form which is in accord 
with the development of the productive forces, establishing a 
complete and scientific internal management system for 
enterprises, implementing a new financial and accounting system, 
and so on. The experimental enterprises should, in accordance 
with their different characteristics, formulate down-to-earth 
and feasible experimental programs, and carry out the various 
reforms in a planned and gradual way. 
  Further doing well in experiments for comprehensive, 
coordinated reform in urban areas. The task of 
comprehensive coordinated reform in urban areas is to take the 
initial steps in building a socialist market economy structure, 
and to create experiences. The experimental points will play a 
demonstration role and spurring role in the course of the 
national reforms and become pioneer regions in establishing a 
new structure. In accordance with this requirement, the various 
experimental-point cities must, in accordance with the spirit of 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, and 
in the light of their own specific realities, further improve 
the experimental-point programs for comprehensive reforms. The 
programs must have an overall, coordinated and leading nature, 
and must also be feasible. At the same time, they will have to 
formulate various types of specific implementation plans, and 
put these into action. The experimental-point cities, as the 
vanguard areas in establishing a new structure, must firmly 
implement the various central, unified reform measures and 
especially the macromanagement structural reforms. Also, in the 
light of their own local realities, in the effective 
implementation of these measures, they must create fresh 
experiences. In the spheres of enterprise reform, changing 
government functions, fostering a market system, establishing a 
new-type social security system and speeding the reform of the 
housing system, all experimental-point cities can, in accordance 
with their own bases and conditions, and under the precondition 
that it is in accord with the overall orientation of reform, 
bravely explore, be daring in practice, strive to make new 
breakthroughs, and accumulate experiences for the whole 
country's reforms. The experimental-point cities must further 
liberate their ideas, and must dare to address those reform 
spheres which involve the deep-level readjustment of interests 
and which will be very difficult. In those aspects which 
present difficulties under the current system and which have to 
be reformed in establishing a market economy structure, these 
cities should actively engage in reform, make brave 
breakthroughs and experiment courageously. They must not shrink 
from this. We are preparing to formulate a relevant document, 
in accordance with the spirit of the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee, to facilitate the better 
carrying out of urban experimental work. This year is a crucial 
year in which the comprehensive urban reforms are being 
implemented in an overall way. This requires that each city 
grasp the opportunity, do work in a down-to-earth manner, strive 
to take quite big steps next year, achieve major breakthroughs 
and realize obvious achievements. 
  Continuing to do well in comprehensive reform 
experiments at the county level. We must take the 
fostering of market entities, the establishment of market 
entities, the development of integrated agricultural, 
industrial, commercial and trade organizations, the acceleration 
of the transformation of government functions, the carrying out 
of structural reform and the establishment of social welfare 
systems as the focal points in the county-level comprehensive 
reforms. The various experimental-point counties can, in 
accordance with their own specific situations, proceed from 
their own realities, readjust the contents of reform and give 
prominence to reform focal points. The State Commission for 
Restructuring Economic System will select a number of 
comprehensive reform experimental-point counties, and then we 
and the relevant provinces and districts will jointly provide 
guidance for the specific experimental-point work, explore 
avenues, and guide the deepening of the comprehensive reform at 
the county level. 
  The State Commission for Restructuring Economic System is 
preparing to focus on the above-noted experimental points. Each 
area can also proceed from its own realities, set down some 
experimental-point projects and actively accumulate experiences 
in exploring new avenues for establishing a new structure. 
  This year's reforms are unprecedented in both their breadth 
and depth. In accordance with the new situation, we must 
further liberate our thought, change our concepts, unify our 
understanding, firmly strengthen and improve reform guidance, 
earnestly do well in building an economic restructuring 
contingent, and make proper arrangements for next year's reforms 
and grasp them tightly and well. 

