93 pp 46-47 
<F P=103> 944K0530A </F>
<F P=104>  Tallinn aRIPaEV </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aap Tanav: "Sildmae Knows What To </F>
 Risk 
With"] 
  [Text] 
  Last Friday EVEA [Estonian Small Business Association] 
awarded the honorary title of `Entrepreneur's Friend '93' to 
Economic Minister Toomas Sildmae--the man who, on every 
possible occasion, has been getting a 'no confidence' showing 
from ERSP [Estonian National Independence Party], that is part 
of the government coalition. The first such showing took place 
on February 8, the day Sildmae took his oath of office 
before Riigikogu [Estonia's parliament]. 
  "The award of `Entrepreneur's Friend' was obviously given to 
me in recognition of my attitude toward entrepreneurs, that is 
different from that of life-long bureaucrats of earlier times," 
said Sildmae the night before yesterday, after the EVEA 
[Estonian Small Business Association] representatives had been 
to the Economic Ministry to present the minister with the pin 
and the certificate confirming the title. 
  Sildmae is convinced that, considering Estonia's 
size and 
its geographic location, the future of our economy can only be 
in small and medium-size business enterprises. He has had a 
considerable share in the creation of the Credit Fund for 
Businesses with Small and Medium-Sized Capital Requirements, the 
utility of which has repeatedly been questioned by the prime 
minister as well as other members of the government. In the 
opinion of many of the European Community experts, lending money 
at a lower interest rate from Estonia's own commercial banks 
amounts to state subsidy. 
<H5>  An Estonian Entrepreneur Is Relatively Honest </H5>
  Sildmae is satisfied with the new income tax law that 
establishes a uniform 26-percent tax rate for natural persons as 
well as legal entities. 
  "Collecting income tax is dialogue between the entrepreneur 
and the tax collector. The objective of the new law was to find 
an optimal level at which there is no point to lie or to hide," 
Sildmae says and rates the Estonian entrepreneur as a 
relatively honest being who no longer has to hide his profits. 
Estonians are relatively honest, especially when compared to 
their Eastern neighbors. In the Western business world of 
developed countries which Sildmae, for lack of a fitting 
term in Estonian, called the business community, 
unwritten rules prevail. "If you cheat once, you will simply be 
left outside of that circle." 
<H5>  Privatize Everything But the Nuclear Plant </H5>
  "The privatization process is slow and one could speculate 
that, following the present policy, it would take about 
two-to-three years to privatize perhaps 80 percent of the 
state-owned enterprises. The rest will take at least 10 years, 
says Sildmae, who is also a member of the Privatization 
Agency's administrative council, and supports the position that 
everything that could be done using private capital, should be 
done using private capital. 
  There are currently 380 state enterprises within the 
administrative scope of the Economic Ministry. Some of them have 
been partially privatized, others are in the process of being 
sold. In Sildmae's opinion, companies that produce and 
sell 
energy cannot be privatized in the near future. For the time 
being some strategic areas like the railroad, for example, 
should also remain the property of the state. 
  "Once the economy evolves, a business culture will emerge 
and 
give substance to the word 'agreement' that, in the rest of the 
world, is acceptable not only in writing but also verbally, and 
onecan start building on that. There are money-printing 
facilities in the world that are based on private capital. If 
there was a nuclear power plant in Estonia, maybe that should 
not be privatized," Sildmae says. 
<H5>  Investment Climate Free of Risk </H5>
  Over the past few years, Estonia has made its way on the map 
of the world. A big job has already been done in the 
Scandinavian countries and in Europe, and Sildmae is out 
to 
conquer new regions. Along with Prime Minister Mart Laar, he 
visited Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan. Along with President 
Lennart Meri, he went to Kuweit, Turkey, Jordan and, only 
recently, returned from Marocco. 
  "This is how agreements are developed for economic 
cooperation, protection against mutual double tariffs, and for 
protecting investments. These, in turn, make possible the 
development of enterprise based on private initiative," says 
Sildmae who, up until now, has put his signature on only 
one 
international agreement that regulates foreign trade relations 
between Estonia and Austria. He thinks that, compared to the 
rest of Eastern Europe, Estonia's situation is very promising, 
and that we have managed to convince foreign investors of the 
relatively risk-free nature of our investment climate. During 
the year now ending, foreign investments made in Estonia have 
been larger than those made in Latvia, Lithuania and Belarus 
combined. This success can be attributed largely to several laws 
passed by Riigikogu lately, such as the right-to-own law, along 
with its implementation. 
<H5>  Approaches of Ministries Differ </H5>
  The Economic Ministry headed by Sildmae coordinates 
the 
preparation of quite a number of laws. Mentioned, among these, 
should not only be the national law to support private 
enterprise, the regional policy law, and the preferred regions 
law, but also the law dealing with the city of Paldiski, and the 
three laws that are closely linked to the decree signed by 
Sildmae in June of this year, dealing with restrictions on 
advertising for alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. These 
are laws on advertising, tobacco and alcohol. This summer's 
decree is not going to take effect with the new year, as 
planned, because everything is held up by the consumer 
protection law. 
  "The Economic Ministry's approach to legislation differs 
from 
that of the Ministry of Justice, which wants to create volumes 
of legislation that would cover the entire field of commercial 
law. This, however, would take a long time and, since life 
cannot be put on hold, we better get the necessary laws ready 
one by one," says Sildmae, not willing to wait until 
Estonia 
gets smart enough to compile such large volumes of laws that 
have taken other states decades, or even centuries to assemble. 
  Sildmae's impatience is understandable considering 
that, 
in order to insure rapid development of Estonia's economy, he is 
expecting investments in the range of $100 to $200 million a 
year to be made in Estonia. 
  "This year's 1 billion Estonian kroons is not enough. 
Looking 
at downtown Tallinn can be deceptive. The cellulose plant alone, 
which Estonia really needs, requires investments to the tune of 
500 million DEM. The areas calling for large investments in 
Estonia are many, like our energy production, for one," says 
Sildmae, as he tries to find reasons why production should 
go outside of Tallinn: "When you look at Estonia on the world 
map, and talk about the investment climate, one can see it has 
become suitable. The same is happening inside Estonia. The 
climate is suitable in Tallinn and the Harjumaa district. It 
gets worse going North-East, and worse yet going South-East." 
  It was for the express purpose of enhancing regional 
development that the Innovation Fund and the Estonian Export 
Credit Fund were created at the Economic Ministry, in addition 
to the credit fund for small business. Sildmae does not 
believe that any production facilities requiring investment 
could be financed by Estonia's commercial banks at the current 
borrowing rates. This type of credit could only work for 
something with rapid turnover, like sales. 
<H5>  Altruistic Creative Potential </H5>
  Besides entrepreneurs, Sildmae wants to support the 
formation of all possible clubs, cooperatives and associations, 
because he sees them as a valuable source of creative potential. 
  "When we started out at the ministry a year ago, our credo 
was that we are not the smartest," Sildmae says, 
describing 
the style he and his team had. "Our success hinges on being able 
to connect the all the sides of the quadrangle: Civil servants, 
entrepreneurs, scientists and foreign consultants." 
  The fact that the economic minister is a man of action, was 
proven by Sildmae in August when he, along with some 
kindred 
spirits, formed the Taxpayers' Alliance, which he also calls 
G-13. 
  "The Taxpayers' Alliance is a completely apolitical 
organization, the members of which simply get together over a 
cup of coffee, to discuss the processes taking place in 
Estonia's society, and to find solutions to the problems facing 
us. To stay in shape, one has to keep evolving. G-13 was one 
such opportunity. Its members come from different walks of life, 
representing different ambitions, and different political 
views," Sildmae says. He characterizes the launching of 
this 
highly controversial organization as a blue-eyed, if not 
altruistic attempt to show that there is a non-partisan force, 
springing from economic realities. 
<H5>  Sildmae's Job Is Done </H5>
  When he took office in February, Sildmae said that 
he had 
agreed on a term of up to one year with Prime Minister Laar. 
That year will be up on February 5. In the meantime, the 
economic minister, as a person, has caused so much controversy 
in government circles that the media has come up with a slogan 
"Sildmae home for Christmas." 
  "I have also been a civil servant prior to my previous life 
and have promised that I will never enter state service again. 
After my January talks with Messrs. Kannik, Luik and Laar, I 
made a different decision knowing full well that it will bring 
me both profit and loss. I thought it would be possible, in 
about a year, to build up a ministry that would be viable and 
could work out an economic strategy for Estonia. Today, this job 
is done," says Sildmae who has consolidated four 
ministries 
under one roof, and reduced the number of his subordinates from 
270 to 150. 
  "By motivating people, and by giving them a chance for 
self-actualization, we can get by with a smaller number of 
employees. People just roll up their sleeves and get to work," 
Sildmae says. 
  He has held out until Christmas, and soon we'll see how it 
goes with the year that was promised. On January 10, 
Sildmae 
will appear before Riigikogu to respond to the inquiry initiated 
by the Isamaa faction regarding the economic minister's 
participation in business ventures. 
  "Actually, I have already responded to this inquiry before I 
took office. For the duration of my term as minister, I have 
turned over my stock portfolio to a lawyer, who will also get 
all the earnings from them," says Sildmae who, besides his 
interest in the Finest Hotel Group (10 percent), and AS Rebaco 
(that controls the Hanseatic Bank), has a relatively less known 
block of shares in AS Tomut, a design and construction firm 
registered in Tartu. 
  It is of utmost importance to Sildmae that, after his 
departure, the ministry retain the same general atmosphere, and 
that the new minister be an expert, and not a politician. 
  He is apparently returning to his former position as 
director 
of the Finest Hotel Group. This could also be deduced from the 
fact that Andres Eesmaa, who is heading the hotel company 
currently, is still using the title of acting director, and has 
not been appointed to head the company officially. 

