Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Column by General Pierre Gallois: "About `Air Strikes'"] </F>
  [Text] The politicians, the media, and the general public 
-- all those who are justly upset by the events in Yugoslavia -- 
view the so-called "air strikes" as the way to end, if not the 
war, then at least the siege of Sarajevo. When "use of force" 
is considered, or even advocated, one does not mean military 
operations on the ground -- which would be too hazardous -- but 
the use of air power. However, before one resigns oneself to 
such an idea, one needs to know the nature of the targets to be 
destroyed and the way air power could be used to achieve such a 
goal. 
  What are the targets? Contrary to a common misconception, 
these are not batteries of artillery operated by gunners, as 
commonly believed, but mortars fired by infantrymen. A mortar 
is a tube whose inside is smooth, not rifled, a kind of 
stovepipe fitted on a tripod or a light carriage. One 120-mm 
mortar type weighs less than 100 kilograms and three men can 
easily carry it around, as well as its projectiles (each of 
which weighs 19 kilograms). It is an inaccurate weapon designed 
for indiscriminate destruction within a given area. When Mr. 
Kouchner [former humanitarian action minister] states that the 
Markale marketplace was a "deliberate and easy target when one 
knows the place," he shows that he has never seen a mortar, much 
less seen one in operation. One cannot hope to hit a 
30-by-40-meter wide target with any degree of accuracy using a 
mortar from a distance of 5 or 6 kilometers. To ensure a good 
probability that such a target will be hit, tens, or even 
hundreds of shells would be needed -- not a single one. So what 
we are dealing with is an inaccurate weapon which is all the 
more difficult to locate since it takes up very little space, 
possibly less than two cubic meters. However, using infrared 
equipment, a mortar could be spotted when it is firing, provided 
a suitably equipped aircraft has been continuously monitoring 
the area where the mortars have been operating. This would 
afford better accuracy than an anti-artillery radar. The U.S. 
Air Force has planes that are specially equipped for such tasks 
-- Lockheed C-130's -- but these are not deployed over Sarajevo. 
  Now for ways of attacking the mortars. As a matter of form, 
let us begin with a procedure which has been frequently 
mentioned: the use of cruise missiles such as the American 
Tomahawk. To be sure, the advantage of such weapons is that 
their operators remain safe at all times. However, they are 
only effective against fixed targets. Preparing the operation 
takes time, especially if the machine's navigation is to be 
based on terrain features. Since mortars are easily moved, 
chances are that, after being located at the moment of firing, 
they would be removed from the spot at which the cruise missiles 
would be directed. 
  Would warplanes be more effective? Would American F-117 A's 
[assault] and aircraft carrying the French AS-30 air-to-ground 
missile fit the bill? In Iraq, against fixed targets, they were 
highly successful. But against mobile mortars, they could fail. 
And there is no guarantee that from a distance of 15 to 20 
kilometers the crew of such aircraft would be able to point its 
laser beam on a very small target easily concealed by a few 
shrubs. Furthermore, on being notified of the air attack, the 
mortar operators would immediately move their weapons. Another 
possible intervention procedure is low-altitude assault using 
30-mm guns or missiles. Locating a hidden mortar at speeds of 
400 to 500 kilometers per hour would require several passes at 
very low altitudes which would put the planes and their crews at 
considerable risk. The U.S. Air Force high command is well 
aware of this and does not intend to tarnish its successes 
achieved in the Gulf War by losing a few aircraft to the Serb 
Army's light anti-aircraft weapons or (soviet-made) 
ground-to-air missiles. 
  Thus the misgivings of the soldiers -- who happen to know 
their job -- are motivated by reasons which the politicians do 
not understand or pretend not to understand in order to remain 
attuned with public opinion. It would be better to inform the 
latter instead of continually blurting out threats that are not 
taken seriously because they cannot be implemented due to 
technical and moral factors. 

