BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Kelantan People Should Initiate Changes"] </F>
  [Text] Sabah, a backward state with a high rate of 
unemployment under the Sabah United Party, is now given a shot 
in the arm by the National Front [NF] administration. Another 
state that needs a similar treatment is Kelantan, which is now 
under the PAS [Pan Malaysian Islamic Party] administration. 
Press reports about Kelantan in 1993 showed a picture of 
sadness with its people's standard of living declining steadily 
compared to people living in other states. 
  The PAS often claims that it is fighting for the glory of 
Islam, but the party has forgotten the fact that Islam wants its 
followers to make progress instead of being stagnant or 
impoverished. This state of backwardness was revealed when 
Mohamed Rozali Isohak, deputy chief minister of Kelantan, 
recently had to admit that the investment climate in the state 
is not very promising. Along with a low investment level, the 
poverty rate in both the rural and urban areas of the state is 
quite high. 
  In 1993, the poverty rate in Kelantan was 29 percent, while 
the overall nationwide poverty rate was 17.1 percent. Besides, 
without investment projects, it is hard for any state to create 
new jobs. It is worth noting that the unemployment rate in 
Kelantan stands at 7.3 percent compared to the nationwide 
unemployment rate of 5.4 percent. Within the period of two 
years, a total of 23,218 unemployed had registered themselves 
with the Kelantan People's Manpower Office, namely 13,869 in 
1991 and 9,349 in 1992. During the same period, a total of 
6,258 youths migrated to NF-controlled states to seek jobs. 
This was disclosed by Kalthom Omar, director of Kelantan State 
Manpower Office. In fact, the fruits of development enjoyed by 
people throughout the country are not accessible to the majority 
of Kelantan people, except those who have migrated to other 
states. 
  Now it is the time for Kelantan people to rise and forget 
the 
sweet dreams promised by PAS for many years but never delivered 
to them. The Kelantan people are entitled to enjoy the same 
prosperity and blessings given by almighty god to other states 
by changing their backwardness into prosperity and progress. 
  The majority of Kelantan people, especially the younger 
generation, certainly want the NF to rescue them from the 
shackles of backwardness, poverty, and unemployment. Rapid 
development programs initiated by the NF will certainly provide 
a fresh breeze of change for Kelantan. Muslims in that state 
will make progress and continue to receive god's blessings if 
they are not narrow- minded in their practice of Islam. 
Practicing Islam for personal or party interest is considered 
narrow-minded because it only brings backwardness to the people 
and state. An excerpt from the Al-Haj Chapter, Verse 78 says: 
"And strive in his cause as ye ought to strive (with sincerity 
and under discipline). He has chosen you, and has imposed no 
difficulties on you." 

