CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, March 3 (PTI). India and Poland today 
pledged to take innovative measures to promote joint ventures, 
trade and economic cooperation which had fallen to a rate not in 
keeping with their potential and interests. 
  Speaking at a banquet in honour of the Polish President, Mr. 
Lech Walesa, the President, Dr. S.D. Sharma, said the changes 
that had taken place in both the countries called for fresh 
approaches to enhance economic and industrial cooperation. 
  Dr. Sharma said the dramatic developments that occurred in 
Poland over the last decade had been an important catalyst in 
ending the cold war and fundamentally transforming international 
relations. 
  Mr. Walesa, in his reply, praised India's efforts to stop 
the 
arms race and eliminate the threat of a nuclear war. 
  India, often together with Poland, had always been in those 
places where conflicts had to be settled, he said citing the 
Indo-China commissions and more recently in peace-keeping 
operations in West Asia and Cambodia. 
  Turning to the economic front, Mr. Walesa said he believed 
that there were right conditions to expand bilateral economic 
co-operations and promote joint ventures. 
  Dr. Sharma noted that the courageous resistance of the 
Polish 
people evoked admiration in India when the dark forces had 
engulfed Poland. 
  The dramatic developments that occurred in Poland and the 
Polish society over the last decade have been an important 
catalyst in changing not only the face of Europe but in ending 
the cold war and thus, fundamentally transforming international 
relations, he added. 
  Mr. Walesa said Poland always attached a great deal of 
importance to its contacts and cooperation with India and also a 
particular respect for its foreign policy. 
  "India has continuously made efforts to bridge the gaps 
separating the world," he said. 
  Mr. Walesa said his country is involved in the process of 
having a market-based economy and sought Indian participation in 
it through cooperation in various industrial and technological 
fields. 
  Dr. Sharma said India will be happy to cooperate with Poland 
in a manner mutually beneficial to both countries. 

