BFN 

  [Excerpts] Four days following the Council of Ministers' 
approval of the letter of intent which the government had sent 
to the IMF and after the explanations given by Economics 
Minister Benachnou in many press statements about the effects of 
the agreement on the Algerian economy as a whole, Abdelouahab 
Keramane, governor of the Algerian Bank, who accompanied the 
economic minister to the talks with the IMF, assesses the 
results of these talks with this financial institution by saying 
that Algeria reached an agreement which is least difficult for 
the Algerian Bank. 
  IMF support for Algeria is important, Keramane said, and the 
IMF's one billion dollar contribution is considered very 
important in connection with the one-year program which is aimed 
at enabling economic stability for Algeria. Here is Ahmed 
Khider with details. 
  [Khider] Abdelouahab Keramane's answers revolved round the 
financial side and its unfolding. They came following the 
explanations given recently by the economic minister about the 
effects of the agreement on the Algerian national economy as a 
whole. 
  Mr. Abdelouahab Keramane, who addressed public opinion for 
the first time in his capacity as the governor of the Algerian 
Bank through APS, summarized his assessment of the agreement 
with the IMF by saying that Algeria reached an agreement which 
is the least harmful and difficult for the Algerian Bank. 
  The governor of the Algerian Bank consolidated his positive 
assessment of the agreement by putting forward a number of 
points which he presented as advantages in view of the 
conditions under which the talks with the IMF unfolded. These 
points include: 
  -- First: social difficulties impose the search for a 
gradual 
transitional phase and the avoidance of what is commonly called 
the shock treatment. 
  -- The level of the dinar devaluation is reasonable, 
necessary, and sufficient. 
  -- The percentages of indebtedness to banks will be 
continuous proportionally [as heard]. 
  -- It is expected that the level of loans for the economy 
would not increase that much, however, the level of the debt 
rates will [as heard]. 
  -- No other sudden measures are expected and it is 
possible to review the interest rates with a view to reducing 
them should the situation allow it. 
  -- The devaluation of the dinar should not lead to a big 
rise in prices. Controlling inflation is the most important way 
of protecting the families' purchasing power. 
  -- It will be easier for the production sector to import 
means of production. 
  -- Measures will be taken for liberalizing foreign trade. 
  -- The program for economic stability will enable Algeria 
to reach the Dinar convertibility. 
  -- The problem of losses in the change was taken into 
account by the authorities during the talks with IMF. [passage 
omitted] 
  Keramane also stressed that the financial support of the IMF 
is a fundamental support for the Algerian balance of payments, 
and it is a hint from the IMF to the international community and 
also to the world banking and monetary systems. 

