BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Norman Chandler and Jo-Anne Collinge] </F>
  [Text] Extremists are secretly planning to disrupt next 
week's election in some platteland areas, and white suburban 
residents in a number of urban areas are preparing to barricade 
their suburbs. Planned disruptions by rightwingers include 
roadblocks on routes to polling stations and "friendly appeals" 
to people not to vote. 
  At Viljoenskroon in the northern [Orange] Free State, 
military watchtowers were set up at the entrance to the town 
yesterday. Floodlights were erected on the road from the nearby 
township. Rightwingers set up poles on which to place booms 
across the road. As the town declared itself "part of the 
volkstaat" [Afrikaner homeland] at 4 pm, rightwingers told all 
blacks to leave town by 3pm. Very few black people defied the 
order. Sources say violence should not be discounted as a 
factor in right-wing plans to disrupt the elections. Former 
SADF [South African Defence Force] officer Willem Ratte -- who 
led a Boerekommando [Boer Commando] group which occupied Fort 
Schanskop at the Voortrekker Monument in December -- claims to 
be organising "regional defence groups" in rural and urban 
areas. He said in Pretoria yesterday that it was largely to 
protect white areas against the National Peacekeeping Force 
[NPKF]. The NPKF has so far been deployed only on the East Rand. 
  Ratte's supporters have been holding meetings in the 
Pretoria, Verwoerdburg and Akasia area in particular, at which 
plans are being made for "protection of suburbs". Measures are 
said to include armed residents patrolling the areas, roads 
being barricaded, shopping centres being placed under guard, and 
pedestrians and motorists stopped "for identification purposes". 
  The AWB [Afrikaner Resistance Movement] says it is moving 
"thousands of members" into an area stretching from the Northern 
Transvaal to the Cape border to ward off persecution or action 
against rightwingers, and says it will not be part of the 
election. The use of roadblocks, particularly in remote parts of 
the Transvaal and Free State, is said to be a key factor in 
intimidating people not to vote. 
  The South African Iron, Steel and Allied Industries Union 
has 
told its whites-only membership "to take every precaution". It 
has also told members that there could be power disruptions 
which could last a week. Eskom [Electricity Supply Commission] 
has denied that electricity could be affected during the 
election period. 

