Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Fritz Werth commentary: "Clinton in Trouble"] </F>
  [Text] The walls of denials and affirmations of innocence 
with which Bill Clinton has tried to separate himself from the 
Whitewater affair for months, are getting increasingly porous 
day by day. The scandal is no longer a personal and private 
problem. It is beginning to paralyze the work and effectiveness 
of the President. The latest decision by the Senate to 
investigate the affair itself guarantees that Whitewater will be 
playing several stages in the future and will thus become a 
public spectacle. So far, the investigations have been in the 
discreet hands of a special investigator who worked behind the 
scenes. 
  The consequences of the fact that this affair is becoming a 
crisis marathon: It paralyzes not only the President's political 
effectiveness, it has now also deteriorated to the mud-slinging 
spheres of a bitter quarrel between the parties, because this is 
an election year in the United States. Congressmen are 
struggling for their political survival. The congressional 
investigation decided by the Senate yesterday thus unavoidably 
moves into the sphere of uncontrolled political blows below the 
belt. 
  What makes this development so painful is the fact that it 
is 
largely the fault of the Clintons themselves. Their often 
incomprehensible crisis-containment policy threatens to 
collapse, because for someone who does not have anything to 
hide, as the Clintons have repeatedly insisted for months, they 
have desperately built many defensive walls around them. In the 
past they vehemently opposed the appointment of a special 
investigator, and then had to give in. And, until yesterday, 
they struggled with equal vehemence against an investigation by 
Congress. 
  The "back flip" has become a familiar piece of crisis 
gymnastics by Bill Clinton. His toppling over, his retreats, 
and his contradictions in this conflict prove what became 
obvious also in far more urgent and more important crises, such 
as Bosnia, Haiti, Somalia, and China: This is a president who 
is ill-advised. 

