Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The inauguration ceremony for the second 
Myanmar [Burma]-Thailand-Lao People's Democratic Republic [LPDR] 
tripartite ministerial conference on cooperation in drug abuse 
control was held at 0900 today at the conference hall of the 
International Business Center on Prome Road, Yangon [Rangoon]. 
[passage omitted] 
  In his opening speech, Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, 
secretary-1 of the State Law and Order Restoration Council 
[SLORC], expressed his pleasure at having the opportunity to 
open the second ministerial conference of the LPDR, Thailand, 
and the Union of Myanmar on cooperation in drug abuse control. 
He said he warmly welcomed the delegates on behalf of the 
government and the people of the Union of Myanmar. He said he 
also welcomed the observers and representatives from Bangladesh, 
the PRC, India, the United Nations Drug Control Program [UNDCP], 
WHO, UNICEF, and FAO. 
  Lt.Gen. Khin Nyunt said that the menace of spreading 
narcotics use is a matter of major international concern, and 
the scourge of illicit drugs trafficked across international 
borders can be successfully overcome through the strength of 
international unity. Myanmar believes that all international 
cooperation at the individual, regional, and international 
levels are necessary for this endeavor. He said Myanmar is 
simultaneously combating narcotics in a national campaign and 
cooperating fully internationally in striving to solve the 
problems of illicit use, production, and traffic in narcotic 
drugs on all fronts. 
  After his speech, Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt cordially greeted 
members of the Thai delegation, led by the deputy prime 
minister; the LPDR delegation led by the Prime Minister's Office 
minister; ambassadors; and representatives from the UN agencies. 
[passage omitted] 
  Speaking at the meeting, Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn, leader of the 
Myanmar delegation, chairman of the Central Committee for Drug 
Abuse Control [CCDAC], and home minister, said the cooperation 
among our three countries, which form part of the infamous 
Golden Triangle, in combating the menace of narcotics will be 
seen as an important milestone in the history of the world. He 
said such an endeavor serves the interests of all humanity. 
  Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn said that the countries attending the 
current conference are part of the region known as the Golden 
Triangle. He said everyone knows who created the Golden 
Triangle and who is smearing its image with black paint. He 
said collective efforts to solve the problem, rather than the 
practice of blaming one another, will gradually bring an end to 
the narcotics problem. 
  He said the history of our country's narcotics problem was 
presented at the first meeting. He said remarkable efforts had 
been made by Myanmar since the first meeting. He said a 
ministry for development of the border regions -- where most of 
the opium is grown -- and national races was formed on 24 
September 1992 and that the Law on the Development of the Border 
Regions and National Races was enacted on 13 August 1993. He 
said one of the objectives of the law is to totally eradicate 
the cultivation of narcotic drugs by establishing economic 
enterprises. He said priority has been given to this task since 
May 1989 and as of the end of 1993, the state has spent kyat 
1,512.4 million for this task. He said the task of eradicating 
opium cultivation in the Kokang Region within six years and the 
Wa Region within 10 years is being carried out in consultation 
with the local national leaders. 
  Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn said agreements had been signed by 
Myanmar, the PRC, and the UNDCP and Myanmar, Thailand, and the 
UNDCP on 12 June 1992 under a joint regional program for 
narcotic drug eradication with financial assistance from the 
UNDCP. Representatives from Laos were invited to attend the 
meetings held by Myanmar. Furthermore, an agreement was signed 
with India on cooperation in combating narcotics on 30 March 
1993 and the first meeting was held in New Delhi on 19 October 
1993. It is hoped that a cooperation agreement with Laos would 
be signed with assistance from the UNDCP. Similar consultations 
will be made with Bangladesh. 
  Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn said cooperative efforts and common 
objectives of the neighboring countries had earned them praise 
from the 36th Conference of the Narcotic Drugs Commission held 
in 29 March-7 April 1993 in Vienna, Austria. The commission 
conference urged West Asia and other regions to take similar 
action. He said another outstanding endeavor was the signing of 
the memorandum of understanding by representatives of Myanmar, 
PRC, Laos, and Thailand on cooperation in combatting illicit 
traffic and use of narcotic drugs on 26 October 1993 at the UN 
Headquarters. 
  Continuing, Lt. Gen. Mya Thinn explained the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances Law of 27 January 1993. He said 
this law was drafted and promulgated in accordance with the 
provisions of the United Nations Convention Against Illicit 
Traffice in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. He said 
the menace of narcotic drugs is growing while psychotropic 
substances are now infiltrating our countries. In addition, he 
said, the task of banning chemicals used in refining narcotic 
drugs is also very important. 
  Lt.Gen. Mya Thinn explained that there is no illicit 
production of these chemicals in Myanmar and there are strict 
restrictions on the matter and the new law contains effective 
penalites. A constant watch is maintained for illegal traffic 
in these chemicals from neighboring countries. Lt.Gen. Mya 
Thinn said that under the new law, laundering financial proceeds 
from the narcotics trade in the form of movable as well as 
immovable property and bank deposits can be investigated and 
they can be confiscated as public property. He said profit is 
the main motive behind the illicit production and trafficking of 
narcotics, and only when the proceeds can be confiscated as 
public property can its machinery be stopped. Similarly, it is 
necessary to make joint efforts to contain traffic in 
narcotics-related chemicals. 
  What is more important is that the drug traffickers can 
easily move across borders and disregard international 
boundaries. It can be seen that they are even capable of defying 
governments concerned with illegal weapons. Therefore, it is 
about time that countries producing weapons stop this illegal 
trade. Lt.Gen. Mya Thinn said the Cold War is over and all 
countries should join hands in working to combat AIDS -- an 
offshoot of the menace of narcotics -- in the interests of all 
humanity. Therefore, in conclusion, he urged all countries to 
continue to cooperate until success is achieved in accordance 
with the motto: Prevent and combat the menace of narcotic drugs 
which endanger humanity. [passage omitted on speeches by Lao, 
Thai delegates] 

