BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke: </F>
"Proof That I Was Right"] 
  [Text] I hope this is not going to be too difficult a month 
for all of us taxpayers. But today I am even more convinced 
that I was right to raise taxes in my 1993 Budget. Of course 
the last thing I ever expected to have to do as a Conservative 
Chancellor was to raise taxes. It pains a Conservative to have 
to raise taxes just as surely as cutting public spending goes 
against the grain for the Labour party. 
  But I have never said or believed that a Conservative 
government should never raise taxes. I am committed to the 
belief that the burden of taxation in Britain should be as light 
as possible, consistent with the delivery of good public 
services and the maintenance of sound public finance. When we 
can afford to lower taxes we have always done so and will always 
do so, but that must be as and when the economy can afford it. 
  Last year we were faced with a deficit which represented 
nearly 8 per cent of Gross Domestic Product [GDP]. The 
Government was borrowing at the rate of nearly 1 billion pounds 
for every week of the year. I had not the slightest doubt that 
my first priority as Chancellor was to continue the good work 
begun by my predecessor Norman Lamont and to get rid of the 
borrowing problem both in the short and the long term. It was 
vitally necessary to raise taxes and reduce public spending to 
get the public finances under control once and for all. Nothing 
has emerged since that has made me think that there was any 
sensible alternative . 
  The Government has been through all this before and not so 
long ago. The huge legacy of debt left by the 1974-79 Labour 
government, together with the effects of the last recession, 
obliged Geoffrey Howe to raise taxes substantially in the 1981 
Budget. The Howe increases in tax at that time raised about 2 
per cent of GDP. Introducing a tax-raising Budget on this scale 
in the depth of recession was fiercely controversial. At the 
time it provoked considerable discontent among backbenchers. 
Rumours of Cabinet resignations were rife. A letter of protest 
delivered to THE TIMES by 364 leading economists claimed that 
the Government's economic policy was well on the way to ruins. 
  The belated flap about my 1993 Budget over the past month or 
two was slight compared with the panic over Geoffrey's in 1981. 
That 1981 Budget established a stable economic framework as a 
prelude to more than eight years of economic growth. Of course 
there are differences and history must never be trusted to 
repeat itself. But my judgement is that the tough decisions I 
took on tax and spending in the winter last year give us the 
chance of several years of steady growth, prosperity and secure 
jobs. 
  When I go abroad I find that people are highly optimistic 
about Britain's economic position and our prospects. At home, 
everything we hear and read is riddled with gloom and pessimism. 
We are in danger of talking ourselves into a ridiculous 
despondency. 
  My job now is to stick to sound economic policies which will 
promote that growth, that prosperity and those jobs. I have got 
our budget deficit under control. Now we must establish a 
culture of lasting price stability. We are determined to get on 
top of inflation once and for all and we are succeeding. 
Inflation has been below 3 per cent for the past 16 months. At 
2.3 percent today it is as good or better a rate than is enjoyed 
by most of our European competitors. Interest rates are down 
dramatically and are among the lowest in Europe. 
  Tough economic policies and stable conditions enable us to 
resume the task of turning Britain into a competitive and 
enterprising industrial country. We achieved a genuine economic 
transformation of the country in the 1980s with supply side 
changes that revived the entrepreneurial flair of our people. 
We can now boast that there are 600,000 more small businesses 
in Britain than there were in 1979 despite the recession. 
  Our productivity, which was pathetic in the past compared to 
our competitors, has improved dramatically and is still 
improving. The number of cars built per production worker at 
Cowley has risen from 10.4 in 1991 to 34 this year. At the most 
modern comparable car plant in Germany the figure last year was 
30.8. 
  Low inflation and increased competition has ensured a 
remarkable decline in some prices. Since the autumn, price wars 
in food retailing have benefited the consumer enormously and one 
supermarket chain announced this month that it was reducing one 
in 10 of its key brands by up to 15 per cent. Fuel prices are 
down and declining. Since privatisation domestic gas prices have 
fallen in real terms by 23 per cent and industrial gas by 30 per 
cent. Electricity prices have fallen by 6 per cent in real 
terms in the past two years alone. 
  Confidence is growing and independent forecasters underline 
future expectations. The latest surveys by Dun and Bradstreet 
and by the CBI [Confederation of British Industry] point to 
further evidence that the economy is recovering decisively. 
They show that sales orders, employment and profits are at 
their highest levels since 1989. All regions and sectors are 
reporting a rise in orders and in employment expectations. 
Construction too has shown a particularly marked increase in 
optimism with sharp rises in activity. As a result house prices 
are recovering. 
  This change is not some preordained swing in the economic 
cycle. It would not have occurred if we had a Labour or a 
Liberal government. One of the most important decisions I have 
taken over the past year has been to ignore the advice of Gordon 
Brown. If I had lowered interest rates in the way he has 
suggested over the past few months we would have put much of our 
gains at risk. Inflationary expectation would have been 
rekindled. If I had not tackled the deficit, that would almost 
certainly have been accompanied by a crisis of confidence in 
sterling. Interest rates would have had to rise. 
  In the late 1970's Labour invented "stagflation" and 
trapped the British economy in a cycle of low growth, high 
inflation and high interest rates. The supposedly reconstructed 
Labour party would do the same today. Labour would have 
introduced the minimum wage and adopted the European Social 
Chapter. The consequence of introducing these would have meant 
that unemployment would be rising today rather than falling. 
  There is still a genuine political divide on the economy. In 
the longer term it remains a divide between a Conservative party 
with low-spending, low-tax instincts and Labour and Liberals 
with high-spending, high-tax habits. But here and now it is a 
sharp divide over the day-to-day handling of interest rates, 
tax, borrowing and public spending. That debate should be 
resolved by the effects of my choices on the real economy. We 
have a good way to go yet before we have growth that is strong 
enough without turning into boom. But I remain sure we are 
heading that way. 
  I have no doubt that overall confidence is growing and that 
the recovery is being sustained. What is more, the major 
European economies so vital to our long-term prosperity are 
beginning to see the bottom of recession. France is 
experiencing some growth and Germany will do so in the 
not-too-distant future. 
  For nearly two years our national income has been rising and 
the latest forecasts from both the EC Commission and the OECD 
suggest that Britain will have the fastest growth among major EC 
countries in both 1994 and 1995. Let us celebrate some good 
news for once. Let us also stick to tough, prudent policies such 
as the tax rises and the spending cuts in my Budget that are 
delivering good news. 

