Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ma Chenguang: "More Courts To Protect Trademarks and </F>
Patents"] 
  [Text] More courts are being set up to handle intellectual 
property rights disputes in a bid to protect foreign and 
domestic companies and individuals. 
  The drive is a nationwide effort to safeguard trademarks, 
copyrights and patents, a court official said. 
  Intellectual property rights courts have begun handling 
cases 
in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Xiamen and Haikou in 
the past few months. 
  The country's first courts, set up last July in the Beijing 
Higher People's Court and the Beijing Intermediate People's 
Court, have heard 125 cases and issued rulings on 87 of them. 
  The cases included the well-known dispute over the computer 
input method for Chinese characters known as the five-stroke 
system. 
  The system's inventor, Wang Yongmin, won 500,000 yuan 
($57,500) compensation when the court supported his claim that 
the Beijing- based China Southeastern Technology and Trading 
Company had pirated his patented invention. 
  In Shanghai, special courts face a growing number of 
disputes 
from around the coast and they have already handled more than 
600 cases since they were set up last month. 
  Courts in Fujian have investigated 47 suits. 
  The network focuses on protecting the trademarks, patents 
and 
copyrights of domestic and foreign firms to promote the 
country's development and investment climate. 
  It is an important step in the country's "progressive 
approach" to strengthening the protection of intellectual 
property, said an official with the Supreme People's Court. 
  China introduced a patent law in 1991, a copyright law in 
1992 and revised its trademark law last year. 
  These enable overseas companies to file a complaint with a 
Chinese court if they feel their rights have been broken. 
  The official also said China has joined the World 
Intellectual Property Rights Organization and adopted several 
multilateral accords to bring the country's legal system more 
closely in line with international practice. 
  The agreements include the Paris Pact on Industrial Property 
Rights Protection, the Madrid Agreement concerning the 
international registration of trademarks, the Patent 
Co-operation Treaty and the Berne Convention for the Protection 
of Literary and Artistic Works. 

