BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava May 5 (CTK) -- The Slovak parliament 
last night failed to pass an opposition proposal of no 
confidence in Deputy Slovak Premier Roman Kovac, who thus 
remains in his function. Sixty deputies voted for Roman Kovac's 
dismissal, sixty-nine were against and there were two 
abstentions. To dismiss a member of the government requires an 
over-50 percent majority -- at least 76 deputies in the 
150-member parliament. 
  After a day of filibustering by the opposition, late at 
night 
parliament voted on the proposal by 35 opposition deputies led 
by ex-Premier Vladimir Meciar that Kovac be dismissed for 
alleged inability to perform his function, suspicion of 
corruption and moral weakness. 
  The opposition say that Kovac, who used to be deputy premier 
in Meciar's government before he had to leave the party in early 
March, led destructive attacks on the plans of former Health 
Minister Viliam Sobona, and is responsible for the present 
critical situation in the ministry. He promoted the buying of 
health equipment from the German company Siemens to the value of 
74 million marks, and allegedly also disposed of five million 
dollars, from an unspecified foreign source, designated for the 
media. These accusations were not accompanied by concrete 
evidence. 
  "The aim is not my dismissal, but to discredit and besmirch 
my honour, to stop me from being a competitor," Kovac said at 
the end of the debate, and pointed to the opposition's aim of 
proposing the dismissal of one minister at each parliamentary 
session. He emphatically rejected all accusations of corruption. 
  After defeating the proposal for Kovac's dismissal, 
parliament also rejected a proposal for the creation of a 
parliamentary committee, which would investigate accusations 
made concerning Kovac. 
  Yesterday evening parliament dismissed four of the six 
remaining members of the Slovak Television Council, leaving in 
their posts two representatives of the current opposition. It 
immediately elected five members from the government parties to 
the Council and one representative of the Union of Slovak 
Television Artists. One member is still needed to complete the 
council, which now reflects the political balance of power in 
parliament. 
  Other points on the agenda -- the election of a member to 
the 
National Property Fund Board and other members to the Fund's 
Inspection Council, and information about the checking of 
privatisation decisions taken by Meciar's government -- were 
postponed till parliament's next meeting, which will take place 
at the end of May in the new parliament building. 

