Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is review of the 8 
February issue of Cairo 'AQIDATI summarizes articles that are 
Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  Sarajevo Highlighted </H5>
  In this issue, 'AQIDATI gives prominence to reports and 
commentaries on the front-page headline, "massacres of 
Sarajevo," and preparations for the advent of the month of 
Ramadan. Chairman of the Board of Directors Samir Rajab wrote 
in a 400-word article on page 1 that what is happening in Bosnia 
is a source of shame for every Muslim. He pointed out that the 
"massacres of bloody Saturday could recur at any time, so long 
as this passiveness and indifference remain." He urged Muslims 
to press their non-Muslims friends hard to undertake "positive 
mediation" in this regard. Details on religious lectures and 
seminars in mosques throughout the country during Ramadan are 
also prominently covered. 
<H5>  Chief Editor on Islam, Extremism </H5>
  Reporters Mahmud 'Ushb and Ahmad Sha'ban described a seminar 
organized by the "AQIDATI Convoy" in 'Ayn Shams and Shubra 
al-Khayman, two Cairo districts. Attendees included local and 
religious figures and al-Sayyid 'Abd-al-Ra'uf, the newspaper's 
chief editor. Several figures spoke during the seminar on 
Islamic topics and answered questions from the audience. 
'Abd-al-Ra'uf noted that extremism is a "deviation from the 
middle ground" in any issue, noting that Islam is a "religion of 
moderation." Defining terrorism, 'Abd-al-Ra'uf said: 
"Terrorism is a crime of collective murder against society and 
cannot be justified by a dispute with the regime, a feud with 
the police, or a protest at reality." He noted that there are 
various ways to tackle terrorism and extremism. He added: 
"There is no question that terrorism must be confronted with 
firmness and strength and that we have to contain and isolate 
it. As for extremism, it must be confronted first through 
education at home, at school, in the mosque, at the youth center 
and cultural center, and in the mass media." 
  'Abd-al- Ra'uf said on the subject of Islam's view on 
newspapers and magazines publishing "obscene" pictures of 
actresses: "There is no doubt that the scenes of nudity we see 
published on some books and magazines as well as in movie 
advertisements in the streets are not acceptable to God, His 
prophet, or any Muslim who is zealous about his religion." 
<H5>  Conspiracy Against al-Azhar Claimed </H5>
  Writer Basyuni al-Halawani charged that there is a 
"conspiracy" to undermine the role of al-Azhar. He criticized 
the BBC for airing a program on the fabricated "battle" between 
some Egyptian intellectuals and al-Azhar. 
<H5>  Banned Books Reportedly Distributed </H5>
  Columnist Majdi Salim, writing on the Cairo Book Fair, noted 
that among the thousands of books on display at the fair, the 
Book Authority has deliberately offered books that are banned 
from being displayed and distributed by law at the 
recommendation of al-Azhar. He also noted that the law has 
authorized al-Azhar to ban any book that may be offensive to 
Islam or public ethics, but the Book Authority "ignored" the law 
and distributed banned books. He emphasized the need to uphold 
the law, which he said is "our first and last weapon." 
<H5>  Promoting Islam in Media Praised </H5>
  Reporter Mamduh al-'Ashri praised Information Minister 
Safwat 
al-Sharif for not going along with the call to cancel television 
"censorship" under claims of "enlightenment and innovation." He 
noted that this proves that the minister knows that the main 
object of the "cultural invasion" to which the country is 
subjected is to "destroy" Egypt's youth. He also gave credit to 
the minister for his call to "intensify religious programs" on 
television, noting that only channel 2 heeded the minister's 
call and doubled the "dose of religious material," while 
channels 1 and 3 did not. 
<H5>  Islamic "Convoys" Resume </H5>
  Reporter Tariq 'Abdallah noted that al-Azhar University's 
"convoys of religious and health orientation" have started their 
activity throughout the republic. One of the convoys, made up of 
students from al-Azhar and doctors from al-Azhar University 
Hospital, has visited a village in al- Qalyubiyah Governorate. 
Dr. 'Ali Mi'bid, professor of philosophy at Usul al-Din 
college, was quoted, saying that the purpose of the convoy is to 
"combat the corrupt and devious ideas through holding seminars 
and competitions" attended by village youth. The convoy's 
activities include treatment of patients and orientation in the 
field of public hygiene, arranging for lessons and seminars on 
religious enlightenment at the village mosques, organizing 
competitions on Koranic and Islamic cultural subjects, and 
distributing free medicine to the needy villagers. 
<H5>  U.S. Anti-Islam Campaign Alleged </H5>
  An unattributed report examined a U.S. media campaign 
against 
Islam and Muslims. It said: "Political and media studies, 
recently conducted by several Islamic institutions in the United 
States, have affirmed that the fierce campaign that the media 
has been launching for a long time against Islam and the Muslims 
have caused the majority of the U.S. public to form a distorted 
picture of Islam and Muslims." A report prepared by the 
"American Islamic Center" showed how the U.S. media treatment of 
specific issues tends to exploit these issues to distort the 
image of Islam. A specific example given in the study refered 
to the media treatment of the bombing of the World Trade Center 
in New York. It noted that all reports and analyses on the 
story had one object in mind; namely, "To convince citizens that 
Islam is a religion of terrorism and that Muslims are 
necessarily terrorists." The same study pointed out that the 
U.S. media advances Islam, rather than Communism, as the West's 
"enemy" and that Islam is the "green danger that has replaced 
the red danger." The study added that a cover of "THE NEW 
YORKER" showed a picture of an Arab boy destroying a city, thus 
giving the impression that "Muslims are destructive." 
  The study also refered to the cartoon movie "Aladdin," which 
"presented a monstrous image of Islam and Muslims with the 
purpose of implanting it in the minds of U.S. children." The 
report concluded, saying: "Despite this gloomy picture, there 
are several indicators that promise a change in the way Islam 
and Muslims will be viewed in the future. This is what makes 
the American Muslims, who number more than 6 million, pin high 
hopes on Islamic countries and organizations to prepare an 
organized and constant plan to present the real image of the 
noble religion and those who believe in it to the American 
people." 
<H5>  Statistics on American Muslims </H5>
  An unattributed report cited statistics by an American 
Islamic institute as saying that 11,000 American citizens 
convert to Islam every year and that the number of Muslims in 
the United States has reached 5 million. 
<H5>  West "Lacks Will" on Bosnia Issue </H5>
  Columnist 'Adil Dayf refered to U.S. President Clinton's 
notion that the international community lacks the will to stop 
the fighting in Bosnia and that neither NATO nor the UN 
secretary general has any desire to use NATO's air power to 
resolve the crisis. He noted that Clinton's remarks reflect the 
"international connivance" toward the plight of Muslims in 
Bosnia- Herzegovina. He urged Muslims to unify their efforts to 
resolve the Bosnian problem instead of waiting for international 
efforts that will lead to nothing, in view of the "obvious and 
blatant international connivance." 
<H5>  West's Reporting on Extremism "Exaggerated" </H5>
  Chief Editor al-Sayyid 'Abd-al-Ra'uf crticized the Western 
media's "extreme and uncalled for" exaggeration in reporting on 
the terrorist incidents in Egypt. He noted that the media 
reports "ignore all the facts that policemen and culprits are 
more often killed and injured in these incidents than civilians" 
and that "the percentage of foreigners who become victims is 
negligible." He added: "This media exaggerates its reports on 
political Islam and Islamic fundamentalists on the premise that 
political Islam seeks to achieve power and topple regimes by 
force." He continued: "We have condemned and continue to 
condemn and reject terrorism and refuse to accept murder, 
terror, and sabotage as means and methods for dialogue and 
reform." He added: "But in the meantime, what these media 
organs are doing must be condemned, first because it seeks to 
undermine Islam by distorting its image and linking it to 
violence and terrorism and, second, because it targets Egypt as 
a symbol and center of power in the Arab countries and the 
Islamic world. And if we realize that Zionism is controlling 
many of these media organs, whether in the form of individual 
ownership or ownership by major corporations, we could 
understand the motives for these malicious campaigns." In 
conclusion, 'Abd-al-Ra'uf hoped that the "voices of reason" 
coming from British Crown Prince Charles and German Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl and the "complimentary" remarks made by President 
Clinton represent a moderate current of dealing with Islam, 
noting the need to "develop" this current. 

