CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sao Jose dos Campos correspondent Virginia </F>
Silveira] 
  [Text] Avibras Aerospace Industry, Inc., a war 
materiel manufacturer, showed a net profit of $21.2 million for 
1993. This result, although positive, was not considered 
significant for the company. "The inflation-induced profit, 
which looks good, is fictitious and was caused by distortions in 
Brazilian monetary legislation," said Avibras Vice President 
Rubens Domingues Porto. 
  Last year the company's net profit was larger--about $22.9 
million. In reality, as Porto said, the figures on the balance 
sheet show that the company, although still operating under 
Chapter 11, has been able to pay its bills and still maintain a 
reasonable level of sales. Avibras's net operating profit in 
1993 was $122.5 million, down 9.2 percent from 1992. 
  The drop in revenues, according to Porto, still reflects the 
reduction in the number of military contracts, which account for 
70 percent of company sales. The crisis at Avibras began in 
1987, with the end of the Iran-Iraq war and the suspension of 
payments by Iraq for units of the Astros-2 saturation rocket 
launching system. In January 1990, when the company filed for 
Chapter 11, its debts were estimated at $458 million. 
<H5>  Debts Paid </H5>
  According to the company vice president, the debts under the 
Chapter 11 proceedings were paid off in January 1992 when the 
company deposited the second installment on the debt. The 
Chapter 11 restrictions have not been lifted, however. "Some 
suppliers were not satisfied with the amounts we deposited," 
Porto said. 
  During the Chapter 11 process, overall company indebtedness 
declined. "For the past four years, we have been unable to take 
out any bank loans or buy anything on the installment plan," he 
explained. In 1993, company indebtedness fell from 47 percent to 
38.5 percent. Short-term debts, according to Porto, amount to 
about $43 million. Once the country's leading exporter of 
armaments, with net sales of $390 million during the 1980's, 
Avibras now survives by selling products to the civilian sector 
and filling small technical assistance contracts, and supplying 
parts and spares under old Astros-2 rockets systems contracts. 
  The firm's latest sale of war materiel, according to its 
vice 
president, was to Angola, last year. "We sold the Angolan army 
Sbat 70 air-to-ground rocket systems--rockets fired from 
aircraft," he commented. He said the contract was worth $3 
million. 
<H5>  Selling Services </H5>
  Taking advantage of the advanced technology it developed 
through the manufacture of military products, Avibras is selling 
products and services in the fields of computer technology, 
chemistry, and telecommunications. The company's computer 
technology unit, set up last year, sold about $100,000 worth of 
386 and 486 PC's, diskettes, and videotapes. The 
telecommunications division has been successful in selling 
satellite communications systems. 
  The fiber optics unit that is now being installed has 
already 
received investments on the order of $6 million. The company 
estimates the market for fiber optics in Brazil at between 
100,000 to 150,000 kilometers annually. The sector that used to 
make rocket fuel and explosives has been reoriented to make 
waterproofing compounds for the construction industry and 
chemical products for parts molding. 

