Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorials: "Arab Nationals Living in Pakistan"] </F>
  [Text] Mustafa Hanafi, the Egyptian ambassador to Pakistan, 
has said in an interview that his government has formally asked 
Pakistan to arrest and extradite 10 persons who have been 
involved in subversive and terrorist activities in Egypt. These 
persons include an Egyptian named (Muhammad Mustari) who was 
involved in an attack on the Egyptian prime minister. 
  During the Afghan holy war, youths of several Arab countries 
had fought, along with the Afghan mojahedin, against the Soviet 
Union and the Communist Afghan forces and the United States had 
been providing them arms. However, after the end of the Afghan 
holy war, there was no justification for those Arab nationals to 
overstay in Pakistan and the Pakistan Government was duty-bound 
to send them back to their homelands under an appropriate action 
plan. The Pakistani nation recognizes the services of these 
Arab mojahedin, but the Pakistan Government cannot provide any 
support and assistance for the struggle they wish to launch in 
their respective countries, nor would the people of Pakistan 
like to see Pakistani soil being used for their respective 
political battles. They create problems for us and defame 
Pakistan in the international community. Therefore, these Arab 
nationals can be requested not to create problems and 
difficulties for us and leave for their respective homelands 
immediately. If these people have any differences with the 
governments of their respective countries, Pakistan is not at 
all interested in them nor is it our problem. The Pakistan 
government ought to say the same thing to the Arab governments 
that we had neither invited their nationals nor are we providing 
them shelter. In view of the situation that has developed along 
our northwestern border, it would be only hypothetical to say 
that these Arab nationals are still staying in Peshawar. They 
may be living under the umbrella of any Afghan organization, but 
Pakistan is being held accountable for them. We should, 
therefore, deal with this entire problem very cautiously. 

