BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kunlachada and Marisa Chimprapha in Bangkok and </F>
Cristina Pastor in Manila: "The Quest for the United Southeast 
Asia"] 
  [Text] The idea of a united Southeast Asian community has 
long been a dream of ASEAN leaders. 
  But since the six-member bloc was founded in 1967 as a 
bulwark against communism, ideological differences have kept the 
region divided. The pro-Westem ASEAN six lined up on one side of 
the bamboo curtain and Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam on the other. 
Then there was also Burma, the region's odd man, doggedly 
following its own isolationist path. 
  The sweeping economic and political changes brought about by 
the end of the Cold War, however, have offered an opportunity to 
make the dream of a Southeast Asian Community a reality. 
  ASEAN has made cautious overtures to the four missing 
Southeast Asian states but the hide-bound membership process has 
added momentum to proposals for an alternative arrangement to 
help promote the development of a Southeast Asian community of 
peace and prosperity. 
  Academics and high-ranking government officials, who 
gathered 
at a meeting sponsored by the Philippines National Security 
Council last week, agreed that there should be a forum 
established to discuss the formation of European Union-styled 
community that would bind the ten nations together. The proposed 
forum would discuss joint approaches on political, economic, and 
social issues. 
  Deputy Foreign Minister Surin Phitsuwan said the forum, 
dubbed the "SEA-10", will be an alternative source of 
cooperation among countries in Southeast Asia. "It will be a 
place for all ten Southeast Asian nations to get together while 
waiting to become ASEAN members," said Surin who attended the 
seminar last week in a personal capacity. 
  Speaking to reporters after the conference, Philippine 
President Fidel Ramos mapped out a more ambitious vision, saying 
it could "approach the model of the European Union." 
  "This is open-ended. They are looking at 20 to 25 years 
which 
is the time for one generation and beyond. The major difference 
is the existing level underdevelopment among the countries 
involved," Ramos added. 
  Surin said officials from the six ASEAN states agreed to the 
establishment of such a forum while the remaining four Southeast 
Asian states have shown interest in the idea. 
  "The four countries are in a challenging zone within the 
world's brightest spot of economic development and we need to 
keep them on board in a certain way," Surin said. 
  The minister said there was also an over-riding need for the 
region to be able to take a unified position regarding external 
economic forces. "We need to take a defensive stance both in 
economic and security terms," Surin said. 
  Participants at the seminar in Manila felt that there should 
be an exclusive forum for the region to work out a pattern of 
relations among themselves and the outside world with a sense of 
common destiny. 
  Peter Ho, who attended the conference with the Singaporean 
delegation said, ASEAN "can no longer expect the United States 
to continue to underpin East Asian regional security". 
  "There will be difficulties with either Japan or China 
taking 
up the slack -- Japan because of the Pacific War and China 
because of the historical tributary relationship and the Chinese 
populations in Southeast Asia. Thus, our only recourse is to 
strengthen our own network of linkages," he said 
  Other ASEAN officials said they hoped the forum could become 
a model of international cooperation and a main actor on the 
global political and economic stage. 
  A joint declaration issued one week after the end of the 
meeting said that given the SEA-10's shared history, culture and 
close approximity, "Southeast Asia should be a community." 
  "A community of equal and sovereign states, each with its 
own 
identity and preferred interest, valued relationships and 
conceptions of development and progress but also with a sense of 
common destiny and shared perception of its own future and 
common commitment to the enhancement of regional peace and 
prosperity, fundamental human value and the basic principles 
enshrined in the Charter of United Nations." 
  "Wars and conflicts among the countries in the past show 
that 
countries in the region often failed the test of good 
neighborliness. 
  "We firmly believe that the time has come to articulate and 
pursue this vision of Southeast Asia, for the rapid and 
far-reaching changes which have been taking place since the end 
of the Cold War offer us a unique opportunity to shape our own 
destiny as the 21st century approaches," said the declaration 
titled "Southeast Asia Beyond the Year 2000, a Statement of 
Vision." 
  While stressing the SEA-10 will be a project of the future, 
Surin said some preparations towards building such a community 
are needed now. He said he hoped that the upcoming meeting of 
ASEAN Foreign Ministers will endorse the idea and that by the 
end of this year a meeting closer to policy making level could 
convene to start discussing the community's structure and 
programme activity. 
  The next step he said is to gel endorsement of the vision 
from ASEAN leaders who will meet for their Fifth Summit in 
Bangkok next year. 
  The delegates in Manila resolved that to achieve the vision, 
a number of flagship projects and measures must be adopted 
immediately. 
  Among these were an informal summit of Southeast Asian 
leaders as soon as possible. 
  The creation of dual-track approach for Cambodia--one to 
help 
consolidate the peace process and another to mobilize support 
and funds for social and economic development either though the 
setting up of a bank for the reconstruction of Cambodia and 
issuing of bonds. 
  Other plans included the organizing of a series of meetings 
at both senior official and ministerial levels to discuss and 
develop a mechanism to settle boundary disputes and other 
problems including piracy, the spread of contagious diseases, 
natural resource management and environmental conservation. 
  The endorsement of an ASEAN initiative concerning the South 
China Sea and the immediate undertaking of a project to build 
confidence among the states concerned. 
  The leaders' made commitments towards projects aimed at 
harnessing and equitably utilizing resources of Mekong river. 
  As things stand now, ASEAN governments have yet to formally 
adopt the issue although they have for the most part expressed 
support for it. 
  Out of fear that the forum might meet the same fate as 
Malaysia's East Asian Economic Caucus which failed to take off 
because of U.S. resistance to a closed economic bloc, the 
delegates stressed one of the imperative principles of this 
vision was that it should be an example of open regionalism. 
  "This means a recognition that while we wish to build a 
stronger and more cohesive community, there is also the need to 
be outward- looking, to look beyond Southeast Asia, and to 
continue to strengthen political, economic, and cultural ties 
with countries outside the region," the declaration stated. 
  It also cited the need for "unity in diversity" which means 
a 
recognition of not only the differences that divided the 
countries but also of the need and capacity for reconciling and 
transcending those differences through process of building trust 
and consensus. 

