CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ilya Grinchenko, chairman of the kray </F>
organizational committee of the Russia's Choice Movement, by 
Vitaliy Mogil; place and date not given: "Orientation Points of 
the New Party: Maritime Kray Gaydar Supporters Plan To Defend 
Civic Peace and the Interests of the Residents of the Kray"] 
  [Text] A long time ago journalists used to "pester" 
the leader of Russia's Choice, Ye. Gaydar, with the question: 
Are you not planning to transform this bloc of yours into a 
party? Yegor Timurovich never ruled out such a possibility. And 
so, it has happened--Russia's Choice will create a party. 
Supporters were found for it here in Maritime Kray. 
  Our KRASNOYE ZNAMYA correspondent met with Ilya 
Grinchenko, chairman of the kray organizational committee of the 
Russia's Choice Movement. 
  [Mogil] Ilya Konstantinovich, the political announcement on 
the creation of a party, which was published in ARGUMENTY I 
FAKTY and signed by its leaders, states that the party is being 
created as a counterweight to the threat of a nomenklatura 
revanche and the accession to power of national-extremists. Does 
such a threat also exist in Maritime Kray? 
  [Grinchenko] Maritime Kray is still not a separate republic. 
But in Russia such a danger is viewed as obvious, and this means 
that our kray is also not secure from it. But even this is not 
the main reason for the creation of a party. Russia's Choice 
will fight not against, but for. For a free society where human 
rights are the highest priority, for stability, for an effective 
state, and for civic peace. 
  [Mogil] The establishment of civic peace and the creation of 
a free society, it must be assumed, are a program maximum. But 
the minimum? 
  [Grinchenko] For Maritime Kray supporters of People's 
Choice, 
this is a struggle for authority in all representative organs in 
order to defend the interests of the residents of our kray. 
  [Mogil] Can we also expect your candidates in the 
forthcoming 
elections to the kray Duma? 
  [Grinchenko] We have supporters among already nominated 
candidates for deputy. But if the Statute on Elections is 
revised and the opportunity appears to nominate new candidates, 
then we will do this. 
  [Mogil] Who was the initiator for the creation of the party 
in Maritime Kray? 
  [Grinchenko] The slogans under which the new party is being 
created found support among members of the Democrat Club--people 
of a different political orientation. Among them are 
social-democrats, supporters of the Russia's Choice Movement, 
and people with no party affiliation. 
  [Mogil] Will they all now become Gaydarites? 
  [Grinchenko] The party has not yet been formed structurally. 
Its constituent assembly is planned for the end of May. Until 
that time it will be necessary to consider the draft charter and 
a political statement. After the congress, party supporters will 
be able to formulate their attitude toward the documents 
developed by it at constituent meetings in the localities. 
Moreover, participation in the activity of the Russia's Choice 
Movement is not limited to party membership. 
  [Mogil] The party has just been formed, but it has already 
actively joined the political life of the kray... 
  [Grinchenko] Yes. On behalf of the kray organizational 
conference of the Russia's Choice Movement, an appeal has been 
sent to the governor of Maritime Kray with a proposal to form a 
kray public chamber (as a consultative representational organ 
under the kray administration) consisting of registered 
candidates for deputy for the period before the election of the 
kray Duma. We think that this could become the first step in the 
establishment of civic peace and accord in Maritime Kray, and we 
declare our readiness to render support in the implementation of 
our proposal. 

