Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Seimas and Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party, </F>
LDDP, member Bronislovas Genzelis: "The Development of 
Lithuanian-Polish Relations"] 
  [Excerpts] I think that the development of friendly 
relations with Poland is one of the most pressing goals of our 
foreign policy. We should seek the signing of the interstate 
agreement and the declaration on goodneighborly relations in the 
immediate future. This way, we would lay a firm foundation for 
the coming generations and leave the former misunderstandings to 
history. [passage omitted] 
  Poland's current government is favorable to Lithuania, and 
it 
understands our problems. Conditions for normalizing the 
misunderstandings inherited from history are emerging. This 
process requires mutual goodwill. Unfortunately, there are 
certain forces both in Lithuania and Poland wishing to open past 
wounds and plot new conflicts. For example, during their recent 
visits to Warsaw, Lithuanian Seimas [parliament] Chairman C. 
Jursenas and Prime Minister A. Slezevicius met with almost all 
Polish leaders, Sejm factions and committees. Those meetings 
did not raise any demands similar to those which were 
unexpectedly put forward by 82 Polish Sejm members. We suppose 
that this was done on the initiative of some Lithuanian Poles' 
Union leaders, while the esteemed deputies of the Polish Sejm 
did not familiarize themselves with the situation. 
  If one side denies the existence of uninterested forces in 
its country and searches for them at its neighbor's place, it 
will be difficult to reach an agreement. This would immediately 
cause its mistrust in the other side and doubts about the 
latter's goodwill. One side must respect the law of the other. 
  Under the Lithuanian law, no sections of foreign 
organizations can operate on its territory. This law is not 
directed against Poland in particular. When we voted for it in 
the Supreme Council, we saw the threat of Russian imperialists. 
The latter were trying to set up branches of their political 
organizations in Lithuania at that time, which posed a threat to 
its statehood. 
  Laws restricting wishes of one neighbor and having no 
significance to the other are impossible in a democratic 
country. There had been attempts to establish a Russian 
university and other organizations in Lithuania. Such ideas 
were abandoned later. Currently, we do not notice Russia's 
attempts to set up any organizations in our country, although 
the threat to our independence has not disappeared. I wish our 
friends, the Poles, realized these subtleties. 
  I would also like the Polish community to understand the 
reasons for disbanding the self-governments in the Vilnius and 
Salcininkai regions. Those self-governments declared 
unequivocally that they did not recognize Lithuania's 
independence or abide by Lithuanian law, and that they 
considered themselves part of the USSR. Their actions can be 
considered nothing short of a revolt against Lithuania's lawful 
government. 
  Politicians must always behave responsibly everywhere. They 
must always remember that each tactless move may result in broad 
comments. The actions of some officials from the Polish Embassy 
in Vilnius arouse many emotions. I do not doubt the good 
intentions of these officials. However, I cannot help noting 
that the meeting of the Polish ambassador with journalists on 
New Year's eve evoked an unfavorable reaction. This meeting was 
interpreted as the ambassador's attempt to teach our journalists 
what, where and when they should write about Poland. Meetings 
between Polish Embassy employees and local officials of the 
Polish nationality from the Vilnius region held without our 
government's consent also invoke negative attitudes. I think 
that such events should be abandoned or at least coordinated 
with our officials, the more so that separate Polish citizens 
arrive in Lithuania and try to negate its statehood. I would not 
like to attach great importance to these facts, however, I 
cannot help mentioning them. 
  Thus, we must outline the future ways for our countries' 
rapprochement. It might be expedient to think about closer 
cooperation with other states as well, for example, Belarus, 
Ukraine, the Visegrad group, and so on. 
  We must think more about the future. The neighboring empire 
[Russia] which inflicted suffering on us, has been shattered 
slightly, but it has not yet collapsed. It would be naive of us 
not to feel its threat. [passage omitted] 

