BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by Zhang Tiegang: "Russia Speeds Up Drive To Join </F>
West"] 
  [Text] Moscow, June 24 (XINHUA) -- Russia, the major 
successor and heir to the old Soviet Union bloc has, after 18 
months of bargaining, accomplished part of its plan towards 
uniting with the West. 
  On Friday [24 June], on the Greek Island of Corfu, Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin signed an historic agreement with the 
European Union (EU), two days after his Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev signed the Partnership for Peace Program with the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Brussels. 
  The dual moves give renewed impetus to Moscow's drive to end 
years of isolation from the West which it had experienced during 
the Soviet-era, marking delicate changes in the Kremlin's 
foreign policy. 
  Failing to gain expected benefits in efforts to improve ties 
with the West in 1992 and 1993, Moscow had been focusing on the 
relations with its neighboring countries especially the former 
Soviet republics at the beginning of the year. 
  But in recent months it again turned its attention to 
relations with the West after thinking over its long-term 
political, military and economic strategies. 
  Before leaving Moscow on Thursday, Yeltsin told reporters 
that the new accord, which strengthened political, economic and 
trade ties with the European Union, was a first tactical step. 
"When Russia really enters Europe, becomes a European country 
then it can only gain from this," he pointed out. 
  The 10-year partnership and cooperation agreement that 
Yeltsin signed with the EU sets the seal on economic cooperation 
after more than 18 months of negotiations. 
  Moscow has frequently protested against what it calls 
discriminatory trade barriers erected by Western nations, saying 
Russia needs to be allowed to sell its products more than it 
needs Western aid. 
  Now, the accord lifts trade barriers, offers greater 
certainty to traders and investors, and opens the prospect of a 
free-trade zone after 1998. It confirms the removal of all 
quotas on Russian exports to the EU apart from certain textile 
and steel products. But it also allows Russia to impose 
temporary quotas on limited amounts of EU imports. 
  The agreement established regular political contacts at all 
levels, from heads of government to officials. It also supports 
Russia's future access to the GATT (the General Agreement on 
Tariffs And Trade) and the World Trade Organization, scheduled 
to replace GATT next year. 
  The accord will take effect after it has been ratified by 
the 
parliaments of Russia and EU member states and the European 
Parliament. 
  A cooperation protocol, put forward by Moscow as a 
precondition for joining the Partnership for Peace Program and 
signed together with the accord, acknowledges Russia's major 
power status and its influence in Europe, declaring that Russia 
and NATO will have extensive dialogue and cooperation and 
conduct political consultations on European global security and 
peacekeeping missions. 
  The revitalized drive toward improved relations with the 
West 
was also on display across the Atlantic with Russian Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin scheduled to meet with U.S. 
President Bill Clinton in Washington. 
  On Wednesday, the Russian premier signed a 
multibillion-dollar energy agreement with international oil 
companies and secured another 820 million U.s dollars in World 
Bank loans. 
  Moreover, Yeltsin is scheduled to attend the Group of Seven 
summit of leaders of the leading industrialized nations in 
Naples, Italy, next month. Russia has been gaining support in 
its efforts to become a formal member of the group. 
  The Russian president is also scheduled to have a second 
summit meeting with Clinton within nine months in Washington in 
September. 
  Outlining Russia's purpose in its drive to join the West, 
Yeltsin stressed on arrival in Corfu: "We move forward as equal 
partners toward our mutual interests." 

