Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of speech by King Husayn to the Council on Foreign </F>
Relations in Washington on 25 January -- recorded; in English] 
  [Text] Mr. (Frye), I would like to thank you most warmly 
and sincerely for the kind invitation for me to address the 
Council on Foreign Relations. Mrs. Graham, your warm welcome is 
deeply felt by myself, Nur, and all members of my Jordanian 
delegation, here with us this evening. 
  It is indeed a privilege and a pleasure for me to stand here 
before you at this most interesting of times, a time of hope, a 
time of challenge, and, obviously, a time of danger. And as I 
look around in this hall -- the years have forced me to wear 
glasses -- but nonetheless I can easily recognize and see many 
dear friends I have got the privilege of knowing over the years. 
I have equally shared with many of you the hopes that we would 
see progress in our region. It was a very dear objective, the 
establishment of a just, durable, and lasting peace. 
  Years have passed and we have had the privilege and the joy 
of preaching peace, the kind of peace that future generations 
can live with, can accept, can enjoy. I hope that we will leave 
them this legacy, a legacy to the children of Abraham for all 
times to come to live in a region and, hopefully, contribute 
toward a better future for mankind, a region that has been a 
beacon, that has contributed much to the progress of mankind 
throughout its history and on many levels. 
  I feel that much has happened, and much ground has been 
covered, and there is, obviously, much more that needs to be 
done. Briefly, since our participation in formulating Security 
Council Resolution 242 in 1967, we sought a comprehensive peace, 
and since the adoption of that resolution, we assumed our 
responsibilities toward our people and others in the region. 
With courage and commitment to the cause of their future, we 
tried over many years to see the implementation of the said 
resolution. In 1974, at an Arab summit in Rabat in Morocco and 
in response to a Palestinian demand and an Arab demand we 
recognized the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the 
people of Palestine, and we have adhered to our word and our 
commitment throughout the years and until now. The Cold War 
affected our region. Shortsighted policies afflicted the region 
and caused many tragedies. The unresolved Arab-Israeli problem 
has been the root cause of instability in that region that has 
been the ladder that has paved the way for many to seek power, 
not always wisely, and not always in total dedication to the 
cause of people and their future. 
  The solution of this problem will bring to all in the 
region the chance and opportunity to live a life that that has 
been denied them for far too long -- a life that is their right. 
In the years since '74 we tried every way possible to achieve 
progress towards peace. Finally we disengaged legally and 
administratively with the occupied West Bank and this paved the 
way for the PLO's acceptance of Security Council Resolutions 242 
and 338. 
  We all lived through the tremendous changes that have 
occurred in our world in recent times, and with them the growing 
feeling in our region by those who look beyond today to tomorrow 
and to years from now, long after we are no more. In the 
interest of people, an interest has grown and manifested itself 
in responsible action hopefully aimed at the establishment of 
peace. We went to Madrid and we did so after holding a national 
conference in Jordan and looking at all the options. We went to 
Madrid supported by the Jordanian people in terms of those 
commitments to the establishment of peace. We went to Madrid 
creating the opportunity for our Palestinian brothers to go 
under an umbrella that has since been pulled down and relegated 
to a closet of history to provide also the opportunity for the 
Palestinians to speak for themselves regarding their cause on 
their land and regarding their future, and beyond Madrid, 
Moscow, the multilaterals and Washington, and the 13th of 
September of last year was a day that will be remembered for 
many many years to come. For, at last, in this capital of the 
United States of America, Palestinians and Israelis recognized 
each other and began the process towards resolving their 
differences based on 242 and 338 that called for negotiations 
amongst the parties. 
  The handshakes that were witnessed by the world were indeed 
of tremendous significance and importance, and I believe they 
tore down many walls and many obstacles in the case of progress 
towards the attainment of peace. That was September the 13th. 
September the 14th, Jordan ratified the agenda that it had 
worked out with the Government of Israel relating to the 
subjects that have to be covered and dealt with and resolved, 
culminating in the establishment of peace. We did so shortly 
after the event that took place the day before because we were 
consistent since 1974 recognizing the Palestinians' right and 
the PLO's right to represent them regarding their fate and their 
future and their cause on their national soil. 
  Although it took us by surprise, we could not but be true 
to ourselves, and therefore, we also recognized the fact that 
what took place on that date was an act of great wisdom and 
great courage on both sides. And in support of it, we could 
have moved before, but we did not because we wanted to see 
progress on the Palestinian track with Israel. 
  What is the future? We are just about starting another round 
of talks here in Washington, and I hope that it will produce 
tangible results. We started from the same point in Madrid. We 
in Jordan have always supported Palestinians regarding their 
rights on their soil. Finally, they acted on their own. They 
will continue to have our full support in any way that we can 
provide for the needs of the times ahead. We and the 
Palestinians, the Syrians, the Lebanese all started at the same 
point. And I believe in the very recent past a very important 
development was the meeting that took place a short while ago in 
Switzerland between President Clinton and President Hafiz 
al-Asad of Syria. I have known President al-Asad over many many 
years, and I firmly believe that there is a conviction amongst 
very many that he is a man of his word. 
  My feeling in the recent past and now is one of hope, not 
only hope, but hope substantiated by reasons of contact and 
coordination to the best of our abilities with all the other 
parties involved in this conflict, and in particular Syria. I 
believe that what we will see in the immediate future is rapid 
progress, hopefully in addressing all the problems on all the 
tracks. 
  A question is asked by some: What of Jordan? Jordan 
believes and strives for a comprehensive peace in the region. 
But in terms of the facts, Jordan is now engaged in addressing 
all the items, all the subjects, that will be the core of the 
efforts, hopefully, of Jordan and Israel to try to resolve, and 
that formulated or formed the joint agenda. Some have suggested 
that I should on this visit, at a meeting with a top Israeli 
official, ratify a peace treaty. My feeling is that a peace 
treaty is the crowning achievement, and must be, of resolving 
all the different problems that are there. And I hope that 
rapid progress will be made to enable us to reach that point 
before long. I hope that we will see progress on all the other 
tracks as well. But we are, hopefully, the masters of our own 
destiny, and let me be very clear and unequivocal in stating 
before you, before the skeptics, that our final goal is a peace 
treaty with Israel, if we can resolve, and when we can resolve, 
all the problems that we are now addressing in the negotiations 
that are beginning, and hopefully, will be ongoing. 
  We have said also that we would be more than happy to see 
implementation of whatever we agree upon, not to wait till the 
end. We have a feeling that we have to sensitize people on both 
sides to what peace means, to the change that is occurring. 
Jordanian territories must return to Jordanian sovereignty. But 
once that happens and in a context of peace, we can look at the 
entire rift valley as an economic unit and one of promise for 
all in terms of the potential to develop the resources and 
benefit from them to the largest possible extent by all 
concerned. Another area is water. That is important to us all. 
And we must work out a way satisfactory to all in terms of the 
fairness of the distribution of what is available, and I believe 
that what is available is not enough for all the needs of people 
before too long in our region. But in the context of peace other 
sources can be harnessed and the needs of people can be 
addressed. 
  And obviously an area which is very, very important is that 
of the human dimension of the problem. We feel that it is of 
utmost importance that people in the occupied territories should 
receive the greatest possible attention and that the times 
ahead, with progress in implementing agreements between Israel 
and the Palestinian people, should immediately see the 
beginnings of a change in the quality of life, we hope. Beyond 
that, others elsewhere will need to also feel the change. As 
you know Jordan has borne the brunt of the results of every 
disaster that occurred in the entire region. Jordan has been 
the home of Jordanians, whether they be of Palestinian origin or 
from whichever part of the Arab world they may be. And our 
position is still the same. All the members of the Jordanian 
family will continue to enjoy equal rights in our country, and 
hopefully equal opportunities to develop in the times ahead, and 
to live in the kind of environment that has not been possible so 
far. 
  I know many of you have looked at the region and worried 
about us all over many years. But it is a terrible situation 
when people don't know what each day would bring -- the strain, 
the effort, the uncertainty, the hope that this will change. So 
all in Jordan will remain members of the one family, proud of 
our reborn democracy, of the National Charter that was put 
together by all schools of political thought in our country, of 
the growing pride of the people of Jordan in their achievements, 
of their determination to partake in shaping their future, of 
respect for human rights, respect for human rights in Jordan and 
hopefully within the region, of the model, of the example, that 
this small country in a very critical area hopefully can be to 
others, until such time when others may have the opportunity to 
return or be compensated or whatever their choice may be. There 
have been many promises regarding the region in the context of 
peace so far. I believe the opportunities that will be 
presenting themselves once we reach that point are tremendous 
for a partnership between us all in creating a new Middle East, 
in creating something entirely different to anything that has 
been there for so many years, in creating peace and harmony and 
mutual respect between the followers of the three great 
monotheistic religions -- the three Abrahamic religions, in 
creating opportunities for cooperation, in creating an example 
for others the world over. 
  I would like to thank you very, very much indeed for your 
patience and your time and the opportunity to be with you. 

