Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on economic developments in Cuba carried on 
Havana radio and television in Spanish between 17 and 22 
February. 
  Radio Reloj at 2034 GMT on 17 February reports that Manuel 
Hermoso, head of the autonomous government of the Canary 
Islands, will arrive in Havana on 18 February for a visit both 
friendly and official. He will be accompanied by a businessmen's 
delegation. Hermoso and Pedro Chavez, president of the 
Provincial Assembly of the People's Government of Havana City 
Province, are to sign a cooperation agreement. After meeting 
with the Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Small 
Farmers, and other organizations, Hermoso and the delegation 
accompanying him are scheduled to leave for Venezuela on 23 
February. 
  Cuba Vision Network at 2320 GMT on 17 February reports the 
following: Cuban biotechnology specialists have made, from 
marine microorganisms, a compound that can biodegrade oil spills 
in the sea. Among the advantages of this compound is the fact 
that it can be stored for use when needed. Specialists say the 
Cuban biological compound is very different from existing 
compounds . 
  The four-star, 140-room Farallon del Caribe Hotel has been 
officially inaugurated at the Marea del Portillo tourist hub in 
Granma. Cubanacan president Abraham Maciques highlighted the 
hotel's importance to the region's economic and social 
development. "The tourist complex is run by the Canadian firm 
Commonwealth Hospitality, whose president was present at the 
inauguration." With the opening of the new hotel the tourist 
complex has a total of 280 rooms. The Marea del Portillo and 
Punta de Piedra Hotels are also in that area. 
  Radio Progreso at 1200 GMT on 18 February reports that the 
Cuban Hydrography Institute, in cooperation with several 
scientific institutions, has collected a large amount of data 
through the embankment works carried out in the northern part of 
Ciego de Avila and Camaguey. With these data the institute has 
published an oceanographic atlas of extremely good quality which 
was submitted to the third congress of marine science. According 
to Engineer Angel Luis Chirino, one of the authors of the atlas, 
the oceanographic atlas of the waters of the Sabana-Camaguey 
archipelago is the result of more than 20 years of research by 
the Cuban Hydrography Institute. This atlas reflects the 
ecological changes caused by the embankment works carried out in 
the zone and all the oceanographic variables of temperature, 
currents, salinity, and tides. He added that more than 20 
researchers participated in this work. More than 100 km of 
rockfill embankments are being built in the archipelago to 
facilitate exploitation of area resources for tourism purposes. 
  Radio Reloj at 2049 GMT on 18 February reports that the 
Fantastico travel agency, "which has up to now operated as a 
Cubanacan travel agency," hopes to bring 300,000 tourists to 
Cuba this year and collect $11 million dollars. "Its new name 
aims to give an image of the agency's plans. In the last period, 
the agency served over 240,000 visitors and took in over $8 
million." The travel agency's manager said Fantastico maintains 
relations with 60 agencies and tour operators worldwide, and has 
60 tour circuits throughout Cuba, which over 20,000 summer 
vacationers took last year." He added that the agency offers 15 
to 20 options at every Cubanacan forum, and can handle an 
average of 80 operations daily. 
  Radio Reloj at 2035 GMT on 21 February reports that Ciego de 
Avila Province has had a record grapefruit harvest during the 
1993- 94 harvest period, thanks to microjet irrigation. The 
province harvested 14,501 tons of grapefruit. Fields using the 
microjet irrigation system had yields of 16 tons per hectare. 
Over 200 hectares using the microjet system went into production 
during the last campaign. The grapefruit was processed in the 
town of Ceballos. 
  Radio Reloj at 2037 GMT on 21 February notes that the 
workers 
of Ciego de Avila made and recycled approximately 200,000 spare 
parts in 1993, most of them destined for cane sector equipment 
to be used in the current sugar harvest. 
  Radio Reloj at 2039 GMT on 21 February announces that the 
first plant in Villa Clara for recycling batteries began 
operating on 21 February in Camajuani Municipality. The plant 
can deliver approximately 200 batteries per month, and is 
located within the bus rebuilding facility belonging to the 
People's Government transportation sector. The plant cost 31,000 
pesos, and the equipment was taken from other workshops. Ernesto 
Suarez, secretary of the National Assembly of the People's 
Government, inaugurated the plant. 
  Cuba Vision Network at 2320 GMT on 21 February reports that 
five railway cars are being built for a new train that is to 
link the cities of Holguin and Las Tunas. The passenger cars 
used in Holguin's intercity trains are made from old bus bodies 
on platforms that were formerly used to transport merchandise. 
The new cars are to be finished before 24 February. 
  Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks at 0100 GMT on 22 
February reports that Brazilian businessmen, managers of firms 
in the Brazilian states of Parana and Minas Gerais, who visited 
Cuba at the end of January said on 21 February that they see 
ample possibilities for doing business with Cuba, which is 
currently obtaining good results from its economic policies. 
These Brazilian managers expressed their satisfaction with the 
contacts regarding investments made in Havana at the end of 
January. "According to the daily paper JORNAL DO BRASIL, the 
firms are interesting in forming joint organizations with Cuban 
state enterprises that are making effective moves." 

