Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A Seoul court has ruled that the authority which 
supplies blood with the HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is 
responsible for the infection and not the state or hospital 
involved. 
  The landmark ruling, made yesterday by the Seoul District 
Civil Court, is expected to have a critical impact in 
legislating laws and regulations pertaining to AIDS (aquired 
imminodeficiency syndrome). 
  In the ruling, the court found the Korea National Red Cross 
(KNRC) responsible for causing the fatal infection of a 
21-year-old man identified only by his surname Yi who committed 
suicide after realizing that he acquired AIDS through a blood 
transfusion. 
  The infection has been confirmed to have occurred in January 
1987 while Yi was undergoing a blood transfusion during surgery 
at the Seoul National University Hospital. He killed himself in 
April last year. 
  Following his death, Yi's family filed a civil suit against 
the government, the hospital and KNRC which processed and 
supplied the blood used in the transfusion, demanding 
compensation of 330 million won. 
  KNRC's Blood Processing Center is responsible for processing 
virtually all domestic blood products. 
  In handing down the ruling, presiding judge Kim Mok-min said 
neither the state nor the hospital is responsible for the 
accident and ordered KNRC to pay Yi's family 12 million won in 
compensation. 
  "Since the discovery of HIV here in December 1985, the 
government has made diligent efforts to ensure that the spread 
of the deadly disease is prevented," Kim noted. 
  He cited that the government issued strict directives for 
related authorities to administer stringent tests on all donated 
and other blood to screen it for HIV infection. 
  The judge went on to say that there are grounds to believe 
that the hospital eliminated detailed tests on the blood before 
the transfusion only on the basis of the fact that Yi was in 
serious condition. 

