BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "ip": "Social Dimension of Transformation; </F>
Results of Slovak Government and National Bank Mission"] 
  [Excerpts] Bratislava--The IMF has become more flexible, 
Slovak Deputy Prime Minister Brigita Schmognerova said yesterday 
after returning from talks at the IMF's Washington headquarters. 
  According to Schmognerova, the fund's steering bodies are 
beginning to realize that, apart from assisting in the 
macroeconomic stabilization of the transforming economies of 
Central and East Europe, it is also necessary to assist in their 
structural reforms. An important role in this process is to be 
played by the World Bank. Both international financial 
institutions are beginning to realize the social dimension of 
transformation, and it seems that they will take it into 
consideration when making recommendations for economic recovery. 
Our delegation won the support of supreme IMF and World Bank 
representatives, and the acquisition of a standby loan amounting 
to up to 40 percent of our stake in the IMF is realistic as 
early as June. It will be paid out over the rest of 1994 and 
the entire year 1995, which can be understood as an expression 
of trust in the stability of the Slovak economy. The condition 
for loans from the World Bank, which could be approved as early 
as September, is that we specify our national economic 
priorities. Resources from the World Bank are to be used for 
the restructuring of commercial banks, the formation of a 
rational labor market, and the completion of apartments under 
construction. [passage omitted] 
  Slovak National Bank [NBS] Governor Vladimir Masar said that 
it transpired from his talks with IMF representatives that the 
NBS is fulfilling its monetary program and that the IMF accepts 
the instruments being applied in monetary policy. 
  Only questions of budget policy remain open. The NBS 
governor came to an agreement with major investment companies 
and banks on their cooperation in putting our commercial banks 
on a sound footing. Special emphasis was placed on the size of 
financial injections and the method of their use. 

