Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA Jan. 26 -- The successful Mid-Term 
National Conference of the Communist Party of Vietnam [CPV] has 
defined premises for taking the country to a new stage of 
development, says the national daily NHAN DAN in an editorial 
today. 
  After six days' sitting, the paper continues, the conference 
discussed and approved the political report of the party Central 
Committee delivered by General Secretary Do Muoi. The report 
assesses the realities of the renovation process of the country, 
identifies the opportunities and challenges it is facing, and 
maps out goals and major tasks for the coming years with a view 
to successfully implementing of the resolutions of the seventh 
party congress. 
  Delegates to the conference reviewed the achievements 
recorded by the party and the entire people over the past years, 
in substantially overcoming the socio-economic crisis, 
continuing to maintain and consolidate the country's political 
stability, broadening external relations. All of this made a 
valuable contribution to heightening Vietnam's position and 
prestige in the world, creating favourable conditions for 
national construction and defence. These initial but very 
important achievements, the paper notes, proves that the 
renovation process initiated and guided by the CPV is correct 
and the resolutions of the 6th and 7th party congresses are 
being realized. 
  The paper also hails the conference for its serious work 
with 
high responsibility when it openly pointed to the weaknesses, 
shortcomings and other newly arising problems that should be 
immediately settled. 
  The paper goes on: "To take those opportunities and 
challenges, our party must do its best to meet the requirements 
of its tasks, to renew and consolidate the close relationship 
between the party and the people. We must guarantee political 
and ideological unity among the entire party, educate all party 
officials and members so that they thoroughly understand the 
viewpoints and policies of the party, heighten their awareness 
and enhance their determination to persist in the socialist 
path, creatively apply and develop Marxism- Leninism, Ho Chi 
Minh Thoughts and the intellectual quintessence of our time...." 

