BFN 

  [Text] The Ministry of the Presidency reported yesterday 
that the government will begin projects to stop the progress of 
poppy cultivation, which increased last year in the departments 
of Amazonas, San Martin, and Huanuco, among others. 
  It has been reported that the sawmill of Santa Maria de 
Nieva, which is under the Jaen Apostolic Vicariate, will be 
reactivated. The reactivation plan also includes the Huaquilla 
mining settlement in the San Ignacio forest, which is up for 
bidding by the Privatization Committee for exploitation by the 
private sector. 
  Priority will also be given to the Mangunchay irrigation 
project and to another sawmill in the San Ignacio forest, which 
is located in the provinces of Jaen and San Ignacio de Cajamarca. 
  According to the Ministry of the Presidency, these projects 
are aimed at giving work to thousands of people who for lack of 
work are motivated to cultivate poppies. 
  According to a report published by this newspaper last 
month, 
poppy cultivation is increasing dangerously. There is 
information that there are small plantations in San Ignacio, 
Jaen, and Bambamarca in Cajamarca. 
  There are also plantations in Huancabamba, Piura; in Bagua 
and Condorcanqui, Amazonas; and in several towns in San Martin 
Department, where cultivation has spread rapidly over the last 
few years in Nueva Cajamarca, Rioja, Soritor, and in the valleys 
of Mayo, Sisa, and Biabo. 
  Outside the northern mountain range, the poppy grows in 
Sarampampa, Ayacucho Department. 
  The Ministry of the Presidency pointed out that the 
government will put into operation the reforestation of forests 
burned by farmers. This work will be done by the Japanese 
Tropical Wood International Organization and by the National 
Institute of Natural Resources (Inrena). 
  The Ministry of the Presidency admitted the imminent danger 
of the poppy, from which opium, morphine, and heroin are taken. 
This is why the government decided to stop poppy cultivation in 
northern Peru "before it becomes a chronic disease and the coca 
cartels escaping from Upper Huallaga settle down there." 
  The ministry said that according to the draft project of the 
National Plan for Drug Prevention and Control, prepared by the 
special commission headed by General Arnaldo Velarde Ramirez, 
retired, "there are worrisome indications about the starting up 
of poppy cultivations in various parts of the national 
territory, encouraged by foreign interests linked to the heroin 
circuit." 
  The Ministry of the Presidency also said: "Hunger in that 
zone is so great that the poppy cultivations are gradually 
gaining more followers. The population is already urgently 
asking for private investment, and demanding from the government 
clear rules for sustainable forest development, forcing loggers 
to do reforestation work with a plan guaranteeing there will 
always be a forest." 
  Poppy grows in the same ecosystem as coca, but offers 
greater 
agro-economic advantages. 
  While cocaine base (the basic element for making cocaine) 
costs from $120 to $150 per kilogram, opium latex (the basic 
element for making heroin) costs $1,000 per kilogram. 
  Poppies grow under the same weather conditions as coca, 
giving better results at from 1,500 to 2,500 meters above sea 
level with cool temperatures of 10 to 20 degrees centigrade. 
  Regarding quantity and what could be called quality, poppies 
produce a greater volume of opium, which is of better quality 
among cultivations at high altitudes. 
  Poppies are planted from October to December to take 
advantage of the rainy season, and can also be planted in July 
and August. The planting is done by "throwing" the seeds onto 
the field. 

