CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Birgitt Riese: "Electronic Scrap Travels </F>
Many Routes To Disassembly"; Subhead: "Waste Managers Have 
Market Divvied Up"] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 25 February 1994 -- Recycling of 
electric and electronic scrap material is off and running. 
Numerous firms have discovered for themselves the lucrative 
waste disposal market -- even absent an electronic-scrap 
ordinance. The loops, however, are far from closed for all 
materials. 
  On 1 January 1994, the "ordinance on the avoidance, 
reduction 
and recycling of waste materials from used electric and 
electronic equipment" was supposed to take effect. The result 
has been zilch since the federal environmental ministry and 
industry associations were unable to reach agreement, 
particularly on the issue of financing. 
  According to estimates by BC Berlin Consult GmbH, a 1.8 
million ton amount of electronic scrap per year is expected 
beginning with 1994, and as of 1998 it will even reach 2.4 
million tons. According to the Central Association of Electrical 
Engineering and Electrical Industry [ZVEI] in Frankfurt, capital 
goods account for 40 percent of that and consumer goods for 60 
percent of it. Major home appliances constitute 62 percent, 
entertainment electronics, 28 percent and small appliances, 
eight percent. 
  Even without an ordinance, industry, business and waste 
managers have started to chip away at this mountain of used 
equipment. Hence, cross-branch cooperation is of major 
importance. Schleswag Recycling GmbH in Rendsburg, for instance, 
has combined with other firms into an umbrella organization, 
Inter Elektro Recycling GmbH [IER]. IER intends to develop a 
network of intake centers and recycling facilities that will 
blanket the FRG. The recycling will be done in various firms. 
So-called S-facilities will disassemble the equipment and remove 
harmful materials. "T facilities" will carry out the dismantling 
and separation of materials, while "MR facilities" will recover 
metals. Schleswag's first recycling plant based on this model is 
already in operation in Brunsbuettel. In the words of Schleswag 
spokesman Stefan Gliwitzki: "The plant recycles everything from 
electric razors to computers with a recycling rate of 95 percent 
and is processing 25,000 t annually." That represents nearly 
half of the electronic scrap occurring in Schleswig-Holstein. 
  Even major corporations see a market in the recycling of 
electronic scrap. In mid-January, Telekom, Alcatel SEL, Preussag 
and Siemens jointly established the Electrorecycling-Anlagen 
GmbH, headquartered in Goslar. In early 1995, however, only 
telecommunications scrap materials will be recycled in the 
recycling plant that will enter into operation in Goslar. Since 
1992 a major experiment has been underway already in a pilot 
facility in Goslar. One of its special successes is that the 
recycling of the plastics portion constitutes a rather small 
problem since acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene [ABS] is 
prescribed as the plastic for Telekom's telephones. "We 
therefore have to deal with only a single plastic," emphasizes 
Georg Froehlich, head of process engineering at Preussag 
subsidiary Noell in Goslar. 
  In the new laender, a subsidiary of RWE waste management, R 
+ 
T Umwelt GmbH, Leipzig, is engaged in this activity. Three 
disassembly facilities have already been set up. A processing 
plant is planned for late 1994. According to R + T data, the 
disassembly facility in Doeberitz, Brandenburg, annually 
recycles 2,000 t of scrap material with an average recycling 
rate of 75 percent. 
  Even the competition in Westphalian Selm is not sleeping. On 
10 March, Rethmann Kreislaufwirtschaft GmbH &amp; Co. Kg will 
open 
up an electrical parts disposal center. Then more than 100,000 
refrigerators, 150,000 TVs, 200,000 cathode ray tubes and nearly 
150,000 t of other electrical and electronic equipment are 
supposed to be processed there annually. 
  Dieter Tartler from Erlangen university dampens 
expectations: 
"So far there is only a small amount of actual recycling of 
electronic scrap." In fact, in only the rarest of instances is 
disassembled material reincorporated into the manufacture of 
electric and electronic equipment. 
  Only the loop for metals is mostly closed: most of them end 
up being smelted. Cycling of glasses is considerably more 
difficult since very different kinds of glasses are included. 
Stefan Maier, head of the recycling sector at Stuttgart's 
Zueblin AG emphasizes: "It is only possible to reuse glasses for 
the manufacture of display screens if the equipment was 
separated by manufacturer when it was collected." Zueblin 
environmental engineering together with Nokia Display Technics 
has developed a method for processing cathode ray tubes. In that 
process, according to Maier, only one percent of the cumulative 
amount needs to be disposed of as special waste material any 
longer. The tubes are crushed, the glass is scrubbed and the 
remaining amount of solids is pressed into a filter cake. At 
present, the glass that is removed mostly ends up in the 
construction or ceramics industry or in he production of 
radioactive waste shields. 
  Even the plastics portion complicates recycling because of 
their diversity. Floor coverings and transportation palettes are 
now resulting from the polymers. Where this approach to 
recycling cannot be used, for example, in the case of plastic 
casings that contain fire retardants, experts consider chemical 
recycling the best solution. In this process the plastic is 
dissolved into its chemical building blocks. 
  Printed circuit boards, constituting a blend of many 
materials, are even more of a problem. In Luebben, Brandenburg, 
BC Berlin Consult is operating an experimental plant based on 
the Pyrocom process, a combination of thermolysis and 
incineration. As BC spokeswoman Kerstin Gustmann puts it 
briefly: "In addition to oil, metals, minerals and solid 
residues, a gas is recovered as a result and is used for heating 
the reactor." 
  Printed circuit boards, above all, are also worrisome for 
recycling expert Tartler. He tosses out for consideration: "No 
one can say precisely what materials are contained therein." 
Erlangen university's research project "recovery of materials 
from blends of multiple materials," should cast some light in 
the darkness. The people in Erlangen are betting on a process 
that combines chemical extraction for separation of metals with 
a leaching out of the plastics. 
  Lots of people want to profit from the recycling of electric 
and electronic scrap material. In Frankfurt, 21 firms have 
combined in the Federal Organization for Electric and Electronic 
Recycling Companies [BEVU] to establish uniform recycling 
standards. In Engen, members of the Federal Association for 
Electronic and Electric Scrap Material Recycling [BEEV] are 
pursuing a similar aim. In order to avoid unnecessary 
competition, both groups are planning to combine under a single 
umbrella organization. "Then the number of waste managers active 
in the market will be discernible," says Rainer Koesling of 
Reichart Metals in Pulheim. 
  Germany is still taking on a trailblazer role in the 
recycling of electronic scrap, although there are also initial 
hints of an EC-wide regulation. According to a report from the 
federal environmental ministry, a "priority-waste-stream working 
group" convened for the first time in January and is supposed to 
draw up recommendations for an EC guideline by mid-1995. 

