BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin and Sian Clare] </F>
  [Text] John Major and his Irish counterpart Albert Reynolds 
today intensified the pressure on the IRA to end its campaign of 
violence immediately. They said there was no shred of 
justification for continuing the killings in Ulster. Speaking 
on the steps of Downing Street after a 90-minute discussion, the 
two leaders warned they were not "waiting around" for Sinn Fein 
to respond to last year's joint declaration. 
  Progress was being made on a framework document grounded in 
the declaration and on talks with the constitutional parties -- 
and would proceed with or without Sinn Fein. Mr Major urged the 
paramilitaries to end their campaign of violence. 
  He and Mr Reynolds shared "a disappointment that the 
violence 
continues," both the IRA violence and the loyalist violence. 
"There is no shred of justification for it whatsoever." 
  Mr Reynolds said: "There is one message quite clear that we 
want to give -- that is that neither paramilitary organisations 
are going to gain anything or bolster their position by a 
continuation of violence. "It is quite clear that the next 
logical step if the peace process is to be moved forward is to 
have a cessation of violence. "There is no single vestige of 
justification for the loss of one single life on either side in 
either community." 
  If Sinn Fein wanted a couple of weeks for further debate 
over 
the joint declaration, then neither government minded. But, he 
insisted, there must be an end to violence immediately. 
  Mr Major made clear there was no deadline for the IRA to 
respond to the declaration, but emphasised the two governments 
were not simply waiting around for Sinn Fein to reply. "There 
is no delay, there has been no delay and there will be no delay 
in continuing discussions with the constitutional parties and 
with the government of the Republic of Ireland on the framework 
document we are producing," said Mr Major. "A great deal of 
progress has been made. There's more to be done but it is not 
awaiting an answer from Sinn Fein." 
  Mr Reynolds said: "The two governments are not going to wait 
around, are not waiting around, for any more prevarication on 
either side to stop the violence. We continue with our own 
business." 
  Mr Major was questioned by reporters about Sinn Fein 
president Gerry Adams's earlier comments in which he offered 
what was interpreted by some as new hope for peace in Northern 
Ireland. 
  Mr Major said: "I see nothing new in what he had to say this 
morning. "What was quite striking was what he didn't say. He 
made no indication that he was going to give up violence." 
  Mr Adams indicated there would be a Sinn Fein response to 
the 
peace moves after the European elections on June 9. 
  "I am quite convinced that what is going to come out of this 
peace process is a peace settlement -- I am quite convinced 
about it. It is a significant step." 
  He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "It is part of one of 
those steps which are required to advance the peace process. It 
addresses some of the core issues and it dismisses some of the 
other questions." 
  The fact that the British government responded to Sinn 
Fein's 
list of questions about the declaration was "very significant". 
  Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring told a European 
conference 
in Paris today: "The time for clarification and debate is over. 
It is now time, once and for all, to stop the killing from 
whatever quarter on the island of Ireland. 
  "The people of Ireland will wait no longer." 
  Mr Reynolds said later he hoped Sinn Fein's response to the 
declaration "will be genuine and positive, and that it will lead 
to a permanent cessation of violence. 
  "That is the only logical next step if the peace process is 
to be moved forward. I do not want to see anybody killed in the 
meantime on either side." 
  He added: "What is important is that the violence by both 
sets of paramilitaries in Northern Ireland should be ended 
immediately." 
  Mr Reynolds said at the Irish Embassy in London that moves 
planned by the British and Irish governments to re-establish an 
inter-party negotiating process in Northern Ireland were being 
maintained. 
  He and Mr Major would have a full-scale summit on their 
peace 
initiative in mid-July. 
  Meanwhile, Liberal Democrat Ulster spokesman Lord Holme 
said: 
"It is urgent that the British government table proposals for 
constitutional progress in Northern Ireland based on devolution, 
power-sharing and a Bill of Rights. 
  "If Sinn Fein want to renounce violence and join the talks 
process, all well and good, but the onus is on the British 
government to take the initiative in consultation with the Irish 
government and the constitutional parties of Northern Ireland." 

