Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Letter from the Presidium of the Albanian Association of </F>
Professional Journalists addressed to Arben Qeleshi, Tirana 
District prosecutor in chief, and for the attention of President 
Sali Berisha, Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi, People's Assembly 
Chairman Pjeter Arbnori, and Procurator General Alush Dragoshi, 
in Tirana on 1 February: "We Demand the Immediate Release From 
Prison of the Journalists Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka. 
We Demand the Suspension of Criminal Charges Against Them"] 
  [Text] Dear Sirs: 
  The Albanian Association of Professional Journalists 
[Shoqata 
e Gazetareve Profesioniste te Shqiperise], assembling at an 
urgent meeting today, vigorously protests the arrest and 
unnecessary imprisonment on 31 January of Aleksander Frangaj, 
editor in chief of KOHA JONE and a member of the association's 
presidium, and of Martin Leka, a KOHA JONE journalist. Accused 
and imprisoned without trial for revealing state secrets and for 
slander, our colleagues Frangaj and Leka are today victims not 
only of the deep contradictions in our legislation, in which 
normally irreconcilable old and new dispositions coexist, but 
also of the escalated revanchism of the state against the free 
press, a revanchism which has for two years trained its sights 
only against free journalists and opposition papers, regardless 
of the fact that there have been excesses in the entire spectrum 
of the Albanian press. 
  Our association, after making contact with those who have 
formulated the accusation, examining the article that led to the 
two journalists' imprisonment, and consulting the Press Law and 
the Constitutional Dispositions, concludes: 
  1. Editor in Chief Aleksander Frangaj, by allowing the 
publication of an article by the journalist Martin Leka about 
the disarming of officers and noncommissioned officers, and also 
publishing a facsimile of the relevant order of the Defense 
Ministry, did not violate any article of the Press Law or any 
other disposition that provides for sanctions, with the 
exception of a ghostly article in the old Penal Code from the 
period of the dictatorship, which has de facto lapsed in the 
last three years, since a free press appeared in Albania. Apart 
from this the article about preserving secrets in the old 
Penal Code has nothing to do with the press, which was entirely 
controlled at that time. 
  As for Article 25 of the Law on the Status of Servicemen, it 
merely draws attention to the need to consult the dispositions 
on state secrets, and does not provide for any sanctions. 
Further, as far as the press is concerned, it emerges that this 
article is superseded by the penultimate article of the Press 
Law, which explicitly states that "All previous dispositions 
conflicting with this law are revoked." 
  2. While there is no clear and rigorous definition of what 
is considered a state secret, the defense minister's order 
applied to a large number of people in military uniform, and can 
in no way be considered a secret. Something that many thousands 
of people know before the day is out is no longer a state secret. 
  3. The journalist Martin Leka, in informing the reader about 
the defense minister's order and expressing his critical opinion 
of an order that obliged officers to leave their personal 
pistols in their units, acted according to the Constitutional 
Dispositions and the Press Law, which guarantee freedom of 
expression and freedom of the press as among the greatest 
inalienable victories of democracy in Albania. Our colleague 
Martin Leka has written about a true fact and cannot be accused 
of slander, despite an element of exaggeration in his article's 
headline, which in no way constitutes a crime. Under these 
conditions, not finding a single legal disposition under which 
our imprisoned fellow-journalists can be punished, the 
Association of Professional Journalists observes that: 
  Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka cannot be accused of any 
crime . 
  -- The crime of which they are charged has been devised 
without reason, has been contrived by the Tirana Prosecutor's 
Office under the pressure of the political state, and is part of 
a series of similar efforts to scare, discourage and punish free 
and opposition journalists. 
  Seriously concerned over the very dangerous consequences of 
such attacks and committed to defend, cultivate, and make more 
cultured the free press in Albania, our association demands: 
  From the Tirana Procurator's Office: 
  -- The immediate release from prison of the journalists 
Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka and the suspension of 
criminal charges against them. 
  From the president of the Republic: 
  -- The protection of the two arrested journalists, accused 
of 
a crime that the president himself has denied is any such thing, 
when he rightly said that "Journalists do not bear 
responsibility for revealing secrets." 
  From Prime Minister Meksi: 
  -- Every measure to halt the war of words against the free 
press and to achieve a civilized coexistence between the press 
and the state, like in Western democratic countries, especially 
the United States, where no journalists have ever been convicted 
even when they have published the plans of the Pentagon. 
  We also ask the government to ensure continual openness in 
communicating with the press, setting an example in bridging the 
gulf that has now been created between the government and the 
press. 
  From the People's Assembly: 
  -- Welcoming the fact that the People's Assembly has not 
approved any sanction against journalists for revealing secrets, 
we suggest to the Assembly that it should remove contradictions 
in Albanian legislation and further define in law what is to be 
considered a state secret in Albania, with the aim of 
eliminating abuses of the undefined and very broad concept of a 
secret. 
  In the hope that these demands will be considered as soon as 
possible, the association expresses full solidarity with all 
efforts to defend and develop press freedom in Albania. 
  [signed] Prec Zogaj, chairman of the Presidium of the 
Association of Professional Journalists. 

