Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, by David </F>
Davenpower, in Belfast on 22 January -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Announcer] It is nearly six weeks now since Albert 
Reynolds and John Major issued their Downing Street Declaration 
aimed at securing a cessation of violence in Ireland. But 
there's still no sign of the Republican movement coming up with 
its response. Britain insists it won't clarify the document for 
Sinn Fein, but that party says it cannot decide its position 
without clarification. The past week has seen the two 
governments attempting to put fresh impetus into the initiative. 
Also in the past week, it became possible legally to broadcast 
interviews with members of Sinn Fein for the first time in 21 
years. So, when our northern editor, David Davenpower, met the 
Sinn Fein president, Gerry Adams, in Belfast yesterday, he asked 
him first to respond to the observation of the deputy leader of 
the SDLP [Social Democratic and Labor Party], Seamus Mallon, on 
the issue of self-determination. Mr. Mallon had said that under 
that heading, there wasn't a whisker of a difference between the 
declaration in Downing Street and the Hume-Adams document. 
  [Begin recording] [Adams] Well, Mr. Mallon is wrong. And, I 
mean, one has to be a bit patient because in all these matters 
party political people, especially people in leadership, always 
have a temptation to advance their own party political platform. 
So, obviously, if Mr. Mallon was right the IRA leadership, 
which last year endorsed what was called the Hume-Adams, surely 
having endorsed that they would have speedily moved to embrace 
the Downing Street Declaration. John Major rejected, in a very 
public way in the British House of Commons, and insulted in a 
very public way John Hume, and at Brussels did exactly the same 
thing in the joint communique. So he clearly saw a difference 
between what is called Hume-Adams and what is now the Downing 
Street Declaration [words indistinct] put the thing back. And 
this is quite clear, if the British think, genuinely seriously 
think that Sinn Fein is playing for time, why don't they call 
our bluff. We are not playing for time. The British Government 
have never engaged positively on this issue since we started to 
move forward on a peace process. And we shouldn't go into side 
tracks around this. We live here. Major doesn't. Major is a 
lame duck prime minister. A man who goes from scandal to 
scandal, from crisis to crisis .... 
  [Davenpower] That's all very well, Gerry Adams, but just 
spell out for us, if you will, this crucial difference between 
the Hume-Adams principles and the Downing Street Declaration. 
Where's the problem? 
  [Adams] Well, the, first of all, first of all, if there is 
no 
difference, or if those who say there is no difference, they 
should then clarify what is clearly not obvious at the moment. 
Secondly, if there is only a narrow gap, or even if there's a 
wider gap, we must move to bridge that gap and if the 
governments move I will respond positively to the move also. 
  [Davenpower] We know all this, but what is the difference? 
  [Adams] Well, I'll tell you the difference now, but what I'm 
pointing out is, notwithstanding the difference, that we must 
move to bridge the difference. Now, what was envisaged in the 
Irish peace initiative and what was outlined was that the Irish 
people as a whole, exercising the right to self-determination, 
the British Government accepting that as a policy objective, the 
Dublin government accepting that as a policy objective, and 
within a broad time frame, which wasn't agreed, but within a 
broad time frame, moving us all in that direction. In other 
words, the British joining the persuaders. The British moving, 
with Dublin. And all of it done in consultation with ourselves 
and seeking the consent and the maximum consent and 
participation of the Unionists. Now that clearly, if that is 
contained in the Downing Street Declaration, then I wish, I am 
anxious, I want to be convinced that that is the case. The 
standoff from my point of view is intolerable. It's silly and 
it's bizarre that a British Government which says it has a 
settlement won't explain the basis of that settlement. 
  [Davenpower] But most of what you've outlined is in fact 
contained in Paragraph Four of the Downing Street Declaration. 
If we just refer to here the relevant section is that the 
British Government agree that it's for the people of the island 
of Ireland alone, which is what you want, by agreement between 
the two parts respectively, to exercise their right of 
self-determination, and the British Government's representative 
here, Patrick Mayhew, has further said that any conclusion is 
possible as a result of that act of self-determination --even a 
united Ireland if that's the conclusion, so be it. 
  [Adams] Well you see, well that is making, if I can say so, 
a 
virtue out of a necessity. If the Irish people have the right 
to self-determination it isn't up the British to have any say in 
how that right should be exercised or even to put in any 
predetermined end to that. But the questions which, David, 
which run from that -- I mean are we now to accept that the 
six-county state is a nation, that the six-county state has the 
right to national self- determination, or are we to accept that 
a united Ireland is dependent upon Patrick Mayhew. What, if the 
Irish people have the right to self-determination of course we 
have always had that right [as heard]. I mean Ireland has only 
been divided for the last 70 years and if the right's been 
denied us how do we exercise that right? 
  [Davenpower] If that's the nub of it then, you want a vote 
-- an all-Ireland vote -- on the same day to decide which way 
the island proceeds politically? 
  [Adams] Well, we cannot even collapse the principle of 
national self-determination into one of being a mere vote. 
National self-determination is the right of a people, of a 
nation, without any outside impediment to determine their own, 
as far as their own economic affairs, their own political 
affairs, their own social affairs. Now that is 
self-determination in terms of the United Nations and of other 
universal declarations and of how it has been exercised now. 
  And in any of the discussions which, for example, John Hume 
and I had, we said that the Irish people as a whole have the 
right to self-determination, we said the majority of people of 
Ireland accept this, we said that there is not agreement on how 
that should be exercised: that part of our task has to be to 
agree on how that right should be exercised. 
  But one thing is clear, from any democratic position the 
British Government have no right to any say in how the people of 
this country, 32 counties of this country, exercise our right to 
decide our own future, and that is bedrock, and for the British 
to, on the one hand, address that issue and then, from the other 
hand, to appear to be qualifying it so heavily as to 
predetermine the future, appears to me to be so vague and so 
obscure and so semantical that it needs clarification. 
  [Davenpower] But what are you going to do with the million 
Protestants, the million Unionists, living in this part of the 
island of Ireland, who don't want to know, and whose property 
and whose businesses are being blown up by people in your name 
just this week? 
  [Adams] Well, first of all, the Unionists have no reason to 
move, none whatsoever. For the last 70 years and before that, 
but particularly for the last 20 years, the Unionists' position 
has been underwritten by British governments. Until the British 
Government joins the persuaders, until the British Government 
says to the Unionists -- your future rests with the rest of the 
Irish people, and we want to help to bring that about, we want 
to move, we want to cooperate -- now we as Republicans and 
Nationalists and everyone else have to appreciate the real 
concerns that Unionists have about their future in an 
all-Ireland context, and I think we have to be flexible, and I 
think that we have to reach out, and I think that we have to 
develop a whole process of what we have called national 
reconciliation. 
  Now, the conflict that has consumed everyone here for the 
last 20-odd years, no section of the people here have any 
monopoly on suffering out of that. Every section of our people 
in this state and the people in Britain, and people throughout 
all of Ireland have suffered as the result of the 
institutionalized violence, the wide range of armed actions by 
all of the factions involved, and the complete disruption of 
life in this state, so that must be brought to an end. 
  [Davenpower] But still, effectively, don't those million 
Unionists represent a million vetoes? Don't they actually hold, 
they can in a practical way, block political progress along your 
chosen road? 
  [Adams] Of course they can, and they have been doing so. But 
what about the Nationalists in this state? Have the 
Nationalists consent? Is it not required? Is a Nationalist -- 
is there a Nationalist veto going to be awarded? I mean, where 
are we going to get here if we all get into a situation of 
everyone having a veto? And I go back to my Fermanagh remarks. 
I mean, if one wants to clarify the six-county area -- and I'm 
not, I'm totally opposed to repartition. But I'm just looking 
at -- if you reduce democracy to mathematics, you know, why not 
one county? Why not West Belfast? Why not Derry or South Down, 
or Armagh or Tyrone? Why not get into that nonsense? And I 
think when you get into that it's just, it's so, it's such a 
crazy conclusion that one has to then come back out of it and 
say, right, let's look around the broad principle of national 
self-determination. How do we best rule, how do we best govern 
ourselves? 
  [Davenpower] Where does your stance on the whole issue of 
Unionist consent now lie? Because when you agreed your 
principles with John Hume, you agreed that consent and 
allegiance was essential for any political progress, that's 
Unionist consent and allegiance. Yet this week in a speech here, 
in Conway Mill, you seemed to be moving away from that. You 
derided the whole notion of Unionist consent; you said that the 
British Government only needed it when it suited them. Where do 
you stand? Do you -- do you feel now that Unionist consent is 
an absolute prerequisite for any agreement? 
  [Adams] I, you cannot have an agreement unless all sections 
of our people, and this particularly is aimed at the Unionists, 
can come to an agreement with it. So their consent is obviously 
and absolutely necessary. But to use that notion and that very 
necessary attaining of consent as a precondition not to move to 
me is just crazy. We're very -- you know, look back on the last 
20 years. What have the Unionist leaderships -- and I think 
they're out of step with grass-roots Unionists in this -- but 
what have the Unionist leaderships initiated or agreed to or 
volunteered in terms of improving the situation? Not one of the 
very modest reforms on housing, on any other issue which was at 
the nub of the civil rights campaign. Some of them will even 
tell you, some of the Unionist leaderships will tell you that 
there is never discrimination, even yet! Where did all of the 
talks, all of the initiatives from way back in 1970 through 
Sunningdale, through Darlington, through the Hillsborough Treaty 
-- what movement did the Unionists make towards that? And in 
all of my criticism of Unionism, I have to say that they behave 
as they behave because the British Government (?come in) and 
underpin their position. I mean look at the relationship 
between Molyneaux and Major. Look at the issue of 
clarification. Ask yourself, is the reason why John Major is 
refusing to give clarification to Sinn Fein because he fears 
losing the support of the official Unionists? 
  [Davenpower] But to return to the nub of the impasse at the 
moment -- what you call this intolerable standoff -- it seems to 
me that the British Government has swallowed a great deal of 
Hume-Adams in the wording of the joint Downing Street 
Declaration. It's swallowed the notion of a united Ireland being 
a reasonable aspiration. It's swallowed the entire notion of 
self-determination for the Irish people as a whole. Why can't 
you go to the IRA and say, look what we've achieved; this is 
enough, lay down your guns now? 
  [Adams] But David, we never need a British Government to 
tell us that a united Ireland is a reasonable [words indistinct] 
this fact, please, even former taoiseachs [prime ministers] 
never asked, even though this Dublin government has probably 
done more to try and resolve the problem than predecessors, they 
never asked for a British Government to merely recognize the 
aspirations as legitimate ones. They asked them to move, to do 
something about it, to activate, to come in behind the process, 
to become persuaders. Now, the IRA is quite capable of reading 
the joint declaration for itself. Derry doesn't need me or 
anyone else to go and interpret it for it. The person who has 
the responsibility to do that is John Major. Now, I said, as 
part of the broader peace process, and the peace process is 
about demilitarization. When I was asked the question by a 
journalist in the IRISH TIMES about the IRA, and I said that 
this, as one of the strands of the peace process, that I sought 
to get what I called the package, a proposition which I could 
bring to the IRA, and which I hoped would allow the IRA to make 
definitive decisions about the conduct of its [word indistinct]. 
Now, I don't have such a proposition to put to the IRA. The 
IRA have said, as John Major has said, that they won't make 
unilateral, they won't take unilateral actions. (?Thirdly,) in 
the course of the summer, and I think that this is a fact which 
should not be lost sight of, Sinn Fein and the British 
Government in the course of protracted dialogue and contact, in 
which there was elaborations and clarifications given by both 
sides, and there was no -- from the British point of view -- 
notion of a settlement. So, if I could just take a rest for a 
second, here we have these discussions going when they had no 
settlement in mind, and they were given clarification. Now, 
they say they have the basis for a settlement and they won't 
give clarification. So it seems to me that that is a very 
bizarre attitude to this. But notwithstanding this, in the 
summer of last year the British Government proposed to us 
delegation meetings with Sinn Fein. And we successfully 
negotiated it out with them the political basis for those 
discussions and the broad conduct of those meetings, and they 
said and have said so for some time before this, this would be 
better, have a better chance of working if there was no IRA 
campaign, if the IRA stopped its campaign, if the IRA lowered 
its campaign, if the IRA did less. And at the request of the 
British Government that proposition was put to the IRA. And the 
IRA agreed to suspend its action [words indistinct] to the 
British Government, and the British Government walked away from 
it. It was on the eve of the Maastricht controversy, it was on 
the eve of the leadership crisis that Major is still involved 
in, it was coming up to Commons votes, it was at a time when 
they started to (?flirt) with the official Unionists. But, 
nonetheless, and regardless of the reasons, the fact is that the 
IRA has in fact, in order to, if you like, enhance the 
possibility of talks and the outcome of talks, had agreed to 
suspend its (?conflict). And that was turned against it and the 
British Government told lies about it, and Major, and Major 
tried to use it to cause confusion in Republican ranks. That, a 
British Government which behaves in that very disgraceful way 
has first of all no real interests in engaging in a real and 
genuine peace process. And secondly, that anything that would 
be presented as by the British Government to the IRA has to be 
one which doesn't have the same baggage as that which engaged 
both sides last summer. But I'm also saying that I'm still 
anxious and still believe that the broad peace process is going 
to bring us about a negotiated settlement. I think we're in a 
critical phase of it. I think the onus is very clearly upon the 
British to move us out of this phase. and I think we are going 
to move out of it. How long it takes is a question that has to 
be asked of John Major. 
  [Davenpower] But if the IRA were prepared to offer a 
cease-fire of two weeks duration during the summer, why can they 
not make that gesture, that monumentally courageous gesture that 
John Hume has dubbed this, of calling a cease-fire now at what 
you acknowledge is a critical stage of the peace process? 
  [Adams] Because it's, because, and this is a matter [word 
indistinct] matter absolutely for the IRA to decide upon, 
because it doesn't see that it has the basis in terms of the 
current phase of the peace process.... 
  [Davenpower] It doesn't feel that it has got enough from 
the British, is that what you are saying? 
  [Adams] Well, what it has from the British is a 
free-standing 
statement which is a masterpiece of ambiguity. Which, which 
James Molyneaux says, and is not contradicted by the British, 
has nothing in it for Nationalists. Which John Major says is 
not a time scale for a united Ireland, is not, in fact, heading 
towards a united Ireland. Which, if I can put it to you like 
this, Major says, and this is the language he uses, now you 
don't hear this language being used in South Africa, or the 
Palestinian-Israel process, he throws down a gauntlet. He then 
says that if the IRA stops that Sinn Fein will go through a 
12-week decontamination process. Now this is the language he is 
using to people who (?vote) for us in this state. They have to 
go through a decontamination process and then we can talk to 
British civil servants about how the IRA can surrender its 
weapons. Now, is that a serious, is that, I mean, is that what 
people, what your listeners seriously think anyone could bring 
to the IRA? 
  [Davenpower] If John Major hadn't made the speech, to which 
Republicans apparently have taken exception, in the House of 
Commons on the afternoon of the joint declaration, would you 
have a sufficient package to bring to the IRA? Is the joint 
declaration without the Major commentary a suitable basis for a 
negotiated settlement? 
  [Adams] Well, he did make the speech. And we can't deal with 
a hypothetical situation. There are three areas, there is the 
declaration itself, there is the contradictory interpretations 
by both governments of it, and particularly the utterances of 
Major and other cabinet ministers. And then there is where or 
how does this declaration fit into the peace process? And I 
have to bring you back again to the start of the interview. 
This, this, I mean, this declaration came well along the road 
of a peace process, this declaration came at the end of a year 
which had seen frenzied activity to try and build peace. So it 
is a response to that and a product of that, and what 
Republicans, you see, and Nationalists have to apply ourselves 
to, is this merely almost a counteroffensive by the British, is 
this sort of a government which didn't want to be in open 
confrontation with the Dublin government trying to get together 
some arrangement to deal with the crisis? And a government 
which is almost in a permanent crisis, to deal with the crisis 
of that time. Or is it genuinely a [words indistinct] a process 
in which we can move ahead. I mean, that's the broad context in 
which this has to be viewed. And the commentary, the 
understanding of the prime ministers is crucial to this. I mean 
it's their statement, they told us last year only governments 
can take initiatives, which is a bit strange, but there you are. 
They told us only governments can take initiatives, and this is 
their initiative. They told us there isn't a solution. So, 
where do we go? What is the next step? And why do we have to 
wait? Why in the middle of a situation where people are, as we 
sit here probably, planning to kill other people, where you have 
armies out there -- Loyalist army, British Army, Republican 
army, why do we, why do the British Government put a barricade 
up of nonclarification and hide behind it and engage in 
megaphone propaganda with Sinn Fein? Why can't they provide for 
Sinn Fein what they have provided for the other parties? 
  [Davenpower] As you say, across Northern Ireland it's a sad 
reality that people are probably planning to kill other people, 
some of them in your name, some of them the so-called godfathers 
of the IRA. Could I ask you at this juncture: What is the 
precise nature of the relationship between your party and the 
IRA? 
  [Adams] Well, Sinn Fein is not the IRA and this needs to be 
clearly said again and again and again. And the IRA is not Sinn 
Fein. I wouldn't try to distance myself as an individual 
Republican from the IRA. I think it would be dishonest, I've 
never tried to do that. I think it would be intellectually 
dishonest, and I think it would be immoral. I accept as a 
Republican leader, as I think other political leaders have to 
accept, a responsibility for what is happening here. But I 
don't lead the IRA. I am a leader of Sinn Fein. Sinn Fein is 
engaged in developing (?unarmed) strategies. Sinn Fein has been 
involved in a long evolution of policy and of strategy going 
back almost over a decade. Most of it missed because of the 
problems created by our censorship. And the main function of 
Sinn Fein now as a political party is to build the peace 
process; and the political priority for me, and the personal 
priority for me, is to assist in enhancing and developing and 
moving that whole process forward. I want to see an end to the 
IRA. I want to see an end to all the organizations which have 
citizens of this country engaged in armed actions. I want to 
see an end to it, I want to see a peaceful progress being made 
towards, as a Republican, I want to see an independent Ireland, 
but a peaceful development towards an accord which everyone can 
give their allegiance to. 
  [Davenpower] But is Sinn Fein subject in the rules of the 
Republican Army to the IRA? 
  [Adams] Not at all, not at all, that's a nonsense. 
  [Davenpower] Well, you said yourself that Sinn Fein was on a 
par with the IRA while still recognizing the army as the supreme 
authority. That's in an interview in 1984. Has that changed? 
  [Adams] My position has consistently been of developing Sinn 
Fein from almost being a poor second cousin, that we all come 
from the same broad constituency. 
  [Davenpower] Is the IRA still the supreme authority in the 
Republican movement? 
  [Adams] Not at all, not at all. The army deals with its 
armed struggle and Sinn Fein deals with its unarmed struggle, 
and Sinn Fein will take decisions openly and democratically at 
our [word indistinct] meetings, that's local level, or at [word 
indistinct]. And we never go to some anonymous grouping of 
people, having come to some democratic conclusion, and say, oh, 
is it OK for us to do this. We move forward, and clearer and 
clearer in recent times you can see how Sinn Fein can actually 
bring about, from a Republican perspective, a situation where 
the IRA in a multilateral way can move into a demilitarized 
situation. 
  [Davenpower] OK, so the relationship is one that's evolving. 
It's evolved from the days in 1984 when you were in a position 
to say that the IRA was the supreme authority. Could it evolve 
to a position where Sinn Fein would break with the IRA? 
  [Adams] Well, it isn't a matter of Sinn Fein breaking. 
There is no organic connection between Sinn Fein and the IRA 
but I have to stress once again that I wouldn't seek to distance 
myself from the army and from all of those people who are in 
prison at this moment, from the suffering of this action of the 
Republican community. But what we have to do is to move the 
situation on, until there is no reason for armed actions by any 
faction, Republican, British or Loyalist, in this part of our 
country. 
  [Davenpower] You see, despite your fine words about the 
allegiance necessary from Unionists and Loyalists, it seems to 
many people that the IRA, part of the Republican family, is 
engaged in what is essentially a sectarian war. It's shoppers 
on the Shankhill Road that get killed, not shoppers in the Falls 
Road, by the IRA. It's businesses in Coleraine and not in 
Republican or Nationalist towns that get blown up and burnt. 
  [Adams] Well, any actions which have been in any way hurtful 
or harmful and, in fact, which have killed civilians, I would be 
highly critical of and have been highly critical of, and have 
done so on the spot right away (?as I can). My, my, er ... 
  [Davenpower] But you felt you had to carry the coffin of the 
perpetrator of one of the worst of those outrages. 
  [Adams] David, I don't think that we should try to heap upon 
that young man the responsibility of all that has happened here 
in the last 25 years, and when I say that I will not distance 
myself from the IRA, the people in the Shankhill Road who were 
killed are my people. The Shankhill Road's only 200 yards from 
where we are doing this interview. At the same time I wouldn't 
add any further offense to Thomas Begley's family, to his mother 
and family, his mother and father, and I think it's important 
that we don't go for the type of tabloid or knee-jerk reaction. 
  [Davenpower] But how did you feel? That outrage happened at 
a critical stage in the peace process. How did you feel? 
  [Adams] Well, at any time when these things happen, and 
particularly because I'm a Republican, when they occur as a 
result of IRA actions, of course there is a feeling of 
despondency and I, like anyone else, I'm appalled. But the only 
political response there can be, from my point of view anyway, 
is to try not to engage in the politics of the last (?tragedy), 
but to try and move to a situation where these actions don't 
happen. And, and -- I mean, one can go through the last 20 
years and pick out -- highlight atrocities, and, God forbid, but 
until we get a peace process going that's what's facing us up 
the road. 
  [Davenpower] But until the IRA show the courage to turn 
their 
back on violence, we're locked into the politics of the next 
atrocity; the next atrocity committed by the IRA could determine 
the future of this peace process, or could bring it to a halt. 
  [Adams] Of course there's always that potential. But there 
is a need for a demilitarization of the situation, and when one 
zeros just on the IRA and when you offer up -- whether it's a 
person or just a debating point that the British Army is a 
legitimate -- er -- army, no, if the British Army wasn't here, 
if the British weren't here there would be no IRA. I mean, if I 
can say so at the risk of frightening the managers of RTE, if 
the British Army were back in uniform in Dublin tomorrow there 
would be young people from all parts of Dublin, back again 
engaged in armed resistance. 
  [Davenpower] That's a hypothetical situation, you seem to be 
able to enter into hypotheses when it suits you... 
  [Adams] Well, that is, it's also the historical situation 
that when the British Army were in your part of the country they 
were met by a ruthless band of people who were criticized in 
those days by the establishment in the same way as Republicans 
are criticized... 
  [Davenpower] They had a mandate that you have just this week 
acknowledged that the IRA currently do not. 
  [Adams] What mandate did they have? 
  [Davenpower] They had a popular mandate, they had a mandate 
from the first day... 
  [Adams] [words indistinct] What about Pearse, what about 
James Connolly? 
  [Davenpower] Are you saying that... 
  [Adams] What about old Wolf Tone and Robert Emmet? What 
about 1916? Did they go out and fight elections before 1916? 
  [Davenpower] The fact is that the IRA currently... 
  [Adams] Was Plunkett elected? 
  [Davenpower] The fact is the IRA currently have support of 
a tiny minority electorally north and south. 
  [Adams] OK, the IRA doesn't contest elections, and I made it 
quite clear last week that the IRA doesn't have any electoral 
mandate, but I mean, I'm just making the point to you that Irish 
revolutionary resistance organizations don't generally have 
electoral mandates. I know of none of them, in fact, that had 
such a mandate. 
  But what -- a mandate comes from the conditions in which 
they 
exist and the mandate for the IRA today comes clearly from 
British occupation of this part of the country, and it has to be 
said that there is enough support for the IRA throughout 
Ireland, and particularly in this part of Ireland, to allow it 
to continue its campaign in perpetuity. 
  But what I want to do, as one who has spent 30 years in this 
struggle, and who has been not just at the funeral of Thomas 
Begley, but at the funeral of a lot of Republicans and also of 
ordinary civilians and neighbors and friends and family members, 
is to bring an end to a situation where an IRA, in the military 
situation which the British successfully brought about -- the 
British militarized this situation -- what I want to do is to 
bring about a demilitarization of it. 
  [Davenpower] Well what most people want to hear is the 
message that the IRA is prepared to lay down its arms, now may I 
put to you this hypothesis, that the reason you cannot go to the 
IRA and tell them to lay down their arms is because Sinn Fein 
north and south doesn't have that mandate -- it doesn't have a 
mandate, it's got 1.61 percent of the population south of the 
border, 10 percent of the population here -- and that once the 
gun is taken out of the Republican movement, Sinn Fein is 
emasculated. 
  [Adams] Not at all. Sinn Fein is in the state it's in in the 
26 counties for historical reasons, many reasons that were 
self-inflicted... 
  [Davenpower -- interrupting, Adams continues speaking in 
background] Oh come on, with all but one candidate losing his 
deposit in the last general election? 
  [Adams] This is the first time that you or anyone else in 
RTE, or that RTE listeners and viewers will have heard a Sinn 
Fein spokesperson for over 20 years. How do we expect people to 
vote for a party which the state seeks to make invisible, which 
the state seeks to strike mute, to make dumb? One cannot take 
away the potential that there was in the last 25 years to 
develop Sinn Fein in the 26 counties and that potential has been 
wrecked absolutely by censorship now. 
  Let me say this: I, as a human being the same as you, don't 
want to be locked into conflict. I want to pursue whatever 
aspirations and ambitions, which aren't all that remarkable, in 
a peaceful and normal way. I happen to live and have been born 
in a military state, in a police state, in the northeast of our 
country, which denies me my rights as a citizen. I still strive 
as a leader of Sinn Fein to develop unarmed strategies to 
counter this, but others in the context of British occupation 
take up arms and that is the reality of the situation. 
  [Davenpower] But John Hume, the joint author of those 
principles, says that there's enough in the declaration for the 
IRA to lay down their arms. He says the justification for armed 
struggle is gone. 
  [Adams] Yes, but John Hume has never been engaged in armed 
struggle. And John Hume knows very well, and he has actually 
made it clear again today that clarification should be given to 
the Republicans -- he has made that quite clear on a number of 
occasions, so let's not, you know, separate John Hume's 
particular attitude to that issue and John Hume's courageous 
commitment when he has been vilified by all sorts of people. 
  [Davenpower] But you've hedged your bets on whether the 
joint declaration has actually removed the justification for 
violence. You've said it remains to be seen whether it has or 
not. Has it? 
  [Adams] Well, first of all, that isn't a question for me. 
I'm not engaged in violence. 
  [Davenpower] No, but you have an input, presumably. 
  [Adams] No, I'm not engaged in violence, David. And I think 
that's very, very important, that Sinn Fein is not engaged in 
violence. Sinn Fein, in fact, has had 13 of our people killed 
in as many months recently. Now.... 
  [Davenpower] I accept that. But the Republican movement is 
engaged in violence. 
  [Adams] The IRA is engaged in armed struggle. The IRA 
haven't moved to endorse the Downing Street Declaration. 
  [Davenpower] OK. Another theory that has been put about is 
that one of the reasons for your inability to recommend to the 
leadership of the IRA that they should lay down their arms is 
that you are afraid of a repetition of the disastrous cease-fire 
from the IRA in the Republican movement's point of view in 1973, 
when the Republican movement effectively split. 
  [Adams] Well, first of all -- first of all -- the IRA will 
come to a decision to come to a cessation by taking its own 
counsel. Secondly, I wish to assist that process, as I have 
said. I've been part of a broad peace process and hopefully as 
a strand of that by finding a proposition to put to the army 
leadership. The reason I haven't put that to the army 
leadership isn't because I'm afraid of anything. 
  It's because I don't have it to put to them. Now, can I also 
say, there is going to be no Republican split. There's no 
potential for it, there's no reason for it, and there's no proof 
whatsoever anywhere in the broad Republican family of any 
indication that there's going to be any Republican split. So 
these things, while they're legitimate enough curiosities for 
journalists to investigate, the only reason why I cannot put 
forward any proposition to anyone is because there isn't a 
proposition there. And the reason there isn't a proposition 
there is because the British Government have decided not to give 
clarification to the people that I represent. It's OK to give 
clarification to everyone else but not to Sinn Fein. 
  [Davenpower] As we draw towards the conclusion of this 
interview -- and we've gone on I think for longer than we 
anticipated -- can I ask you about some features of your letter 
to John Major? I know you were angry that this was made public, 
but you do say that, in the letter, that the document that was 
forwarded to the British Government by the Irish Government 
earlier this year in April or June -- I can't remember which 
month -- was a suitable basis and contained enough of the 
Hume-Adams principle to have been endorsed by the IRA. What 
happened to that? 
  [Adams] I don't know. I mean this is, this is one of the 
imponderables of the situation. And, you see, all of this as 
we, as we develop it may become more difficult and more 
confusing. I remember on a number of times when there was a lot 
of deadlines being set and false hopes being raised where I 
said, look this situation is liable to be protracted, it's 
dangerous, risky, and people are going to try and confuse us. 
All I know is that the propositions that John Hume and I were 
working on were that both governments were informed at every 
stage in the development of those proposals. And all I know is 
that John Hume and I came to an agreement -- that that was given 
to the British Government. And I also know, and you know, that 
publicly the IRA endorsed it. Now, where did it go? Ask John 
Major. 
  [Davenpower] Is it your opinion that the Brussels summit 
actually saw the end of those proposals that you had put 
forward, that you had inputted into the system? 
  [Adams] Well, I am told that there is enough of them in the 
Downing Street Declaration. That's what I'm told. And if that 
is the case then I would like to move ahead on that basis. On 
what I can read myself I see no evidence that that is the case. 
But I come back to what I said earlier, that there's a gap 
between what is now on offer and what is required. Let us move 
to bridge that gap. Let's not get back to pre-April '94 [as 
heard]. Let's move forward to try and bring about peace. Let's 
not let the British Government squander -- you know, If I can 
come back again just to this whole issue -- are the Irish people 
-- whether we're Unionists or whether we're Nationalists, 
whether we have no politics at all -- are the Irish people not 
intelligent, reasonable, sensible enough to shape out some 
arrangement to live on this island without half-baked English, 
failed English, politicians being sent here by a lame duck prime 
minister to set out the rules and regulations and restrictions 
and innovations for our future? And I would argue very strongly 
that we -- we're no better than anyone else in the world -- but 
we deserve the chance to shape our own future free from British 
interference. And we can make accommodations with the 
Unionists, and we can come to an arrangement with the Unionists 
which satisfies all of the people of this island. And that's 
what the peace process should be aiming to do -- not setting up 
barricades as the British do, not the British (?being) 
reluctantly making the minimum movement possible over the 
longest protracted period -- but bringing about a conclusion 
which will allow people to live peacefully together. And David, 
as I've said many times, the other big issues of prosperity and 
everything else that our people deserve. 
  [Davenpower] Even if the IRA don't call a cease-fire -- and 
as you say they were prepared to call a cease-fire last year but 
apparently not at the moment for whatever reason -- even if they 
don't, do you think that there is the prospect for peace in '94? 
  [Adams] I think the prospect for peace, without putting any 
deadline on it, remains now. I think the potential for peace, 
the opportunity for peace, is still there. It deserves and 
requires cooperation from all the people involved. I am 
prepared to cooperate to bring that about. Whether John Major 
is or not remains to be seen. So far he hasn't shown much 
evidence and must be moved to that position. [end recording] 
  [Announcer] And that was the Sinn Fein president, Gerry 
Adams, speaking in Belfast yesterday afternoon to RTE's northern 
editor David Davenpower . 

