Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wolfgang Mock - "Demand for Increase in the </F>
Research Budget and for Tax Relief on Research Investment"] 
  [TEXT] 
<H3>  SPD: Intergenerational Commitments Can Be Built Only Upon 
the New Technologies. </H3>
  SPD research policy makers like Josef Vosen find "the 
growing 
loss in importance of research and technology policy" to be 
"nothing short of irresponsible." By the middle of the projected 
decline, the speaker on research policy of the SPD [Social 
Democratic Party of Germany] calculates that "the share of the 
research budget will sink below 2% of the federal budget 
for 
the first time in 20 years. And in view of these numbers there 
can certainly be no question" of a research policy initiative by 
the government coalition. 
  More than in the past years, the German Social Democrats now 
also see in research and technology policy a way out of the 
economic crisis. What was previously the province of a few 
specialists in the Federal Parliament is increasingly becoming a 
prime-time topic. Still in mid November, Rudolf Scharping 
allotted unusually much space to research and technology policy 
at the party conference in Wiesbaden. Also Oskar Lafontaine, the 
economic and political forecaster of the Social Democrats, has 
always granted it a central roll in the "future perspectives for 
a model Germany." 
  In the "Government Program 1994" Commission, a task force 
under the direction of Peter Glotz is currently developing a 
concept of a research and technology policy for the SPD's 
government program. It is supposed to be presented early next 
year. 
  An early outline of this conceptualization is already taking 
shape. "Above all," according to Vosen, "we must again give 
research policy the importance it deserves." In the view of SPD 
research policy makers, that should also have an discernable 
affect on the research budget. According to Ocsar Lafontaines' 
criticism of the government, "German unity is [still] not being 
reflected at all in the research budget." And still at the 
beginning of December at the SPD's science forum, Peter Glotz 
calculated that, since the beginning of the current government 
coalition, federal expenditures for research have fallen from 
121 German marks per capita in 1981 to 97 German marks in 1992. 
  "If the research budget had grown since 1986 the way the 
federal budget has," an SPD paper on research policy says, it 
would "mean a sum of about 12.5 billion German marks" for the 
1994 budget of Federal Minister for Research and Technology Paul 
Krueger. In fact, Krueger has only just 9.47 billion German 
marks at his disposal. Therefore, the Social Democrats want to 
increase the research budget by at least a "minimum" of one 
billion German marks. 
  The differences between the government coalition's and the 
SPD's ideas on research and technology policy are notably small 
in principle regarding the question of financing. Both are 
primarily concerned with improving the competitiveness of the 
German economy and improving living conditions. 
  There are, however, significant differences in the details. 
The Social Democrats want to again take up the nearly expired 
middle class assistance for senior citizens and make more money 
available for the transfer of technology. A significant 
difference is also their demand, which is supported by industry, 
for tax benefits for investments in the area of research and 
development. 
  At the same time the SPD wants to again take up the expired 
"Humanization of Work" program and direct more funds into the 
research and development of renewable energies and energy-saving 
technologies. 
  The SPD wants to decrease funding above all for basic 
research in large-scale research directions, for space flight 
and high-energy and elementary particle physics. The 
possibilities for intervening in the factors controlling human 
heredity would have to remain under federal control. 
  For the SPD, research has thus also become an "extremely 
important element in policy concerning the labor market and 
industry." "Social security benefits can only be safeguarded 
though the jobs of future generations," according to the Social 
Democrats' conceptualization of research policy. 
"Intergenerational commitments can be built only upon the new 
technologies." 

