BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 15 (CTK) -- The Slovak coalition 
government has not yet agreed on how to fulfill its pledges to 
the Council of Europe and the Hungarian minority parties in 
government nor on how to implement the screening law in 
practice, Premier Jozef Moravcik said after the Coalition 
Council session today. Negotiations will continue on Friday [17 
June], he said. 
  Moravcik's cabinet promised Egyutteles [Coexistence] and the 
Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement (MKDH) to fulfill two 
pledges it made to the Council of Europe in return for their 
support in government. The first pledge concerned the use of 
Hungarian names in their original form, and has already been 
approved by the Slovak Parliament. The second pledge -- to 
allow the use of bilingual road signs in areas with a sizable 
ethnic minority -- was not approved in a vote two weeks ago, and 
since then the government has not known how to proceed in 
meeting its obligation. 
  Moravcik believes the "road sign bill" should be put before 
parliament again unchanged, given that only one vote was lacking 
in the last vote. The government is in disagreement over 13 
communities named after Slovak historical figures, for which 
certain coalition deputies do not want Hungarian names to be 
used. "If we don't get them (the 76 votes needed) we will leave 
the question to the new parliament," Moravcik said. Elections 
are to be held on September 30 and October 1. 
  The Coalition Council also discussed the screening (or 
"lustration") law, passed by the federal parliament in 1991, 
which forbids communist-era functionaries to hold important 
official posts for five years. The law is scarcely applied in 
Slovakia. In spite of much speculation and mutual accusations, 
mainly directed at Economy Minister Peter Magvasi, the 
lustration certificates of cabinet ministers -- revealing 
collaboration or not -- have not yet been published. The 
official reason for the delay is that the law does not specify 
whether lustration should be conducted by the Interior Ministry 
or by the Slovak Security Information Agency, as it has been 
until now. 
  "We did not agree on how to resolve this," Moravcik stated. 
He conceded that debate on amendments to the law was being held 
up by the Democratic Left Party (SDL), the strongest coalition 
party, which wants to abolish the law. He said the matter may 
remain unresolved until the elections. Disagreement within the 
coalition has not reached a scale that threatens the functioning 
of the government, Moravcik said. 

