BFN 

  [Text] Malaysia remains cool to the idea of creating a 
multinational naval force involving ASEAN countries and the 
United States to maintain security in the region. 
  Nor is it keen to expand military cooperation beyond the 
Five 
Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA), which obliges the United 
Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore and Malaysia to 
"consult" each other in the event of an external threat. 
  This was apparent from the remarks of Malaysia's Chief of 
Navy, Vice-Admiral Datuk Mohamed Shariff Ishak, when he spoke at 
a maritime security forum in Kuala Lumpur on Tuesday. 
  "We welcome multilateral cooperation," he said in response 
to 
a question at the forum organised by the Malaysian Institute of 
Maritime Authority. "The only snag preventing the Royal 
Malaysian Navy from expanding cooperation with neighbouring 
countries is the lack of assets. 
  "We've confined cooperation to ASEAN and the FPDA. Others 
would like to play games with us, but we lack the assets to do 
this." 
  To defence planners who are proposing closer military 
cooperation between ASEAN and its allies and the creation of a 
multinational naval force to police the region, Datuk Shariff 
was being polite. 
  While Malaysia may not have the military hardware to engage 
in large-scale naval exercises, this is hardly the main reason 
for its lack of enthusiasm to expand existing regional security 
alliances. 
  Datuk Shariff's response could be a reflection of the 
residual mistrust and rivalries in the region, despite the 
willingness among ASEAN states to discuss mutual security 
concerns in recent years. 
  Many of the problems which inhibit wider military 
cooperation 
are rooted in ideological outlook or history, if they do not 
stem from disputes over territory. 
  Indonesia, for example, is unhappy that Malaysia is 
fortifying its rival claim on Sipadan island, off the Sabah 
coast, by developing it as a tourist resort despite Jakarta's 
strenuous objections. 
  Both the Philippines and Malaysia have claims in the 
potentially mineral-rich Spratlys, and there is the dormant 
Philippine claim over Sabah. 
  Recently, some Malaysian defence officials criticised 
Thailand's naval build-up particularly its acquisition of a 
helicopter carrier, as a move to bolster its offensive 
capabilities. 
  While these bilateral problems per se will not lead to armed 
confrontation between ASEAN states, they inhibit military 
cooperation on a wider scale. Thus defence planners who 
envisage ASEAN as the nucleus of a regional naval force allied 
to the US to keep peace and security in South-east Asia are 
ahead of the times. 
  So, too, is the idea of expanding the FPDA to include 
Indonesia and the US to keep the vital Malacca Straits open. In 
a paper on small navies in the Asia-Pacific, American defence 
analyst Joseph Morgan suggested that Malaysia, Singapore and 
Indonesia could use their small navies to patrol the straits in 
conjunction with the US Seventh Fleet. 
  On paper, such an arrangement certainly looks reasonable in 
terms of bolstering the region's security. It also fits well 
with the US, which may be forced to draw down drastically its 
forces in the Pacific if its budget deficit worsens. 
  However, the American concept of cooperative engagement with 
its ASEAN allies can only remain on the drawing board, for now 
at least, given Malaysia's stand. 
  And in the absence of an immediate threat to rally the ASEAN 
countries, there is no urgency to create such a multinational 
naval force. 
  For Malaysia, pursuing the ideal of a Zone of Peace, Freedom 
and Neutrality (Zopfan) means essentially keeping the big powers 
out of the region. 
  Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed has said there is no need 
for 
the US Seventh Fleet to patrol the region. 
  "We don't believe in security set-ups ... The era of 
colonisation is over," he told reporters last month. 
  "The presence of American military might in the US is 
sufficient to persuade people not to be aggressive, just like we 
want the military of China to remain in China and the Japanese 
military to remain in Japan." 
  Given this attitude and the different perceptions on 
security 
threats, it is sensible for the ASEAN Regional Forum to avoid 
discussion on contentious issues in its first substantive 
meeting in Bangkok in July. 
  It is critical that the fledging 18-member forum, created by 
ASEAN last year to discuss regional security issues with its key 
dialogue partners, starts off on a right footing to build up 
mutual confidence. 
  It could begin with more consultations among forum members 
to 
ensure transparency and coordinated moves to deal with piracy in 
Southeast Asian waters. 
  By making haste slowly, the Bangkok conference could be the 
first step on the long road to a new regional security alliance. 

