Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fernando Alonso] </F>
  [Text] San Jose, 7 Feb (PL) -- Shortly after his election 
victory was confirmed, Costa Rican President-elect Jose Maria 
Figueres Olsen pledged to work to improve the situation of his 
country's poor sector. 
  In an interview granted to PRENSA LATINA, the National 
Liberation Party [PLN] winner of the presidential elections 
reiterated the social democratic administration, which will come 
to power on 8 May, will work for the eradication of poverty in 
Costa Rica. 
  "Just as we promised during the election campaign, the 
central part of our program will be the creation of 
opportunities for all Costa Ricans, especially for the poorest 
sectors," according to Figueres Olsen, son of three-time 
President Jose Figueres. 
  "The social policy of the next PLN government will not be 
based on the giving of alms. Our social policy will be an 
instrument of change to facilitate everyone having access to 
education, health, and a worthy home," according to the 
president-elect, who promised to explain the phases of his plan 
within the next few weeks. 
  After saying the social programs implemented by the 
government of President Rafael Angel Calderon left many negative 
consequences for the population, the president-elect promised to 
change them so as to avoid paternalism and the manipulation of 
the needs of large segments of the population. 
  "The improvement of the country's living conditions and the 
fight to eradicate dengue, malaria, and other diseases that have 
emerged in the last few months as a result of the abandonment of 
health practices will also be a priority," the president-elect 
said. 
  Concerning the economic duties his government will perform, 
the president-elect said one of the priorities will be the 
strengthening of economic stability as a result of handling 
properly the country's public finances to prevent the state bank 
from running into debt. 
  "In addition," he said, "we must take a step forward in the 
development of Costa Rica by increasing productivity and 
efficiency to improve the quality of life and facilitate the 
unity of the economic policy with social matters." 
  Asked about the next government's foreign policy, Figueres 
Olsen spoke in favor of strengthening ties with Central America 
and the Caribbean, including Cuba, to promote regional 
development. 
  Concerning international financial organizations, Figueres 
Olsen said Costa Rica will have a more active participation in 
these forums so that the policies that are promoted in these 
organizations are more in touch with the needs and interests of 
the developing countries. 
  The president-elect, a 39-year-old industrial engineer who 
was graduated in the United States, defeated Miguel Angel 
Rodriguez of the Christian Social Unity Party in his first 
attempt by getting 49.7 percent of the votes out of 1.881 
million eligible voters. 
  Criticized by certain sectors of his party, Figueres Olsen 
described his election as a victory over the neoliberal policies 
of Miguel Angel Rodriguez, who, after accepting defeat, wished 
success to the president-elect for the 1994 to 1998 term. 

