Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By special staff correspondent Hou Chung-wen (0186 0112 </F>
2429): "Central Propaganda Department Tightens Controls Over 
Press; Guangdong Reorganizes Five Newspapers and Four Magazines"] 
  [Text] The CPC Central Propaganda Department called a work 
conference a few days ago in Nanning, Guangxi on rectifying 
newspapers and magazines, which demanded that localities rectify 
newspapers' weekend editions and leisure publications and 
tighten controls over reports in this area. 
  In line with the Central Propaganda Department conference, 
from the end of 1993 onward, localities have been rectifying 
local newspapers and magazines. In Guangdong, where the 
cultural market is relatively active, authorities in charge of 
ideological matters recently launched a large-scale 
rectification of newspapers and magazines within the province. 
So far, four magazines, five newspapers, and three major 
provincial publishing houses have been punished to various 
degrees. Such a situation and trend is rarely seen in Guangdong 
news and publishing sectors. 
  It is understood that this rectification movement is not 
targeting the "sleazy" tabloids, but almost without exception 
respectable newspapers which are quite influential in the 
province and country, apart from some newly founded newspapers. 
That receiving the "capital sentence" -- having its operating 
license revoked -- was LUCHAO [Travel Tide], a monthly devoted 
to tourism published by the Guangdong Travel Publishing House 
run under the Guangdong Provincial Travel Bureau. The story is 
that the provincial department in charge held that some articles 
run by the monthly were guilty of propagating "sex culture" and 
"encouraging pre-marital cohabitation." The magazine has been 
disbanded and all the editorial and news staff had jobs arranged 
by the tourism bureau. 
  XIWANG [HOPE], a cultural monthly published by the Guangdong 
Provincial People's Publishing House, was "suspended for two 
issues for rectification." Another publication touted as a 
Sino-foreign joint venture, XIANDAI HUABAO [MODERN PICTURES], 
was ordered to "spell out the origin of its foreign capital" and 
was accused of "becoming the mainland counterpart of NEXT 
MAGAZINE [a general interest and lifestyle magazine which has 
voiced support for democracy in China] of Hong Kong." Cultural 
monthly WENHUA GUANGCHANG [CULTURE SQUARE], published and run by 
the Huacheng publishing house of Guangdong has been suspended 
for rectification for allegedly "preaching bourgeois 
liberalization views." 
  As for newspapers, DONGFANG YEBAO [ORIENTAL EVENING POST], 
run by the Guangzhou City Cultural Bureau and XING BAO [THE 
STAR] run by the Guangdong Provincial Writers' Association, 
though both newly established, were born at the wrong time and 
were punished with "continuing to publish while rectification is 
going on," with the reason that they "exceeded the scope set by 
their application and approval," with the former being further 
accused of "failing to build the character of an evening post." 
  NANFANG ZHOUMO [SOUTHERN WEEKEND], under NANFANG RIBAO -- 
the 
mouthpiece for the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, caught 
the wrath of the Public Security Ministry last July with a 
"highly inaccurate article," but was saved from suspension under 
the protection of Xie Fei, Guangdong CPC secretary and CPC 
Central Committee Political Bureau member, although they were 
ordered to write an "in-depth" criticism by the Guangdong 
authorities. The two criticisms have been circulated to all the 
province's news and publishing units and cadres at or above 
section head rank and departments by the Guangdong Provincial 
Propaganda Department in the form of official documents to serve 
as an example. 
  YUEGANG XINXI RIBAO [GUANGDONG AND HONG KONG INFORMATION 
DAILY], which is jointly run by YANGCHENG WANBAO, the Guangdong 
Provincial Economic Committee, and the Yuehai Group Company, has 
recently been accused of being the source of the recent crazy 
rises in grain prices for running articles analyzing grain price 
movements on the mainland. Its chief editor and assistant were 
summoned to the provincial propaganda department to be lectured. 
They were criticized for the reports and ordered to "toe the 
party line and not speak in a middle position." 
  The noteworthy thing is that both LUCHAO and XING BAO were 
punished for the same crime of "running articles favoring second 
births" and "opposing family planning." 
  News reforms in recent years in China have resulted in 
newspapers expanding pages and editions to increase their 
readability and entertainment value. But from the second half 
of 1993, the Central Propaganda Department has repeatedly sent 
out a signal of rectification, pointing out that newspapers were 
printing words about sex culture and high consumption and had 
been targeted by officials in charge of ideological matters. 
Meanwhile, some economic newspapers have also been accused of 
misleading readers for reporting economic problems closely 
related to the people's livelihood. 
  Therefore, many of those in charge of these newspapers and 
magazines are at a loss and are carefully and cautiously 
shelving development plans for 1994 and adopting a "defensive" 
strategy. 

