Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Silvio Buzzanca report: "Napolitano Attacks Forza Italia: </F>
`Demagogic and Untrustworthy'"] 
  [Text] "Evasive," "demagogic," "clumsy," "parochial," 
"irresponsible." These are some of the adjectives that lower 
house speaker Giorgio Napolitano used yesterday morning [2 
March] at his press conference for foreign journalists, during 
which he took stock of the 11th Parliament. The adjectives 
apparently had only one target -- [Forza Italia leader] Silvio 
Berlusconi and his electoral program. 
  Napolitano, speaking in the same forum from which Berlusconi 
made one of his first political speeches, urged all the forces 
to display "a sense of responsibility" and an "awareness of 
Italy's international responsibilities," avoiding "clumsy 
provincialism." He went on: "Judging from Forza Italia's 
lengthy program, it seems that not everyone remembers the 
pledges made in Maastricht, our cooperative relations with the 
IMF, and the objectives approved by parliament in its most 
recent budget deliberations." Furthermore, the lower house 
speaker added, there is a lack of clarity "about public finance 
reform and how to reduce the state debt." 
  These missing elements prompted Napolitano to say: "You 
cannot make proposals, however questionable and fragmentary, 
with regard to taxation and public spending and not say 
something about the framework of objectives and obligations for 
public finance reform." The lower house speaker said that these 
obligations and objectives must be honored, "otherwise the 
result will be a lapse into the demagogic, the evasive, the 
untrustworthy." 
  Napolitano perceived another strange omission in Forza 
Italia's program: "I am amazed that Forza Italia's program does 
not include any reference to the media; it is evidently believed 
that everything is perfect in this sector in Italy." According 
to the lower house speaker, the present situation is on the 
contrary not at all satisfactory: Indeed, he expressed the hope 
that one of the new parliament's first steps will be to revise 
the Mammi Bill. 
  Napolitano said that "it is parochial to ignore the analysis 
and debate that Europe's governments and political and cultural 
forces have been conducting for some time on issues such as 
industrial policies and how to boost the economy, especially 
employment." He pointed out that work is ongoing for these 
issues in Spain, Germany, and France, and cited the white paper 
presented by European Commission President Delors. 
  His argument seemed like a direct response to Berlusconi's 
promise to create a million jobs. The lower house speaker 
explained that to dismiss everything "as statism means 
reinstating old ideological disputes; it is an example of clumsy 
parochialism." He added: "It is quite simply irresponsible to 
put forward vague liberalist recipes for resolving the problems 
of unemployment." 
  Napolitano never named Berlusconi. He later explained that 
his remarks should be interpreted not as an attack on Berlusconi 
but as "an attempt to "stimulate a debate and, if necessary, a 
controversy over matters of substance, over programs, and not 
the mutual attaching of labels between the political forces at 
play." [quotation marks as published] 
  Precisely in order to avert any institutional controversies, 
Napolitano indeed did not answer a question concerning the 
debate prompted by [President] Scalfaro's remarks about private 
education. 
  There was a prompt response from Arcore [Berlusconi 
residence], from Berlusconi's spokesman, Antonio Tajani. Forza 
Italia accused the lower house speaker of abusing his 
institutional position to make "slanderous accusations against 
Forza Italia." According to the Berlusconi supporters, 
Napolitano's remarks, which are linked to [Italian Popular Party 
Secretary] Martinazzoli's attacks, smack of the "historical 
compromise." 
  During his press conference Napolitano formed a positive 
assessment of parliament's work, and urged people to draw a 
distinction between this and the judicial status of some of its 
members. He also said that he opposes an amnesty in order to 
resolve the kickbacks scandals, adding that he considers a 
resumption of the debate on the latest proposals made by Justice 
Minister Conso a possibility. 
  But he was most anxious to stress that "some people would 
have us believe that it is possible to govern tomorrow starting 
from scratch." Napolitano warned, however, that "only 
proceeding from the results of the 11th Parliament is it 
feasible to initiate a program of development." According to 
the lower house speaker, the next parliament (and, he specified, 
not the government) will be a "constituent" one. This, he 
concluded, is because it is not reasonable to discard the work 
done by the Bicameral committee on institutional reforms. 

