Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Chen Yun (7115 5366): "A Prelude to New </F>
Enterprise Reforms -- What One Sees and Hears at the State 
Economic and Trade Commission"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 14 Jan (XINHUA) -- Recently people from 
various localities and enterprises who come to visit the State 
Economic and Trade Commission suddenly number more than before. 
They come not to ask for money, preferential policy, or 
authorization for certain projects. They come to recommend 
themselves to be the experimental units of modern enterprise 
system. 
  One day around the end of last year, this reporter had an 
appointment to interview Chen Qingtai, vice minister of the 
State Economic and Trade Commission. However, the manager of 
the Shanghai No. 2 Textile Machinery Company was already in Chen 
Qingtai's office early in the morning. The manager requested 
that his company be included in the 100 large and medium 
state-owned enterprises selected to try out the modern 
enterprise system. Soon afterwards, some representatives of the 
Shanxi Provincial Government came to visit Chen directly from 
the railroad station after an overnight train ride. They 
strongly recommended Taiyuan City be included in the 10 cities 
selected for the experiment on "accelerating the structural 
readjustment, reducing unreasonable burdens, and replenishing 
the working capital of enterprises." Before the Shanxi comrades 
left, comrades from Anhui's Bengbu City came to submit their 
application for the pilot project. 
  After a long wait, this reporter at last entered Chen's 
office for the interview. With hospitality toward visitors 
still lingering, Chen Qingtai said: In the reform of 
state-owned enterprises this year, we will continue to implement 
the "Regulations on Changing the Management Mechanism of 
Industrial Enterprises Owned by the Whole People." In addition, 
we will select 1,000 enterprises for the experiment, by stages 
and in groups, on state-appointed board of supervisors. We will 
select 100 enterprises for the experiment on modern enterprise 
system. We will also select 10 cities for the experiment on 
reducing the burdens of enterprises and establishing a sound 
social security system. At present, more than 20 cities have 
applied for playing the experimental role of the 10 cities, and 
more than 130 enterprises have applied for the role of trying 
out the modern enterprise system. In the meantime, we have 
consulted with other departments concerned and initially 
selected 33 ministerial enterprises as the first group to 
experiment on state-appointed board of supervisors. 
  In the last two months, the State Economic and Trade 
Commission has done a series of foundation-laying work for these 
enterprise reform pilot projects. It has run two seminars on 
modern enterprise system and trained a large number of cadres. 
It has inspected 100 enterprises with respect to their 
implementation of the new accounting system. It has clearly 
understood the situation of 9,400 enterprises selected to 
conduct experimental appraisal of fixed assets and circulating 
funds. It has done a great deal of investigation and 
coordination before the selection of enterprises for 
experimental reforms. 
  Both the leadership and the rank and file have been busy 
with the new round of enterprise reforms. Chen Qingtai, who 
came from a large state-owned enterprise, remained coolheaded. 
He said: Many forceful reform measures have been introduced 
this year. Although the state has fully considered state-owned 
enterprises' current situation in the course of promoting 
reforms, short-term pains are inevitable. For instance, in the 
past enterprises turned to the government when they ran into 
difficulty because the government could lower taxes and allowed 
them to retain more profits. This road has now been basically 
blocked. Another example is that the merger of different 
exchange rates, which will benefit export enterprises, will also 
bring difficulties to some import enterprises. Among 
enterprises, "some will rejoice while others will grieve...." 
For this reason, we should pay attention to studying new 
circumstances and problems from time to time. Currently, 
workers, staff members, factory directors, and departments are 
all raising questions. We should, therefore, make particular 
efforts to intensify reform-related publicity and training, 
mobilize all propaganda and training organs, and give everybody 
a clear idea of the new reforms in terms of substance and 
implementation; otherwise, people will not support us for lack 
of understanding. 
  On the first work day after New Year, this reporter again 
visited the State Economic and Trade Commission to conduct an 
interview. A meeting was in progress at the commission; it was 
held by the office established to implement the 
soon-to-be-promulgated "Regulations on Supervising and Managing 
the Property of State-Owned Enterprises." From a 10-minute 
interview with Wei Dongjin, deputy director of the commission's 
Department in Charge of Enterprises, the reporter gathered the 
following information: The office, which was founded just more 
than a month ago, has made fairly ample preparations for the 
promulgation of the "Regulations on Supervising and Managing the 
Property of State-Owned Enterprises." The "Opinions on 
Implementing the 'Regulations on Supervising and Managing the 
Property of State- Owned Enterprises'," which have been revised 
many times, are being co-signed by various departments. The 
preliminary drafts of the "Charter of the Board of Supervisors" 
and the "Detailed Rules and Regulations on Supervisory Work" 
have been completed. The "Interim Measures for Managing Changes 
in the Property Rights of State-Owned Enterprises" and the 
"Index System and Evaluation Measures for Preserving and 
Increasing the Values of State-Owned Assets" are being drafted. 
Additionally, preparations have been made for holding news 
briefings and providing training material following the 
promulgation of the "Regulations on Supervising and Managing the 
Property of State-Owned Enterprises." We can say that 
everything is ready, and all we need is an "east wind" [the 
decisive factor]. 

