Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lanzhou, February 18 (XINHUA) -- The appeal of 
remote northwest China, with its snow-covered mountains, vast 
prairies and deserts, colorful folk customs and ancient 
religious sites, is growing among domestic and overseas tourists. 
  Northwest China consists of Shaanxi, Gansu and Qinghai 
Provinces, and the Ningxia Hui and Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
Regions. The area makes up one third of the total Chinese 
territory. 
  Over the past few years the three provinces and two 
autonomous regions have made active efforts to improve basic 
facilities and tap their tourism resources. 
  The endeavor has in turn brought about a rapid development 
of 
tourism in the area. Tourists of different nationalities are 
now common sights in the streets of the once desolate cities of 
the northwest. 
  Reliable statistics show that the area receives more than 
one 
million overseas tourists and several million domestic 
travellers a year. Tourism has now developed into an important 
source of revenue for northwest China. 
  For instance, in Shaanxi, which abounds in historic sites 
and 
cultural relics, earnings from tourism account for 10 percent of 
the local income. 
  Northwest China has 13,300 historic sites and scenic spots 
spread all over the region. 
  Gansu, dubbed a "treasure house of cultural relics", has 
opened 108 historic sites and scenic spots to overseas tourists. 
To cater to the growing trend of "returning to nature" the 
province built 24 forest parks of different styles in 1993 alone. 
  Qinghai Province, on the loess plateau, is not lagging 
behind 
its neighbors. Besides improving facilities at existing tourism 
resorts, the province has developed many new scenic spots. 
  Shaanxi has more than 300 new scenic spots. In addition, the 
province boasts over 2,020 places which enjoy key protection as 
historic sites or cultural relics. 
  Tourism programs with special features include expeditions 
to 
the sources of the Chang Jiang and Yellow rivers, hunting in the 
Qilian mountains, grotto and "roof of the world" tours and 
border market shopping trips. 
  Gansu has introduced 5.4 million U.S. dollars of foreign 
funds to develop local tourism resources. For example, a center 
for the protection, research and display of the Dunhuang 
grottoes treasures is funded partly by Japanese interests. 

