BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Coptic Pope Shanudah by 'Abdallah </F>
al-Sinnawi; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [Al-Sinnawi] What were the motives of the attack 
on the al-Muharraq Monastery? According to your information, 
was it an isolated incident or was it premeditated? 
  [Shanudah] I do not know the motives of those people; they 
are in their minds and hearts, and I cannot express them. But 
the incident apparently took place as follows: Some monks were 
seeing off guests to a microbus outside. The monastery's door 
was opened. A terrorist happened to be passing by in his car. 
The door was open, the man had a machine gun in his hand, and 
the chance was there. He fired his bullets and killed two monks 
and some guests. It was merely an opportunity that he found too 
good to miss. 
  [Al-Sinnawi] Do you believe that the attack was not planned? 
  [Shanudah] I believe that it was not planned or 
premeditated. 
No one knew that the monastery's door would be open at that 
particular time and that some monks would be out seeing some 
guests off. It was merely a chance incident. 
  [Al-Sinnawi] Is it not possible that the attack was an 
attempt, even an individual one, to create sectarian sedition? 
  [Shanudah] The term "sectarian sedition" was invented by 
[the 
late President] Anwar al-Sadat. We had never known this term 
before al-Sadat. These people want to disrupt public order in 
general, and if this can be achieved by attacks on foreign 
tourists, operations against police, bombs against banks, or 
attacks on Copts, then it is fine. Even trains are now being 
attacked; the aim is to disrupt security. Moreover, the 
monasteries date back to the Roman era. They are like castles, 
with high walls; it is not easy to attack them. I have no doubt 
that the attack was individual and largely carried out by 
chance. We cannot talk about "chance," unplanned sedition. 
  [Al-Sinnawi] When was the last time a monastery was 
attacked? 
  [Shanudah] This is the first time in the modern age. The 
whole thing means that the attacker had no feelings of love and 
was far from right. What was the sin of some monks or monastery 
guests? Monks are virtuous, humble worshipers who have nothing 
to do with any disputes or rivalries. Why should they be 
attacked? But do not forget that the al-Muharraq Monastery is 
located in Asyut, which is raging with violence. 
  [Al-Sinnawi] Some people say monasteries and churches are 
storing weapons for the decisive time. 
  [Shanudah] What is the decisive time? 
  [Al-Sinnawi] When the prestige of the state is about to fall 
and the groups of political Islam come close to governing. 
  [Shanudah] No. The state's prestige cannot be lost. Anyway, 
this is a rumor that has been proved false and that we have 
repeatedly denied. If some people are exaggerating things to 
the point where they say without thinking that the monasteries 
contain weapons arsenals, then my response to them is clear: 
  First, our monasteries and churches are open to anyone, 
including non-Christians. Our Muslim brothers frequently visit 
these places for social and national functions. I say it once 
more: You have carte blanche, go see for yourselves whether 
there are weapons. 
  Second, the Christians do not carry arms and will not do so 
unless they are provided by the state, the Armed Forces, or the 
police. How can the Christian, whose religion teaches him a 
life of modesty and tells him to turn his other cheek to whoever 
slaps him, bear arms against his brothers in the homeland, 
against his society? At the end of al-Sadat's presidency, large 
numbers of Coptic bishops, priests, and members of the laity 
were arrested. Did you ever hear anyone calling for the use of 
weapons? 
  Third, where is the Ministry of Interior on this matter? Why 
has it not yet discovered the alleged arsenals of weapons in the 
monasteries and churches? The churches and monasteries are open 
to it. Why, throughout the past years, have we not heard or 
read in the newspapers about arms being seized in a monastery or 
church? 
  [Al-Sinnawi] Could the deteriorating security situation 
provide the necessary reason for some Copts to think about 
forming militias or starting to train in the use of weapons? 
This is a possibility that has evidence to prove it. 
  [Shanudah] It is impossible to have such militias, and also 
impossible for the security situation to deteriorate to such an 
extent. Is it possible that some individual troublemakers, or a 
handful of individuals, could lead to a complete breakdown of 
the security system and the collapse of the state? I completely 
rule out a scenario like the one you are talking about. I do 
not only rule it out, but I regard it as impossible. It is 
intended to create an atmosphere of fear among people; no more, 
no less. [passage omitted] 
  [Al-Sinnawi] After the Hebron massacre and its 
repercussions, do you feel satisfied with your stances prior to 
the massacre regarding banning visits to Jerusalem until Copts 
and Muslims gain access to it together? What would your stance 
have been had the head of the Egyptian church responded to the 
calls for normalization at once, before the massacre had taken 
place? 
  [Shanudah] We follow a basic principle that we are convinced 
of from the bottom of our hearts. Many things happen, and we 
shall continue to have the same stance. When some tourist 
agencies continued to advertise in the newspapers about trips to 
Jerusalem because they believed that the Gaza-Jericho Agreement 
had found a solution to the Palestinian problem, I said: 
"Listen to me people. The problems have not yet been resolved. 
The situation has not changed yet, despite the Gaza-Jericho 
Agreement." Israel is still placing obstacles in matters such 
as the area of Jericho, the crossings, and other issues. 
  This agreement, which many did not like and others 
considered 
a mere step, required tremendous effort to be achieved. There 
is a popular saying: We accepted defeat, but even defeat 
rejected us. 
  I said: The situation is not over yet and our stance 
continues to be the same. I published many statements in the 
public newspapers and Coptic magazines. I still cling to the 
stances I expressed in these statements. Then, the Hebron 
massacre took place to prove that what we had said was right. 
Travel agencies, whether owned by Muslims or Copts, should 
place their national principles and the general interests of the 
whole Arab homeland before all else. They should not profit 
from tourism or use superficial advertising that takes advantage 
of people's love and respect for Jerusalem. [passage omitted] 
  [Al-Sinnawi] After the al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre, the 
al-Azhar shaykh called for liberating Jerusalem. He said that 
this is the duty of every Muslim. Is there a possibility of 
coordinating stances with the office of al-Azhar shaykh on this 
issue? 
  [Shanudah] Yes. We call on him to discuss with us the 
practical stances for liberating Jerusalem and retrieving our 
Islamic and Christian holy shrines. [passage omitted] 

