Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Way Out is Still Not in Sight For </F>
Japan-U.S. Economic Framework Talks"] 
  [Text] With the 11 February Japan-U.S. summit talks 10 
days away, the Japan-U.S. economic framework talks are entering 
the 11th hour. U.S. Trade Representative Kantor will arrive in 
Japan on 1 February and emergency Japan-U.S. ministerial talks 
will be held in Tokyo. The United States aims to break the 
deadlock in the Japan-U.S. negotiations on the three sectors of 
"government procurement, "automobile-auto parts" and 
"insurance," but differences between the two countries still 
remain wide. Hence, the two countries are likely to repeat a 
heated exchange shortly before the summit talks. 
  The Ministry of International Trade and Industry [MITI] 
says: 
"The heavy burden of politics has now been removed ...." The 
Foreign Ministry, MITI, and other ministries in charge of the 
Japan- U.S. economic framework talks now feel relieved. They do 
so because the United States was in the mood to carefully watch 
the future of the Hosokawa government and the political upheaval 
in Japan was casting a chill on the talks. 
  A working-level meeting on the government procurement 
(telecommunications) will begin on 1 February and the vice 
ministerial talks are expected to be held this weekend. The 
Japan-U.S. economic framework talks will enter the final stage. 
  Invariably, the future of the talks remains uncertain. MITI 
Deputy Minister Okamatsu, who negotiated with the U.S. side 
until last week in Washington, told a news conference that "both 
sides made clear their positions." In this way, he revealed the 
existence of differences between the two countries. 
  What has become an issue between Japan and the United States 
is setting an "objective criteria" to measure foreign access to 
the Japanese market. Negotiations on the automobile and auto 
parts and vice ministerial talks held in Washington discussed a 
U.S. proposal for setting the objective criteria, but failed to 
hammer out an agreement. While the United States is seeking a 
future indicator, Japan is making clear its position that it 
does not care about simply monitoring the past data, but "it 
cannot accept anything that will become a de facto numerical 
target." As a result, no compromise is in sight. 
  The U.S. Government has decided to send U.S. Trade 
Representative Kantor to Japan because it is irritated with a 
rough sailing in negotiations between bureaucrats of the two 
countries. A senior MITI official suggests that "the United 
States might intend to sound out Japan's intentions through 
contacts with cabinet ministers." The United States, however, 
takes the view that the enactment of a package of political 
reform bills in the Diet has bailed the Hosokawa government out 
of the political crisis and U.S. Trade Representative Kantor 
will thrust upon Japan to cut taxes deeply and go along with the 
U.S. proposal for setting the numerical targets. 
  Japan cannot accept the U.S. proposal for setting the 
numerical targets, but it is hard for Japan to rebuff the U.S. 
proposal on the eve of the Japan-U.S. summit talks. It seems 
that at the ministerial talks, Japan will be pressed to make 
hard choices. 

