Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 21 Mar (NA) -- U.S. Vice President 
Albert Gore this afternoon concluded a visit of slightly over 15 
hours to Argentina. During the visit he met President Carlos 
Menem to analyze, among other issues, the official draft bill on 
pharmaceuticals patents and the steps being taken to prepare for 
the Americas Summit to be held in Miami in December. 
  The number two man at the White House -- who has visited 
Argentina within the framework of a mini-tour of South American 
countries, including stopovers in La Paz and Brasilia -- 
completed this morning a heavy agenda with a meeting with 
Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella and a speech at the opening 
ceremony of the First World Conference on Telecommunications 
Development, which is being held in Buenos Aires. 
  At the end of the almost one-hour meeting between Menem and 
Gore, the Press Secretariat released a short communique pointing 
out that the visiting official "again praised Argentina's recent 
economic achievements and President Menem's personal commitment 
to the approval of the law on patents protection." 
  No other official reference was made to the pharmaceuticals 
patents bill, although diplomatic sources have admitted that the 
issue was one of the central topics discussed at the meeting. 
Emphasis was also given to antinarcotics legislation and the 
role performed by Argentina in the "peace missions" organized by 
the UN Security Council. 
  According to the communique released by the secretariat 
headed by Raul Burzaco, the U.S. vice president congratulated 
Menem for "his commitment to the democratic institutions, his 
efforts in favor of essential economic reforms, his commitment 
to supporting the international nonproliferation norms, and the 
constructive role played by Argentina as a member of the UN 
Security Council." 
  The communique reported that Gore praised President Menem's 
proposal to create a humanitarian aid contingent within the UN 
framework, which would be called the "white helmets." 
  The note also reported that one of the main issues discussed 
by the two presidents referred to details of steps being taken 
to prepare the so-called Americas Summit, which has been 
scheduled for December in Miami. 
  The note stated: "President Menem expressed satisfaction 
over President Clinton's invitation. The two leaders discussed 
some general issues related to this summit, including democracy, 
good administration, trade, and investment." 
  About Argentina's possible admission into the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the communique only reported that 
the two officials discussed ways to intensify trade ties between 
the two countries in the light of the recent ratification of the 
treaty signed by the United States, Mexico, and Canada. It did 
not mention that the United States allegedly conditions this 
admittance to approval of the patents law. 
  The issue, however, was discussed, and Menem himself pointed 
out the importance of recognizing the intellectual property of 
medicines when he admitted to journalists that this issue is a 
central element in U.S.-Argentine relations. 
  In short comments made at the Hall of Busts of the 
Government 
House, Gore said that the meeting with Menem "was profitable, 
because it had to do with topics of interest to both countries." 
  "We are equally concerned about improving our peoples' 
standard of living," Gore said. He also expressed his 
"admiration for President Menem's leadership." 
  The U.S. vice president arrived at Casa Rosada at 1035 amid 
intense security, which included the deployment of almost 100 
men inside and outside the government house. 
  Menem received the visitor at the entrance to the White 
Hall. 
He was accompanied by Minister Di Tella, State Intelligence 
Secretariat head Hugo Anzorregui, Antinarcotics Struggle 
Secretary Alberto Lestelle; and Argentine Ambassador to the 
United States Raul Granillo Ocampo. 
  Gore was accompanied by a reduced entourage comprised of 
Alexander Watson, assistant secretary of state for 
inter-American affairs; Richard Feinberg, national security 
senior director for inter-American affairs; and U.S. Ambassador 
to Buenos Aires James Cheek. 

