BFN 

<F P=106> [Claire Trean report: "Bill Clinton, the European"] </F>
  [Text] It has been rare to see Francois Mitterrand so 
jovial in a television performance, and as relaxed in the 
presence of a U.S. President, as was the head of state on 
Tuesday, 7 June during the interview he granted in the evening 
to the three main French TV stations along with his U.S. guest. 
In Clinton, Mitterrand has clearly at last found a U.S. 
President after his own heart. 
  There was a sure sign: On at least two occasions in two 
days, the president of the Republic permitted himself to say 
"let's go!" [previous words in English] in public. He would 
never have allowed himself this sacrilege to the French-speaking 
cause in the presence of George Bush, and even less in that of 
Ronald Reagan. Mitterrand was visibly relaxed when he received 
Clinton on Tuesday. Not that his old prejudices against the 
United States have completely disappeared. But now that the end 
is approaching of a presidency whose only principal topic in the 
foreign policy area has been the strengthening of Europe and its 
emancipation vis-a-vis the United States, could Mitterrand have 
dreamed of any better U.S. President than this one, who came to 
France with calls for a "stronger" Europe? Could he have hoped 
for a more flattering image than this double portrait which 
appeared on TV screens on Tuesday? An image of himself serene, 
smiling but tenacious, and the leader of the leading world 
power, youthful, falsely inexperienced, giving the appearance of 
malleability at his sides? 
  Mitterrand's words on Tuesday evening would not have to be 
stretched too much to make him say that the United States has 
finally given itself a Socialist president. A president "who 
should allow us, within the GATT framework, to introduce a 
social clause which would lead to the prohibition of child labor 
and forced labor by prisoners, and which would make 
recommendations with regard to trade union activities so that 
they can no longer be made subject to harassment or 
prohibition," Mitterrand said. In this fight for universal 
social progress, "it is Bill Clinton's United States and France" 
which were at the forefront, Mitterrand insisted. Clinton 
played the game, notably by recalling the social preoccupations 
of his administration faced with the problems caused by the 
extreme "flexibility," as they say, of the U.S. labor market. 
Still, one could not believe one's ears, remembering 
Mitterrand's past diatribes against U.S. liberalism and, in 
particular, his warnings to the former communist countries in 
East Europe against a dangerous fascination for the United 
States. 
  Nor could one believe one's ears when the president of the 
Republic stated that the U.S. commitment in Bosnia was "full and 
complete," as if it was a self-evident truth which he had never 
doubted. 
  Forgotten, therefore, are the repeated calls on the United 
States to accept their responsibilities and stop giving lessons 
when they were not present in the field alongside French blue 
helmets in Bosnia; also forgotten is the sarcasm and bitterness 
against the air strikes advocated for so long by the Americans, 
who only consented to show firmness at a very high altitude. 
  But U.S. policies in Bosnia have indeed changed, and 
Mitterrand's praise on Tuesday was addressed to Washington's 
current commitment to a negotiated settlement and against 
lifting the arms embargo. The fact that [French Foreign 
Minister] Alain Juppe managed to obtain this turnaround from the 
U.S. Administration last month was no doubt related to France's 
U-turn three months earlier, when it proved to be the United 
States' most solid partner in NATO at the time of the ultimatum 
to Serb forces in Sarajevo. But on Tuesday evening, Mitterrand 
did not allude to this episode, which constituted a break with 
presidential policy. 
  U.S. policies have also changed toward the European Union in 
general and France in particular. But the major factor in this 
detente, as Clinton let it be understood on Tuesday, was the 
unblocking of the GATT negotiations right after the Balladur 
government took office. These negotiations had poisoned 
transatlantic relations for years. 
  Finally U.S. policies have changed with regard to security 
in 
Europe and the responsibility it to be assumed by the Europeans 
themselves. The U.S. Administration has largely abandoned its 
mistrust, still maintained under Bush, toward European defense 
projects and the initiatives aimed at undermining NATO, which it 
ascribed to Paris back then. But should we simply rejoice, or 
is there also some reason for concern? We should have no 
delusions: The strong Europe which Clinton is advocating in the 
security field is in line with the current U.S. policy in favor 
of withdrawal and against direct intervention, while allowing 
the United States not ot lose too much in terms of influence. 
Mitterrand's policies were aimed at the large-scale 
redistribution of the Euro-Atlantic cards which is being called 
for in this field. But the dice are far from being cast: It 
will take years for Europe to set up its own security system and 
to define its role with regard to the East European countries 
and Russia, in particular, thus making it possible to determine 
the respective shares of the Americans and Europeans in it. 
  More generally, the conflicts which are currently raging in 
various parts of the world raise the question, beyond the 
efficiency of the United Nations, of the willingness of Western 
countries to intervene in outside theatres. Mitterrand and 
Clinton are the leaders of the two single Western countries 
currently likely to enter these theatres. The least one can say 
is that their declarations about Rwanda on Tuesday are hardly a 
cause for optimism. 

