CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xie Ping (6200 1627): Chinese People's Bank </F>
Policy Study Office: "On Reform of the Specialized Banks." 
Editor's Note: The author delivered this report as a paper at 
the "International Workshop on Chinese Banking Reform and 
Development" in Shenzhen during November 1993. It has been 
abridged for publication in this magazine] 
  [Text] 1. Basic Character of National Specialized 
Banks and Reasons Why Their Reform Is Lagging 
  Greater emphasis on finance and banking and reform of 
finance 
and banking, characterized by a diversification of financial 
institutions, the use of new financial instruments, and the 
development of financial markets, has been going on in China for 
15 years (Xieping et al, 1992). However, these institutional 
innovations have taken place and have been promoted largely 
outside the specialized bank system. The organizational 
structure and the operating mechanisms of national specialized 
banks, which are the main financial business entities in China, 
have not been greatly reformed. In fact, the lag in their reform 
underlies the lag in all of China's finance and banking reform. 
Before analyzing the reasons for the lag in reform of national 
specialized banks, it is necessary to summarize the basic 
character of the national specialized banks (because, it is 
these characteristics that play a very great role in determining 
the internal structure and behavior of China's specialized 
banks): 1) Regionalized structure. From top to bottom, level by 
level, the Chinese specialized banks have set up branch banks 
based on administrative divisions (provinces, cities, 
prefectures, and counties). Consequently, the specialized banks 
are superficially individual banks in a unified national bank 
system when they are, in fact, several thousand relatively 
independent local banks. 2) Internal administrative ranking 
system. For historical reasons, the national specialized banks 
have had the character of government organs since the date of 
their founding. Thus, the banks have fashioned an internal 
"official standard" stimulus mechanism in which the pursuit of 
promotion is the ultimate concentrated expression of the 
individual effectiveness of bank staff members and workers. 3) 
Mixing of policy-related business with business-related 
business. 4) Government plan-controlled credit business. Because 
of the lingering influence of the planned economy model, the 
government regards the specialized banks as credit middlemen for 
plan distributions, and as intermediary institutions for 
payments and settlements, whose business is solely to ensure 
that planned financial distribution activities are performed. 
They have become an operating mechanism whereby production 
proceeds according to plan, and finance is subordinate to 
production plans. In a market economy environment, however, the 
specialized banks do market style business outside credit plans 
insofar as possible with a view to making a profit. In the 
absence of restraining laws and regulations, this kind of 
two-track system of doing business can easily lead to disarray 
in the financial trading order. 5) The industrial division of 
labor pattern among the four large specialized banks. At the 
working level, this industrial division of labor creates a 
situation in which a firm borrows, opens an account, and makes 
settlements only through a single bank, thereby producing a 
pattern in which a bank handles a firm's funds exclusively. 
The bank becomes a firm's largest creditor, thereby making it 
easy for the firm to shift risks to the bank. 6) Unified state 
control over income and expenditures as part of financial 
management. Evaluation of the specialized banks' business 
effectiveness and individual earnings have never been linked to 
profits; instead a semi-administrative agency-style unified 
state control over income and expenditures has been practiced in 
financial management. Some profit retention pilot projects were 
tried with some specialized banks (such as the Chinese Bank of 
Agriculture between 1989 - 1991), but without success. 
  There are two main reasons why it is so difficult to move 
ahead with reforms to convert the specialized banks into 
commercial banks as follows: First are internal reasons, i.e., 
the reasons created by the specialized bank's internal 
microstructure. Second are external reasons. Quite a few 
articles published in China have contained a fairly large number 
of analyses of the external reasons (Zhou Ziyuan [0719 5261 
6678], 1993; Xu Jian [6079 1696], 1992), but analysis of the 
internal reasons have been few. Many articles have said a great 
deal about reforms that the specialized banks should make, and 
they have even gone so far as to provide quite a few ideas about 
the reform steps that should be taken (Xu Maosen [5171 5399 
2773], 1993). However, just why reform of the specialized banks 
has lagged during the past 15 years has never been made clear. 
All these analyses imply one idea, namely, that the government 
has not really pushed reform of the country's specialized banks. 
If the government really wanted reform, it could move ahead with 
reform measures unimpeded. Indeed, many of the reforms that 
China has conducted during the past 15 years have been 
"compulsory institutional reforms" that the government has 
pushed. (Lin Yifu [2651 3015 1133], 1989) But why does the 
government fail to "apply pressure" only on the matter of 
national specialized bank reform. In China, reform of the 
national specialized banks has a bearing on many interest 
groups. To reform or not to reform, how much reform, and reform 
toward what goal depend on whether those that approve, support, 
and push these reforms are in an advantageous position to muster 
relatively more strength against opposing interest groups. (Hu 
Ruyin [5170 3067 6892]. National specialized bank reform is more 
difficult to promote than enterprise reform, foreign tarde 
reform, price reform, agricultural reform and taxation reform 
because these specialized banks play a special role in China's 
modern economic and political life. They have a bearing on 
interests in many quarters. Since this reform would lead to a 
substantial alteration of interest patterns, possibly it would 
be very risky. 
  1. Monopoly Position. The monopoly position of the 
specialized banks is a factor in the lag of reform in two ways: 
First, monopoly interests have led to insufficient motivation 
for internal reform. Now that financial markets have entered a 
situation of strong barriers, and a shortage of money, coupled 
with vigorous demand and a fairly tremendous gap between 
state-controlled interest rates and market equilibrium interest 
rates, the monopoly interests of the specialized banks are 
enormous. Under these circumstances, for the banks, keeping 
things the way they are is preferable to reform that would 
damage their monopoly position. Conversely, some reforms and 
policies that might benefit the specialized banks' monopoly 
position (such as central bank delegation of authority, 
elimination of credit controls, permitting the specialized banks 
to provide full service business, increasing cost deductions, 
increasing bad debt reserves, etc), the specialized banks do 
their utmost to promote. Thus, the course of finance and banking 
reform in China for the past 15 years has been weird. On the one 
hand, progress has been substantial in reforming the central 
bank's monetary policy and the development of financial markets 
while, on the other hand, the specialized banks' monopoly 
position has not changed in the course of reform. Meanwhile, the 
efficiency of these banks has declined, their services have not 
improved, their return on assets rate has fallen, and the 
percentage of their bad debts and overdue loans has risen. 
Second is the outward resistance created by oligopolistic 
interest relationships. By so-called outward resistance is meant 
the united resistance of the several specialized banks to 
external reform pressures. In 1986, 1988, and 1991, several 
efforts were made to implement substantive reform plans for the 
specialized banks, but none of them succeeded. This situation 
shows that since the several specialized banks monopolize the 
finance and banking business, a tacit agreement was reached 
among those sharing a common interest in certain quarters to 
block or weaken the central bank's reform plans or monetary 
policy. In fact, any major decision that the central bank makes 
must obtain the "approval" of the specialized banks before it 
can be put into effect. Sometimes "dialogue and consultation" 
(such as joint conferences and joint reports to the State 
Council) must be employed to solve problems. Unavoidably, the 
central bank must make "necessary compromises." 
  2. The government's related interests and hesitation. The 
government (including the central bank) has never been resolute 
on the specialized banks reform issue. The reasons for the 
insufficient external (government) reform motivation are as 
follows: a) fear that central government's revenues might be 
impaired. The business taxes and profits that China's 
specialized banks pay have always been a main source of revenues 
for the central government treasury amounting to about one-sixth 
of central government revenues. In view of the relatively great 
decline in the percentage of central government's fiscal 
revenues since 1987, this revenue has assumed greater 
importance. Consequently, when a given reform may impair the 
central bank's earnings, the central government usually finds it 
hard to be firm. b) worries about carrying out the government's 
economic policy intentions. For many years, the government has 
declared that the national specialized banks also have 
"macroeconomic regulation and control functions." Government 
direct participation in specialized bank business decisions has 
never changed. This has three aspects: One is that the 
specialized banks are responsible for all policy-related loans 
for government-designated purposes; second, a substantial 
portion of commercial loans flow toward the sectors or 
enterprises that the government favors, particularly loans to 
state-owned enterprises (at interest rates that are lower than 
the market equilibrium interest rate), which is actually a form 
of subsidy; and third, the total amount of specialized bank 
credit has a very great effect on total social demand. The 
prevailing system helps the government regulate and control 
total demand by controlling total credit. Therefore, when the 
existing specialized banking system fits in with the 
macroeconomic control system in certain regards, there can be no 
demand for "compulsory reform" for the time being. c) Certain 
technical factors. In the course of many years of operation, the 
specialized banks have constructed a huge and complicated 
internal system. Were this to be fundamentally reformed, 
government would not be able to deal completely with certainly 
technical matters such as how to split up institutions, 
placement and transfer of personnel, changes in the settlement 
system, rescheduling taxes, accounting and the division of 
accounts for policy-related business and commercial business, 
rescheduling creditors and debtors, relations with local 
governments, etc. Worries about these matter may magnify the 
risks of specialized bank reform with the result that it has 
never been possible to make a decision. 
  3. Other External Factors. The central government, the 
central bank, and the specialized banks themselves are the main 
decision makers in drawing up specialized bank reform plans. 
They consult with each other, and they haggle back and forth. 
However, in this decision-making process, certain external 
factors, or one might say "external conditions for reform" 
frequently become the main topic of discussion, or may even 
become the main factors affecting decisions. These factors 
include mostly the following: Since China has not yet set up a 
modern enterprise system, no strong restraints apply to 
enterprises' credit and liabilities. This is a decisive factor 
influencing the quality of specialized bank assets. No markets 
have yet been set up for the substantial flow of the key 
elements of production; thus, no profit equalizing mechanism has 
been formed. The entire interest rate system remains controlled; 
thus, interest rates cannot truly reflect the money supply and 
demand situation and money's opportunity costs. The finance and 
banking business' taxation system and fiscal system is unfair. 
They frequently have a fairly pronounced administrative 
interference coloration, etc. This situation has produced two 
points of view: One point of view maintains that it is necessary 
to wait until the above external conditions have been reformed 
to a certain extent before reform of the specialized banks can 
make any substantive headway. Only then can some reform measures 
be inaugurated. The other point of view maintains that China's 
current economic environment is not an obstacle to specialized 
bank reform. Both the specialized banks and the aforementioned 
external factors require substantial reform at the same time, 
but reform of the specialized banks happens to be lagging now. 
The author agrees with the second point of view. Actually, 
emphasizing the full necessity for external conditions for 
specialized bank reform is a "chicken or egg" argument for which 
there can be no solution. 
  4. The Non-Support Attitude of Local Governments. Under 
current conditions in China, local governments (particularly 
provincial governments) have no decision-making authority on the 
specialized bank reform issue. However, local governments do 
have substantial power to direct the credit business of 
specialized bank branches. "When the treasury has no money, go 
to the banks," is the usual rule. In the eyes of many local 
administrative officials, the local branches of specialized 
banks are a "second treasury." Therefore, the funds of the 
nationwide specialized banks are cut up by jurisdiction; credit 
is localized; and how credit is used is subject to local 
government interference. The main office not only is unable to 
move money around, but its branch cadres efforts to allocate and 
apportion funds frequently meet with refusal by or "a plea" from 
the local government. This is particularly the case regarding 
the credit business of specialized bank local branches and 
sub-branches, and matters closely related to administrative 
officers' "pet projects," and "career achievements." Frequently 
local funds shortfalls can be made up by having a specialized 
bank branch or sub-branch dun the central bank or the main 
office of a particular specialized bank. Therefore, local 
governments are largely satisfied with the present specialized 
bank pattern and its operating mechanism. They maintain an 
attitude of nonsupport for any reform plan that might change the 
present situation. This nonsupport attitude makes itself felt on 
ultimate decisions via various channels. 
  5. Enterprises Demand for Specialized Bank Reform Not 
Sufficient. As far as state-owned enterprises are concerned 
(particularly for large- and medium-sized enterprises on which 
decisions have a substantial effect), the limitations on 
specialized bank credit are very weak. For them, the specialized 
banks may be termed creditors, but they are actually suppliers 
of funds. The existing specialized bank set-up benefits 
state-owned enterprises. Consequently, the demand of state-owned 
enterprises for reform of the specialized bank is by no means 
urgent. On the contrary, were the specialized banks to become 
real commercial banks, only those able to repay would be issued 
credit. The poor would be scorned and the rich favored. The 
toughening of credit restraints poses a threat to state-owned 
enterprises. For numerous state-owned enterprises that depend on 
credit to carry on, in particular, reform of the specialized 
banks would confront them with the threat of bankruptcy. Large 
numbers of nonstate-owned enterprises are very dissatisfied with 
the specialized banks system because their possibility of 
obtaining credit from these banks is very small. Therefore, the 
urgency of their demand for reform is strong. However, 
nonstate-owned enterprises have no influence in the overall 
decision-making structure. 
  Summarization of the foregoing shows that from the 
standpoint 
of four main interest groups -- the specialized banks 
themselves, the central government, local governments, and 
enterprises -- external motivation and external demand for 
specialized bank reform is not great. This is another way of 
saying that the existing specialized bank system has had a 
"positive benefit" for the above four major interest groups for 
a certain period, and this is also the reason that reform has 
lagged. The fact is that this "positive benefit" stems from the 
tremendous amount of credit that the specialized banks grant 
every year, and this increase comes from the central banks 
credit (basic money) increase. It also comes from an increase in 
the cash balance that society needs in the process of 
monetarizing the economy. It is income derived from the issuance 
of money. During the next several years, the monetarization of 
China's economy will slow; thus, the surplus income that comes 
from currency issuance will decline. On the other hand, the 
specialized bank's loans in being will not turn over; the 
quality of assets will decline; and a latent crisis may appear. 
  2. Challenges that the Specialized Banking System 
Faces 
  The special bank system has been in operation in China for 
more than a decade. As market reforms intensify, the 
shortcomings of this system will become increasingly apparent. 
Therefore, some analysis of the lambasting and challenges that 
the specialized banks have borne in recent years will help 
clarify the objective model for specialized bank reform. 
  1. Development of Specialized Bank Foreign Financial 
Institutions. Since the advent of reform, very great advances 
have been made in the diversification of China's finance and 
banking institutions. The financial reform path formed outside 
of these banking institutions has now entered a new stage. Eight 
small commercial banks, foremost of which is the Bank of 
Communications, (including the Zhongxin Industrial Bank, the 
Guangda Bank, the Shenzhen Development Bank, the Guangdong 
Development Bank, the Fujian Enterprise Bank, the Shekou 
Merchants Bank, the Huaxia Bank, and the Pudong Development 
Bank) have been in business for only a short time. Nevertheless, 
all of their businesses have developed very rapidly. As of the 
end of June 1993, these banks had loan balances totaling 97 
billion yuan, or 4.53 percent of the 2.143 trillion yuan loan 
balance of the four large specialized banks for the same period. 
Their savings balance was 6.9 percent that of the four 
specialized banks. In addition, there are 380 trust investment 
corporations, 3,800 urban credit cooperatives, and 94 
foreign-owned or joint venture banks (or operating financial 
institutions). The financial institutions, other than the four 
large specialized banks, have begun to compete in savings, 
loans, settlements, and foreign exchange business with the 
specialized banks. In addition, the flexibility of their 
operations, their tight internal management, their high assets 
quality, and their superior services have attracted quite a few 
talented people and business from the specialized banks. In 
places such as Shenzhen and Guangdong, in particular, the market 
share of the specialized banks had declined to around 50 
percent. The administrative institution character, the 
cumbersome nature, the ossified management, and the not very 
high efficiency of the specialized banks puts them in an 
increasingly unfavorable competitive position. 
  2. The International Onslaught. With the development and 
widespread application of science and technology in every 
country of the world in recent years, and with the tremendous 
increase in the socialization and even the degree of 
internationalization of production and markets, financial 
reforms have been conducted on a global scale. In particular, 
the business and the organization of commercial banks have 
undergone profound and tremendous changes. These changes have 
entered China through international exchanges, and they stand in 
strong contrast to China's specialized bank system. The "model 
effect" that the development of banking outside China has 
engendered in China has stimulated pressures for reform in 
China. These pressures come from both within the specialized 
banks themselves and from outside. One onslaught that is 
particularly apparent is the outflow from the specialized banks 
of many expert cadres to foreign banks and other financial 
institutions. This has had a very great impact on the 
development of business in the specialized banks. The ossified 
system, technological backwardness, and the loss of skilled 
personnel poses an even greater hidden danger for the future. 
Such a lambasting also means that after China "re-enters 
GATT," when more foreign banks will enter China and may handle 
renminbi business, unless the specialized banks carry out basic 
reforms, they will be at a future competitive disadvantage. 
  3. Challenges From the Development of China's Market 
Economy. 
Since institution of a market economy, Chinese industrial and 
commercial enterprises have gradually shifted over to the market 
economy. Market economy principles have been incorporated into 
enterprises operating behavior. Enterprises demand for funds and 
financial services are also expressed in market law terms. Given 
this situation, the specialized banks, which mostly follow the 
former plan model, do not fit in with the market style 
enterprise system. For example, the operating plans that 
enterprises have drawn up to meet market demand do not mesh with 
the specialized banks' credit plans. When enterprises need 
money, no credit is available, but when they do not it, the 
banks urge credit on them. Non state-owned enterprises that are 
making good returns cannot get loans, but money losing 
state-owned enterprises have plenty of credit available. Thus, 
these state-owned enterprises may re-lend money at higher 
interest, or they may not repay the loans or rhwy may charge off 
the interest as a cost. When market interest rates are high, 
grassroots branches of the specialized banks use their money to 
make call-loans rather than for regular credit. By issuing 
call-loans, they can figure interest at the market rate [rather 
than at the government-set interest rate], and lend it and 
re-lend it making a commission on each transaction. The rise of 
real estate markets also lured some grassroots level branches of 
the specialized banks to invest. Risks were great and they lost 
money. By the end of 1992, the country's four large specialized 
banks had a net more than 100 billion yuan in short-term loans 
outside the system. This created havoc in the domestic financial 
order, the deepseated cause of which is the failure of the 
prevailing specialized bank system to fit in with development of 
a market economy. 
  4. Challenges of Finance and Banking Innovations. Finance 
and 
banking instrument innovations made in China between 1985 and 
1990 may be divided into seven categories: trust savings, 
commission savings, negotiable large amount certificates of 
deposit, national bonds, enterprise bonds, financial debentures, 
and stock. As of the end of 1991, these seven types of financial 
instruments accounted for 13 percent of total assets held by the 
nonfinance and banking sector and individuals. Moreover, all of 
the above financial instruments, with the exception of the 
financial debentures, were used by the specialized banks. Since 
the last half of 1991, China has faced another surge of 
financial innovations. In addition to a sharp increase in the 
amount of stock shares and enterprise bonds issued, new 
financial instruments include: shares issued to staff members 
and workers in enterprises, corporate shares, informal fund 
raising by enterprises and local governments, mutual funds, 
beneficiary bonds, stock warrants, and convertible bonds. 
Financial innovations have sparked the development of direct 
financing and a large scale outflow of funds in many directions. 
In 1992, the country's negotiable securities markets issued 128 
billion yuan worth of negotiable securities of all kinds, 
including 41 billion yuan worth of national bonds, 12.7 billion 
yuan worth of National Planning Commission National Investment 
Corporation bonds, 37.9 billion yuan worth of enterprise bonds, 
22.5 billion worth of financial debentures, and 11 billion yuan 
worth of stock. If shares issued within enterprises, the raising 
of funds outside plan, and such measures for which no statistics 
exist are added in, the People's Bank head office estimates the 
total at 250 billion yuan. This is 76 percent of the 329 billion 
yuan additional loans issued by the four specialized banks. 
These financial innovations and the outflow of funds through 
many different channels are actually a "backlash" against the 
existing specialized banking system. Since indirect financing 
in China has long been primarily through the specialized banks, 
unless the specialized banks conduct fundamental reform, 
continuation of this intermediation may threaten the effective 
operation of the specialized bank system. 
  5. Threats to the Macroeconomic Regulation and Control of 
Finance and Banking. For many years, the government's 
macroeconomic monetary policy acted on total social demand 
through the specialized banks. The specialized banks have been 
the microeconomic foundation for monetary policy. However, the 
situation during the past several years shows the actions of the 
specialized banks to be at odds with the market economy. Because 
of the effect of all sorts of external and internal factors, the 
loans that the specialized banks have issued have not flowed 
into high output sectors. The result has been a large number of 
dead loans. In addition, the specialized banks have used their 
monopoly position to "exert reverse pressure" on the central 
banks large increase in the basic money supply through devices 
such as "ensuring payment," "guaranteeing large and medium size 
enterprises needs for working capital," "backing the building of 
key construction projects," and no "issuance of IOUs." Since 
1992, in particular, the specialized banks have acted as a 
"funnel" for central bank basic currency through the use of 
short-term loans, joint investment with enterprises, and 
subsidiary corporation switch investments. As a result, money is 
added to the basic supply but never comes back. This can easily 
lead to credit inflation. Clearly, if the specialized banks 
themselves are not commercial banks that are self-limiting and 
bear risks themselves, this will hurt implementation of 
macroeconomic monetary policy in a market economy unless 
administrative measures such as the "high official mechanism" is 
used (General Planning Research Team, 1992). Faced with the 
current specialized bank system, market-oriented monetary 
policies will become increasingly ineffective. This threat is 
also one of the motivations for government and central bank 
determination to reform the specialized banks. 
<H5>  3. Object Model for Specialized Bank Reform </H5>
  The goal of national specialized bank reform is presently 
clear. It is to make them into truly commercial banks. This 
holds three different levels of meaning: The first is the need 
to regard commercial banks as an industry, putting reform of the 
specialized banks into the context of industrial reform and not 
looking at it solely from the angle of individual banks. Second, 
it means that the four specialized banks will not necessarily be 
converted into four commercial banks. They might be converted 
into even more commercial banks. This would help shape a 
competitive environment. Third, the ultimate goal of this reform 
is to improve banking business returns and to promote the 
allocation of financial resources through the market. It is not 
reform for reform's sake. 
  Furthermore, since the specialized banks are a distinctive 
economic organization in China that are large in size and 
strongly monopolistic, the measures taken to reform them should 
be different. First of all, reliance on "gradualist" methods 
generated outside the system are not likely to be effective. The 
time required will be protracted; thus, competitive markets will 
not be formed for a long time. Second, unlike the reform of the 
enterprise system, since there are only four specialized banks, 
reform of the specialized bank system becomes reform of the 
internal organization of four separate specialized banks. At 
this time, institutional reform and internal reform of the 
economic organization will coincide, i.e., external reform 
impetus being applied directly to reform the organization 
internally. 
  1. Destruction of the Specialized Banks Monopoly Position. 
Currently, there are four different ideas about this issue: One 
is to loosen banking business market access under strict 
standards (General Planning Research Team, 1992), permitting the 
founding of new banks. The second is to permit the several 
already existing small banks, such as the Zhongxin Industrial 
Bank and the Guangda Bank, to do business across province lines 
to foster the formation of nationwide banks. Third is to permit 
the founding of civilian-run banks (Fan Gang [2868 4854], 1993). 
Fourth is to divide up the four specialized banks into several 
banks by province or region (World Bank, 1993). Even though the 
feasibility of these ideas awaits validation, the basic idea of 
destroying the specialized banks monopoly position is correct. 
  2. Separation of Policy-Related Banks and Specialized Banks. 
As a result of many years validation, the government, the 
central bank, and the centralized banks have reached a consensus 
on this issue, and it has been spelled out in the State 
Council-approved financial reform plan (Chen Yuan [7115 0337], 
1993). 
  3. Reform of the Specialized Banks' Organizational 
Structure. 
a) Structural reorganization of China's industrial and 
commercial banks: While retaining the framework for the main 
office and branch system, the provincial branches should be 
abolished, 40 to 60 urban branches being placed under direct 
jurisdiction of the head office, these branches retaining about 
80 percent of existing savings deposits. These urban branches 
would be operating branches doing business directly with 
business enterprises and not administrative banks as formerly. 
The remaining branches would be organized as regional savings 
banks in a head office and branch bank system, doing business 
within a specific province. Their capital could be augmented 
through the issuance of corporate shares, and their business 
would attract business enterprise and individual savings 
deposits. They would provide short-term credit, settlement of 
accounts, and other retail services to industrial and commercial 
firms. b) Structural reorganization of the Chinese Bank of 
Agriculture: Once agricultural policy-related banks have been 
founded, the existing Chinese Bank of Agriculture would become a 
Chinese agricultural cooperative bank system. The Chinese 
Agricultural Cooperative Bank would have a head office (at the 
national level), but it would no longer be like the present 
all-encompassing large bank with a headquarters and branches but 
rather a multilevel corporate system. The head office's funds 
would come from purchases of shares by regional level 
agricultural cooperative banks and, aside from regular 
commercial bank business, its main business would be to balance 
financing among the regional agricultural cooperative banks, and 
to standardize the system's regulations and dealings with 
foreign countries. The present Bank of Agriculture provincial 
branches would be eliminated. Branches and sub-branches below 
the provincial level, and local rural credit cooperatives having 
requisite conditions would be amalgamated through the share 
system into a multitude of agricultural cooperative banks. They 
would be divided into grassroots level banks (county or 
township) and prefecture or municipal banks, all of them being 
independent corporate entities. c) Changes in the structure of 
the Bank of China and the Chinese People's Construction Bank. 
These two banks would become commercial banks retaining intact 
their head office and branch system, but the provincial level 
bank level would be abolished. From among the numerous first 
level urban branch banks, regional banks in charge would be 
selected as was the case with the Bank of China organizational 
structure before 1986. The main purpose of these changes is to 
weaken the direct relationship between the existing specialized 
bank provincial branch banks and local governments in the 
provinces, to prevent the regionalization of provincial branch 
banks, and to enhance head office regulatory authority and 
capabilities. 
  In discussions of reform within the specialized banks during 
recent years, the cry for decentralization of authority over 
provincial level branch banks has been very loud. (This is 
related to local government support.) These banks want a greater 
delegation of autonomy to provincial and prefectural branch 
banks, and they maintain that this is the only way to increase 
the operating efficiency of the specialized banks. Actually, 
this is a mistaken understanding. If a commercial bank system of 
a head office and branch banks is adopted, externally the bank 
would be an independent corporate entity, and internally there 
would be no need for market dealings among branch banks. If 
corporate or semi-corporate entity status is conferred on branch 
banks, and market trading is done internally among branch banks 
(such as making short term loans, savings and loan business, and 
securities trading back and forth), that would demonstrate that 
the bank has not attained the optimum returns of scale, and that 
it should be divided up into several banks or become a 
multilevel corporate system group bank. The twisted 
organizational structure of the specialized banks in China today 
is due to this: Outwardly, they are a single bank, but 
internally, the operating autonomy among branch banks is very 
great. They conduct market trading among themselves, and branch 
banks even sign external contracts without authority of the head 
office. This blurs the line between the market and enterprises. 
It is an expression of the mixing of equity rights. 
Consequently, beginning with the equity structure in 
reorganizing the national specialized banks holds great 
significance. The author believes that once policy-related banks 
are set up and the "Corporation Law" is passed, the Chinese 
Industrial and Commercial Bank, the Bank of China, and the 
Chinese People's Construction Bank may be transformed into a 
full capital state-owned limited liability corporation and, once 
conditions are ripe, this may be changed into a stock share 
limited liability corporation. 
  4. Elimination of government administrative interference in 
the specialized banks. Once they have been transformed, as full 
capital state-owned commercial banks, the specialized banks 
should have the following relationship with the government: 
First, the government should have decision making authority only 
about the hiring and firing of the director of a commercial 
bank's head office, and it may not concern itself with internal 
bank personnel matters. This is the most crucial point, namely a 
a clear-cut client-agent mechanism. The specialized banks would 
have a vertical system, and the provincial government and 
governments below the provincial level would not interfere with 
personnel matters within the bank. Second, no level of 
government could interfere in the specialized banks' credit 
business. Third, the state-owned commercial banks would set up a 
board of supervisors, the board of supervisors personnel to be 
selected by the government (most of them coming from outside the 
bank). The board of supervisors would be empowered to supervise 
and examine the state-owned commercial bank's business plan and 
how well the value of state-owned capital was being maintained 
and increased. It would supervise, evaluate and note the 
performance of the bank director, and make recommendations on 
hiring, firing, rewards, and penalties. 
  5. Integrated business orientation. Once China's specialized 
banks have been transformed into state-owned commercial banks, 
the integration of their business orientation is inevitable. The 
position of commercial banks in providing short-term loans to 
industrial and commercial enterprises is well established. 
Throughout the world today, the business of commercial banks 
that have a head office and branch bank system shows a universal 
trend toward diversification and all-inclusiveness, and this 
trend has also been quickly transmitted into China. Although 
China's specialized banks have nominally maintained the business 
separation system whereby they could not deal in securities or 
investment, in fact, they did do every kind of business through 
separate trust investment corporations. Therefore, the issue is 
not a separate business system or a comprehensive system per se, 
but on what kind of foundation to build an oversight framework. 
If the specialized banks become commercial banks that account 
independently, are responsible for risks, are self-limiting, 
have autonomy in operation, and are responsible for their own 
profits and losses, and strict oversight measures also apply to 
them (such as the make-up of their assets and proportional 
limits standards, assets responsibility proportional standards, 
and independent operation agent proportional standards), the 
integration of its business will not carry a very great risk. 
Instead, this will help mesh China's finance and banking with 
international finance and banking. The key issue is oversight, 
not what kinds of business the bank does. 
Main References 
  Xie Ping et al, 1992: "Intensification of China's Finance 
and 
Banking and Finance and Banking Reform," Tianjin Press; "Use of 
Market Economy Principles to Reform China's Finance and Banking 
System," "Finance and Banking Research" 1993, Issue 1. 
  Xu Jian, 1992: "Further Exploration of the Commercialization 
of the Specialized Banks," "Finance and Banking Research," 1992 
Issue 4. 
  Zhou Ziyuan: 1993: "Cursory Analysis of Obstacles to 
Commercialization of the Specialized Banks," "Chinese Urban 
Finance and Banking," 1993, Issue 3. 
  Xu Maosen, 1993, "Ideas About the Operating Mechanism of a 
State-Owned Commercial Bank," (Chinese Urban Finance and 
Banking) 1993, Issue 5. 
  Hu Ruyin, 1992: "The Political Economics of China's Reform," 
"Economic Development Research," 1992, Issue 4. 
  Lin Yifu, 1989: "Economic Theory of System Change: Induced 
Change and Forced Change," "Property Rights and System Change," 
(Translation Collection), Shanghai, Sanlian Bookstore, 1992. 
  General Planning Research Team, 1992: "China's Finance and 
Banking System Reform During the 1990s," "Reform," 1992, Issue 5. 
  Chen Yuan, 1993: "Outlook for China's Finance and Banking 
System Reform," Text from the Chinese People's Bank and World 
Bank-sponsored "International Workshop on Chinese Finance and 
Banking Reform," 17 September 1993, Beijing. 
  World Bank, 1993: "China: Fiance and Banking Sector Reform 
Strategy," Chinese mimeographed text. 
  Fan Gang, 1993: "What Is the Crux?n" "Finance and Banking 
Research," 1993, Issue 9. 

