Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by leader Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi in Banghazi on 18 </F>
January -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] In the name of God. First I would like to greet 
you, brothers, and thank you for the glorious reception you gave 
me and with which we challenge the enemies. The welcome given by 
the people of Banghazi is one of the important messages which we 
said we would be sending to the enemies during these days. 
[applause] These days we see the entire world focusing its 
attention on what is going on in Libya. We receive delegations 
from Arab and foreign countries. They all tell us how their 
countries are surprised by the revolutionary phenomenon in Libya 
and the Libyan people's challenge and revolution; official as 
well as popular delegations come to Libya and draw our attention 
to the fact that the entire world is aware of what is going on 
in the land of Libya these days. Some of them say that this came 
as a surprise to them and to the world. As far as we are 
concerned it is not a surprise, as we know ourselves and know 
the times when we come out to challenge or to sacrifice 
ourselves. Some time ago there were U.S. and British bases and 
the Italians in Libya; Libya was totally subjugated in 1970--in 
1969--to foreign control. Libya had signed a 99-year treaty 
which allowed American forces to be stationed on Libyan soil. 
The treaty was signed with [King] Idris al-Sanusi; its effect 
was that until it ran dry the oil would remain in the hands of 
the American companies and one British company. They forgot that 
they were occupying a land that belonged to martyrs, heroes, and 
honorable people whose families fought the Italians for long 
years with limited resources. The Americans, the British, and 
the West have no farsightedness; they do not ready history. They 
are always deceived and are always taken by suprise by the 
people. [passage omitted] Even when they established their 
bases in Libya and signed a 99-year treaty -- look how they 
disregarded and belittled us. How could they sign a 99-year 
treaty which would allow them to remain in Libya? How come? Has 
Libya no people? Has Libya no generations of people? The 99-year 
period mean three generations; that is to say, they passed 
judgement on all these three generations as being submissive and 
capitulationist, and accepting the American presence for at 
least 99 years, to be renewed for a further 99 years. [passage 
omitted] 
  When the Westerners heard a deputy, a minister, an 
ambassador, a prince, a counsellor, a king, or a head of 
government speaking they imagined that all the Libyan people 
were like him -- submissive and ready to sell out their homeland 
in order to fill their bellies, welcoming the Americans, the 
British, and the Italians, keeping Libya under the control of 
American bases for 99 years while the oil remained forever in 
the hand of the American companies. This shows that the 
Westerners are simpletons, unable to look ahead and incapable of 
genuine analysis. Otherwise the Westerners would have said 
that those people who are around us -- ministers, counsellors, 
and so on -- do not represent the Libyan people. [passage 
omitted] 
  These days we Libyans have felt that there was a greedy 
attempt being made against us by the Western states. This in 
fact has made us angry; we have taken to the streets and squares 
in challenge. We felt that 25 years after the revolution the 
West has forgotten what the revolution did and imagined that a 
country where a revolution has taken place is like any other 
country that has surrendered. The Arabs made the Western states 
and the Israelis entertain ambitions against them because they 
accepted a humiliating and shameful surrender -- a surrender 
which is shameful to the Arabs and their history. They 
unlimitedly, unreservedly, freely, and unjustifiably compromised 
the future and dignity of the Arab nation. The Arabs competed 
against each other to offer unconditional recognition to the 
Israelis. There was no need for that. We have hope that we 
will emerge from the confrontation victorious, and that we will 
deny the enemies their opportunity. Despite this revolution of 
anger by the Libyan people and the language of challenge, Libyan 
diplomacy and politics at all levels -- legal, political, 
economic, and intelligence, and so on -- are working day and 
night to win the battle at the levels of politics, diplomacy, 
economy, intelligence, and so on. 
  But we should not make excessive demands for a friendly 
solution and understanding because then winning will become 
worthless. If a triumph is achieved through being nice or being 
submissive, it will be of no value. I believe therefore that 
the Libyan people have actually felt that matters have reached 
such an point that we cannot continue in a friendly way as this 
will be useless and of no value, even if we win the case 
peacefully. We are taking a serious stance and showing that we 
do not always ask for peace, friendship, amity, and so on. No, 
this is not necessary. If you -- the West -- do not want 
friendship, then to hell with you; we will no longer regard 
ourselves as having good relations with you. Let the good 
relations go to hell. I have, brothers, said this in public 
speeches. It was not Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi who said it; it was 
God himself who said: Neither the Jews nor the Christians will 
be satisfied with you until you follow them. When they dictate 
to you and you carry out their orders they will be satisfied 
with you and accept you. They issue the orders and you will 
carry them out. This is what God himself said. See how 
conditional it is as God said: until you follow them. 
Otherwise, neither the Jews nor the Christians will be 
satisfied with you. The Jews and Christians today are the the 
Israelis and the Western states. [passage omitted] 
  The West is waging a civil war in the streets of Egypt. 
'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman who is waging a civil war in the streets 
of Egypt is with U.S. intelligence who are supplying him with 
money and...[pauses] Algeria -- the Algerian black hand is 
waging a war in Algeria -- this is common knowledge. It is the 
same black hand that tried to kill [as heard] Ahmed Ben Bella at 
the Ittihad hotel in Tripoli before...[pauses] during the days 
of the Algerian revolution. It is the same black hand that is 
now taking revenge on Algeria; that is, France is fighting 
Algeria now. 
  I want to tell you that when you hear leaders or anyone, 
even 
me, one day talking about friendship or such a thing, these 
friendly countries or... [pauses] No, we, as a people, should 
understand that this language could be a diplomatic one but in 
reality we never ever had any ambition that the Americans, the 
French, or the English could become friends of ours. They will 
remain our enemies until the Day of Judgement [applause] and if 
they find a weakness in us or an opening they will penetrate it. 
  You have seen the proof of that. Did they not go to Chad, 
contact Libyan POW's there, give them money, keep brainwashing 
them for several months, and subject them to all kinds of 
pressures until they persuaded them and took them away? Some of 
them came to their senses and returned from Nigeria, some 
returned from Zaire, and some came to their senses, escaped, and 
returned from the United States. There are some who still remain 
out of Libya. We do not know who is unable to return, who is 
under pressure, who is locked up, or who is being brainwashed. 
Look, who are the evildoers now? Has anyone gone to U.S. 
soldiers anywhere to bring them over to Libya? They are the 
ones who went to our sons in Chad and brought tension between us 
and Chad. Let us not get taken in or allow anyone to come and 
deceive us. 
  They say al-Qadhdhafi has got you into trouble with the 
United States and involved you in problems; why is he hostile to 
the United States? Are we hostile to the United States? Did we 
go to Vietnam to ask them to hand over to us the U.S. POW's whom 
they were holding so that we could take them over to Libya and 
train them against the United States? Or was it the Americans 
who went to Chad and asked the Chadians to give them the Libyans 
whom they were holding so that they could be mobilized against 
their country? It did not work, we found out. [crowd chants] 
  With America, the Western states, and the Israelis, it is 
not 
a question of seeking them in peace, in war, or in 
confrontation. No, they have very, very clear ambitions; you 
either accept their ambitions or you become their enemy, even if 
you turn the other cheek or keep quiet. See what they have been 
doing with us, and we have been keeping quiet. They have been 
pursuing us and seeking us out. They want to control the Arab 
homeland, destroy the revolution, destroy the unity of the Arab 
nation, and destroy Yemen's unity. They have to take the oil 
and control the regions where there is oil. They have to 
control the strategic regions. [two-minute break in reception] 
  When we asked about the story, they said that after the 
crash of their airliner over Britain, the Americans announced 
that anyone who would provide them with information on the crash 
would be given $1 million; that is, 300,000 Libyan dinars. 
Ju'akah [witness in Lockerbie case] told them: Give me the $1 
million and I will provide the information. They told him to go 
to them. He is a Libyan married to a Maltese woman and was 
living in Malta. He went to America. U.S. intelligence put him 
in jail and told him that he had to stay in jail until he 
testified before a court. 
  He asked for the $1 million. They replied: What $1 million? 
You are an important witness and have to stay in jail. He asked 
them: What will happen to me after the trial? They said: We 
cannot release you after the trial, because after the trial you 
might say that you were lying to us, that we enticed you, and 
that you had your eyes on the $1 million. You might change your 
testimony and create problems. 
  There was an interview between the Americans, Americans from 
U.S. intelligence, and some journalists. They were asked about 
Ju'akah's fate. They said that his fate was sealed. He will 
spend the rest of his life in a U.S. intelligence prison. 
  When the Libyans heard of this name, they started asking 
about Ju'akah's origins until they found out that he was from 
Suq al-Jum'ah in Tripoli. [passage omitted] Suq al-Jum'ah 
people met and found out in fact that there was a family named 
Ju'akah. I had met with these people in a large tent similar to 
this one. So the Ju'akah family was summoned and told by Suq 
al-Jum'ah people: your son told lies to the Americans. He told 
them that Libyans had caused the Lockerbie airplane crash. We 
are going to burn you, your house, and your plantation. The 
poor family said: We will kill our son when we find him. We 
disown him. The family went and brought his medical record, and 
said that he had been in a psychiatric hospital. [passage 
omitted] Then the Arabs of Zawiyat al-Mahjub started to 
investigate and they had meetings to see if the Ju'akah family 
were really from Zawiyat al-Mahjub; if this were so, they would 
have found the family members, homes, and farms. They had 
decided to burn them after pouring oil over them. They told me 
that there was an error and that Ju'akah was not from Zawiyat 
al-Mahjub. They said that he was from an area close to Ghmatah. 
When they hear the news in Ghmatah, they would start to look 
for them and if they found a family called Ju'akah to whom he 
belonged they would want to destroy and burn them and their 
home. This is tragic. It is tragic that serious things of this 
kind should take place. However, I, personally, cannot prevent 
that from happening. No one can prevent it because the masses 
are like a sea; if thousands of people storm a house of treason, 
they can storm, crush, burn and knock it down. [passage omitted] 
Despite the fact that these are dangerous things which might 
take place without anyone -- even the police -- being able to 
prevent them, when thousands of people march on a house, or a 
plantation, or a tribe, or families, they can tear them up into 
pieces without anyone being able to offer them protection. The 
reason is that the Libyan people cannot in fact bear this kind 
of thing. How, when we are in a state of confrontation against 
the enemy, could someone go to sell us? Some stray dog, a spy, 
an apostate, someone who is ready to sell his country for his 
interests, goes and sells us like a traitor. There are 
barricades between us and the Americans. We are on one side and 
they are on the other. How could you jump over barricades and 
go to the other side? 
  These are dangerous and very frightful things. Anyone who is 
considering treason, now thinks about it a thousand times, and 
even if he manages to flee, and offers himself in sacrifice, he 
knows that his family, his home, his plantation, and all his 
property will be destroyed, burned, and walked over by the 
masses. The angry masses might march over them and destroy them. 
[applause] 
  The fact is that treason is no longer an easy thing. This 
is the positive thing. The Libyan people set up this practice 
and made a decision, not through the legal system -- judges, 
prosecution, and courts. The Libyan people made a decision and 
set a rule which consists in attacking treason, putting it under 
siege and attacking it with a view to destroying it. The target 
would not be the person only, but his family too. [passage 
omitted] 
  In fact these are all dangerous threats which originate from 
the masses against whoever thinks of treason. Now, as long as 
this is a basis rule that has been established by the Libyan 
people and a decision that has been taken by the Libyan people, 
everyone should take these threats seriously. Everyone should 
please pay attention to his family, his kids, his relatives, and 
himself. You would not only be taken to the public prosecution 
and to court and get capital punishment, a life sentence or 
other punishment for being a traitor or a spy; you should also 
think of the family, the traitor's family, and home which have 
become endangered. [passage omitted] 
  Yes, these threats have become dangerous. Please, everyone 
who is present here should inform those who are not. No one 
could prevent the masses' revenge. By God, we can no longer 
guarantee the safety of the family, relatives, or possessions of 
traitors. People are right; that is, if a traitor's family comes 
from a given tribe, then the tribe would disavow them so that 
treason could be contained in that family. The tribe would 
destroy them, and tell them: You have dishonored us. [passage 
omitted] 
  There are other things which are no less serious than going 
over to the United States and selling oneself. It is all 
treason; you will see. Considering that so far the battle has 
not been a battle of guns, missiles, aircraft or similar things. 
The battle has begun, but it is a cold war. I wish it were a 
heated battle. Perhaps with rifles and machine guns, the 
Americans would not be at peace and would feel unsettled, and 
finally withdraw as they are doing now from Somalia. 
  The threat is that in a cold war the enemy might win without 
your noticing it. The enemy might occupy your home, your 
street, your mind, your stomach, your farm, and your shop 
without your being aware of it. How? Trading in dollars 
constitutes treason, pushing down the value of the Libyan dinar 
constitutes treason, smuggling out Libyan products constitutes 
treason, smuggling out medicines constitutes treason, smuggling 
out food constitutes treason, smuggling out fuel and petrol 
abroad constitutes treason. By God, brothers even going for 
treatment abroad, tourism and spending money in Switzerland... 
[pauses] you have heard from your radio what Switzerland has 
said. It has said that it will implement the sanctions against 
Libya. You should keep quiet at least, Switzerland, because 
Libyans always say: Switzerland, Switzerland, Switzerland. 
Those who need medical treatment want to go to Switzerland and 
millions have been spent in Switzerland. Listen to what 
Switzerland has been saying. It has not said that it was 
benefiting from Libyans -- from whom it has taken millions -- 
but it has said that it wants to implement sanctions against 
them and freeze Libyan assets if found. Did you or did you not 
hear about this? [passage omitted] 
  Those who have been playing havoc in the country through 
nepotism and corruption are traitors. But who is doing this? 
Is there a solution for this? Any solution will come from you. 
Those things are being carried out by you; and it is up to you 
as free men. [crowd chants] If I were the one doing these things 
I would stop straight away here in front of you, but it is not 
me. They are being carried out by members of the public, by 
free citizens. It is, thus, up to you to stop anyone who is 
caught smuggling anything, like that one who was caught at the 
harbor trying to smuggle medicine to Syria. [passage omitted] 
  Treachery is not merely those spies, who. we caught the day 
before yesterday, or those stray dogs. Your children, who have 
joined the Muslim Brotherhood, are also traitors; those of them, 
who have joined heretics, are also traitors. 
  Those calamities which are called Atonement and Flight, the 
Call, al-Jihad, the Party of Liberation, and the Muslim 
Brotherhood -- did they exist during the era of the prophet or 
during the era of 'Umar? Did they exist when were fighting the 
Italians? If they did exist we did not know about them. Even 
of they had existed no one would have followed them because 
hundreds of denominations have always existed. [crowd chants] 
[passage omitted, including one-minute break in reception] 
  The spies whom you have caught were found to be responsible 
for many rumors which we have been hearing on the street. This 
was done on the orders of U.S. intelligence; rumors which were 
hatched by U.S. intelligence, taught to them [the spies] who 
were then asked to spread them in the Libyan streets to 
undermine the Libyan people's morale, make the Libyan people 
doubt their revolution, their ability to revolt, and their 
capabilities, so that the Libyan people would weaken before 
America, Britain, and France, hand over their sons, accept to be 
ranked among the agents and those who have surrendered, and 
again surrender their oil and their land to the enemies. 
  The rumors that we used to hear; they [the spies] have now 
admitted that they were spreading these rumors at the 
instigation of U.S. intelligence. They say: They told us to 
spread a rumor against so and so; distort this and distort that; 
do this and do that. This is known to us; it is not strange to 
us. 
  When rumors emerge, we know that there is a black hand and 
foreign intelligence is behind them. However, we are not so 
stupid as to repeat them. What, repeat them and destroy our 
homes and dig our own graves? This is what would hurt and mean 
that we are stupid people. America wants us to repeat rumors. 
America has hatched and spread them in our streets. 
  The hashish you hear about -- this is on the orders of the 
Western states. Israel runs narcotics farms. Hashish is 
planted in Palestine and directed against the Arab countries. 
The Israelis have said: If there is no war of missiles, let us 
have a hashish war. We cannot accept the existence of an Arab 
nation; Israel has to extend from the Atlantic Ocean to the 
Gulf, not from the Euphrates to the Nile. The Jewish state must 
extend to North Africa and include the whole of Syria. 
  Brothers, the drugs, the hashish, come in sealed boxes and 
organized containers under the seals of a state. These are 
missiles and bombs which they drop on Arab shores from Morocco 
to Egypt to Syria. The farms are in Palestine. It is strange. 
This should have been said a long time ago; at least people 
should have known about it. They talk about hashish as if it 
has come down from the sky. Do they not know that it is a plant 
that grows in Palestine? Who grows it? The Jews grow it. Why? 
So that they can destroy the Arab nation. It is clear. 
  America is fighting in Latin America; the United States 
invaded Panama because of hashish. So why don't you invade 
Palestine and the Israelis, and destroy the hashish farms? No, 
because the West is in agreement with the Israelis; the hashish 
farms in Palestine are weapons against the Arabs. No one can 
touch those farms. [The West tells the] Israelis, grow hashish 
and distribute it in Arab countries and we will pay you. 
America is paying a billion [currency not specified] just for 
them to plant hashish and send it to Libya and Morocco. 
[passage omitted] 
  If you take a box of hashish from Libya and leave it on U.S. 
shores, and if they know it is from Libya, they will hit you 
with missiles. We are submissive; bring in hashish, distribute 
hashish, trade in hashish, taste hashish and get used to 
hashish. [passage omitted] 
  The Americans, the English, and the French have been hit 
hard. They changed their tune when they saw a sea of Libyan 
masses with al-Qadhdhafi. They said: We used to think that 
al-Qadhdhafi did not have people supporting him and his people 
were ready to surrender. [crowd chants slogans] This is what 
has deterred and frightened them and made them change their tune 
recently. By God, their tune has changed, brothers. The Arab 
rulers began to contact me and said: Please calm the situation 
down a little bit. They were frightened. Each one got in touch 
with me. Some contacted President Husni Mubarak and said to 
him: Your relations with al- Qadhdhafi are good. Please tell 
him to calm the situation down a little. What is this 
revolution he started in Libya? This revolution is motivating 
the masses against us. Please, Mu'ammar, calm down a little. 
[applause, chanting] Yesterday a delegation from Egypt came to 
see me. The delegation said that the reception given to me in 
Banghazi was intimidating. [Al-Qadhdhafi laughs; applause] 
[passage omitted] 

