Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marcel aan de Brugh: "Dinko Valerio: `There Is </F>
Plenty of Money in the Netherlands for Gene Therapy'"] 
  [Text] "In the end there will be six or seven centers 
worldwide which will carry out gene therapy on a commercial 
basis. Europe will have one of them. And we intend to be that 
European center," said Professor Dr. Dinko Valerio. 
  The director of the recently set up company of Introgene has 
a deep-rooted belief in private enterprise, a positive outlook 
on business that is normally encountered only in America. "Oh, 
the Netherlands are not so different from America, it is just 
that we are not yet convinced of the fact. If you look at the 
matter carefully, we do not have anything to complain about. 
The Netherlands possesses a good climate for research, with a 
long-standing tradition of both medical research and 
biotechnology. During the past few years, more and more 
universities have acquired an entrepreneurial attitude, and the 
government is also showing positive support. The tremendous 
subsidy scheme covering genetic manipulation and gene therapy is 
prove of this. We are wealthy. The possibilities ahead of us 
are enormous." 
  Despite all this praise, the majority of researchers are 
still crossing the Atlantic when they want to set up their own 
company. Valerio does not only see a brain drain in the 
direction of America, but also an entrepreneurial drain. "There 
is a great gap in Europe as far as any commercialization of 
knowledge is concerned. There is as yet no clear 
infrastructure, and financial backers have not yet had much 
experience of risk-carrying initiatives. I want to change all 
that." 
  In America, for instance, it is absolutely normal that a 
venture capitalist should invest in a company, thus giving it a 
chance to grow. The knowledge available and the value of the 
business increase visibly. After a few years, the company 
appears on the stock exchange. It is sold to the public, long 
before it has made even a guilder in profits. The venture 
capitalist receives his investment back with interest, while the 
company has got off the ground. 
  Valerio wants to be able to extract an investment of 1.1 
million Dutch guilders from Atlas Venture, a Netherlands venture 
capitalist, by using this economic maneuver. In addition, he 
will receive a Pioneers' Grant (1.5 million guilders) as well as 
subsidies from the Rotterdam University Hospital and from the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs. 
  Within a short while, Valerio hopes to be able to exchange 
his out-dated laboratory on TNO [Netherlands Central Institute 
for Applied Research] ground in Rijswijk for brand new premises 
on the grounds of Leiden University. From 1996 to 1998 Leiden 
State University (at which Valerio was recently appointed 
professor of gene therapy) will subsidize the university 
research group which Valerio will lead. The new professor can 
then reckon on a subsidy of 2 million guilders. According to 
Valerio, "all the investors concerned are aware that the market 
for gene therapy is not just around the corner. I think that we 
have to wait for at least about eight years for that. 
Fortunately they also understand that the Netherlands could 
become an important center in the field of gene therapy." 
<H5>  Adenosine Deaminase </H5>
  In March of this year Valerio became the first researcher to 
apply gene therapy to a human being. In this case, a French 
child in the Necker Hospital in Paris was treated for ada-scid, 
a disorder of the immune system in which a defect in the gene 
that codes for the adenosine deaminase (ada) enzyme interrupts 
the production of white blood cells. Patients fall prey to all 
kinds of infections from which they can die if not treated. 
  Valerio and his colleagues played a large part in the 
success 
of the operation. They transferred a correct ada gene into 
isolated bone marrow cells from the child. The bone marrow 
cells were then injected back into the body of the patient, the 
intention being that the cells will resume their function and 
produce completely perfect white blood cells. Whether the 
operation will actually produce any results will not be known 
for several months. 
<H5>  On the Way to a Routine Technique </H5>
  While gene therapy was originally seen as a solution for 
hereditary diseases, nowadays researchers also see possibilities 
in such disorders as hepatitis B, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
cancer (of the brain and of the lung, amongst others). All 
kinds of cell types are being considered for the technique: 
muscle cells, lung cells, nerve cells. 
  Valerio's group intends to specialize in gene therapy in 
genealogical cells, and therefore is making use of bone marrow 
cells. "We want to bring the technique to the point that it can 
be routinely applied. We ourselves will probably be involved in 
the treatment of only one, at the most two diseases, as test 
cases for the technique. For other diseases we will eventually 
only deliver the tools. We will make those so simple that 
anyone will be able to work with them." 

