Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [26 February PASASON editorial: "Let Our Entire Army Strive </F>
To Fulfill National Defense Duty for 1994"] 
  [Text] Respected listeners: In the armywide conference of 
cadres for 1993-94, the participants discussed and profoundly 
studied national defense direction and duty for this year as 
presented by the National Defense Ministry. The guidelines 
derived from the conference are aimed at enabling Armed Forces 
of all units and localities to creatively adopt plans in a 
spirit of responsibility to be in conformity with their 
respective practical conditions and specific points with a view 
to guaranteeing fulfillment of the tasks of defending the 
country, maintaining public security, and building and 
consolidating their units and localities to be strong in all 
respects. The national defense direction and tasks for this year 
are as follows: 
  Continue to consolidate national defense and public security 
maintenance work in all respects and combine it with 
socioeconomic development work and expanding relations and 
cooperation with foreign countries; determinedly check and 
overcome all subversive and sabotage schemes and acts of bad 
elements to basically bring to the entire country a tranquil 
situation, political stability, and social order; pay attention 
to firmly consolidating, building, and strengthening Armed 
Forces in all respects by emphasizing improved quality of work 
in the political field while attaching importance to serving and 
raising the quality of combat work; and build the Armed Forces 
to be strong, maintain a revolutionary nature, and stick to 
rules and regulations on the march forward to becoming a modern, 
well-organized Army. 
  Another significant duty of the Army is to continue 
coordination with local administrations in building the grass 
roots to be firm and strong in all fields by building and 
combining the entire people's field position of national defense 
and public security work with rural development. Along with 
this, it is also necessary to continue to step up emulation 
campaigns in building all-around strong units and all-around 
leading party units. 
  The objectives are that all local units must strive to set 
up 
one or two model units; pay attention to organizing military 
training for combatants to enable them to achieve competence in 
combat tactics and strategy and gain experiences in using 
weapons available in their units; and enthusiastically and 
continually boost crop cultivation and livestock breeding 
movements in organizations, units, and localities in all 
seasons. Regarding this, first and foremost, attention must be 
paid to growing vegetables for their daily meals. In addition, 
attention must be paid to planting perennial fruit trees in 
order to build green units. An endeavor must be made also to 
create all favorable conditions as possible to plant 
goods-oriented crops to serve the requirements of the markets in 
order to gain more revenues for the units. Favorable conditions 
must also be created for promoting poultry and fish breeding. 
  To successfully fulfill the aforementioned tasks, first and 
foremost, party committees and command staffs at all levels must 
pay attention to educating and training all cadres and 
combatants to enable them to understand the glorious traditions 
of the nation, the Army, and their own units, and to profoundly 
understand the restructuring line of the party and duties of the 
Army as well as of their respective units and localities. All 
cadres and combatants must be educated and trained to maintain 
appropriate attitudes and raise to a higher level their spirit 
of political responsibility. Attention must be paid to building 
the contingents of cadres and party members with appropriate 
qualifications, competence, and experiences in organizing, 
leading, and commanding units; enhancing the unique solidarity 
in the ranks of party committees and command staffs as well as 
the solidarity between cadres and combatants and their 
solidarity with the multiethnic people; maintaining the Army's 
political way of living; and promoting and expanding good, 
positive points of units and localities. Each unit and locality 
must organize to regularly review its achievements won in 
implementing the duties in each period. They must also pay 
attention to learning good lessons from other units or 
localities. Simultaneously, they must be determined to check 
and settle their weak points and remaining problems in a timely 
manner in order to enable their units and localities to continue 
to enthusiastically carry out movements to fruitfully fulfill 
the national defense direction and tasks for this year. 

