Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Nail Gafutulin report: "Certificates That Have Put </F>
Deserters in Prison"] 
  [Text] Samara -- A lot of ways have been thought up of 
avoiding the service draft All of these ways are illegal and 
punishable. That is clear to everyone. But, it turns out, 
there are whole organizations which aspire to the role.... 
  However, judge for yourselves what role they actually play 
in 
the final analysis. 
  Practically every day, young men of draft age and deserters 
from Russian subunits appeal to the Committee for the Protection 
of Servicemen at the All-Tatar Public Center [ATPC], submitting 
statements renouncing Russian citizenship and expressing the 
wish to serve in the National Guard of Tatarstan. Here they 
become the owners of certificates which, according to the ATPC 
leadership, replace passports; the passports remain at the 
military commissariats. On their military card draftees get an 
"Azatlyk" youth organization stamp certifying that they have 
been drafted into the Guard. 
  "The ATPC is deceiving people," according to Colonel of 
Justice Aleksandr Fadeyev, military prosecutor at the Kazan 
Garrison. 
  The deserters are promised the moon. They are told that they 
are being taken under the organization's protection, but in the 
end.... In actual fact, there is no legal foundation for this. 
A draftee is reassured, although in fact he is "on the run." 
And severe punishment still awaits him as a result. 
  Today fewer and fewer people trust the ATPC. No doubt the 
fact that criminal proceedings have twice been instituted 
against the organization's chairman-coordinator Z. Agliullin has 
had an effect. The first time it was for whipping up 
interethnic strife, the second for keeping firearms. But the 
main reason seems to lie elsewhere. Time has started to put the 
numerous organizations, unions, and parties which emerged 
following the collapse of the Union in their place. People who 
at first blindly believed the promises are now demanding action. 
But there is no action at the ATPC committee for the protection 
of servicemen and draftees. 

