BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 13 (CTK) -- Slovak President 
Michal Kovac, in an interview with CTK today on the forthcoming 
meeting of seven Central European presidents in the east 
Bohemian town of Litomysl, pointed to its importance for the 
future of the Central European region and the prospects of the 
region's integration with the European Union (EU). 
  "I am expecting that the meeting will contribute to 
strengthening mutual trust and creating an appropriate 
atmosphere needed to enhance and expand the zone of peace, 
security, stability and prosperity," Kovac said. 
  He pointed to the mutual interest of Central European states 
to join the European democratic economic and security 
structures, to carry through the transformation of their economy 
to a market mechanism and to carry out other economic, political 
and social reforms. 
  "Unlike other states of the Visegrad group (the Czech 
Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Poland), after the fall of the 
totalitarian regime, Slovakia had to solve much more complicated 
problems linked to the appearance of an independent state. In a 
short period of time we had to introduce all constitutional 
functions, to establish the central state administrative bodies 
and to transfer to an independent economic and banking system. 
And all this had to be done while implementing economic reform 
and fighting hyper-inflation and the excessive growth of 
unemployment. We have managed to handle these problems 
comparatively successfully; various catastrophic scenarios which 
predicted the collapse for the Slovak Republic have not come 
true," Kovac said. 
  Kovac confirmed Slovakia's interest in developing relations 
with the Czech Republic and especially in preserving the Customs 
Union and in creating the conditions which would not hinder 
mutual cooperation. 
  "In broader interconnections our cooperation and the ability 
of mutual communication is also important as regards the 
interests of the whole Central European region. I firmly 
believe that the process of our integration into the EU will 
depend on the level of our cooperation within the Visegrad 
group. The Partnership for Peace programme obliterates the 
differences between Central European and East European countries 
and our cooperation is thus acquiring, in its final meaning, not 
only economical but also political and security dimensions," 
Kovac said. 
  He pointed out that also after the division of the former 
Czechoslovak Federation its two successive states - the Czech 
and Slovak republics were united by similar interest of 
completing their transformation and integrating into the 
European structures. "This is a basic pre-condition from which 
our relations will ensue also in the future. The feeling of 
alienation or drifting apart is a temporary one and we will 
certainly overcome it," Kovac stressed. 

