BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Elmar Theviesen] </F>
  [Text] [Theviesen] German submarines can be bought like a 
sausage -- either as a whole or in slices. The HDW 
[Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft] shipyard in Kiel makes this 
possible -- also for Turkey. The parts of two submarines are 
currently being delivered to the NATO partner. 
  The sale of three speedboats to Turkey by the (Luersen) 
shipyard in Bremen is also being prepared. However, the 
financing is not yet ensured. One could, however, arrange 
things as it was done with the third deal. Four frigates have 
been ordered at Blohm and Voss in Hamburg; the volume of the 
order is 1.6 billion German marks [DM]; DM300 million of that is 
provided by Bonn for the NATO partner. 
  Trade with Turkey has grown for a long time. Military and 
civilian goods worth DM7.5 billion were exported by German 
companies to the Bosporus last year. Turkish imports from 
Germany amounted to DM6.4 billion. 
  Turkey is increasingly also developing into a bridge to the 
markets of the Turkic republics of the former Soviet Union and 
to Iran. This is also an opportunity for German exporters. 
However, so far Turkey has primarily been seen as a security 
barrier against the Middle East. Therefore, the FRG primarily 
subsidizes arms exports. It is high time to change that. 
  The Turkish economy is in a desolate state. This was much 
discussed at the foreign trade conference in Hagen. Still, 
German companies want to invest, but they need help from Bonn. 
More money for civilian instead of military exports could help 
stabilize the situation in Turkey. If this is not done, the 
country might slide into fundamentalism. 
  However, this is precisely what is indirectly promoted by 
the 
loud accusations against Turkey in connection with human rights. 
Turkish trading partners are already annoyed. The 
representative of German industry in Istanbul admonishes caution. 
  [Wolf Martin of the Federation of German Chambers of 
Industry 
and Commerce] Yes, quite certainly this has an effect. When we 
talk to our Turkish friends, they are very much affected by 
accusations coming from Germany. 
  [Theviesen] Can this also harm economic relations? Does one 
hear that orders have gone to somebody else as a result? 
  [Martin] This is conceivable. 
  [Theviesen] Now the Bundestag wants to ensure mutual 
understanding by establishing a permanent work group with the 
Turkish parliament. However, obviously the beginning is 
difficult, because just at the time when the delegation arrived, 
the Bundestag plenum was critically examining Turkey's policy 
toward the Kurds. An insult, the Turks felt. [Bundestag 
President] Rita Suessmuth apologized. 
  Nevertheless, in the future it is intended to discuss 
xenophobia and dual citizenship in Germany, but also about 
torture and war in Turkey. 
  The economic and political situation forces Germany to be 
diplomatic and use velvet gloves. 
  [Foreign Minister Kinkel] At the latest local elections we 
have indeed seen a worrying development in the direction of 
fundamentalism. Turkey has economic difficulties. We must try 
to help it. I repeat that this does not change anything about 
the fact that the problems have to be addressed frankly. One 
must always look at things in their entirety and carefully 
cultivate friendly relations in foreign policy and not work with 
a sledge hammer. 
  [Theviesen] A sledge hammer like these photos, for instance 
[video shows black-and-white photographs in a briefcase]. They 
were supposed to prove the use of German weapons against the 
Kurds. Human rights groups passed them on to the Foreign 
Ministry weeks ago. Even before, the Federal Government had 
ordered a suspension of arms deliveries. 
  BONN DIREKT now has obtained the analysis of the photos, 
which was carried out by the Defense Ministry and is available 
as an official letter to the Foreign Ministry. According to 
this document, it cannot be proved that tanks with allegedly 
typical characteristics, such as rear-view mirrors, come from 
Germany. Russian tanks, too, have such characteristics. Trucks 
of the MAN or UNIMOG types are even produced by the Turks 
themselves under a license. In addition, no vehicle is shown in 
combat position or beside destroyed buildings. The summary: 
With the available photos one cannot prove that weapons and 
equipment from deliveries within the framework of NATO defense 
aid, material aid, or special armament aid have been used in 
violation of the contracts. 
  [Kinkel] So far, we do not have any evidence that weapons 
delivered by Germany have been used in internal Turkish 
conflicts. However, I would like to make a final statement only 
when I have received the official result. 
  [Theviesen] This is supposed to happen this week. Then Bonn 
will probably give the go-ahead for the delivery of 16 Phantom 
jets, the last installment of military aid to Turkey for the 
time being. 

