Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Angel Paez] </F>
  [Text] The "Cachique Rivera Clan" is a drug trafficking 
gang that is still free and continues to manufacture cocaine in 
Augaytia and in the Pozuzo Valley under the orders of the Cali 
Cartel. 
  None of its members have ever been arrested although the 
police have conducted several operations against it, both in the 
coca producing areas and in Lima where five stylish houses were 
searched in San Borja and La Molina. 
  The Cachique Rivera brothers, from Huanuco, is another 
family 
involved in large-scale trafficking. The Cachique Rivera family 
is perhaps the only drug gang authorized by the Cali Cartel to 
produce cocaine hydrochloride in Peru. 
  The Cachique Rivera family, originally residents of Rupa 
Rupa, Leoncio Prado Province, Huanuco Department, mainly conduct 
their operations in the Pozuzo Valley, a jungle area in Pasco. 
They work from a big abandoned ranch that has a secret landing 
strip. They also operate in Aguaytia, Padre Abad Province, 
Ucayali Department. 
  Cocaine production is a task carried out exclusively by 
Colombians in their country, but the Cachique Riveras have 
achieved such an important organizational level that the Cali 
Cartel heads have allowed them a biweekly production of between 
400 and 500 kg of cocaine. 
  Chemists from Colombia, trained by their Peruvian employers, 
are in charge of transforming the cocaine paste into cocaine. 
  In November 1991, the Cachique Rivera family received a 
harsh 
blow from the antidrug forces when their laboratory in Boca de 
Santa Ana, Ycayali, was destroyed and 250 kg of cocaine 
hydrochloride was seized. 
  About 100 kg of this seizure was "lost" in the offices of 
the 
Executive Agency for Drug Control, Ofecod. This scandal was not 
investigated and remains unpunished. 
  The Cachique Rivera family organization system is highly 
effective because none of its members were arrested during the 
police operation. Two years later they again evaded the 
security forces. 
  On 5 February 1993, the DEA invaded the Cachique Rivera 
hideout in Aguaytia and found a well-equipped laboratory, a 
sophisticated arsenal comprising UZI submachine guns, Remington 
repeater rifles, Star and Browning rifles, AKM rifles, hand 
grenades, and a highly- sophisticated communication system, 
including an Icon transceiver and Yaesu equipment. 
  Moreover, the antidrug force found 25 gallons of 100-LL type 
gasoline for small planes. 
  Three days later, and as a result of the questioning of 
those 
arrested in the operation -- Marina Saavedra Ramirez, Augusto 
Figueroa Garcia and Alicia Egoavil Grandez -- the police broke 
into the Cachique Rivera laboratory in Carachama, Aguaytia, on 
the Yurac River. 
  The antidrug force found 48 large containers of chemicals 
used in the manufacturing of drugs; 16 gallons of ammonia; 50 kg 
of potassium permanganate; 16 hammocks used in the drying of the 
cocaine paste; 10 zinc sheets; high-precision scales; six 
microwave ovens; a dozen generators, and even a beacon [faro]. 
  The quality of the infrastructure, which included electric 
water pumps, 50 primus stoves, metal sieves, and staples to feed 
two dozen people for three months, show the volume of the gang's 
production. 
  The Dinandro [Antidrug Division] again gave another blow to 
the Cachique Rivera family on 28 April 1993, but this time it 
was in Lima. 
  The antidrug police raided five stylish houses owned by the 
Cachique Rivera brothers. Two are located in the La Encantada 
and La Campina urban developments in Chorrillos; two on Breton 
and Tiziano Streets in San Borja; and one on Vina del Mar Street 
in the El Sol de La Molina urbanization development. They were 
valued at $500,000. 
  Other members of the gang were identified during these raids 
but they are still at large. They are: Armando Rivera Tanga, 
Maria Sanchez Rios, Isminia Espinoza Ascencia, Adrian Condor 
Meza and Gladys Escalante Aguilar. 
  Dinandro and the DEA office have reported that the chief of 
the trafficking gang is Abelardo Cachique Rivera, alias 
"Teniente" or "Negro". He was born on 20 September 1959 in 
Bagua Grande, Amazonas. 
  His second in command is Segundo Gaudencio, alias "Capitan" 
or "Guno." He was born on 3 December 1957, in Rupa Rupa, 
Leoncio Prado, Huanuco. 
  The police have also identified Adolfo, alias "Alferez", who 
was born on 20 November 1961; Nicolas, alias "Mayor", born on 30 
November 1953; Margarita, no known alias, born on 7 May 1964; 
all of whom were born in Rupa Rupa. 
  Also identified in the Dinandro files but reported as "at 
large" is the father of the clan, Gaudencio Cachique Rivera, 57 
years old, born in Lamas, San Martin. 
  A high-ranking Dinandro official said: "Cachique Rivera is a 
very well organized family gang that receives a very special 
treatment from the Cali Cartel. They produce cocaine 
hydrochloride in large quantities. They have been identified." 
  A well-informed U.S. Embassy source connected to the 
antidrug 
operation said he is aware of the activities of the Cacique 
Rivera brothers and described them as "an important trafficking 
gang that operates in Peru." 
  With the arrest of [Drug Kingpin] "Vaticano", and the damage 
to his organization with his arrest, the so-called "Cachique 
Rivera gang" has now gained a new level of importance. 
  The U.S. Embassy source said: "This gang moves a great deal 
of drug because they are cocaine manufacturers and hoarders." 
  The Dinandro office reports that in addition to 
"manufacturing" 1,000 kg of cocaine per month, the Cachique 
Rivera gang also "exports" 20 metric tonnes of cocaine paste per 
month to Colombia. 
  The members of the Cachique Rivera gang are being sought by 
the 7th Correctional Court and by the 13th Lima Instruction 
Court on charges of drug trafficking. They will most likely be 
sentenced to life imprisonment. 
  Abelardo Caccique, alias "Teniente" or "Negro" frequently 
travels to Colombia to report on the gang's activities to its 
Cali Cartel chiefs. 
  A Dinandro officer said: "This gang is one of our immediate 
objectives. It is only a matter of time. We are working on it." 

