[Signed to press 6 Dec 93]--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 944Q0281A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SSHA: EKONOMIKA, POLITIKA, IDEOLOGIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article in two installments, first installment by Aleksey </F>
Demosfenovich Bogaturov, candidate of historical sciences and 
ISKRAN (Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of the United 
States and Canada) sector chief; Vladimir Vladimirovich 
Drebentsov, candidate of economic sciences and ISKRAN senior 
scientific associate; and Irina Viktorovna Isakova, candidate of 
historical sciences and ISKRAN senior scientific associate; and 
second installment by authors above plus Irina Yakovlevna 
Kobrinskaya, candidate of historical sciences and ISKRAN senior 
scientific associate; based on the ISKRAN analytical report 
entitled "Priorities of the United States in the New Abroad," 
compiled under the general direction of Doctor of Historical 
Sciences Professor V. A. Kremenyuk; under the rubric "At the 
Institute of the United States and Canada": "Washington and the 
Post-Soviet States"] 
<H5>  [No 12, Dec 93, pp 55-63] </H5>
  [Text] In April 1993, an analytical report entitled 
"Priorities of the United States in the New Abroad" was prepared 
at the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of the United 
States and Canada under the general direction of Doctor of 
Historical Sciences Professor V. A. Kremenyuk. Below we offer to 
readers' attention the first of two articles prepared on the 
basis of that report. Used in the report were materials 
presented by Candidate of Historical Sciences N. V. Osipova and 
Candidate of Historical Sciences M. A. Guseynova. 
  The coming to power of the Clinton administration introduced 
an element of additional tension in expectations regarding 
American policy in the new Russian abroad. The traditional 
interest of the Democratic Party in human rights contrasted with 
a certain number of infringements of them in virtually all 
states of the former USSR, Washington's hesitation to provide 
direct economic support to post-Soviet reforms, and the 
contradictions inherent from the start between the need for a 
priority partnership with Russia as the main strategic successor 
of the USSR and attempts to acquire levers of influence on 
Ukraine, which competes with Moscow, and Kazakhstan and 
Belorussia, which take a more restrained attitude toward 
implementing their independent role[.sup]1[/], all create a 
complicated set of problems colored by preoccupation with 
military dangers for the new American leadership. The 
combination of the sense of danger transformed and "compacted" 
as compared with the Soviet period, which comes from the former 
USSR, and the democrats' official and informal precepts on 
ensuring individual rights, one of which is the right to 
democratic development, today determines the United States' 
approaches to most of the processes on former Soviet territory. 
This position of course includes elements of succession in 
relation to the position the Bush administration worked out 
toward the Russian abroad. While the Republican leadership was 
more openly and insistently interested in aspects of strategic 
stability and control over nuclear weapons, the new 
administration's initial period of activity shows its attempts 
to overcome a certain one-sidedness in previous American policy 
and, while maintaining heightened attention to military 
questions, to provide a more extensive vision of its interests 
related to the extremely painful and contradictory establishment 
of democracy and market reforms in the post-Soviet states. It is 
still difficult to speak of any complete definition of the 
American position in relation to events in the former republics 
of the USSR. On the one hand, Washington is seriously concerned 
over conflicts on the former Soviet periphery and intends to 
expand its influence on the situation taking shape there. On the 
other, it is very clearly trying to limit its participation in 
the developing conflicts, emphasizing the importance of mutual 
understanding and cooperation with Moscow. "We want to develop a 
partnership with Russia in order to eliminate the obstacles 
arising as a result of these conflicts," stressed the Clinton 
administration's official explanation of 13 August 1993 on the 
U.S. position toward the armed clashes in the Transcaucasus and 
Central Asia. 
  Washington's more vigorous posture is of course determined 
by 
the ideological precepts of the Democrats, which are more than 
just slightly different from those of the Republicans. 
  It is more significant that it was precisely in the last 
months of Republican rule and the first months of Democratic 
rule (December 1992-May 1993) that tendencies which were not so 
much military-strategic in character as political and 
political-humanitarian began to develop in Russia and its 
immediate neighbors. 
<H8>  I </H8>
  From the moment of the 1991 agreement in Belovezhskaya 
Pushcha, which reinforced the three Slavic republics' "united" 
desire to move along the path of reforms in a coordinated way, 
each of the parties that signed this document had its own 
interpretation of the document's essential point. Russia and 
Belorussia initially interpreted what had been achieved as a 
variant of a Union treaty without such burdensome components as 
a Union government and the less economically developed Central 
Asian republics. 
  However, the agreement's strongest unifying element was the 
common fear of a union Center and a desire to eliminate its 
might. The constructive element was poorly expressed in the 
Belovezhskaya agreements. Belorussia's leadership treated this 
union as one among equals. The Russian leadership planned to 
hold dominant positions in it. Ukraine saw its participation in 
the agreement as a step on the path of the gradual 
disintegration of the former USSR. 
  The Alma-Ata agreement of 21 December 1991, by which the 
republics of Central Asia joined the triple alliance, made it 
appear that a particular structure uniting the new independent 
states had been formed, one which would allow them on a 
coordinated basis to endure the difficulties of the transitional 
period from the administrative-planned system of economy to the 
market and political independence without the forcible 
disruption of existing ties. 
  Differences in the national interests of the CIS countries 
began to show clearly in the time that has elapsed. Even the 
signed agreements have been revised on a bilateral and 
unilateral basis. The changes in the positions of the CIS 
members toward the unified strategic forces of the Commonwealth 
may serve as a clear example. 
  In accordance with Point 6 of the agreement on the formation 
of the Commonwealth, the member states are committed to 
"preserve and support a common military-strategic space under 
unified command, including unified control over nuclear 
weapons." Regarding the question of nuclear weapons, the 
Alma-Ata declaration noted that "combined command of 
military-strategic forces and unified control over nuclear 
weapons will be preserved." The actual agreement with the 
corresponding measures regarding nuclear weapons says that until 
nuclear weapons are completely eliminated on the territories of 
Ukraine and Belorussia, the president of Russia makes the 
decision to employ them with the agreement of the leadership of 
the three nuclear states. 
  But Ukraine's leadership let it be known that it had its own 
interpretation of the agreements reached. To them unified 
control over nuclear weapons meant employing the "double key" 
principle when using them. 
  Attempts were made by Ukraine to revise the provisions on 
defense issues regarding the unity of CIS strategic forces. 
  Ukraine's position found understanding and support in 
Azerbaijan and Moldavia and then in Uzbekistan and Turkmenia, 
which supported preserving the CIS's common military-strategic 
space only after creating their own armed forces. As a result, 
joining the Bishkek Agreement on the concept of military 
security were 6 of the 11 Commonwealth states: the Republic of 
Armenia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, 
the Russian Federation, the Republic of Tajikistan, and the 
Republic of Uzbekistan. The Republic of Ukraine, the Republic of 
Turkmenistan, and the Republic of Belarus did not sign the 
treaty, building military-political relations within the 
framework of the CIS on a bilateral basis. 
  Belorussia's refusal to sign this agreement destroyed 
Russian 
politicians' hopes to balance Ukraine's aspirations to move away 
from the center with the formation of a Minsk--Moscow--Alma-Ata 
military-political bloc. The "restrictive" approach of the 
Belorussian leadership to participating in military-political 
cooperation within the CIS brought additional, although 
apparently, surmountable, complications to this cooperation. 
  We should mention that the "allergic" rejection of the idea 
of participating in military actions outside the country's own 
undeveloped borders is typical of not just Belorussia. It is 
confirmed by the serious difficulties which Kirghizia and 
Kazakhstan had in fulfilling the decision adopted by the 
Commonwealth to send their military contingents to Tajikistan to 
participate along with Russian armed forces in disengaging the 
warring sides. The parliaments of both republics opposed the 
governmental agreements. As a result, the Kazakhstan and Kirghiz 
contingents joined the peace-keeping mission of the Russians 
only at the start of 1991 during a temporary decrease in the 
level of conflict in Tajikistan. 
  Russia's switch in late May 1993 to selling energy media at 
world prices (introducing customs duties on oil exports and the 
like) was an example of the use of methods of economic pressure 
on the countries of the near abroad. The Russian action promoted 
the adoption of the decision to prepare a treaty on the creation 
of an economic union at the first meeting of the CIS 
Consultative-Coordinating Committee on 1 June 1993. The treaty, 
which above all deals with removing customs barriers, regulating 
the mechanisms of interstate payments, and standardizing certain 
economic legislation, was supposed to be signed on 16 July 1993 
at the meeting of the heads of state in Yerevan. 
  But the planned course of events was disrupted by the more 
drastic aggravation of the economic situation in certain CIS 
republics than was expected. Above all, for the first time since 
the dissolution of the USSR, Ukraine felt that it was in fact in 
a critical situation. The economic and following that financial 
crisis, the drop in the exchange rate of the kupon, and as a 
result the explosion of sociopolitical activism, for the most 
part in regions of the northeast which depend on Russian energy 
supplies to a greater degree, resulted in Kiev's convulsive 
efforts to regulate trade with Russia in order to stabilize the 
situation in Ukraine. 
  The Asian republics of the CIS brought additional anxiety to 
the situation. In their own way also dissatisfied with the pace 
and conditions of economic cooperation with Slavic partners, 
they participated even more enthusiastically in the conference 
of heads of governments of the countries of Central Asia, 
Kazakhstan, Turkey, and Pakistan held in Ankara within the 
framework of the transatlantic Organization of Economic 
Cooperation in the first 10 days of July 1993. During the 
conference, an agreement to improve the freight transport system 
among the participating states was signed and certain issues 
related to relaxing customs regulations and liberalizing trade 
conditions were agreed upon. 
  Against the background of this conference, on 13 July 1993 
the heads of governments of Russia, Ukraine, and Belorussia 
signed their own joint statement on urgent measures to deepen 
economic integration, which in fact forestalled the signing of a 
comprehensive economic treaty within the CIS. This was the 
second, after the Belovezhskaya Pushcha shock of 1991, assertion 
of special relations within the CIS based on the "Slavic angle." 
  The rapid evolution of Ukraine's position on issues of a 
union with Russia deserves specific attention. As was noted, 
there have been deep disagreements between the two countries 
from the moment the CIS was created. They are for the most part 
derived from the most important issue, the dispute between 
Russia and Ukraine--in its present borders and with its varied 
combination of social-domestic, economic, and intellectual 
currents--regarding the future of their ethnocultural community. 
  Against this background, the announcement of President L. 
Kravchuk in the summer of 1993 regarding the possibility of 
reviewing the question of a political union of Slavic states 
which did not exclude their military cooperation, with the 
condition that a close economic bloc was created among them, 
must be evaluated soberly, taking into account the deteriorating 
economic and internal political situation in Ukraine. Kiev was 
forced to evaluate its dependence on preferential economic ties 
with Russia, above all related to the supply of energy media, 
more realistically. 
  The detachment of the Slavic subgroup of the CIS evoked an 
excessive response by the states of Central Asia, above all 
Kazakhstan. These states, experiencing the pull toward a union 
with Russia for security considerations, at the same time are 
developing the idea of consolidation on the regional level. A 
manifestation of this was the creation on 4 January 1993 of the 
Central-Asian Regional Commonwealth, which Russia was not a part 
of. 
  Moreover, the coalition states tried to consolidate the 
firmness of their positions toward Moscow and in a broader sense 
toward the non-Asian components of the CIS with as yet rather 
cautious probing of possibilities for establishing new relations 
with the states of the "far abroad" East--Turkey, Iran, the Arab 
countries, and China. 
  The situation which has taken shape highlights the 
difficulties remaining on the path toward integration in 
post-Soviet space. Clearcut conclusions concerning its prospects 
would hardly be appropriate. But given the delicacy of the 
balance of Russia's interests in relations with Ukraine, on the 
one hand, and with Kazakhstan, on the other, relying on a union 
of the three Slavic countries to the detriment of the rest seems 
questionable, although emotionally attractive. For a multitude 
of circumstances, Kazakhstan has many more objectively 
coinciding interests with Russia than it has with Ukraine. 
Consequently, at the very least it has the right to be 
considered a privileged partner of Russia, and the real status 
of relations with it should at least not be inferior to 
Russian-Ukrainian relations. 
<H8>  II </H8>
  The situation in the area of economic relations remains 
complicated. The agreement on the formation of the CIS was 
founded on the idea of the need to coordinate the actions of 
members of the Commonwealth in the economic and 
currency-financial spheres. But when the agreement was ratified 
in the Ukrainian parliament, amendments were made to 12 of the 
document's points, which in fact replaced "coordination of 
actions" with a vague appeal for "cooperation" among independent 
states. 
  Despite the obligations to guarantee "open borders, freedom 
of movement of citizens, and freedom of transfer of information 
within the Commonwealth" (Article 5 of the Minsk Agreement), the 
Ukrainian government began to restrict migration processes. The 
edicts of the Ukrainian President L. Kravchuk on creating a 
state customs committee and his unwillingness to postpone 
introduction of Ukraine's own currency and coupons demonstrated 
his resolve to move faster in reducing Ukraine's dependence on 
the former Union republics. The situation is peculiar because 
even the Russian leadership, following the recommendations of 
the IMF and the IBRD [International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development] and the policy of accelerating economic reforms, is 
not matching them against the potential of the other countries 
of the Commonwealth, and thereby plays against its stability. 
  Understanding of the discrepancy between the rate of Russian 
reforms and transformations in the other republics obviously 
largely determined Moscow's negative attitude toward the 
initiative of the president of Kazakhstan, N. Nazarbayev, to 
transform the CIS into the semblance of a confederation with 
unified coordinating-administrative structures, which had been 
promoted on the threshold of the meeting in Bishkek in October 
1992. Ukraine, Belorussia, Turkmenia, Uzbekistan, and Kirghizia 
also opposed Nazarbayev's plan. 
  The economic ties among the former republics were a 
pseudo-integration which did not reflect the real extent of 
their interdependence. Clear evidence of that is the failure of 
all attempts on the state level to preserve the economic ties 
among the republics. Most provisions of treaties on interstate 
deliveries of the most important types of output concluded by 
the governments were no more than 40-50 percent fulfilled in 
1992, and for some goods the situation was simply disgraceful: 
in the first 10 months Russia's enterprises shipped only 13 
percent of the amount of zinc covered by yearly agreements to 
the members of the CIS, Georgia, and the Baltic countries; 4 
percent of the refined copper; and 2 percent of the lead; while 
the shipment of tin and cobalt through interstate deliveries was 
not even begun. In turn the republics did not fulfill their 
obligations to Russia: during that same period only 6 percent of 
the stipulated level of gasoline was received from Belorussia, 
while less than 10 percent of the petroleum products was 
received from Turkmenia. During the entire year, Ukraine 
delivered only 2 percent of the stipulated volume of dairy 
products to Russia. 
  In other words, the integration pyramid which in the USSR 
did 
not rest on a strong foundation of mutually advantageous 
horizontal ties and transnational capital fell apart as soon as 
the fulcrum in the form of the center vanished. Relations among 
the post-Soviet states returned to a natural state, reflecting 
the real level of their economic and political development and 
varied individual interests. The United States and other foreign 
partners of the former Soviet republics must take this level 
into consideration. 
  Among the factors weakening integration at present are those 
related to the nonuniform socioeconomic development of the CIS 
members and the critical state of even the most developed of 
them. The need to concentrate increasingly more resources in 
order to resolve domestic problems (which in some states are 
rapidly becoming an ever-greater threat to their state 
integrity) forces the economic leaders of the Commonwealth, 
Russia and Ukraine, to reduce the volume of aid to the less 
developed states. This in turn induces the latter (above all the 
Central Asian states) to seek nontraditional partners, most of 
whom are outside the geographic borders of the former Union. 
  The varied speed and orientation of the reforms being 
conducted by the Commonwealth members and their comrades in the 
former USSR are accelerating the dissolution of unified economic 
space. Three models stand out: the radical model (the Baltic 
countries, Armenia, and Kirghizia), the cautious model (Ukraine 
and Kazakhstan), and the conservative model (Uzbekistan and 
Tajikistan). 
  Nor were inter-republic ties strengthened by the fact that 
even the freely set contract prices for output that Russia 
exports to the countries of the near abroad (above all energy 
resources) proved to be lower than the world level, while 
Russia's partners set prices for many goods Russia imports from 
the republics (cotton and sugar) at a level higher than world 
prices. Even Kazakhstan, which traditionally maintained stable 
relations with Russia, in early 1993 raised prices for grain 
supplied to the Russian Federation to a level exceeding world 
market prices. 
  As a result, it seems that it would have been more 
profitable 
for Russia to export raw materials not to the republics but 
outside the borders of the former USSR, and buy the goods needed 
to import there too. Considering that the overall losses which 
Russia incurred in 1992 in connection with price disproportions 
are estimated at 2 trillion rubles, the gain from such a 
reorientation of foreign trade would have been very significant. 
  The turning point to some extent was mid-February 1993, 
which 
was marked by the decision of the presidium of the Russian 
Federation government to switch to trade with all countries of 
the near abroad in prices accepted in world practice. At the 
same time it was proposed that Russia offer the CIS countries 
credits to pay off debts for deliveries of Russian energy media. 
  It is another matter that these steps put the governments of 
the republics which up to then had been trying to observe all 
the rules dictated by Moscow in order to avoid making prices for 
critical imports higher (for example, Belorussia) in a very 
difficult position. For them, in present conditions the economic 
wisdom of preserving the CIS is in many respects disappearing. 
  As the first year of the CIS's existence showed, a universal 
organizational mechanism of interaction in the present stage of 
development of the post-Soviet states could not be created 
successfully. Within the Commonwealth full accord is not found 
even on the basic issues: the draft of the CIS Charter was 
initialed in January 1993 by only seven members, and six of the 
republics signed the agreement on preserving the ruble zone in 
the fall of 1992. In light of that, not one of them (other than 
Belorussia), it became clear, intended to fulfill the 
obligations assumed to coordinate credit-monetary policy, which 
made keeping the ruble as the common currency extremely 
disadvantageous for Russia. 
  All this confirms that for objective reasons the CIS in the 
present stage has been unable to become an economic union of the 
states that emerged from the depths of the USSR. 
  Despite all the contradictory interests of the Commonwealth 
countries, the CIS nonetheless continues to exist. It is 
altogether likely that apart from the temporary and relative 
economic reasons for preserving the Commonwealth, there are 
political conditions forcing these states to keep together. 
<H8>  III </H8>
  At this time one may ponder three variants of the 
development 
of events. 
  First variant: The CIS acquires a more precise 
structure and other republics are drawn toward Russia. This 
scenario in all probability would be accompanied by Russia's 
taking a tougher approach to the Commonwealth and the need to 
ensure support for it on the part of the Russian periphery. 
  Second variant: Several subregional alliances with 
varying degrees of integration (economic, military-political, 
and so on) form within the CIS while observing the principle of 
inviolability of borders. The bilateral ties of the states 
constitute the basis of the subregional alliances. Essentially 
this variant describes the present condition of interrelations 
within the Commonwealth, and it may find increasing support on 
the part of the republics. But this form of the Commonwealth is 
unstable, since the situation in the republics is unstable. 
  Third variant: It is at least theoretically 
possible that a new political-economic formation could arise on 
the basis of the CIS, and regional associations which include 
adjacent areas of several former Union republics would claim the 
role of subjects in it on a par with the republics. 
  Chances that such an association may arise must not be 
exaggerated. But it is extremely important to follow the trends 
toward establishing a special form of direct ties among regions 
of the independent states of the CIS carefully, when the 
subjects of relations are, on the one hand, the central 
authorities of an independent state (the government of Ukraine, 
for example), and on the other, the administrations of the 
national-territorial formations which are part of the Russian 
Federation, for example Yakutia (the Republic of Sakha). Another 
example of this type is the Republic of Kazakhstan's treaties 
with Tataria and Bashkiria. Up to this point the government of 
Russia has not taken similar steps in relation to its partners 
in the CIS. However, there is every reason to consider them 
imminent and useful, at least in relation to regions of East 
Ukraine, the Crimea, oblasts of the North Black Sea Region, and 
the Dnester Region, which are drawn toward development of 
comprehensive ties with the Russian Federation. 
  But under all the scenarios for the development of the 
situation, it is obvious that the CIS does not have a chance in 
the foreseeable future of becoming a suprastate formation able 
to act collectively as a U.S. partner on the strategic, 
economic, and political issues of international relations. 
  Allowing perceptions of the USSR to be transferred by 
inertia 
to the Commonwealth of Independent States has continued to be 
significant for Washington for a fairly long time. Now and again 
it might have seemed that all American politicians related to 
the CIS more as a suprastate than an interstate formation, while 
for the Commonwealth countries themselves, undoubtedly including 
Russia, right from the start priority was very definitely given 
to precisely national sovereignty. 
  However, without questioning in principle the need to 
maintain the policy of cooperation with Moscow, the American 
side at the same time has not found sufficiently weighty 
arguments in favor of maintaining it on the level which the 
Soviet-American dialogue reached under M. S. Gorbachev. 
  But in the first months after the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union, at least two new elements in the approach to relations 
with the Russian abroad were denoted. The first was that at that 
point, apparently having overcome its doubts, the American 
leadership made the choice to take a bilateral approach to the 
states of the former USSR. In terms of terminology, this was 
reflected in abandoning the expanding use of the combination 
"CIS" and replacing it in official statements with the 
expression "new independent states," which earlier had been 
applied only to the former members of the Yugoslav federation 
(Croatia and Slovenia). 
  At the same time, however, the rejection of the 
"supra-country" approach to the states which were successors of 
the USSR illuminates political and other specifics of the 
present stage of development of each of them--either in terms of 
the path of liberal-pluralistic transformations or along the 
lines of protective efforts of one degree of stringency or 
another. Under this approach, the moral advantages of the 
"Russian path" for overcoming totalitarianism becomes clear and 
the "image of Russia" wins out and is enriched by positive 
features. 
  It is not accidental, and this is the second peculiarity of 
American policy, that the Clinton administration has taken an 
active stance toward the domestic processes on the territory of 
the former USSR, above all in Russia, openly and insistently 
announcing its support of the radical-reformist course of 
President B. Yeltsin and organizing international public opinion 
accordingly. The Russian-American summit meeting held in 
Vancouver in April 1993 was only a generalizing symbol of W. 
Clinton's new moral-political activism, and a return to the 
American policy of traditional ethical values and ideals which 
he promised was behind it. 
  Needless to say, demonstrations of solidarity with the 
democratic reforms in Russia must not be equated with actual 
U.S. readiness to devote primary attention in American foreign 
policy to Russian-American relations, such as was devoted to 
Soviet-American relations. Russia has not replaced the Soviet 
Union in American preferences, and in 1992 Russia's role in the 
hierarchy of American foreign policy priorities was perhaps even 
reduced. 
  Compared with the almost self-sufficient significance of 
Soviet-American political relations, Russian-American relations 
in the final stage of the Republican reign proved to be more 
like merely a derivative of U.S. interests on issues of the 
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and military high 
technologies as well as weapons control. Washington's interest 
acquired a kind of "negative tone": The United States strictly 
defined what Russia should not be for it (the source of a new 
threat), but at the same time gave a very dim picture of its 
vision of Russia's possibly positive function in international 
relations. 
  The United States' decreased interest in cooperation with 
Moscow in this regard can hardly be attributed with any serious 
foundation to the "scattering" of cooperation among the states 
which were successors to the USSR. American aspirations in these 
states have been more and more openly colored by pragmatism and 
a classification as "secondary" in relation not only to the U.S. 
military-strategic and at times economic interests, but even to 
Russian-American relations, which still maintain the gloss of 
"special relations" which was acquired in the years of 
perestroyka. 
  Needless to say, in the future, depending on the evolution 
of 
the strategic and economic landscape of Central Eurasia, the 
independent interest which the post-Soviet states represent to 
the United States may increase substantially. 
  But today it is above all determined by the alarm over the 
prospects of the division of the USSR nuclear legacy among 
Russia and the three "seminuclear" republics. The U.S. position 
on this issue is quite definite: The appearance in Eurasia, as 
in any other part of the world, of new nuclear powers is not in 
American security interests, and Washington firmly intends to 
oppose it. Inasmuch as absolutely the same thing can be said 
about Russia too, there are very solid reasons for 
Russian-American partnership on the issue of nuclear 
nonproliferation. 
  U.S. concern primarily over the nuclear aspects of the 
strategic situation in Central Eurasia predetermines its 
interest in Russia's stabilizing relations with its most 
powerful neighbors in the CIS. Consequently, increased 
Russian-Ukrainian disagreements, especially if they turned into 
a serious conflict, would not suit American objectives. Taking 
into account the prospect of Ukraine becoming a fairly strong 
power, in Central European terms, and giving proper 
consideration to its potential, the American administration at 
the same time is a very long way from being ready to help Kiev 
implement its exaggerated claims to a new world-political 
status, especially since for more than a year now the primary 
means of realizing these claims continues to be opposing Russian 
policies for demonstrative purposes. 
  Under no circumstances would alienation and tension in 
Russia's relations with its Slavic neighbors and Kazakhstan 
satisfy American interests until that indefinite time when the 
question of their acquiring nonnuclear status is fully and 
affirmatively answered. Based on that, the American 
administration is not inclined to encourage centrifugal and 
disintegrational tendencies in the geostrategic space of the 
former USSR. At the same time, however, the United States' 
active interest in the situation in the CIS is largely exhausted 
by nuclear-strategic problems. 
  The already armed conflicts developing between the new 
independent states of Asia which are free of nuclear weapons 
(Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, and Tajikistan), for example, not 
only fail to arouse Washington's active interest, but are even 
definite evidence of its desire to distance itself from the 
prospects of involvement at even the very lowest level. In these 
cases, the United States demonstrates a fairly favorable 
attitude toward the actions of Russia, which has been impelled 
to take the role of conflict-stopping device using force by 
virtue of the actual involvement of its armed forces in combat 
actions. The positions of these parts of the CIS, above all 
Armenia, Tajikistan, and other Central Asian republics which 
consider Russia's military guarantees a pledge of their own 
territorial integrity, give additional reasons for the American 
administration to be loyal on this issue. 
  But the U.S. attitude toward the situation in the European 
parts of the former USSR--in this case we mean the nonnuclear 
countries of the Baltics and Moldavia--is fundamentally 
different. Because of historically traditional factors (the 
circumstances of these states becoming part of the Russian 
Empire, their second absorption by the Soviet Union, and 
American public opinion's assessment of both), Washington reacts 
heatedly to the "residual projection" of Russian military might 
in these territories. Here we can hardly speak of the American 
administration's good will toward the Russian presence. 
  On the contrary, the question of the American perception of 
Russian armed forces in the territory of the Baltic Region and 
Moldavia, the withdrawal of which the governments of these 
countries are trying to ensure (in the latter case, with varying 
insistency), continues to sting. But there is reason to assume 
that the United States' principled support of their demands will 
not become a serious problem in Russian-American relations if 
Russia's diplomacy is consistent and insistent in explaining the 
temporary nature of the Russian troops' stay there, as well as 
the economic and organizational reasons delaying their 
withdrawal. 
  There are sufficient reasons to explain the delay in 
withdrawing troops from Moldavia and the Dnester Region: the 
clear desire of the Left Bank population; the role of the 
Russian Army in preventing a major internal Moldavian conflict; 
and, finally, the high probability of the repetition of such a 
conflict. 
  The question of Russia's military presence in the Baltic 
region is more complicated. Diplomats' arguments will remain in 
limbo if they are not reinforced with concrete steps--steady 
progress in the withdrawal of Russian troops to their own 
national territory in a realistic but not too distant period of 
time reconciled diplomatically with the governments of the 
Baltic states. Appropriate in this sense would be parallel 
contacts with and information support of American diplomats on 
progress in the Russian side's negotiations with the Baltic 
countries, so to speak organized working contact between Russia 
and the United States on issues of cutting back the Russian 
military presence in the Baltic Region. 
  There is hardly any use in clearly and rigidly linking the 
question of postponing the withdrawal of troops with the ethnic 
discrimination laws of Latvia and Estonia, especially in a 
dialogue with the United States, as was already done in a fit of 
temper. Russia has a fairly broad set of other means to 
influence Riga and Tallinn without the use of force--from making 
the customs and visa system tougher to measured and selective 
economic pressure on the governments of both countries. 
Moreover, these methods are likely to arouse incomparably less 
of an "allergic" reaction in Western public opinion than the 
question of Russian troops, which have not ceased to be a 
frightening symbol for Europe and the United States. 
  However, the question of U.S. involvement in cooperation 
with 
Russia on legal rights problems, which for Moscow is directly 
connected to the question of violation of the rights of Russians 
and the ethnic communities of Latvia and Estonia oriented in the 
cultural sense to Russia (the Ukrainian and Jewish communities), 
requires much more attention than it has now. It is precisely 
under a Democratic administration that the chances for such 
cooperation seem favorable. 
  Russia may in fact compete with Latvia and Estonia on the 
question of whether their national standards for insuring human 
rights meet international standards and has every chance of 
finding itself in a more advantageous position. Russia's loyalty 
to democratic transformations combined with a democratic 
leadership and public organizations, including Jewish ones, may 
at least theoretically create favorable prospects in the United 
States for coordinated influence on both Baltic countries in 
order to convince them to abandon discriminatory practice toward 
persons of nonnative nationality. 
<H5>  [No 1, Jan 94, pp 37-46] </H5>
  [Text] In April 1993, an analytical report entitled 
"Priorities of the United States in the New Abroad" was prepared 
at the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of the United 
States and Canada under the general direction of Doctor of 
Historical Sciences Professor V. A. Kremenyuk. We present the 
second article prepared on the basis of this report to readers' 
attention (the first article was printed in SSHA-EPI, No 12, 
1993). 
<H5>  Second Article </H5>
<H8>  IV </H8>
  Since the start of 1992, the U.S. administration has begun 
to 
grant aid and strengthen economic ties with the CIS countries on 
a large scale. In the 1992 fiscal year, the governmental Agency 
for International Development spent 235 million dollars for 
these purposes. In 1993 the U.S. government allocated 417 
million in accordance with a law supporting freedom adopted in 
the summer of 1992 and another 412 million in the form of 
outright food aid to Russia, Armenia, Georgia, Moldova, Belarus, 
Kyrgyzstan, and Turkmenistan. Apart from that, in order to 
expand crediting of the former Soviet republics by the 
International Monetary Fund, the United States increased its 
contribution to the IMF in 1992 by 12 billion dollars and agreed 
to contribute half of the 6 billion dollars earmarked to form a 
currencies stabilization fund in the new states on the territory 
of the former Soviet Union. 
  A distinctive feature of the new stage in U.S. 
trade-economic 
ties with the sovereign republics is the organization of direct 
contacts with their authorities. In our opinion it was not the 
particular interests of the United States which played the 
decisive role in selecting such an approach, but the actions of 
the republics themselves, which (for objective reasons too) 
demonstrated an inability to create a strong economic union in 
the current stage of their development. 
  With the rare exception, not one of the republics is given 
preference on the official level either as a recipient of 
American humanitarian and technical aid or as a potential trade 
partner or object of investment (the negative example of 
Azerbaijan, which by an amendment to the law on support of 
freedom was deprived of the right to receive humanitarian aid in 
1993, may perhaps serve as the only exception). Although the 
link between the support granted to the republics and their 
resolve to carry out economic reforms was made very clear, the 
administration's representatives are successfully avoiding 
categorical assessments and preferences. 
  One can speak of the lack of privileges for certain states, 
however, only in relation to emergency humanitarian aid. But as 
to the rest, the priority of relations with certain of the 
post-Soviet republics shows quite clearly through the formal 
equivalence of U.S. economic ties with all the post-Soviet 
republics. Russia is undoubtedly given first place, and 
military-strategic considerations played no less a role in this 
than purely economic factors. Moreover, taking into account that 
"the democrats in the Kremlin cost less than nuclear missiles," 
the United States has been inclined to concessions to Russia 
which the other states of the former USSR have been unable to 
expect. 
  For example, the IMF, in which the United States plays the 
leading role, has never applied to Russia the rigorous rules 
used when granting credits to Latvia and Estonia (the annual 
total of loans to both countries was divided into four equal 
parts, and every 3 months the Fund would check to see whether 
the governments were complying with the conditions placed on 
them and only then would the next 25 percent of the 
appropriations be allocated). For these same reasons, the United 
States pays greater attention to the other "nuclear" republics, 
especially Ukraine and Kazakhstan. 
  Apart from the United States' interest in preserving 
stability in Russia and Ukraine, the special nature of relations 
with these republics is also the result of their significance to 
the economy of the United States itself (Russia accounts for 
more than half of the American exports to the former Soviet 
Union). After Russia and Ukraine delayed payments on American 
food credits in the winter of 1993, the U.S. deputy secretary of 
agriculture, J. Omar, was compelled to acknowledge: "Washington 
needs a program to guarantee continued sales of American grain 
to Russia and Ukraine, since the United States cannot afford to 
lose those markets." 
  The interests of business also determine the distribution of 
direct foreign investment in the former Soviet economy. From 
September 1991 through September 1992, the volume of influx of 
foreign capital investments included the following: 9.1 billion 
dollars to Kazakhstan, 7 billion to Russia, 237 million to 
Lithuania, 197 million to Ukraine, 159 million to Latvia, 88 
million to Estonia, and 40 million dollars to Azerbaijan. 
  The list of former Soviet republics (excepting the Baltic 
countries) which used short-term credits from the U.S. 
Export-Import Bank in 1992 to finance American exports is very 
similar to the previous list. They included Belarus, Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, Russia, and Ukraine. The group of countries which in 
1992 signed agreements with the U.S. Department of Commerce also 
differed only slightly in make-up: Armenia, Russia, Belarus, 
Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Moldova. But even so there 
were undisputed favorites among these republics. In order to 
determine them, it is sufficient to pay attention to the 
selection of sites for offices of organizations overseeing 
American technical aid to the former Soviet Union. 
  During the last year, the Agency for International 
Development opened offices in Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Armenia, and Ukraine and has been preparing a project focused on 
the conversion of the military industry of the CIS countries. 
Special groups of advisors whose job includes creating a 
favorable climate for attracting American investments in the 
conversion of the defense industry will be sent once again to 
Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. It was precisely to those three 
countries where American farmers were also sent in 1992, which 
marked the beginning of a new project (at a cost of 30 million 
dollars) for development of farming in the Commonwealth states. 
  But the public democracy corps, which is largely engaged in 
offering services to experienced American businessmen in the 
area of production, marketing, finances, privatization, and 
creation of new firms, had only one office, in Moscow, and 
planned to open them in Kiev and Alma-Ata. It is symptomatic 
that in late 1992 when the American Bar Association held a 
conference on foreign investments in the former USSR, the topic 
was limited to only three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and 
Kazakhstan. Incidentally, the United States signed agreements 
allowing companies and their employees to avoid dual taxation on 
their income only with these three countries. This created one 
of the main conditions necessary for successful movement of 
American capital into those markets. 
  All this illustrates that in the near future it is precisely 
Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan which will remain the focus of 
the United States' economic policy in the former USSR. U.S. 
military-strategic interests and the priorities of American 
business which is interested in these states' markets and 
natural resources also prompt this choice. Armenia and 
Kyrgyzstan will most likely be next in terms of significance, 
without counting the Baltic states. Armenia, to a significant 
extent because of the efforts of the Armenian lobby, which is 
fairly influential in the United States, as well as the result 
of the consistent implementation of radical economic reform. 
Kyrgyzstan, exclusively because of the resolve shown by the 
government to build a democratic market economy in the shortest 
possible time. And in both cases the state interests of the 
United States, which is trying to acquire as an ally a country 
founded on similar economic principles, proved to be more 
significant than the interests of private capital in both the 
Transcaucasus and Central Asia. 
<H8>  V </H8>
  The American administration's general principles in relation 
to the CIS will of course be adjusted with consideration of the 
specifics of U.S. relations with the particular countries and 
the particular features of the situation within and surrounding 
them. At this time, though, one can speak of clearcut American 
priorities only with some qualification. 
<H8>  The United States' Approach to the European Part of the New </H8>
Abroad 
  U.S. policy toward the particular states of post-Soviet 
space 
is built with consideration of several key circumstances. The 
first and most obvious is the state of deep political and 
socioeconomic crisis of these states. The second is the critical 
question of the violation of human rights in them, including the 
rights of the Russian minority and minorities oriented to 
Russia. And finally, the third is the intertwining domestic 
policy and foreign policy aspects of relations within the CIS, 
which always causes suspicion and disorients U.S. policy in 
relation to Russia and its former "little brothers" in the 
Union, who are extremely scrupulous about what affects their new 
powers in the international political sphere, whose meaning they 
do not grasp very clearly yet. Meanwhile, the United States 
itself in one way or another keeps track of the shaping of the 
new states' foreign policy priorities, although in practically 
everything which is outside nuclear concerns it takes the 
position of an observer who is not specially interested. 
  The U. S. noninvolvement is promoted by the situation in the 
new foreign countries themselves. Like the former socialist 
countries of Eastern Europe which right after the "velvet 
revolutions" plunged away from the USSR to the West, the new 
post-Soviet states, on the one hand, are at a loss and shocked 
by the independence hurled down upon them, and on the other, are 
unable to find the right tone in negotiations with foreign 
partners, and not only Moscow. They typically have exaggerated 
expectations of aid from the advanced countries, which are not 
ready to use their own assistance to compensate for the 
republics' ill-considered disruption of ties with Russia. 
  The idea of a "sanitary cordon" on western Russian borders 
is 
also questioned in the United States, since it is customary in 
Washington to consider the guarantee against rebirth of the 
"Russian question" to be involving Russia in ties with the 
outside world rather than isolating it (this idea, when meeting 
for the most part ignorance in the West, is used to attempt to 
clumsily manipulate the diplomats of, for example, Estonia). 
  People in the United States take a more cautious attitude 
toward the withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic 
Region. At the same time, however, it is precisely in these 
countries that American representatives have encountered the 
problem of infringement on the rights of the Russian minority on 
the level of state policy in a more open form. The laws on 
citizenship adopted by Estonia and Latvia are discriminatory by 
international criteria. As experience already accumulated shows, 
the most balanced instrument for resolving the problems of the 
Russian minorities in these countries is to involve 
international organizations (the CSCE [Conference on Security 
and Cooperation in Europe] and the United Nations), that is to 
say, to internationalize the problems. In this sense even the 
United States can play an important role by supporting Russia's 
position or, on the contrary, refusing to do so. On the whole, 
the Baltic Region is an "awkward" region for American diplomacy. 
  Settling the question of relations of the international 
community with Ukraine is almost more complicated. 
Despite the fact that Ukraine's failure to sign the Union Treaty 
was one of the main reasons (or rather pretexts) for the breakup 
of the USSR, the prospects for Ukraine's future participation in 
the Commonwealth are not predetermined. While in the political 
and military area, Ukraine's line suggests its intentions to 
become completely sovereign, the extremely bad situation in the 
economy spurs it to restore interdependence under conditions 
which are within the framework of relations of sovereign states. 
  Despite the absence of a real military threat to Europe on 
Ukraine's part, the scale of unsettled military-strategic 
questions, above all problems of nuclear weapons control on 
Ukrainian territory, makes this sphere of Russian-Ukrainian 
relations a high potential risk zone going beyond the geographic 
borders of the former Union space. The United States takes a 
very guarded attitude toward the chances of Ukraine's possible 
refusal to join the Treaty on Nonproliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons as a nonnuclear state. 
  The scope and significance of disagreements between Russia 
and Ukraine in the military field seem to dictate the need for 
and feasibility of internationalization of the solution of these 
questions through the joint efforts of Russia and the leading 
countries of the West, above all the United States, within the 
framework of treaties concluded. The Eastern European factor may 
be used in regulating Russian-Ukrainian disagreements, including 
in the military field; this means joint efforts by Russia and 
Poland, Hungary, Czechia, and Slovakia, which have an interest 
in preserving unified control over nuclear weapons on the 
territory of the former Union. 
  The measured and orderly internationalization of the most 
highly controversial questions of bilateral (or multilateral) 
relations among the former republics is allowable. At the same 
time, however, in realizing this principle it should be 
considered that a constitutional crisis reflected either in the 
opposition of the federal and local level authorities or in 
discrepancies between national laws and the acts of local 
parliaments is to a certain extent present in each of the 
European countries of the new Russian abroad. 
  A face-off between the executive and legislative branches of 
power is typical of Ukraine just as it is of Russia. A similar 
problem exists in the Republic of Belarus. Because there is no 
strict delimitation of powers for resolving international 
questions, the governments and parliaments of these countries at 
times fail to coordinate certain aspects of bilateral relations. 
  Contacts among the states have taken the form of 
"multichannel direct interaction." The governments, parliaments, 
local authorities, and subjects of the federation (for the 
Russian Federation) and even certain ministries and private 
business groups of one republic deal directly with partners of 
the corresponding level in another. And they consider themselves 
tenuously bound by the official postures of their countries, 
especially since sometimes there simply is no single posture. 
  Thus, despite the worsening of intergovernmental 
Russian-Ukrainian relations in connection with questions of the 
status of Sevastopol and the division of the Black Sea Fleet, 
the primary area of confrontation has all the same been in the 
parliaments of the two countries, whereas the municipal 
authorities of Kiev and Moscow, claiming a right to participate 
in settling the interstate dispute, have attempted to take 
conciliatory postures. 
  A similar situation is observed in relations with the Baltic 
countries. Despite a tougher Russian line applied to the Baltic 
countries, certain Russian ministries and import-export 
companies continue to step up economic ties with Estonia and 
Latvia, lessening the results of Russia's diplomatic attempts to 
influence the Baltic governments. 
<H8>  The Asian Perimeter </H8>
  In devoting special attention to Kazakhstan, the 
United States proceeds from the idea that this country's 
potential combined with its political stability allows it to 
expect the status of one of the main components in the regional 
balance of forces. Like Ukraine, Kazakhstan is formally a 
nuclear power and will possibly be so for a relatively long time 
yet. 
  President N. Nazarbayev links his position on the question 
of 
the future of nuclear missiles on his country's territory with 
receiving guarantees from the nuclear powers, Russia, China, and 
the United States. But, as far as one can judge, the president 
considers the course of a potential strategic threat not to be a 
direct conflict with one of these three powers, but rather a 
hypothetical conflict among them where the nuclear objects on 
Kazakhstan's territory could be under attack. 
  The challenges to Kazakhstan's security are now obvious. 
Above all they include the extremely unstable military-political 
situation in the neighboring republics of Central Asia, which is 
only a narrow wedge separating Kazakhstan from the regions of 
direct political and military confrontation and rivalry in the 
India-Pakistan-Afghanistan-Tajikistan-Iran polygon. President 
Nazarbayev, who is actively developing a "southern policy," 
favors preserving the Soviet, multinational, and cooperation 
variant of modernization. Neither communist nor Islamic 
fundamentalism is congenial to him. Although Kazakhstan does not 
emphasize its differences from its southern neighbors in this 
regard, it does not hide them either. Naturally, for such an 
independent course confidence in one's own defense preparedness 
is by no means a luxury. 
  It is doubtful that people in Alma-Ata fear the nuclear 
potential of their powerful eastern neighbor, China. First, 
overall China has shown restraint and caution on questions of 
nuclear policy. Secondly, this country, let us not forget, has 
repeatedly demonstrated the ability to use military pressure 
without resorting to nuclear power in past decades. In 
establishing diplomatic relations with China, Alma-Ata promised 
not to harp on nationality questions (above all that means 
influencing peoples related to Kazakhs in the Chinese province 
of Xinjiang). But what if a wave rolls out from Chinese 
territory? People in Beijing and in Alma-Ata are thinking about 
that, and not without reason. 
  Kazakhstan's significance as a stabilizing factor of the 
regional situation is clearly increasing. It is becoming 
Moscow's main Asian ally. And to one extent or another, its 
significance to the United States and all powers in one way or 
another interested in regional stability is increasing. 
  The republics of the Transcaucasus until recently 
did not draw the specific attention of the United States, 
apparently because of its limited economic interest in this 
region as well as the extremely unstable political situation. 
The concentration in a relatively small space of two fullfledged 
wars (the Abkhaz and Karabakh wars) and at least two smoldering 
conflicts (the Georgian-South Ossetian and Lezghian-Azeri 
conflicts) and tense Armenian-Georgian relations makes the 
Transcaucasus an altogether unattractive site for investing 
capital and, on the contrary, makes the country want to distance 
itself from the events occurring there when possible. 
  But the United States maintains diplomatic relations with 
the 
Transcaucasian republics and follows the development of regional 
conflicts, above all the Armenian-Azeri conflict. And 
Washington's position is taking shape under the influence of 
both pro-Armenian sympathies prompted by the Armenian diaspora 
in the United States and a firm intention to adapt its line from 
the standpoint of such an important U.S. ally in the region as 
Turkey, which supports Azerbaijan on the Karabakh question. 
  After starting in the late 1980s from a general expression 
of 
support of nations' right to self-determination, which could 
also be interpreted as an expression of loyalty to the 
irredentist aspirations of the Karabakh Armenians, recently the 
United States has definitely been inclined to understanding the 
impossibility of a civilized solution of the conflict on the 
basis of territorial changes. 
  Information indicating the presence of uncompromising 
sentiments in Yerevan and Stepanakert which the United States 
received through its own (after an American office was opened in 
Baku) and independent international sources as well as the 
active offensive operations of both Armenian sides (Armenia 
itself and the forces of Karabakh) in the area of the Lachin 
Corridor, control over which opens the way to the actual 
annexation of Karabakh by Armenia, played a role in the 
evolution of American policy. Against the background of 
Azerbaijan's obvious military failures, the model of Armenia as 
a victim of aggression, which from the start had a strong 
influence on American policy, has markedly paled. 
  Finally, the real contours of the threat to Armenia from 
Azerbaijan and Turkey have also been revealed. It seems that 
Ankara is able to show sufficient restraint in relation to the 
conflict and even help alleviate the standoff, including by 
means of humanitarian aid and deliveries of energy media to 
Armenia. And Azerbaijan still obviously does not have the real 
potential to decisively defeat the Armenian forces in Karabakh. 
In this situation, American diplomacy has shifted the focus to 
the need for a political solution of the dispute while complying 
with the principle of territorial integrity. 
  The American evaluation of the conflicts in Georgia has been 
constructed in a similar key. After Gamsakhurdiya was overthrown 
and E. Shevardnadze came to power, the situation in 
Georgian-American relations improved somewhat. Georgia's 
prestige also rose in American public opinion after a largely 
satisfactory settlement of the conflict in South Ossetia with 
Russia's mediation which was reached while preserving the 
principle of Georgia's territorial integrity, something the 
Georgian side had stubbornly sought to have respected. 
  Apparently not without taking into account the experience of 
the South Ossetia settlement, the United States was developing 
its approach to the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict as a conflict 
within Georgia, while the North Caucasus national radicals, who 
did not feel the proper limiting influence of Russia, try to 
turn it into a clash between the peoples of the Adighe group and 
Georgia. The development of the situation was significantly 
influenced by the leaders of Chechnya, who encouraged 
anti-Georgian activism, and the overthrown president 
Gamsakhurdiya, who influenced the situation through his numerous 
supporters in Mengrelia, whose territory the Georgian-Abkhaz 
conflict touches. In addition, under pressure of the 
national-republic lobby in the former Supreme Soviet, Russia in 
fact took Abkhazia's side, although it also officially 
restricted the role of its regular armed forces to a 
peace-keeping function. However, that was not an obstacle to the 
armed intervention in the conflict by volunteer North Caucasian 
formations financed, according to Western information, by 
Chechnya and the nationalist forces of the North Caucasus 
republics. 
  In such a situation the probability of a Russian-Georgian 
conflict rose sharply, and that would have been completely 
unjustified either by Russia's long-term geopolitical interests 
or by the distribution of political forces in the North 
Caucasus. It was especially important to Russia to provide 
coordinated pressure both on the Georgian leadership and on the 
Abkhaz radicals in order to force both sides to negotiate 
conditions for settling the situation and substantially 
expanding Abkhazia's rights while unconditionally affirming 
Georgia's territorial integrity. 
  The Central Asian republics, Kyrgyzstan, 
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan, are of interest to the 
United States for the most part in three spheres: exploiting 
resource wealth--from uranium to oil and gas, promoting the 
formation of a political base of development along a moderately 
pluralistic and secular path, and preventing the escalation of 
local conflict to the scale of a regional war. And the balance 
of American interests in relation to these states can hardly be 
considered fixed. 
  As for the U.S. attitude toward local political forces, 
there 
is more caution in it than optimism. In any case the initially 
clear focus in American statements on the need to promote 
democratic, including national-and Islamic-democratic, trends in 
the region in late 1992 has become markedly dampened and 
American policy itself more restrained and less definite. 
  The resolution of the critical situation in Kabul affects 
the 
prospects of the regional situation very seriously. The contours 
of the triple Tajik-Afghan-Russian conflict in fact began to 
take shape after the attack in July 1993 by the forces of Tajik 
opposition from bases on Afghan territory and with the support 
of Afghanistan's armed forces. A specific feature here was that 
it was unclear to what degree the support of the military 
actions against the Russian armed forces on Tajikistan's 
territory could be considered a stable element of Kabul's 
foreign policy. 
  For Afghanistan, the question of maintaining Tajikistan's 
independence is most closely linked to the question of the ratio 
of the Pushtu and Tajik components in the country. A drastic 
change in the balance in favor of the Tajiks in the event, say, 
of the creation of an Afghan-Tajik federation would undoubtedly 
raise the question of the territorial unity of Afghanistan 
itself, since the Pushtus are unlikely to reconcile themselves 
to the prospect of becoming a minority in the country in which 
they have traditionally tried to dominate. But the prospect of a 
new territorial division in this region inevitably affects the 
interests of many neighboring powers, and indirectly those of 
the United States. Nonetheless, during the latest aggravation of 
the situation, Washington has chosen waiting tactics and shown 
no desire to take an active stance toward what is happening. 
<H8>  VI </H8>
  Throughout the entire postwar period, the American 
orientation was actually primary in the Soviet Union's foreign 
policy, although relations with the socialist countries were 
formally declared basic. It was another matter that the 
importance of relations with the United States was interpreted 
negatively, through the prism of the American military threat, 
Soviet-American rivalry, and the expansion of American 
imperialism. In this sense the period of perestroyka (1985-1991) 
differed from the preceding decades only by the degree of its 
negativism, which was initially perceived weakly and almost 
brought to the level of a neutral-interest attitude in the final 
stage of the USSR's existence. 
  The affirmation of new, encouraging prospects in 
Russian-American relations after August 1991 was not simple even 
for the ruling elite to interpret. It turned out that not only 
did the radical-nationalist and communist factions of society 
fiercely protest against the complete elimination of the factor 
of rivalry with the United States from the new Russian policy, 
but even a significant part of the centrist and even openly 
liberal forces experienced some psychological trauma from the 
altogether unusual role of the "complaisant" partner in which 
Russian diplomacy found itself. 
  At the same time, the radical-democratic wing was not able 
to 
persuasively substantiate the need for all-out consolidation of 
the partnership with Washington. Reacting to accusations of the 
"excessive globalization" of Russia's foreign policy, which in 
mass consciousness was equated with its "pro-American 
orientation," the government took the path of moving the United 
States out of first place in Russian foreign policy preferences, 
at times giving it to Europe associated with German aid (most of 
1992) and at times to the CIS states (roughly since the fall of 
1992). These fluctuations reflected the intuitive response of 
practical diplomats to the impossibility of effectively 
distributing efforts without having clear priorities, and at the 
same time their inability to substantiate priorities from the 
standpoint of the new demands and inclinations in a society 
which originated from the period of rejection of the Soviet 
legacy and felt altogether unable to create a new legacy. 
  The U.S. role in the Soviet Union's foreign policy took 
shape 
from at least three main components: first, the factor of a 
global nuclear conflict and the threat to the security of the 
USSR and its allies, a group viewed broadly, including, 
sometimes without proper reason, many developing states which 
were not of direct interest to the USSR (Nicaragua, Cuba, and 
the countries of Black Africa); secondly, the potential of 
American influence on international economic organizations and 
world economic ties on the whole, the condition of which "in the 
nonsocialist sectors" had a fundamental effect on the Soviet 
Union's potential, despite its economic autarky and the 
existence of the "iron curtain"; thirdly, strictly bilateral 
Soviet-American relations whose significance should never have 
been overestimated because of the low level of development of 
economic ties. Only humanitarian and cultural contacts had a 
certain significance in bilateral relations. 
  Given the existence of this structure of Soviet-American 
relations, it is not surprising that Russian public opinion, 
based on the elimination of the nuclear threat in its American 
embodiment, was spontaneously inclined to conclude that Russian 
policy generally had less "need" for the United States, which is 
altogether compatible with how American society began to give 
much less attention to the "Russian question" when it was 
convinced that the "Soviet danger" had disappeared. This view, 
however, which is encountered even among experts, seems at the 
least inadequate. 
  The United States retains its significance as a most 
important partner of Russia on questions of its national 
security. That positive change in Russia's security which in 
fact occurred affected only one thing, the global level of the 
threat of war. Nonetheless, there is no reason to believe that 
the nuclear problem has been completely eliminated in the 
military sense as such. It continues to exist on regional levels 
in the form of many unsolved questions related to the possession 
of nuclear weapons (China, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus) and 
to stubborn and obviously unsuccessful attempts to acquire them 
(India and Pakistan) and active preparatory work in this same 
direction (Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and Israel). 
  The potential of these challenges fits better on a regional 
scale. But for precisely that reason, it can directly threaten 
the security of Russia rather than of the United States. 
However, without cooperation with Washington, that is, to speak 
plainly, without the United States' support of Russia, neither 
questions of reinforcing the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons 
system nor of eliminating the consequences of the dispersal of 
the nuclear potential among four former USSR republics will be 
resolved. 
  This is especially clearly seen using the example of the 
situation with nuclear weapons in the CIS. Ukraine, Belarus, and 
Kazakhstan have announced their desire for nonnuclear status. 
But fundamental difficulties of both a political and an 
economic-financial and technical nature constantly arise in 
questions of its realization. It is quite difficult to establish 
a precise balance among them. Most likely the balance is not the 
same in certain republics, just as their positions regarding 
nuclear disarmament are not the same. But the fact that with 
obviously similar problems related to eliminating nuclear 
weapons, all three republics are in fact following three 
different courses (Ukraine--offensive, Kazakhstan--moderately 
restrained, and Belarus--definitely constructive) makes one 
ponder the dominance of political motives in the formulation of 
the approaches of Kiev, Alma-Ata, and Minsk toward the nuclear 
problem. 
  It may be assumed that for Ukraine this represents its 
desire 
to master the new and attractive role of an altogether 
independent subject of international relations in an all-out and 
demonstrative way, a task which according to the Ukrainian 
leadership's logic is more effectively feasible through a 
dialogue with Washington, but in no way with Moscow. It is no 
accident that all the declarations on nuclear policy have been 
made at the same time as the Ukrainian-American negotiations. 
  The same motive surely exists in Kazakhstan's actions, 
although in a much more proper form. President N. Nazarbayev 
also preferred to lay the foundations of his nuclear policy 
during a visit to Washington rather than in his own capital. But 
in this case the most important thing is still not the 
"demonstrative aspect." For Kazakhstan, there are considerable 
real fears that the country may be pulled into a regional war in 
the event the conflict in Tajikistan escalates with involvement 
of Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, not to mention the mightier 
neighboring powers. 
  As for Belarus, its constructive and definite response to 
questions on reinforcing nonnuclear status is most likely above 
all a means of raising its international prestige as a strictly 
peace-loving state and at the same time a means of stabilizing 
ties with Russia, which obviously remains a preferential partner 
in Belorussian priorities. 
  In this way, the three new nuclear powers, although to 
different degrees, clearly show the desire to coordinate their 
policies on defense questions not only with Russia and not even 
so much with Russia as with the United States. A paradoxical 
situation takes shape where Moscow is forced to influence the 
Ukrainian position not directly but through interaction in the 
United States, and this path proves to be the only effective 
one. However, a nonnuclear Ukraine means security and stability 
above all for Russia, and then for Europe, the world, and so on. 
  The significance of the American factor in nonnuclear 
questions of Russia's security is less pronounced but completely 
obvious. That means regional conflicts within the geostrategic 
space of the former USSR, the two Caucasian (Karabakh and 
Abkhazia) and one Central Asian (Tajikistan) conflicts. Despite 
Russia's desire to distance itself from them, Russian army units 
have in fact participated in combat actions. However, it is 
altogether obvious that Russia will be unable to effectively 
fulfill its slightly ambiguous "buffer" role if it encounters 
tough opposition by the international community, above all the 
United States and Europe. Consequently, the factor of mutual 
understanding with Western partners on questions of regional 
conflict is a most important condition of the effectiveness of 
its efforts in consolidating the borders which still are not 
fully demarcated and equipped and are pervious to destabilizing 
waves coming from the near abroad. 
  A critical question is mutual understanding with the United 
States in the humanitarian area, which is becoming increasingly 
important in Russian foreign policy as awareness grows of the 
problem of the rights of Russian communities which were isolated 
outside Russia's borders after the dissolution of the USSR. This 
question has many facets. But most likely the aspect of it 
related to the violation of the rights of Russians in the Baltic 
is more sensitive and at the same time more difficult to 
interpret. The complex history of Russia's relations with Latvia 
and Estonia[.sup]2[/] makes explaining the attempts of 
representatives of the indigenous nationalities to create 
guarantees for preserving their identity emotionally 
understandable. But these attempts have taken on 
antihumanitarian, unfair forms of actual discrimination on the 
ethnic principle. The link between the question of Russians' 
rights and the presence of Russian troops in the Baltic Region 
may seem controversial. But a clear Russian-American mutual 
understanding of the need for effective peaceful influence on 
Latvia and Estonia in order to convince them to stop 
constructing a Baltic variant of apartheid must appear. 
  But in speaking of the link of Russian policy in the 
countries of the former USSR with Russian-American relations 
overall, one must certainly mention that the CIS states' being 
made paramount in Russian foreign policy priorities in fact 
works to preserve a consistently high, preferential role of 
relations with the United States. Russia is no longer able to 
achieve stabilization and the establishment of peace in its 
closest international neighbors without American support. 
  Relations with the United States have obviously lost the 
role 
of a unique kind of end in themselves for Moscow 
policy, as they were in the Soviet era. For democratic Russia, 
they have acquired the significance of a most powerful 
means to achieve national goals in the sphere of 
international relations, and without that means, as experience 
shows, it is difficult and in some cases unrealistic to expect 
the success of Russian undertakings in direct proximity to 
Russia's state borders in post-Soviet space, where chances are 
now concentrated to overcome the economic crisis and consolidate 
the political stability of the Russian Federation. 
Footnotes 
  1. The traditional Russian names of the adjacent countries 
are used in the report, with the exception of cases where their 
official names are indicated: the Republic of Belarus, for 
example. 
  2. See the history of these relations in the chapter 
"Retrospective" (editors). 

