Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Ricardo Alarcon, president of the </F>
National Assembly of the People's Government, in Paris by Radio 
Rebelde journalist Maria Elena Alonso -- live, monitored in 
progress] 
  [Text] [Alonso]...Cuban official on his tour through 
Europe. A very good afternoon to you, Alarcon. 
  [Alarcon] Good afternoon, Comrade. 
  [Alonso] We have been following your meetings very 
attentively, in both Belgium and Germany -- with 
parliamentarians, government representatives, and businessmen's 
groups. Let us talk a little about the talks you have had in 
France, please. 
  [Alarcon] In France we have talked with Deputy Andre 
Santini, 
who is the chairman of the production and exchange committee of 
the [National] Assembly -- who, as a matter of fact, will be 
arriving in Havana next Sunday [13 February] at the head of a 
delegation from the French National Assembly. He is also the 
president of the French National Assembly's Friendship With Cuba 
group and a leader of one of the parties in the current French 
Government. 
  In fact, we have just come from a very important meeting 
with 
comrade (Robert Hughes), who is the new national secretary of 
the French Communist Party [PCF]. We met with him and a group of 
comrades from that party. It was truly a very friendly meeting 
-- there was a lot of camaraderie -- at which the PCF's very 
clear policy of solidarity with Cuba was reiterated. 
  As you know, the PCF has been at the center of a growing 
movement of solidarity with Cuba that has been expressed through 
the ship of solidarity, and recently the plane that [word 
indistinct] Cuba, with its group of persons of all leanings from 
France, carrying, in addition, important material aid. And there 
is much contact with friendship associations and with the entire 
movement of solidarity with Cuba in this country, in which the 
PCF has been (?at the very center). 
  Comrade (Hughes) reaffirmed to us very clearly the 
continuity 
of that policy on the part of the PCF, following the congress 
during which he was elected national secretary. We brought him a 
message from Comrade Fidel. It was truly a very gratifying, very 
friendly conversation. 
  Tomorrow, we will meet with the president of the French 
National Assembly and with the president of the Senate, and we 
also have another meeting with French parliamentarians. 
  [Alonso] We understand that you and the delegation that you 
are heading will be ending your tour of Europe next Friday [11 
February]. 
  [Alarcon] (?Yes) [Words indistinct] we will be back in Cuba. 
  [Alonso] If you were to make an overall assessment, how 
would 
you describe the talks and meetings in these three countries? 
  [Alarcon] I would say that, in the first place, there is a 
great and growing interest in Cuba's situation. People want to 
know about our problems, about our prospects, from a point of 
view that I would describe as very open, very objective. We 
really have talked to people of every inclination, every 
ideological position, every point of view, and every profession 
-- including important businessmen, especially in Germany. And 
Cuba has encountered that open attitude toward what Cuba means 
today, in the world, and also a growing empathy. I mean, I think 
the stage of astonishment over how Cuba was able to survive the 
tremendous blow of the disappearance of the Soviet Union, the 
socialist bloc, etc., is over; now people are beginning, rather, 
to study our experience. 
  Moreover, to many people in Europe, Cuba means the very 
singular case of a country where material and economic 
difficulties are being confronted while there is, at the same 
time, an attempt to preserve such fundamental human values as 
solidarity, respect for people's rights, etc. 
  Europe leaves one with a very interesting impression: One 
walks the streets here and finds, all over the place, street 
musicians, acrobats, people out there inventing things, to see 
how they can survive -- in one of the planet's most developed 
places but a place where the main theme is unemployment, is what 
they call marginalized people, those on the margins of society. 
  (?I was just) seeing, over French television here, how the 
level of unemployment in the western part of Germany already 
exceeds 4 million. In the former GDR, the figures are even more 
impressive. It goes as high as 20 percent of the work force in 
parts of that country. 
  That is to say, there are very serious problems there. Many 
people have no place to live. They found themselves in the 
streets; and, in the streets, they sing, recite poetry, do 
acrobatics, seek ways to get help from others in order to 
survive. And they see the case of Cuba -- a poor, underdeveloped 
country, but one where, collectively, making use of the wisdom 
of all, we try to find ways to solve our problems while 
preserving the kind of society that many truly find 
inspirational, [repeats] many, going beyond affinities and.... 
[leaves sentence unfinished] 
  [Alonso] Of course. By contrast I wanted Alarcon -- because 
it happens that a delegation of French businessmen is in our 
country from the National Council of French Employers [Consejo 
Nacional del Patronato Frances], a private organization that is 
here to assess possibilities for doing business. I tell you this 
because, I repeat: You are over there, and we have this other 
delegation over here. 
  [Alarcon] [Words indistinct] has talked to me about that 
visit, a very important visit. They are not simply a group of 
businessmen. They represent the employers of France, the owners 
of French businesses. There are some very important firms 
represented there, heavy-weight firms. And, as I was saying to 
you, to this is added the parliamentary delegation that arrives 
Sunday, and a third group of French friends, promoters of Havana 
cigars, which are very popular here. They, too, are going to be 
in Havana these days. So there will soon be representatives of 
the cream of French society over there. 
  As for this businessmen's delegation that is over there now: 
Here in Paris, the people we have spoken with look upon it with 
great interest, and also as evidence of an interest in studying 
the Cuban market and establishing increasingly solid ties. 
  [Alonso] Thank you very much, Alarcon, for your words for 
the 
"Doing Radio" program. Have a good return trip. 
  [Alarcon] Thank you. 

