BFN 

  [Text] As we informed you earlier in the bulletin, the 
first extraordinary meeting of the foreign ministers of member 
countries of the contact group of the Islamic Conference 
Organization [ICO] will convene in a few hours time in New York. 
The meeting is to discuss ways to deal with the present 
situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. We draw your attention to an 
interview by our correspondent with Mr. Velayati, our country's 
foreign minister, who is in New York at present: 
  [Begin recording] [Velayati] On Wednesday morning, New York 
time, we plan to have a private, informal and consultative 
meeting with the foreign ministers of the contact group 
countries. Then we will participate in the ICO's official 
session. Thereafter, we will attend the UN Security Council 
General Assembly. We intend to discuss more profound and 
detailed legal and political issues with the Security Council. 
This is because the continuing complacency by the United 
Nations in defending peace, security, and human rights in 
Bosnia, and in Gorazde particularly, cannot be justified. On 
the basis of Article 51 of the UN Charter, the right of 
legitimate self-defense is one of the fundamental and 
indisputable rights of the people of Bosnia. Unfortunately, 
however, with the imposition of an arms embargo on Bosnia, which 
is based on UN Security Council Resolution 713, the right of 
self-defense has in effect been taken away by the United Nations 
from the people of Bosnia. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] In your opinion, to what extent 
will the decisions to be adopted at the session be effective in 
countering the Serbian aggression? 
  [Velayati] There is no doubt that diplomatic and 
international initiatives are effective in paving the ground for 
inception of a correct or, as the case may be, a wrong process 
at a global level. [sentence as heard] The elements who 
violated the rights of the Bosnian people during recent times, 
were earlier active at the diplomatic and international levels 
to prepare the ground for their actions. If we seek to defend 
the rights of the Bosnian people, we must pursue diplomatic and 
international efforts carefully and seriously, alongside our 
efforts to secure various types of aid and assistance to the 
Bosnian people. In this way, we will be able to present the 
world with a logical explanation for the endeavors that are 
currently being made by the Muslims of the world. [end recording] 

