BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 29 (KCNA) -- School sports games in 
separate events currently under way in provinces, cities and 
counties of Korea entered into the final stage. 
  Experts are struck with admiration at the technical 
movements 
of players in ball games, field-and-track, gymnastics and other 
events. Many players from different schools had displayed 
special techniques in various events at the 21st national games 
of school youth and children held earlier, opening bright 
prospects for the development of the nation's physical culture 
and sports. 
  The games of school sports circles in the domain of general 
education are held annually. 
  Korea which is covered with dense school networks has put 
big 
efforts into school sports, systematically rearing the nation's 
reserve sportsmen and women from among several million school 
youth and children who account for one fourth of the population. 
  In school sports, great importance is being attached to the 
specialization of events. The specialization of school sports 
in Korea was started in April, 1974. 
  Now, more than 211,080 sports circles are operating at the 
senior middle schools and primary schools across the country, 
involving over 520,000 students. 
  Schools make students acquire more than one sports 
techniques 
through circle activities and contribute to the development of 
the nation's sports techniques as a whole. 
  Many reserve sportsmen and women of the country come from 
among them. More than 29,650 athletes from sports circles have 
been registered as reserve players of the country over the past 
20 years. Yi Pun-hui, Yu Sun-pok, Chu Chong-chol, Pae Kil-su and 
Song Hwa-son, people's sportsmen and people's sportswomen widely 
known to the world's sports circles, also went through sports 
circle courses. 
  The Taejong senior middle school in Singye County, North 
Hwanghae Province, briskly conducting sports circle activities, 
has annually won 15 gold medals on an average in various events 
including the basketball game in the past. 
  The sports circle of the Nanam senior middle school in 
Chongjin city, North Hamgyong Province, has set an example 
nationwide in gymnastic dance. The school has bagged over 500 
gold medals in many sports festivals and games. And it has 
produced more than 400 fine rhythmic gymnasts in this course. 
  In the process of the popularization of school sports more 
than 560 schools have won the title of model sports school, and 
342 sports circles the title of model sports circles nationwide. 

