Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Itogi" program -- passages within slantlines </F>
recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Announcer Yevgeniy Kiselev] Since the latest 
attempt to reform the security bodies is again in the public 
eye, the case of the chemical scientist Vil Mirzayanov is very 
relevant. He was accused by the investigating bodies of the 
former Russian Security Ministry of disclosing state secrets 
regarding production of chemical weapons. Although the 
president issued a decree in December closing the Security 
Ministry and creating the Federal Counter-Intelligence Service, 
what used to be the Security Ministry investigation arm does not 
form part of the new security authorities but falls within the 
procuracy's jurisdiction. Many people see the fact that the 
Mirzayanov case has been brought back to life just when the 
process of reforming the former Interior Ministry [as heard] is 
under way is no mere coincidence, and many even doubt the 
sincerity of the authorities' stated intention to truly remove 
the Security Ministry as a political secret police. Reporting 
on all this and on the past week's new twists in the Mirzoyanov 
case is Vladimir Lenskiy. 
  Lenskiy: The Mirzayanov case has been in train 
since last October when the scientist published an article 
called "The Poisoning of Politics" in MOSCOW NEWS. In the 
article he said that despite Gorbachev and Yeltsin's 
declarations, Russia is continuing to create chemical weapons. 
More than that, a toxic substance called Novichok-5, a binary 
weapon component, has been synthesized. Mirzayanov was charged 
with disclosing state secrets and his trial began on 6 January 
1994, even though many lawyers and human-rights activists 
consider that he has no case to answer. [passage omitted -- 
background, international organizations defend Miraoyanov, 
Mirzayanov arrested and incarcerated] 
  Mirzayanov's lawyer (Aleksandr Asnis) thought it necessary 
to 
meet with Russian Procurator General Kazannik, but not only this 
meeting ought to have an impact on the secrets trial. 
  A colleage of Mirzayanov, (Vladimir Uglev), yesterday 
managed 
to obtain a meeting with Yuriy Baturin, the president's national 
security adviser. (Vladimir Uglev's) fight to see someone from 
the presidential entourage nearly led to a real disclosure of 
state secrets. 
  Uglev: On the afternoon of the fourth [month not 
specified], I will turn over to the Russian and foreign mass 
media data on a new type of Soviet chemical weapon, of which I 
am one of the developers. I want to talk about its chemical 
formulae, its chemical ingredients, some ways of obtaining it, 
its military application, and the raw materials from which it is 
made. 
  Lenskiy: The gamble paid off. Uglev was not only 
given a whole hour of the Kremlin's time, but Yuriy Baturin even 
assured him that the Mirzayanov case would soon be resolved. 
The scientist used his meeting with the national security 
adviser to draw the authorities' attention to certain aspects of 
the destruction of chemical weapons in Russia. 
  Uglev: According to our figures and calculations, 
there are far more chemical weapons in this country than the 
declared 40,000 tonnes. At present, the military persons 
responsible, the highest-ranking officials, the Defense 
Ministry's chemical weapons forces directorate, which at some 
point provided that figure, are now apparently trying to fit the 
country's security into it [podognat pod etu tsifru]. 
  Lenskiy: According to Uglev, explosions at the 
Shikhany range are slowing killing everything that lives nearby. 
  Uglev: In Volskiy Rayon, Voskresenskiy Rayon, and 
those that surround the range there has been an outbreak of skin 
diseases. A military institute, under instructions from the 
town authorities, carried out an investigation, but it tried to 
make its investigation prove that cow parsnip was to blame, 
which does not grow at all in Volskiy Rayon. And details that 
objectively, so to speak -- the clinical features of these skin 
diseases as shown by a skin clinic -- have an extraordinary 
external similarity to those of mustard gas [iprit ilyuzit] are 
virtually sweeping the town. That is, there is a large number 
of sick children. Worse, it is growing stronger every year, it 
is very serious. That is, there is obviously a sufficient 
concentration of these substances in the environment so that any 
more could lead to really tragic consequences./ 
  Lenskiy: In the opinion of Mirzayanov, Uglev, and 
their colleagues all this means that Russia is not ready for 
chemical disarmament, neither technologically nor economically. 
The cost of the American program to destroy chemical weapons 
has already reached tens of billions of dollars. The Russian 
program, Vladimir Uglev thinks, will cost even more. 
  Kiselev: By way of conclusion, let me add that I 
was speaking to a highly-placed member of the presidential 
staff, who requested anonymity, today. He confirmed the 
information in the report that you have just seen, namely that 
the absurd and ambivalent situation of the Russian authorities 
over the Mirzayanov case could be resolved some time this week. 

