BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Restoring Territorial and Water Rights First"] </F>
  [Text] Undoubtedly, Jordan is extremely eager to render the 
peace process a success on all tracks to help achieve just and 
comprehensive peace. 
  Nonetheless, Jordan will not accept any peace. For the peace 
that Jordan is striving to achieve is the peace that would 
return all rights, be they territorial or otherwise, to their 
lawful owners. While negotiating with Israel within the context 
of the tripartite economic committee, which also includes the 
United States, Jordan will not accept to embark on economic 
coordination with Israel before the latter gives it back its 
territories, before its borders with Israel are demarcated, and 
before its usurped water rights are restored. 
  As His Majesty King Husayn has repeatedly said, Jordan will 
not abandon a single iota of its territorial or water rights. 
In the same vein, Jordan will not conclude a separate peace 
agreement with Israel. 
  This firm Jordanian position is widely known to Israel, the 
U.S. Administration, and the fraternal cordon states. 
  Consequently, when it insists on economic or noneconomic 
coordination with Jordan before the latter restores its 
territorial and water rights, and before all issues that need to 
be addressed are resolved, Israel spikes the peace process and 
shows a desire to thwart the negotiations. 
  If Israel actually seeks economic coordination with Jordan, 
or any other Arab party for that matter, it must recognize the 
legitimate rights of the Arab sides, and subscribe to the 
relevant international legitimacy resolutions and the principle 
of trading land for peace, as well. 
  It must comply with UN Resolutions 242, 338, and 425, and 
express a willingness to withdraw from the occupied Jordanian 
territories, the Golan, and southern Lebanon. This must precede 
any talk of economic or noneconomic cooperation with this or 
that Arab country. But when it persists with its ground, sea, 
and air attacks on fraternal Lebanon, destroys its cities and 
villages, and damages the houses of Lebanese citizens, Israel 
creates insurmountable difficulties in the path of peace and 
pushes for a military escalation in the region--a development 
that could paralyze the peace process and demolish its very 
foundations. 

