CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Kolinko: "Former Minister's Legacy"] </F>
  [Text] Kiev--A portrait of former Defense Minister 
Konstantin Morozov, a principal candidate for the office of 
president of Ukraine, has been published in the nationalist 
UKRAINSKAYA GAZETA. The ex-minister has been demonstrating an 
enviable political assertiveness as of late. He is sharply 
criticizing the present Ukrainian leaders. In a book that has 
just appeared, for example, he ruthlessly shows the hypocrisy of 
the president of Ukraine, publishing details, carefully 
concealed by the Ukrainian side, of the Massandra negotiations 
between Yeltsin and Kravchuk. The ex-minister's critical attacks 
are being given credence, it would seem. But is there anything 
positive and creative in his political experience permitting a 
moral claim to the presidency? 
  ...Major General Konstantin Morozov, commander of the 17th 
Air Army, was appointed minister of defense after the August 
putsch of 1991, when he appeared to be virtually the sole 
commander in Ukraine who supported the idea of the creation of 
independent armed forces. In fact, Leonid Kravchuk had no choice 
in this appointment. The main role at that time was performed 
not by military professionalism and breadth of outlook but 
political orientation and trustworthiness. 
  Virtually the sole achievement of developed socialism in the 
USSR were the armed forces. Ukraine had the best part of them, 
both organizationally and technically. So that in the creation 
of its own armed forces there was no need to perfect or 
modernize anything. It was sufficient to preserve what had been 
acquired, changing merely the system of the chain of command. 
  But the minister of defense went his own way. He began the 
organizational development of the armed forces with the 
ideologization of the army. Ukraine had decided that the 
soldier's main weapon was his selfless patriotism. A so-called 
sociopsychological service of the armed forces was formed. 
Whereas previously political officers had coached the career 
personnel in the postulates of the classics of Marxism-Leninism, 
they now began with the same zeal to inculcate the ideas of 
Ukrainian sovereignty. A campaign to eradicate from people's 
memory the heroic pages of the history of the Soviet Army was 
mounted. The straightforward implantation of the traditions of 
the Ukrainian Insurgent Army and the ideology of Petlyura, 
Bandera, and Mukhevich began in place of this. Konstantin 
Morozov appointed to the position of leader of the 
sociopsychological service Vladimir Mulyavu, who had in two 
years made dizzying career progress from sergeant of the reserve 
to major general in the field. 
  This patriotization turned out as might have been expected: 
nihilism, increased desertion, and the flourishing of hazing. 
  Konstantin Morozov removed from the leadership of the 
Ministry of Defense the best professionals--for, more often than 
not, the simple reason that against their background the 
professional level of the minister himself seemed quite insipid. 
Thus General Sobkov, chief of the Main Staff, General Oleynik, 
deputy minister for armament, and General Ignatenko, deputy 
minister for personnel, quit their posts. 
  An idea that has as yet no counterpart in the armed forces 
of 
other countries, on the other hand, was realized: unification of 
the navy and the air defense forces. It was in this way 
confirmed that in military matters Ukraine would be going its 
own, original way. 
  Considerable losses were sustained by military research and 
military education thanks to the activity of the newly fledged 
General Yuriy Prokofyev, who was appointed chief of the Ministry 
of Defense Directorate of Education. Of the 34 academies and 
schools, he retained only nine military training institutions, 
having eliminated, for example, the Kiev Combined-Arms Command 
Military School, one of the best in the former USSR, and having 
destroyed during the reorganization the unique equipment of a 
number of training centers. 
  ...Mariya Cherednichenko, an inhabitant of the Onufriyevka 
community of Kirovograd Oblast, believes that army commanders 
made her son a criminal. After having been drafted into the 
army, the young man ended up in a strategic aviation unit not 
far from Kiev. The Busol association, which uses military 
aircraft for commercial transportation, operates at the 
long-range bomber unit base, apparently. The stores for housing 
arms and military equipment were stuffed with footwear, 
clothing, perfumery, home electronics, sugar, butter--goods 
which practical fellows from the Caucasus were ferrying on 
military aircraft on commercial routes known only to them. At 
night the soldiers would be roused at the command of toughs in 
leather jackets to load up another aircraft. 
  Guarding the storehouse with the commercial odds and ends, 
Mariya Cherednichenko's son was unable to withstand the 
temptation, stole, was caught, and was committed to trial. "I am 
not excusing him," his grief-stricken mother says. "But I did 
not send him to the army for him to guard the property of 
profiteers and mafiosi who had built a thieves' nest in an 
operational military unit...." 
  In Konstantin Morozov's years at the helm of power the army 
become a huge proving ground for economic activity. 
  Inasmuch as in the former Soviet Union Ukraine had, as a 
consequence of its geographical location, been the key component 
in a possible conflict between the countries of NATO and the 
Warsaw Pact, the republic was literally larded with the most 
modern military equipment and represented a principal arsenal of 
the USSR. Aside from this, an immense quantity of military 
equipment and munitions had been concentrated here in recent 
years in connection with the withdrawal of Soviet forces from 
the Warsaw Pact countries and Germany. With Ukraine's 
proclamation of independence, all this material wealth became 
its property. 
  And, simultaneously, a base for criminal business. 
  As Grigoriy Olmechenko, colonel of the Security Service and 
people's deputy of Ukraine, believes, a substantial part of the 
$12-16 billion which annually ends up in overseas banks in the 
personal accounts of a few hundred citizens of Ukraine is the 
result of commercial deals involving military hardware and 
equipment. 
  Theft and economic crime have affected all army strata: from 
the privates through the generals. The crime list abounds in 
reports of the sale by soldiers of grenades, automatic weapons, 
pistols, and grenade launchers stolen from military stroes. The 
level of the "commercial activity" of the officers is somewhat 
different: the sale for cash of trucks, tractors, bulldozers, 
equipment, gasoline, and building materials which have allegedly 
been written off. 
  As far as the generals are concerned, the horizons of 
activity are far wider here. 
  In accordance with an order of Konstantin Morozov, a 
Commercial Center for the sale of military equipment and weapons 
was formed more than two years ago under the auspices of the 
Ministry of Defense. The monies earned were to have been 
channeled into the construction of housing for the servicemen 
(several tens of thousands of officer's families are without 
apartments in Ukraine today). 
  But it was ascertained right from the start of the center's 
activity that even the highly modest monies which it was earning 
were being channeled mainly into the replenishment of accounts 
in various banks, foreign banks included, for the purchase of 
prestige automobiles for the generals. The Commercial Center was 
created, incidentally, in defiance of legislation of Ukraine, 
was not a legal entity, and was not, therefore, licensed for the 
activity in which it was engaged. The deputy prosecutor general 
wrote to Konstantin Morozov about this 18 months ago. He did not 
receive a response to his message, and he himself was retired 
shortly after. 
  The Commercial Center, meanwhile, was involved in very 
curious actions. Such as, for example, the deal involving the 
sale of 13 warships, including the Leningrad, Provornyy, and 
Komsomolets Ukrainy ASW ships, the Dmitriy Galkin tender, and 
several patrol craft for a total of... just R35.1 million! In 
experts' opinion, this is tens of times less than their true 
worth. At least, as was ascertained subsequently, the 
Ukraina-AKHTIAR joint-stock partnership, which acted as the 
middleman, made some R129 million for just two ships from these 
13. 
  At approximately the same time the Commercial Center sold 
various authorities eight military bases and three individual 
buildings and did so in such a way, what is more, that the 
Ministry of Defense of Ukraine was caused a loss of more than 
R110 million. 
  Such transactions followed one after the other. Information 
to the effect that approximately 80 tanks were sold abroad last 
year and that the proceeds constituted only $375,000 filtered 
into the Ukrainian press. 
  And although the Commercial Center was ultimately disbanded, 
the public never heard of any of its leaders being punished. 
  Although, no. There was one such instance, but in accordance 
with the well-known rule of "rewarding the nonparticipants, 
punishing the innocent." This happened when 23 Tu-16 long-range 
bombers were written off at a military unit located in Lvov 
Oblast. The Commercial Center concluded a recycling contract at 
that time not with the state-run Ukrtvortsvetmet, as required by 
law, but with the Asper (Kiev) small enterprise. The value of 
the 23 bombers being written off was put at 1.2 million 
Ukrainian karbovantsy. According to the commodity-exchange rate, 
however, a tonne of such scrap metal has a value of not less 
than $1,000. The agreement was signed by the leaders of the 
Commercial Center with the blessing of Lieutenant General G. 
Zhivitsa, deputy chief of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine 
Main Staff. When, following the intervention of the Security 
Service of Ukraine, however, this deal was canceled, the person 
punished was... Major Gubanov, the commander of the military 
unit at which the Tu-16 bombers had been based. A person who had 
had nothing to do with the deal concluded in Kiev. 
  General Vladimir Tolubko, leader of the "hawks" in the 
Ukrainian parliament, who has insistently demanded the 
preservation of nuclear weapons in Ukraine, has prospered and 
continues to prosper. Appointed 18 months ago the leader of the 
Kharkov Military University, he has shown himself there to be 
primarily a magnificent businessman. And it is not only a 
question of his apartment-dacha epic, which was successful, but 
which raised a considerable clamor. The general has conducted a 
number of large-scale commercial transactions: He has sold for a 
pittance practically new trucks in the guise of ones that had 
been written off and leased to commercial entities premises of 
the military university with an area of more than 3,000 square 
meters (what price a military secret here!). And the university 
understands full well why tens of millions of karbovantsy have 
been transferred to the Dobrodiy Commercial Bank: The general 
himself is a cofounder of this bank. I have absolutely no reason 
to believe that the former minister was involved in this 
malfeasance or that he is in the least way mixed up in dirty 
machinations. But what use is a leader who cannot bring if only 
elementary order to bear in the area entrusted to him? 

