Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Within the last half hour it's been 
confirmed that two British MP's have been kidnapped in Somalia. 
The MP's are Mark Robinson, a Conservative member for Somerton 
and Frome, and Tony Worthington, the Labour member for Clydebank 
and Milngavie. They were visiting Somalia with the charity 
Action Aid -- first reports suggest they were seized in the past 
48 hours, along with a woman journalist. She was subsequently 
released unharmed. And on the line from Nairobi we have Roger 
Hearing, our correspondent. Roger, what can you tell us? 
  [Hearing] Well, I've spoken to the president of Somaliland, 
the self-declared republic, which contains the area where these 
MP's were visiting and where they were kidnapped. He told me 
that in fact these people had gone to an area near Erigavo in 
the northeast corner of the republic, they had gone to an area 
called (Mait) which is known apparently for kidnappings by 
militia gunmen in the area, and against his advice apparently 
had gone there with Action Aid and been kidnapped. He could 
confirm that. 
  [Announcer] And is the UN in a position to do anything about 
it? 
  [Hearing] The UN has very few troops in that area at all. 
They carry out a policy of avoiding the area of Somaliland -- 
this self-declared, apparently illegal republic -- and have 
really kept their presence there down to officials. The 
president, however, told me that he was himself declaring an 
ultimatum to these people, he was now sending a plane -- he 
chartered a plane with 10 elders of the same clan as the people 
who had kidnapped the MP's, and that he himself would, if they 
didn't release them within 24 hours, send a force, including 
these technical, these armored vehicles they use in Somalia, to 
get them back by force if necessary. 
  [Announcer] Any clues as to why they were kidnapped, any 
sign 
of demands? 
  [Hearing] Kidnapping in Somalia is very much a matter of 
money. They would have known that these people were important 
figures, visiting foreign dignitaries, and money is to be made 
if you have guns in Somalia and there is very little law and 
order to keep people from kidnapping. So I think money is 
almost certainly the motive. 

