BFN 

  [Text] Thailand and three other countries of the lower 
Mekong basin are expected to reach an agreement for the use of 
the mighty Mekong River within two months, ending three years of 
painstaking negotiations, according to a UN official. 
  Denis J. Halliday, the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP)'s Resident Representative to Thailand and Hong Kong, said 
the agreement for the sustainable use of the Mekong is expected 
to be finalized between August and September. 
  "This is the hope of all four governments," he said. 
  The UNDP acts as facilitator for talks among the four 
riparian countries -- Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and Victnam. 
  In February 1993 the four riparian countries agreed to set 
up 
a Mekong Working Group to draft a Future Framework of Mekong 
Cooperation before the end of 1993. A drafting working group 
under UNDP chairmanship was to focus on two areas; principles 
for the sustainable utilization of the Mekong River system; and 
institutional and management issues relating to the mechanism of 
cooperation. 
  "We are optimistic. A lot of work is on-going. There is a 
lot 
of donor interest. All four governments recognize the importance 
of water management. Governments work slowly and cautiously but 
it's happening," said Halliday. 
  The pending negotiation on the new framework has also 
technically suspended the official re-entry of Cambodia into the 
the 1957 Mekong committee. Although a Mekong official says the 
official admission of Cambodia is purely technical, the country 
itself was quite worried. 
  Ing Kieth, Cambodia's Minister of Public Works and 
Transport, 
said his country wishes to officially re-enter into the Mekong 
Committee as soon as possible so that the committee could be 
fully functional. 
  Cambodia dropped out in 1975 when Khmer Rouge guerillas took 
control of the country. The absence of Cambodia prompted 
remaining members to set up an Interim Mekong Committee in 1978. 
  Ing, who is also chief of the Cambodian Cabinet, was 
speaking 
after a four-day visit here at the invitation of the Ministry of 
Science Technology and Environment. 
  Dr. Prathet Sutabut, director general of the Department of 
Energy Development and Promotion, said that as soon as Cambodia 
signs an agreement to resume its membership of the panel, the 
Interim Mekong Committee will become the Mekong Committee. 
  "Cambodia has in fact resumed its participation in Mekong 
Committee activities in 1991 after signing the peace agreement 
in Paris. Now it wishes to officially resume membership," said 
Dr. Prathet who headed a Thai technical drafling working 
committee. 
  Prathet said the Interim Mekong Committee is now in the 
final 
stage of negotiation. He did not say when a meeting of the 
drafting committee would be held. It last met in January in 
Vientiane. 
  Ing Kieth said he had already conveyed Cambodia's wish on 
the 
issue to senior Thai ministers during his visit, including 
Deputy Prime Minister Suphachai Phanitchaphak and Foreign 
Minister Prasong Sunsiri. 
  "We want to nomlalize our participation in the Mekong panel. 
We agree to the necessity and importance of early 
re-establishment of the Mekong Committee. My country has been 
out of the activities. We need to rebuild the country to seek 
support from outside," Ing said. He expected that Prasong would 
convey this message to the Thai govemment. 
  Some sticking points remained with regard to the negotiation 
on Article 5 of the draft agreement concerning the utilization 
of water. Vietnam, located in the lowest stream, has expressed 
concems about the utilization of water of the upstream 
countries, in panicular that the diversion of waters from the 
mainstream and the use of water in the dry season will affect 
the flow downstream. 
  Ing Kieth said Cambodia appreciated Vietnam's concerns. If 
the upper countries consume much water, Vietnam would certainly 
suffer from the intrusion of sea water into its delta. 
  The minister urged the present negotiation also take into 
account Mekong committee's 1957 basis documents which provided 
safeguards against unfair use of water of the upstream nations. 
  Thailand was a leading opponent of the use of the old 
documents which it said constituted an interference in the 
upstream nations' sovereignty in using waters in the basin and 
and placed obstacle to the advancement of national water 
resource development related to the mainstream. 

