Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By XINHUA reporters Zhou Lixian (0719 4539 2009) and Jia </F>
Fenyong (6328 1164 0516); Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in 
Chinese at 0403 GMT on 17 March transmits a service message 
canceling the following item and asking it be replaced with 
another version; differences between the two items noted below] 
  [Text] Beijing, 17 Mar (XINHUA) -- The Fourth World 
Conference on Women will be held in Beijing in 1995. A total of 
30,000 people are expected to attend the conference. This will 
be the largest international event hosted by our country, and no 
woman in China or other countries has not paid attention to it. 
How is the [variant version reads: ...our country, and it has 
attracted the attention of Chinese and foreign women. How is 
the... (rephrasing)] host of the conference, China, making the 
preparations for the conference? Kang Ling, who is currently 
attending the Second Session of the Chinese [variant version 
reads ...Second Session of the National Committee of the 
Chinese... (adding "the National Committee")] People's Political 
Consultative Conference and secretary of the All-China Women's 
Federation [ACWF] Secretariat, answered this question in a 
highly [variant version reads ...Federation Secretariat, 
answered in a highly... (deleting "this question")] affirmative 
tone: "Our government places great importance on the conference 
to be held in Beijing. Preparations for the conference have 
been satisfactory." [variant version reads: ...on the 
conference. Preparations have been satisfactory." ... (deleting 
"to be held in Beijing" and "for the conference")]. 
  Kang Ling said: In August 1992, the State Council 
established the Chinese Organizing Committee for the Fourth 
World Conference on Women, whose chairperson is Peng Peiyun. 
The Chinese Organizing Committee is composed of [variant 
version reads: ...Conference on Women headed by Peng Peiyun. It 
is composed of... (replacing "whose chairperson is" with "headed 
by" and "The Chinese Organizing Committee" with "it")] 30 units 
and 37 members, 12 of whom are female ministers or vice 
ministers and four are officials in charge of nongovernmental 
organizations [NGO's]. Under the organizing committee are five 
functional subcommittees and one office, with the subcommittees 
being tasked, respectively, with propaganda and mobilization, 
committee affairs, administration, and finance and security. 
The [variant version reads: ...with the subcommittees taking 
charge, respectively, of propaganda and mobilization, committee 
affairs, administration, finance, and security. The... 
(replacing "being tasked, respectively, with" with "taking 
charge, respectively, of" and rephrasing)] functional 
subcommittees have drawn up detailed annual work plans and 
monthly progress plans. All kinds of preparations are 
proceeding in an intensive and orderly manner. Madame Gertrude 
Mongella, secretary general of the Fourth World Conference on 
Women, and Kunren Supalada Mashadi [transliteration of name as 
received], chief convener of "Forum '95," led fact-finding 
delegations to Beijing last June and in mid-February of this 
year, respectively. Expressing satisfaction with the 
preparatory work for the conference, they decided to hold the 
conference at the International Convention Center in Beijing, 
and agreed to hold the opening and closing ceremonies in the 
Great Hall of the People. 
  Kang Ling specifically discussed the work, entrusted to the 
ACWF by the Chinese Organizing Committee, of the committee for 
the forum of NGO's in the host country. She said: The NGO's 
forum is the main venue where mass organizations will discuss 
women's issues. The forum, which has attracted many 
participants, will discuss a wide range of issues. The forum's 
primary theme is "Equality, Development, and Peace"; its 
secondary theme is "Health Care, Education, and Employment." 
The forum will take the form of symposiums of varying sizes or 
special-topic seminars where each of the participants can 
express his or her views freely. As the host, the ACWF should 
organize Chinese women to participate in the forum's activities. 
It is expected that 5,000 people in China are expected to 
attend the forum, surpassing the number from any of the host 
countries in previous conferences. Through the forum, Chinese 
women will make friends with their counterparts in other 
countries, share experiences, and learn from each other so as to 
let the world understand China and to inform Chinese women about 
the world. 
  CPPCC member Kang Ling also discussed the significance of 
the 
upcoming World Conference on Women in promoting our country's 
work toward women. She said: The Third World Conference on 
Women was held in Nairobi, capital of Kenya, in 1985. The 
conference formulated the "Forward-Looking [variant version 
reads: ...was held in the capital of Kenya in 1985, and it 
formulated the "Forward- Looking... (rephrasing)] Strategy of 
Nairobi on the Development of Women." The Seventh Chinese 
Women's Congress set 10 goals regarding the development of our 
country's women in this century in accordance with the 
objectives outlined in the "Nairobi Strategy" and in light of 
China's realities. 
  She said: In ushering in the World Conference on Women, our 
government and people will advance these goals in real earnest, 
working to develop our women's programs in keeping with the 
excellent situation where reform is deepening and various 
economic and social services are flourishing. 
  A large number of women throughout the country are not only 
concerned about the World Conference on Women's convocation but 
have also expressed a strong desire to get involved. Many 
female comrades wrote to the [variant version reads: ...get 
involved. Many people wrote to the... (replacing "female 
comrades" with "people")] Chinese Organizing Committee and the 
ACWF expressing the hope that they would be able to attend the 
conference or deal with some matters related to the conference. 
Kang Ling said: The feelings of the broad ranks of female 
comrades are understandable. What is important is that they 
should work efficiently in their respective jobs; this is how 
they support and take part in the conference's activities. 
  Kang Ling said joyously: Leading comrades from many 
government departments not only actively support the organizing 
committee's work but have also signaled their intention to get 
involved. Taking the World Conference on Women as one's own 
affair is something that we should feel happy about. 
  In closing, she told the reporters: The ACWF will [variant 
version reads: ...feel happy about. She indicated: The ACWF 
will... (merging grafs and rephrasing)] will try its best to 
support and coordinate the various preparations being made by 
the government to make the conference a complete success. 

