BFN 

  [Text] Today the Saeima adopted on its third reading a law 
on the state security institutions and a law on the Bureau for 
the Protection of the Constitution [Satversmes Aizsardzibas 
Birojs]. The law on the state security institutions, as an 
umbrella law, determines the concept and content of national 
security, the legal basis, purposes and tasks of the work of the 
state security institutions. 
  According to this law, the state security institutions as a 
whole will create the Bureau for the Protection of the 
Constitution, the Military Counter-Intelligence Service of the 
Ministry of Defense, the Security Police of the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs, and the Information Service of the Home Guard 
Headquarters. The main tasks of the organs of state security are 
the collection of political, economic, military, and other 
information connected with state security and ecological 
threats, and its use in a manner prescribed in the law, as well 
as the protection of state secrets and other vitally important 
information to the state's interests. The fulfillment of the 
main tasks of the state security organs will be monitored by the 
National Security Council [Nacionalas Drosibas Padome]. 
  The Cabinet of Ministers will monitor the state security 
institutions subject to it. Parliamentary control of the state 
security institutions will be exercised by the Saeima Commission 
on National Security. The Bureau for the Protection of the 
Constitution is a nonmilitary institution of state security, 
which is to conduct, in a manner prescribed in the law, as well 
as organize and coordinate, the intelligence and 
counter-intelligence activity of the state security 
institutions, receiving, collating and using information 
relating to the country's security, defense and economic 
security. Supervision of its activity, in correspondence with 
the laws, will be the work of the Procurator-General of the 
Republic of Latvia or procurators especially delegated by him. 
The Bureau for the Protection of the Constitution is also 
subject to the control of the courts. 

