CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Merete Reinholdt: "Drugs Are Democracy's Worst </F>
Enemy"] 
  [Excerpts] The drug problem cannot be solved by giving more 
money to the police. According to Raymond Kendall, director of 
Interpol, the politicians could better use the money for 
prevention and treatment. 
  Denmark will not be able to avoid corruption at the top if 
European drug policy continues as it has up until now. Giving 
more money to the police is just putting a Band-Aid on a disease 
that needs to be cured at its roots, through prevention and 
treatment, before the European democracies ultimately succumb to 
drug crime. 
  This is the opinion of General Secretary Kendall, whose 
unconventional opinions have set many to thinking. He has 
perhaps even succeeded--however slightly--in helping to change 
the lawmakers' conception of the drug problem. In any case, the 
debate can be heard all over the Western world. The Danish 
government's recently proposed drug initiative is only one of 
many European measures. 
  "The connection between the drug trade and organized crime 
means that today the two types of criminal activity cannot be 
easily separated from one another. Drug profits have risen so 
steeply that corruption in itself is a significant concern. We 
can see it in industrialized countries such as Italy and in 
southern France. I am certain that even in Denmark and Great 
Britain opportunities for corrupting highly placed officials 
present themselves more frequently than ever before.'' 
  ``When I say this, it is in order to make the politicians 
understand how serious the problem is they are confronting. It 
is not just a question of the rise in drug abuse, which is 
serious enough, but also the danger organized crime poses to our 
society. The drug trade is an attack on our democracy and 
economy,'' said Kendall. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Shortsighted </H5>
  "More than 60 percent of all crime is connected with the 
drug 
trade. This increase has occurred during the last 20 years. In 
1974, Europe did not have a real drug problem, although there 
was naturally a small number of drug addicts in every country. 
Great Britain had, for example, about 150 confirmed drug 
addicts. At that time, the biggest problem in Europe was the 
`French Connection,' the group in southern France that produced 
designer drugs primarily for drug users in the United States. 
But a mere 20 years later the situation has reached a point 
where a critical drug situation is found not only in the 
capitals but in all the larger European cities.'' 
  ``This has happened because in the beginning we believed the 
problem belonged to others. We focused our energies on 
pressuring the countries who produced the drugs, offering them 
assistance in eliminating drug manufacturing, etc. Next, we 
expended our resources on building up our own effective 
narcotics police force. At no time did we seriously attempt to 
reduce the demand for drugs in our own countries. As a result, 
consumption rose drastically. Because drugs were not seen as a 
serious problem, production and demand soared.'' 
  Kendall blamed European politicians for this. Even though 
some politicians have been inclined in recent years to 
acknowledge the danger signs, efforts to tackle the drug 
question have not been adequate. 
  "Politicians first adopt a stance on an issue when the 
problem has already reached alarming proportions, and then it is 
often too late. Eventually they comprehend the seriousness of 
the problem and they discover that their expectations of beating 
the problem at home by stopping production in other countries 
are not realistic. The problem cannot be disposed of in this 
way. It simply crops up in a new place, as may be appreciated by 
the fact that a number of the former Soviet states, such as 
Kazakhstan and Tajikistan, have now become centers of drug 
production.'' 
  ``Unfortunately, it takes a long time before social 
assistance programs show results and therefore they cost a lot 
of money. Thus the tendency has always been to give more money 
to the police. This means that we arrest more people and seize 
more drugs. Results like these count more in the eyes of 
politicians whose perspective on the future stretches only three 
to five years into the future--until the next election. In the 
current economic crisis, politicians do not like to spend large 
sums of money on preventive measures that will not yield results 
for many years. Whereas anything that will yield results before 
the next election is OK.'' 
  ``However, they are not tackling the real problem. 
Increasing 
police strength does not reduce the demand for drugs. As long as 
we do nothing about demand, none of our other efforts will have 
any effect. We are going to have to recognize just how enormous 
the problem really is. It has reached proportions where 50 to 60 
percent of our budget goes to security measures and other items 
that directly or indirectly relate to drugs.'' 
<H5>  Toward Liberalization </H5>
  The growing disposition for a more preventive approach, is 
thwarted in part, Kendall feels, by the debate over the 
liberalization of drug policy. He has recently been quoted--in 
Denmark by Justice Minister Erling Olsen--as favoring an overall 
decriminalization of drugs. But this is due to a poor 
translation of a French interview by the English-speaking press, 
he explained to this interviewer. 
  "What I said was that decriminalization of drugs should be 
considered with the consumers in mind. There is no point in the 
police arresting people who have drugs intended for personal use 
in their possession. It is quite another matter in the case of 
dealers, on whom we must come down hard. What purpose is there 
in ensnaring an addict in the justice system and sending him to 
jail where he risks falling in with an even more criminal 
element, when our resources do not even permit us to investigate 
every single case?'' 
  ``Even so, it should be prohibited to sell drugs. Only in 
creating barriers to the use of drugs do we have a hope of 
inducing people to go into preventive treatment programs. They 
will hardly do so voluntarily. Deeply dependent addicts, 
whatever their desire to throw off their addiction, are not 
capable of taking the initiative themselves. They must be forced 
into it. Therefore the leverage to send them to a treatment 
facility once they violate the law has to be retained. This 
requires that treatment facilities be built and treatment 
programs set up. The problem today is that these facilities do 
not exist. Preventive approaches have been left to the private 
humanitarian organizations, volunteer assistance groups, and 
other nongovernmental agencies who have been allocated some 
minor economic funding. That cannot be called a serious effort.'' 
  ``On behalf of Interpol, I speak out against the 
liberalization of drugs. We must act pragmatically and 
realistically. It is not realistic to believe the drug problem 
can be solved through liberalization. In the first place, it 
would be very difficult to do. Which drugs should be 
decriminalized, what quantities should be permitted to 
individuals, how should they be distributed, and what age limit 
should there be? If drugs were decriminalized, there would be 
even more ways to become addicted and the problem would end up 
bigger than it already is.'' [passage omitted] 
  Kendall added that it is meaningless to make a distinction 
between hard and soft drugs or to argue that hashish, at least, 
should be decriminalized. He called this type of argumentation a 
"smoke screen," inasmuch as all drugs are harmful. Society, he 
insisted, would create still more problems for itself if hash 
were made legal. 
  "Furthermore, it is an oversimplification of the issue to 
maintain that drug crime can be eliminated simply by 
decriminalizing drugs. Twenty years ago, the traditional 
organized criminal groups were Mafia who made their money in 
prostitution, casinos, weapons, and so forth. So even in a 
future in which there were no drugs, the organized criminal 
groups would continue to make money in one way or another. Maybe 
they would make less, but they would make something. In the last 
20 years, however, organized crime has changed its financial 
methods. Becoming involved in the drug trade has also made it 
easier for criminal leaders to engage in corruption at very high 
levels of our society," he said. Kendall was formerly a police 
inspector in Scotland Yard's narcotics division before coming to 
Interpol in 1971 to serve as, among other things, director of 
the narcotics division. Since 1985 he has occupied the top 
position in the organization, the first person who was not 
French to do so. 
<H5>  Weapons and Drugs </H5>
  Increasingly, trade in weapons and drugs go hand in hand. 
The 
embargo in Bosnia has opened up the illegal trade in weapons, 
which is chiefly financed by drug money. The same is true in 
Kurdistan and many other places, Kendall said. 
  "Many of the countries who formerly assisted terrorist 
groups in such things as selling weapons in local conflicts 
around the world no longer do that. This means that these groups 
must go out and find other economic sources. The drug trade is a 
relatively easy way to earn quick money. It is easier than, for 
example, robbing a bank." 
  Kendall returned to prevention campaigns as a solution to a 
substantial part of the drug problem. If it is possible through 
informational campaigns to persuade the new generation to stay 
away from both hard and soft drugs, it will affect the whole 
drug network adversely, with economic consequences for 
ringleaders and middlemen. 
  "Politicians' new awareness can be attributed, on the one 
hand, to the link between AIDS and needle users, and on the 
other hand, to the ill effects the problem has brought with it. 
First of all, it impacts our economic situation. But more 
critically, many jobless young people find it harder and harder 
to find any meaning in their future and are, as a result, 
particularly vulnerable to falling into drug dependency. The 
quantity of drugs on the market will not diminish. Heroin, 
opium, and cannabis are being sold as always, while the sale of 
artificial stimulants is on the rise.'' 
  ``Yet, with the proper preventive programs it is possible to 
see results in the future. Compare it with smoking, which has 
fallen dramatically on the basis of antismoking campaigns. Or 
with the drop in the use of hard liquor around the world. These 
things prove to me that the general public is reasonably 
intelligent, when the right information is fed to them. But you 
have to be clear about one thing: We will never entirely be rid 
of drug abuse, we can merely reduce the extent of it.'' 
  Without wishing to single out any particular country for its 
drug policy, Kendall is nevertheless impressed with Sweden, 
which uses more resources per capita on prevention and treatment 
than any other country in the world. The United States is next, 
while the European nations in general do not reap much praise 
from the general secretary, both because they put too little 
money into the problem and because too many places are 
mindlessly using methadone as a treatment without attempting to 
lower consumption. 
  "When people talk about methadone treatment as a solution to 
the problem of drug addiction they are getting things mixed up. 
In my opinion, the only people who have the right and the 
knowledge to express themselves on methods of treatment are 
doctors and addicts. Whether methadone should or should not be 
used in treatment is not within my expertise, nor should it be a 
matter of political contention.'' 
  ``The fact that Switzerland is now experimenting with 
controlled dispensing of heroin is, in my opinion, a courageous 
attempt. I believe this type of solution needs to be tried. Of 
course, one could say that dispensing drugs by prescription is a 
type of liberalization, but I do not agree with that. One should 
bear in mind that it is against the law to take drugs. However, 
in the beginning, in order to solve the big problems, it is 
necessary to introduce an interim type of liberalization. But it 
must not be legalized so that you and I begin to take the 
stuff.'' 
  Despite the measures that are slowly taking hold in Europe, 
Kendall does not see much light in the future. It is far from 
enough, and good intentions will not bring much change. 
  "I am not optimistic. In the present economic situation, 
initiatives are being proposed for which there is no money and 
which will never therefore be implemented. I am not optimistic." 

