Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, Jan. 20 (YONHAP) -- The Board of Audit and 
Inspection (BAI) told the Transportation Ministry Thursday its 
decision to build the track and stations of the Seoul-Pusan 
high-speed railway at ground level rather than underground was 
made without proper study or consultation with other government 
agencies, and it has to be reviewed. 
  In June last year, it was decided to construct the 
high-speed 
train stations and tracks in Seoul, Taegu and Taejon at ground 
level to save 1.43 trillion won. 
  BAI said, however, that this increases the length of the 
line 
from 421.7 kilometers to 430.7 km and boosts trip time from 
108.5 minutes to 124 minutes, and instead of saving money it 
adds to the annual cost by 17.5 billion won. Because the change 
was decided without sufficient consultation with concerned 
agencies, a barrage of complaints against building South Seoul 
Station in a conservation zone and concerning the ground-level 
track between Taegu and Taejon are causing delays in the 
project, a BAI spokesman said. 
  The BAI said it looked into the screening of high-speed 
train 
systems fairly and in detail but found no faults, except for 
some suggestions it cannot reveal because negotiations with the 
priority candidate, GEC-Alsthom, are ongoing. 
  Although Maglev trains excel in tests, they cost up to 30 
percent more than wheel-on-rail trains, and because they are yet 
to be commercialized they proved to be unfit for the Seoul-Pusan 
line, according to the BAI assessment. 
  The investigative agency also advised using a more realistic 
means of fund procurement after finding problems with the 
current plan for obtaining 331.6 billion won, 31 percent of the 
total cost of 10.74 trillion won, by issuing long-term, 
short-term and overseas bonds. 
  Issuance of short-term bonds might raise market interest 
rates and floatation of overseas bonds is difficult under 
related laws, BAI noted. It also faulted design of gradient 
sections for wasting 1.32 trillion won and demanded a revision 
in tunnel designs. 
  BAI ordered stronger anti-noise measures since the 
authorities stated track-side noise levels from passing trains 
at 86 decibels when they are actually 93 db. 
  It was also critical of the project's administration as 
division of work between the Transportation Ministry and Korea 
High-Speed Railway Authority is unclear and they have too few 
high-speed railway experts. 

