BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "March Against Death Penalty and for </F>
Human Rights"] 
  [Text] (ANSA) Rome, April 3 -- An Easter Day march to 
demand the abolition of the death penalty around the world and 
checks on human rights violations was led today by Rome Mayor 
Francesco Rutelli and his Sarajevo counterpart, Muhammed 
Kresevljakovic, from Rome's Capitoline Hill to the Presidential 
Quirinale Palace and on to St. Peter's square. 
  At the presidential residence, a delegation was received by 
Head of State Oscar Luigi Scalfaro who declared his support for 
the aims of the initiative, one of which calls for the creation 
of a permanent international tribunal for ruling on human rights 
violations. "Justice wants crimes against mankind to be 
stricken but does not want the addition of another act of blood, 
the death sentence," the president was quoted as saying. 
  A communique issued by the president's office said the 
delegation Scalfaro conferred with included Rutelli and 
Kresevljakovic, Radical Party Secretary Emma Bonino, 
representatives of the Catholic Sant'Egidio community and the 
Rome office of Caritas, the international Catholic charity 
organization, and other exponents of the movement to abolish the 
death penalty. Also marching, said the communique, were the 
mayors of more than 80 cities in Italy and abroad and 
representatives of European pacifist associations. 
  In St. Peter's square, where the marchers arrived at midday 
under heavy overcast and a light rain, Pope John Paul II 
declared from the basilica's loggia, "Happy Easter to you, men 
and women of Italy." 
  "May the risen Christ lead you on the paths of justice and 
solidarity and peace in this hour of great responsibility. May 
the secular heritage of culture and spirituality which 
characterizes Italy inspire everyone with wisdom and courage to 
pursue together the arduous and indispensable task of building a 
future open to hope and common good," he continued. 
  Turning to the 86 Italian and European mayors who led the 
procession, John Paul extended to them his "hope for peace" and 
"cordial greetings." Among the mayors were those from Vukovar, 
Osijek, Coventry and Guernica. 
  Announcing their initiative Friday [1 April], sponsors said 
the march was also intended to focus attention on the problems 
of financing for the ad hoc war crimes tribunal for 
ex-Yugoslavia, which was installed in The Hague November 17 
under Chief Justice Antonio Cassese of Italy, and on demands for 
the establishment for a permanent forum for hearing cases of 
human rights violations. 
  The permanent court, said Radical spokespersons, must be an 
instrument of international law which punishes human rights 
violations, "a true threat to peace (because) there is no peace 
without justice." The 49th United Nations General Assembly, in 
session in September, will be called on to convene an 
international conference for the formation of this permanent 
forum under the auspices of the United Nations. 
  On the ad hoc court, the Sarajevo mayor said in a letter 
that, "Hearing and punishing crimes committed in 
ex-Yugoslavia... without recourse, however, to the death 
penalty, must be the first step in affirming a new international 
law so that human rights violations, in all the Bosnias of the 
world, become criminally answerable." 

