Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Speech by President of the Russian Academy of Medical </F>
Sciences V.I. Pokrovskiy at the Second (LXV) Session of the 
General Meeting of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
26-30 January 1993: ``The Report of President of the Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences V.I. Pokrovskiy''] 
  [Text] The scientific portion of this session is devoted to 
the neurosciences.[.sup]1[/] This is connected with the fact 
that an increase of the number of people suffering from nervous 
and mental illnesses, the outcome of which in half of the cases 
is disability, is being noted throughout the world. 
  This is not only the loss of manpower resources, but also a 
loss of the intellectual potential of the nation, as well as one 
of the causes of serious social deformations. Diseases of the 
brain are usually accompanied by disturbances of thinking, 
behavior, and the emotional sphere, of which an increase of drug 
addiction, crime, and suicides is a direct consequence. 
  In Russia not less than 20 million people suffer from 
diseases that to one degree or another are connected with brain 
disorders. About 5 million people are chronically disabled owing 
to these illnesses. The maintenance of patients costs 
approximately 23 billion rubles [R] a year. 
  The scale of the total losses of society in connection with 
pathology of the nervous system is unprecedented. They are 
estimated, for example, in the United States alone at $401 
billion a year, which amounts to an economic value that is equal 
to 7.3 percent of the gross national product. Of course, the 
noneconomic harm is extremely great, but it is not liable to 
scientific determination. 
  It should also be considered that the process of the 
increase 
of the length of the biological life of man is not being 
accompanied, unfortunately, by the lengthening of the period of 
his labor activity. On the contrary, it is making him 
unprotected against nervous system diseases of old age and in 
need of the help of others. Nervous and mental disorders, 
particularly psychoemotional stress, are the favorite place of 
the application of the activity of charlatans of all 
colors--sorcerers, psychics, and miracle workers. This also 
merits the more active attention of specialists. 
  The World Health Organization and the leadership of a number 
of countries have made at the state level the decision on a 
10-year program on the study of the brain--``The Decade of the 
Brain, 1990-2000''. In the United States this program has 
acquired the status of a law, which has been passed by Congress 
with its annual financing in the amount of more than $350 
million a year. Similar decisions are being made in the 
countries of the European Community. 
  The development of the neurosciences in our country and in 
the world confirms the possibility of obtaining in a 
comparatively short time results that can actually change the 
negative situation in the country, which is due to the medical 
and socioeconomic consequences of brain diseases of man. In 
connection with this the problems of the neurosciences should be 
grouped with priority problems. 
  It should be recalled that earlier the AMS [Academy of 
Medical Sciences] also discussed repeatedly the problems of the 
central nervous system and the brain. In particular, the sixth 
session (1950), which was held jointly with the USSR Academy of 
Sciences, was devoted to the development of the teachings of 
I.P. Pavlov. At the seventh session (1952) the first results 
were supplied (the theme--all diseases are due to a cortical 
disorder). The ninth session (1955) was the physiological 
analysis of the problem of inhibition. The 24th session (1967) 
was devoted to questions of the disturbance of cerebral 
circulation. The 32d session (1972) discussed the problem ``The 
Physiology and Pathology of the Brain.'' 
  At this session, which encompasses a wide range of 
questions, 
we need to approve the scientific program ``The Human Brain.'' 
We hope that this will be the first academic program that is 
supported by state financing, on which there is preliminary 
agreement. 
  The Presidium of the RAMS [Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences] also made the decision to conclude the scientific part 
of the sessions henceforth not with decrees, but with the 
adoption of scientific programs, the financing of the themes and 
projects of which will be carried out on a competitive (grant) 
basis. 
  Experience has shown that the formulation of state programs 
with special-purpose budget financing and their implementation 
on the basis of an expert evaluation and competitive selection 
during the period of an acute financial shortage are the most 
advanced form of the planning, coordination, and support of the 
most promising scientific research and collectives of 
scientists. The programs make it possible to consolidate the 
efforts of researchers, to set up temporary collectives, to halt 
in good time the financing of unpromising ones and, on the 
contrary, to strengthen promising ones. 
  Goal program financing is a tool, by means of which the 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences can accomplish its main 
task--to raise to a qualitatively new level basic and applied 
research in medicine, the results of which will make a 
substantial change in the notion of the processes of vital 
activity of the healthy and ill person or will cause the radical 
improvement of the methods of diagnosis and treatment. 
  Under present conditions medical science, just as the entire 
domestic health care system, is close to crisis. The 
preservation of the Academy of Medical Sciences, its structure, 
and the scientific potential is a great achievement. However, 
thus far there is no concept of state policy of the development 
of medical science in the country, since the judicial legal 
status of scientific research and other institutions and of the 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences itself has not been 
determined. The phrase from the Edict of the President of the 
Russian Federation that the functions on the organization and 
coordination of medical science in the country have been 
assigned to the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, is well 
known. But by other Edicts similar functions have been assigned 
to other ministries and departments, and this phrase remains a 
phrase, since legal and financial ties of the scientific 
councils of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences with higher 
educational institutions and scientific research institutions of 
the Ministry of Health and the State Committee of Sanitary 
Epidemiological Supervision of the Russian Federation and of 
other departmental affiliation are lacking. Owing to this the 
indicated institutions do not submit to the scientific councils 
and problem commissions plans and reports of scientific research 
work. Each department is introducing its own planning and 
reporting cards, which often are incompatible with each other. 
  Now 62 state programs, which concern the protection of the 
health of the population and medical science and were submitted 
by 12 ministries and departments, are now under consideration 
for financing in the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation. 
The Ministry of Health of Russia has drawn up another 38 
sectorial programs, moreover, all the programs are financed from 
the state budget, bypassing the Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences. There are also various foundations. In the formed 
situation it is obvious that the Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences is unable to perform the functions assigned to it by 
the President of Russia on the planning and coordination of 
medical science in the country, to conduct a qualified 
examination of scientific research projects, and to plan the 
further development of health care. 
  Taking what has been said into account, since August 1992 a 
commission, which was set up by the Presidium of the Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, under the chairmanship of 
Academician of the RAMS V.D. Fedorov has been working on the 
preparation of the Law on the development of medical science and 
the place of our academy. The commission has been working 
together with the Committee for Health of the Supreme Soviet of 
the Russian Federation and at present has prepared documents for 
the holding of parliamentary readings, which will take place in 
February 1993. 
  The necessity of the Law is determined by a number of 
circumstances, among which the most important one is the 
determination of the place of the academy and its institutions 
in the system of the distribution of the forms of property 
(state, municipal, and private) in accordance with the Law on 
Property, which was passed after the Edict of the President of 4 
January 1992 on the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences. 
  In the Law the landed ownership of other types of property 
should also been attached to the academy and its institutions, 
since the lack of the same considerably complicates the activity 
of scientific collectives. 
  Further, it is necessary to legalize what was incorporated 
in 
the decree of the Government of July 1992 and, unfortunately, 
has thus far not been fulfilled--the determination of the level 
of financing of the academy and the social support of scientific 
associates of the academy and the assignment to the academy of 
the expert evaluation of scientific plans and the distribution 
of assets through grants. 
  In spite of the existing difficulties, scientists of Russia 
continued to conduct scientific research intensively. 
  Among the achievements of world level are the isolation of 
clones of hybridoma cells, which secrete monoclonal antibodies 
to the antigens of B cells of the pancreas, and the development 
of methods of the early diagnosis of insulin-dependent diabetes. 
Various immunomodulators were developed and were partially 
introduced in practice. Sparing methods of the treatment of 
intricate disturbances of the heart rhythm, techniques of 
transluminal angioplasty, and methods of the combined therapy of 
lymphogranulomatosis, which ensure a five-year survival rate of 
70-92 percent, were developed. New neurotropic and psychotropic 
drugs, heart remedies, and others were developed, tested, and 
introduced in practice. 
  Original X-ray endovascular methods of the replacement of 
blood vessels, sclera-strengthening methods for the prevention 
of the progression of myopias, and equipment and instruments for 
microsurgical operations, traumatology, and orthopedics, which 
have received world recognition, were developed. The Urat-2 
device for the intrarenal crushing of stones was developed. 
  Scientists of the Siberian Department developed methods of 
monitoring the health of the population and the environment and 
conducted depth epidemiological studies of the most prevalent 
noninfectious diseases. This made it possible to carry out the 
medical demographic, public health, and ecological mapping of a 
number of territories of Siberia and the Far East. 
  A collection of molecular probes of synthetic 
oligonucleotides, which is making it possible to study the 
structure of human DNA, were created. 
  The universal phenomenon of regenerator-plastic 
insufficiency 
and the decrease of metabolism was established, which makes it 
possible to reveal one of the mechanisms of the adaptation of 
the body under present adverse ecological conditions and creates 
the foundation for the development of fundamentally new 
approaches to prevention and therapy. New drugs were obtained 
from local resources. 
  It is possible to continue this list. But now is not the 
time 
to talk about successes. It is more important to find means of 
escaping a number of extremely negative trends that have 
occurred. 
  The main one of them is the decreasing amount of financing. 
  At the end of 1992 the amount of financing of scientific 
research of the academy came to R1.7 billion. As compared with 
1991 financing has increased by 8.7-fold, moreover, 24.3 percent 
of these assets (R428 million) were transferred to the academy 
only on 25 December 1992. The amount of financing of clinics 
came to R3,001,000,000. Allocations for the acquisition of 
equipment and the capital repair of the buildings of clinics 
were envisaged in the indicated sum, but 27 percent of the 
year's assets were also transferred to the academy after 20 
December. 
  How was it possible in a week to spend these assets 
purposefully? 
  And as a whole the increase of the amount of financing by 
the 
sections ``Science'' and ``Clinic'' does not offset the level of 
material expenditures of municipal services, which has increased 
by 15- to 30-fold, and at clinics the level of the cost of 
foodstuffs and medicines, which has increased by 50- to 100-fold. 
  Institutions and organizations have cut sharply the purchase 
of equipment and current outlays on scientific work and are not 
buying laboratory animals from nurseries, which has led 
nurseries to the decrease of production volumes, as a result of 
which their financial position is in a critical state. 
  The buildings of institutes are falling to the ground, since 
there are no assets for the performance of capital repair, for 
preparation for operation under winter conditions, and for their 
maintenance in proper condition. 
  An extremely serious situation has formed at the clinics of 
scientific research institutions. 
  The financial difficulties are being accompanied by the lack 
of the necessary drugs, instruments, equipment, and so on. A 
significant amount of imported equipment is idle, since there 
are no spare parts for it and no reagents. Freely convertible 
currency has not been allotted to the Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences for two years. 
  On 15 January 1993 there were no control figures with 
respect 
to the budget for 1993 at the academy. It is unknown whether 
funds will be allocated for the introduction as of 1 December 
1992 of new salaries in accordance with the unified wage scale. 
  Financing for January has been opened in the amount of 
one-third of the credits of the fourth quarter of 1992. 
  It is natural that the financial crisis is adversely 
affecting the state of medical science. The attempts at the 
commercialization of medical science and the conversion of 
scientific research institutions to full self-support and 
self-financing are intensifying. The mass departure of 
scientific associates, moreover, the best trained ones, for work 
abroad under long-term contracts is being noted. Here a third of 
the scientific institutions of the RAMS have completely rejected 
international cooperation, the others have drastically 
restricted its volume. 
  The reason consists in the lack of assets for the 
fulfillment 
of the obligations of the Russian side within the framework of 
the signed agreements, and first of all with respect to the 
receiving of foreign specialists and the sending abroad of 
scientists of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences. 
  Attempts to establish parallel structures or structures that 
replace the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences (State 
Scientific Centers, which are directly subordinate to the 
Ministry of Science, the Higher School, and Technical Policy of 
the Russian Federation, the National Institute of Health, and so 
forth), having taken away the rights and functions of the 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, are being observed all the 
time. Is it worthwhile, perhaps, to hear alternative proposals 
at the General Meeting of the academy, especially as they are 
being put forward or are supported by individual members of the 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences? 
  Of course, the activity of the Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences and its presidium deserves criticism. It is reacting 
slowly to the changed political and economic situation in the 
country. 
  We have not formulated a scientifically substantiated 
concept 
of the protection of the health of the population and the 
development of health care under the new economic conditions. We 
have not achieved, in spite of intensified work, the fulfillment 
of the Edict of the President of the Russian Federation and the 
decree of the Government, which concern medical science. We are 
carrying out slowly, although in a number of cases this has 
proved to be a positive factor, the reorganization of the 
activity of the academy itself. 
  However, it has been possible to do something. Today the 
session is settling the question of the establishment of the 
Northwestern Department of the RAMS, the structure of which will 
be absolutely new for the academy. Higher educational 
institutions and scientific research institutions, which are not 
included at the administrative level among the institutions of 
the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences and are not financed by 
it, will be a part of the department on a functional basis. 
Given the break of vertical ties in the country and the 
strengthening of the economic independence of administrative 
territories the regional principle of the activity of the 
academy is acquiring particular interest, although many 
organizational and economic questions thus far remain unclear 
and inadequately studied. 
  The question of establishing the Volga River Center is being 
raised. 
  The Kursk Medical Institute in the person of its 
rector--Prof. A.V. Zavyalov--advanced the interesting initiative 
of establishing a Central Chernozem cost accounting affiliate of 
the RAMS. 
  Two institutes, which have a large turnover and are 
operating 
entirely on a cost accounting basis, became a part of the 
academy. 
  The Medical Literature Association, of which the Meditsina 
Publishing House, the Meditsinskaya entsiklopediya Scientific 
Production Association, and the publishing division of the 
Moscow Medical Academy imeni Sechenov became a part, was formed. 
There are grounds to hope that the systematic publication of 
medical journals will be resumed. Manuals and textbooks have 
again begun to appear. Work has started on the fourth edition of 
Bolshaya meditsinskaya entsiklopediya (The Great Medical 
Encyclopedia). 
  Several changes of the structure have also been carried out 
in the staff of the Presidium of the academy. A legal division, 
an economic administration, and a consular group in the 
Administration of Foreign Relations have been established. The 
structure in the administration of affairs has been streamlined, 
and several other things. 
  The level of medical science is the level of health care, 
this is the future health of the people. Today the academy is 
experiencing not the best of times, but nevertheless it is 
developing. 
  The academy in essence is beginning a new cycle of its 
development and activity. And our task is not only to preserve 
the scientific potential of medical science of the country, but 
also to enrich the traditions of domestic medicine, which is 
strong first of all in its scientific schools. And if step by 
step we achieve successes, this will help make the future of 
Russia brighter than it appears today. 
Footnote 
  1. The scientific materials of the session will be published 
in the journal VESTNIK ROSSIYSKOY AKADEMII MEDITSINSKIKH NAUK, 
No 7, 1993. 

