Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Daniel Kwan in Guangzhou] </F>
  [Text] A senior Guangdong official yesterday reassured 
property developers that their investments in the province would 
be protected, in spite of a new tax introduced by Beijing. Yuan 
Zheng, director general of the Lands Department of Guangdong 
said although the province would follow Beijing's order and 
implement the Capital Gains Tax, the Government was confident 
the new levy would not jeopardise investors' interests. "I 
don't think the impact will be serious. The formulation of the 
new tax will have to protect the healthy development of the real 
estate market. So (I believe Beijing) will be very prudent in 
formulating the (tax)," he said. 
  The controversial levy, only briefly mentioned in government 
reports tabled at the ongoing Provincial People's Congress, 
might trigger fresh friction between the central Government and 
regions. Regional cadres have indicated that foreign investors 
should be given a "reasonable return" for putting their money 
into the property market in face of the higher risk involved. 
Mr Yuan said the mainland's property development would also 
suffer if foreign investors were unable to make a profit on 
their investments. 
  The official said the Government would continue to give 
priority to basic infrastructure projects in its land-use 
programme, although Guangdong still faced an insatiable demand 
for houses. It was unlikely that projects signed before this 
year would be affected by the new tax, he said. According to 
him, a set of detailed regulations on the implementation of the 
tax which will be promulgated by Beijing soon, will help clarify 
certain controversies over the new levy. They would take into 
account factors such as inflation, loan costs, and project risks 
for developers. 
  Property transactions contributed 11 billion yuan (HK$9.76 
billion) to government coffers last year and the sum was not 
included in the Government's Budget. The Government has 
earmarked 8,240 hectares of land to be sold through auction and 
tender to real estate developers this year. Mr Yuan also said 
Guangdong would control the development of golf courses in the 
province. He admitted there was already an oversupply and said 
authorities would limit each city to one or two courses. 

