BFN 

<F P=106> [By Eduardo Klinger Pevida, a PRENSA LATINA contributor and </F>
economist and professor at the Cuban Higher Institute for 
Foreign Relations: "Agrarian Reform in the State Sector of Cuban 
Agriculture"] 
  [Text] The restructurization of Cuban agriculture can be 
regarded, in fact, as the third agrarian reform law implemented 
in the country in the last 35 years. 
  In 1959, the Cuban Revolution implemented what would be the 
first agrarian reform in a country where 3 percent of the 
landowners controlled 56 percent of the country's total farming 
land; 25 percent of the best lands were owned by U.S. citizens. 
  The law had a profound effect on U.S. monopolies and the 
landowning oligarchy, but it still did not limit the possibility 
for capitalist development in agriculture. Afterward, in 1963, 
it became necessary to issue a second agrarian reform law that 
did have a socialist nature and concept, and it represented an 
important extension of the country's process of agrarian 
restructurization and a reduction in the structure of large 
landholdings, given its limited land ownership to 67 hectares. 
  State ownership of land reached almost 83 percent of the 
total surface or 75 percent of the farming surface. 
Agricultural and livestock production cooperatives, as well as 
credit and service cooperatives, represent 22 percent of the 
total farming surface today, whereas the thousands of individual 
small-scale farmers hold the other 3 percent. 
  The state-owned lands were organized into major farms. The 
development of ambitious state plans entailed substantial 
changes in Cuban rural areas, namely, mechanization, 
agricultural aviation utilization, the replacement of teams of 
animals, the increase of cultivated areas, the extension of 
irrigation, and large-scale use of pesticides, fertilizers, and 
herbicides. 
  Bad habits were also developed, however, as in the rest of 
the economy, with the creation of bureaucratic structures that 
engendered huge payrolls that had personnel not directly linked 
to production. Strong elements of disorganization also became 
the norm. 
  All of these factors had already been seen since the 
mid-1980's, and a series of actions, dubbed the process of 
errors rectification, was started, after the Socialist bloc 
vanished and the USSR fragmented, as it was with these states 
with which Cuba conducted 85 percent of its trade and had 
reached an important level of integration. It was for that 
reason the effect on the economy was so severe. 
  A major plan of agricultural and livestock production was 
already designed in the second half of the past decade, a plan 
known as the food program, to allow the replacing of 40 percent 
of food imports. 
  The entire process of broad investment required to develop 
the necessary infrastructure was implemented, but the sources of 
essential supplies on which the country relied vanished. 
  Quite the opposite of the results expected for 1992 and 
1993, 
the country experienced a profound setback in production in 
almost all sectors. The agricultural situation is extremely 
difficult, creating a scene in which objective and subjective 
problems merge: 

  -  Fuel deficit 
  -  Shortage of spare 
parts 
  -  Lengthy drought as sugarcane was growing 
  -  Administrative 
and individual adjustments to await the resources that were 
received before. 
  -  Insufficient attention to the crops during 
sowing 
  -  Inadequate use of the available resources 
  -  Lack of 
stimulus for individuals 
  -  Disorganization and indiscipline 
  -  Deviation and subtraction of resources. 

  In view of this situation, the country's leadership decided, 
as part of the measures being implemented to revitalize the 
economy, to create the basic cooperative production units, UBPC, 
whereby farmers are given state lands for their own profit, and 
to base production on cooperatives. 
  As a matter of fact, this situation entails a profound 
structural change in the organization of agriculture in Cuba 
that will have a major importance and an extraordinary potential 
and scope. Although it has not been officially given that name, 
we are basically facing the third agrarian reform law the 
revolution is implementing. On this occasion, it is taking 
place within the state sector. 
  This new unit of organization: 

  -  Sets indefinite use of 
lands for profit 
  -  Owns production 
  -  Sells to the state 
  -  Obtains 
technical and material goods through purchases 
  -  Holds banking 
accounts 
  -  Acquires through credit fundamental means of 
production 
  -  Will pay fiscal obligations as contributions to the 
country's expenses. 
  -  Will elect as a group its leaders and 
administrators. 

  Four of the fundamental principles taken into consideration 
to create the UBPC are: 

  -  A direct link between the 
individual and the area of work 
  -  Production for the consumption 
of UBPC members and their families 
  -  The sharing of 
benefits 
  -  Greater self-sufficiency in terms of production with 
higher autonomy 

  The sole objective of this new organization of agricultural 
and livestock production is to obtain an adequate formula to 
face the crisis in a manner that succeeds in stimulating and 
motivating people to raise production with scarce available 
resourses under conditions of maximum efficiency and 
profitability. Now, this sector has to be efficient and 
decrease to a minimum the numerous resources it absorbs from the 
budget concerning subsidies. 
  Farm workers at the service of the state are becoming, by 
virtue of the new law, co-owners of production methods and 
actual production, and, therefore, they cease to be wage earners 
to share directly in the benefits. It is expected that with 
this measure, workers will be more dedicated as they become more 
supportive and motivated by this activity and that they will 
develop a mentality of economics and efficiency. 

