Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Asia Flexes Its Muscles"] </F>
  [Text] Most people in the West today are well aware of the 
economic rise of the Asian tigers. But recent events emphasise 
a parallel growth of political assertiveness in the East. 
Britain's disputes with Malaysia over the Pergau Dam, and with 
China over Hong Kong, are only the most conspicuous examples of 
a wider trend. It is less that Asian sentiments towards the 
West have changed than that there is now a willingness 
forcefully to express them. They believe, and are prepared to 
declare, that they are the masters now. 
  As Asia's economic growth has increased, there has been a 
flexing of political muscle. Alongside that, in the cases of 
both Malaysia and China, is the rankling legacy of the colonial 
era. The Malaysians resent criticism from the press of the old 
colonial overlord. Behind China's resistance to greater 
democracy in Hong Kong lies not only the paranoia of an ageing 
communist dictatorship, but a fierce resentment that Britain 
should seek to impose unilaterally -- on territory seized from 
China by force during that not altogether creditable episode in 
our history, the Opium Wars -- a system of government which it 
has reason to fear. The readiness with which Beijing has fallen 
back on crude anti-colonialist rhetoric, after a period of 
co-operation during the Eighties, suggests that in the emerging 
Asian superpower old resentments run deep. As that malign 
slogan of a malign old man, Mao Zedong, had it: Remember past 
bitterness. 
  In the case of the old Soviet Union during the Cold War 
scholars cudgelled their brains to work out how much of its 
behaviour could be attributed to ideological and how much to 
nationalist factors. The case of China is simpler. It is a 
historically aggrieved power, whose revolution was as much 
nationalist as communist, with a profound sense of its own 
uniqueness and cultural superiority inherited from a 4,000-year 
history. Such a power will glory in, but not be satisfied by, 
mere material growth. The possibility of a more liberal Chinese 
society remains very uncertain. 
  Yet, even if there were progress towards democracy, we 
should 
not expect China to divest itself of its accumulated grievances 
overnight. One could even argue that the greater China's 
political maturity, the more nationally assertive it is likely 
to become, as the world opens its doors. Whatever the future, 
the traumas of two centuries of humiliation, real or perceived, 
will take time to heal. 
  The West will increasingly be irked and exasperated by 
Asia's 
new self-confidence, and sometimes truculence. The Pergau Dam 
will not be the last issue in which British political 
sensitivities become entangled with overseas trade. Our 
response will require a delicate balance between receptiveness 
to foreign feelings and a determination to stand by our own 
values. It does no harm to remind ourselves that Asia needs 
Western markets every bit as badly as the West needs those of 
Asia. It will get us nowhere to abase ourselves before 
temperamental potentates. But we shall do well to keep clearly 
in mind the rawness of their societies' nerve-ends about history 
which we have put behind us, but they have not. 

