CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Iulia Rosca: "A Question a Day Column; `What </F>
Does European Extension Mean?'"; response by Adrian Severin, 
Democratic Party deputy and representative of the Parliamentary 
Assembly to the Juridical Commission for Human Rights] 
  [Text] "At this time, the main concern of the Council of 
Europe is its own redefinition. At the time of its 
establishment, two zones existed in Europe: one was free and 
democratic and the other was occupied and supervised militarily, 
spiritually, and civilly. This configuration no longer exists. 
The USSR has disappeared and, in its place, the CIS has 
appeared. It is not known exactly what type of community it is 
or whether its members really are independent states. The 
Council of Europe will have to redefine the concept of Europe. 
  In this situation Europe no longer appears only as a 
geographic area but as an area of behavior, a cultural and 
historical area and even an area of specific interests. For 
example, the Encyclopedia Britannica -- a scientific document 
used in the Council of Europe -- defines Europe as a peninsula 
of Asia, between the Atlantic and the Urals. Such a definition 
cannot be accepted. What will the integration of Russia in 
Europe mean? The acceptance of the extension of the borders of 
Europe beyond Azerbaijan? 
  First of all, emphasis is placed on the idea of a European 
space, which is extended in regard to culture and behavior and 
on the idea of specific interests. In this system of reference, 
there are movements of geographic boundaries. The failure to 
clarify specific interests generates a state of constant 
insecurity. For this reason, the Council of Europe cannot 
restrict itself to the issue of human rights but also must deal 
with security problems. Whenever European standards on human 
rights are in question, European security is implicitly in 
doubt. The extension of Europe also modifies economic standards 
of property rights and access to the market economy. 
  Romania, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia have common borders 
with the former USSR. Hungary and Romania do not have a common 
border with Russia so they are not part of the so-called `first 
line' in the sphere of interest of the Russian Federation. The 
current CIS should not be identified with the former USSR, the 
inveterate adversary of democracy and pacifism. The 
aforementioned countries should give more attention to their 
mutual relations. However, it would be dangerous for us to 
believe that, with the disappearance of the USSR as a political 
concept, the expansionist and autocratic spirit which has 
characterized the history of Russia for so many centuries has 
also disappeared. 
  We must recognize that today's Russia is a superpower, even 
though it has very great problems. We know that when a 
superpower is `sick' it is more dangerous than when it does not 
have any weaknesses. This is why the internal stability of 
Russia and of the countries in its sphere of influence should be 
a major concern of Europe. Unfortunately, this stability is not 
easy to achieve and should not be confused with moments of 
domestic tranquillity or with pacificist statements made to the 
outside world. Stability must be based on a democratic structure 
and a sound economy, which would truly guarantee the domestic 
and foreign security of states. The instability of a state 
presents a danger for its neighbors. 
  Perhaps we should add Turkey to the list of the four 
countries which I mentioned earlier. Turkey is a neighbor of the 
former USSR in the Asian zone. In my opinion, the European West 
should support these states not for the purpose of creating a 
defensive military barrier but to form a starting zone for 
actions in the aid of Russia and its allies. 
  In Warsaw, I called attention to the fact that the tension 
between Romania and Hungary as well as the failure to utilize 
the entire potential of Romanian-Polish relations only increase 
the level of danger for the `first-line' countries and for 
European security. Political factors should be concerned with 
eliminating `disputes' and utilizing, to best advantage, the 
potential of these countries for collaboration." 

