Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Lima Radio Programas del Peru Network in 
Spanish at 1410 GMT on 22 January broadcasts a 55-minute 
"Saturday Focus" program roundtable discussion hosted by Denis 
Vargas Marin and including Alfonso Bustamante, president of the 
Council of Ministers; Agusto Alvarez, director of the APOYO 
publishing house; Humberto Campodonico, economist and San Marcos 
University professor, and Arturo Salazar. 
  Vargas starts the discussion by mentioning that last week 
was 
marked by the conflicting situation in the economic field 
between mayors and the government due to a decree granting the 
government control over municipal taxes. Vargas says: "Many of 
the nation's mayors believe this is an unconstitutional 
measure." Vargas asks what was the true spirit of this measure, 
and "how will the economy be administered in 1994, how much 
longer must we wait for economic reactivation, and the so longed 
for sustained growth?" 
  Bustamante replies that there was no political criteria 
behind the government decree on municipal taxes although it is a 
political decision. Bustamante says: "To fight against poverty 
and for social investment, resources are required. Resources 
come from basically two sources: local taxes and foreign loans." 
Bustamante adds that tax collection is very important. This 
year, Bustamante notes, the government expects to collect larger 
amounts of taxes, and to redistribute these in a better fashion, 
noting that previously, of 100 million soles, 30 million went to 
the Lima municipality while the other 70 percent was for the 
rest of Peru. Bustamante indicates that the government wants the 
poorer districts to secure more funds. 
  Campodonico asks Minister Bustamante why the municipalities' 
revenues were taken away. To this Bustamante replies: "We are 
talking about municipal funds and in any case it is a large 
amount of money. What are we seeking? Obviously with this we 
want more to be distributed to the poor. From what resources 
are we going to get this? Well, this has to come from the 
resources collected locally." Bustamante then explains the 
amounts collected and assigned by the government to the 
municipalities. Salazar questions the government decision to 
take away municipal revenues as in the framework of the law, 
revenues for the central government are generated by general 
sales tax. 
  Salazar continues by noting that in Article 5 of the 
municipal law, it is set out that 2 percent of the general sales 
tax will be for municipalities. Salazar asks: "Is this not a 
technical incoherency? To this Bustamante replies that this is 
very easy to explain. The General Value Tax is 16 percent and 
the Tax on Business Holdings is 2 percent; added together these 
are the general sales tax." 
  Vargas says that to conclude with the municipalities issue, 
it had been recently announced that the government was going "to 
compensate the municipalities," from Treasury resources. "Is 
this not taking a step back?" Vargas asks. To this Bustamante 
replies that the government cannot halt the financing of 
important scheduled public projects, therefore the projects must 
be analyzed before making a decision. 
  Alvarez mentions to Bustamante that the question most people 
on the street want answered is: "When are salaries going to be 
raised?" What would you reply to these people, Alvarez asks. 
Bustamante replies that salary increases go hand in hand with an 
improved economy, the quality of the services rendered, and on 
the capacity to compete. As mentioned before, Bustamante tells 
Alvarez, in the private sector this is much clearer, as it must 
compete in the market. In the public sector, Bustamante notes, 
matters are much more complex, because despite government 
efforts "we still have a very large payroll to meet." Vargas 
insists on asking: "Will there be a salary increase that is not 
the minimum wage this year?" Bustamante replies that a 30 
percent salary increase for public workers has been earmarked in 
the budget. 
  Campodonico then asks why the government conveys the image 
that foreign investment is coming in and that we are paying less 
than what is coming in while the numbers indicate exactly the 
opposite? To this Bustamante replies to Campodonico that he does 
not have the complete picture; while great efforts are being 
made to foster exports, privatization is a first step for 
foreign investment and implementing social programs requires 
greater revenues for the treasury. Bustamante indicates that 
investment needs to grow and that Peru does not have $5 billion 
in savings for investment; therefore it must look for foreign 
investment. 
  Vargas asks why beer is taxed 30 percent while whisky is 
taxed less. "What has been the spirit of this law?" Vargas 
asks. Bustamante replies that the this is a selective tax on the 
consumer although he notes in his opinion it is a bit high. 
  To conclude Alvarez says that in real terms the budget has 
been increased but not salaries. Alvarez asks: "Why is 
something not done to avoid the continuous loss of purchasing 
power for salaries? Bustamante replies that in the private 
sector it is absurd to pay low salaries if these can be raised. 
  Vargas asks Bustamante if he would accept being the next 
economy minister to which he replies that he certainly would not. 

