BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wilfredo G. Reyes] </F>
  [Text] Beijing has reaffirmed its commitment to a common 
economic exploration and development program for the disputed 
Spratly Island group but has remained silent on an accompanying 
proposal for a phased military force reduction among contending 
claimants in the area. 
  In an official statement, House Speaker Jose de Venecia Jr., 
who is currently in Beijing in his official capacity as 
president of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
Inter-parliamentary Organization (AIPO), said Chinese 
Vice-Premier and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen reaffirmed his 
country's support for the adoption of a common economic 
exploration and development program in the area. 
  Messrs. de Venecia and Qian agreed that a common economic 
development program in the island group "could include 
fisheries, minerals, oil and gas exploration, maritime 
arrangements, and weather forecasting." 
  But Mr. Qian was noncommittal on Mr. de Venecia's remarks 
regarding a four-year old proposed "concomitant reduction of 
forces (which) would be a prelude to eventual demilitarization 
of the Spratlys." However, Vice Chairman Wang Hanbin of 
Beijing's National People's Congress (NPC) assured the AIPO 
delegation that Chinese parliamentarians support proposals for 
contending parties to temporarily shelve their claims to 
sovereignty to the islands. 
  Current strategic assessments of forces stationed in the 
islands have manifested continuing constructions of air and 
naval support facilities, aimed at facilitating force buildup 
during crisis situations. 
  The AIPO delegation had earlier held discussions with 
President Jiang Zemin, NPC standing committee chairman and 
former security chief Qiao Shi, as well as Foreign Relations 
Committee Chairman Zhu Liang, during which Mr. Jiang had vaguely 
assured the delegation that his government would "play a 
positive role, not a negative role" in dealing with the 
currently brewing crisis in the Korean peninsula. 
  Mr. Jiang had also issued the customary assurance that his 
country "will not be a threat to its neighbors in Asia or to 
world peace," pointing out that increases in his country's 
defense budget were caused merely by "inflation adjustment." 
  For his part, Mr. de Venecia sought views on China's 
experiences with special economic zones, reforestation, forest 
conservation, mass housing, operation of township enterprises, 
and waste disposal. 
  Mr. de Venecia led a 12-man ASEAN delegation composed of 
Reps. Antonio Cuenco of Cebu, Victor Ortega of La Union, and 
Roque Ablan Jr. of Ilocos Norte; Deputy Speaker Eugene Yap Giau 
Cheng and Teo Tee of Singapore; Tjokong Tarigan Sibero and 
Benjamin Massakh of Indonesia; Shahidan Kassim and Chor Chee 
Heung of Malaysia; and, Adm. Prawit Siwaraks and Burirak Namwat 
of Thailand. 

