BFN 

  [Text] The Second Session of the Eighth Gansu Provincial 
People's Congress closed in Lanzhou city yesterday afternoon. 
The session was presided over by Lu Kejian, executive chairman 
of the session presidium. The session adopted a resolution on 
the provincial people's government work report, stating that the 
report had reviewed last year's work based on facts and in a 
realistic manner, and had set forth positive and practicable 
measures and feasible tasks for the new year. The session urged 
all people throughout the province to work together with one 
heart and one mind, strive to do a still better job, be 
determined to carry on reform, blaze new trails, and work really 
hard to fulfill all the targets that have been set for the turn 
of the century. 
  Deputies to the session also adopted resolutions on the 
implementation of the 1993 Gansu province economic and social 
development plan and on the 1994 provincial economic and social 
development plan, on implementation of the 1993 provincial 
financial budget and on the 1994 provincial financial budget, 
and on the provincial people's congress standing committee, the 
provincial higher people's court, and the provincial people's 
procuratorate work reports. 
  The newly elected governor, Zhang Wule delivered an 
impromptu 
speech. He first expressed his thanks to all the deputies for 
their support and to the people of all nationalities in the 
province for their trust in him. He said: This year will be an 
unusual year, as the central authorities have introduced a 
series of major reform measures, which will offer opportunities 
as well as challenges to our province. I deeply feel the grave 
responsibility on me. 
  Zhang Wule said he would pay attention to three things. 
First, every effort will be made to increase Gansu province's 
economic strength. Second, efforts will be made to improve the 
living standards of all the people in the province, urban and 
rural alike. And third, it is necessary to cultivate a good 
social mood and a fine social environment. 
  Zhang Wule noted that this year the province would 
concentrate its attention on implementing plans regarding the 
development of honest and clean government, in the hope of 
satisfying all the deputies to the people's congress and the 
people of all nationalities throughout the province. His speech 
won the enthusiastic applause of the participants in the session. 
  The executive chairmen of the presidium presiding over the 
afternoon meeting were: (listed in the order of the number of 
strokes in their surnames) Ma Yuhai, Wang Jintang, Pan Jiuxing, 
Sun Ying, Lu Hao, Pu Peie, Rao Fengzhu, Yan Haiwang, and 
Jiabuniang Lesheng Jiumei Tudanquejimeima. Seated on the 
rostrum were Li Ziqi, Wang Shitai, Xu Feiqing, Ge Shiying, Li 
Bulin, Song Zhaolong, Shi Jinyuan, Liang Peigen, Lu Benjiu, Liu 
Yuhan, Xing Anmin, Li Fuquan, Wang Daoyi, Ma Jinqing, Li Wenhui, 
Wang Ganchang, and other members of the presidium. Also seated 
on the rostrum were leading people of the provincial people's 
congress, the provincial government, the CPPCC provincial 
committee, the provincial higher people's congress, the 
provincial people's procuratorate, and a certain unit of the 
People's Liberation Army, including Comrades Zhang Wule, Ke 
Maosheng, Lu Ming, Chen Qiling, Cui Zhenhua, Tan Jiqing, Wang 
Ping, Chen Jianhong, Ying Zhongyi, Lu Daxu, Sun Guoquan, Wang 
Peisheng, Wang Shiyuan, Xu Dekui, and Qin Bing. Some old 
comrades residing in Lanzhou, including Chen Xu, Wang Yaohua, 
Liu Lanping, He Jianshan, Ma Tili, Ma Zuming, Qian Qiwei were 
also present at the session. 

