CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Bavarian Interior Minister Guenther </F>
Beckstein by unidentified correspondent; place and date not 
given] 
  [Text] [TAGESZEITUNG] Are you satisfied with Bavarian 
politics with respect to internal security? 
  [Beckstein] Yes, we are the safest land in the FRG. We have 
the lowest crime rate of all the federal laender and, at 61.8 
percent, the highest percentage of cases solved. Internal 
security has always been a hallmark of the CSU [Christian Social 
Union], and that will continue to be the case. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] Your party chairman Waigel has issued the 
slogan for the 1994 elections that the elections will be won 
with topics oriented to the right of center. Internal security 
is also a topic that is typically being emphasized by all the 
political groupings on the extreme Right. Is the CSU using this 
topic in an effort to pick up votes at the right edge of the 
spectrum? 
  [Beckstein] The fact that right extremists seize upon all 
possible topics does not bother me in the least. It does not 
matter whether right extremists ape the CSU in this case. The 
increased crime rate is a problem that is of real concern to the 
citizens. What matters is that we see to it, by means of the 
appropriate security policies, that we get the threatening 
explosion in the crime rate under control. Bavarian politics are 
an important milestone to this end. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] Internal security seems, in addition, to be 
an 
ideal topic for inclusion of the so-called foreigner question. 
You, too, cannot refrain from constantly talking about the 
"criminality burden of the foreign population." 
  [Beckstein] That is not an accurate statement. According to 
Bavarian crime statistics of 1993, 42.8 percent of all 
investigated crime suspects were non-Germans. Ten years ago, the 
percentage was still 20.1 percent. That is a cause for concern. 
Even if you exclude tourists, illegal immigrants, and 
asylum-seekers, it remains a fact that a fifth of the foreign 
suspects are permanent residents of Bavaria. That is still far 
too many. A study covering 1983 to 1990 revealed that this 
segment of the population had a crime rate two-and-one-half 
times higher than the Germans living in Bavaria. It is true, of 
course, that the sociological stratification of the foreign 
population is different from that of the Germans. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] If it is known that these figures are not 
meaningful, figures which naturally always provide ammunition 
for right extremists, then why do you not simply refrain from 
using them? 
  [Beckstein] You don't solve problems by closing your eyes to 
them, but rather by noting them and finding ways to solve them. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] As the interior minister of a land which has 
the Republikaner watched by the Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution, you are probably very familiar with the program of 
the Republikaner. How do you assess the agreement between the 
CSU and the Republikaner programs in the asylum and internal 
security sectors? 
  [Beckstein] The Republikaner have carefully cleaned up their 
act. They are taking care that their public statements and their 
program do not cause them to be perceived as an extremist, but 
rather as an exemplary democratic, party. It is for that reason 
that we, like most of the other interior ministers as well, are 
having the Republikaner observed by intelligence means, to 
enable us to lay bare their real right extremist convictions. 
Basically, however, a true statement is not rendered 
questionable by the fact that it is being similarly voiced by 
others with whom one does not like to be associated. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] Streibl is meeting with Schoenhuber; 
Gauweiler 
calls the Republikaner "a little to the right," and Haider an 
"interesting politician." Must the CSU itself not submit to 
observation in the near future? 
  [Beckstein] Many of the people asking such questions do so 
with a great deal of hypocrisy. Anyone who proudly grants Herr 
Gysi and people from the PDS [Party of Democratic Socialism] a 
forum to make public statements has little right to prohibit 
others from having a private conversation with someone. What is 
decisive for me, however, is this: There will not be cooperation 
between the CSU and the Republikaner. The SPD [Social Democratic 
Party of Germany] ought to state this just as clearly with 
respect to the PDS, however. We need to apply the same standards 
to the right and to the left... 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] ...You can't always set the one off against 
the other. There is no doubt but that the Streibl-Schoenhuber 
meeting enhanced the status of the leader of the Republikaner... 
  [Beckstein] ...There are many meetings between prominent SPD 
people and Gysi, the representative of a clearly 
unconstitutional party... 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] ...Was the meeting politically wrong, or not? 
  [Beckstein] It was not a political meeting. No office-holder 
spoke with Schoenhuber. Streibl had resigned, was only a private 
person, therefore. Whether the meeting was politically smart is 
another question. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] When one inquires into the causes for the 
rising crime rate and brutality, you often bring up, as an 
argument, the values decline caused by the "cultural revolution 
of 1968." Franz Schoenhuber uses the identical argument. 
  [Beckstein] I am not familiar with the details of what 
Schoenhuber says in this connection. I am, however, familiar 
with comparable reflections by Heiner Geissler, who can surely 
not be called a rightist. The anonymization of society, the 
weakening of bonds to certain basic values--these are 
indisputably important causes of the increasing crime rate and 
the willingness to resort to force. For the new laender, there 
are additional aspects. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] The demand is often voiced for national 
identity to be reestablished as a basic value of a strong state. 
"The state must be perceived again as a protective community 
sharing a common destiny." To whom would you ascribe this 
statement, to Wolfgang Schaeuble or to Franz Schoenhuber? 
  [Beckstein] I don't know who said this... 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] ...It stems from Schaeuble... 
  [Beckstein] ...But it is clear that a state has a special 
responsibility for its citizens. The fact that, in the 
international arena, we must also give consideration to German 
interests is a self-evident fact as far as I am concerned. 
  [TAGESZEITUNG] Wolfgang Schaeuble argues that Germany lacks 
the national consciousness to make social conflicts 
controllable. Do we need a redefinition of terms in the 
direction of a greater national consciousness? 
  [Beckstein] For me, the question is: How can I explain to 
the 
citizen in the old laender that we are transferring 150 billion 
German marks every year to the new laender. This is, you know, 
related to the fact that the new laender are a part of Germany 
and that we therefore have a significantly greater obligation to 
practice solidarity. It is precisely the feeling of solidarity 
by the average citizen that forms the basis for his 
understanding the need for restrictions. That is a rational 
explanation. There is also an irrational one: Precisely in a 
society that is becoming more anonymous, it is necessary that 
one feels a certain bond. I consider it self-evident that, 48 
years after the end of World War II, a feeling of nationalism, 
not exaggerated but definitely self-assured, emerges in the FRG 
as well. If someone asks me abroad where I come from, I say 
proudly that I am a German, one who draws a part of his identity 
from the tradition of his people, with all the strengths and 
weaknesses that our history has. To deny this would be unreal. 
That would only mean that we feel even less rooted in our 
homeland and have even greater problems. 

