CSO 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H5>  U.S. Position Viewed </H5>
  Writing in the 15 May Athens weekly KIRIAKATIKI 
ELEVTHEROTIPIA, New York correspondent D.P. Dhimas noted that 
the New York talks on the "Skopje" [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia--FYROM] issue are at a "decisive turning point" 
because of Washington's "new ideas," promoted through UN 
procedures. Nevertheless, Dhimas wrote, the United States 
seemingly wishes to maintain a certain distance, preferring to 
leave the initiative to the United Nations to avoid being made a 
"scapegoat" for the "probable" failure, resulting from an 
"essentially sterile anti-Americanism," of any attempted U.S. 
mediating effort. Washington's reluctance to become deeply 
involved may be justified by the fact that the Greek defense and 
foreign affairs ministries "are not speaking the same language 
and are sending antithetical messages to Washington." On the 
one hand, U.S. officials are reportedly noticing an "updated 
perception of the situation" in Greek foreign policy resulting 
from the "freeing of its fixation on Skopje" and from the 
expansion of political and economic cooperation between Athens 
and Washington in the wider Balkans area, as expressed by Deputy 
Foreign Minister Yiorgos Papandreou, Dhimas continued. These 
attempts, however, are seen by Dhimas as being undercut by 
Foreign Minister Karolos Papoulias, who, influenced by his 
immediate entourage, believes that his deputy minister's moves 
are "too accommodating" toward the United States. According to 
Dhimas, the "forked tongue" is apparent with regard to the 
establishment of a NATO headquarters in Larisa. While in 
December 1993 Washington received a message from Defense 
Minister Yerasimos Arsenis, conveying his agreement to open 
talks on this subject, in January 1994 Deputy Defense Minister 
Nikos Kouris demanded that the NATO headquarters issue be 
removed from the agenda of the meeting on defense cooperation 
between the Greek Ministry of Defense and the U.S. Department of 
Defense. According to Dhimas, the incident "upset" the U.S. 
side, which has since evidenced a degree of "indifference" and 
"incredulity" regarding Athens' wish for an increased Greek role 
in the Balkans, Dhimas concluded. 
<H5>  Pangalos' Statement </H5>
  The 13 May Athens daily ELEVTHEROTIPIA cited Alternate 
Foreign Minister Theodhoros Pangalos as saying during a radio 
interview that the "Skopje" problem must be settled "at all 
costs," and that it will be difficult to avoid the term 
"Macedonia" in any name. Pangalos was further cited as repeating 
his previous assertion that the Skopje issue was a "lost cause" 
and that Skopje insists on "Macedonia," because this was its 
name from 1950 to 1990 in the former Yugoslavia that Greece had 
recognized, because "Skopjeans" inhabit the smaller part of 
"historic Macedonia, and because the previous New Democracy [ND] 
government had recognized the name `Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia,' which includes the term `Macedonia.'" 
<H5>  ND Official's Views </H5>
  In an interview with Panos Sokos published in the 14 May 
ELEVTHEROTIPIA, ND deputy and former Foreign Minister Mikhalis 
Papakonstandinou told Sokos he agreed with Pangalos that the 
"Skopje state" is located in what has been known as "Macedonia" 
from antiquity and opined that the alternate foreign affairs 
minister is "always or almost always on the right track." In the 
interview Papakonstandinou offered two interpretations of 
Pangalos' remarks: that he spoke on his own, or that his 
statement was a "trial balloon" coordinated with the government 
intended to gauge public reaction. However, Papakonstandinou 
remarked, the government ought to be more daring if it agrees 
with Pangalos, or else government spokesman Evangelos Venizelos 
should not have stressed that only Prime Minister Andreas 
Papandreou's statements on the Skopje issue are valid, for this 
implies that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be abolished. 
<H5>  Skopje's "Threat" </H5>
  According to international relations professor Panayiotis 
Ifaistos, writing in the 9 May ELEVTHEROTIPIA, it is an 
"oversimplification" to say that the "Skopje republic" [FYROM] 
is not a threat to Greece and that Greeks are possessed by 
"collective hysteria" on this subject. First, while Greece 
wishes to coexist with Skopje--and this might even be profitable 
if it were possible--this state is a "constant destabilizing 
factor" in the Balkans because, "rent by internal contradictions 
and external interventions," it is not "viable." Second, even if 
the FYROM Army is presently "insignificant," it could be 
"strengthened by inimical forces," complicating if not seriously 
destabilizing Greek strategic estimates and weakening Greece's 
deterrent force in the face of the Turkish threat, Ifaistos 
continued. Third, it is "unrealistic" to believe that only a few 
"Skopjeans" are "chauvinists and anti-Greek," while the majority 
are "friendly" to Greece and could easily be won over. In fact, 
Ifaistos commented, relations between states are not guided by 
"friendship and individual sentiments," but by complicated 
collective interests and geopolitical parameters. Greece, he 
wrote, is vitally interested in a stable and viable Balkans 
area, which will only materialize if Athens acts seriously like 
a "modern" country to influence the regional balance of power. 
"If Greek strategy is well planned, we should not have to beg 
[FYROM President] Gligorov to be our friend; he should be 
begging us to save him," Ifaistos concluded. 

