BFN 

  [Text] The foreign minister, Squadron Leader Prasong 
Sunsiri, and his delegation are paying an official visit to the 
Union of Burma at the invitation of His Excellency Burmese 
Foreign Minister U Ohn Gyaw from 19 to 20 April. During his 
visit, the foreign minister met and held talks with Burmese 
leaders such as Senior General [Sr. Gen.] Than Shwe, chairman of 
the State Law and Order Restoration Council [SLORC]; Lieutenant 
General [Lt. Gen.] Khin Nyunt, SLORC secretary-1; and Burmese 
Foreign Minister U Ohn Gyaw. 
  Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri is visiting Burma not only 
as 
the foreign minister of Thailand, but also as chairman of the 
ASEAN Standing Committee. Thailand will host and chair the 
annual meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers to be held in Bangkok 
in July. 
  The objectives of his visit are to hold discussions with 
Burmese leaders on bilateral relations between Thailand and 
Burma as well as cooperation in the Southeast Asian region. 
  Other major issues of discussion between the Thai foreign 
minister and the Burmese leaders were as follows: 
  Touching on relations between Burma and ASEAN, Sr. Gen. Than 
Shwe, Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt, and U Ohn Gyaw were pleased to hear 
from the Thai foreign minister that after his informal 
approaches other ASEAN member countries have shown no objection 
to Burma's participation as a guest of Thailand in the upcoming 
annual meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers in Bangkok. Sr. Gen. 
Than Shwe said that Burma wants to learn new experiences by 
participating in ASEAN activities and is willing to comply with 
correct ASEAN procedures. Sr. Gen. Than Shwe and Lt. Gen. Khin 
Nyunt reaffirmed that Burma will accept Thailand's invitation to 
participate in the ASEAN foreign ministers' annual meeting and 
will assign U Ohn Gyaw, foreign minister, to attend the 
gathering. 
  The Thai foreign minister informed the Burmese leaders that 
Burma's participation in the ASEAN meeting in Bangkok will bring 
representatives of the ten Southeast Asian countries -- the six 
ASEAN members, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Burma -- face to 
face for the first time in history, which is an important event 
and a good omen for the Southeast Asian region to move toward 
peace, stability, and economic prosperity. When that time 
comes, the next step is to highlight the significance of the 
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia or the Bali 
Treaty. With the participation of the two remaining nations -- 
Burma and Cambodia -- the treaty will become a noble symbol of 
regional cooperation. Burmese leaders have agreed to consider 
this matter further. 
  Regarding Thai-Burmese bilateral relations, the foreign 
minister said he has been following up all related developments 
since the meeting of the joint commission of the two countries 
in September 1993. He thanked Sr. Gen. Than Shwe for his 
cooperation in moving Thai inmates from various places to 
Rangoon so it is easier for Thai Embassy officials in Rangoon to 
visit them. He also asked the Burmese leaders to consider 
giving parole to Thai inmates on special occasions such as 
Burmese National Day or the Thai king's birthday. Sr. Gen. Than 
Shwe accepted his request in principle. Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt 
disclosed that parole will be considered for Thai inmates after 
they are transferred to Rangoon prison. The foreign minister 
has instructed the Thai Embassy to follow up this matter closely. 
  Touching on the Salween River basin development project, the 
Burmese leaders informed the foreign minister that Burmese 
technical officials are still studying the Thai memorandum. As 
for the project to build a bridge across the Moei River, the 
Burmese side was informed that the Thai Government has set aside 
a budget for the construction of the bridge. The Burmese side 
accepted the foreign minister's proposal to have technicians of 
the two countries jointly consider the details of the project. 
  Regarding cooperation in narcotics suppression, the foreign 
minister and Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt agreed that Thailand and Burma 
should work together closely and make serious efforts in the 
suppression of narcotics. 
  Briefing the foreign minister on the situation in Burma, the 
Burmese leader said that the principle duties of the SLORC are 
to create national reconciliation and draft a constitution. 
They said the Burmese Government has made much progress in its 
endeavors to achieve national reconciliation and successfully 
encouraged 10 out of the 14 minority groups in Burma to 
participate in the drafting of the constitution. Three 
additional minority groups have agreed to take part in writing 
the charter. Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt himself went to talk with the 
Karen. The Burmese Government attaches highest significance to 
the tasks of creating national reconciliation and drafting the 
constitution and will be ready for other undertakings after 
these two targets have been achieved. 
  In addition to making personal acquaintances, the meetings 
between the foreign minister and the Burmese leaders have helped 
increase mutual trust which will benefit peace and stability. 
These are the basic conditions for social and economic 
development in Southeast Asia. 

