Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Quito, 3 Mar (EFE) -- Ecuadoran Foreign Minister 
Diego Paredes today summoned U.S. Ambassador Peter Romero to 
explain the controversial remarks he made on how Ecuador should 
handle its territorial dispute with Peru. Paredes made the 
announcement at a breakfast meeting with several journalists. 
He said that after hearing Romero, the Foreign Ministry will 
adopt whatever diplomatic measures are warranted and issue a 
communique. "Ecuador is very respectful of the internal 
situations of other countries and expects the same treatment," 
he noted. 
  During an interview with the newspaper EL TELEGRAFO of 
Guayaquil, Ecuador, the U.S. ambassador had remarked that 
"Ecuadoran people are not prepared to recover their territory by 
the use of arms." "Thank God they don't want to. One must 
accept what happened and try to take advantage of trade and 
other topics to promote the unity between the two peoples and to 
progress," Romero added. 
  Regarding the Peruvian-Ecuadoran war of 1941 and the peace 
agreement signed a year later -- the Rio de Janeiro Protocol 
that Ecuador later declared "inapplicable" -- Romero said "we 
must set aside the criterion of considering fair or unfair what 
happened 50 years ago at the border between the two countries." 
We must accept what happened and go on from there, the diplomat 
stated. He said he did not know if the Ecuadoran land dispute 
is fair or unfair. 
  These statements caused quite a reaction in Ecuador, 
starting 
with the participation of the influential Association of Retired 
Generals and Admirals of the Armed Forces (Retired) which 
described Romero's words as "unheard of and inadmissible." The 
association claims that ever since he arrived in Quito several 
months ago, the ambassador "has engaged in the ungrateful task 
of advising Ecuadoreans about state modernization, aggressive 
privatizations, foreign debt payments, and giving state opinions 
about coups d'etat, appointments," and other internal affairs. 
  A bulletin issued by the association, whose voice reflects 
the opinion of the Armed Forces, says the ambassador is now 
"advising us to forget about territorial rights, which are 
inalienable and unpostponable, offending the most intimate 
patriotic feelings of Ecuadoreans." "It is surprising the 
Foreign Ministry does not defend the principle of 
nonintervention and allows a diplomat to violate his `status' 
and to express an opinion as any other politician about internal 
affairs of the country," the document states. 
  According to the retired generals and admirals, when Romero 
says that Ecuador cannot recover the territory it lost to Peru, 
"it is stating that at the beginning of the 21st century it 
remains the only means to solve international problems." 
  When the ambassador said he does not know if the claim (of 
this country) is fair or unfair, he is forgetting that Ecuador 
was sacrificed (in the 1942 peace agreement) everything because 
of a misunderstood continental solidarity," the text states. 
  The United States, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile are 
signatories of the Rio Protocol and the Association claims that, 
therefore, the U.S. ambassador should be "more cautious about 
what he says." The U.S. Embassy has not issued an official 
response to the communique by the retired military or to the 
Foreign Ministry summons. 

