Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Mark Griffin: "Feeling Familiar Tremors in </F>
South Slovakia"] 
  [Text] As news of the Jan. 8 meeting of Slovakia's ethnic 
Hungarians in Komarno filtered through, one could discern a 
certain sense of deja vu about the whole affair. With leaders of 
the minority group gathered to condemn government proposals for 
new administrative boundaries, what transpired was a debate 
about the "sufferings" of the Hungarians at the hands of Slovaks. 
  While not detracting from the aspirations of a minority to 
express its identity, the situation provides more than a few 
worrying parallels to the pre-World War II conflicts between the 
Czech government and the Sudeten Germans in Bohemia and Moravia. 
Nazi Germany's extreme irredentism (the desire to regain lost 
territories) has no modern parallels, but the transnationalism 
of Hungarian minorities in Central Europe is similar to that of 
prewar German minorities. 
  Such parallels figure prominently in Slovak minds. German 
reunification in 1990 showed borders can be changed. To deny 
that possibility in the case of Slovakia would be gross naivete. 
  A campaign for minority rights poses more questions than it 
answers. What has to be dealt with is an equation of the rights 
and duties inherent in any concept of citizenship. This is 
problematic in a liberal democracy. 
  What is needed is a complete reformulation of the concept of 
citizenship. While this might seem theoretically removed from 
the aspirations of the Hungarian minority, the recurring theme 
of this conflict is self-administration. For the Slovak 
government, this would amount to a step toward redrawing the 
border. Hungarians both in Budapest and in South Slovakia rarely 
miss an opportunity to internationalize local tensions, shunning 
subdued solutions. 
  If the means of solving the problem are to be international, 
then there must be an unequivocal recognition of the borders of 
all of Hungary's neighbors. To make the situation conditional on 
minority rights precludes any settlement of an increasingly 
amplified dispute in southern Slovakia. 
  Add to this the communal memory and mutual recriminations 
over changes to the Slovak-Hungarian border between 1938 and 
1945, and one can begin to understand the nervousness of the 
Slovak government. Slovakia is a new state with a fragile 
coalition government and a history of tense relations among 
ethnic groups. 
  The government surprised few when it pursued a thinly veiled 
attempt to change voting districts to dilute the electoral 
composition of the more ethnically Hungarian districts. In 
return, the proposals presented at Komarno by the Hungarian 
minority were, likewise, less than realistic. 
  The Trianon agreement of 1920, which pared Hungary to its 
present size, remains for most Hungarians the ultimate betrayal 
and injustice, leaving large communities of Hungarians stranded 
in four foreign countries. This is a bitter pill they have never 
swallowed, though they have grudgingly accepted their neighbors' 
borders. The problem now is that Central Europe is a region 
where politics are not designed to facilitate solutions. 
  It's understandable that this minority should look across 
the 
border for support, given geographical proximity and the 
compactness of communities along the border. As Dutch Foreign 
Minister Louwe Kooijmans suggested on a recent visit, it would 
be more in the Hungarians' interest to seek an internal 
accommodation rather than work through a neighboring government. 
  While the danger of minorities being used by certain sectors 
of the Hungarian political spectrum are present, the perception 
of potential manipulation is more destabilizing than the 
reality. This is the Slovak national nightmare and the plaything 
of conspiracy theorists in both Slovakia and Hungary. 
  By sending a clear signal of recognition to both the Slovak 
government and its Hungarian minority, Hungary would play a 
positive role and deflate the nationalists on both sides. 
Accepting Trianon and thus undermining potential conflict is the 
only effective gesture that can lead to a settlement. 
Unfortunately, we are facing a deficit of constructive politics 
in the region. 
  A lasting solution may be found with Slovak President Michal 
Kovac's decision to invite a delegation of parliamentarians from 
the European Union to deliberate on all administrative boundary 
proposals. This was, of course, unique--the first time the issue 
has been internationalized by the Slovaks, in this case 
constructively. 

