BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Republic Party Chairman Janos Palotas by </F>
Attila Zsoldos; place and date not given: "Extremists Do Not 
Stand a Chance"] 
  [Text] The Republic Party set out the goal to have a 
candidate in every electoral district. However, only 84 
candidates succeeded in gathering the nomination slips necessary 
to run in the elections. We asked Republic Party Chairman Janos 
Palotas about his party's election chances. 
  [Palotai] Making it into parliament basically depends on the 
number of lists, namely the number of places in which voters can 
vote for a party. From this point of view, the Republic Party 
has achieved good results, because it set up 17 district lists. 
It can be voted in in 164 districts out of 176 districts, or 
more than 90 percent of the country. 
  [Zsoldos] In other words, the party is hopeful. 
  [Palotas] Absolutely. We have the chance now to exceed the 
5 percent threshold. Looking at it from this viewpoint, our 
achievement is not worse than what we expected. However, it is 
worse from the viewpoint that the party fared slightly worse 
than expected in individual districts. However, I am not 
pessimistic. I think that, as a party formed one year before 
the elections, we tried the impossible when we set out the goal 
to have candidates in every district. We presented candidates 
everywhere, and more than 50 percent of these candidates 
survived. Originally, we counted on the success of about 80 
percent of them. Given the fact that we started from zero and 
we are the only party among our competitors that does not get 
budget support, these results cannot be regarded as a failure. 
  [Zsoldos] In the parliamentary debate on the electoral law, 
you supported the proposal to increase the threshold to 5 
percent. Have you changed your position? 
  [Palotas] My opinion has not changed. Those who submitted 
the proposal and the leading speakers of various parties 
justified this increase by claiming that this would avoid the 
exaggerated proliferation of parliamentary parties and, 
subsequently, a decreased efficiency of parliamentary activity. 
In my address, I called this a crude mistake. I nevertheless 
supported the proposal because I thought it would increase the 
chances of keeping the lists of extremist forces out of 
parliament. In my opinion, for example, the Workers Party, or 
Torgyan's Smallholders Party, or the Hungarian Justice and Life 
Party [MIEP] have no chance at all of winning in individual 
districts. 
  [Zsoldos] However, the Workers Party and Torgyan's 
smallholders have more than 150 candidates, and have been able 
to present lists everywhere. Nor can the MIEP be written off 
easily with its 10 district lists. Does all this upset your 
plans? 
  [Palotas] I was very glad to see all the three parties 
running after the candidate nomination. In my opinion, the 
extremists are supported by only 6-7 percent of the voters. The 
aforementioned three parties represent an approximately 
identical power. Given the fact that they share this narrow 
support, there are good chances that none of these parties will 
reach the 5-percent threshold. They do not stand a chance in 
individual districts either, because their candidates should get 
the majority votes to win, and there is not a single electoral 
district in Hungary with a majority for extremist parties. 
  [Zsoldos] For an outsider, it seemed that the Republic Party 
was left out of the alliance of liberal parties because of 
pressure exercised by the Federation of Young Democrats 
[Fidesz]. Did you have to carry out a strategy modification 
because of this? 
  [Palotas] This is only the appearance. However, there is a 
little truth in this, namely that Fidesz would indeed not have 
welcomed it if the Republic Party had joined the liberal bloc. 
Fidesz made this clear to the Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] 
in the course of negotiations held behind closed doors. As far 
as I know, the SZDSZ did not share the Fidesz position; the 
SZDSZ has good enough relations with us to say that no liberal 
bloc would emerge if this was the condition. Therefore, there 
would have been no obstacle for our party to join the liberal 
bloc. But we did not even consider the possibility. 
  [Zsoldos] Why not? 
  [Palotas] One of the basic principles of our program is that 
the Republic Party cannot commit itself to any ideology before 
the elections. 
  [Zsoldos] In other words, you did not want to join the bloc. 
  [Palotas] Not at all. When it leaked out from the secret 
negotiations that a tension emerged in connection with the 
Republic Party, I let the SZDSZ know that they should sign the 
agreement because we did not even consider the possibility of 
joining the bloc. If we had joined, two-thirds of our members 
would have immediately left the party. One of the essential 
elements of our organization was that people with leftist, 
Christian, and liberal commitment can freely join our party if 
they limit their ideology to private affairs. 
  [Zsoldos] Where would you place the Republic Party on the 
current Hungarian political scene? 
  [Palotas] Just like the American Democratic, conservative, 
and Republican Parties, the Hungarian Republic Party cannot be 
placed on the main line of this scene. If you asked the 
politicians of the aforementioned party whether they are 
liberals or social democrats, they would not understand the 
question. 
  [Zsoldos] This is most probably true, but the current 
Hungarian political scene is divided into 
conservative-Christian, liberal, and social democratic trends. 
One cannot disregard this fact. 
  [Palotas] That is true, but someone has to undo this, and 
our role and possibilities in this are not bad at all today. 
The global tendency today is that ideological issues are 
constantly forced back into the private sphere. However, 
ideological blocs have emerged in Hungary. However, this does 
not matter, because none of the parties will be able to form a 
government alone. The next government coalition can only emerge 
through forced compromises, and this gives a big opportunity to 
make sure that ideology stays at the level of party politics and 
does not become part of the government program. This is a great 
opportunity for the Republic Party. 

