BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aleksandr Mukomolov: "You Won't Fool Around </F>
Under the Interpol Cap"] 
  [Text] In April in Moscow in a private apartment in the 
region of the "Bibirevo" subway station staffers of the Federal 
Counterintelligence Service directorate for Moscow City and 
Moscow Oblast arrested PRC citizen Lin Chiyu, a 27-year-old from 
Beijing of Han nationality, a former judo practitioner and 
unemployed. Following an application from the Chinese side he 
had been sought by Interpol for crimes on the Beijing-Moscow 
international train. 
  No one right now can cite the exact number of Chinese living 
in the Moscow region. According to very approximate figures in 
1992 there were 40,000 of them, now there are 150,000. But the 
fact that there are many of them and that most are living in 
Moscow and Moscow Oblast under false documents and far-feteched 
pretexts is a fact. 
  The "Alex International," "Tampos," "Orient Express," 
"Dzhuntan," "Sovindep," "Stamp," "People's Capital," "Min Sin 
Limited," and "Voyager" companies are rendering PRC citizens 
active assistance (not for free, of course) in penetrating 
Russian territory. Thus, in the period from April through 
October 1993 alone the "Voyager" commercial services company 
arranged 1,520 visas for PRC citizens. 
  Stable Chinese criminal communities have formed on the 
territory of the Moscow region -- the "Beijing," "Harbin," and 
"Fujian" groupings -- to send their fellow citizens via Russia 
to the countries of West and East Europe. The profitable 
underground business has been joined by the criminal structures 
of China, Hong Kong, and Malaysia. They have set up ties in 
Russia and European countries with criminal formations which 
trade in fake visas and passports. The cost of sending one 
person is $5,000-15,000 so this business is guaranteed to 
flourish. 
  Tens of thousands of Chinese whose fate depends on 
recruiters, suppliers, shippers, escorts, the producers of fake 
documents, and the owners of doss-houses have complicated the 
crime situation in the capital and oblast. Without the means of 
existence many have been forced to engage in smuggling, the 
drugs business, and prostitution, often themselves becoming the 
victims of crime. 
  Over the past year alone 138 crimes were committed against 
Chinese, including five murders, 50 muggings, and 33 robberies, 
while seven crimes were committed by PRC citizens. Actually 
this figure scarcely reflects the true state of affairs since 
the Chinese community is characterized by a wall of silence, the 
absence of those willing to complain, and fear of reprisal. 
  During the operational investigation measures the capital's 
Federal Counterintelligence Service directorate managed to close 
several channels for the illegal immigration of Chinese to the 
West. Weapons, fake passports and seals and stamps of PRC 
embassies, consulates, and state institutions and notaries' 
offices, blank forms, documents of authorization, visas, and 
other items relating to illegal activity were confiscated. 
  Since the signing in 1992 of the agreement on cooperation 
between the Russian Ministry of Security and the Chinese 
Ministry of Public Security working contacts have been 
established with staffers of the PRC Embassy in Moscow and 
representatives of the Ministry of Public Security. 
  In December last year PRC citizens Yan Chunyou and Yu 
Haishun, arrested by Moscow counterintelligence staffers, were 
handed over to the Chinese side. These men had committed 
serious crimes in China and were being looked for. 
  But these are only the first steps. The main problems have 
not been eliminated. Numerous limited partnerships and 
commercial structures (over 1,200) engaged in the organization 
of tourist trips to our country and inviting people to work and 
study are sending out hundreds of thousands of new invitations. 
But no one is seriously monitoring the placement, stay, and 
departure of foreigners from the country. 
  Soon Lin Chiyu will be sent to Beijing under the escort of 
Chinese Ministry of Public Security staffers but where are the 
guarantees that on that same day tens of new adventure-seekers 
will not enter Russia? 

