Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [John Madeley articles: "Second Dam Deal Outrages Greens"] </F>
  [Text] As the controversy rumbles on between Britain and 
Malaysia over the Pergau dam aid-for-arms deal, the Malaysian 
Government is embroiled in another dam controversy closer to 
home. 
  Environmental groups in Malaysia are angry at their 
government's decision to go ahead with the Bakun hydroelectric 
dam project in Sarawak, the country's easterly state. 
  Pergau is a tiddler in comparison, costing around 450 
million 
pounds and supplying about 600MW [MegaWatts] of electricity to 
Malaysian consumers. But Friends of the Earth [FoE] Malaysia 
says Bakun will cost 30.6 billion Malaysian ringgits (more than 
7 billion pounds) and be able to supply about 16,000MW of power 
within 10 years. 
  The dam will be on the Rajang river in north-west Sarawak, 
where about 5,000 people of the Kenyah, Kayan, Lahanen, Ukit and 
Penan tribes, living in communal houses, could be uprooted. 
  Nearly 275 square miles of forested land will be flooded as 
a 
result of the scheme, but FoE says the large reservoir to be 
built could also trap sediment that would silt up the dam and 
shorten its working life. 
  Mohamed Mahathir, the Malaysian premier, claims the dam is 
vital for the country's energy needs. Launching the project, he 
admitted it could destroy some trees and animals and displace 
natives, "but to get the desired achievement of well-being of 
the people later on, some price has to be paid now." 
  The Malaysian government says it has conducted studies that 
show the economic gains of the project far outweigh the adverse 
environmental impact. But Friends of the Earth says the 
Government is relying on selling electricity to neighbouring 
countries to make the dam pay. 
  It is concerned about the `viability and safety' of a 
planned 
submarine cable, yet to be built, that would transmit 
electricity from Sarawak to mainland Asia, 400 miles away. 
  The cable would be the longest of its kind in the world, and 
there is a `complete lack of experience' of laying such a cable 
and of continuously transmitting large amounts of power, says 
FoE. 
  Ironically, in June 1990, the government resolved to scrap 
the Bakun project, but Dr Mahathir said its changed decision 
proved `we care for the environment... Malaysia has made a big 
sacrifice for the environment.' 

