CSO 

    [Editorial Report] The 28 March Paris daily LIBERATION 
published the results of a poll conducted on 18-19 March by the 
BVA organization on behalf of France 2, France 3, Europe 1, 
PARIS MATCH and LIBERATION among a representative sample of 968 
individuals over 18, with a commentary by Eric Dupin. 
Respondents were asked their views on the government one year 
after its accession to power. 
  "Taking everything into account, do you consider [Prime 
Minister] Balladur's balance sheet very positive, rather 
positive, rather negative or very negative?" 
  Only 3 percent replied "positive," with 46 percent choosing 
"rather positive." Some 37 percent said "rather negative" and 13 
percent replied "very negative." Only 1 percent did not know. 
  According to Dupin, while the above results are fair, public 
opinion becomes more severe when government action is examined 
in more detail: 
  "For each of the following areas, tell me if you believe 
that 
the Balladur government's action over the past year has rather 
improved or rather aggravated the situation?" 
  French action in the former Yugoslavia: 60 percent 
thought it rather improved the situation, 25 percent that it 
rather aggravated it, 1O percent that it remained the same, and 
5 percent did not know. 
  The defense of the franc in the European Monetary 
System:57 percent thought it rather improved the situation, 
21 percent that it rather aggravated it, 11 percent said it 
remained the same, and 11 percent did not know. 
  Clandestine immigration:45 percent thought it 
rather improved it, 35 percent that it rather aggravated it, 12 
percent that it remained the same, and 8 percent did not know. 
  Efficiency of the justice system:4O percent said 
that it rather improved it, 4O percent that it rather aggravated 
it, 15 percent said it remained the same, and 5 percent did not 
know. 
  The general state of the French economy:39 percent 
thought it rather improved it, 46 percent that it rather 
aggravated it, 11 percent saw no difference, and 4 percent did 
not know. 
  Security in cities and suburbs:33 percent said it 
rather improved it, 5O percent that it rather aggravated it, 14 
percent said it remained the same, and 3 percent did not know. 
  The general state of the education system and of 
schools:29 percent thought that it rather improved it, 50 
percent that it rather aggravated it, 17 percent saw no 
difference, and 4 percent did not know. Level of taxation: 27 
percent said that it rather improved it, 59 percent that it 
rather aggravated it, 12 percent that it remained the same, and 
2 percent did not know. 
  Policy on unemployment:26 percent thought that it 
rather improved it, 59 percent that it rather aggravated it, 13 
percent saw no difference, and 2 percent did not know. 
  Social Security and pensions:26 percent said that 
it rather improved it, 59 percent that it rather aggravated it, 
13 percent saw no difference, and 2 percent did not know. 
  French agriculture:22 percent thought it rather 
improved it, 66 percent that it rather aggravated it, 8 percent 
that it remained the same, and 4 percent did not know. 
  Problems of poverty and exclusion:2O percent said 
that it rather improved it, 64 percent that it rather aggravated 
it, 14 percent saw no difference, and 1 percent did not know. 
  Social climate in France:13 percent thought it 
rather improved it, 78 percent that it rather aggravated it, 8 
percent saw no difference, and 1 percent did not know. 
  Purchasing power and standard of living:12 percent 
said it rather improved it, 65 percent that it rather aggravated 
it, 22 percent that it remained the same, and 1 percent did not 
know. 
  "Balladur has been prime minister for one year. Would you 
say 
of his government that it..." 
  ...respects the obligations it assumed during the 
electoral campaign or not? 
  Some 52 percent said it does, 42 percent said it does not, 
and 6 percent did not know. 
  ...equitably assigns the efforts demanded of the French 
people or not? 
  Some 31 percent said it does, 66 percent said it does not, 
and 3 percent did not know. 
  ...acts on the spur of the moment or follows a definite 
policy? 
  Some 49 percent said it acts on the spur of the moment and 
49 
percent that it follows a definite policy; 2 percent did not 
know. 
  ...goes too far in the field of reforms, does not go 
far enough, or conducts reforms at a good pace? 
  Some 3O percent thought the government is going too far, 36 
percent said it was not going far enough, 29 percent said reform 
is taking place at a good pace, and 5 percent did not know. 
  Respondents were also asked to rate ministers' performance. 
They gave the highest rating to Minister of Interior Charles 
Pasqua, whose performance was approved by 60.7 percent. Pasqua's 
lowest rating came from respondents aged 25-34 (52.9 percent) 
and his highest rating (71.6 percent) came from respondents over 
65. Minister of Social Affairs Simone Veil received an overall 
approval rate of 44.7 percent, and Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Alain Juppe achieved a rating of 42.2 percent. Minister of 
Defense Francois Leotard received an approval rate of 40.7 
percent. 
  At the lower end of the rating scale were Minister of 
Finance 
Edmond Alphandery, with an approval rate of 7.6 percent, 
Minister of Industrial Development Alain Madelin (9 percent), 
Minister of Labor Michel Giraud (9.5 percent) and Minister of 
Public Works and Transportation Bernard Bosson (9.8 percent). 
  Another question was related to the performance of the 
opposition. Respondents were asked the following questions: 
  "For each of the following parties, tell me if it has played 
its opposition role in the past year very well, rather well, 
rather poorly, or very poorly?" 
  With regard to the Communist Party (PC), 6 percent answered 
"very well," 26 percent "rather well," 37 percent "rather 
poorly," 26 percent "very poorly," and 5 percent did not know. 
  With regard to the PS, 4 percent answered "very well," 34 
percent "rather well," 43 percent "rather poorly," 17 percent 
"very poorly," and 2 percent did not know. 
  Concerning Generation Ecologie, 4 percent answered "very 
well," 28 percent "rather well," 42 percent "rather poorly," 21 
percent "very poorly," and 5 percent did not know. 
  With regard to the Greens, 3 percent answered "very well," 
28 
percent "rather well," 43 percent "rather poorly," 21 percent 
"very poorly," and 5 percent did not know. 
  Concerning the National Front (FN), 6 percent answered "very 
well," 20 percent "rather well," 31 percent "rather poorly," 38 
percent "very poorly," and 5 percent did not know. 
  "Do you think that the PS has an alternative policy it can 
propose to the French people?" 
  Some 30 percent said "yes," compared to 68 percent who said 
"no" and 2 percent who did not know. 
  "In light of the social difficulties, do you think that, if 
the PS were in power, it would do better or less well than the 
present government?" 
  Some 21 percent said "better," 53 percent said "less well," 
24 percent said "the same," and 2 percent did not know. 
  Dupin adds that Balladur cannot use cohabitation with 
Socialist President Francois Mitterrand as an excuse for his 
government's "limited action." In fact, 88 percent of the 
respondents believe that "in general, cohabitation between 
Mitterrand and the prime minister has functioned smoothly," 
compared with only 11 percent who think the opposite. In the 
view of 52 percent of the respondents, "Mitterrand's presence 
has braked Balladur's policy little or not at all." 
  It is surprising that in spite of the multiple problems the 
government endured during its first year, cantonal elections 
results were fairly favorable for Balladur, Philippe Reinhard 
commentsin the 29 March Paris daily LE QUOTIDIEN. However, it is 
not certain that the government will be able to resist much 
longer, he continues. Balladur is aware that more difficulties 
await him, especially in the areas of the economy and 
employment. While the future is "less than radiant" for the 
prime minister, he does possess a trump card, namely, the fact 
that he is perceived as "different" from all other politicians. 
Even if slowly declining, his popularity remains "exceptional," 
as if no alternative to him exists in the voters' mind. One year 
after his election, the prime minister is "paradoxically both 
threatened and serene," Reinhard concludes. 

