Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Herbert Schaefer from the "Kennzeichen D" program] </F>
  [Text] According to our investigations, the Libyan Embassy 
in Bonn has had contacts for years with German companies. The 
background: after its al-Rabta chemical weapons plant was 
uncovered and destroyed in a fire in March 1990, Libya initiated 
a new, huge armament project -- a tunnel project. 
  Head of state al-Qadhdhafi has claimed that the project is 
an 
irrigation plant for arid areas in the north -- around the Great 
Man River -- a name by which al-Qadhdhafi celebrates himself. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi's lucrative orders also lured German companies 
to the desert. The office of the Frankfurt state prosecutor 
suspected an infringement of the foreign-trade law. 
  [Begin recording Hubert Hart, senior state prosecutor of 
Frankfurt] A short time ago we received a long list of names of 
companies that might have been involved in a project in Libya. 
This will be reason enough for us to examine the matter again, 
and to take a closer look at the mentioned companies. [end 
recording] 
  Pictures of al-Qadhdhafi's tunnel project are not available. 
Nevertheless, eyewitnesses have described it as a bunker system 
65 km southeast of the capital of Tripoli, which is camouflaged 
as an irrigation plant of the neighboring Great Man River 
project. Underground armament plants, runways for missile 
launcher systems, and command centers -- probably the largest 
underground arms arsenal in the Third World. 
  A draft plan was made available to ``Kennzeichen D.'' 
According to it, the tunnel network extends over an area of 15 
square km. The Economics Ministry in Bonn knows. 
  [Begin recording Volker Hahn, official in the export-control 
office of the Federal Economics Ministry, broadcast in progress] 
...that Libya is interested in duplicating the poison-gas plant 
of al-Rabta -- underground. Initially the location was not 
known. Later, evidence accumulated about the location and the 
size of these subterranean facilities. It is true that we 
received information that German products were also used to make 
this tunnel project possible. [end recording] 
  For tactical reasons in connection with the investigations, 
the official would neither confirm nor deny it: German and 
foreign enterprises with offices in Germany did not only supply 
certain machinery for the construction of tunnels, but were also 
active themselves in Libya. Even a long time after the al-Rabta 
chemical weapons plant was uncovered, up to 62 German 
enterprises with more than 1,000 employees were temporarily 
active in the various projects all over Libya. According to 
documents made available to ```Kennzeichen D,'' 57 German 
experts were active in special construction tasks, the 
maintenance of radar systems, and directional radio and computer 
technology. 
  Companies in the Darmstadt and Stuttgart areas have come 
under particular suspicion, as has the branch office of an 
Austrian enterprise for tunnel construction in Frankfurt. 
However, no one is available from that office at the moment. 
Gerhard Sauer, head of the Salzburg company, one of the world's 
most renowned tunnel constructors, is said to have provided 
construction plans for the project near Tripoli. 
  [Begin Hart recording] We are familiar with the connections. 
One or two years ago we actually initiated preliminary 
investigations against the defendant, but we had to close the 
case. [end recording] 
  Because, the ultimate proof was missing, namely that Sauer 
had infringed German export regulations. Nevertheless: 
  [Begin Hart recording] Most recently we have received new 
documents that might provide evidence that business activities 
have taken place here in Germany. This means that we will 
reexamine the case. [end recording] 
  Particularly since evidence provided by eyewitnesses is 
growing stronger that al-Qadhdhafi is also storing barrels with 
poisonous substances, and, unlike what has been hitherto 
assumed, he intends to produce not only chemical but also 
bacteriological weapons. 
  In this connection, Karl-Heinz Matthias, head of the central 
federal customs office for criminal investigations, Cologne, 
said: 
  [Begin Matthias recording] According to the evidence we 
have, Libya is trying to develop such bacteriological weapons. 
[end recording] 
  Is al-Qadhdhafi's desert bunker also a workshop for 
bacteriological weapons, so to speak? Such a laboratory for 
bacteriological tests, which is usually used for pharmaceutical 
projects, is said to have been shipped to Libya via a third 
country, and redesigned there for the production of 
bacteriological weapons. German investigators are currently 
pursuing information in this connection. 
  A bioreactor or fermenter is the centerpiece for the 
production of bacteriological weapons. Libyan scientists who 
trained in Europe should have no problems redesigning such 
bioreactors for systems that can produce any amount of germs -- 
easily and inexpensively: the poor man's nuclear bomb, as 
molecular biologist Manuel Kiper put it: 
  [Begin Kiper recording] Well, with modern biotechnology and 
the necessary facilities -- these fermenters -- it is possible 
in principle to breed a large number of germs within one to four 
weeks, let us say within one month, and to pour them, so to 
speak, into conventional ammunition. [end recording] 
  One example is the highly dangerous anthrax bacteria that 
can 
cause severe ulcers. One can also produce certain fungi that 
can be used to contaminate entire regions and destroy crops. 
  Apart from U.S. products, bioreactors made in Germany are 
the 
leading brands on the market. As a result of recent 
developments the German producers must now expect a close 
examination of their Libya deals. 
  [Begin Hahn recording] We will, of course, examine the 
information we have received. After all, this is a matter of 
preventing the spread or production of weapons of mass 
destruction. We will make full use of all means to prevent that 
as best we can. [end recording] 
  This applies to so-called starting cultures, the feed for 
the 
bioreactor so to speak. According to investigations, German 
institutes sent the sensitive products to laboratories in crisis 
areas -- never, of course, without adding that the material was 
intended for purely scientific and peaceful purposes. 
  In view of the internationally booming mail order business 
for microorganisms, the international warning symbol for 
dangerous bacteriological products sometimes proves to be 
fraudulent labelling. On this issue, Oliver Thraenert, an 
expert on bacteriological weapons from the Friedrich Ebert 
Foundation, said: 
  [Begin Thraenert recording] Of course, they do not have any 
control over the ultimate use, which is the fundamental problem 
of armament exports, especially in the sphere of bacteriological 
weapons. Particularly when we are speaking of exports of 
microorganisms, which reproduce by themselves. [end recording] 
  At least it would certainly be possible to have stricter 
controls at the exporter's end, as is demonstrated by Holland, 
for example. In the central office at (Baarn), near Utrecht, the 
world's largest and model institute for fungi cultures, tens of 
thousands of organisms are the subject of research and are 
stored there. Quite frequently this institute receives orders 
from crisis areas. If, however, a country such as Iran, is 
suddenly interested in fungi of bacteriological weapons-grade 
fusarium kind, the researchers categorically reject cooperation. 
Yet, wherever the Netherlands refused delivery, others helped 
out, for example institutes in Germany. 
  Even though there is a convention against bacteriological 
weapons, which was signed by more than 130 countries, there is 
no control of the contract partners on location. 
  Whether in Libya or other developing countries -- in times 
of 
international conflicts, there is great demand for the poor 
man's nuclear bomb. There is an increasing risk of a war 
involving bacteriological arms, particularly since all necessary 
equipment is cheap and easily available. Control is virtually 
impossible. 

