BFN 

  [Text] This is an abbreviated version of the 25 coalition 
guidelines that were laid down by the National Council of the 
Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ] at the end of February. We 
literally quote the passages that the Hungarian Socialist Party 
[MSZP], judging from its program, might argue about. 
  1. A new or reworded constitution "that is identical to the 
current one in its basic principles." 
  2. To appoint the ombudsmen. 
  3. To provide solid guarantees for judicial independence. 
  4. To curtail the power of commissioners of the Republic and 
increase the independence of local governments. 
  5. Independent media. 
  6. Quick and public privatization controlled by parliament. 
"The state's role as owner has to be cut back." "To support" 
the participation of foreign capital, and to ease the 
participation of "domestic entrepreneurs and investors" in 
privatization. 
  7. To stimulate growth with the help of stimulating 
investments, reducing taxes, and by helping local authority 
investments and housing construction and the underdeveloped 
regions to catch up. However, in the meantime, "the current 
budget deficit must not be allowed to increase any further," and 
efforts have to be made to reduce inflation. 
  8. To continue the policy of foreign economic opening and 
fitting in with the developed foreign market systems, and to 
renew our economic links with the East-Central European 
countries "in accordance with the realistic possibilities." 
  9. To support all forms of enterprises and ownership in 
agriculture which have proved successful. 
  10. To reduce unemployment; this viewpoint should also be 
asserted in privatization. 
  11. To preserve the value of pensions, reduce the 
differences of living standards caused by family size, and 
assist in finding first homes. Welfare benefits "have to be 
more targeted through normative regulations." 
  12. Overall economic and social agreement with the employers 
and the trade unions. 
  13. To stop corruption. 
  14. To make health care available for everyone. "To 
continue the privatization of health care services," "to finance 
hospitals regardless of the sector." 
  15. Freedom to establish and choose schools. To have a 
neutral world view in education. To extend the range of people 
in further education. To abolish the regional educational 
centers. 
  16. Culture and science: To have patronages, but no control 
of contents. 
  17. Diversity in world views. To guarantee the separation 
of church and state. 
  18. To set up national minority local governments. 
  19. Join NATO and the European Union. Improve relations 
with the neighboring countries. We do not intend to change the 
borders. 
  20. To support the Hungarians living beyond the borders also 
by relying on the democratic forces of the neighboring countries. 
  21. Overall reform of military forces. We will "adjust the 
size and character of the Army to the changed security and 
economic conditions." 
  22. To strengthen public security. 
  23. To have a cheap and modest state. 
  24. To have better relations with the opposition, forces 
outside parliament, and the interested representation bodies. 
  25. To seek the possibilities of national reconciliation and 
to close the past in a way acceptable for a large section of 
society. 

