Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Make Efforts To Build a Modernized Nation -- Full Text of </F>
Executive Yuan Premier Lien Chan's Special Report Delivered at a 
Monthly Meeting Held by the Chinese Kuomintang Central Committee 
on 10 January To Commemorate Dr. Sun Yat-sen"] 
  [Text] Chairman, Respectable Seniors, and Fellow Members: 
  Today, the Central Committee held a monthly meeting in 
January to commemorate Dr. Sun Yat-sen. It is a great honor for 
me to be entrusted to deliver a work report on administration at 
the meeting, and to explain to respectable seniors my 
administration ideals and concepts as well as the orientation 
for our efforts. First of all, I would like to wish everyone 
present here a Happy New Year; may everything turn out as you 
wish. Meanwhile, I also hope that I shall be able to draw up 
new plans and usher in a new situation under the guidance of the 
president and all respectable seniors so as to make new 
contributions to the party and our country. 
  Looking back on the past decade, we may say that the period 
constituted a stage in which the Republic of China [ROC] made 
the fastest progress in history. In politics, we lifted martial 
law and the ban on political parties and newspapers, terminated 
the period of mobilization for suppressing the communist 
rebellion, held elections for all the members of the National 
Assembly, and amended the Constitution by stages. As a result, 
we have laid a foundation for a certain scale of party politics, 
and the breadth and depth of our democracy is catching up with 
that of the advanced countries in Europe and America. In our 
economic activities, oriented by the drive to liberalize and 
internationalize our economy, we stepped up capital construction 
and dedicated ourselves to upgrading the industries. As a 
result, the ROC has evolved from an economically developing 
country to a rising industrial country. In cross-strait 
relations, we lifted the ban on people's travel across the 
Taiwan Strait to visit their families, expanded cultural and 
economic exchanges between the two peoples, caused both sides of 
the Taiwan Strait to evolve from long-term separation to 
mutually beneficial exchanges, admitted the reality of 
separation between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait and their 
separate rules at present, insisted that the reunification of 
China should be achieved under the prospect of the establishment 
of a system in which all people are free and equally rich and by 
democratic and peaceful means, and, following this principle, 
opened up more space for international activities to maintain 
the position, rights, and interests that our country should 
have. In culture, the modern Chinese culture's capability to 
bring forth new ideas and to contain differences as well as its 
plurality blossomed in the garden of academic and creative 
freedom and condensed into a sense of living community. In 
addition, in society, the ideals of justice and fairness were 
gradually fulfilled in our policy and life and promoted social 
tranquility and harmony. The most striking mark was that per 
capita GNP increased from $3,167 in 1984 to $10,570 in 1993. 
This demonstrated the prosperity of the Republic of China [ROC] 
in a most truthful and objective way. This was a result of the 
implementation of the Three People's Principles by the 
Kuomintang [KMT] and the greatest gift it has presented to the 
nation. The period fully deserves to be praised as another 
"golden decade" in the history of the ROC. 
  Administration Ideals and Concepts 
  Of course, such drastic changes taking place in as short a 
period as 10 years would inevitably bring about numerous new 
problems due to the country's speedy operation [in various 
fields of endeavor]. For example, giving consideration to both 
democracy and rule by law at the same time, achieving harmony 
between the economy and culture, and making adjustments between 
fairness and efficiency remain tasks that require us to make 
continued efforts. However, what I would like to particularly 
mention here is that the principal objective that the ROC has 
been striving for more than four decades' to achieve on Taiwan 
is "modernization of the nation." By this we mean to establish, 
in politics, a democratic society based on the free will of all 
the people; to transform ourselves, in economic activities, from 
a society in which the traditional agriculture plays the 
dominant role into an advanced industrial country full of 
innovation and in which the development of science and 
technology plays the dominant role; and to enable the evolution 
of a peaceful society that encourages diverse development and 
contains various differences. At a juncture when the whole 
nation is making common efforts to achieve our objective, 
"modernization of the nation," I deeply feel that my 
responsibilities are heavy as I undertake the work of the 
Executive Yuan. 
  Looking ahead, I think the years to come are the most 
crucial 
period for our country. At present, the complete collapse of 
the Eastern European communist countries has changed the 
tradition of bipolar confrontation and, consequently, has 
reduced the risk of regional conflicts. Communist China's 
deepening economic reform is very attractive to capital in the 
Asia-Pacific Region. The success of the GATT Uruguay Round of 
talks, the forthcoming establishment of a new world trade 
organization, and the important progress made by economic 
conformity in Europe, America, and the Pacific Region show that 
the obstacles to cultural and economic exchange are gradually 
being eliminated. Every country in the world is going to vie 
with each other for leadership in an arena with fewer dividing 
lines and less protection. Each one strives to establish a new 
international order on the basis of freedom, human rights, and 
mutually beneficial economic relations and trade. It is very 
likely that the fulfillment of the ideal of a world village may 
accompany the advent of the 21st century. The last six years of 
the 20th century will precisely be the time for every country to 
improve its own condition, to warm up, and to be ready and 
waiting for a new era. We must seize this crucial period, 
smoothly accomplish our transformation tasks, and march to the 
sphere of "modernization" with one action so as to race against 
the advanced countries on a equal footing and from the same 
starting line. In other words, the next six years will be the 
most important period determining the future of our Chinese 
nation. This will depend on the extent of our efforts. As a 
ruling party, the KMT should, of course, undertake this great 
mission of our times. The government is bound by duty to 
shoulder the heavy responsibilities of administration. 
  It has been more than 10 months since I was ordered to take 
charge of the administrative work. I am deeply aware that our 
country is presently in a crucial period in which it will have 
to inherit the past and usher in the future, and that we must 
enhance the existing splendid achievements and accomplish all 
the projects designed to expedite the nation's transformation 
during this period. We must open the door for modernization when 
the 21st century arrives and lead the Chinese nation to 
regeneration. 
  Based on the understanding mentioned above, I think the 
Executive Yuan should achieve overall and forward-looking 
development in carrying out its work and should be a very 
capable government. Therefore, our administration ideals and 
concepts are: 
  -- widen our horizon and use a broad international outlook 
to 
determine the position and orientation for national construction; 
  -- achieve balanced development, eliminate unbalanced 
development, and strive for overall progress; 
  -- respect and condense the will of the people and promote 
unity among all the people; 
  -- and implement a forward-looking and practical policy on 
public utilities, look upon taking the rank of a modernized 
nation in the 21st century as our objective, work quietly and in 
a down-to-earth manner, and score some achievements for the 
country and people. 
  Overall Planning 
  The Executive Yuan will undertake overall planning to 
realize 
these ideals and concepts and to accomplish the major goal of 
national transformation. Today, I would like to deliver the 
following report, for your consideration, on several major 
trends in planning and administrative priorities: 
<H5>  Great Constitutional Achievements </H5>
  1. Within the bounds of rationality and legality, our great 
achievements in constitutional reform have inspired the healthy 
maturation of democratic politics and the implementation of 
local autonomy. 
  The ROC's progress in recent years in pursuing democratic 
politics on Taiwan is yet another achievement, after our 
country's economic development, and thus merits our attention. 
The quintessence of democratic politics is to consider people's 
interests and allow people to decide things in all matters. 
Instead of steering public opinion, the government's functions 
are to coordinate various interests through the application of 
professional knowledge and embody them in policies and practices 
that satisfy the requirements both of ideals and of practicality 
and find acceptance among the majority of people. Civil 
servants should go down to the grass roots and approach matters 
from a popular perspective. Policies are feasible only if they 
are supported by most people. 
  Next, we should maintain our stand on administering 
government affairs in strict accordance with the law. The law 
concedes that people's actions and activities are protected and 
inviolable; it is against the law to infringe upon them. Legal 
restrictions and prohibitions cannot be disregarded; tolerance 
in this respect amounts to negligence of duty. Administrative 
agencies are allowed to enforce, but not to violate, the law. 
To defuse public resentment, laws that are outdated, rigid, and 
out of step with society should be revised or abrogated 
according to legal procedures. 
  In addition, a democratic country must have a modern 
government whose hallmarks include "clean administration," which 
aims to expose and uproot embezzlement and malfeasance, and to 
guard against and eliminate government corruption and the 
practice of dispensing patronage. Other hallmarks are 
"efficiency," which means better organization, fewer personnel, 
streamlined operations, responsibility at various levels, 
improved administrative efficiency, and the efficient use of the 
country's resources; and "convenience for people," which aims to 
foster the concept of serving the people based on popular will. 
In 1993, the Executive Yuan formulated and implemented the 
"Plan for Administrative Reform," which calls on all 
administrative personnel to understand the country's situation 
and popular expectations, to renew their concepts by taking 
active and bold actions, not to be content with following the 
beaten path, and to attain the goal of streamlining 
administration and making things easy for people. Currently, we 
are going all out to implement the plan, which may yield 
practical results after a considerable period of time. 
  Personally, I do not think a modern government should manage 
everything. Except for a few undertakings requiring government 
planning and attention because people cannot or will not launch 
them, or because they are not fit for people to run, the 
government, with its limited financial resources, manpower, and 
functions, should mainly be responsible for steering courses, 
drawing up rules, and creating an environment in which people 
can tap their potential and realize their ideals, in order to 
strengthen people's affinity with the country, deepen their 
concern for society, and enhance their confidence in the 
government. Therefore, popular participation and implementation 
of local autonomy are the Executive Yuan's future administrative 
priorities. 
  We should improve the relationship between the "government" 
and "people" through all means. Specifically, we should start 
with local autonomy and allow people to express their views, 
through the "ballot" and "tax payment," on matters of immediate 
concern to them, and solve common problems, so as to realize the 
ideal of creating a responsible government through responsible 
people. We have now completed the drafts of the "Law on 
Provincial and County Autonomy," the "Law on Autonomy for Cities 
Under the Central Government," the "Law on Delineating 
Administrative Divisions," and the "Amendments to the Election 
and Recall Law." Following the completion of the legislative 
process, we can hold extensive elections aimed at implementing 
local autonomy and partially realize the ideal of constitutional 
reform. Democracy is the surging trend of the times. Dr. Sun 
Yat-sen said: "The tide of the world roars ahead. Those who 
swim with it will prosper, while those who swim against it will 
perish." Buffeted by the tide, we have no choice but to swim 
with it, and we cannot avert it. 
  Intensifying Economic Liberalization 
  2. We will continue to promote and strengthen the strategy 
of 
liberalizing the economic system, using our country's superior 
manpower to usher in a phase of economic development driven 
primarily by science and technology. 
  Over the past four decades, our country's economy has gone 
through an import substitution period in which the government 
exercised "internal control" and "closed the country off to the 
outside world," as well as an "export-oriented" period in which 
the government mainly pursued a planned laissez-faire economy; 
it has achieved splendid results in both periods. The global 
trend of liberalization, as well as our country's current 
environment and conditions reinforced by economic development, 
will inevitably lead to liberalization and internationalization, 
which can be achieved essentially through the improvement of 
human quality and competitiveness. 
  To improve human quality, we will reform education and 
intensify vocational training. In reforming education, we must 
take a more realistic approach toward rebuilding ethical, moral, 
and value standards to keep pace with current and future social, 
political, economic, and cultural development trends; to satisfy 
popular aspirations and demands for knowledge and advanced 
studies; and to accommodate the growing liberalization and 
openness of our society. In addition, we will ensure that "human 
resources" will contribute to economic development, quicken the 
pace of planning and instituting an educational system based 
chiefly on lifetime education, expand adult education, 
popularize education, effect flexible exchanges and operations 
within the educational system, adopt flexible and varied 
admission standards, and institute an educational system that 
caters to different special aptitudes. We have completed 
amendments to the "University Law," thereby giving universities 
room for independent academic development. We also have revised 
the "Law on Teachers' Education" and formulated the "Teachers' 
Law" to expand the channels for sourcing qualified teaching 
staffs. Along with the implementation of a teachers' licensing 
system, we will improve the qualifications of primary and 
middle-school teachers in the future. We will promote a system 
of tailoring technical and vocational education to professional 
licensing requirements and establish more technical colleges to 
clear the channels for technical and vocational school students 
to pursue advanced studies in order to accommodate future social 
demands stemming from industrial restructuring. We will also 
chart and promote the "Plan for Developing and Improving 
Technical Education in Junior Middle Schools -- Toward the Goal 
of 10-Year Compulsory Education." To search for effective 
measures to cope with various educational reforms, the 
government is actively making plans for the national educational 
conference scheduled for late June in hopes of drawing on 
collective wisdom, devising a grand scheme, and painting a 
completely new and magnificent picture for our country's 
education in the 21st century. Moreover, we will also reform 
our vocational training facilities, vocation types, and the 
substance and form of vocational training to improve pre-job 
training and strengthen retraining for people transferred to 
other jobs, in-service training, and training in secondary 
skills. To upgrade the technical levels of personnel engaged in 
economic construction and cater to the needs of industrial 
upgrading and economic internationalization and liberalization, 
we will also promote and implement a technicians' licensing 
system that integrates training, examination, and employment. 
  A very important task in increasing our economic 
competitiveness and improving all aspects of our investment 
climate is to accelerate industrial restructuring and upgrading. 
The Executive Yuan has formulated and is actively implementing 
the "Plan for Economic Rejuvenation"; it has adopted concrete 
strategies, which can be implemented immediately, to tackle such 
key factors as accelerating industrial upgrading and 
strengthening the operational structure of small and medium 
businesses, as well as various problems currently affecting 
private-sector investment. To attract domestic and foreign 
investment and create broad prospects for economic development, 
we are also devising plans to exploit Taiwan's special 
geographic and economic conditions in developing the Taiwan area 
into a multifunctional business center in the Asia-Pacific 
region; promoting the free flow of skilled manpower, capital, 
and commodities; and stimulating the exchange of information. 
Moreover, one of the important conditions for ensuring 
continuing growth in personal income in the wake of economic 
modernization is to permit flexible changes in the industrial 
structure. In terms of policy, the Executive Yuan will further 
push various production factors onto a more competitive path, in 
addition to intensifying efforts to promote established long- 
and medium-range plans for scientific and technological 
development, with a view to reinforcing our industrial 
technological prowess and creating an environment in which to 
develop industrial technology. In my opinion, this policy 
course carries vital importance for our country's shift toward a 
modern economic system. This is because for a long time after 
World War II, the West used currency, interest rate, and tax 
policies to upgrade investment levels, increase demand for 
essential goods, and attain the goal of full employment. Such 
investment policies, which primarily aimed to create demand for 
essential goods, were also implemented in our country. In view 
of our country's impending status as a modern state, however, 
the so-called "improvement of the investment climate" should be 
achieved by channeling various production resources toward 
development of the most competitive, vibrant, and creative 
industries through the operation of market mechanisms. In other 
words, in the future our economy as a whole must acquire an 
ability to repeat its pioneering process as well as a flexible 
ability to adapt to change, with a view to promoting industrial 
upgrading and attaining the goal of continuously readjusting the 
industrial structure. Such "supply-oriented" economic concepts 
are new ideas in the contemporary world. 
<H5>  Promoting the Southbound Policy </H5>
  A country's main production factors include land, capital, 
manpower, and intellectual property amassed in the course of 
scientific and technological development. Central to the 
introduction of "supply-oriented" improvements in the investment 
climate is the establishment of competitive markets for land, 
finance, manpower, and intellectual property rights. The next 
important step is to bring automatic regulatory and control 
mechanisms into full play through effective market operations, 
with a view to achieving the goal of introducing flexible 
changes in the industrial structure. Based on this concept, the 
Executive Yuan will adopt the following measures regarding the 
markets for various production factors: 
  -- While we certainly should stress the principle of 
"fairness and justice" concerning land utilization, we will 
emphasize the efficiency of land utilization and increase land 
supply so that enterprises can rent or buy land needed for 
manufacturing in accordance with the principle of 
competitiveness during the process of economic development. The 
Executive Yuan will formulate sweeping plans regarding land 
issues. 
  -- Regarding the financial market, we will place greater 
emphasis on the efficiency of financial markets, continue to 
lift government restrictions on setting up intermediary 
financial institutions in accordance with the trend of 
liberalization, and encourage more foreign intermediary agencies 
to compete in our country, with a view to further opening up our 
financial market. These administrative strategies have arisen 
from the prevailing situation. 
  -- Regarding the market for manpower, one of the main 
reasons 
for our country's miraculous economic development is the 
possession of excellent human resources. In the past, we 
allocated manpower to different industries in accordance with 
the principle of competitiveness and maintained harmonious 
relations between employers and employees on such issues as 
wages, dismissal, and job change while preserving flexibility in 
adapting to changes in the industrial structure. Maintaining "a 
competitive labor market and harmonious relations between 
management and labor" is indeed the greatest guarantee for our 
country to continually attract investment and effectively 
improve the investment climate. It is a matter that merits our 
attention. 
  In addition, liberalization is a world trend arising from 
changes in the international economic situation. This trend of 
change will inevitably link the ROC's "domestic market" with the 
"world market" more closely than ever. To meet the challenges 
posed by our forthcoming participation in the GATT, we must 
vigorously carry out adjustment of various systems. Therefore, 
the ROC will gradually open its domestic market to foreign 
investments, lift the policy on protectionism for the 
agricultural sector, and promote the management of government 
enterprises by the private sector. Gaining admission to the 
GATT is the primary goal of our vigorous efforts to participate 
in international organizations. The Executive Yuan will treat 
the promotion of the southbound policy which targets ASEAN and 
the expansion of our international economic relations and trade 
as well as the space for development as the specific objectives 
for its administration. 
<H3>  Treat 12 Construction Projects as the Focal Points of 
Administration </H3>
  3. We must join the forces of the government with those of 
the people to carry out the construction of various major 
projects and achieve balanced development of the country. 
  Our country has gone through the implementation of nine 
economic construction plans and continues to promote major 
construction plans, which involve 10 projects and 14 projects 
and the Six-Year National Development Plan. National 
construction is a continuous and endless job. The Executive 
Yuan reviewed and rearranged the Six-Year National Development 
Plan into 632 programs in the light of the needs of our country, 
our capabilities for actual implementation, and the government's 
financial resources, and then instructed relevant organs to 
conscientiously promote their implementation. However, the 
Executive Yuan will place more emphasis on achieving "balanced" 
development and on encouraging participation by the private 
sector in promoting the major national construction projects in 
the future. By "balanced" development we mean rationally 
allocating the government's financial resources to different 
departments and areas in order that both the central and local 
governments, both hardware and software, and both the economic 
sector and cultural circles may receive an allocation of 
resources. We encourage participation by the private sector in 
order that we may use the guidelines of the "Regulations on 
Encouraging the Private Sector To Participate in Major 
Communications Projects" to promote the construction of major 
national projects and, above all, rely on the forces of the 
private sector to help the government surmount the many 
difficulties it has encountered with respect to trained 
personnel and experiences. It is hoped that the private sector 
can cherish the breadth of vision of offering a present to 
society in return and can help the government promote all 
national construction projects. Looking ahead, the government 
will treat the following 12 construction projects as the focal 
points of administration in addition to making continued efforts 
to promote the Six-Year National Development Plan as well as 
relevant key construction projects, and will enlist the help of 
all people to draw up specific measures for their implementation: 
  (1) Renovate and install educational facilities at middle 
and 
primary schools. 
  (2) Build recreational areas as well as parks and sports 
facilities in cities. 
  (3) Install more cultural facilities, both software and 
hardware, in provinces (municipalities), counties (cities), 
townships and towns, and communities. 
  (4) Develop new cities and towns and build public housing 
units. 
  (5) Improve public transportation and carry out 
comprehensive 
construction of road systems and parking lots in and around 
communities. 
  (6) Build industrial and commercial complex areas. 
  (7) Speed up the construction of garbage incinerators and 
sites for garbage disposal by burying them underground. 
  (8) Step up the development and control of water resources. 
  (9) Build a south-north high-speed railway. 
  (10) Build a rapid transit system in the metropolitan area 
of 
Kaohsiung and build subways in the cities of Taichung and Tainan. 
  (11) Carry out construction of the next phase project of the 
second freeway and build an east-west superhighway. 
  (12) Make a plan for the construction of an east-west 
superhighway in central Taiwan. 
  Actively Promote Social Welfare Measures 
  4. Guided by the principle of giving consideration to both 
the soundness of the government's finance and justice and 
fairness in society, we must actively promote social welfare 
measures. 
  Justice and fairness in society is an issue to which any 
modern nation must pay close attention. Besides providing an 
equal right for everyone to have the opportunity for education, 
employment, and participation in government affairs, our country 
will adopt a policy to strive for equality in income through 
taxes on rent and disbursement transfers. Our basic practice 
regarding social welfare measures is to let the government look 
after those who need to be looked after. Therefore, beginning 
from the next fiscal year, we are going to increase living 
allowances for the elderly people who have only medium or low 
income; those elderly people whose income is less than 1.5 times 
the minimum living standard will be entitled to a monthly 
allowance of 6,000 new Taiwan dollars [NT$] and those elderly 
people whose income is in the bracket between 1.5 and 2 times 
the minimum living standard are entitled to a monthly allowance 
of NT$3,000. The government will continue to implement 
supportive measures for medical care, employment, and education, 
supplemented by launching projects to provide jobs by way of 
relief, by conducting vocational training, and by offering loans 
for people to start a business. The government will give 
priority to looking after elderly people who have no one to 
support them, people who are seriously disabled, patients 
suffering from chronic diseases, vegetables [zhiwuren 2784 3670 
0086], and so forth. The government will give better guidance 
to women, children, and youngsters and strengthen protection for 
them. In addition, we shall enlist the help of all the people 
and do our best to promote the system of "health insurance for 
all the people" as well as the "citizens' annuity" system. 
  The system of health insurance for all the people combines 
the existing medical care services for government employees, 
laborers, and farmers; expands the scope of the insured to cover 
all citizens; and is developing into a unitary health insurance 
system in which the insurance premium is equitably shared and 
which entitles all citizens to basic medical care. We are 
expediting the legislative procedures for relevant laws and hope 
to successfully implement the system by the end of this year. 
As regards the "citizens' annuity" system, we hope to gurantee 
that every citizen will be free from want when they are old by 
means of compulsory savings and through joint efforts by the 
government and people. The system is being planned by relevant 
organs and will be rearranged by the Council for Economic 
Planning and Development. We also hope that it will be 
completed this year. As these two systems are important 
administrative measures that have a bearing on the welfare of 
all the people, the Executive Yuan shall plan and promote them 
with utmost circumspection and, meanwhile, will call on the 
whole nation to support them. 
<H5>  Maintain Sound Finance </H5>
  Although our country is marching to join the ranks of 
advanced industrial countries, we must draw a lesson from the 
mistakes made by them in the past. The "welfare state" practice 
adopted by many advanced countries in Europe and America in the 
past has not only led to financial deficits from which they 
cannot extricate themselves, but it has ultimately resulted in a 
vicious circle, plunging both the economy and society into 
predicaments for which they can find no solution. A movement to 
make revisions to the welfare state is in the making in both 
Europe and America. It is really necessary for our country to 
understand this trend. Taxpayers are willing to look after old 
widowers, widows, and lonely people who are unable to look after 
themselves by paying taxes. However, according to Chinese 
cultural tradition, it is the children's duty to support and 
wait upon their parents, and working industriously is the way to 
live and become wealthy. The government must keep up the 
tradition. Therefore, I think it is an important responsibility 
of the government to maintain sound finance. Besides having 
made a five-year-long plan for the government's finance, we are 
gradually adjusting the order of priority for various government 
expenditures by increasing production-related expenditures and 
reducing consumption-related expenditures, and we shall see to 
it that taxpayers' tax burden is maintained under a reasonable 
ceiling. 
  As far as my colleagues in the administrative departments 
are 
concerned, the year 1994 makes them feel that they have heavy 
responsibilities and poses great challenges because we realize 
that a new face and new problems have cropped up in the 
environment at home and abroad which we must confront and 
resolve. When we inherit the achievements from the past and 
look ahead to the advent of the 21st century, all citizens look 
forward to the nation's modernization. Therefore, we must 
double our efforts, surmount every difficulty, and look forward 
to its fulfillment. I sincerely hope that all respectable 
seniors will not stint their criticisms. 

