Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jacques Isnard: "French Forces Reorganized"] </F>
  [Text] At the explicit request of Francois Mitterrand, the 
French UNPROFOR [UN Protection Force] contingent in Sarajevo 
will be reinforced -- from 2,280 men today to around 3,135 -- in 
the framework of a supposedly even vaster reorganization of the 
military forces in the former Yugoslavia. This new contingent 
of some 855 extra men consists of engineers and will contribute 
to the restoration of the main public services in Sarajevo 
itself. This redeployment of French forces in the region and 
even in the Adriatic is likely to be done in several stages. 
  The French battalion (900 men) at Glina, in Krajina (part of 
Croatia occupied by the Serbs), which currently consists of the 
27th Alpine Division's light infantry, will be relieved by 
members of the 7th Armored Division. However, France plans to 
definitively withdraw its UNPROFOR troops from Glina on 15 June. 
The United Nations has already been informed of the move. 
  In Bosnia itself, the reorganization also affects Tuzla and 
Sarajevo while, on the former Yugoslav coast, the aircraft 
carrier Foch currently patrolling the area is to be replaced by 
the Clemenceau, probably at the end of March. In Tuzla, France 
has just assigned an attachment of 54 men to the airport, 
consisting of 32 engineers (mine disposal experts) and 22 others 
(for air traffic control and the fire service). 
  Lastly, the 855-men Sarajevo reinforcement will be taken 
from 
the 9th Naval Infantry Division (based in Nantes) and the 11th 
Parachute Division (from Toulouse). These are troops 
specializing in mine disposal, engineering operations, and the 
restoration of public services. They may be supplemented by EDF 
[French Electricity Company] engineers. This battalion will be 
deployed in Rajlovac, west of Sarajevo, between 23 March and 6 
April, with no fewer than 300 vehicles of various types, 
including a squadron of 12 Sagaie light armored vehicles. It 
will join up with two other battalions already stationed at the 
airport and in the eastern part of the town. 
  The forces have been reorganized and increased in Sarajevo 
at 
the explicit request of the head of state. Despite the upcoming 
withdrawal from Glina, France remains the highest contributor to 
UNPROFOR, with some 6,000 troops out of a total of 10,000 
(including, in addition to the UN troops, the naval forces in 
the Adriatic and the airmen based in Italy). 
  Since October 1992, the French have also been the only UN 
force in the besieged Muslim enclave of Bihac, where they have a 
battalion of 1,200 men. For some weeks, the Serbs have been 
putting the enclave under great pressure and have been bullying 
the 5th Bosnian Army Corps, which comes under the mandate of 
Sarajevo and whose survival is largely dependent on the presence 
of the French UNPROFOR troops. Nonetheless, the French 
contingent has for some time been caught between the two camps 
and is meeting with more difficulties than in the past. The 
visit of the prime minister on Sunday 13 March again sparked 
persistent rumors -- that in reality have been heard since last 
year -- that France is to pull out. In that case the United 
Nations would have to find a replacement country. Military 
sources state that a withdrawal from Bihac is not planned. 
  That does not mean that the situation in Bihac is final. 
France is not hiding its intention of eventually regrouping its 
contribution to the UN effort in a single region, namely the 
town of Sarajevo. For security reasons first and foremost, but 
also because the France's capacity to supply UNPROFOR troops is 
coming into conflict with the amount of professional and 
enlisted or voluntary forces available. Other theaters of 
operation require the presence of the French Army, starting with 
Africa. 

