BFN 

  [Text] The Export-Import Bank of Korea is a special 
government financial institution whose purpose is to promote the 
development of the Korean economy and economic cooperation with 
foreign countries. 
  To accomplish this, the bank supports export and import 
transactions, overseas investment projects, and the development 
of natural resources abroad through extending loans, providing 
re-lending facilities and issuing guarantees. 
  The bank also operates the Economic Development Cooperation 
Fund (EDCF) and the South-North Korea Cooperation Fund (SNKCF), 
both entrusted by the government. Since its establishment, Korea 
Eximbank has supported over 1,800 projects in approximately 100 
countries around the world, contributing to the economic 
development of those nations. 
<H5>  History of Operations </H5>
  The bank was established July 1, 1976 under the 
Export-Import 
Bank of Korea Act. Since then, Eximbank's programs have been 
renewed and developed, reflecting the bank's determination to 
shape its operations to match the changing circumstances of 
domestic and global markets. 
  From the early stage of its founding, the bank has been 
extending financial support for export transactions under 
medium- and long-term credit, overseas investment and the 
development of natural resources abroad. 
  Imports of raw materials, essential supplies, sophisticated 
machinery and related high technology have been financed by the 
bank since April 1, 1988. 
  The bank has also been operating the EDCF and SNKCF, both 
entrusted by the government, since June 1, 1987 and March 20, 
1991, respectively. 
  The bank had operated the export insurance scheme from Jan. 
1, 1977 to July 7, 1992, when Korea Export Insurance Corp. 
(KEIC) was founded and took over the scheme. 
<H5>  Major Activities </H5>
  Korea Eximbank supports exports principally through 
extending 
loans directly to both suppliers and buyers, providing relending 
facilities to foreign financial institutions, and issuing 
guarantees. 
  The bank plays a complementary role to commercial banks, and 
does not compete with them in providing financial services. 
  When operating the programs, the bank requires reasonable 
assurance of repayment as prescribed in the Export-Import Bank 
of Korea Act, after reviewing technical, managerial, and 
financial soundness of the borrower and the project concerned. 
  Financing is the most important activity of Eximbank, and is 
designed to assist and encourage export of capital goods and 
services, overseas investment, and major resources development, 
which usually require larger credits and longer repayment 
periods. The bank also assists imports of certain natural 
resources and high-tech equipment. 
  The bank's financing services fall into several categories. 
The most important services are export credit, overseas 
investment credit, major resources development credit, and 
import credit. 
  The bank provides guarantees to Korean commercial banks and 
foreign banks that participate in cofinancing with the bank. 
The bank also directly guarantees a foreign importer that a 
Korean firm will perform as contracted. 
  The business of operating and managing EDCF and SNKCF is 
also 
vital to the bank's activities. EDCF aims at enhancing economic 
cooperation by providing ODA (official development assistance) 
loans required for the industrial development and economic 
stabilization of other developing countries. 
  SNKCF, under the initiative and policy coordination of the 
National Unification Board, intends to expand mutual exchange 
and cooperation with North Korea. 
  Financing services have received the highest priority among 
the bank's activities, since they are the primary means of 
fulfilling the mandate to support external transactions. 
  In 1980, the bank introduced its cofinancing program. The 
co-financing partners can be either domestic or foreign banking 
institutions. 
  Export credit has enjoyed much popularity among Korean 
exporters, accounting for the lion's share of the bank's total 
credit amount. 
  This credit is mainly categorized into three types: export 
loan, direct loan and relending facility. 
  Export loans is extended to Korean exporters as a supplier 
credit, in order to provide them with the required funds to 
finance exports of designated capital goods, such as industrial 
plants ships, rolling stocks, industrial machinery, electrical 
equipment, vehicles, iron and steel products, nonferrous metal 
products, aircraft, optical instruments, precision and medical 
equipment, and parts and components thereof. 
  Direct loan is provided to foreign entities as a buyer 
credit, in order to finance the purchase of the same capital 
goods as those eligible for export loan. The contract price 
shall be in excess of $1 million. 
  Both loans are available in foreign currencies or Korean won 
up to 100 percent of the export contract price, less a minimum 
15-20 percent cash payment, on a medium- and long-term basis. 
<H5>  Guarantees </H5>
  Eximbank provides guarantees to Korean commercial banks, 
local branches of foreign banks, and foreign banks that 
participate in transactions financed by the bank. The bank also 
directly guarantees foreign importers that Korean firms, will 
perform as contracted. 
  The bank provides a 100 percent guarantee of principal and 
interest to co-financing banks for transactions of usually up to 
five years. 
  The bank provides a foreign importer with a 100 percent 
guarantee to refund the cash payment for medium- and long-term 
transactions when it becomes impossible for the domestic 
exporter to perform as contracted. 
<H5>  EDCF Services </H5>
  The Economic Development Cooperation Fund (EDCF) is a 
bilateral official development assistance (ODA) program 
established by the Korean government in June 1987 to support the 
desire of other developing countries to shape their economic 
development, and encourage a beneficial relationship with these 
countries as well. 
  The government regulates the principal policies and general 
outlines of EDCF, while the bank handles project appraisals, 
executes loan agreements, monitors the projects, provides 
advisory services and carries out other functions for EDCF under 
the guidelines of the government. 

