Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday evening, in his traditional New Year 
message, head of state Abdou Diouf announced backup measures to 
cushion the effects of the emergency plan on the purchasing 
power of workers after elaborating on the problems which led to 
the adoption of this plan. 
  [Begin recording] We (?believe) that whatever our 
difficulties, in order to build our economy on a sound and 
flexible base, it is better to make proposals that will finally 
put Senegalese far ahead of other African countries. History 
will not forgive us if we sacrifice the dignity of the oncoming 
generations to preserve our own interests and make ourselves 
fragile. That is why I have decided to maintain the plan as it 
was passed. I have approved, in conformity with the 
constitution, measures aimed at creating, with reasonable 
sacrifices and for a limited period, the conditions for a sound 
and sustained economic growth -- the basis for the development 
of our country -- instead of hazardous and very expensive 
solutions. 
  Thus, I want to remain truthful to the mandate that you have 
entrusted to me which gives me the right to somehow anticipate 
the traps that are on the road lined with land mines which leads 
to development. Of ocourse, I remain open to dialogue with only 
one objective: finding the best solutions for our people. 
  Thus, the government has just ended consultations with 
Senegalese businessmen on the problems facing them before and 
after the adoption of the emergency plan. The discussions took 
place in a serene atmosphere and fruitful decisions were made. 
That augurs well for the series of meetings on the economic 
situation. I have asked the prime minister to set up before the 
end of January 1994 a committee that will be responsible for 
preparing the meetings. 
  In the same vein, to cushion the bad effects of the plan on 
the purchasing power of workers, I have approved the reduction 
of the prices of certain basic commodities. The prime minister 
will give you a list of the commodities and the rate of 
reductions. 
  Finally, I confirm that, as promised, the measures adopted 
in 
the emergency plan will be implemented with openness after the 
adoption of the documents. To this effect, the monitoring 
committee will be set up and benefit from my total support to 
fully accomplish its mission. [end recording] 
  In conformity with the head of state's decision to adopt 
backup measures for the emergency plan to help consumers, the 
prices of the following commodities and services will be reduced 
as of 3 January 1994: rent -- at the SICA [expansion unknown] 
rents lower than 25,000 francs will be reduced by 15 percent. 
Rents between 25,000 francs and 100,000 francs will be reduced 
by 7 percent. Rents higher than 100,000 francs will be reduced 
by 5 percent. All low- and medium-priced houses [FL-HLM] will 
be reduced 6 percent. 
  Cement: One metric tonne of cement will be reduced 6 
percent. 
Electricity: 5 percent reduction on the price of one kilowatt of 
low voltage. Telephone: connection fee is reduced by 10 
percent, reconnection fee by 50 percent, and maintenance fee by 
10 percent. 
  Soap: 8.5 percent reduction on the price of a cake or a bar 
of soap weighing 200 grams has been reduced from 75 francs to 68 
francs, a soap of 500 grams from 160 francs to 146 francs, and 
the one weighing 750 grams from 230.5 francs to 228 francs. 
Instant coffee: there is a reduction of 100 francs on the price 
of the family size tin. 
  The maximum time for the liquidation of debts incurred from 
the purchase of state-built houses has been extended from 40 to 
48 months. 
  In his New Year message to the nation, the president of the 
Republic also reaffirmed the policies of regional development 
and the struggle to create job opportunities: 
  [Begin recording] I am persuaded that the continued 
development of our democracy and the accomplishment of the 
mission that you have entrusted me depend on bold efforts of 
decentralization. It is with full determination that this 
project is becoming a (?reality). We are working towards 
incorporating into the objective of regional integration our 
pan-African ambitions which constitute an everyday ideal for our 
youths [words indistinct]. It is the question of regional 
integration and development that will enable the realization of 
big joint projects in which the necessary aspect of 
supranationality will remain in harmony with the identity of 
each and everyone. 
  Regarding the struggle for employment, I have a strong 
conviction that creating 20,000 jobs every year during this 
five-year period is a Senegalese challenge [word indistinct] 
because we are going to take up together the challenge of 
training and imagination. 
  Restoring lasting peace in Casamance is also the concern of 
the president of the Republic. We must search for a permanent 
solution to restore lasting peace following France's testimony. 
[Words indistinct]. I warmly thank all those who enabled us to 
pass through this difficult stage. It is a challenge to be 
taken up and I firmly promise not to leave any stone unturned to 
[words indistinct]. That is the decisive turning point that 
will enable the return of peace in the Casamance Region in the 
interest of these brave people [words indistinct]. [end 
recording] 

