BFN 

  [Text] An official spokesman for the Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine-General Command [PFLP-GC] has stated the 
following: 
  More than 40 days have passed since the al-Ibrahimi Mosque 
massacre. Press statements and angry announcements have been 
made and threats issued to stop the negotiations unless the 
Zionist enemy submits to the demands of the so-called 
Palestinian negotiating delegation and its leadership. There 
was also a period of stalling, procrastination, and threats to 
use the veto. Yet all this, including the PLO leadership in 
Tunis and Resolution No. 904, only affirmed one unchanging fact; 
namely, that Palestinian blood was exploited in the auctions and 
markets of [the Middle East] settlement both in Washington and 
the Camp David capital to orchestrate the political process. 
'Arafat never fails to provide evidence of his direct and 
indirect involvement in underrating the blood of our Palestinian 
people, coordinating his positions with those who want from the 
settlement the liquidation of our cause and to conspire against 
our people and their objectives. 
  'Arafat's most recent Cairo accord--calling for deploying a 
multinational force--confirms the anticipated results of the 
maneuvers of this treasonous leadership that had issued 
deceptive statements on the status of the Hebron settlers, 
raised the prospect of suspending the talks unless they were 
evicted, and then demanded that the future of Jerusalem and the 
settlements be put on the agenda before the expiration of the 
first phase of self-rule. 
  However, the latest Cairo accord is evidence of how lightly 
our people are being taken, along with their memory and 
principles. We in the PFLP-GC view this accord as a transparent 
attempt to betray the blood of the Hebron massacre martyrs and 
our people's cause. We ask whether a token force made up of 
only dozens of blue helmets and operating under a limited 
timeframe and the control of the enemy and the Hebron town 
council can provide our people with real protection in the face 
of the terror of the settlers and the enemy military. 
  This accord reinforces the settlements and runs counter to 
the fiery statements made by 'Arafat in the aftermath of the 
massacre. The token international force is just another false 
witness. 
  The PFLP-GC's official spokesman adds: In the latest Cairo 
accord, 'Arafat brushed aside the Arab refusal to return to the 
negotiating table while the Zionist terror persists. In the 
final analysis, the return to the negotiations accommodates a 
U.S.-Zionist decision and shows 'Arafat cannot wait to complete 
the self-rule conspiracy. Talk about deploying a 'Arafatist 
police force by mid-April within the framework of self-rule 
arrangements is like throwing sand in ones eyes and a prelude to 
civil war being programmed by the parties to the conspiracy and 
executed by 'Arafat and his lieutenants. 
  The spokesman concludes: We have absolute faith in our 
people's awareness and capacity to thwart what is being hatched 
against them. Our people's will and their mujahidin are sure to 
thwart all the maneuvers, whose authors will reap only disgrace. 
Revolution until the liberation of land and man. 

