Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Moncrieff, PRESS ASSOCIATION political editor] </F>
  [Excerpt] The Government today dramatically slammed the 
door on all overtures for talks with the IRA until their 
campaign of terror is ended for good. 
  And a transatlantic plea by SDLP [Social Democratic Labour 
Party] leader John Hume for ministers to resume negotiations 
with Sinn Fein met with a similar rebuff from Downing Street. 
  The message from the British Government to the men of 
violence was stark and uncompromising in the wake of the three 
terrorist mortar attacks on Heathrow Airport within the space of 
five days and killings in Ulster. Downing Street seemed to 
treat with contempt Mr Hume's implied suggestion that it was in 
the IRA's favour that it was not their intention to detonate any 
of the mortar bombs which rained into Heathrow in the three 
attacks. 
  Mr Hume, who is in Boston, Massachusetts, drumming up 
investment for Ulster, said: "It was their intention to 
demonstrate to the British Government what they are capable of, 
so that if there is a total cessation of violence they are not 
backing down or standing down from a position of weakness, but 
from a position of strength." 
  And he claimed that this was the best opportunity for peace 
in 20 years. 
  But a senior Downing Street source said: "It is deeply 
offensive to people in Ireland and in Britain that the IRA 
should claim to be interested in peace while continuing to kill 
in cold blood and to mount acts of terror. This behaviour will 
only reinforce the Government's resolve to stick with utter 
determination to the course which we have chosen which has huge 
support. We have not been waiting and we are not waiting for 
the IRA in our efforts to achieve a lasting political settlement 
which is acceptable to all the constitutional, democratic 
parties." 
  New top-level talks are planned between Dublin and London on 
security cooperation, amid speculation that a crack-down is on 
the way. 
  The Government continues to say that internment is not ruled 
out, but its imposition could -- some believe -- destroy Albert 
Reynolds, the Irish Premier. 
  Meanwhile, Heathrow was recovering from the chaos created by 
the third attack on Sunday [13 March], and compounded by a 
security shut-down overnight -- an alert which also closed down 
Gatwick for a time. 
  The IRA itself also demanded new direct talks with the 
Government, insisting there had to be discussions if there was 
to be any chance of an end to the violence. They said they were 
prepared to be flexible and positive, but the lines of 
communication between the two sides would have to reopen. 
  But the message from Downing Street was that there was 
absolutely no prospect of resuming negotiations or contact under 
any kind of duress. The IRA overtures are seen by the 
Government as a means of trying to force talks before any 
commitment to end the violence. 
  The IRA came under attack from Mr Reynolds. "This multiple 
attack on Heathrow and indeed the closure of Gatwick is in my 
view a gross miscalculation by the IRA. It is not going to 
advance the peace process and it is certainly not going to do 
anything to endear themselves to the general public." 
  Mr Reynolds, who was speaking in New York, was at one with 
John Major in insisting that the Downing Street declaration was 
unaffected by this latest IRA campaign. [passage omitted] 

