BFN 

<F P=106> [Exclusive interview with Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, leader </F>
of Egypt's Islamic fundamentalists, by Peter Lennon, date and 
place not given] 
  [Text] When you arrive at the great Pyramid of Cheops, just 
a few miles outside Cairo, these days you are not going to be 
bothered by queues of tourists; the Sphinx, squatting alongside, 
is also short of admirers. In their bid for power, Islamic 
fundamentalist terrorists have fired on tourist buses and 
trains, killing four and wounding a score of visitors. Though 
relatively few in number-seven over two years -- these incidents 
have virtually destroyed Egypt's tourist industry. 
  Egypt is now looking fearfully at the experience of Algeria, 
which is being overwhelmed by Islamic terror, and at Turkey, 
where two weeks ago Islamic fundamentalists took over Istanbul 
and Ankara in local elections. 
  A figure, relatively unknown in the West, is now emerging in 
Egypt in the Islamic challenge to President Husni Mubarak. He 
is 77-year old Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, a former mosque 
manager and professional Islamic proselytiser. Over the years 
he has worked in Iran, Kuwait and Algeria spreading the message 
of Islam. He received Saudi Arabia's FaIsal Prize for Services 
to Islam in 1989 and a state award from Pakistan in 1990. 
  Sheykh al-Ghazali achieved international notoriety last June 
when he appeared for the defence in the case of the two alleged 
assassins of the author Dr Faraj Foudah. Dr Foudah had been 
murdered by Islamic extremists after his work had been branded 
apostate. At the trial, al-Ghazali had declared that it was the 
duty of the government to carry out the death penalty on 
apostates; if it failed to do so, he made plain, he understood 
why others should feel entitled to carry out the sentence. 
  In his first interview with the foreign press in many years, 
al-Ghazali raised the stakes an unhealthy notch by declaring it 
might become his duty to "mobilise the people and overthrow the 
government". 
  We met in his spacious, but not ostentatious, apartment in 
Cairo, where the conversation began in the most philosophical 
and serene of tones. "Culture is the ocean in which we all 
live," he declared. "It is the ocean in which humanity lives. It 
has its crosscurrents. But we have no objections to seeing what 
your culture has to offer so long as this is done with a sense 
of truthfulness and honesty." 
  Al-Ghazali was accompanied by two watchful sons who 
monitored 
the translation. He is small of stature, with a rather cross 
expression but very courteous and candid. There is a certain 
heated intensity of manner when defending his faith and 
castigating the corruption of the West. He claimed to have been 
able to muster 300,000 faithful for his last oration. Even a 
third of this figure would be an intimidating congregation to 
make any president think. 
  His Excellency recalled the first flowering of Islamic 
civilisation when works by Plato, Aristotle and a whole range of 
Greek thinkers were translated into Arabic and there was a 
complementary flow of translations of Arab writers into European 
languages. But then we reached a dramatic moment. He had made 
it known through my interpreter that he would answer any 
question, so I brought up his public defence of the alleged 
assassins of Dr Foudah. "We find it very hard to understand," I 
said, "how a scholarly and cultivated person could be seen to be 
inciting ignorant people to take the law into their own hands." 
  Al-Ghazali denied he had incited anyone to kill. Indeed, he 
had declared in court that "if everyone did that there would be 
chaos". But in decribing what had happened in court he made his 
attitude towards apostates very clear. "I was not in court to 
issue fatwas," he said, "but as a witness. Faraj Foudah had 
denied the Rule of Islam to me personally in open debate at the 
Cairo book fair two years ago. Now a man is free to believe 
that if he wants to; he can go and sit at home and say it. But 
this man went out into the streets and worked against the Rule 
of Islam. This is unacceptable because it strengthens Zionism 
and colonialism and I am against anything that strengthens these. 
  "The prophet Muhammad, in his struggle with pagans, said to 
his companions: `Any one of you who wants to can go and join 
them. But do not physically stay amongst us if your heart is 
with those who do not accept the Rule of Islam'." 
  (Presumably so as not to over-tax the credulity of a 
Westerner, al-Ghazali used the term "Rule of Islam", whereas 
normally he would use a phrase which leaves no room for argument 
-- "Rule of God".) 
  What, I asked, would be his attitude to an Egyptian 
government which failed to carry out its duties towards Islam? 
"If it does not do so it is up to me to mobilise people to 
overthrow the government." 
  Was this an eventuality which he felt might arrive in the 
near future? Al-Ghazali laughed and said: "Why overthrow a 
government when you can organise elections and do it through the 
ballot box?" But were there free elections in Egypt? "You 
should be asking that question of the people who rig the ballot 
boxes." 
  Such an open accusation of political corruption would have 
resulted in instant arrest for a more modest citizen and 
subjection to the torture which a UN report for 1993 found has 
now become systematic for "political" suspects in Egypt. 
al-Ghazali is technically an employee of the government in his 
role of member of the influential Islamic Research Council. He 
was speaking, too, in a context in which life is becoming 
increasingly hazardous for President Mubarak and his ministers. 
Over the past two years there have been a number of attempted 
assassinations in Cairo: of the Prime Minister, last November, 
the Minister of the Interior in August and of an army general in 
July. The deputy governor of security in Asyut province was 
assassinated earlier. 
  But the terrorists are not now the most potent threat to 
Mubarak. A vigorous policy of shoot-to-kill and mass arrest has 
kept them in check. It is the "moderate" Muslim Brotherhood 
(tolerated but banned as a political party) which, inspired by 
the leaders of al-Azhar, appears to be nudging Egypt towards an 
Islamic state. 
  The government would have particular reason to be wary of 
al-Ghazali. A few months ago the Algerian Government accused 
him of having been instrumental in setting up the resistance 
movement FIS (Islamic Salvation Front) during the years he spent 
in Algeria. Al-Ghazali had said that in Egypt the state feared 
the label "Islam" because it was afraid of alienating the West. 
Was it simply afraid of losing its economic association with 
the West? "The Muslim world is in a state of military weakness 
and both economic and trading weakness. Therefore the question 
of whether there will be economic assistance or not is a way of 
maintaining that fear of the West." 
  But there were elements of European culture that they could 
accept, he said. "There is the scientific element. We support 
scientific progress and are willing partners in this. But there 
are philosophical standpoints which are unacceptable to us, such 
as atheism and communism. The third element is to do with 
stimulating desires, which we consider to be socially damaging 
and which we wish to contain." 
  I pointed out the fate of the Church in fundamentalist 
countries such as Ireland, where the inflexibility of Catholic 
leaders had resulted in its decline in modern times. "I would 
like to ask a question," he retorted. "If you Europeans have 
abandoned spiritual guidance is it required of me to do the 
same? I will answer No! 
  "I want my religion to be strong, because I want my nation 
to 
be strong, to be able to defend itself. We are militarily 
defeated, we are a defeated nation and the only way we can 
regain our strength and self-respect is through religion." 
  Following the turmoil in Algeria, if Egypt -- a vital 
secular 
ally of the West --were to be taken over by Islamic leaders 
there would be a catastrophic up-ending of Western influence in 
the Middle East. Playing the "moderate" card against the 
excesses of the terrorists, but also offering a contrast to a 
ruthless secular government, Islam appears to be winning over 
the Egyptian business class, traditional allies of the West who 
now see the need to protect their backs in the event of serious 
fundamentalists' gains. 
  However, if Shaykh al-Ghazali reinforces the West's image of 
lethal religious bigotry -- when you go out among the faithful 
at prayer at the al-Azhar Mosque, respond to good humoured 
stall- holders in the bazaars and ask guidance of helpful 
passers-by on the streets of Cairo -- you wonder where are the 
fanatic hordes who are seemingly poised to overwhelm Egypt and 
terrorise foreigners? 
  To persist in carrying the baggage of Western prejudice 
which 
depicts Arabs indiscriminately as bloodthirsty primitives, with 
an unholy will to carve up Westerners, is no help at all in 
understanding what is happening in Egypt. 
  While specifically making tourists targets has had 
spectacular success for the terrorists -- tourist operators 
simply won't risk booking tours to Egypt -- by European 
terrorist standards Egyptian extremists have a very modest 
record: only seven attacks on tourists spread over two years; 
four deaths. 
  There is a casual racism in the media's reporting on the 
Arab 
world (they are much more self-conscious about black nations) 
which attributes to an entire nation the excesses of its 
fanatics. But to brand the Egyptians with the mentality of the 
al-Jamaat al-Islamiyah is as logical as to have branded all 
Germans sympathisers of Baader-Meinhof. 
  The observable truth about Egyptians is that they deserve 
their reputation as the kindliest of the Arab nations. 
"Welcome!" they call out everywhere. "No. problem!" It's only 
occasionally motivated by the hope of selling you some jammy 
perfume. Mugging is simply not part of the mores of Cairo and 
the poor are far less importunate than their London 
counterparts. It was startling to discover that begging is 
rare. I was approached only three times in one week. If the 
kids pester, shyly, it is to have their photograph taken. 
  How soothing to be able to saunter around markets or the 
commercial areas, compared to walking the lugubrious gauntlet of 
the Strand or Leicester Square in London; it gives one's sense 
of guilt a rest. Since this inexplicable resignation of Cairo's 
citizens can have nothing to do with prosperity, it can only be 
attributed to pride. 
  Where then is the religious fanaticism which fuels the 
West's 
fears? Within the cloisters of al-Azhar certainly. 
  But at one point I was a guest of the hospitable clients of 
a 
sunken roadside cafe in a muddy souk in Old Cairo. Talking and, 
out of politeness, fastidiously simulating sucking the hookah, I 
began to suspect that these people might have simple and genuine 
faith but their religious fervour would probably hardly be of a 
quality superior to that of the deserving poor of Victorian 
England. Were they to rise in prosperity this would be 
transformed, by the example of the present ruling class, into 
taking shameless advantage of the more comfortable Western 
values while retaining any interdictions which might suit their 
authoritarian -- and commercial -- tastes. 
  The posture of disbelief and horror that the Christian West 
adopts before Islamic fundamentalism is often disingenuous, 
sometimes politically calculated. It is highly convenient in 
justifying support for a regime such as President Mubarak's, 
willing accomplice of Western business strategies whose benefits 
never reach down to the true faithful. 
  Like the Christian Church with its tradition of papal 
interdictions, puritanical censorship, proselytism, terrifying 
fatwas (whose gross inhumanity reaches"to an eternity in hell) 
and its willingness to bless men as they are sent to kill or die 
for remote sheep-keeping territory (the Falklands), Islamic 
fundamentalists are a body with the habit of power and 
long-nurtured taste for control. 
  If there is a vacuum, in the name of God they will fill it. 
The vacuum here is created by well-documented corruption and 
nepotism which flourished under Sadat and has reached plague 
proportions under Mubarak. It is now tangible in the very look 
of Cairo. With pavements which rarely seem to stretch five 
yards without collapse, the debris of reluctantly started or 
sloppily finished public works littering the city; fly-overs, 
heavily financed by Western aid, but built for cost-cutting, at 
such a low level over even main shopping streets that they are 
darkened and suffocated by a double dose of pollution, Cairo is 
a city which suggests a regime which treats its own cities with 
contempt. 
  The Emergency Laws, bypassing the Constitution, which 
Mubarak 
has maintained for 13 years, are not only used to fight 
terrorism; they have been manipulated by high officials to 
devour the vital 4 per cent of arable land for real estate which 
the Constitution, were it active, expressly protects. 
  Compared with secular interdictions, banning, censoring, and 
Mubarak's arsenal of edicts, backed up by arbitrary arrest, 
torture and, recently, direct pressure on the foreign press, the 
pious prohibitions of al-Azhar, restricted to religious matters, 
can seem rather gentlemanly. 
  Al-Azhar's authority can be defeated in a way impossible 
with 
aggressive secular measures. When, three years ago, a committee 
of shakhys from the university banned five books by an eminent 
judge, Sa'id Ashmawi, at the Cairo Book Fair, the judge 
threatened to sue them for exceeding their religious brief Not 
only were the books immediately returned; the university 
officially retracted its ban. 
  The present situation seems to be that not only the 
deserving 
poor but I much of the cheated middle class need a friend. They 
don't have it in the government. The poor therefore can be 
easily led or driven into turmoil. 
  That they have nothing much to lose in the fall of the 
present government is the people's consolation. That they may 
not achieve much material benefit under the care of religious 
leaders who largely exonerate themselves from such vulgar 
preoccupations is their probable future misfortune. 

