Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kampala, 10 March (AFP) -- New fighting between 
Ugandan Government forces and rebels had broken out in northern 
Uganda, forcing thousands of people to flee their homes, the 
official NEW VISION newspaper reported on Thursday [10 March]. 
Fierce fighting between the National Resistance Army (NRA) and 
Joseph Kony's Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), broke out on Monday 
when the NRA suddenly stormed the rebels' camp at Minakulu in 
Apach district, NEW VISION said. Apach is the home district of 
deposed President Milton Obote, who now lives in exile in Zambia. 
  The paper said that five people, who had been kidnapped by 
the rebels from Moyo district on the Uganda-Sudan border and 
held hostage, managed to escape during the battle that forced 
the rebels to retreat to the Murchison Falls National Park at 
the River Nile bank, where they are said to have other bases. 
NEW VISION quoted some of the freed hostages as saying that it 
was difficult for them to ascertain the outcome of the fighting 
as they had been more concerned with how to escape. 
  The rebels have mainly targetted civilians since they 
resumed 
their activities in northern Uganda, which has not seen peace 
since the rebellion against President Yoweri Museveni's 
government started in 1987, shortly after he come to power in 
1986. A number of civilians, including priests and 
schoolchildren, have been kidnapped by the rebels who 
purportedly use them as human shields in the event of an attack 
by pursuing government forces. 
  As fighting continued to spread, thousands of villagers are 
said to be fleeing their homes in region, severely devastated by 
five years of civil war many more homeless. [sentence as 
received] The new wave of fighting at Minakulu Trading Centre 
brings back memories still fresh in people's minds when hundreds 
of civilians were killed there in August 1988 in crossfire 
between the NRA and the rebels. 
  The new fighting comes at a critical time when the East 
African nation, which has had a turbulent history since 
independence from British colonial rule in 1962, is trying to 
lay the foundations for democratic rule. Political analysts say 
the fighting in the region is likely to disrupt the March 28 
elections for a constituent assembly that is going to debate, 
enact and promulgate the country's new constitution. 

