BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, June 14 (BTA) -- Vladimir Shumeyko, chairman 
of the Upper Chamber of the Russian Parliament, addressing a 
news conference at the end of a three-day official visit today, 
said, "This visit is not only of a parliamentary character, it 
had been cleared with President Yeltsin and the government and 
preceded a visit to Bulgaria by Prime Minister Viktor 
Chernomyrdin in the autumn." Mr. Shumeyko headed a Russian 
parliamentary delegation to this country. Yesterday he was 
received by President Zhelyu Zhelev, Parliament Chairman 
Aleksandur Yordanov, Prime Minister Lyuben Berov and Foreign 
Minister Stanislav Daskalov. 
  Mr. Shumeyko stressed that Bulgaria and Russia should 
establish closer political contacts which would improve economic 
relations, now suffering from unjustified neglect. The Russian 
parliament already has a group for parliamentary contacts with 
Bulgaria. According to Mr. Shumeyko, the two parliaments should 
pass laws promoting closer ties between the two countries. 
Asked about the different positions held by Bulgaria and Russia 
on European cooperation, Mr. Shumeyko said they differed in 
their assessment of the Partnership for Peace programme. "For 
me, Partnership for Peace is an economic rather than a political 
problem," he said, recalling that in the former Soviet Union one 
in four were engaged in the military-industrial complex, while 
the proportion of these employees in Bulgaria's work force was 
smaller. 
  Mr. Shumeyko welcomed all tactical steps taken by Bulgaria 
towards its integration into Europe. As to strategy, Mr. 
Shumeyko said, the ethnic, national and spiritual ties between 
the Bulgarians and the Russians should not be forgotten. 
  This is the fourth high-level Russian delegation to Bulgaria 
this year. In February Bulgaria was visited by Ivan Rybkin, 
chairman of the State Duma, in May Patriarch Aleksiy II, and 
this month Oleg Lobovo, chief secretary of the Russian Security 
Council, made separate visits to Bulgaria. 

