Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Z. Mihajlovic: "Bread and Milk at the Flea </F>
Market"] 
  [Text] For months now, the people in the rural areas have 
been just looking at shop windows, because, with the exception 
of naked window mannequins, there is no merchandise to speak of. 
Shopping is done on the market, the flea market, or on the 
nearby street corner where the supply is superior to that of all 
the supermarkets put together. The capital resisted the gray 
economy monopoly somewhat longer. Now and then, some money would 
trickle from the Topcider mint, colorful displays would appear 
on shelves, and checks would be hurriedly shaken "from the 
sleeve." However, after the August economic measures and the 
freezing of prices, legal trade cannot come out of a latent coma. 
  Shopkeepers are trying to figure out how to beat the 
manufacturers, who, in the past few months, have been delivering 
merchandise -- which is a source of life -- only for foreign 
currency. They also have to turn the tables on the consumers 
who survived the second part of last year with the help of 
checks. 
  Up until the New Year, this illusion of "plenty" somehow 
kept 
the tide at bay, but after the inflatory explosion and the 
holidays, massive inventories began. The few shops whose doors 
are still open will not accept checks, while cash has been 
considered gold for some time now. People were gripped by panic 
because of the prices expressed in billions, but even more 
because of the shattered illusion that one can live on loans 
indefinitely. 
  On the other hand, private shopkeepers who have been backing 
the good choice of goods with green banknotes for months look at 
you as if you were from Mars when asked whether they accept 
checks. Some of them have even decided to stop the farce with 
the dinars and have started putting the prices in German marks. 
To quote one of "them": "Not only do I pay for the merchandise 
in foreign currency, I also bribe business partners extensively. 
This is the only way to ensure that there is bread at noon and 
milk and dairy products throughout the day. I have to beg 
farmers for eggs, cheese, and vegetables. They do business only 
in German marks, they do not know what to do with piles of 
pfennings." 
  Is this the end of legal trade? Still-valid regulations 
state that merchandise can only be paid for with the national 
currency, which was banned from all business transactions a long 
time ago. 
  If this status quo continues, it is absurd even to talk 
about 
the chances of legal trade surviving. In a situation where the 
manufacturer conditions every delivery with payment in hard 
currency, we will not be able to survive after the end of 
January, says Ratko Lukovic, manager in the "Beograd" department 
stores. The only way to survive is to sell the merchandise 
under the same conditions, that is, for German marks. However, 
the Federal Government has introduced this possibility only for 
a narrow assortment of goods, of which the import components 
make up over 50 percent [sentence as published]. At the same 
time, it has returned everything to the beginning by giving the 
consumers the chance of paying in dinars or checks. The state, 
which secured the little money that has been coming into the 
budget from sales taxes, is also in for a bad time. Customs 
fees constitute a symbolic amount because of the symbolic 
export-import trade. The only thing that can save legal trade 
is settling this monetary and financial chaos. The inflation 
has to be trimmed down to reasonable figures. The out-of-control 
printing of money has resulted in there being far more money 
than merchandise. 

