Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel Mykola Vasylkevych, head of the Lvov </F>
Oblast organization of Ukraine's Officers Union [SOU], by Mariya 
Bazelyuk; place and date not given: "Ukraine's Military 
Doctrine Rules Out Full Unilateral Disarmament"] 
  [Text] Ukraine's Officers Union has always occupied a 
firm position defending our state independence. It took an 
active part in creating Ukraine's Armed Forces, and later -- in 
their building. Here is an interview with Colonel Mykola 
Vasylkevych, head of the Lvov Oblast organization of Ukraine's 
Officers Union. 
  [Bazelyuk] Colonel, it is believed that servicemen are not 
supposed to engage in politics, something for which SOU has 
frequently been criticized. However, how can one remain outside 
political life when questions of the military doctrine, the 
Black Sea Fleet, or Ukraine's nuclear disarmament are being 
resolved? 
  [Vasylkevych] Quite true, servicemen are not allowed to take 
part in the activity of political parties, however, this should 
not be confused with the work of public organizations, such as 
Ukraine's Officers Union or with the participation in 
state-building processes in general. Article 4 of the law "On 
Associations of Citizens" forbids the creation of political 
parties within the Armed Forces. However, Article 6 of the 
provisional Statutes of the Internal Service reads that 
servicemen have all socioeconomic, political, and personal 
rights. The creation of the Armed Forces is politics. From the 
very first days of our state's existence, patriotically minded 
Ukrainian officers and generals began to elaborate legislative 
documents on the Armed Forces. For example, Colonel Vitaliy 
Lazorkin, jointly with a group of officers, elaborated at least 
two variants of the military doctrine that were published in the 
press. General Oleksandr Rol, the present head of Ukraine's 
Officers Union, proposed his own variant of the military 
doctrine. Incidentally, Oleksandr Rol has been registered as a 
candidate for [Supreme Council] deputy at Halych Electoral 
District No. 260. 
  [Bazelyuk] What is the character of Ukraine's military 
doctrine? 
  [Vasylkevych] To begin with, it must be clearly understood 
that the military doctrine is a system of views of the possible 
character of a war, preparation of the country for war, military 
building, and comprehensive provision of the Armed Forces. It 
has three subdivisions: the military-political, 
military-technological, and military-economic aspects. As a 
matter of fact, servicemen may only take part in the elaboration 
of the military-technological aspect, whereas the other two are 
the prerogative of the Supreme Council and of the Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
  Ukraine's strategic tasks in the defense sphere comprise the 
defense of its state sovereignty, political independence, and 
territorial integrity. In other words, the military doctrine 
has a defensive character. 
  [Bazelyuk] In that case, how can one account for the 
presence on our territory of the 43d Missile Army, which has 
not, to this day, sworn allegiance to Ukraine? 
  [Vasylkevych] In the past, Ukraine's Defense Minister issued 
an order, in accordance with which all those military units and 
subunits that are in charge of storage and use of nuclear 
munitions, were included into the 43d Missile Army, whose 
command is subordinated to the Ukrainian military department. 
Therefore, they were supposed to take the oath, something upon 
which SOU insisted during meetings with former Defense Minister 
General Kostyantyn Morozov. All the more so, since it was 
found, during the meeting in Vinnytsya with officers of the 
Missile Army and from opinion polls, that 80 percent of officers 
and warrant officers in the 43d army wish to take the oath. 
Now, that the military doctrine has become a state document, 
all those who serve in Ukraine must take the oath. 
  [Bazelyuk] Ukraine, which, in accordance with the military 
doctrine, rules out full unilateral disarmament, is today giving 
away its nuclear weapons, Why do you think such metamorphoses 
are taking place in our country? 
  [Vasylkevych] The military doctrine specifically states 
that, in the future, Ukraine intends to become a nonnuclear 
state and that it links the destruction of nuclear weapons with 
identical actions on the part of other nuclear powers. It has 
recently been stated quite frequently that nuclear weapons may 
become a great misfortune for Ukraine. There is some truth in 
this. For example, the SS-19 missiles deployed in Ukraine were 
manufactured at Moscow plants, and some missile warheads are 
also of Russian manufacture; it is true that, in 1994, the 
warranted service life of some of them is due to expire and, in 
this connection, certain difficulties may arise. However, SS-24 
missiles for example, were manufactured at our own Ukrainian 
plants, and one does not have to be a great strategist to 
understand that they may be reprogrammed for a shorter range of 
action. If we do, after all, give up our nuclear potential 
(which, to me, seems too generous), then, after the warranted 
service life of nuclear charges expires, the SS-24 missiles may 
be converted into missiles with conventional warheads. 
  [Bazelyuk] However, there are demands that we urgently 
transfer them to Russia, because we need fuel for our atomic 
electric power plants [AES's]. 
  [Vasylkevych] You know, even though I am not a specialist in 
this sphere, I am certain that Ukraine extracts uranium ores and 
even has facilities to enrich them to the concentration of 0.7, 
however, having enriched them to that level, for some reason, it 
ships them to Russia, where they are brought up to the necessary 
concentration, following which only some of them return to 
Ukraine in the form of fuel for our AES's. This was stipulated 
well in advance, but I am far from believing that Ukraine is 
unable to resolve the problem of the complete enrichment of 
uranium ores. 
  [Bazelyuk] It is maintained that we do not have military 
specialists at the level that may work with nuclear and space 
weapons. If so, why can they not be trained? 
  [Vasylkevych] In the past, there were more than 30 higher 
military educational institutions and a number of research 
institutes on the territory of Ukraine. I can say with 
certainty that there are military specialists in Ukraine who 
have taken and continue to take part in the development of the 
most up-to-date military technology and weapons. It is a 
different matter that the reform of military education was not 
conducted properly, and today we need cadres that are capable of 
commanding formations, armies, and so on. As has become known 
to us, the minister of defense has taken upon himself the 
personal control of the Administration for Military Education, 
having replaced its leadership. Even today, Ukraine's Armed 
Forces have enough specialists capable of training highly 
qualified personnel to service advanced military technology. 

