BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Vinogradov report: "Pavel Grachev Creating Special </F>
Region in Kaliningrad. Lech Walesa Alarmed"] 
  [Text] Polish President Lech Walesa has called the number 
of Russian troops in Kaliningrad Oblast an "alarming 
phenomenon." He does not understand why it is necessary to 
maintain such a powerful grouping in peacetime, and has called 
on Western politicians not to close their eyes to this 
"excessive militarization." 
  While in Riga recently, Walesa expressed concern at the fact 
that there are around 100,000 Russian troops in the Kaliningrad 
area. His position is shared by Lithuania, which has a common 
border with the oblast. Vilnius began to be particularly 
insistent in demanding explanations after Pavel Grachev, who 
visited Baltiysk in mid-March, announced that Russia intends to 
set up a "special defense region" in Kaliningrad Oblast. 
  The new term used by the minister came as a surprise both to 
military strategists and to diplomats. At any rate, the Russian 
Foreign Ministry could tell us nothing instructive on this 
score. With a view to its geopolitical uniqueness we can guess 
what makes the region "special." It is harder to understand 
whom it is necessary to provide a defense against. Against a 
potential aggressor on sea or land, according to Grachev. 
  Vilnius and Warsaw are on their guard. Germany and the other 
NATO countries are being tactful. The British Gen. Hardy 
Johnson, commander in chief NATO Forces, Northern Europe, who 
visited the Baltiysk naval base the other day, said that he 
respects Russia's right to have near Kaliningrad the army it 
considers necessary. As long as its size does not go beyond the 
framework of the Europe-wide CFE treaty. 
  Under the treaty, the Defense Ministry explained, Russia 
could keep 3,800 tanks and one-third of all its Armed Forces in 
the enclave. Thus, as far as "militarization" is concerned, 
this quota has by no means been used up. But this does not mean 
that the grouping will be increased. 
  Meanwhile, Lithuania continues to propose that NATO and the 
CSCE elaborate a special regime for Kaliningrad which, it 
claims, will lose its status of "Russian enclave" by the year 
2000 in accordance with the Potsdam agreements. Admittedly, the 
idea met with no support from the Western states, which are 
proclaiming the principle of the inviolability of postwar 
borders. 
  Vilnius itself is taking steps toward "demilitarization," 
placing obstacles in the way of military trains crossing 
Lithuanian territory, making detachements [komandy] disembark, 
and not allowing the transit of combat hardware into Kaliningrad. 

