BFN 

  [Text] Berlin, May 31 (YONHAP) -- The International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA] said Tuesday it has proposed that North 
Korea take technical action that would enable the IAEA to 
confirm the history of reactor operations at Yongbyon despite 
the fact that Pyongyang's replacement of fuel rods has already 
passed the halfway mark. North Korea, however, announced that 
it has selected and stored spent fuel rods taken from the 
5-megawatt reactor according to certain standards in an effort 
to guarantee future measurement of the rods. 
  The IAEA emphasized that it could not accept North Korea's 
method because it would not be able to confirm the location of 
the fuel rods, which is necessary for future measurement. 
Without confirming where the spent fuel rods had been located, 
the agency could not determine whether the North Koreans had 
diverted nuclear material, according to an IAEA announcement. 
  Yun Ho-jin, counselor at the North Korean Embassy in Vienna, 
stressed that the refueling is proceeding and "it should not be 
stopped." 
  Yun added, "we are not shuffling the spent fuel rods 
discharged from the reactor but putting them, 40 at a time, into 
a radioactivity-proof tank after writing the location and serial 
numbers on the rods, with monitoring cameras operating." 
  Therefore, when the nuclear problem is solved through a 
package deal between Pyongyang and Washington, the IAEA can find 
necessary fuel rods based on the records and measure them, he 
said. 
  The IAEA wants to take 300 fuel rod samples from 30 fuel rod 
channels, Yun explained, and has demanded that North Korea 
segregate and secure 10 fuel rod bundles per channel. 
  North Korea, however, is putting 40 fuel rods from four 
channels into a case, increasing the number of sample fuel rods 
to 1,200, Yun said. 
  "The IAEA is actually demanding that North Korea accept ad 
hoc and routine inspections," he said. "We can never accept 
this demand, considering our special position that we reserved 
our decision to withdraw from the nuclear nonproliferation 
treaty (NPT)." 
  Meanwhile, IAEA Spokesman Hans Meyer confirmed that North 
Korea had not stopped replacing fuel rods in spite of a 
statement by the president of the UN Security Council. 
  He expected that the refueling would reach a critical point 
in one or two days, after which the IAEA could no longer analyze 
the history of the reactor's operations. 
  The UN Security Council Tuesday adopted a presidential 
statement demanding that North Korea comply with IAEA safeguards. 

