BFN 

<F P=106> [By Miu Oikawa Dieter] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo, June 9 KYODO -- The request of the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ) for views on the legality 
of the use of nuclear weapons has driven Japan, the only nation 
to have suffered atomic bombings, into a difficult corner. 
  The Japanese Government initially planned to offer a purely 
legalistic view to the ICJ that the use of nuclear weapons does 
not violate international law. 
  But the government was forced to drop the idea after the 
revealed plan prompted a backlash of criticism. 
  "I think this case showed how the Japanese people have an 
aversion to nuclear weapons and how strong their antinuclear 
feelings are," a high-ranking Foreign Ministry official said. 
  Antinuclear groups and atomic bomb sufferers reacted with 
shock and disbelief to news that Japan intended to say in a 
document to the ICJ that although the use of nuclear weapons is 
unacceptable from a humanitarian point of view, it does not 
violate international law. 
  Hiroshima and Nagasaki, where the U.S. dropped atom bombs in 
1945, strongly objected to the planned statement, and urged 
Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata and Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa 
to change the wording of the report and denounce the use of 
nuclear arms as a violation of international law. 
  Politicians from opposition parties as well as cabinet 
ministers within the ruling coalition also voiced their concern 
about it, prompting a further stall in Diet deliberations on the 
much-delayed budget. 
  The dispute was further aggravated by the timing, since the 
standoff regarding North Korea's alleged development of nuclear 
weapons is at a highly sensitive stage with the possibility of 
U.N. sanctions looming. 
  "It's unbelievable," said lawyer Masanori Ikeda, a member of 
the World Court Project Japan Center, about the original report 
planned for submission. The center is composed of lawyers and 
victims of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
  "If you say the use of nuclear weapons is not illegal, that 
means countries can possess and use them without being 
punished," Ikeda said. "Tell that to North Korea and it will be 
delighted." 
  Japan's stance contradicts its position to support possible 
U.N. sanctions against North Korea, he added. 
  "The international community considers Japan's nuclear 
policy 
to be very authoritative because it is the only nation 
experiencing atomic bombing. But if Japan says the use of 
nuclear weapons is not illegal, it will certainly be extremely 
shocking to the world," he said. 
  The Japanese Government received a request from the ICJ, 
based in The Hague in the Netherlands, last September to submit 
by June 10 a written statement on whether it thinks the use of 
nuclear arms is illegal. 
  The ICJ made the request to all U.N. member countries after 
the World Health Organization (WHO) asked the court in May 1993 
to offer an "advisory opinion" on whether the use of nuclear 
arms violates international law from the standpoint of its 
impact on health and the environment. 
  The contents of the statements will not be disclosed until 
the International Court compiles a report based on statements 
submitted by all U.N. member countries. 
  But according to the gist of the initial statement revealed 
by Foreign Ministry officials, Japan was to reiterate its 
traditional stance that "judging purely from the standpoint of 
international law ... the international community has not yet 
reached a consensus that the use of nuclear weapons violates 
present international law." 
  The government has been taking such a position since the 
1960s, according to the ministry. 
  The ministry, which is in charge of preparing the statement, 
tried to ward off criticism by saying the ICJ request was for a 
"legal interpretation" of the use of nuclear weapons. 
  "Unfortunately, there is no international law that bans the 
use of nuclear weapons," said a senior ministry official, adding 
that Japan's opposition to nuclear weapons is clear in the 
statement because it includes passages stating nuclear weapons 
should never be used and others referring to Japan's three-point 
nonnuclear policy. 
  Japan has claimed to adhere to a policy of not producing, 
possessing or allowing nuclear weapons into Japan since it was 
approved by the Diet in 1968. 
  After much bickering in the press and in the Diet, however, 
the ministry decided to delete the passage about the legality of 
the use of nuclear weapons. 
  Instead, the Japanese statement will stress that 
"considering 
its tremendous power to destroy, kill and injure, the use of 
nuclear arms is not consistent with the spirit of 
humanitarianism that exists at the basis of thought in 
international law," according to ministry officials. 
  "The government decided to avoid specifying its legal 
position in the statement considering the opinions within and 
outside of the Diet," said a high-ranking ministry official. 
"Instead the Japanese Government decided to express its 
political position on the matter." 
  The official pointed out that it does not mean the Japanese 
Government's legal interpretation of nuclear arms has changed. 
  Submitting the written statement to the ICJ is not 
compulsory, but the official said the option of abstaining from 
presenting the paper was ruled out from the beginning. 
  "As a major U.N. member, and as a country which is deeply 
involved in nuclear problems, it would be extremely unnatural 
for Japan not to submit the statement," he said. 

