Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ryuji Sato] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 9 Mar -- The total amount and all the 
details of the projects connected with the fourth series of 
yen-based loans expected to begin in 1996 which the Chinese 
Government has requested from the Japanese Government have been 
disclosed. In the past, yen-based loans were provided at a 
period of five to seven years. However, the two governments have 
agreed to shorten the term of the fourth series of loans to 
three years. The Chinese Government has simultaneously 
submitted a list of loan requests for a period of five years, 
with the period divided into a first term of three years and a 
second term of two years, and with the amount totaling 
approximately 1.5 trillion yen [Y], which is nearly twice the 
Y810 billion set for the third series of yen-based loan, the 
largest amount requested for the six-year period so far. At the 
same time, the number of projects--mainly for improving the 
industrial infrastructure--has climbed to 71. One project 
costing as much as Y1 trillion has been planned for the first 
three-year term. However, in providing economic aid the Japanese 
Government has requested China suppress its military 
expenditures. Moreover, the Japanese Government itself is 
currently in a severe financial situation. Therefore, Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who is scheduled to visit China on 
19 March, will face difficulties in dealing with this issue. 
  The Chinese Government has doubled its request for yen-based 
loans because, with the high degree of economic growth, it has 
become conspicuous that China is in short supply of such 
infrastructures (social foundation for production) as 
transportation, energy, and ports. As stated by a Chinese 
government source, judging that "in order to continue this high 
growth the urgent task lies in improving the infrastructure," 
the Chinese Government has decided to make this large-scale 
request to the Japanese Government. 
  Among large-scale projects planned for the first term are 
one 
for transporting huge amounts of coal from inland to coastal 
areas so as to solve the energy shortage problem in the coastal 
areas, and projects for building the Longtouqiao Dam in 
Heilongjiang Province and a hydroelectric power station in 
Yunnan Province. Among projects worked out for the second term 
are one for preventing droughts in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region, and one for promoting environmental protection such as 
eliminating air pollution in Shenyang. 

