SUMMARY 
                                        Although clearly welcoming the recent spate of high-level Sino- 
U.S. exchanges, Beijing has remained cautious about the prospect 
for improving bilateral relations, identifying the U.S. position 
on human rights, the question of most-favored-nation (MFN) 
trading status for China, and the Sino-U.S. trade deficit as 
obstacles that continue to hinder stronger ties to Washington. 
                                     END SUMMARY 
   Reflecting its happiness with the continued expansion of high- 
level contacts, Beijing was upbeat in assessing the significance 
of U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's 19-22 January visit to 
China and the 24 January meeting between Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher and PRC Foreign Minster Qian Qichen in Paris. 
Meeting with Secretary Bentsen on 19 January, PRC Premier Li Peng 
took a positive view of the visit, claiming that it would 
"strongly promote" the development of bilateral ties (Xinhua, 19 
January).  Qian also praised his meeting with Secretary of State 
Christopher, describing it as "positive and constructive" in 
remarks to reporters after the meeting on the 24th (Xinhua, 24 
January). 
   Commentary on Secretary Bentsen's visit in PRC media and in the 
PRC-owned Hong Kong press was even more upbeat in assessing the 
results.  A 22 January Xinhua commentary, for example, said that 
the resurrection of the Sino-U.S. Joint Economic Commission, 
which met for the first time in six years during the Treasury 
secretary's visit, and the conclusion of a new Sino-U.S. textile 
accord marked a "major step toward a new stage" in trade and 
economic cooperation.  A 22 January editorial in the PRC-owned 
Hong Kong Daily Wen Wei Po effusively claimed that the visit had 
made "inspiring achievements and had vigorously promoted" 
bilateral trade and economic relations.  The editorial went on to 
praise the statement issued by the Joint Economic Commission as a 
"successful attempt" to handle bilateral economic ties, saying 
that it had set up a "new framework for close economic and trade 
relations." 
   Continued Obstacles 
   Despite its obvious pleasure at the increasing number of high- 
level Sino-U.S. contacts, Beijing has indicated that the U.S. 
position on human rights, the question of MFN trading status for 
China, and differences over the Sino-U.S. trade deficit continue 
to hamper the development of a "normal" relationship.  At his 
meeting with Secretary Bentsen on 19 January, for example, Li 
reiterated China's longstanding position on U.S. human rights 
demands, saying that the two sides, in handling "differences in 
ideological concepts and values," should "seek common ground 
while reserving differences."  In apparent reference to the MFN 
question, Li called on the United States to "seize the 
opportunity" created by the November summit meeting between 
Presidents Bill Clinton and Jiang Zemin and "do something 
practical and down-to-earth" in order to push Sino-U.S. relations 
back onto a "normal track" of development. 
   Media commentary on Secretary Bentsen's visit went even further 
in decrying the obstacles to better relations.  The 22 January 
Xinhua commentary, for example, complained that the trade deficit 
continues to "affect" bilateral ties.  It noted that, although 
there are now "sound grounds" for developing bilateral economic 
and trade ties, the "annual discussion" of MFN status for China 
continues to "cast a shadow" over the relationship.  Placing the 
burden for removing these obstacles on Washington, the article 
predicted that there would be "smooth development" of bilateral 
economic and trade ties if the MFN question was "permanently" 
resolved and that there would "surely" be a "remarkable increase" 
in Chinese imports from the United States if U.S. restrictions on 
exports to China were rescinded.  The 22 January Wen Wei Po 
editorial also portrayed the annual debate over China's MFN 
status and U.S. restrictions on exports as "obstructions" to 
Sino-U.S. trade.  Like the Xinhua commentary, the editorial 
called on Washington to take steps to resolve these issues, 
expressing the "hope" that the United Sates will do "more solid 
work and break away from quibbling over certain issues to 
vigorously make a new step forward." 
   Prospects 
   While Chinese leaders are clearly buoyed by the increasing number 
of high-level contacts with the United States, there is no media 
evidence at this time to suggest that Beijing is prepared to make 
significant changes in its position on human rights and the Sino- 
U.S. trade deficit in order to improve bilateral ties.  Routine 
media commentary continues to suggest that Beijing believes it 
can rely on the lure of the Chinese market and pressure from U.S. 
business interests to limit Washington's options on MFN, human 
rights, and trade deficit questions. 
(AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/BIETZ  cka 02/2124z  feb 

