CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lieutenant Shakir Tair-ogly Salimov, deputy </F>
military commissar of the Kyapyazskiy Rayon Military 
Commissariat, by correspondent I. Guseynov; place and date not 
given: "...Answer to Your Conscience...."] 
  [Text] Azerbaijan is experiencing difficult times. 
Today it is very important for all the people, each resident of 
the republic, whether he be at the front or in the rear, to 
clearly understand the extreme nature of the situation, to be 
maximally mobilized, and to find his place in the sacred cause 
of defense of the Motherland. 
  The front and the rear are linked by a common destiny, 
a common task. The military commissariat of Kyapyazskiy Rayon of 
Ganje arranges its activity on this basis. This is the subject 
of the discussion between our correspondent and the deputy 
military commissar of the Kyapyazskiy Rayon Military 
Commissariat, Lieutenant Colonel Shakir Tair-ogly Salimov. 
  [Guseynov] How long have you been working in the military 
commissariat? 
  [Salimov] I have been here since November of last year. I 
was 
assigned here after I sustained a serious injury in battle for 
liberation of our native land from the Armenian scumbags. After 
graduating from the Novosibirsk Higher Military-Political School 
with a desire to join the airborne troops, I served in Germany 
and the Transbaykal and Siberian military districts. At the 
beginning of 1991 when the Armenian aggression was increasing I 
decided that my place was at the front, where the fate of my 
Motherland and my people was being decided. When I took the 
military oath I swore to be faithful to my Motherland until the 
end of my days. This oath and, above all, the sense of civic 
duty to my Motherland and family, who raised me and got me on my 
feet, forced me to return to Azerbaijan. I have been severely 
wounded in battle three times. The last time I lost a leg and 
that, one might say, put me out of commission for good and made 
it impossible for me to fight. And so I ended up here. If I had 
my way I would go back to the front today, to my comrades in 
arms. 
  [Guseynov] The regular draft into the National Army has 
ended. How did it go in your rayon? 
  [Salimov] Extremely badly. To be truthful, the mobilization 
we are conducting cannot stand up under any criticism. As a 
military person I must emphasize that today, when Azerbaijan is 
being subjected to aggression from our neighboring republic, the 
question of universal mobilization acquires primary 
significance. The whole problem is that when executing the order 
on mobilization in the majority of cases the edicts of the 
president of the republic and the Cabinet of Ministers are 
distorted. I am not saying this just to hear myself talk. After 
all, there are edicts to the effect that individuals who are the 
sole breadwinners for their parents are not subject to being 
drafted into the army, or a person whose brother is fighting at 
the front, or if one of his brothers has died at the front, and 
others are exempt from the draft. Why do we refuse to carry them 
out? 
  Understandably, a draft order, like all other military 
orders, is subject to strict obedience without discussion. But 
not at the expense of only sons. And how many of these chaps 
have already died and how many are fighting at the front today?! 
  [Guseynov] Comrade lieutenant colonel, it seems that only 
sons are a sore spot in your work. 
  [Salimov] Imagine that a worker of the law enforcement 
organs, say, in the precinct brings a young person of draft age 
to the military commissariat, knowing ahead of time that this is 
the only son of his parents, and he says nothing about it. By 
the time we sent him to the military unit his parents come with 
a paper from the housing operations section saying that he is 
their only son. But their son has already received his orders, 
he has entered the service, and now only an order from the 
Ministry of Defense can release him from further service. 
  [Guseynov] Shakir Mulladim, can it be that nobody other than 
only sons respond to the draft in the military commissariat of 
which you are in charge? 
  [Salimov] I think there are many draftees who are 
conscientious chaps who really understand their civic duty to 
the Motherland which is in danger. We have no problems with 
them. But there are also those who deliberately evade the draft 
and do not show up at the induction facility. And where should 
we look for them, and in general, is it the job of the military 
commissariat to look for people like this? And then "chaps" who 
are forced into the army exhibit cowardice at the front. 
  [Guseynov] Do you think that strengthening discipline is 
task 
number one in the army today? 
  [Salimov] Undoubtedly. At this time there is no task more 
important than that one. Without iron discipline the army is 
nothing but a wandering band of gypsies, but even there, 
incidentally, people obey the law. It is hard to admit it, but 
our army does not have enough discipline today. Otherwise, there 
would be no cases of desertion and absence without leave from 
the military unit. Have you never seen young men in military 
uniforms roaming around the city and in public places? Well, 
many of them are absent without leave from their million 
subdivisions. And I think that these cowards who have fled from 
the battlefield deserve the most severe punishment. 
  [Guseynov] Are there cases of desertion in your rayon, and 
what measures are being taken against such people? 
  [Salimov] I do not deny that we have had cases of desertion 
and absence without leave from the combat unit by certain of our 
draftees. But we are not authorized to take any measures against 
them. This falls within the jurisdiction of the military 
procuracy, which must hold all deserters strictly accountable. 
  [Guseynov] In your opinion, is there a solution to the 
problem? 
  [Salimov] Of course, there is nothing on this earth that 
cannot be corrected. Today every citizen of the republic must 
clearly understand that there is a war going on in our land; the 
Armenian aggressors want to take away part of our territory and 
they are encroaching on our sovereignty and independence. 
Finally, all of us must understand that today at the front and 
in the rear there is one common task--to drive the Armenian 
occupiers out of our native land. And all of our interests must 
be subordinate to this task. In the localities we must step up 
propaganda and agitation work; in the schools and VUZ's [higher 
educational institutions] we must improve military-patriotic 
work with youth, the level of which, unfortunately, leaves 
something to be desired. In the streets, squares, and public 
places it is a rare event to see patriotic posters and appeals 
for defense of the Motherland. And in the army itself we must 
overcome the existing psychology of complacency and 
insubordination to officers and junior commanders. Sometimes 
even a little bit of gratitude shown to a fighting man before 
formation cheers him up, raises his fighting spirit, and calls 
him to victory. It is very important to understand this. 
Finally, and this is the main thing, the actual time has come 
when we must answer to our conscience as to precisely what we 
have done for the front, for victory. 

