CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mahir 'Abbas: "Saudi Computer Companies To </F>
Provide Consumers With Inexpensive Genuine Programs"] 
  [Text] A law to protect authors' copyrights and electronic 
rights began to be implemented this month in Saudi Arabia, 
making software piracy and copying illegal acts punishable by 
law. Software manufacturing, production, and distribution 
companies are encouraging this approach. At the same time, they 
are promising the consumer that the law is in his interest and 
that they are about to market a variety of inexpensive, original 
programs that will obviate the need to buy counterfeit software. 
  Now that Saudi Arabia has joined the International Agreement 
on Copyrights amended in Paris in 1971, many economic circles in 
the Kingdom stress that implementation of the copyright law will 
protect intellectual property rights, especially computer 
programs and the works of authors and artists in the Kingdom. 
Spokesmen for companies in the computer and software field said 
that the law's enforcement will have a positive effect on the 
software market and will prevent the piracy that was common in 
the market. Furthermore, implementation will be an incentive for 
companies in the field to increase development of their 
programs. It will give them a good opportunity to innovate, 
whereas previously they wasted energy in attempts to protect 
their programs and monitor the market. Several directors of such 
companies told AL-MAJALLAH that they had devoted more effort and 
money to protecting software than to producing it. This had 
raised costs as well as prices for the consumer. 
  Sources indicated that implementation of the intellectual 
protection ordinance will stop acts of piracy and the gray 
market whose participants until now took advantage of the 
absence of any deterrent to stop them. The result was that 
genuine programs struggled to survive in the market in the face 
of similar copied programs at token prices with which they could 
not compete. 
  In order to investigate views of the software business as 
the 
ordinance to protect intellectual property goes into effect this 
month, AL-MAJALLAH sounded out the computer software market 
through three major companies in the field. 
  According to Faysal Jam'an, general director of 
ISCO-Microsoft Integrated Systems Company: "Implementation of 
the ordinance will undoubtedly give a powerful impetus to 
software companies to devote themselves to more innovations that 
serve the market. They will expand into more new research 
programs than previously. The companies were very concerned in 
the past with monitoring the market and protecting their 
programs. The effect for the consumer came in the form of higher 
prices." 
  He referred to serious efforts by several Saudi banks and 
other companies to prevent dealing in unauthorized software. He 
indicated that this constituted significant cooperation with the 
protection law. 
  Al-Jam'an declared that companies and various agencies would 
try to protect their equipment and networks by seeking genuine 
software, pledging to use it, and conforming to the law. "At 
Microsoft, we have organized an information campaign to coincide 
with implementation. We present the importance of using the 
original program and how to protect one's computers. As previous 
methods of piracy disappear, the market will be revitalized with 
new software. The big companies will embark on more future 
investments to bring out new products." However, Jam'an 
emphasized that implementation by itself will not suffice. 
Cooperation between consumers and companies is needed. The 
advantages of original programs over counterfeit or copied ones 
are indisputable. This cooperation will reduce many of the 
consequences of the time and effort that were devoted to 
monitoring. Al-Jam'an also calls for monitoring the market after 
implementation of the law, to prevent counterfeit software from 
entering. 
  He noted that pirating companies had become skilled at 
copying programs. They had a wealth of technical tricks and used 
the most advanced techniques in the field of counterfeit copying 
of highly advanced programs. 
  With implementation of the new law, the market will be 
protected from such programs, which had a negative effect on the 
market and on companies. 
<H5>  Protecting Investments </H5>
  Hani al-'Alami, director of training at Gulf Star Company, 
said that the matter would delight software companies and give 
them means to protect the investments they had made in programs. 
Previously, the picture was unclear, which enabled anyone to 
copy software from the original without legal prosecution. This 
led to large-scale piracy, which affected the market. 
  Al-'Alami thinks that implementation of the law will give 
the 
software market more orderly buying and selling operations and 
will protect companies that invest in this field. He indicated 
that Gulf Star Company had a program called "Arab Word" that had 
been designed with a special protection system. However, the 
copying companies had overcome the protection and had become 
expert in copying the program, breaking the self-protection 
system on which the company had relied. This had affected sales. 
Gulf Star's original program sold for about 1,000 riyals [R], 
later lowered to R250, while the counterfeit copy sold for only 
R5. The counterfeit spread through the market, while companies 
were unable to prosecute the violators. 
  Al-'Alami cited many examples of methods of piracy in the 
absence of legal deterrent. The company represents various 
software companies, such as the American companies Novell and 
C.A. Novell offered a program valued at $10,000. It was copied 
and counterfeited and sold on the market for only R100. 
Al-'Alami added: "This is certainly piracy and theft of others' 
property and effort. The protection law will eliminate it." 
  Al-'Alami predicts that companies that buy software will be 
forced to buy authorized software and will comply with the law. 
He does not rule out that some companies may be disturbed by the 
law's implementation, but he hopes that dealing in counterfeit 
programs will cease now that there is a law making violators 
accountable. 
  As for market conditions after the new law is implemented, 
he 
predicts that his company's sales on the market will double. 
  Mr. 'Imad al-Dughaythir, general director of al-Dawalij 
Technical Company, thinks the law will have a big effect on the 
software industry, especially in a market like Saudi Arabia, 
which forms about 60 percent of the market for Arabic software. 
The law will help companies grow and invest more in the area of 
software. 
  Al-Dughaythir agrees that companies now spend much time, 
effort, and money on ways to protect their programs--more than 
the costs of production. This has caused many companies to 
shrink from risking further investments. These companies have 
been making great efforts to monitor the market. With the new 
law, they will devote themselves to other activities, and this 
will be reflected in the products offered in the software market. 
  The law will form a protective wall for the companies 
against 
piracy. As a result, they will be able to devote themselves to 
developing their product, instead of monitoring the market. 
Implementation of the law will be an impetus to new investment 
opportunities in the field with equal competition, rather than 
piracy. 
  The development programs of various companies will receive a 
good deal of investment directed toward them. The law will stop 
piracy by putting copied programs out of commercial circulation. 
This will give companies the opportunity to operate in a secure 
market. It will also do away with the so-called gray market. 
<H5>  Viruses </H5>
  Al-Dughaythir thinks that the new law will eliminate or stop 
the spread of viruses. Many copied programs are moved from 
machine to machine and therefore transmit viruses to the 
companies. 
  Regarding the condition of the market, he indicated that the 
consumer will find new programs at low prices around R100 or 
R200. He added that his company has comfortably priced programs 
that have not been put on the market yet because their costly 
copy protection system made the programs uneconomical. The 
company refused to spend enormous sums to protect programs that 
the market might not absorb. 
  Al-Dughaythir also thinks that the software sector will see 
positive movement with the implementation of the law. In the 
past, protection was not up to the level of investment. Now, 
however, the Arabic software market will see many formerly 
absent programs in the coming period. 
  The prevailing impression in the companies was that 
consumers 
in the Arab market look for cheap programs and do not consider 
the effort and money needed to produce them. With the law's 
implementation, al-Dughaythir predicts that the market will 
attract new companies that had stayed out and viewed it as 
unprotected. Now that there is protection, it will be a fertile 
market, and this will affect its condition positively. He 
believes that the new situation will limit prices because of 
abundant production and the presence of competition. 
  [Box, p 54] 
<H5>  Counterfeit Programs: Cheap But Very Harmful </H5>
  Counterfeit software may seem a good deal to the consumer, 
who acquires an unauthorized copy of a program at a low price 
and uses it without noticeable differences between it and 
genuine software. However, software companies in the Saudi 
market draw attention to the following drawbacks of such 
programs of which the consumer may not be aware: 

  -  Counterfeit software is not accompanied by documentation 
and manuals that explain how to use it correctly and benefit 
from it. 
  -  The consumer does not get technical support from the software 
company or information about updates or adaptation to new 
computers. 
  -  Counterfeit software may contain viruses that wreck the 
computer and ruin all its files. 
  -  Counterfeit software threatens the value of producers' 
investments. As a result, they do not risk new investments to 
produce more modern programs and to offer more applications that 
might be subjected to copying. Companies suffer losses that 
impel them to leave the sector. 
  -  Companies are forced to employ security keys and protect 
software against unauthorized copying, thus increasing the cost 
of the software to consumers. 
  -  Using these counterfeit programs 
makes the user subject to punishment by law for every time the 
programs are used. 



