BFN 

  [Text] During his current visit to Singapore, Vietnamese 
Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet addressed the Asia Society 
conference. The theme of the conference was Waves of the 
Future: ASEAN, Vietnam, China and Opportunities for World Trade. 
Following are excerpts of the prime minister's speech. 
  Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet said: If the waves of the past in 
the Pacific were in a hot-war-and-cold-war situation, today, 
waves were in calmer waters with a trend of cooperation having a 
chance to develop. ASEAN, China, and Vietnam were places where 
there are new opportunities for businesses. Now it was 
beneficial to turn the trend toward cooperation under a formal 
basis whose mainstay was mutual respect and cooperation of 
mutual benefit. 
  The Vietnamese prime minister said that when implementing 
its 
policy, Vietnam took into account the new trend. The danger was 
to lag behind in economic development compared to many countries 
in the world, including many countries in the region, if Vietnam 
was not fully well aware of this and did not strive harder. Mr. 
Vo Van Kiet said: By adopting the policy of comprehensive 
renovation in time, Vietnam had overcome its most crucial moment 
and could now work out for itself the way to step by step 
industrialize and modernize itself in the building of a 
prosperous and powerful Vietnam with an equal and civilized 
society. However, while the Vietnamese understood that domestic 
resources were the decisive factor, those resources would 
multiply if integrated into global development trends. Vietnam 
was an inseparable part of the world. It wished and must take 
part in the trend of international cooperation. 
  Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet stressed that the necessity for 
development in the region and the world was to enter into a new 
wave of peace and stability. He said the Asia-Pacific was a 
region of dynamic development. Trends for peace, stability, and 
cooperation were prevailing. However, he said, there might be 
some hidden factors which cause instability in the region. 
These were disputes over territory and territorial waters and 
tension in the Korean peninsula and in Cambodia, which were 
worrying to all. 
  He called for the settlement of existing disputes and 
differences between nations through peaceful negotiations on the 
basis of respect for international laws and in accordance with 
the common trend against the use of force in international 
relations and a recurrence of the cold war. 
  Once again, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet affirmed Vietnam's 
foreign policy to befriend all countries in the world and strive 
for peace, independence, and development. He said Vietnam 
attached great importance to friendship and cooperation with 
neighboring countries and the Asia-Pacific region. He once 
again welcomed the U.S. President's decision to lift the embargo 
on Vietnam, which opened up new possibilities for normalization 
of relations between the two countries. He said the Vietnamese 
Government and people welcomed and created favorable conditions 
for foreign investors to come to Vietnam. 

