BFN 

    [Editorial Report] During the week from 9 to 15 April, the 
German media carried several reports on right-wing extremist 
activities in Germany. 
  On 11 April Munich ARD Television Network in German at 1730 
GMT, in its "Report" series, carries an 8-minute report by 
Stefan Rocker and Oliver Merz about the current boom of those 
who deny that Jews were killed in Auschwitz after the Federal 
Court of Justice ruling that denying the existence of the 
Holocaust is not a punishable act in itself. 
  The report begins with clips of various events, among which 
is one organized by the National Democratic Party (NPD), where 
the Holocaust is denied. 
  As an example of brochures denying the Holocaust, the report 
cites a "pseudoscientific" report by Germar Rudolf, who was 
formerly employed by the renowned Max-Planck Institute in 
Stuttgart and who now uses the name of the Max-Planck Institute 
to try to give his report -- called "Blaubuch" (The Blue Book) 
after the infamous Auschwitz gas Cyclone-B -- some scientific 
plausibility. Rudolf also pretends to have received scientific 
support by the well-known chemical company Degussa and the 
Fresenius Institute. The reporter says that there is "a new 
method used by right-wing extremists to abuse names." Rudolf 
was fired by the Max-Planck Institute when they found out that 
he had abused their name, and now the Public Prosecutor's Office 
is investigating him for incitement. 
  In Tuebingen, the (Grabert) Publishing Company is located, 
which prints right-wing extremist material. A few months ago 
"Lectures on Contemporary History" by Ernst Gauss was published, 
which is basically the Rudolf report with a few changes -- Gauss 
is Germar Rudolf's pseudonym. The author claims that the 
infamous selections in Auschwitz did not lead to the gas 
chambers but were only intended to "get better medical treatment 
for sick Jews." 
  The reporter notes that revisionism is not just advocated by 
a few fascist sectarians but that it is becoming dangerous 
because of "the growing circle of bourgeois sympathizers." 
  At a recent meeting of the Thomas-Dehler Foundation in 
Nuremberg, which is affiliated to the Free Democratic Party of 
Germany, the chairman invited a Swiss who denied the existence 
of the Holocaust at a seminar on revisionism. He was 
accompanied by half a dozen right-wing extremists, including 
Germar Rudolf. The Swiss speaker was sentenced for incitement 
three weeks ago. Georg Batz, the chairman of the Thomas-Dehler 
Foundation, says that he had invited him only to give a neutral 
overview of revisionist theses -- a "naive" plan, as the 
reporter notes. 
  Since then right-wing extremists have been disseminating the 
20-page lecture by the Swiss under the name of the Thomas-Dehler 
Foundation. 
  JUNGE FREIHEIT (YOUNG FREEDOM), a weekly, is becoming 
increasingly popular and is "a skillful attempt to forge a link 
between right-wing extremists and conservatives." The report 
gives a few quotes from this weekly, showing that it spreads 
right-wing extremist ideas. 
  The report concludes with clips on Internet, "the world's 
largest computer network with millions of business, scientific, 
and private users," where right-wing extremists are now 
spreading their ideas. For some weeks the complete writings of 
those who deny the existence of the Holocaust have been 
available on computer. 
  This report is followed by a six-minute report by Thomas 
Leif 
on the so-called "Komm Mit" (Come With Me) calendar, which has 
been distributed by Catholic priests to their altar boys as a 
present for almost 40 years. Now it has been discovered that 
this calendar is full of fascist ideas (for instance, it 
publishes all the verses of the Germany Song with "Deutschland 
Ueber Alles", shows a map of Greater Germany with the areas lost 
in World War II, and "agitates" against German collective guilt 
for Nazism, etc.). The Catholic Church denies any 
responsibility for this calendar. The bishops of Mainz and 
Trier have distanced themselves from the publishing company that 
distributes it. 
  On the same day the weekly FOCUS in German reports that Uwe 
Goller, land chairman and leading candidate of the North Rhine- 
Westphalian Republikaner for the European elections, has 
obviously covered up that party colleagues of his were involved 
in an attack on an asylum-seekers' hostel in Bergheim near 
Cologne on 7 October 1993. (filed as au1304091594) 
  On 12 April Bonn DIE WELT in German reports that the first 
Hamburg Protection of the Constitution report classifies the 
right-wing extremist Republikaner as right-wing extremists and 
thus hostile to the constitution. "For us the Republikaner are 
a part of right-wing extremism," Ernst Uhrlau, head of the 
Hamburg Office for the Protection of the Constitution said on 11 
April. Hamburg will continue to watch the party using 
intelligence service techniques. Hamburg was the first land that 
began to watch the Republikaner, in January 1990. 
  On 12 April Hamburg DPA in German reports at 1541 GMT that 
the Baden-Wuerttemberg Administrative Court in Mannheim has 
confirmed the ban of the right-wing extremist "German 
Association Loyal to the Homeland" (Heimattreue Vereinigung 
Deutschlands), which was issued by Baden-Wuerttemberg last 
summer, because the group had acted "militantly and 
aggressively" against the constitutional order. The court 
substantiated its ruling, which was published on 12 April by 
noting that the association had been rightly banned because "in 
its program and its ideas it shows features that are related to 
Nazism." 
  On the same day at 1859 GMT DPA reports that Ignatz Bubis, 
chairman of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, again said 
that he does not want to sue Republikaner Chairman Schoenhuber. 
He justified this decision by saying that "someone like Mr. 
Schoenhuber cannot insult me." Bubis also said that the Central 
Council of Jews in Germany will not act against Schoenhuber 
because of his claim that Bubis is one of the "worst inciters of 
people in Germany." 
  During a lecture in Koblenz on 12 April in the evening, 
Bubis 
said that, in his view, about 15 percent of the people in 
Germany are anti-Semitic and another 15 percent are "latently 
anti-Semitic." The chairman of the Central Council of Jews 
advocated the view that "hostility toward Jews has not increased 
over the past years but now it is shown more openly." 
On 13 April DPA reports at 1406 GMT that the Christian 
Democratic Union, Social Democratic Party of Germany, Greens, 
and Free Democratic Party of Germany in the Baden-Wuerttemberg 
Landtag expressly came out against a ban on the right-wing 
extremist Republikaner. At the same time, speakers from these 
four groups accused the Republikaner of being "intellectual 
arsonists" for hatred against foreigners, arson attacks, and 
anti-Semitism. The politicians also agreed that Constitutional 
Protection is right in watching the party. The Republikaner, 
who are represented in the Baden-Wuerttemberg Landtag with 15 
deputies, said that a campaign of stigmatization against their 
party is under way. 
  Minister President Erwin Teufel demanded that "democrats 
must 
struggle against the extremists with political means." The 
reason for the debate was the statement by Republikaner chairman 
Franz Schoenhuber, accusing Jewish leader Ignatz Bubis of being 
"one of the worst instigators of people in Germany." Teufel 
commented: "Victims are turned into perpetrators. There is 
nothing more perverse and impudent." 
  Republikaner Landtag group chairman Rolf Schlierer refused 
to 
distance himself from Schoenhuber's words. He claimed that the 
accusation against Bubis is justified, since Bubis was the one 
to start the matter when he claimed that the Republikaner were 
involved in arson attacks. Schlierer demanded that Bubis 
retract his accusations. 
  On 13 April DPA reports at 1628 GMT that the Republikaner in 
Saxony will be watched by the Land Office for the Protection of 
the Constitution through intelligence service methods from now 
on. Leading members of the Republikaner in Saxony are already 
closely cooperating with neo-Nazis, Interior Minister Heinz 
Eggert said in Dresden. (filed as au1304185494) 
  On 14 April DIE WELT reports that neo-Nazis and right-wing 
extremists have offered the Republikaner "sensible action 
alliances" and "active election support" for the Bundestag 
elections. (filed as au1404150094) 
  On the same day DPA reports at 1118 GMT that the 1993 report 
by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution 
says that in 1993 right-wing extremist and left-wing extremist 
crimes increased further. (filed as au1404134294) 
  At 1402 GMT on 14 April DPA reports that right-wing 
extremists have terrorized foreigners and Jews in Nuremberg with 
forged "notices of deportation." According to information 
released by the police on 14 April, at least 11 people have 
received forged notices, which threaten them with deportation, 
carried out, if necessary, by police or military. Bavarian 
Interior Minister Guenther Beckstein spoke of "most evil 
instigation of people" and announced that the police will carry 
out a thorough investigation. 
  According to DPA, which obtained one of the forged notices, 
the notices use the letterhead of the Federal Office for the 
Recognition of Foreign Refugees and the heraldic eagle and read 
as follows: "In view of the precarious financial situation of 
our nation we cannot and do not want to afford your 
cost-intensive presence any longer." The letter adds that anyone 
who "cannot prove their Aryan origins" in line with "Article 41, 
Section 4 ARG (Foreigners' Returnee Law)," must leave the FRG 
immediately or will be "deported by force." "Appropriate means 
of transportation are ready" at the Nuremberg cargo railroad 
station. 
  Arno Hamburger, chairman of the Jewish Community in 
Nuremberg, was shocked by the forged notices. "This is 
particularly bad if someone who was deported from a cargo 
railroad station in the past gets such a notice." He has never 
heard of comparable action "in this massive, impudent, criminal 
form." In particular the conclusion of the letter has caused 
shock and outrage, which threatens anyone "who does not listen 
to reason" with a "solution" for which this person "then has to 
blame himself," police say. Addressees of the letters, which 
were all posted in Nuremberg and also use the term "deportation 
law," were members of the Jewish community, Yugoslavs, Turks, 
Syrians, Libyans, and Vietnamese. Some of them have filed a 
complaint against unknown perpetrators. 
  A police spokesman said that the letters come from the 
right-wing extremist scene but investigations have not yet had 
any result. 
  At 1442 GMT on 14 April DPA reports that all parties in the 
Bundestag have condemned the arson attack on the synagogue in 
Luebeck. (filed as au1404154794). 
  On 14 April at 1703 GMT DPA reports that a 25-year-old man 
from the Frankfurt/Main area, who had been arrested at the 
beginning of February as a co-author of the neo-Nazi brochure 
DER EINBLICK, has been released again. This is because the 
current state of investigations does not permit urgent suspicion 
that the man was involved in the founding of a criminal 
association, which presupposes the association of at least three 
persons. Even though the chief prosecutor general had applied 
for maintaining the arrest warrant, the investigating judge of 
the Federal Court of Justice canceled the warrant. 
  On 15 April at 1039 GMT, DPA carries a report similar to the 
above, noting that investigators are increasingly helpless 
regarding the suspected authors of DER EINBLICK. According to 
Constitutional Protection, the 25-year-old man who was released 
reportedly was a member of the right-wing extremist "Taunus 
Front," which was founded in Hofheim in 1985. Police now hope 
that investigations of at least another four suspects from 
Hesse, Rhineland-Palatinate, and Bavaria will be more successful. 
  On the same day Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG reports that 
Interior Minister Kanther has announced that the Federal Office 
for the Protection of the Constitution will observe the 
Republikaner more closely. Indications that the Republikaner 
are to be rated as right-wing extremist are getting stronger. 
  At 1431 GMT on 15 April DPA reports that Hamburg journalist 
Joachim Siegerist, managing chairman of "The German 
Conservatives" association, was sentenced to 18 months in prison 
for statements made against Sinti and Romanyi gypsies. The 
court found the 47-year-old journalist guilty of instigating 
people, incitement of xenophobia, and insult. 
  In 1992 Siegerist had written two letters with racist 
contents on behalf of his association and sent it to many 
people. The 48-year-old manager of the association was a 
co-defendant in the trial; the court sentenced him to a 
suspended sentence of eight months and a fine of 25,000 marks. 
In pamphlet which had a print-run of 18,000 copies, the 
defendant had slandered Romanyi and Sinti gypsies as, among 
other things, an "evil, criminal pack." 
  At 1532 GMT on 15 April DPA reports that Glenn Goertz, 
federal manager of the right-wing extremist Liberal German 
Workers Party (FAP), and seven other right-wing extremists were 
arrested in Hamburg in the afternoon. In their cars police 
discovered striking tools, signal ammunition, and neo-Nazi 
propaganda material. At the same time, about 1,000 people 
demonstrated against a "National Info Telephone," which is 
operated by the FAP. In the vicinity of the demonstration 
another 20 to 25 right-wing extremists were detained. On 25 
March the Hamburg public prosecutor's office had impounded the 
"National Info Telephone," but the FAP established a new one. 
  Among the eight arrested right-wing extremists is also 
Hamburg FAP chairman Andre Goertz, the brother of the FAP 
federal manager. Glenn Goertz was reportedly disguised when he 
was arrested. 

