Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 20 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Premier Li 
Peng said here today that the Chinese Government attaches great 
importance to its good-neighborly friendship and 
mutually-beneficial cooperation with Japan. 
  He made these remarks during the two-hour talks with 
visiting 
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa at the Diaoyutai State 
Guesthouse here this morning. 
  Li said looking towards the future and the 21st century, 
China will work together with the Japanese side to strengthen 
their coordination and develop their bilateral ties in all 
fields, and will make joint efforts with it for peace and 
prosperity in Asia and for turning the 21st century into a 
century of peace and development. 
  Li noted the Japan visit by General Secretary Jiang Zemin of 
the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee and the China 
visit by the Japanese emperor and empress in 1991 has ushered 
the Sino-Japanese relations into a new phase of development. 
  Since then, Li said, high-level exchanges have increased and 
economic and trade cooperation has developed rapidly. This is 
the result of the joint efforts made by the two governments and 
peoples for a long time, and should be cherished by both sides. 
  Li said that since Hosokawa took office as prime minister, 
he 
has continued to attach great importance to Japan-China ties, 
and has devoted himself to the friendly bilateral cooperation. 
"We express our high appreciation for this," Li added. 
  The Chinese premier emphasized that China and Japan are two 
important countries in the region. After the Cold War, the 
status of Asia is rising obviously, and the impact of the 
Sino-Japanese relations has been felt beyond the scope of 
bilateral ties. 
  Hosokawa said that through joint efforts of the two 
countries, Japan-China relations have entered a new stage of 
development. The Japanese Government highly values the 
bilateral ties. 
  Japan will continue to support China's reform and open-up 
policy and modernization construction, he said. 
  In the past, Hosokawa said: "The Japanese invasion and 
colonial rule had brought intolerable sufferings to the people 
of various countries in Asia." 
  "We deeply deplore at this," he said, adding that Japan 
will, 
on the basis of the introspection of the past history, make 
continued efforts to establish its friendly ties with China and 
ties that will look towards the future. 
  Premier Li appreciated Hosokawa's position and views, and 
said, "It is our consistent stand that while taking a correct 
attitude towards history, we should also look towards the 
future." 
  "The statesmen of the two countries should have their eyes 
on 
future and the 21st century," Li said. 
  He described the rapid development of the bilateral economic 
and trade relations as an important sign that the Sino-Japanese 
ties have entered a new stage. 
  The premier said the economies of the two countries are 
mutually complementary, and the economic development of China is 
focused on energy, transportation and telecommunications in 
which Japan is strong. 
  So further growth of bilateral cooperation will have 
tremendous potential, and will benefit both countries, Li said, 
adding that industrialists and entrepreneurs of the two 
countries have a better understanding of this and have showed 
high initiative. 
  "The two governments should seize the opportunity to promote 
this trend, " he said. 
  Li and Hosokawa called on the Sino-Japanese 21st Century 
Friendship Committee to put forward proposals on how to develop 
bilateral ties with an eye on the 21st century when it holds its 
meeting this year. 
  On China's military budget, Li said that China pursues an 
independent foreign policy for peace, and has not a single 
soldier stationed abroad. 
  China is among the countries whose military budgets are the 
lowest in terms of both absolute and per-capita figures, he said. 
  China's military budget is only 52 billion yuan or over five 
billion U.S. dollars this year, he said, adding that the 
increase of the absolute military expense is mainly for 
offsetting the influence of inflation, so as to maintain the 
daily expenditure of the army and improve the life of the 
servicemen. 
  In contrast, the military budget of the United States is 
more 
than 200 billion U.S. dollars, and Japan's is over 40 billion 
U.S. dollars, he said. So any worry abroad about the increase 
of the absolute figure of China's military budget is groundless, 
he added. 
  Hosokawa expressed his understanding of this. 
  The Japanese prime minister said that the two countries both 
have responsibility for the world, and he was pleased that as 
Japan's trade with and investment in China are expanding in the 
recent years, the interdependent relations between the two 
countries have been deepened. 
  The rapid development of the Chinese economy has attracted 
worldwide attention, and has produced positive effect on the 
Japanese economy, he said, adding that the prospect for 
strengthening bilateral cooperation in various fields is bright. 
  He said that Japan would continue to support the resumption 
of China's status as a contracting party in the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and take a cooperative attitude 
towards this. 
  He expressed his hope that China's status in the GATT will 
be 
restored at an early date. 
  Li thanked Hosokawa for this and appreciated his position. 
  On the fourth batch of yen loans to be offered by Japan to 
China, Hosokawa said that he had given an instruction to 
departments concerned to propose an amount of loans which would 
contribute to the Japan-China friendship in the future. 
  He reaffirmed that Japan will strictly abide by the 
principles of the Japan-China joint statement, and will not 
develop any official relations with Taiwan. 
  Li Peng expressed his appreciation for this. 
  During the meeting, the two leaders also exchanged views on 
the nuclear issue related to the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea. 
  Premier Li elaborated China's basic position, and stressed 
that the issue should be solved through dialogues and 
negotiations. 
  He said that to maintain the stability on the Korean 
peninsula would be beneficial to its neighboring countries 
including Japan and to peace and stability in the region. 
  Hosokawa said Japan also held that it is better to solve the 
issue through negotiations. 
  He expressed his worry about the current developments of the 
issue. 
  Among those present at the talks were Chen Jinhua, chairman 
of the Chinese Government Reception Committee and minister in 
charge of the State Planning Commission, Xu Dunxin, Chinese 
ambassador to Japan, and Michihiko Kunihiro, Japanese ambassador 
to China. 

