BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Who Is the American, a Spy Linked </F>
to `Omonia'?"] 
  [Text] By the end of last week, RTSh [Albanian 
Radio-Television] said six "Omonia" [political organization of 
Greek minority population in Albania] activists -- in actual 
fact the official communique said five -- were not charged with 
anticonstitutional offenses, but with espionage activities in 
favor of Athens. Strangely enough, this announcement had its 
roots in the U.S. State Department, whose spokesman turned up 
before the journalists and made known his country's stance 
toward the controversy between Albania and Greece. 
  The strangest thing though was to hear the same spokesman 
declare that a U.S. citizen was enmeshed in these espionage 
activities linked to the Greek intelligence service, and that 
the U.S. Government gave the Albanians a free hand to treat him 
without the slightest hesitation according to their laws. 
  RTSh has been manipulating this event in a disgraceful way, 
trying to show that the United States is so close and friendly 
to us that it cares neither for its old ally -- Greece -- nor 
for its own citizen. This is a shameless bluff. In actual 
fact, there is no U.S. citizen at all embroiled in the 
sensational "Omonia" affair. "The U.S. citizen," victimized by 
Washington, first and foremost is an Albanian citizen who has an 
Albanian passport, because he was born and grew up in this 
country. Second, he has a Greek passport because, by 
nationality, he belongs to the Greek minority in Albania, and 
finally he is a U.S. citizen because, a year ago, he was issued 
a passport of that country, where he has stayed perhaps less 
than a month altogether. This is the man, Mr. Theodhori 
Bezhani, whom the State Department's spokesman said Albania 
could treat according to its law. This the reason why now it 
turns out that there are six and not five "Omonia" arrested 
activists, because Th. Bezhani is alternately counted now as 
Albanian and now as American (in fact he should have been 
counted also as Greek, but it would have boosted the number to 
seven). 
  Now everything is O.K. with us, because even spy networks 
are 
to be discovered for us by the United States, and there is no 
need for any of us to work in this direction.... 

