BFN 

<F P=106> ["Ws."-attributed report: "Interior Ministers Agree on </F>
Observation of Republikaner"] 
  [Text] Potsdam, 8 May -- At their conference on the Island 
of Usedom, the interior ministers of the laender agreed that the 
Republikaner party be kept under intensive observation by the 
Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution [BfV] in 
the future. As Brandenburg Interior Minister Ziel (Social 
Democratic Party of Germany), chairman of the Permanent 
Conference of the Interior Ministers of the Laender, reported, 
the interior ministers have come to the conviction that the 
legal prerequisites for the observation of the Republikaner by 
the authorities for the protection of the constitution are 
given. So far, the BfV has kept the Republikaner under 
observation in only nine of the 16 laender. 
  At the same time, the interior ministers of the laender 
called on the Federal Government, in view of the dangers that 
might emanate from the possession of arms and explosives by 
extreme-right organizations, to see to it that the law on arms, 
the hunting law, and the explosives law are amended. In this 
way, right-wing extremists are to be prevented from getting 
arms. According to Ziel's report, the laender also agree that 
marches and public propaganda of extreme-right groups have to be 
prevented by all legal means. The policemen of the laender 
cooperate here according to fixed principles. 
  The interior minister of the laender and the FRG interior 
minister were not able to agree on a stop to the deportation of 
Kurds, which had been demanded by Schleswig-Holstein. The 
interior ministers of the laender called on the FRG Government 
to ensure that permanent contacts for deported Kurds be 
appointed at the German Embassy in Ankara and the German 
consulates. It must always be possible to reach these officials 
to immediately follow up the suspicion of the state's 
encroachment on the rights of deported Kurds, if necessary. 
Moreover, the interior ministers of the laender are pressing 
the FRG Government to advocate a political solution of the 
problem of the Kurds in Turkey. Criminal proceedings against 
Kurds who have committed a punishable offense in Germany shall 
continue to be instituted in Germany first. In connection with 
the deportation of Kurds, Saxony Interior Minister Eggert (CDU) 
criticized the Foreign Ministry. He mentioned the case of a 
Kurdish family who had been deported to Turkey and had allegedly 
been tortured there. The Foreign Ministry did not check the 
reports on the torture quickly enough, he said. Schleswig- 
Holstein Interior Minister Bull talked of an increasing number 
of indications that human rights are violated in the southeast 
of Anatolia and Kurds are tortured. In this context, he 
criticized that the FRG Government had rescinded the stop of 
arms deliveries to Turkey. 
  At their conference, the interior minister of the laender 
emphatically appealed to the Federal Government to abandon its 
hesitant attitude regarding the formation of an East-West 
security council. In March last year, the interior ministers' 
special conference on "police cooperation with East Europe" had 
called for the establishment of such a council. At that time, 
it was also deplored that insufficient and lacking contracts are 
considerably impeding effective cross-border police work. 
According to Interior Minister Ziel, the interior ministers of 
the laender agree that, on the one hand, cross-border crime can 
be multilaterally tackled by an East-West security council and, 
on the other, bilateral agreements, such as agreements on legal 
assistance with the East European states are indispensable to 
stop cross-border crime. The agreement between Germany and 
Poland on the cooperation of the police authorities in border 
areas and the border police, which has come within one's reach, 
is a first step in this direction. However, it can only become 
effective in an overall package of measures against crime 
involving several countries. Therefore, the interior ministers 
of the laender urge the FRG interior minister to conclude 
skeleton agreements for police cooperation with the states 
bordering on the FRG as soon as possible. Priority is to be 
given to agreements with the states of Central and East Europe 
and Switzerland, it was stated. 

