BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jaroslav Kmenta: "The Army Is Getting Ready for </F>
Permitted Reconnaissance Flights Over Foreign Countries"] 
  [Text] Prague -- Military experts are putting the 
finishing touches on the special reconnaissance aircraft that 
will be able, based on the so-called Open Skies convention, to 
carry out inspection flights over foreign countries. The 
convention, which has been signed by 27 countries so far, will 
at the end of the year open up the airspace over most of the 
North American continent, Europe, and the territory of the 
former Soviet Union. 
  The Czech Army will be using for reconnaissance a modified 
AN-30 transport aircraft, manufactured in the former Soviet 
Union, that will be equipped with the prescribed navigational 
instruments and the permitted types of sensors. The machine 
will be equipped so as to be able to carry, in addition to the 
crew and the inspection team, representatives of the country 
being inspected. 
  "The convention makes possible the control of whether some 
country builds new military facilities or concentrates its units 
near a neighbor's border. Such extensive measures or movement 
of troops cannot be concealed from modern instruments," one of 
the representatives of the Defense Ministry Foreign Relations 
Section said. 
  According to the convention, the inspection teams must 
report 
their flights in advance, and they may enter the airspace of any 
country only once a year. 
  Bilateral treaties permitting reconnaissance flights over 
the 
territory of another state have existed so far between Germany 
and the United States, for instance, and between Romania and 
Hungary. 
  Of the other international conventions that are to reinforce 
mutual trust among European countries, the Czech Republic joined 
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe earlier, and 
signed the Vienna Documents on limiting convention arms. 
According to these treaties, the Czech Army should destroy 
another 417 tanks, 43 armed combat vehicles, 52 artillery 
pieces, and 38 fighter aircraft by 15 November. 

