CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ian Burrell: "Police Rebel Against `Harsh' </F>
Cannabis Law"] 
  [Text] The majority of police forces in England and Wales 
have introduced the partial decriminatisation of cannabis, with 
first-time offenders allowed to escape with only a caution. 
  Four out of five constables questioned in a survey of 30 
forces last week admitted they had introduced the liberal policy 
for all first offenders caught in possession of cannabis for 
personal use. Three out of four said existing legislation on the 
drug was too harsh. 
  The chief constable of one Midlands force went further, 
demanding the drug's immediate legislation for personal use. He 
said that the use of cannabis was so widespread that prohibition 
had clearly failed and it was wrong to punish users. 
  The findings demonstrate a sharp divide between the opinions 
of police officers and senior politicians, most of whom support 
the existing drug laws. 
  The police's desire for a softer approach will be 
highlighted 
this week when the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) 
debates the issue at a conference to frame its new strategy on 
drugs. 
  The Midlands chief constable who wants to see personal use 
of 
cannabis legalised asked to remain anonymous because his views 
were so directly opposed to government policy. "The reality is 
that people possessing cannabis for personal use tend not to end 
up in court and I think that is right," he said. 
  "When I talk about legalisation I am talking about the need 
for recognition that people use cannabis and that punishment is 
not the solution to that problem. We need to move away from 
enforcement and look at education and other approaches to try to 
influence people in the same way that we do with drink and 
cigarettes." 
  On Wednesday, Keith Hellawell, the chief constable of West 
Yorkshire and chairman of the ACPO's drugs committee, will gauge 
the opinions of his colleagues with a view to drawing up a new 
strategy to fight the war on drugs, which many police officers 
admit is being lost. 
  The ACPO conference will also be addressed by Raymond 
Kendall, secretary general of Interpol, who said recently that 
all personal drug use should be legalised. 
  The practice of cautioning first-time cannabis offenders was 
pioneered by Merseyside police a decade ago before spreading 
across Britain over the last few years. "It has been a success 
story," said detective inspector Tony Doyle, from the Merseyside 
force. "We are seeing from our figures that 80 percent of people 
who are cautioned over drugs do not come to the attention of 
police again." 
  However, Michael Howard, the home secretary, and Tony Blair, 
the shadow home secretary, both reiterated their determination 
to keep the drug illegal last week. Howard is raising the 
maximum fine for possession of the drug from &pound;500 to 
&pound;2,500, through an amendment to the Criminal Justice Bill 
currently going through parliament. 
  By contrast, several of the chief constables questioned in 
the survey said the higher fines would lead to more cannabis 
users being jailed for non-payment. The current average fine 
imposed by magistrates on cannabis users who are prosecuted is 
&pound;180. 
  Last night campaigners for reform of the drug laws accused 
politicians of being out of step with public opinion on the 
dangers and attractions of the drug. 
  "It is refreshing that professionals and top public servants 
in the police and criminal justice system are now accepting the 
case for reform. It is sad that the politicians are so out of 
touch," said Mike Goodman of Release, the drugs advice agency. 
  The Home Office said last night that it had no intention of 
relaxing the laws on cannabis. A spokesman said: "There are 
indications that more dangerous, stronger strains of cannabis 
are emerging and that the use of cannabis can lead to the 
further misuse of other drugs. Legalisation would send the wrong 
message to society." 
  TIMES NEWSPAPERS LIMITED, 1994 

