Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Erich Inciyan: "An Act of Violence Is Said to </F>
Have Been Planned Against Pasqua's Antiracism Adviser"] 
  [Text] The founder of l'Oeuvre francaise [French 
Work], Pierre Sidos, and three members of this small 
anti-Semitic group were kept in police custody, not to exceed 48 
hours, on Tuesday, 14 December. They were arrested in the course 
of an investigation about a planned act of violence against 
Patrick Gaubert, the minister of interior's mission chief for 
the fight against racism, anti-Semitism, and xenophobia. Sidos 
was released on Wednesday morning. 
  The three anti-Semitic activists of Oeuvre francaise had 
very 
carefully planned their action against Patrick Gaubert. Since 
November, in order to watch Pasqua's mission chief for the fight 
against racism, anti-Semitism, and xenophobia, they had set up a 
larger number of hideouts and stepped up their tailing and 
observing of him. Was this trio planning an assault, a campaign 
of intimidation, a kidnaping, or a crime? In any case, the 
reality of the personal threats hanging over Gaubert has been 
proved by what has been seized by the Sixth Division 
investigators of the Criminal Police Department in charge of 
"the repression of attempts against state security and of 
subversive activities." 
  Detailed plans of his Parisian apartment and of his 
secondary 
home in Deauville, as well as a collection of photos of the 
premises, were thus discovered during Thierry Verasani's house 
search; he is one of the three activists of Oeuvre francaise. 
The mission chief's weekly schedule and movements, precisely 
detailed hour by hour, were also found in the course of the 
searches. An automatic pistol, an antiriot rifle, and a laser 
sighting device making shooting a target in the dead of night 
possible were also uncovered at Thierry Verasani's home. At 
Alain Leclerq's home, the investigators laid their hands on a 
FAMAS rifle, a military weapon. Finally, high-caliber ammunition 
was found at the home of Patrick Nouhaud, the last member of the 
trio. Some 10 weapons in all--including a high caliber 
Winchester, a Colt 45, pistols and guns, and hunting 
rifles--were seized. 
<H5>  Information from the General Intelligence Service </H5>
  This police operation took place on Tuesday, 14 December, 
when, late in the evening of the previous day, the 14th Section 
of the Paris Prosecution Department, known as the antiterrorist 
section, instructed Parisian Examining Magistrate Marie Paule 
Moracchini to open a preliminary investigation for "conspiracy 
and infraction of the law against weapons." Implicated by one of 
the members of the trio, Pierre Sidos, founder of Oeuvre 
francaise, was also summoned and placed in police custody before 
being released Wednesday morning. The other three activists of 
Oeuvre francaise were still in police custody on Wednesday 
morning. 
  A few weeks earlier, the Central Directorate of the General 
Intelligence Service had provided the information that Oeuvre 
francaise was planning something against Gaubert. Following the 
attacks against Jacques Roseau, the spokesman for Recours, and 
Jean Claude Madrenas, the mayor of Bages (Pyrenees-Orientales), 
the threat was taken seriously, the more so as, over the past 
few months, Pasqua's adviser had been regularly targeted by an 
extreme right press insisting heavy-handedly on his Jewish 
origins. A 45-year old oral surgeon and a member of the 
Executive Committee of the International League Against Racism 
and Anti-Semitism (LICRA), Gaubert had already been an adviser 
of Minister of Interior Pasqua during the first cohabitation, 
and he later followed him as mission chief when he became 
chairman of the RPR [Rally for the Republic] Senate group. This 
loyal supporter of Pasqua is now vigorously coordinating the 
activities of the "departmental units against racism" 
implemented under the authority of the minister of the interior. 
<H5>  "Fight Like Our Forefathers" </H5>
  In an article published in September in INFORMATION JUIVE, 
Gaubert had explained his action by noting that "no extreme 
right organization (...) is or will be protected from a just 
repression." He had announced an extended action against "these 
organizations that advocate a racist ideology," and he had 
specified his intent to "bring about the disappearance of 
bookstores, newspapers, and all sources of communications 
legally praising xenophobic speeches." The daily newspaper 
PRESENT, close in beliefs to the National Front, replied to 
these comments on 9 October: "If fear must change location, it 
is because it has not yet done so. For the time being, it is 
therefore Gaubert who is afraid." JEUNE NATION, the official 
publication of Oeuvre francaise, which once again began 
publication in November 1993 after a 30-year interruption, went 
further by advising Gaubert to write a book which "he could 
entitle--it is imperative--Mein Kampf." The Oeuvre 
francaise newspaper indicated further that JEUNE NATION's 
"combat" could use "a pen, a broom, and paste for our posters 
while waiting for Destiny to give us the opportunity to fight 
like our forefathers...." 

