BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Anatoliy Polynskyy] </F>
  [Text] The word resident means to vote in the Crimean 
language -- so joked a journalist at a briefing at the Central 
Electoral Commission devoted to the second round elections. 
There is indeed some truth in this joke. Although the Crimeans 
have already gone to the polls four times since the beginning of 
this year, it is still too early to summarize the elections. 
The election results for the Ukrainian Supreme Council are 
particularly unsatisfactory, despite the fact that they were 
held in all 23 constituencies. The majority of candidates for 
people's deputy did not manage to reach the so-called 20-percent 
threshold set by Ukrainian legislation, meaning that less than a 
quarter of registered voters voted for them. Of course, it is 
sad, but the Crimea, nonetheless, elected 11 deputies to the 
Ukrainian parliament, including five women. The remaining 12 
deputies will have to be elected in repeat elections which are 
to be within the next six months. 
  The Crimean parliament, however, has been virtually formed. 
Moreover, the first session of the Crimean Supreme Council has 
already been scheduled. According to legislation of the 
Autonomous Republic, the first session is supposed to be held 30 
days after the elections -- on 10 May. The final decision, 
however, is to be made by the former Supreme Council Presidium. 
Who won seats in the new parliament? There should be 98 
deputies, 94 of which have already been elected, including 55 
representatives of the "Rossiya" bloc. Eleven deputies have been 
reelected to the Supreme Council. 
  It must be noted that the current elections confirmed the 
complete collapse of the communist idea on the peninsula. In 
the Supreme Council, the Communist Party will be represented by 
only two deputies. An additional two deputies were elected from 
the Party of Economic Revival of the Crimea, and one deputy was 
elected from the Russian Party. By the way, Serhiy Shuvaynikov, 
leader of the Russian Party, was again defeated. He was elected 
neither president nor deputy. The voters did not put their 
confidence in Valeriy Averkin, leader of the Russian-Speaking 
Movement of the Crimea and manager of the scandalous Impex 55 
Krym association. Nevertheless, there will be enough people in 
the new parliament to deliver speeches, debate, and fight 
against Ukrainian nationalists. Oleksandr Kruhlov, the organizer 
of countless meetings in Sevastopol, is one of them. There will 
be enough people to support this restless fighter for the 
historic truth and victory of the Russian idea in the Crimea. 
The number of orators elected to the new parliament is 
impressive -- Viktor Mezha, Borys Kozyryov, Yuriy Rozhonyuk, 
Lidiya Kovalenko, Tatyana Ryabchykova. Time will tell, however, 
if the new parliament will be able to work constructively and 
adopt laws needed for economic reforms. 

