Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] La Paz, 1 Mar (EFE) -- The Bolivian Government 
today released the third official version of Spanish citizen 
Manuel Ramon Puchol's death in the city of San Matias on 10 
February. The government said Puchol committed suicide, despite 
a police report and a witness who say that Puchol died as a 
result of a savage beating by a group of military men. 
  Local officials have been putting together an official 
version of Puchol's death for the past few days. Meanwhile, the 
in situ investigation of the case, which is being closely 
followed by Spanish Ambassador Fernando Martinez Westerhausen, 
has begun in San Matias. 
  Before the beginning of the investigation promised by 
Bolivian authorities, and 20 days after Puchol's death, Interior 
Under Secretary Hugo San Martin said he was "convinced that a 
suicide, and not a murder, occurred in San Matias." 
  The new Bolivian Government version contradicts the police 
report that said Puchol died as a result of a beating by a group 
of military men, the testimony of a witness who confirmed the 
report, and the pictures in the hands of the Spanish Embassy, in 
which Puchol is seen with clear marks of violence over his 
entire body. 
  San Martin talked with ANF [Fides News Agency], but did not 
say how is it possible for a person to commit suicide and end up 
with double encephalic traumatism, cranial crushing, and 
extensive hematomas throughout the body, as was indicated by the 
autopsy. Puchol, 33, was born in Alicante and worked in Justice 
Ministry prisons. 
  The under secretary defended the official theory of Puchol's 
suicide before Spanish Ambassador to Bolivia Fernando Martinez 
Westerhausen, with whom he traveled to San Matias, where the 
Spanish citizen died on 10 February. 
  Bolivian authorities and the embassies of Spain and the 
United Kingdom in La Paz did not report on the whereabouts of 
Douglas James Morrison, a resident of San Matias, who testified 
to having witnessed the beating by the military shortly before 
Puchol died. EFE learned that Morrison disappeared after 
requesting the protection of the two diplomatic missions. 
[passage omitted] 

