Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 19 (XINHUA) -- The Second Session of 
the Eighth National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC) today approved the government 
work report delivered by Premier Li Peng. 
  A political resolution of the session adopted today affirms 
the "great achievements" the Chinese people have scored over the 
past year in reforms, opening up and the modernization program. 
  According to the resolution, the principles for various 
kinds 
of work and tasks in China spelled out in the report are 
"practical and inspiring." 
  It says that CPPCC National Committee members voiced their 
concern over a number of prominent problems, such as the 
overextended scale of investment in fixed assets, high price 
rises, a weak agricultural base, difficulties faced by some 
major state- owned enterprises, corruption and poor social order 
in some localities. 
  "We hope that the government will take effective measures to 
solve these problems promptly," the resolution says. 
  It points out that the reunification of China in accordance 
with the principle of "peaceful reunification and one country, 
two systems" reflects the common aspiration of the Chinese 
nation, including Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macao compatriots and 
overseas Chinese. 
  It says that all parties, people's organizations and people 
of various nationalities and from all walks of life who have 
joined CPPCC express full support to the Chinese Government for 
its preparatory work to ensure a successful transfer of 
sovereignty and smooth transition in Hong Kong and Macao, in 
accordance with the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, the Basic Law of the Macao Special 
Administrative Region and relevant resolutions of the National 
People's Congress Standing Committee. 
  They all resolutely support the solemn and just stand of the 
Chinese Government to resume exercising China's sovereignty over 
Hong Kong on schedule and to ensure the long-term stability and 
prosperity of Hong Kong, the resolution says. 
  The session resolutely opposes any attempt and move to split 
the motherland and hopes that differences across the Taiwan 
Straits will be resolved by adhering to the principle of one 
China and through increased contacts and consultations. 
  The session places hopes on the Taiwan authorities and, to a 
greater extent, on the Taiwan people. 
  The central task for China in 1994 is to seize development 
opportunities, deepen reforms, open the country wider to the 
outside world, promote development and maintain stability, the 
resolution says. 
  All kinds of CPPCC work must comply with and serve this 
task, 
it says. 
  The resolution calls on participating units and 
organizations 
at all levels, as well all members of the CPPCC, to make 
political consultations and supervision a success, and actively 
participate in managing and discussing state affairs in order to 
make fresh contributions to China's modernization and peaceful 
reunification. 

