Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary: "In the Margin of the Interior </F>
Minister's Remarks in Majles"] 
  [Text] The esteemed Interior Minister Mr. Besharati's 
answer to a question by Rasht Deputy Elyas Hazrati about why 
students of the Unity Consolidation Bureau [UCB] were not 
allowed to stage a rally against the United States on 2 November 
[on the anniversary of the occupation of the American Embassy in 
Tehran], is worthy of discussion since, as he himself stated, 
our Islamic revolution is a revolution against world blasphemy 
and oppression and its symbol-- the United States--in the world 
today. The need for a multifaceted struggle in all its 
dimensions against the United States was repeatedly pointed out 
by the founder of the Islamic Republic, Imam Khomeyni--may his 
soul be sanctified--and by Ayatollah Khamene'i, leader of the 
Islamic revolution. But neither of them said that this struggle 
should be carried out at a specific time and specific place. 
  Basically speaking, our revolution is a popular revolution; 
and when the Muslim people of Iran and the revolutionary strata, 
especially the combatant students--despite their tastes and 
political platforms--want to work toward this objective [a 
popular revolution] within the framework of the recognized laws 
and regulations of the country, no obstacles should be raised 
for them. In his remarks, Mr. Besharati listed several reasons 
why the student rally was banned. But none of these reasons are 
justifiable, either from the legal or revolutionary aspects. 
  1. He said: "We disagreed with the rally that the UCB 
students had proposed because we are in favor of a show of unity 
by our nation, which can become a powerful phenomenon that can 
prevent and thwart any aggression or overt or covert 
intervention in this society and this unity. This was the main 
reason for our disagreement." 
  First of all, the rally that was proposed by the students 
was not to take place parallel with the official march that had 
been planned, but two days before the official march. But where 
does it say that permission should be granted for an expression 
of aversion to the United States on a specific day, at a 
specific time, and in a specific way? 
  Also, the UCB is a student organization that is allowed to 
operate on the basis of our Islamic country's laws; and rallies 
can be held under any circumstance, on any day, and in any form 
by requesting permission from the interior minister provided 
that the rally will not impair public order and security in the 
country. And if the Interior Ministry--as the executor of law 
and order--feels that such a request would disrupt national 
order and security, it should clearly state why it believes so. 
  There is no doubt that coordination, unity of methods, unity 
of tastes, and so on are positive and ideal points. But the 
responsibility that the Interior Ministry has is a legal 
responsibility. On what points did the students' request for 
permission conflict with the recognized laws of the Interior 
Ministry? Should a march against the United States be held only 
on a specific day and under the supervision of one specific 
institution? Then what is the meaning of the freedom to express 
one's views, to protest, and the freedom to hold legal 
demonstrations? Is the Interior Ministry a legislative or 
policy- making body or is it an executor of law? If such issues 
were to be dealt with through such channels, then the Majles 
should have approved a law saying that demonstrations against 
oppressive and despotic America should be carried out only in an 
official manner and through the channels of official 
institutions. 
  2. The second reason which the esteemed interior minister 
gave referred to a circular issued by the representative of the 
religious leader and the Islamic Publicity Coordination 
Council's secretary that states that "on the basis of the 
attached copy of Circular No. ... [ellipsis as published] of the 
esteemed president, the Islamic Propaganda Coordination Council 
is in charge of organizing and directing all public and official 
ceremonies and rallies." 
  The rally which the students wanted to hold was not of this 
nature. A number of students, an association, and a legal 
student formation wanted to march and to demonstrate. This 
could not be categorized as an official and public march that 
falls under the jurisdiction of the country's official 
institutions. Therefore, it was not correct to refer to this 
circular. If the UCB students had applied for permission to 
organize an official ceremony on the national level, then 
naturally this circular would have applied, and whether it is 
correct or not, the Interior Ministry could have opposed it. 
But in the students' application to the Interior Ministry there 
was no sign of the students' intention to hold an official rally 
at the national level. 
  3. Another reason given by the esteemed interior minister 
was that "it is not our duty to safeguard each person under any 
circumstances and to grant permission and extend facilities for 
rallies." 
  First of all, if the request is legal and within the 
framework of state regulations, then on the basis of law, the 
Interior Ministry should grant permission and extend the 
necessary facilities, whether the interior minister likes it or 
not. Secondly, in this country with its Muslim, revolutionary, 
and anti-American people, anti- American demonstrations--and by 
Muslim and committed students at that--are not dangerous; danger 
emanates only from pro-U.S. elements. Those who struggle 
against America do not fear the mentors of arrogance. This 
remark by the interior minister means that had the Interior 
Ministry not ensured security, the demonstrators might have been 
attacked and would not have been safe. But it is clear that the 
devoted Iranian people have nothing to fear, that if there is 
insecurity it is created by the supporters of America, and that 
it is the duty of the Interior Ministry to make the supporters 
of America feel insecure. Our people, our students, and our 
officials are so broadminded that they are unaffected when they 
hear what those who explicitly do not consider America to be an 
enemy and who want relations with it -- contrary to the thought 
of Imam Khomeyni, may his soul be sanctified, and what the 
leader of the revolution has so explicitly stated. But not only 
do those who utter such words not feel any insecurity, they even 
resort to various means to express so-called expert views on the 
topic. Now, how can one accept a situation where certain people 
who without doubt are Muslim, revolutionary, and committed 
persons and followers of the leader cannot express their 
opposition to America as they wish, or accept for this wish of 
theirs to be considered as an act that spreads discord in the 
national ranks and that their legal rights be ignored while 
people like the esteemed Majles deputy Raja'i-Khorasani are 
allowed to speak without considering their own remarks as being 
discordant? Just as we believe that any person-- whether a 
Majles deputy or anyone else--can say what he wants within the 
framework of his beliefs, ethics, and the law and order of this 
Islamic country as long as he does not insult or act against the 
interests of Islam and of the country and that he should not 
feel insecure, in the same way others too should be able to 
enjoy these rights. 
  Of course, there are also other points in Mr. Besharati's 
remarks, which we will discuss at another time. But the main 
point is that we should act within the framework of the system 
and of its laws to preserve the rights of the members of this 
society; and this is only possible when we do not mix personal 
tastes and assessments with executive decisions. 

