Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Kemal Yurteri: "Drug Trafficking Shifts to </F>
Ports"] 
  [Text] Ankara -- Developments in the Balkan countries and 
the Caucasus have forced the drug traffickers to make 
significant changes in the routes they use to transport their 
narcotics from Turkey to Western Europe and from Western Europe 
to North America. While narcotics were smuggled into Turkey from 
Iran and Syria in the past, the drug traffickers are also 
bringing in supplies from Georgia, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, and 
Uzbekistan at the present time. It is common knowledge that 
they used the "Balkan route" to transport their narcotics to 
Europe in the past. However, the recent use of ports in drug 
trafficking has drawn attention. It has been reported that even 
the Kurdish Workers Party [PKK] has complied with the changes in 
transportation routes and moved to intensify its activities in 
Italy and Greece. 
  It has been ascertained that the new changes in routes have 
been prompted by the internal war in the former Yugoslavia and 
the transport of narcotic substances in TIR [Transit Highway 
International] trucks from Georgia, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, 
Afghanistan, and Uzbekistan to Turkey through the Sarp border 
gate. The TIR trucks have established a new route between Turkey 
and Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran, which are known as the 
"Golden Crescent" countries. 
  The Directorate of Smuggling and Intelligence Work Narcotics 
Department, which is affiliated with the General Directorate of 
Police, has drawn up a report on the recent changes in drug 
trafficking in the region. The report said that several drug 
trafficking organizations have intensified their activities in 
Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijan because 
they are close to the "Golden Crescent" countries. It also 
said: "The drug trafficking organizations in the Golden 
Crescent and the Golden Triangle (Laos, Thailand, and Burma) 
assign selected elements from the cocaine cartels in the United 
States and the terrorist organizations in Lebanon to supervise 
and control each and every stage of drug trafficking 
(production, transportation, and sale of drugs). An operation 
against drug trafficking in the United States has revealed that 
the Cali cartel assigned 40,000 men for the sale of cocaine in 
that country and even paid monthly salaries to each one of 
them." The report also drew attention to the possibility of 
international drug trafficking organizations cooperating with 
criminal groups in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and 
Azerbaijan. 
  The report described Turkey as an important transit center 
for heroin and hashish trafficking in the world and noted that 
the Balkan route starts from Turkey for geographical reasons and 
stretches to North America. It said: "The political 
developments along that route have forced the drug traffickers 
to make certain changes. The fact that a large quantity of the 
narcotic drugs that were impounded in Europe in the latter part 
of the 1980's was smuggled through the Balkan route drew the 
attention of the officials at the time. The Interpol General 
Secretariat established the "Pro-Balkan Unit" within the 
framework of the Interpol sub-committee on drug trafficking. 
The unit was established in accordance with the proposal the 
Yugoslav delegation made in the Interpol General Assembly 
meeting in 1989." 
  Drug traffickers used five routes to transport their 
narcotics through the Balkan region in the past. The narcotic 
substances brought to Turkey from the Golden Crescent countries 
and Lebanon were transported to other countries from: 
  1. Kapikule border gate in Edirne to Kapitan Andreevo in 
Bulgaria; Gradina, Yugoslavia; Spielfeld, Austria; Bad 
Reichenhall, Federal Germany, and other areas in Western Europe. 
  2. Ipsila to Kipoi [as published] and Borogodiko [as 
published] in Greece; Trieste, Italy; and other areas in Western 
Europe. 
  3. Istanbul to Sofia, Bulgaria; Bucharest, Romania; 
Budapest, Hungary; Prague, Czechoslovakia; Waidhaus [as 
published] in Federal Germany; and other areas in Western Europe. 
  4. Istanbul to Sofia, Bulgaria; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 
Budapest, Hungary; Prague, Czechoslovakia; Furth im Wald [as 
published] in Federal Germany; and other areas in Western Europe. 
  5. Istanbul to Sofia, Bulgaria; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; Graz, 
Austria; and other areas in Western Europe. 
  The changes in the routes the drug traffickers used as a 
result of the fragmentation of Yugoslavia, through which 
Macedonia, Serbia, Croatia, Karadag, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and 
Slovakia have emerged as independent countries, are as follows: 
  1. From Derince, Turkey to Trieste, Italy and other parts of 
Western Europe. 
  2. From Haydarpasa in Istanbul to Constanta, Romania; 
Budapest, Hungary; Bratislava, Slovakia; Prague, the Czech 
Republic; Germany; and other parts of Western Europe. 
  3. From Edirne, Turkey to Sofia, Bulgaria; Bucharest, 
Romania; Budapest, Hungary; Bratislava, Slovakia; Prague, the 
Czech Republic; Germany; and other parts of Western Europe. 
  4. From Kapikule, Turkey to the Port of Patras, Greece; 
Trieste, Bari, and Brindisi, Italy; Switzerland; France; and 
other parts of Western Europe. 
  5. Kapikule, Turkey to Thessaloniki, Greece; Trieste; Bari; 
and Brindisi, Italy; Switzerland; France; and other parts of 
Western Europe. 
  6. From Kapikule, Turkey to Sofia, Bulgaria; Bucharest, 
Romania; Budapest, Hungary; Vienna, Austria; and Rome, Italy. 
  Regarding the PKK, the report said: "It has been ascertained 
that the PKK will maintain its underground activities, intensify 
its drug trafficking operations, take harsh steps to continue to 
extort funds, and shift its activities from wherever it is 
banned to neighboring countries (particularly to those that have 
a coastline). The obstruction of PKK's activities in the 
countries in which that organization is banned will be 
impossible if its members are not expelled." 
  The report also drew attention to the shifting of drug 
trafficking operations to Italy and Greece, which are on the 
shores of the Mediterranean Sea. 

