Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Focus" by Kohei Murayama] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 26 KYODO -- Japan's financial and 
monetary authorities are losing their direction, with political 
confusion retarding budgetary schedules and reviving 
credit-easing hopes at a time when prompt action is needed for 
the flagging economy. 
  With the coalition government failing last Friday [21 
January] to pass its reform bills through the Diet's upper 
house, and with a Japan-U.S. summit in Washington only a couple 
of weeks away, financial authorities hope to draft a final plan 
for a third extra fiscal 1993 budget and the fiscal 1994 budget 
early next week before further political chaos sets in. 
  The Ministry of Finance (MOF) hopes the political situation 
"will change to allow various things as soon as possible," said 
Jiro Saito, vice finance minister and administrative head. 
  Six ministers responsible for economic affairs, including 
Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii, have agreed to focus on 
reviving the political reform bills, stressing that passage 
would be the best help for the economy. 
  Fujii said a timetable for the budget is "not yet decided," 
but stressed the government will do its utmost to form a new 
economic stimulus package "after the current extraordinary Diet 
session ends on Saturday." 
  Both Fujii and Saito said the government has not mentioned a 
specific date for the budgets. But now that some party leaders 
are hinting at a dissolution of the lower house and cabinet 
resignation, the budgets and fiscal measures could be in for 
further delay. 
  But even if the cabinet survives for a transitional period 
to 
launch them, uncertainties remain over the crucial issue of 
cutting income tax to help jack up the economy. 
  Under these circumstances, attention is shifting to 
nonpolitical monetary authorities which have stayed on the 
sidelines since cutting the discount rate in September to an 
all-time low of 1.75 percent. 
  In his latest press remarks Wednesday, Bank of Japan 
Governor 
Yasushi Mieno said he is "concerned" about the political 
turmoil, but added it is too early to judge the economic effects 
of a "still fluid" situation. He said the economy "remains 
stagnant with no clear signs for recovery," while stressing he 
would continue to "carefully watch" the effects of past measures 
and political developments. 
  There is perhaps some optimism, however, beginning to spread 
among monetary authorities as Mieno said his branch managers 
reported at a meeting this week that corporate sentiment has 
"calmed down somewhat" though [it] is still weak. 
  Branch managers attributed the improving sentiment to a 
recent rally in stock prices, the halt in the yen's 
appreciation, and a positive restructuring stance. But all 
these are apparently based on expectations of imminent fiscal 
measures, and hopes for an immediate rate cut were rekindled on 
Monday when stock prices took their steepest dive in two years 
of over 900 points in the key Nikkei index of 225 selected 
issues. 
  The stock market remained stable after recovering slightly 
on 
Tuesday, and the currency market was not much affected by the 
political turmoil. 
  Along with concerns over the impact of delayed fiscal 
measures, market attention is now fixed on Japan-U.S. relations 
ahead of the February 11 summit. Fujii stressed the 
"importance" for Japan to explain its political and economic 
policies at the summit "in the sense of Japan-U.S. friendship." 
  Indeed, the government wants to see some tangible results at 
the summit, as Hosokawa and Fujii vowed to do their best in both 
economic measures and the ongoing "framework" trade talks when 
they met separately on Sunday with U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd 
Bentsen. Fujii said that he told Bentsen to "trust us" and 
leave "the details" of the measures to Japan. 
  Bentsen said in press remarks after the meetings he had 
asked 
for measures to include an effective income tax cut, and 
stressed the United States would have to "reexamine" the 
bilateral trade talks if a reasonable agreement is not reached 
at the summit. 
  In Washington where subcabinet-level negotiations are now 
under way, U.S. Commerce secretary Ron Brown hinted at economic 
sanctions. That would mean a new round of sharp appreciation 
for the yen and a stock-price plunge, and the worst scenario for 
financial and monetary authorities would be that they could not 
prevent a further economic setback amid the continuing political 
confusion. 

