Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Public opinion survey by the "Inform-Klub ES" Agency </F>
reported by Guzaliya Mansurova: "Guesswork on the Eve of the 
Elections"] 
  [Text] Marriages are made in Heaven, as we know, but 
contracts with the devil are signed in blood. Against this 
background, the Russian-Tatar treaty signed in the Moscow 
Kremlin with pen and ink is very banal. But the emotions it 
evoked put it in the center of public attention. For this 
reason, a sampling of the elite polled in the February survey 
conducted by the sociological service of the "Inform-Klub ES" 
were asked to express their view of the treaty. 
  In assessing the treaty demarcating the powers and subjects 
of jurisdiction between Russia and Tatarstan, 72 percent of 
those polled expressed a positive attitude toward this document, 
6 percent thought that "the enemies of sovereignty" in Moscow 
had deceived our president, 4 percent had difficulty making an 
assessment, and finally, 18 percent of the respondents decided 
to comment, stating that 1) a lean comproimise is better than a 
fat lawsuit; 2) despite the lack of specifics in the wording and 
the possible short duration of the treaty, it is still the basis 
for strengthening relations between the RT [Tatarstan Republic] 
and the RF [Russian Federation]; and 3) the treaty guarantees 
the existence of two political elites without confrontation. One 
of the respondents assessed the Moscow agreements as a treaty 
between two presidents which cannot be compared with the 
Constitution as far as legitimacy is concerned, in his view, and 
it is consequently illegal. The noted Tatar author Dias Valeyev 
noted sadly that this document reminds him of an agreement 
between two decks of the sinking "Titanic." 
  Some respondents noted the unusual nature of the treaty in 
world juridical practice, calling the Tatarstan Republic and the 
Russian Federation pioneers in the field of new political 
realities. 
  The last paragraph in the survey was dictated by the treaty 
itself. This document assumes that permanent representations of 
Russia and Tatarstan will be established in Kazan and Moscow, 
respectively. A representation of Tatarstan is already 
functioning in Moscow, but who will be representing RF interests 
in Kazan? 
  Our respondents named R. Abdulatilov, S. Shakhray, and Zh. 
Semenov as candidates for this position. However, most of those 
polled had difficulty in determining the personality of a 
plenipotentiary representative, limiting themselves to 
definitions such as: a Kazan Tatar (46 percent), or a Moscow 
Tatar, possibly of Kazan extraction (40 percent). The 
overwhelming majority are certain that it will be a person who 
is familiar with local details, and that his candidacy will be 
coordinated with the President of Tatarstan. That is, Moscow 
will not send a complete "foreigner." 
  By not expecting a foreigner among its own, however, 
Tatarstan should make a determination about just who will 
represent it "among the foreigners." Seven surnames should be 
designated in elections to the Russian parliament: two to the 
Council of the Federation and five to the State Duma. 
  We asked representatives of the Kazan sampling to give the 
names of possible winners in three electoral 
districts--Tatarskiy, Moskovskiy, and Privolzhskiy. Some 84 
percent of those polled believe that Mintimer Shaymiyev will 
represent the republic's interests in the Council of the 
Federation, 62 percent thought that Farid Mukhametshin would 
receive the mandate as deputy together with him, and 12 percent 
named Aleksandr Lozovoy. Such a spread in the figures was not 
seen in determining the possible deputies for the lower chamber 
of parliament. In Moskovskiy District, there were three 
favorites: Vladimir Belyayev (46 percent), Yuriy Voronin (20 
percent), and Oleg Morozov (12 percent). In Privolzhskiy 
District, the ones named were Valentin Mikhaylov (44 percent), 
Rais Belyayev (14 percent), and Yuriy Reshetov (12 percent). 
Respondents noted that surprises are possible in Privolzhskiy 
District because of the large number of candidates. 
  A traditional question in our express surveys has been 
determination of the average income per family member. The Kazan 
elite are not threatened with starvation at present, for in 
recalculating for daily bread, each member of it was able to buy 
an average of 195.5 loaves of black bread per month. And this 
means finding the sum required out of his 110,000 rubles [R] in 
average monthly income to meet certain other needs, but ones 
that are not too refined. And once again, the "picture of 
financial prosperity" of the Kazan elite has been slightly 
spoiled by the representatives of science, those professors who 
either have not received any wage at all or received only part 
of it. They set the per capita income of their families at about 
R20,000 to R40,000. 
  There are legends and anecdotes about the vital optimism of 
our people. Neither 300 years of rule by the Romanovs nor 74 
years of Soviet authority have been able to shake it. At the 
beginning of 1994, our respondents were satisfied with 66 
percent of their lives. This is a general indicator which covers 
finances, personal contacts, and housing. The situation is worst 
with finances--representatives of the elite say that the incomes 
being received enable them to achieve 57 percent of what they 
desire. At the same time, 47 percent is the satisfaction 
indicator for male scientists and 66 percent for businessmen. 
These and others, such as journalists, politicians, managers, 
and artists, arrange contacts with people to a much greater 
extent, meeting 80 percent of their requirements. 
  A few words about housing. Remember in "Master and 
Margarit," 
when Voland says: "They aren't bad people, but the apartment 
problem has spoiled them." Judging by that, the Kazan elite is 
satisfied with 77 percent of its housing conditions, and 
shortcomings of this nature should be justified by something 
else. 
  In completing the political and economic group, we cannot 
help but mention that our respondents assessed the economic 
situation in Tatarstan this time at 2.9 points, and in Russia as 
a whole at 2.5 points, as before. 
  Not only the elections await us in March. There is also a 
women's holiday on 8 March. On the threshold of this day, we 
have asked the male part of Kazan's professional elite to 
express their wishes for the better half of humanity. Some 22 
percent of those polled wished the women love, and love of 
various types--from love for men to love from men. In the 
opinion of the other representatives of the elite, there should 
be love as well as peace of mind, stability, a good frame of 
mind, rejuvenation and improvement in physical characteristics 
from year to year, and a great deal of money. This combination 
will enable the women to continue to be women to make the men 
happy. Joining in the general flow of congratulations, Aleksandr 
Tarkayev, chairman of the Tatarstan Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry, wished the women the chance to work not for economic 
necessity but guided exclusively by personal inclination. There 
were also calls to make a historical shift from masculinization 
and feminization and not to confuse 8 March with 23 February 
(the second Russian revolution began on 8 March, according to 
the new calendar, with the demonstration by female workers in 
St. Petersburg). 
  As far as the better half of our sampling is concerned, it 
wished that the men would continue to be men. Even on 8 March. 

