BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin said that during 
yesterday's attack in the security zone, Hizballah fighters 
fired 12 Sagger missiles at an IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
convoy, a missile volley unprecedented in the history of the 
clashes with the Hizballah. The prime minister added that on 
average, five clashes occur every week in south Lebanon; 
however, since these incidents generally result in no casualties 
they are not reported. 
  Prime Minister Rabin said he would be happy to meet Jordan's 
King Husayn and Jordanian officials anytime, anywhere. Our 
political correspondent Shlomo Raz reports that the prime 
minister was responding to King Husayn's assertion that the time 
for a public meeting between himself and Israeli leaders was 
drawing near. King Husayn is currently visiting the United 
States and will meet President Clinton on 23 June to discuss the 
promotion of the peace process. 
  [Tel Aviv MA'ARIV in Hebrew on 21 June in a pool report on 
pages 1, 2 notes that "officials at the prime minister's bureau 
yesterday clarified that the exchange of declarations between 
King Husayn and Prime Minister Rabin was not a smokescreen to 
conceal contacts already under way to hold a meeting in the near 
future. Nevertheless, political sources expressed the assessment 
that the declarations may lead to a process similar to the one 
which accompanied Egyptian President al-Sadat's trip to 
Jerusalem in 1977 and resulted in the first public meeting 
between Israeli and Jordanian officials -- including Husayn and 
Rabin -- in the near future. 
  "Meanwhile, political sources in Jerusalem yesterday 
reported 
that Jordan was signalling its readiness to permit limited 
numbers of Israeli tourists to enter Jordan soon." MA'ARIV adds 
that "Officials in Jerusalem yesterday asserted that Jordan had 
not been frightened by Syria's anger over Amman's progress in 
the negotiations with Israel, and apparently intended to 
implement various aspects of normalization with Israel over the 
coming months."] 
  The prime minister met with the Labor Knesset faction 
yesterday and discussed the government's achievements over the 
past two years. At the meeting, the prime minister said that the 
state of calm in the Gaza Strip and the drop in terrorism 
influenced the national mood more than any debate at the Labor 
party's Central Committee. Rabin described the implementation of 
the agreement with the Palestinians as not bad. Commenting on 
the difficulties in the negotiations with the Syrians, the prime 
minister stressed that he was not pessimistic and noted that 
meetings with Jordanian officials would take place next month 
along the border. These political developments, Rabin said, 
calms the security situation. 
  The prime minister asserted that the Labor party's rule 
would 
be judged in three fields: infrastructure, education, and the 
scope of unemployment. As for Hayim Ramon and his associates, 
Yitzhaq Rabin said that it was inconceivable for them to hold 
two passports. Although they were not members of the party they 
remained members of its Knesset faction. At the same time, the 
prime minister was not proposing to expel them from the Knesset 
faction. Our correspondent Yo'el Nir reports that the 
atmosphere at the meeting was relaxed and many of the faction 
members said that following last week's uproar, the party should 
start putting its house in order. The debate on the party's 
condition was put off until tomorrow. 

