Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Army General Raul Castro, minister of the FAR 
[Revolutionary Armed Forces], yesterday continued an extensive 
tour of the territory defended by the Western Army. Castro, who 
is also second secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba, was 
accompanied by Division General Leopoldo Cintra Frias and 
Candido Palmero -- both Politburo members -- as well as by other 
high-ranking officials and political leaders. 
  Raul visited Unit 4261, where he congratulated unit 
personnel 
for their decisive contribution to defeating the illegal 
television broadcasts from Miami. He stressed the fact that he 
had devoted the first visit of the year to this unit because it 
is the best of its kind in the FAR. 
  At Unit 2100, Castro received a detailed explanation of the 
unit's characteristics and operations, as well as the progress 
of the fortifications. 
  It has also been learned that the tour of the civil defense 
tunnels in San Jose de las Lajas provided deep satisfaction to 
Raul and those accompanying him, given the magnificent job that 
has been done there. During a conversation in one of the 
classrooms there, the FAR minister expressed his conviction that 
the new generations will be able to continue moving forward. 
  Castro was also avised on the combat readiness of Unit 6100. 
Castro asked about the agricultural-livestock plans for the 
current year and insisted that an increase in production must be 
accompanied by a decrease in the unit cost of items. 
  Lastly, Raul visited an installation being built by the Blas 
Roca Contingent. The installation is earmarked for the 
production of 90 tons per year of a variety of kelp 
[espirulina], a high-priced protein on the international market. 
  [Havana Radio Progreso Network in Spanish at 1200 GMT on 7 
January, in a similar report on Castro's tour of Western Army 
territory, adds: "For his part, Colonel (Perez Pileta), chief of 
Unit 6100, briefed the minister on the combat readiness of his 
mechanized infantry brigade, as well as on the agricultural- 
livestock plans for the current year, and insisted that an 
increase in production must be accompanied by a decrease in the 
cost per unit. In this connection, Raul Castro stressed that our 
military chiefs must have a good grasp of economic data, from 
how much it costs to produce a single boniato to how much a 
rifle bullet costs. The tour's heavy schedule did not prevent 
Castro from reiterating a great interest in increasing 
fish-farming production or from visiting the Western Army's fry 
production center. This center is being built with the 
collaboration of the Ministry of the Fishing Industry."] 

