Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch" from Beijing by the mainland news </F>
center: "What Did Jiang Zemin Say at the Shanghai Group 
Discussion?"] 
  [Text] Several days ago we heard National People's 
Congress [NPC] deputies talking about Jiang Zemin's and Li 
Peng's different styles at group discussions. Jiang Zemin likes 
to talk endlessly about everything, without keeping to the main 
topic, whereas Li Peng is serious and generally only gives 
simple answers to simple questions. Several days ago in the 
lounge during an interval, we listened to the Shanghai 
delegation's brief explanation of Jiang Zemin's remarks at a 
group discussion. We found out that, as far as "style" is 
concerned, he did not like to make presumptuous remarks. 
<H5>  Talking at Length for More Than Two Hours </H5>
  A provincial delegation asked the Shanghai delegation: "What 
did Jiang Zemin talk about at your group discussion?" The 
Shanghai delegation's answer was a little surprising: "Nothing, 
though he talked at length for more than two hours." The 
province's delegation asked again: "What did talk about?" Thus 
the Shanghai delegation provided a brief explanation. 
  "He talked about the Asia-Pacific Summit in Seattle for more 
than half an hour" "explaining the process but not policy." The 
length of time that Jiang Zemin spent on this issue fully 
suggests the CPC's concern for the Seattle summit. The CPC 
regards the Seattle summit as a major breakthrough in its 
diplomatic relations with the United States. The CPC 
particularly stressed that, during an "informal meeting" between 
Asia-Pacific heads of state, "Chinese and U.S. heads of state 
formally met" -- a turning point in Chinese-U.S. relations. 
During the Seattle summit, Clinton knocked on the gate to 
China's mainland markets, and the sound of the knock boosted the 
CPC leaders' courage. 
<H3>  Jiang Zemin Said That Dealing With U.S. Human Rights 
Diplomacy Was Child's Play [xiao er ke 1420 0334 4430] </H3>
  Therefore it was not strange that Jiang Zemin said dealing 
with U.S. human rights diplomacy was "child's play." Jiang 
Zemin said: Christopher came to China as our guest. We arranged 
for him to stay in the State Guesthouse, but he wanted to stay 
at the China Hotel and use his own car. He wanted to "play 
tricks." While in Seattle, I acted according to my host's 
preference. When Shattock came to China, he met Wei Jingsheng. 
What is Wei Jingsheng? He is a prisoner. According to Chinese 
law, he is on parole, but still serving his prison term. Was it 
not ridiculous that a U.S. official met a Chinese prisoner? So 
it is not difficult to understand why the CPC took so much 
effort to send dissidents away from Beijing to "control" them. 
Since we could not control Christopher, we controlled the 
dissidents. As a matter of fact, the mainland understood that, 
according to the CPC means of control, it was as easy as raising 
a hand to stop Wei Jingsheng from meeting Shattock, U.S. 
assistant secretary of state for human rights affairs. The CPC 
did not do that, however, and let the matter proceed naturally. 
Subsequently, the CPC played the card of "Chinese law" at the 
negotiating table. Therefore, it is correct to say that dealing 
with U.S. human rights diplomacy is "child's play." 
<H3>  Jiang Zemin Extraordinarily Praised Yeltsin, and Had Full 
Confidence in Obtaining MFN Status </H3>
  Jiang Zemin said: Some people have suggested that we should 
not meet Christopher, but I said we had better meet him. The 
CPC's recent move on human rights is inseparable from the 
"hardliners' stand." It was not a coincidence that some people 
in the United States proposed that Christopher cancel his 
Beijing tour, because the mainland's human rights record was 
worsening. There were people on both sides who cherished 
wishful thinking. What was Jiang Zemin's inclination? This can 
be judged from his extraordinary praise of Yeltsin, saying that 
Yeltsin was very firm -- after Nixon met the opposition party 
leader in Russia, Yeltsin canceled their appointment. Maybe 
this was the first time a CPC leader spoke highly of Yeltsin on 
a semi-open occasion. Jiang Zemin seemed to have full 
confidence in obtaining most favored nation status. He said: 
Even Chris Patten has taken the same stand as we have, although 
he is making trouble for us on the Hong Kong issue. In 
addition, the CPC is taking a strong attitude toward the United 
States because, apart from U.S. businessmen being eager for 
entry into the mainland market as a result of its rapid economic 
development, there has been a delicate change in U.S.-Russian 
relations recently. Thus, the United States wants to make 
several choices ahead of time for its strategic interests. 

<H3>    He Did Not Care About the Prices of Western-Style But 
Was Very Clear About Egg Prices in Shanghai </H3>
  This Shanghai NPC deputy said with deep feeling: "I did not 
expect that Jiang Zemin would know very much about Shanghai." 
Jiang Zemin said: Eggs were two yuan and 80 fen per jin in 
Shanghai not long ago but now cost two yuan and 70 fen. Why? 
He added: I do not know the prices of Western-style suits, but 
I am concerned about the "vegetable baskets." It was said that 
[Shanghai Party Secretary] Wu Bangguo and [Shanghai mayor] Huang 
Ju immediately explained: Not long ago Zhu Rongji asked them 
about the prices of several kinds of vegetables in Shanghai. 
After they provided some "approximate" figures, Zhu Rongji 
asked: "Are these purchase prices or wholesales prices?" This 
question embarrassed them. They went to a vegetable market and 
found that the retail prices of vegetables were far higher than 
the figures they had provided. Prior to going to Beijing this 
time, Huang Ju purposely went to several vegetable markets to 
familiarize himself with the market situation for fear of being 
asked about vegetable prices. This Shanghai NPC deputy said 
that he himself did not know about egg prices in Shanghai, let 
alone the mayor. 
  It is said that Jiang Zemin has a high regard for singer 
Wang 
Luobin. One night, he was fatigued with work and read a book on 
Wang Luobin. Jiang Zemin said: Popular songs should not be 
prohibited, nor should pop stars from Hong Kong or Taiwan. 
Serious songs should also be supported, but Hong Kong and 
Taiwan pop stars should not be given too much publicity. "What 
`four superstars?'" [reference to Hong Kong's four most popular 
singers] At first, I thought they were the heavenly kings in the 
`Pilgrimage to the West'!" [name of a Chinese fairy tale] Jiang 
Zemin's remarks ended amid laughter. Immediately, press reports 
said the "atmosphere of the discussion was lively." 
  The NPC deputy from the province said: "Only this much? 
This is different from what was published in the newspapers!" 
  This Shanghai NPC deputy said: "Yes. This is what Jiang 
Zemin said. Jiang Zemin said he could talk freely at the 
Shanghai group discussion, without consulting documents, adding: 
`What you will see in the newspapers tomorrow will be different 
from what I am saying here.' On this point, Wu Bangguo and 
Huang Ju hurriedly explained: `There is a connection between 
them, there is a connection between them.'" 
  The province's NPC deputy said: "He had spoken for more than 
two hours, and what would be published the next day would be 
different. The reporters will find it difficult to cope with 
that." 
  The Shanghai NPC deputy replied: "Jiang Zemin had his speech 
notes in hand. I did not see any reporters at all." 
  It has been reported that more than 1,400 reporters are 
covering the NPC session and the session of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference. What were they busy doing? 

