Russia' 
<H4>    List of Council Members </H4>

<F P=102> 944Q0399B Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 27 May 94 pp 
5 </F>

<F P=103> 944Q0399B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [List of Foreign and Defense Policy Council members] </F>
  [Text] From the files of NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA: 
  According to its charter, the Foreign and Defense Policy 
Council "is a public association of politicians, entrepreneurs, 
state employees, members of the mass media, and scholars, who 
set for themselves the task of facilitating the development and 
implementation of strategic concepts of Russia's development, 
its foreign and defense policy." 
  A.L. Adamishin, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State 
Duma, 
RF first deputy minister of foreign affairs 
  Ye.A. Ambartsumov, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State 
Duma, Russia's ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary to 
the Mexican United States 
  Ye.V. Basin, chairman of the RF State Committee for 
Architecture and Construction 
  Yu.Yu. Boldyrev, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly 
Federation 
Council 
  L.I. Vainberg, president of the Association of Joint 
Ventures 
and International Associations and Organizations 
  A.P. Vladislavlev, vice president of the Russian Union of 
Industrialists and Entrepreneurs 
  A.I. Volskiy, president of the Russian Union of 
Industrialists and Entrepreneurs 
  V.P. Vorozhtsov, chief of the RF MVD [Ministry of Internal 
Affairs] public relations center 
  Yu.M. Vorontsov, RF presidential foreign policy adviser, 
Russia's representative to the United Nations 
  I.N. Golembiovskiy, IZVESTIYA editor in chief 
  A.C. Grachev, MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI founder's council member 
  A.P. Dubrovin, board deputy chairman of Inkombank 
  S.Ye. Yegorov, president of the Association of Russian Banks 
  K.F. Zatulin, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State Duma, 
chairman of the State Duma Committee on CIS Affairs and 
Relations With Compatriots, vice president and general director 
of the Association of Enterprise Managers, president of the 
Interregional Exchange and Trade Union 
  G.D. Ivanov, chief of the RF Ministry of Defense military 
development and reform administration, foreign policy aide to 
the RF minister of defense, lieutenant general 
  V.O. Ispravnikov, corresponding member of the Russian 
Academy 
of Economic Sciences and Entrepreneurial Activities 
  S.A. Karaganov, member of the Presidential Council, deputy 
director of the Russian Academy of Sciences' Europe Institute 
  O.V. Kiselev, chairman of the board of directors of AO 
[joint-stock society] Mosexpo 
  Ye.M. Kozhokin, director of the Russian Institute of 
Strategic Studies 
  A.A. Kokoshin, RF first deputy minister of defense, 
corresponding member of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
  M.P. Kolesnikov, chief of the General Staff of the RF Armed 
Forces, colonel general 
  A.A. Kotenkov, RF deputy minister for federation and 
nationalities' affairs, major general 
  V.Ya. Kremlev, aviation colonel general (retired), doctor of 
technical sciences, professor 
  S.V. Lavrov, RF deputy minister of foreign affairs 
  V.P. Lukin, doctor of historic science, professor 
  I.Ye. Malashenko, general director of NTV 
  M.V. Masarskiy, president of the Association of Enterprise 
Managers 
  V.N. Mironov, deputy chairman of the RF Ministry of 
Defense's 
Committee for Military-Technical policy, major general 
  N.V. Mikhaylov, president of Vympel Interstate Joint-Stock 
Corporation, doctor of economic sciences, professor 
  S.A. Mndoyants, general director of the Foundation for 
Development of Parliamentarism in Russia 
  A.V. Mordovin, deputy chief of the Russian Ministry of 
Social 
Protection's main administration, aviation major general 
  B.F. Petrovskiy, RF ambassador extraordinary and 
plenipotentiary, UN undersecretary general, UN general director 
of the UN office in Geneva (head of the United Nations' European 
branch) 
  A.A. Rodionov, deputy chairman of the RF State Committee for 
Defense Industries 
  V.A. Rubanov, deputy secretary of the RF Security Council 
  Yu.A. Ryzhov, RF ambassador extraordinary and 
plenipotentiary 
to the Republic of France, member of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences 
  D.B. Ryurikov, RF presidential aide 
  S.B. Stankevich, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State 
Duma 
  S.A. Stepashin, director of the RF Federal 
Counterintelligence Service, lieutenant general 
  V.T. Tretyakov, NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA editor in chief 
  A.V. Fedorov, political scientist, head of the Special 
Information Bureau 
  S.N. Fedorov, general director of MNTK [Interbranch 
Scientific and Technical Complex] Mikrokhirurgiya Glaza 
  I.M. Khakamada, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State Duma 
  A.V. Tsalko, executive secretary of the Interagency 
Commission on Social Issues of Military Servicemen and Their 
Family Members, chief of a RF Ministry of Social Protection's 
main administration 
  A.I. Cherkasenko, deputy chairman of the board of directors 
of the Balkanross investment-industrial group 
  S.M. Shakhray, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State Duma, 
deputy chairman of the RF Government 
  V.V. Shlykov, former deputy chairman of the RF State 
Committee on Defense Issues 
  I.Yu. Yurgens, first deputy chairman of the General 
Confederation of Trade Unions 
  S.N. Yushenkov, chairman of the RF Federal Assembly State 
Duma Committee on Defense 
  G.A. Yavlinskiy, deputy of the RF Federal Assembly State 
Duma, chairman of the board of the Center for Economic and 
Political Research 

