BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with IFP Central Committee member Ben Ngubane, </F>
ANC official Mac Maharaj, and IEC Commissioner Ben van der Ross 
by announcer John Bishop in the Johannesburg studio--live] 
  [Text] [Bishop] A very good evening to you. First the big 
news of the day. The Inkatha Freedom Party [IFP] will take part 
in next week's historic election. That momentous agreement was 
reached earlier today at the meeting between the IFP's chief 
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, National Party's F.W. de Klerk, and the 
ANC's Nelson Mandela. Thank you all very much gentlemen for 
coming. 
  Starting with you, Dr. Ngubane. Just briefly, the talks that 
you backed down last week -- the international mediators went 
home -- and here you are in this situation. How did it happen? 
  [Ngubane] Well, fortunately, the negotiations continued 
after 
the mediators had left for their countries. Professor Okumu of 
Kenya carried on negotiations between Dr. Mangosuthu Buthelezi 
and Dr. Mandela, and President de Klerk; and sooner or later 
consensus emerged as to the way forward. 
  [Bishop] Yes, Mr. Maharaj, how are you reading this now, 
this 
question was put in our new bulletin -- victory or defeat for 
whom? 
  [Maharaj] I think it's an unqualified victory for the people 
of our country -- all our people, black and white across the 
board. I think South Africa today was able to breath a sigh of 
relief at the breakthrough that was made through this agreement. 
I do not think we should look at the matter from the point of 
view of winners and losers. Political commentators will talk 
about strategies, failed strategies, and bad strategies. The 
important thing is that South Africa now is faced with an 
election which is really inclusive. It has been achieved in 
injury time, but still a try scored in injury time is a try. 
  [Bishop] I've heard that somewhere before. Pik Botha said 
it, that's right. Let's move to you, Mr. van der Ross. The 
meat and potatoes, the bread and butter question. Eighteen 
million ballots now to have IFP added to them. How are you 
going to do it? 
  [Van der Ross] Well, with a lot of elbow grease, of course. 
The whole logistics of being able to provide at this very late 
stage for an effective accommodation of a new player is truly 
going to be very problematic and very difficult, but we have 
mobilized immediately a sort of an A-team into the field, they 
are already in kwaZulu working with our local team there. We've 
got a back-up team back in the head office working right at this 
moment on developing strategies for all the different elements 
of the election. On the basis of the work we have done today 
already it does look as if it's possible to put it together. 
  [Bishop] Now sticking physically IFP at the bottom of the 
form, that will probably raise some legal questions there? 
  [Van der Ross] No, the act and the regulations will be 
changed to accommodate all of the necessary. There are a number 
of issues that will need to be changed, but obviously with the 
cooperation of all the parties this is going to be possible. 
  [Bishop] Mr. Maharaj, the amendments that have to be made 
now. What do they look like? 
  [Maharaj] The amendments are being drafted since this 
afternoon. They will be put to the negotiating council 
tomorrow. The amendments to the constitution are fairly straight 
forward. They simply are an amendment to two clauses, one, a 
constitutional principle; and the other one is Section 160 which 
provides that in the case of provincial constitutions, and 
specifically in the case of kwaZulu/Natal, there shall be 
provision for the Zulu monarch. 
  [Bishop] Dr. Ngubane, now what has happened? What is the 
situation with King Zwelithini and the Zulu nation, and how are 
you reading that? 
  [Ngubane] Well, the king was worried when it became clear 
that a federal dispensation will not be achieved in this 
country. So self-determination for his people, for his kingdom 
was going to be totally wiped off the political process. So he 
demanded that the sovereignty of the Zulu Kingdom should be 
restored, and the kingdom itself recognized. We worked hard at 
negotiating this position, and now it is going to be enshrined 
both in the national constitution, and it will be made mandatory 
for the provincial constitution of kwaZulu/Natal -- to enshrine 
that as well. 
  [Bishop] Nevertheless it remains as part of the greater 
whole, doesn't it? 
  [Ngubane] Certainly, it's part of a greater South Africa, 
but 
allowing for the different communities to achieve what we can 
call a fair measure of self-determination. 
  [Bishop] What do you say Mr. Maharaj? 
  [Maharaj] I do not think that the provision speaks in any 
way 
about sovereignty. What the provision says is that the 
constitution of Natal shall provide a place for the Zulu 
monarch. That will be left to the legislature, and it will be 
left to the mediation process to resolve precisely in what form 
and to what extent the matter is dealt with. But I think that 
nonetheless it is important that the provision has led to 
similar space being made in other provinces where there may be a 
monarch. 
  [Bishop] Now back to you, Dr. Ngubane. Now the Zulu 
supporters, the supporters indeed, not just Zulu, of the IFP. 
Are they going to get the message quickly that you are on board 
now? 
  [Ngubane] Well, we've been very much primed for elections 
all 
along. We have an election campaign which has been working 
incessantly. We never opposed election as a matter of just 
opposing it. We wanted to have a dispensation that we could 
live with, that could have meaning to the lives of our people, 
and that has been achieved, and we are ready to go. 
  [Bishop] But when you say ready to go, I mean, only a week 
ago you were saying no go, and I suppose that message got 
through -- all over the place where there are IFP supporters. 
Now you will have to say go, go, go. 
  [Ngubane] Well, our people are highly motivated, highly 
politicized, and they will respond accordingly. 
  [Maharaj] I do think that the public have been faced with 
confused signals coming from the Inkatha Freedom Party, and 
perhaps I would ascribe that to poor tactics and strategy, 
because it is very important that while politicians are seen to 
be people who make glib promises, it is very important as people 
who have fought for freedom that our promises should be real and 
should be consistent. And I believe that that's a crucial 
element in winning voter support. 
  [Bishop] Dr. Ngubane, would you comment there? 
  [Ngubane] Well, I mean, Mac is (?skirting) the whole ball 
game here. He was one of the people who made it impossible for 
us to be part of the process from the word go by the 
intransigence that they adopted in the negotiating process. 
Thank God that sense has prevailed at last. So, we have never 
promised anything that was not attainable. What we wanted was a 
federal dispensation for this country which the negotiation 
process was quite capable of addressing, but it was stopped from 
doing so. 
  [Bishop] Alright, let's move on now, if we may, to violence. 
The whole country, I suppose, is screaming out: Let's stop it, 
stop it, stop it! What steps are both parties, the ANC and the 
IFP taking, like really, to go and stop this now? 
  [Ngubane] Well, the agreement states very clearly that it is 
an agreement for reconciliation and peace in South Africa, and 
all the signatories commit themselves, pledge themselves to work 
for peaceful and free elections. So it is going to have to be a 
truly combined effort. No one party can do it on its own. 
  [Bishop] The mass action now? Inkatha youth, are they going 
to march or not? 
  [Ngubane] Well, the cause for mass action is removed, as far 
as we are concerned? 
  [Bishop] Will the message get through? 
  [Ngubane] Well, it is getting through right now because 
there 
was no mass action yesterday, today, and tomorrow, so the 
message is getting through. 
  [Bishop] Another question for you at the moment, Dr. 
Ngubane... 
  [Maharaj, interrupting] I think that on the question of 
violence the country has certainly gone past the point where the 
threat of violence to the electoral process, which was perceived 
at one time as a very serious and formidable threat, has now 
been reduced, in my estimate by about 75 percent from what it 
was two months ago. The events which brought Bophuthatswana 
fully -- the people of Bophuthatswana into the electoral 
process, the break up of the white right, as well as the coming 
in of the IFP, have reduced that potential for violence 
immensely, and I believe that if we work at it with a will -- 
all parties -- we can, certainly shortly after the elections, 
through national unity establish peace in our country. 
  [Bishop] Right, one more for you before I move on a little 
bit, Dr. Ngubane. The imbizo [meeting], gathering of Zulus 
called by His Majesty the king, will it go ahead? 
  [Ngubane] Well, I don't know yet, but His Majesty has called 
the imbizo to mark a sad moment in our history, where we were 
being stripped of our identity and our possessions and so on -- 
now, I don't know whether that precise condition still exists or 
not. 
  [Maharaj] My understanding of the matter is slightly 
different. We did consult His Majesty in the course of the 
negotiations, and he indicated that the press reports were not 
within his knowledge, that he would be looking into the matter, 
and certainly he has issued a statement now calling upon his 
subjects to participate in the elections. So I believe that 
now, since it was called according to press reports for the 
26th, 27th, 28th, that matter will no longer intrude on the 
electoral process and the elections will go on. 
  [Bishop] Well, let's stay with King Zwelithini. Dr. Ngubane, 
what is his status now? 
  [Ngubane] Well, he is recognized as the constitutional 
monarch in terms of our present kwaZulu constitution. He has a 
function in the Legislative Assembly, he is the head of the 
whole indigenous law system, he is the head of the amakhosi 
[chiefs], and he occupies a position of unity in terms of our 
nation. 
  [Bishop] And the obvious next one, Chief Buthelezi, what's 
his position? 
  [Ngubane] Well, he is the traditional prime minister to the 
king, but he is also the elected head of government of kwaZulu. 
  [Bishop] There has been a news rumor--let's put it no more 
than that--for the last couple of weeks, that Chief Buthelezi 
was offered even a deputy presidency, a cabinet position, even 
if the IFP did not score well at the polls. True or false? 
  [Ngubane] No, I have not heard of such an offer. I think Dr. 
Buthelezi is a democrat. He will work hard to lead out party to 
victory so that they will be no offers, but he will get what is 
his due in terms of the constitutional provisions. 
  [Bishop] Mr. Maharaj? 
  [Maharaj] Certainly no such offer has been made from our 
side. What we have consistently said is, and in promoting the 
idea of a government of national unity, is that on the basis of 
the electoral results, we will do everything to accord all the 
parties a proper place in that government. We believe that the 
next five years centrally require a trust of national unity. We 
are coming from a conflict ridden, hate ridden society, and we 
have an immense job of reconstruction, so we made no such offer, 
except to say that each party believes it is important, has 
immense electoral support. The elections will test that, and on 
the basis of that test each will be accorded a proper place in 
that government of national unity. 
  [Bishop] That means what? 
  [Maharaj] It means if any party wins five percent of seats 
in 
the National Assembly, it qualifies for one seat in the cabinet, 
and in proportion to the higher percentage of number of seats it 
has in the assembly, it will get the requisite seats in the 
cabinet. So that if a party won 60 percent of the seats, it 
will have 60 percent of the cabinet. 
  [Bishop] Mr. Van der Ross, I know you are not going to 
engage, obviously, in the political discourse, but there are 
some more questions for you, very quickly. One concerns the 
safety of your monitors and their ability to get to places. How 
confident are you that this can happen, I don't think in 
particular in Natal/kwaZulu, of course? 
  [Van der Ross] Well, we are certainly looking to the kwaZulu 
authorities to provide both the message and the cover for the 
climate for our people to be able to move freely through the 
territory. If we are to set up machinery we need to, within a 
very short space of time, a few days, if we are to move in with 
massive voter education programs which we are planning, we can 
only do that with complete cooperation from the authorities. 
But we are pretty certain that it is obviously in the interests 
of Inkatha, and through that possibly the kwaZulu Legislative 
Assembly, to give that kind of assistance, and I am sure we will 
get it. 
  [Bishop] They will, Dr. Ngubane? They'll get this support? 
  [Ngubane] They certainly will. We've always pledged support 
for the IEC. 
  [Bishop] What's the situation about the state of emergency, 
or partial state of emergency, the National Peacekeeping Force? 
Couple of questions there in one? What's going to be the 
attitude now? 
  [Ngubane] We have not really addressed that issue. We do 
accept that it's anachronistic to say you're going to have free 
and fair elections while you have a state of emergency. We have 
stated that position. But nevertheless we need to maintain the 
highest levels of law and order and peace during the election 
process. 
  [Bishop] There might be loose canons there outside your 
control. 
  [Ngubane] That's what forces of law and order are there for. 
That is a job really for the security forces. 
  [Bishop] And the National Peacekeeping Force -- is it going 
to be recognized as for what it has been set up there -- to 
maintain peace as a national force? 
  [Ngubane] We've had problems with the constitution of the 
National Peacekeeping Force because it's taken in what I would 
call party-political people and pretended to turn them into a 
national peacekeeping force which will be above prejudice and 
impartial. We doubt that people who have been trained as 
political guerrilla forces can perform such a function. 
  [Maharaj] Let me say this about the state of emergency. It 
was imposed because of the violence and the loss of life. If 
that continues, I believe that this agreement will contribute 
substantially to reducing that violence. But the violence is 
totally unacceptable. Yesterday the death of a leading 
photographer, Ken Oosterbroek, threw South Africa into a shock. 
Any more deaths are unacceptable. So the state of emergency 
has been motivated by that need, and at present, while the 
agreement holds promise, the reality is that the violence is 
ravaging that province, and we need to maintain it in such a way 
that free political activity can take place actively. 
  [Bishop] Thank you very much. Just a reminder that, of 
course we've been talking to Mac Maharaj, Dr. Ben Ngubane, Mr. 
Van der Ross; and we did approach the National Party, 
unfortunately they've have an extremely busy political day and 
we could not get anybody here at this time. That is the reason 
why we don't see the National Party sitting with our other 
guests. 

