Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Thai-Cambodian `Caravan for Friendship' was 
turned back by Cambodian officials yesterday shortly after it 
was allowed to enter Cambodia, and the tour was eventually 
cancelled. 
  The caravan began moving into Cambodia at 1 p.m. after a 
day's delay caused by Cambodian officials refusing to let the 
caravan enter the country. The delay caused 11 cars to pull out 
of the tour to Angkor Wat. But when the caravan of 61 cars 
carrying 191 passengers arrived at a roadblock on Highway 5 
about four kilometers from the border, it was stopped by 
Cambodian officials who told all the Thai motorists to remove 
the Thai-Cambodian Caravan for Friendship stickers from their 
cars. 
  Cambodian officials, who offered no explanation, refused to 
let the caravan go further. The disappointed participants 
delegated representatives to file complaints with the district 
police against the organizer of the trip, Mrs. Prakaimat Wiara 
of the Goodtimes Entertainment Company. 
  Cambodian government forces were yesterday engaged in a 
fierce artillery and mortar duel with Khmer Rouge guerrillas 
near the Thai border yesterday. Thai military sources said the 
fighting, which lasted about four hours, caused Thai villagers 
living in Ban Khok Sabaeng to take cover in bunkers. Stray 
shells overshot and landed in uninhabited Thai territory. None 
of the Ban Khok Sabaeng villagers was injured. It was the most 
intense fighting since a lull began late last month, sources 
said. 
  Border patrol police sources said about 40 Khmer villagers, 
mostly children, fled into Thailand. Three were wounded and had 
to be taken to the district hospital. One of the three, Mrs. 
Pol Li, 29, said that before the artillery duel took place, a 
group of about 30 armed bandits believed to be Khmer Rouge 
surrounded their village and ransacked 15 houses. They later 
clashed with Cambodian government police at the village. A 
policeman and a civilian were killed in the clashes, Mrs. Pol Li 
said. A woman is missing and is believed killed. 

