Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Mute Dialogue With Syria"] </F>
  [Text] The Palestinian organization of The Battalion of 13 
Black September fired a katyusha at the Western Galilee on 16 
February to demonstrate its opposition to the Oslo and 
Washington agreements. The prime minister described it as a 
"marginal" organization; the commander of the Northern Command 
said it was an "isolated" katyusha. 
  General Yitzhaq Mordekhay did not promise that such shooting 
will not be repeated, and the fact that it is marginal does not 
make the organization less threatening. The two reactions, 
however, indicated there is an Israeli desire to distinguish 
between Hizballah and other terror organizations. Rabin 
determined that the understandings between Israel and Syria 
which followed Operation Accountability remained intact even 
after this shooting: "Our understandings, which referred to 
Hizballah activity, are being observed." As for the Palestinian 
battalion, "the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] will find ways of 
dealing with it." 
  The prime minister, therefore, rejected the opposition's 
demands and refused to charge the Syrians with responsibility 
for the katyusha which fell in Israeli territory. It could be 
detected from the prime minister's restrained reaction to the 
Hizballah ambush which left us with four fatalities that Rabin 
is making an effort not to disturb the atmosphere in which the 
bilateral talks are being held in Washington. In fact, he no 
longer holds Damascus responsible for terror acts in which 
Hizballah is not involved, and gives Syria credit for keeping 
the agreement which was made at the end of July 1993 with U.S. 
mediation. 
  It could be assumed that Hafiz al-Asad understands Rabin's 
intentions. His willingness to accept a delegation of 
condolences of Israeli Arabs -- Muslims, Christians, and Druze 
-- can be viewed as a gesture to Israel. The fact that the 
agreement came in the wake of U.S. and Egyptian encouragement 
does not diminish its importance: It can be viewed as answering 
a wish Rabin expressed some two weeks ago: that Syria take 
confidence building measures between the two countries. If the 
Prime Minister's Office did say that the Syrian approval of the 
delegation's visit could be considered "an important signal from 
the Syrian president," it could become apparent that a sort of 
mute dialogue is taking place between Rabin and al-Asad. 
  There may be some in Israel who will regard the affair of 
the 
delegation as a Syrian trick: al-Asad attempting to set up a 
pro- Syrian lobby in Israel. This idea should not be 
disregarded, but -- even if we assume this suspicious attitude 
has grounds -- did we not always say that the Israeli Arab 
citizens could serve as a "bridge" between the Jewish state, the 
neighboring Arab countries, and the entire Arab world? 
  There is no need to overdramatize the delegation's trip. 
Knesset Member Darawshah will not be authorized to hold 
negotiations with the Syrian president who on his part, through 
the media subordinate to him, will stress that the visit is only 
held to allow the visitors to perform the rite of extending 
condolences -- nothing more. Nevertheless, it is significant 
that the Syrian president will receive the condolences of 
Israel's Arabs in a manner similar to that which Jordan's King 
Husayn has been maintaining for years. 
  The "ongoing" talks in Washington -- and the Americans have 
not yet started talking about the 13th round of talks -- are 
still stuck; the Syrian delegate keeps making peace conditional 
on Israel's full withdrawal from the Golan Heights. This, 
however, is no reason to stop talking to him. As long as Syria 
is interested in holding the negotiations, Israel should keep 
them up as well. 

