Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Wang Qingxian (3769 3237 2009): </F>
"Shock of Modern Enterprise System--Survey and Thoughts on 
Transformation of Enterprise Shareholding System in China (Part 
Two and Last Part)"] 
  [Text] The period of experience in practice of the 
shareholding system has been a very short one. The shareholding 
system has invigorated our enterprises and boosted enterprise 
reform. Nevertheless, the most valuable thing of the short 
practice of establishing a modern enterprise system lies in the 
significance of the issues raised and settled in modifying the 
enterprise system and accelerating the pace of the establishment 
of a modern enterprise system rather than the achievements 
already attained. 
<H3>  The Sense of Reform of the Government Departments Is Not 
Enough for Establishing a Modern Enterprise System. At The Time 
When Enterprise Reform Has Entered a Stage of Blazing New 
Trails, the Pressing Task at the Moment Is To Upgrade Knowledge 
of Administrators and Comprehensively Improve Managerial 
Qualities of the Government. </H3>
  When an enterprise has undergone the transformation of a 
shareholding system, its decisionmaking powers will be properly 
implemented. However, this does not mean that relations between 
the enterprise and the government are brought to a proper 
balance. As regards the government, management over a 
shareholding enterprise is a brand new topic. The 
organizational form of a modern shareholding enterprise has 
unique operation means and a full set of well- organized and 
standard operational systems. If the excessive interference of 
the administrative departments in enterprises under the 
traditional system was mainly due to ambiguous relations of 
property rights, the contradictions between government 
departments and state enterprises after undergoing the 
transformation of the shareholding system should be attributed 
to the government, which is unfamiliar with operational rules 
under the shareholding system and with its management over the 
shareholding enterprises, and which has stuck to the traditional 
means of enterprise management. 
  A shareholding enterprise has no higher level authority. It 
is responsible only to the shareholders and to law. Over the 
years, however, the views of the higher levels are necessary in 
almost all affairs. After converting to shareholding, the forms 
of various departments remain unchanged and so do the "views of 
the competent department." Unless this is changed, 
administrative departments cannot rest assured and "dare not" 
approve any project. In order to remove this troubled 
procedure, a number of shareholding enterprises had to find 
"influential persons" or temporarily "hire one." In order to 
resolve such a problem, a shareholding enterprise in Shanxi 
submitted a report to the government, asking for approval to 
become an "enterprise without higher level leadership." 
Question: Haven't you already become an enterprise without a 
higher level? Answer: We just need a letter of approval. Some 
departments do not know what a shareholding company is even when 
you give them explanations. They only believe in letters of 
approval. 
  A shareholding company, particularly a listed one, has a 
strict financial system. A registered accountant's office gives 
an account of its operation, income, expenditure, and structure 
of shares to the public every half a year. Any information 
about the enterprise may affect shareholders' investment 
decisions on the enterprise and result in price fluctuations of 
its shares in the stock market. For this reason, information 
related to the enterprise operation cannot be disclosed at will, 
which may result in unfairness. However, the finance of a 
listed shareholding company in the south was audited by relevant 
departments on more than five occasions in the first half of 
1993. Some people asked jokingly: Who knows whether there are 
stock speculators among the administrative inspectors? Similar 
departments concerned asked the shareholding enterprises for the 
following operational figures: Rate of capital and delivery of 
profits and taxes, use of working capital, costs, and profits 
and losses. Such a practice did not cause any problem in the 
past. If a shareholding enterprise spreads such information at 
will, it will constitute a serious violation of the principle 
governing information of the company. Those who need 
information do not care about this: Why are the shareholding 
enterprises so uncooperative? Let us wait and see. You will 
come and ask us for help in the long run. 
  The findings of a joint survey by the State Commission for 
Reform of the Economy, State Securities Commission, and State 
Commission for Economy and Trade pointed out that an increasing 
number of laws, rules, and regulations have been promulgated by 
various localities and departments to restrain listed companies, 
some of which contradict with each other. Without an 
understanding of the "Opinions on Standardization of the 
Shareholding Enterprises," some localities still try to decide 
the level of enterprises, namely, the so-called "office level 
enterprises" or "departmental and bureau level enterprises." As 
a result, the board of directors have to consider the rank and 
level while employing managers. The director representing the 
state stake sent by the locality to a shareholding company only 
attends meetings but does not care about routine work. Hence, 
he knows nothing about the company's operation. When a meeting 
of shareholders is held, another person is sent to cast a vote. 
Some localities send a number of people who represent the state 
stake. As each expresses his own views, they cannot reach 
consensus on major issues. Similar stories are common in 
shareholding enterprises. These contradictions cannot be 
summarized by the implementation of enterprise decisionmaking 
powers. These are problems related to the shareholding system 
which government departments should understand, the operational 
rules of the shareholding system which they should be familiar 
with, the rights and interests of the shareholding enterprises 
which they should respect, and management and operation of the 
shareholding enterprises which they should upgrade. This shows 
that in establishing a modern enterprise system, government 
departments should emancipate their minds, upgrade their 
knowledge, and dare to be and be good at assimilating the 
advanced managerial experience of developed nations. The Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee pointed out 
that the central task of enterprise reform is to establish a 
modern enterprise system, which involves many new concepts, 
terms, and expositions. Practically, it will be expressed in 
new operational methods and means of enterprise management. The 
transformation of the shareholding system has posed a series of 
problems in this regard. 
<H3>  The Establishment of a Contingent of Enterprise Managers Is 
Urgently Required for Establishing a Modern Enterprise System. 
We Should Intentionally Adopt Institutional Measures To Promote 
the Growth of This Contingent. </H3>
  In Shenzhen, a listed company which issued B shares told the 
survey team: Even the issue of B shares produced a negative 
effect. The views of foreign businessmen are different from 
those of ours on investment in real estate. We are optimistic 
about the real estate market, which was active in the first half 
of this year. However, the shareholders of B shares said that 
the risks in real estate was too big. They were against 
enterprise investment in real estate and blamed us for deviating 
from the investment orientation as stated in the new stock 
subscription brochure. As a matter of fact, the investors are 
most concerned about their returns. When a company is making 
profits, why is it necessary to meddle in its affairs? 
  At present the investment orientation of a number of 
shareholding enterprises runs counter to the new share 
subscription brochure, diverting the funds to trades other than 
the main one. According to statistics, at least 30 percent of 
the capital of the listed companies is not invested in the 
projects listed in the subscription brochure. In some 
localities, the figure goes as high as 70 percent and investment 
is made in a blind manner. These companies willfully change the 
purpose of the funds pooled because they are pressed by the 
shareholders for high returns and have invested their funds in 
profitable trades. In addition, it indicates that the managers 
of the listed companies do not respect the public investors and 
do not have a strong sense of law. The complaints about the 
shareholders of B shares prove this problem. The public is 
willing to make investment because they are optimistic about 
your enterprise. These people prefer low returns to high risks. 
Otherwise, they would have simply bought shares of the real 
estate companies. Domestic investors, particularly individuals, 
have become mature, and they have an increasingly higher demand 
for quality in managers of shareholding enterprises. 
  Following the transformation of the state-owned shareholding 
enterprises, the state can only control state assets by sending 
directors to participate in the making of policy decisions. 
What kind of people should then be sent to represent the state 
to perform such a task, ensure the legitimate rights of the 
state stake, and ensure incremental increases of the state's 
equity? A problem has cropped up: Because of a lack of special 
personnel who are good at operations and management, cadres who 
are not experienced in management are sent to symbolically 
represent the state's management over the enterprise. After 
all, there is a great difference in intellectual structure and 
qualities between cadres and enterprise managerial personnel. 
Because of the large numbers of shareholding enterprises in 
Shenzhen, some heads of the state assets management companies 
are directors of two companies. As a result, it is difficult to 
maintain the rights and interests of the state stake. 
  One of the marked and essential characteristics of the 
shareholding and modern enterprise system is its distinct 
property rights: Ownership by those offering capital is 
separated from the property right of the corporation. In other 
words, enterprise owners will not necessarily be the specific 
operators of enterprises and have a direct control over 
operation of the property. Instead, a person good at operations 
and management will be assigned in a certain form to exercise 
management. The modern enterprise system constitutes a 
transformation of the whole of China's enterprise system. It is 
the direction of reform for all kinds of enterprises, including 
state enterprises. Hence, we badly need large numbers of 
qualified personnel. 
  The formation of the contingent of enterprise managers 
depend 
on the following factors: First, property rights of enterprises 
must be clear and enterprises should carry out operation 
independently; second, incomes of managers should be relatively 
high so their value is expressed through their incomes; third, 
there must be an institutional and legal guarantee (including 
rights and responsibilities) to ensure that their value is 
recognized socially. 
  Of the enterprises surveyed by the three commissions, most 
enterprise managers made a common call: Increase the incomes of 
managers of shareholding companies and embody the principle of 
distribution based on efficiency. An assistant manager of the 
Shenzhen Property Development Shareholding Company Limited said: 
We are managers employed by a shareholding company, but our 
wages are still based on the standards for state cadres. We 
received the same wages although the the company's profits 
increased from 70 million to 300 million yuan. As the 
shareholders want high returns, the managers are bearing great 
psychological pressure, operational responsibility, and risks. 
If the shareholders do not consider returns of the managers, 
how can they boost the enthusiasm of the managers? Who will 
then be willing to be entrepreneurs of shareholding enterprises? 
Such a distribution system, which is unfair, neglects the labor 
value of the managers. If such practice continues, it will be 
impossible for entrepreneurs to become a competitive contingent, 
which assembles people with wisdom from society and allows the 
best to survive. 
  In defining property rights, we have started doing some work 
and made specific arrangements. The transformation of the 
shareholding system has enabled us to make a relatively 
successful attempt. In terms of distribution and honor, it is 
also a pressing task to tackle the problem of offering a system 
and legal environment for the growth of managers. 
<H3>  The Establishment of a Modern Enterprise System Is an 
Extremely Arduous and Complicated Project, Which Covers a Wide 
Range Far Exceeding Enterprise Reform. We Must Study the 
Problems Which We Cannot Avoid and Will Have To Face Sooner or 
Later. </H3>

  While operating in light of standard rules, the shareholding 
enterprises have encountered a difficult problem: How to 
properly handle relations between the "three old organizations" 
(party committee, trade union, and workers' congress) and the 
"three new ones" (board of directors, supervisory commission, 
and shareholders' committee). According to the rules of the 
shareholding system, the shareholders' committee is the highest 
organ of power of an enterprise. The board of directors is a 
standing committee which exercises power on behalf of the 
shareholders' committee and is responsible for making major 
policy decisions for the enterprise and employing senior 
managerial personnel. The supervisory commission exercises 
supervision over the board of directors, its members, and other 
managerial personnel. 
  The question in this regard is: How should party leadership 
be manifested in shareholding enterprises, which should also 
conform to the standard of operation of these enterprises? How 
should the role of the vital force of the workers be brought 
into full play in reform and development, and how should this 
converge and coordinate with the new shareholding system? These 
are problems which remain to be experienced and explored. 

