Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] The Portuguese press recently reported 
on Admiral Antonio Carlos Fuzeta da Ponte, said to be the 
strongest contender for the position of Armed Forces chief of 
staff that is being vacated by retiring General Soares Carneiro. 
  According to the 3 February Lisbon weekly VISAO, Fuzeta da 
Ponte, 59, was born in Setubal in a family of lawyers. Breaking 
with family tradition, he entered the Naval Academy after 
attending Lisbon University's Faculty of Science. Acquaintances 
note his "fighting spirit and clear perception of how to get 
ahead." While his former Academy classmates consider him "highly 
intelligent," they also affirm that behind his "irreverence" he 
hides "ambition, a thirst for notoriety, and personal vanity." 
He was graduated second in a class noted for its brilliance. His 
arduous work did not hinder him from loving fun and playing the 
latest tunes on the piano after a three-year stint at the 
Conservatory. VISAO quotes former Minister Correia Jesuino as 
saying that "it was impossible to be sad in the presence of this 
jovial and exuberant extrovert with a good sense of humor." 
Along with music, swimming, and sailing were his favorite 
hobbies. The admiral is known to be "charming" and "loquacious." 
Those close to him, the weekly continues, maintain he has a 
strong personality and temperament. He is also "impulsive" and 
"can easily make enemies." According to fellow Adm. Sousa 
Cerejeiro, he is also demanding, both of himself and others. 
  Fuzeta da Ponte, the weekly continues, is considered 
"unique" 
in the Navy, for he became its chief without ever having 
commanded a ship. A specialist in electronics, he spent five 
years in Africa during the colonial war at the Hydrographic 
Mission in Angola and Sao Tome. From October 1989 to February 
1991, he was head of the National Military Mission to NATO. 
Promoted to the rank of admiral in 1991, he was appointed chief 
of the Navy General Staff. Sousa Cerejeiro is cited as saying 
that the absence of ship command experience stems from the fact 
that not all admirals can have a turn at commanding a ship, 
given the fleet's limited size, and is not due to lack of 
aptitude. 
  VISAO also reports that Fuzeta da Ponte is married to an 
Englishwoman, Mary Jane. They have a son, a daughter, and two 
grandchildren. 
  Fuzeta da Ponte's probable appointment as chief of staff may 
be jeopardized by a 28 May 1975 video cassette, reports Isaias 
Gomes Teixeira in the 4 February Lisbon weekly O INDEPENDENTE. 
The cassette shows an interview with Fuzeta da Ponte, then civil 
governor of Setubal, "one of the country's most leftist 
districts," after a meeting between Armed Forces officials, 
"representatives of the people" and the admiral, Gomes Teixeira 
writes. In the interview, Fuzeta da Ponte defined "capitalism" 
and "international imperialism" as the "enemies of the April 
Revolution." He is also quoted as saying in the interview that a 
strategy was needed to defeat the "enemy's attack." In this 
strategy, he said, "Setubal has a lot to say about the progress 
of the Revolution." While Teixeira considers the admiral 
"competent, dynamic, a good strategist, and experienced in 
international affairs," he also reports that in the opinion of 
certain military and political sectors Fuzeta da Ponte lacks the 
necessary qualities to become Armed Forces chief of staff. These 
sectors are quoted by Gomes Teixeira as saying that "to be a 
leader one has to be respected: Fuzeta is not." 
  Finally, Gomes Teixeira charges that the admiral, suspected 
of having been too close to Portugal's dictatorship in the 
sixties, gradually modified his convictions as the Revolution 
seemed to make gains during his term as Setubal governor. 
"Perhaps this is why the admiral's official curriculum did not 
mention his governorship when handed to the press," Gomes 
Teixeira notes. 

