Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] The AFP news service issued a 
report from Hong Kong on 10 December stating that Major General 
Thanat Phakpadiphat, a 55-year-old officer assigned to Supreme 
Command, appeared at the Hong Kong court last Thursday while 
awaiting extradition to the United States on charges of having 
smuggled $4 million worth of narcotics. He will have to wait 
until 4 February 1994, because it will take American officials 
that long to prepare the extradition documents. For the time 
being, Maj. Gen. Thanat will remain in the custody of the Hong 
Kong court. 
  Maj. Gen. Thanat was arrested at the Hong Kong airport last 
Wednesday. U.S. DEA officials, with the cooperation of U.S. 
consular officials in Hong Kong, informed Hong Kong police that 
he was going to travel to Hong Kong in order to pick up $20,000, 
his share of the money. 
  As for Maj. Gen. Thanat's background, he was promoted to 
major general in 1993. He spent his career working for Supreme 
Command before being appointed assistant director of the 
Directorate of Joint Communications, Supreme Command. He 
attended the Chulachomklao Royal Military Academy [CRMA] as a 
member of Class 9. Other members of this class include General 
Mongkhon Amphonphisit, the deputy chief of staff officers, 
Lieutenant General Anuson Kritsanaserani, the director of the 
Information Office, Supreme Command, and Lieutenant General 
Chettha Thanacharo, the 1st Army Region commander. 
  He was once dismissed from government service for being 
involved in the April Hawai rebellion in 1981. That was during 
the period when he served as an aide to General San Chitpatima, 
the head of the Revolutionary Council. But later on, he was 
reinstated in the military. [passage omitted] 
  On the morning of 10 December at the Sirikit National 
Conference Center, Mr. Chuan Likphai, the prime minister, said 
that the case involving Maj. Gen. Thanat must be handled based 
on the facts and in accord with the law. A reporter asked if 
officials will request that Maj. Gen. Thanat be returned to 
Thailand so that the case can be handled here. The prime 
minister said that the facts must be reviewed first. 
  Mr. Chamni Sakdiset, the deputy minister of interior, said 
that heroin trafficking is an individual offense. Even if the 
person is a soldier, that has nothing to do with the military. 
If he is guilty, action must be taken against him. We must allow 
those who arrested him to handle the case. We could handle the 
case, but the country that prosecutes this case must give its 
reasons and state what evidence it has. 
  Mr. Samak Sunthorawet, the leader of the Thai Citizen Party, 
said that narcotics trafficking is a very serious charge. Thus, 
those concerned should explain things. They may claim that this 
is a personal matter, but this will undoubtedly affect the 
institution to some extent. He said that the military will 
probably conclude this matter very quickly. And if no other unit 
is implicated, this won't affect anything. We must wait until 
the accused makes his statement. 
  Mr. Surin Phitsuwan, the deputy minister of foreign affairs, 
said that he just read about the arrest of a general on 
narcotics trafficking charges. The government has clearly stated 
its policy on this. The government has a clear policy on 
suppressing narcotics and will resolutely support international 
narcotics suppression organizations. The U.S. DEA has frequently 
requested the cooperation of the Thai Government. He was asked, 
In view of the fact that a high-ranking officer has been 
implicated, what can the Thai Government do to put a good face 
on this? The deputy foreign minister said that we must question 
his superiors. But this was the act of an individual. You can't 
blame the military. There are evil people in all organizations. 
If he is guilty, he must be punished in accord with the law. 
  Police General Praman Adireksan, the leader of the 
opposition, said that as a former soldier, when he learned that 
a Thai general had been arrested on narcotics trafficking 
charges, he felt very distressed, because this will tarnish the 
Army's image. 

