Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren and Chip Tsao] </F>
  [Text] President Jiang Zemin of China has stepped in to 
try to settle the prolonged row between Britain and China on the 
financing of the new airport in Hong Kong. In a hitherto 
undisclosed move, Jiang recently sent an emmissary, Li Chuwen, 
to the territory to conduct substantial on-the-spot research on 
the Hong Kong government's latest funding proposal for the 
multi-billion dollar new airport at Chek Lap Kok. 
  Li, a former priest before the Communist takeover of 
Shanghai 
in 1949 and former deputy director in Hong Kong of the New China 
News Agency (XINHUA), has just returned to Shanghai after a 
week-long secret visit to Hong Kong. Currently serving as 
director of the Shanghai municipality government's foreign 
affairs office, Li was personally chosen by Jiang to undertake 
the mission in Hong Kong. 
  During Li's stay last week, several informal meetings were 
arranged for him and Hong Kong government officials in charge of 
the new airport project. These meetings were said to have been 
held in a very relaxed and informal atmosphere, where government 
officials outlined details of the fourth airport funding 
proposal. Li also met a number of pro-China figures, party 
leaders and business representatives during his visit. 
  A Chinese official in Beijing declined to disclose the list 
of people Li met. He did say the purpose of Li's visit was to 
find out "professional views" over the fourth airport funding 
plan. China has so far not responded formally through the Joint 
Liaison Group (JLG). "In a word, the Chinese central government 
wanted to know whether or not, the latest proposal was 
acceptable," the Chinese official said. 
  It is understood that most of the people Li met last week 
urged the Chinese government to get on with the project as 
quickly as possible since the new funding plan has addressed 
China's main concerns. "We told Li that it was time an 
agreement was reached by both sides," a source who met Li said. 
"It is better than no agreement at all since that will enable 
the Hong Kong government to gain financial approval from the 
Legislative Council without check and balances by Beijing." 
  Some people proposed to Li that China should urge the Hong 
Kong government to inject more equity into the core airport 
projects, as China viewed the Provisional Airport Authority's 
and the Mass Transit Railway Corporation's $23bn [billion] in 
borrowings as government debt. This is more than four times the 
borrowing limit set out in the Sino-British Memorandum of 
Understanding on the airport. 
  The fourth proposal was passed to China through the JLG 
early 
this month. China was also briefed by Hong Kong government 
officials last week. Under the proposal, the Government will 
inject a total of about $60.3bn into the project, the amount 
China demanded last year. 

