Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Mu Yajun (4476 0068 6511) and Correspondent </F>
Zhong He (6988 7729): "Clearly Understand the Situation, 
Reinforce Confidence, Severely Punish the Corrupt, and Blaze New 
Trials"] 
  [Text] In his important speech made on the afternoon of 8 
January at the meeting of teachers and students of institutions 
of higher learning in Hohhot, Wang Qun, secretary of the 
regional party committee, stressed the need to correctly 
understand the current situation and the development prospects 
of the region, further strengthen lofty faith in building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, launching the 
anticorruption campaign in a penetrating and sustained manner, 
continuously deepening the reform of educational structure, and 
mobilizing people of all nationalities in the region to enhance 
morale, pioneer the road of advance, and struggle to build a 
united, prosperous, and civilized Inner Mongolia. 
  Wang Zhan, deputy secretary of the regional party committee, 
presided over the meeting. Qian Fenyong, Wuyunqimuge, and Zhao 
Zhihong attended the meeting. Over 1,300 persons from 13 
institutions of higher learning in Hohhot participated. 
  Wang Qun pointed out: The 15 years since the commencement of 
reform and opening up is a period characterized by large-scale 
reform and large-scale development and is a period in which the 
economy and society has developed most rapidly and the masses of 
all nationalities in urban and rural areas have obtained most 
practical benefits in comparison to any other period in the 
region's history. Major indicators are: The region's national 
economy has embarked on a completely new period of development; 
overall economic strength has been enhanced obviously; 
agriculture and animal husbandry has continued to develop 
rapidly; overall production capacity has embarked on a new 
stage; industrial production has increased in a steady and 
sustained manner; the non-state-owned economy, and township and 
town enterprises in particular, has witnessed high-speed growth 
trends; the scale of opening to the outside world has been 
expanding; the export-oriented economy has witnessed 
breakthroughs; education, science, technology, and public health 
undertakings have developed vigorously; income of urban and 
rural residents has doubled and redoubled; people's living 
standards have improved clearly; various difficulties and 
problems occurring in the process of reform and development have 
gradually been solved; and the overall index of social and 
economic development ranks 15th in the country. The increased 
speed in the fixed assets investment, the fact that some newly 
built coal, power, and chemical industrial projects will soon be 
put into production, the renovation through "grafting" of 
state-owned enterprises, and the overall development of township 
and town enterprises as well as the non-publicly owned economy 
will certainly play a positive and promoting role in 
accelerating the region's economic development. So long as the 
people of all nationalities in the region firmly seize the 
opportunity provided by the opening up of the border areas and 
by the westward shifting of the state economic development 
strategy, and so long as we aim at the goal of building a 
socialist market economic system and work hard with one heart 
and one mind, the advantages in our region's natural resources, 
geological relations, and policies will be brought into full 
play, our economy will develop even more rapidly, and the gaps 
between our region and the developed areas will be narrowed 
gradually. Comrade Wang Qun also made specific analysis and 
explanations of the issue of the gaps between the region and 
other places and the issue of financial and tax reform, unpaid 
wages in some areas, and pricing reform. He also set forth some 
measures and demands for solving these problems. 
  On ways to strengthen confidence in socialism, Wang Qun 
pointed out: In contemporary China, only Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics can solve 
problems related to the future and destiny of socialism. We 
should profoundly study Volume 3 of the Selected Works of 
Deng Xiaoping, persist in the party's basic line of "one 
central task and two basic points" without wavering for 100 
years, and further strengthen the lofty faith in building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. All comrades, 
particularly the young generation that strides from this century 
to the next, should make due contribution to the socialist 
modernization drive that has a bearing on the future and destiny 
of China. 
  Wang Qun said: Anticorruption is a hot social issue on which 
the masses have expressed strong comments. Whether we can 
firmly and unswervingly persist in and achieve obvious results 
in the anticorruption campaign is not only a question with which 
the masses are much concerned and worried but also a major event 
that has a bearing on the success or failure in reform and on 
the destiny of the country. We should realistically appraise 
the corruption in the party's present situation. We should not 
only see the basic fact that the main trend of our party is 
good, most party members and cadres are honest and clean in 
performing official duties, and corrupt elements within the 
party comprise only a very small part. We should also fully 
understand the importance and harmfulness of the corrupt 
phenomenon within the party and actually carry out the struggle 
against corruption in a resolute and unremitting way by 
regarding it as a strategic task. Before the Spring Festival, 
we should accelerate the pace of handling cases and make public 
a number of appalling and major cases to inspire the people and 
to warn others against following bad examples, on the basis of 
extensively launching the education on opposing corruption and 
advocating administrative honesty and consolidating and 
developing the results achieved at the present stage. At the 
same time, we should guard against the plot hatched by hostile 
forces at home and abroad, of intentionally defaming communist 
party and socialism. 
  Wang Qun pointed out: Education is of fundamental importance 
to the fulfillment of our great long-range mission. Party 
committees and governments at all levels should list education 
as a strategic emphasis of economic and social development and 
give rise to a fine situation in which the whole party pays 
attention to education and the whole society runs education. 
Under the current situation characterized by financial 
shortage, we should actually ensure the development of education 
on a priority basis and truly do good things and run tangible 
things for developing educational undertakings. We should exert 
great efforts in tackling difficulties and problems that emerge 
in developing education and make great efforts to improve and 
enhance teachers' working conditions and remunerations to 
stabilize the ranks of teachers. We should constantly deepen 
the educational structure reform, boldly explore new ways to run 
education well, vigorously train the skilled persons urgently 
needed by the four modernizations, and give full play to their 
positive role in carrying out reform, opening up, and economic 
construction in order to make new and even greater contributions 
to invigorating and developing the region. 

