BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lajos Berenyi, deputy state secretary at the </F>
Ministry of International Economic Relations, by Agnes G. Barta; 
place and date not given: "Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance Foreign Trade -- Conditions Becoming Settled"] 
  [Text] Our trade relations are developing well with the 
former CEMA [Council for Mutual Economic Assistance] countries, 
in spite of the extremely difficult economic conditions that can 
be found in certain places, according to Lajos Berenyi, deputy 
state secretary at the Ministry of International Economic 
Relations [NGKM]. 
  [Barta] In the past four years, the NGKM has often been 
criticized for our trade not being sufficient with the countries 
of our region. 
  [Berenyi] This opinion can be strongly disputed in view of 
the facts. With the region's countries, we switched over to 
applying the conditions normally used in world trade in our 
economic relations on 1 January 1991. The introduction of free 
currency accounting meant that the economic performance of the 
region's countries was measured by world market requirements. 
It was obvious to everyone that a whole range of products would 
not live up to these requirements and, as a result, the 
artificially inflated bilateral trade of the CEMA period quickly 
began to decline. This decline was made worse by the increasing 
economic crises among our partners, especially in the Soviet 
Union of the time. The Hungarian Government's efforts were 
aimed at stopping the decline in trade and establishing new 
types of economic relations that have a future and are in 
accordance with modern times. 
  According to the statistics, the decline in trade with 
Russia 
was relatively small, only 40 percent, while this reached or 
even exceeded 60 percent with the other CEMA countries. As 
early as 1990, the Hungarian Government and members of the 
business community made a conscious effort also to prepare 
enterprises for the changes. We signed agreements with almost 
all the Soviet republics on promoting economic and trade 
relations. In the meantime, naturally, the enterprises also 
took up contact with their partners, and so we managed to reduce 
the shock effects that resulted from the decline. A year later, 
in 1992, we managed to achieve increasing foreign trade turnover 
with the successor states of the Soviet Union. 
  [Barta] In spite of this, many Hungarian enterprises that 
had mainly produced for the Soviet market and were unable to 
change in time, went bankrupt. However, this is the past. What 
is the situation now? 
  [Berenyi] I think that we have reason for some optimism 
because Russia now is Hungary's second largest trade partner 
after Germany. In 1993, trade with Russia amounted to $3.4 
billion. Raw materials and energy resources are still the 
leading products. Even now, almost all our crude oil and 
natural gas needs are satisfied from here. In terms of 
Hungarian exports, Russia is a huge market. Hungarian 
enterprises continue to be present, although they are aware that 
the solvency of Russian enterprises is unsure and this situation 
cannot be expected to change in the near future, so it is 
essential to specify adequate payment assurances. Although our 
exports have decreased as a whole, the export of machines and 
processed agricultural and food industry products have started 
to increase dynamically. It is clear that demand for Hungarian 
products is much greater than the effective demand. It also has 
to be mentioned that, from a distance, the Russian laws appear 
to be rather confusing, but they are much clearer for those who 
are already present on the market, and they offer several 
possibilities. Recognizing this, Hungarian entrepreneurs are 
establishing an ever increasing number of joint ventures in 
manufacturing and trade. Hungarian enterprises are maintaining 
representations and our trade representation has set up 
sub-offices in Bashkiria, Tatarstan, and in the territories 
beyond the Urals. In spite of all our efforts, it would be vain 
to believe that it is possible to achieve anything more than a 
modest 5 to 10 percent export increase in the coming years. 
  [Barta] What is the situation with the other member states 
and the republic? 
  [Berenyi] Partly because of the common border, Ukraine is 
very important to us. In 1992 and 1993, our foreign trade 
turnover amounted to $300-350 million. Relations with 
Subcarpathia are improving and an increasing number of Hungarian 
enterprises are present in Kiev, where we have trade 
representation. Ukraine is also important for us because of the 
natural gas and crude oil pipelines. Out of the other 
republics, I have to mention Kazakhstan because of our project 
in Tengiz and their purchase of our agricultural systems. 
Uzbekistan is similarly important; we delivered goods to the 
value of $40 million in 1993. Turkmenistan is rich in natural 
resources. Our economic links with Belarus and Moldova expanded 
promisingly in 1993, just as with the Baltic states. 
  [Barta] Trade with the Visegrad four has also declined, 
although the Central European Free Trade Agreement [CEFTA] may 
significantly boost relations. 
  [Berenyi] Our annual foreign trade amounts to nearly $1 
billion with Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia. One can 
say that this is a nice figure but it can also be increased. 
This is one of the reasons we signed CEFTA in 1992, which came 
into force in March 1993 and the legislatures of all states 
expect Poland have ratified it. 
  Because of the shortness of time, it would be difficult to 
prove the effects of the agreement in the second half of 1993 
with statistical data; however, it is a fact that almost half of 
the trade of industrial products became duty free, and this is a 
significant advantage, even compared with the most favored 
status treatment. We are continuously modernizing the CEFTA 
agreement to reduce the tariffs further. We will completely 
remove duty on industrial products by 2000, and we are also 
planning considerable changes in the case of agricultural 
products. We will probably sign the the supplementary agreement 
in Budapest in the second half of 1994. With Slovakia, 
bilateral links on the level of enterprises are very lively, and 
this is a good opportunity for small and medium-sized 
enterprises, whose activities the NGKM supports in every way. 
The Czech Republic is also a traditional market for us, as our 
trade with them is somewhat bigger than with Slovakia, and in 
our daily work, it is our experience that, on both the 
entrepreneurial and the governmental levels, they are interested 
in further developing bilateral links. After the prior decline, 
our trade with Poland increased by 14 to 15 percent in 1993. We 
have to recognize that these countries have keen competition in 
agricultural products and consumer goods because, like us, they 
have made association agreements with the European Union and the 
European Free Trade Association. Therefore, the Hungarian 
exporters have serious competitors on these markets. 
  During the transformation, it was also a major task to 
establish relations with the Yugoslav successor republics. We 
have now done this. Hungarian exports to Slovenia approached 
$150 million in 1993 and we reached a significant trade surplus. 
In addition to this, we have drawn up a free trade agreement 
similar to the CEFTA agreement. We also have good relations with 
Croatia although our trade has decreased a little. In addition 
to foreign trade, these countries are also important for us 
because of tourism and transit routes. Serbia is a painful loss 
to our foreign trade; we have had to accept a $1.3 billion loss 
because of the embargo. Relations with Macedonia [The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] are promising, the 
value of Hungarian exports is from $20 million to $30 million 
per year. The Yugoslav embargo is also making an impact on our 
trade in the Balkans: Our trade with Bulgaria and Albania have 
continued to decrease. Nevertheless, we do not want to give up 
the market opportunities in these two countries. We can assess 
our economic links with Romania positively, with the value of 
Hungarian exports at $200 million in 1993. We have a trade 
surplus. The number of Hungarian enterprises registered in 
Romania exceeds 1,000. 
  [Barta] Owing to the change to dollar accounting, there are 
huge amounts owed to us by the former CEMA countries. Have 
these been settled in the past four years? 
  [Berenyi] Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia have 
settled most of their former debts. The same can also be said 
of Romania. Bulgaria has not yet started to repay its debts. 
Russia, which has taken on the debts of the former Soviet 
Union, repaid half of its $1.7 billion debt in 1993 through 
military industrial deliveries. Talks are under way on the 
second installment. The remaining amount will be repaid between 
1994 and 1996 at 3.5-percent interest. They will partly pay 
with goods but we are also discussing the possibility to use 
some of this amount for Russian privatization or in establishing 
joint ventures. 

