BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 24 (YONHAP) -- The government will 
include indirect support costs, such as outlays for real estate 
and personnel support and tax favors, in the won-based costs of 
the U.S. Forces in Korea (USFK). 
  For a more reasonable computation of the burden-sharing 
between the Korean and U.S. Governments, Seoul will introduce 
new criteria for determining the USFK's won-based costs. The 
new criteria will give the particulars of both direct and 
indirect support costs, and computing the costs by the new 
criteria will reduce Korea's share of the burden. The government 
will negotiate this policy with Washington in a meeting of the 
policy review subcommittee of the Security Consultative Meeting 
(SCM) slated for June 13-15 in Hawaii. 
  To be included in the USFK's won-based costs will be such 
indirect support costs as those for real estate used by U.S. 
troops, training grounds for the USFK, for the KATUSA (Korean 
Augmentation Troops to the American Army) soldiers assigned to 
the USFK, and tax favors to the USFK. 
  Washington has not recognized these indirect support costs 
as 
won-based costs of the USFK in past SCM sessions. Under an 
agreement reached at the 1991 SCM session, Korea must bear 
one-third of the USFK's won-based costs after 1995, and the 
government has to complete new negotiations to determine the 
amount it must bear after 1995 by next year. 
  A ranking government official says the concept of 
burden-sharing between the two countries should be redefined to 
include indirect support costs, as well as direct support costs, 
in the burden. 
  Previously the criteria for computing the USFK's won-based 
costs have been equivocal, resulting in gaps between the costs 
determined by the U.S. and Korean Governments, he said, adding 
there must be new unequivocal criteria for a reasonable 
determination of the costs. 
  The U.S. Government reportedly plans to have the Korean 
Government shoulder two-thirds of the USFK's won-based costs 
between 1996 and 1999 in spite of the 1991 agreement stipulating 
that Korea must bear one-third of the costs after 1995. 

