BFN 

<F P=106> ["China Executies Four Cigarette Smugglers"] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, May 29 (XINHUA) -- Four Chinese smugglers, 
including one government official and three frontier police 
officers, were executed this morning in Shandong and Guangdong 
provinces for two separate cases, a top judge said today. 
  Another criminal named Wang Jianzhi, former party chief of 
Rushan City of east China's Shandong Province, was sentenced to 
death with a two-year reprieve for harboring smugglers and 
taking bribes of 221,000 yuan, said Zhu Mingshan, vice-president 
of the Supreme People's Court, at a press conference here today. 
  Liu Qishan, Fan Zhanwu and Liu Ning from Shandong Province 
were condemned to death with political rights deprived for life 
for illegally transporting 9,900 packing boxes of cigarettes, 
taking bribes of 62,000 yuan, 154,000 yuan and 258,000 yuan 
respectively, and offering bribes. 
  Liu Qishan was head of the Commerce Bureau of Rushan City, 
Fan Zhanwu was political commissar of the frontier subbureau of 
the Weihai Police Bureau, and Liu Ning was an officer under Fan. 
  Yang Mingji, a former frontier officer in coastal Zhuhai 
City 
of Guangdong, was sentenced to death for ordering his staff to 
provide armed escorts for cigarette traffickers four times in 
March last year from Macao, smuggling 2,300 packing boxes of 
cigarettes, worth 5.18 million yuan, and taking escort fees of 
172,000 yuan with 48,200 yuan pocketed by himself. 
  Zhu said the Rushan crime was committed by the Rushan 
Commerce Bureau, a state organization, with smugglers and 
officers of law enforcement bodies collaborating, using armed 
escorts and protection from local officials. 
  The Rushan Commerce Bureau was fined 100,000 yuan for the 
crimes of smuggling and bribing. 
  According to Zhu, the Rushan crime story began when the 
frontier subbureau of the Weihai Police Bureau issued a 
regulation contrary to existing laws in July last year. It 
stipulated that state functionaries or enterprises involving 
smuggling would be "fined without having their original capital 
confiscated," provided they "confessed voluntarily" to the 
bureau. The frontier subbureau was surreptitiously encouraging 
the Rushan Commerce Bureau to smuggle cigarettes from south 
China. 
  Once he knew that the smuggling vessel was on the sea, Liu 
"confessed immediately" to the Weihai Frontier Subbureau. Fan 
ordered his four staff members, armed with machine guns, to 
receive it. 
  At Liu's request, two police heads from Rushan led more than 
20 staff members and three police cars to the port to meet the 
vessel, to "maintain order." 
  They refused inspections by customs officers, who later left 
for fear of armed conflicts. 6,900 packing boxes of cigarettes 
were unloaded and sold immediately, with a portion of the 
illegal cargo left behind for investigation by relevant 
departments. 
  After being informed of the case, former Rushan City Party 
Chief Wang did not press for a further probe, but covered up the 
criminals' activities with false statements in ensuing 
investigations. 
  The verdicts by the local courts of Weihai and Zhuhai have 
been upheld by the higher people's courts of Shandong and 
Guangdong and approved by the Supreme People's Court, the top 
judge said. 
  Zhu said China has cracked a number of smuggling cases and 
severely punished the smugglers in its anti-smuggling campaign 
since last August. 
  He described these two cases as "typical" of the smuggling 
wave the government is battling, with crimes characterized by 
involvement of "a considerable number" of legal persons, such as 
state agencies, organizations and enterprises, with huge amounts 
of state funds siphoned off, bringing extremely harmful 
consequences to the state and society. 
  Another feature reflected in the crimes is the collusion 
between smugglers and law enforcement officers, Zhu said, adding 
that such link-ups by a small number of people have played a 
growing role in setting off rampant smuggle activities. 
  "Local protectionism and departmental cover-ups are an 
important root of the malignant and prevailing crime," Zhu said, 
warning that "those still adhering to such ideas will swallow 
what they have sown." 
  The vice-president pledged that the people's court will 
continue to severely punish smugglers according to law, 
especially in what he called the "major and important" cases, to 
guarantee the progress of the country's reform, opening up, and 
economic development. 

