Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Historical Sciences and Docent </F>
Colonel (Reserve) N. Zavgoroniy under the rubric "Military 
Reform and Higher Educational Institutions": "See the Future by 
Comprehending the Past"] 
  [Text] The reform of higher military schooling urgently 
requires a reconsideration of the attitude toward 
military-historical training (VIP) of cadets and enrolled 
personnel at Air Forces higher educational institutions. Its 
content and volume today do not fully conform to national and 
international norms; whence the low level of military-historical 
knowledge of matriculants at the academies, and the absence of 
any logical link between the academic teaching discipline of 
"The History of the Military Arts" and the curriculum of the 
schools in "Military History"; there is no center that would 
coordinate military-historical training in the Air Forces. The 
importance of VIP for the military cadres, and the consequences 
of underestimating the formation of a historical consciousness 
of the Air Forces among them, have unfortunately not yet been 
realized. 
  Moreover, the role of VIP for cadets and enrolled personnel 
in the system of higher military education is increasing. The 
military-historical disciplines, after all, are an important 
component of the operational-tactical, special and humanitarian 
training of military cadres. The creative assimilation of 
contemporary military arts is possible only based on the 
clarification of military-historical experience and its lessons 
and an understanding of overall principles and general laws, 
which not only stimulates professional training but also serves 
as the basis for the patriotic and moral indoctrination of 
officers and facilitates the formation of leadership qualities. 
  A natural question is, what must be done to bring the level 
of VIP at Air Forces higher educational institutions into 
conformity with the requirements of the times, with the nature, 
specific features and development prospects of the armed forces 
of the Russian Federation? 
  I will try to answer. 
  There are no doctors today among the cadre officers who are 
instructors in the military-historical disciplines at the Air 
Forces academies, and no candidates of historical sciences at 
the military schools. The training and retraining of cadres in 
the field of "Military History" must thus be improved first of 
all. Young and promising instructors who are candidates of 
historical sciences could be thus recommended for doctoral 
studies, and those who have no academic degree, especially at 
the schools, could enter graduate studies in the department of 
the history of the military arts of the VVAs [military aviation 
academies] for this purpose. It would be expedient to train 
military-history instructors for the academies, as well as to 
retrain them, based on the Military Academy of the General Staff. 
  The problem of the scarcity of historians at the Air Forces 
schools could be resolved first through training at the 
Retraining and Skills Enhancement Department of the Air Forces 
Academy imeni Yu.A. Gagarin. Their subsequent training is most 
expediently continued according to individual plans in the 
departments of tactics of the military aviation schools. 
  The future creation of a teaching group on the basis of the 
academy, oriented toward the training of military historians for 
the higher educational institutions, NIU, Air Forces Main Staff, 
newspapers and magazines would seem to make sense in the future. 
Young officers interested in military history from the ranks, as 
well as the enrolled personnel of the academy who recommend 
themselves through their participation in the work of the VNO 
[military-science society] circle in the department of the 
history of the military arts, could be brought in for training. 
  The name, purposes and content of the military-historical 
discipline being studied at the Air Forces schools of the RF 
must be clarified. It is called "Military History" today. 
Yesterday's grade-school pupils, however, are scarcely able to 
study "The History of Warfare," "History of the Development of 
Armed Forces," "History of the Military Arts," "Military 
Historiography" and the other courses of study that constitute 
this concept over 120 hours. It is obviously worth discussing 
the "History of Warfare"; a cadet, having studied it, should 
know the aims, nature, essence, experience in preparation and 
waging of the most important wars since ancient times up to the 
present day, the reasons for triumphs and defeats in them and 
the effects of wars on the development of Air Forces tactics. 
Anyone who has studied the "History of Warfare" should be able 
to make creative use of the knowledge he has obtained in his 
studies at the school and during service in the ranks. 
  The course "The History of the Military Arts" at the Air 
Forces academies will become the next, higher degree of 
acquisition of military-historical knowledge. Enrolled personnel 
should know, as a result of it, the history of the operational 
arts of the Air Forces and the ground forces since the time of 
their birth up to the present day, the fundamentals of the 
history of the operational arts of PVO [air defense] and naval 
forces, and the general laws, principles and lessons that arise 
from the experience of the development of the operational arts. 
The nature of the military-educational institution and the 
actual capabilities of the department or training cycle must 
naturally be taken into account when determining the dedicated 
purpose and content of the courses. 
  Four sections can be introduced into the course of "The 
History of the Military Arts," proceeding from the dedicated 
principle. The first considers the birth of the military arts in 
Russia and their development before World War I; the second, the 
development of the military arts during World War I, the civil 
war and the period between the wars; the third, World War II; 
and, the fourth, after World War II. The course could conclude 
with the study of the topics "The Lessons Arising Out of the 
Experience of the Development of the Military Arts" and the 
"Tasks of the Commander (Commanding Officer) in Supervising 
Military-Historical Work Among the Troops," with the subsequent 
passing of an examination. 
  The assimilation of the military-historical disciplines 
should precede, in the structural-logical system of training 
cadets and enrolled personnel, the study of the tactical 
disciplines at the schools and operational-tactical ones at the 
academies. Things are unfortunately still the reverse at the Air 
Forces Academy imeni Yu.A. Gagarin. 
  There is another substantive issue as well. The study of 
"Patriotic History" and "The History of the Military Arts" at 
the academies is now conducted in different departments, and 
there is no logical connection or succession between the 
disciplines. It would seem expedient to study the historical 
disciplines at the Air Forces higher educational institutions in 
a unified department of "The History of the Fatherland and the 
Military Arts," and in the departments and cycles of study of 
tactics at the Air Forces military schools. That is indeed what 
was done in prerevolutionary Russian military schooling, and is 
currently done at the higher educational institutions of the 
distant abroad. The Air Force Academy in the United States, for 
example, studies modern military history (120 hours) in the 
first year, the modern history of warfare and society (120 
hours) in the second, and military theories and an analysis of 
the state of armed forces (120 hours) in the fourth year. 
  The activity of military historians is in need of academic 
guidance on the scale of the Air Forces of the RF. This function 
could be entrusted to the Historical Group of the TsOTI of the 
Air Forces Main Staff or to a specially created 
academic-instructional council on a voluntary basis. It would 
formulate a strategy for military-historical work in the Air 
Forces, long-term plans for the publication of the necessary 
literature etc. 
  The publication of an official document (order, directive) 
with an analysis of the state and tasks of military-historical 
work in the Air Forces also seems expedient during the 
preparations for the 80th anniversary of the military aviation 
of Russia (1994) and the 50th anniversary of Victory in the 
Great Patriotic War (1995). 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 


