BFN 

  [Text] Manila, May 30 (XINHUA) -- One health official and 
four organizations including two from China were chosen to be 
bestowed with the World Health Organization's (WHO) 1994 Tobacco 
or Health Award for their continuing effort and support in 
fighting tobacco. 
  The awardees were announced here today by the WHO regional 
office for the western Pacific. 
  The award, which highlights the observance of the World No- 
Tobacco Day on May 31 each year, is presented annually to a very 
selected number of individuals and institutions for their 
continuing commitment to promoting a tobacco-free society 
through research or health promotion activities. 
  It is intended to make governments, communities, groups and 
individuals aware of the health hazards of smoking and encourage 
them to take appropriate action, the who said. 
  The five awardees for this year in the western Pacific 
region 
are Philippine Health Secretary Juan Flavier; Buchun [spelling 
of name as received], YMCA, South Korea; Cathay Pacific 
Airlines, Hong Kong; and the Chinese Association on Smoking and 
Health as well as the Health Bureau of Jishan County, Shanxi 
Province of China. 
  At present, three million people die of tobacco-related 
diseases worldwide every year, WHO said, warning that if the 
current trend continues the death toll from smoking would reach 
10 million by 2025 and 70 percent of them would be in the 
developing world. 
  In view of the agressive promotion on the part of the 
tobacco 
companies, which have predicted a 33 percent increase in tobacco 
sales in the western Pacific region before the end of the 
century, the who has launched a program aimed to ban tobacco 
advertisements completely in the western Pacific region by the 
year 2000. 
  This year's World No-Tobacco Day links the media to fighting 
smoking with the theme of "The Media and Tobacco: Getting the 
Health Message Across." 
  In bestowing the award to Flavier today, WHO's regional 
director for western Pacific Dr. S.T. Han challenged the media 
to help bring about a significant change in tobacco consumption 
"by instigating a truly dynamic health information campaign on 
the danger of smoking." 
  He also urged the media to support anti-tobacco legislation. 

