BFN 

<F P=106> ["Rejection" issued by the National Army of Democratic </F>
Kampuchea spokesman in Kampot on 4 April -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] 1. On 3 April, there was a sarcastic report hinting 
that the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea [NADK] had 
abducted an American woman and three Cambodians in Kampot 
Province and was holding them for ransom. 
  The NADK has nothing to do with this matter and vehemently 
rejects this accusation, which stems from bad political aims. 
  The NADK is an army that loves the nation and the people and 
has righteous ethics and moral principles. It is very different 
from the communist Vietnamese and imperialist aggressors and 
their puppets, who are bellicose and violate the human rights 
and right to self-determination of every nation and people. 
They have massacred and are continuing to massacre untold 
numbers of Cambodians without fearing anything. They are 
wicked, atrocious, and cruel brutes who live on the people's 
flesh and blood like Satan. 
  There is no reason for the NADK to kidnap anyone for ransom. 
They should look for the culprit among their own people instead. 
  2. Why do they keep accusing the NADK of doing this and 
that? It is a part of their psychological propaganda war aimed 
at disgracing the NADK, which enjoys the support of all 
Cambodian people. The people regard it as a national force that 
has dared to rise up and fight the communist Vietnamese 
aggressors for the past 14-15 years and to wage all forms of 
struggle against the Vietnamese alliance and the evil Western 
powers. We have thus trapped them in an impasse and are pushing 
the communist Vietnamese, their alliance, and their puppet 
two-headed government toward a comprehensive defeat. 
  3. The NADK is launching activities everywhere in Cambodia, 
together with the local people, to thwart and smash the evil and 
barbarous campaigns continuously launched by the forces of the 
communist Vietnamese puppets and the two-headed government, 
which have persistently continued to fuel the flames of war in 
line with their masters' strategies and orders. All of this is 
to defend the Cambodian nation and people. There is no reason 
for the NADK to kidnap anyone for ransom. The NADK is not like 
the communist Vietnamese, the imperialists, and their lackeys 
who have killed nations and people across the world merely to 
scramble for money and benefit. 
  [Signed] The NADK spokesman 
  [Dated] 4 April 1994 

