Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio interview with Croatian National Security Adviser </F>
Hrvoje Sarinic by an unidentified correspondent in Zagreb--live] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] Our guest this evening is Mr. Hrvoje 
Sarinic, a man who early this morning signed a cease-fire accord 
with the Serbs from the UNPA [UN Protected Areas] on behalf of 
the delegation of the Republic of Croatia. Mr. Sarinic, in 
specific terms, what is Croatia gaining by this accord? 
  [Sarinic] First, if you permit me, let me correct you. I 
have 
not signed only the accord, but also 35 maps attached to the 
accord, without which the accord would not function. I will now 
answer your question. 
  By this accord, Croatia has taken the first step on the road 
to peace and the normalization of relations within the borders 
of the Republic of Croatia; how brief, but how important at the 
same time. For, after four years of all that has happened, it is 
obvious that everyone--all Croats and even those in 
Krajina--have awaited this accord with great impatience. 
  The accord was not a goal in itself. It is merely the first 
step in the process that will take us toward full normalization 
of relations, but without which the next two stages--i.e., talks 
about normalizing economic relations and, eventually, about a 
political solution--would not be possible at all if we had 
failed in our first task, which was ending hostilities. 
  [Correspondent] What exactly is meant by the cessation of 
hostilities? Many accords have been signed so far. Many 
agreements have been reached, but this one seems to be a 
watershed. 
  [Sarinic] This one is obviously a watershed for two 
fundamental reasons. The first is that the entire international 
community is a guarantor behind this accord. You saw that the 
negotiations were attended by representatives of the two 
greatest powers in the world: a personal envoy of President 
Clinton, a personal envoy of President Yeltsin, a representative 
of the European Community and, finally, a UN representative. In 
other words, the creme de la creme of world politics was present 
here. This in itself is a guarantee that the accord will be 
implemented on the ground. 
  The second fundamental reason is that the accord is 
technically a very good one. I will not go into all technical 
details of the agreement. However, I can describe three 
important stages: 
  The freezing of all forces in the 20-km long corridor, i.e. 
10 km on either side, begins on 4 April. This is followed by 
the withdrawal of all heavy weapons on both sides. The weapons 
are to be placed under UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] control 
at such a distance that they can no longer be used for shelling 
the combat lines that had been shelled during the hostilities. 
  Finally, the third, and not the least important reason, is 
that the infantry will be separated. Each side will withdraw by 
one kilometer, and UNPROFOR will move into the vacated area. 
For instance, there will be no technical means if either side 
wanted to continue the hostilities since, as I have said, the 
heavy weaponry will be under control and would be too far to be 
of any use, while, on the other side, UNPROFOR will be deployed 
between the two infantries. 
  [Correspondent] What is UNPROFOR authorized to do in case 
the 
agreement is not implemented? 
  [Sarinic] A number of measures have been envisaged. There 
will be mixed commissions. There will be clauses that will 
specify what to do in case of any incidents. Neither side must 
respond in case of incidents. Mixed commissions will meet 
immediately, report the incidents, and there will be some sort 
of a legal mechanism that will prevent any further escalation. 
  [Correspondent] Does the Croatian side have any objections 
to 
negotiators on the other side? 
  [Sarinic] I would not like to say it here. Of course, there 
have been sparks, and specific problems have arisen during the 
talks, but we have resolved them quite successfully. We had 
another problem though, not only with the other side but also 
with UNPROFOR's status and the way in which UNPROFOR will be 
involved in the implementation of the agreement itself. In 
order to feel more comfortable--if I can say it that 
way--UNPROFOR wanted to have absolute control and absolute 
freedom of movement--absolute control of everything in our 
territory. Of course, we agree regarding all those aspects 
where control is necessary for the agreement to be implemented 
and to be effective. They had our full cooperation in this, but 
we could not allow certain things, i.e. that Croatian territory 
should become some sort of a colony. Our stand was clear in 
this respect. We will cooperate efficiently [as heard]; 
however, we attach enormous importance to our independence, and 
we do not want Croatia to become Cyprus over a long period of 
time. We devoted special attention to this. I would even say 
that almost half of the negotiating time was devoted to this 
matter. 
  [Correspondent] A conviction prevails in Croatia that peace 
will be restored only when UNPROFOR is deployed along the 
borders of the sovereign and independent Republic of Croatia. 
How close is this agreement to that? 
  [Sarinic] Well, listen, these are two problems. Your second 
question is more in connection with the next UNPROFOR mandate. 
Of course, we have been insisting on it, the Croatian 
leadership has been insisting on it. The problem of controlling 
the borders is naturally the fundamental problem, however, 
because it creates conditions for the prevention of an influx of 
weapons and special units from the east. This further creates 
conditions for the resolution of difficult problems, very 
complex problems, in a normal way--problems of the type of 
autonomy. All these solutions will be based on our Constitution 
and the constitutional law. In this regard, however, Croatia 
will particularly insist that the next UNPROFOR mandate should 
create conditions for controlling borders. 
  I must say that UNPROFOR does not have the power to 
implement 
it today. But, you know, what before seemed to be science 
fiction-- that NATO could come and secure these borders--is 
becoming a very realistic possibility today that is being 
examined by all, including the top players in the international 
arena. 
  [Correspondent] At the end, these negotiations lasted quite 
long. What was the atmosphere like, and why was it shrouded in 
so much secrecy when it came to the flow of information, when it 
came to all those things in which our public was so much 
interested? 
  [Sarinic] This is almost a provocative question from you, 
because personally I am not much inclined to great media 
coverage. I believe that we must not interrupt business and come 
out with details from the course of negotiations when such 
serious business is being dealt with, because many different 
interpretations will be given that can have a negative effect on 
the results of the negotiations. 
  We were very disciplined. We had agreed with the mediators 
in these negotiations, and nobody, as you saw, made any 
statements. 
  [Correspondent] What are further steps to be taken now? 
  [Sarinic] Further steps are the following: We must not treat 
the signed agreement in a static way. It is only phase one, and 
it is to be implemented on the ground in seven to 10 days. We 
will have additional meetings immediately afterwards, which we 
have to prepare and at which we will examine economic issues. 
Talks on the specific political solution will be held after 
that. I think that talks on phase three will begin in three 
weeks or one month. They are not going to be concluded in one 
night. No matter how long they may be, we created conditions 
for them today. 
  [Correspondent] Mr. Sarinic, thank you very much for the 
interview. 
  [Sarinic] Thank you. 

