Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, February 17 (CNS) -- The rapid development 
of Mainland township enterprises has made them the main pillar 
of the rural economy and probably constitutes half of the total 
national economy, while playing an important role in leading 
farmers to become comparatively well-off since reform and 
opening to the outside world got underway. The township 
enterprises, however, are facing various crises after 
state-owned enterprises staged property rights reform, obtaining 
more self decision-making powers and enhancing their competitive 
strength. 
  The total output value of the country's township enterprises 
is reported to have been RMB 2,900 billion [renminbi] last year, 
of which the total industrial output value was RMB 180 billion, 
profits RMB 160 billion and tax paid RMB 95 billion. The 
industrial output value of township enterprises last year made 
up 40 percent of the country's total and the exports of such 
enterprises were worth RMB 190 billion, making up 45 percent of 
the country's total export value. 
  The earlier form of township enterprises were people's 
commune-owned enterprises. The "big rice bowl" practice 
resulted in slow development of such enterprises. Rural 
productivity did not increase until the introduction of the 
contractual household responsibility system linking remuneration 
to output in 1978. A large number of surplus labourers were 
absorbed by the township enterprises and their rapid development 
was seen from then on. What was important was that the township 
enterprises in Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang and Jiangsu had much 
capital introduced from Hong Kong and Macao for the development 
of the processing industry, forming an important force in the 
Chinese economy. 
  China now has 21 million township enterprises employing 112 
million workers with six million newly recruited last year. In 
recent years, 60 percent of the increase in the average income 
of farmers was earned from such enterprises. They also supplied 
more than RMB 40 billion to fund the development of irrigation 
works, scientific research, transportation, culture and 
education. More than 400 township enterprises had an output 
value of over RMB 100 million last year and 300 of them a sales 
value of RMB 100 million while another 100 of them had an export 
value of RMB 100 million. 
  One of the main reasons for the rapid development of 
township 
enterprises, however, was the lack of competition of state-owned 
enterprises due to their rigid economic system. But, after the 
reform of property rights and the expansion of 
self-decisionmaking powers of the state-owned enterprises, the 
township enterprises have faced five crises, including their 
weak operating mechanism, their reliance on the major 
enterprises, had management, backward technology and low quality 
of their products. How to settle these problems is a task 
facing the new situation. 

