Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadim Kawash] </F>
  [Text] Abu Dhabi, Jan 11 (AFP)--A dispute between Iraq and 
Kuwait is delaying the return of the Organisation of Arab 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) to its Kuwait headquarters 
after an absence of more than three years, Gulf oil sources said 
on Tuesday [11 January]. 
  OAPEC moved to Cairo after Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait in 
August 1990. 
  Kuwait has refused to grant entry visas to the 
organisation's 
Iraqi staff, delaying a seven-month-old decision to shift back 
to Kuwait from its temporary headquarters in Cairo, the sources 
said. 
  But intensive diplomatic contacts within the 10-member group 
have made progress and OAPEC is expected to be back in Kuwait by 
June. 
  "The problem is on its way to a solution. OAPEC will start 
moving back to Kuwait in March and the shift will be completed 
by June. Procedural matters have also delayed the move," said 
one source, who is close to OAPEC. 
  Several other Arab organisations also left the emirate but 
most of them have returned since it was liberated by a U.S-led 
international coalition in February 1991. 
  The invasion prompted Kuwait and its partners in the 
six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to suspend Iraq's 
membership from all their joint groups, including the United 
Arab Shipping Company and the regional organisation for the 
protection of marine environment. 
  "The return of OAPEC to Kuwait has political implications," 
a 
Gulf source said. "It shows the situation is back to normal and 
Kuwait is again assuming its role in Arab politics, oil and 
other activities." OAPEC oil ministers decided to move back to 
Kuwait at talks in Cairo in June and they reasserted the 
decision at their conference in Damascus in November. 
  The organisation was created in Beirut in 1968 by Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait and Libya and later it was joined by iraq, 
Algeria, Syria, Bahrain, Qatar, Egypt and the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE). Tunisia also joined the organisation but its 
membership was suspended three years ago at its request. 
  OAPEC, which is open for all Arab oil producers, was set up 
with the primary aim of promoting energy cooperation among 
members states through joint projects. Its operations do not 
cover oil production and price policies. 
  Saudi Arabia, the world's top crude exporter and producer, 
and six other OAPEC states are members of the 12-nation 
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), which 
chalks out output and price policies. 

