Technology 

<F P=102>   946B0068A Beijing TAIYANGNENG [SOLAR ENERGY] in Chinese No 
1, 28 Feb 94 pp 6-9 </F>

<F P=103> 946B0068A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing TAIYANGNENG [SOLAR ENERGY] </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Changgui [3769 7022 6311]: "Formulate </F>
Programs and Adopt Measures To Accelerate the Development of 
China's New Energy Resource Technology"] 
  [Text] Starting with the strategic concept of limited 
mineral energy resources and the inevitably more serious 
environmental pollution caused by using large amounts of mineral 
fuels, all countries of the world, especially the economically 
developed nations, have paid a special attention to developing 
and utilizing new energy resources and they have placed new 
energy resource technology in an important position of a 
supporting technology for the new technological revolution, 
formulated programs, adopted measures, increased investments, 
and actively developed them. 
  In China, new energy resources refer to solar energy, wind 
energy, biomass energy, geothermal energy, ocean energy, and 
other renewable energy resources. Over the past 20-plus years, 
China has had a substantial foundation in utilization of new 
energy resources and they have played a significant role in 
construction of our national economy. However, compared with 
future energy resource development requirements and present 
world development levels, a substantial lag exists. We should 
rouse ourselves to catch up and accelerate the development of 
China's new energy resource technology. 
<H5>  I. The Strategic Importance of Developing and Utilizing New </H5>
Energy Resources in China 
  China's strategic objective in utilizing new energy 
resources 
in the short term mainly involves solving the power supply 
problems and energy supply problems of regions that have no 
power or have power shortages and of special locations, 
conserving conventional energy resources, and reducing 
environmental pollution and ecological destruction. Our primary 
long-term goals should be to optimize China's energy resource 
structure, continually increase the proportion of new energy 
resources in our energy resource structure, reduce consumption 
of mineral energy resources, and make preparations for an energy 
resource transition in China in the future. 
  1. Important sociopolitical significance. 
Statistics through the end of 1992 show that China still had 28 
counties, 1,462 townships, and 63,853 villages without 
electricity and about 30.68 million peasant households and a 
rural population of 120 million that does not have electricity. 
Most of these places are in frontier mountain regions, pastoral 
regions, plateaus, and islands which lack conventional energy 
resources and are distant from large power grids, and have 
sparse populations, scattered settlements, and extremely 
inconvenient communication. However, they have relatively 
abundant local solar energy, wind energy, biomass energy, and 
other new energy resources. Thus, the most important way to 
solve the power supply and energy supply problems of these 
places is to develop and utilize their locally abundant solar 
energy, wind energy, biomass energy, and other new energy 
resources. Moreover, making these places prosperous as quickly 
as possible has major significance for equilibrium and 
coordinated development in our national economy, and it has 
major significance for increasing China's national unity and 
political stability. 
  2. Important energy resource economic 
significance. For the past several years, development of 
our national economy has resulted in surging growth in demand 
for energy resources and electric power and it has exacerbated 
our long-term energy shortages and power shortages. Regarding 
electric power, statistics show that China's total power 
generating equipment capacity in 1991 was 151,470MW while our 
power-using equipment capacity was 367,300MW, for a ratio of 
1:2.42 between power generating equipment and power-using 
equipment (a rational proportion should be two or less). Serious 
shortages of electric power have frequently resulted in many 
industrial and mining enterprises, especially those in rural 
areas, to shut down and stop producing because of power outages, 
and there have been even fewer guarantees of the electricity for 
people's lives, which has seriously affected and restricted 
development of our national economy and improvement in the 
people's living standards. The planned and gradual development 
of photovoltaic power generation and wind-powered electricity 
generation, and the utilization of biomass energy, geothermal 
energy, marine energy, and other new energy resources can 
conserve several 10 million tons of standard coal in 
conventional energy resources as well as play a significant role 
in alleviating China's shortages of energy resources and 
electric power and make a substantial contribution to China's 
modernization and construction. 
  3. Important environmental and ecological 
significance. Atmospheric pollution and global warming is 
an important environmental problem closely related to energy 
resources facing the entire globe in the 1990s. Many countries 
are now adopting measures to solve this problem along with 
actively increasing energy resource efficiency and energetically 
improving their energy resource structure. This is the so-called 
energy resource efficiency revolution and clean energy resource 
revolution. Currently, in the world's consumption of primary 
energy resources, about 78 percent is petroleum, natural gas, 
coal, and other mineral fuels. The burning of mineral energy 
resources is the primary cause of the continual increase in the 
atmospheric content of CO[.sub]2[/] and other greenhouse 
gases and the formation of acid rain. China is third in 
CO[.sub]2[/] discharges, only below those of the United 
States and the former Soviet Union. We discharged 23.866 million 
tons in 1989, 10.9 percent of total world discharges. China is 
the world's biggest coal producing and consuming country. 
Statistics show that the amount of CO[.sub]2[/] discharged by 
coal fuel in China is 85 percent of our total discharges from 
mineral fuels and 60 percent of China's total greenhouse gases. 
There are two primary countermeasures for reducing China's 
CO[.sub]2[/] discharges. One is a major effort to improve 
energy resource utilization rates and conserve energy resources. 
The second is gradual improvement of our energy resource 
structure, major efforts to develop hydropower, solar energy, 
wind energy, biomass energy, geothermal energy, marine energy, 
and other renewable energy resources, reducing the consumption 
of mineral energy resources, and reducing the cutting of forests 
and the burning of firewood. Data from the United States 
National Office of Technology Assessment show that common 
coal-fired power plants discharge 304 grams of sulfur for each 
kWh of electricity they generate, whereas solar energy thermal 
power plants that have natural gas reserve generators only 
discharge 47 grams, geothermal power generation only discharges 
2.5 grams, and photovoltaic and wind-powered electricity 
generation discharges zero. One can see that using several 
5-Year Plans to achieve a rather substantial development of new 
energy resource utilization in China would play an important 
role in reducing China's discharges of CO[.sub]2[/] and in 
reducing environmental pollution and maintaining an ecological 
balance in China. 
<H5>  II. China Has Excellent Natural Resource Conditions for the </H5>
Development and Utilization of New Energy Resources 
  China is located in the northern hemisphere with a vast 
territory and huge population, a suitable climate that extends 
across tropical, temperate, and frigid zones, and a long 
continental coastline, which are excellent natural conditions 
for the development and utilization of new energy resources. 
  1. Abundant solar energy resources. According to 
estimates, China's continental surface receives 50 x 
10[.sup]18[/] kilocalories of solar irradiation each year, 
which is equivalent to about 170 billion tons of standard coal. 
All the regions of China as a whole receive 335 to 837 x 
10[.sup]4[/] kilocalories/m[.sup]2[/]/year in total solar 
irradiation, with a mean of 586 x 10[.sup]4[/] 
kilocalories/m[.sup]2[/]/year. Looking at the distribution of 
total solar irradiation in China, a vast region in Tibet, 
Qinghai, Xinjiang, southern Inner Mongolia, Shanxi, northern 
Shaanxi, Hebei, Shandong, Liaoning, western Jilin, central and 
southwestern Yunnan, southeastern Guangdong, southeastern 
Fujian, eastern and western Hainan Island, and southwestern 
Taiwan have very large total solar irradiation. This is 
particularly true of the Qinghai Plateau, which average over 
4,000 meters above sea level and has a thin and clean atmosphere 
with good transparency, a low latitude, and a long sunshine 
time. China's regions with relatively abundant solar energy 
resources with yearly sunshine times greater than 2,000 hours 
and total irradiation greater than 586 
kilocalories/m[.sup]2[/]/year account for more than 
two-thirds of China's total area, so we have excellent 
conditions for developing and utilizing solar energy. 
  2. Relatively abundant wind energy resources. 
According to estimates by meteorological departments, China's 
wind energy density is 100 W/m[.sup]2[/] and our total wind 
energy resources are about 2,530GW, which includes about 253GW 
that could geographically and economically be developed and 
utilized in the short term. This is particularly true for the 
southeast coast and nearby islands, Inner Mongolia and the Gansu 
corridor, northeast China, northwest China, north China, the 
Qinghai Plateau, and other regions which have more than 4,000 
hours/year in which wind speeds exceed 3 meters/second, and in 
several regions average wind speeds can reach 6 to 7 
meters/second, with an average annual effective wind energy 
density of more than 200W/m[.sup]2[/] that would have 
substantial development and utilization value. 
  3. Enormous biomass energy resources. According to 
statistics, our total yearly output of crop straw is more than 
560 million tons, about one-half of which is used as industrial 
raw material, feed, and directly returned to fields with the 
other half being used as a household fuel. China has now created 
about 4 million hectares of fuel forests. Rational cutting and 
harvesting of fuel forests and tree varieties that could be used 
to supply firewood could provide about 110 million tons of 
firewood a year. Moreover, we also have extremely substantial 
amounts of animal wastes and other biomass energy resources. 
However, present utilization modes are very irrational, with 
straw and firewood equivalent to about 250 million tons of 
standard coal being burned up each year as cooking fuel in low 
efficiency and low function combustion modes. Only 2 million 
tons of straw is used to make biogas, equal to only 0.4 percent 
of total straw output. Moreover, the utilization of other 
technologies is practically zero. One can see that there is 
extremely huge resource potential. 
  4. Relatively abundant geothermal resources. 
Through nearly 20 years of surveys, a total of over 4,000 
geothermal sites have been discovered to date in China's 30 
provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions. There are 
almost 90 high-temperature geothermal fields above 150C, of 
which 51 are in Tibet, five are in Sichuan, 28 are in western 
Yunnan, and six are on Taiwan, so we are one of the countries 
with the greatest number of high-temperature geothermal fields. 
There are moderate and low-temperature geothermal resources 
found throughout China in more than 700 cities and counties, 
with the provinces along the southeast coast having the most, 
and the geothermal resources of Tianjin, Fuzhou, Beijing, and 
other large cities have even greater development and utilization 
value. According to current survey estimates, China has about 
321GW in geothermal resources. Among them, geothermal fields 
that are mainly basin-type conductive ones have the best 
development and utilization prospects, with confirmed geothermal 
resources of 261GW, equal to 81.3 percent of our total 
resources, and they are mainly contained in the North China 
Basin and Songliao Basin which are currently producing large 
amounts of petroleum. 
  5. China's continental coastline is 18,000 kilometers 
long, and we have over 6,500 islands of varying sizes with 
14,000 kilometers of marine island coastlines where there area 
abundant marine energy resources. According to a survey of 
tidal resources that concluded in 1982, we have 156 bays and 33 
river mouths with total installed generating capacities greater 
than 500 kW, and China has a developable tidal energy resource 
installed generating capacity of 20,980MW which could generate 
58 billion kWh of electric power annually, so we are the world's 
richest country in tidal energy resources. The total power of 
China's coastal wave energy is about 70GW and its distribution 
is concentrated in Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong, Hainan, Taiwan, 
and other provinces. According to estimates, China has 50 to 
100GW of offshore sea current energy, about one-tenth to 
one-twentieth the total amount of sea current energy in the 
world's large oceans. 
<H5>  III. China Has A Substantial Foundation for New Energy </H5>
Resource Utilization 
  After efforts through several 5-Year Plans, China now has a 
substantial foundation for new energy resource utilization. 
  1. Solar energy: In the area of photothermal 
utilization, by the end of 1992 we had extended about 140,000 
solar stoves, over 2 million square meters of solar energy water 
heaters, 1.185 million square meters of solar houses, about 
147,000 hectares of solar energy plastic sheds, about 5.35 
million square meters of solar energy heated poultry and 
livestock buildings, and over 10,000 square meters of light 
gathering area for solar energy driers. There have been 
continual improvements in the technical performance and product 
quality of solar energy water heaters, and the technical 
performance of vacuum tube heat collectors has attained 
international levels. We have completed several key solar energy 
water heater production plants at a substantial scale. China is 
the world leader in the number of solar stoves, and we have made 
relatively large advances in the areas of design theory, 
materials technology, stove models, and so on. Passive solar 
energy houses have produced significant benefits in winter 
season heating in the "three norths" [northwest, north, and 
northeast China] regions, where they have conserved coal and 
reduced environmental pollution and enabled the rapid recovery 
of their increased construction investments. In the area of 
photovoltaic utilization, we have completed five solar cell 
production plants on a substantial scale that use imported 
equipment as a foundation. Their annual production capacity is 
3.5MW, including 2.5MW of monocrystalline silicon cells and 1MW 
of non-crystalline silicon cells. The efficiency of 
monocrystalline silicon cells has now reached 12 percent, and 
they have a lifespan of 20 years and a selling price of 40 to 45 
yuan/peak W. By 1992, we had applied about 2.5MW of solar cells, 
with rather good applications in railroad signals, aviation 
markers, microwave relay stations, satellite ground stations, 
television transponders, rural carrier wave radio stations, 
rural household lighting, and other areas. In particular, we 
have built a 10 kW and a 20 kW independent photovoltaic station 
and several solar powered satellite television ground receiving 
stations at Ali in Tibet at more than 4,500 meters above sea 
level which have solved the power problems for the urgently 
needed lighting and television reception by the local Tibetan 
people and raised photovoltaic applications technology in China 
up to a new level. 
  2. Wind energy utilization: We have placed 50 to 
200 W miniature wind-powered generators into fixed model batch 
production and they have superior product quality and are 
reliable and inexpensive. Our annual production capacity is more 
than 10,000 units, so we have attained an initial industrial 
scale and even export them in small amounts. We now have a small 
batch production capability for 1 to 20 kW medium-sized and 
small wind-powered generators and we are now developing 50 to 
200 kW large and medium-sized wind-powered generators. Moreover, 
300-t automatic control sail-assisted boats have now been 
successfully developed on a trial basis and research on wind 
energy heating is now in progress. According to statistics for 
the end of 1992, we have now extended and applied about 120,000 
miniature and small wind-powered generators with a total 
installed generating capacity of about 16.8MW. We have now 
established 11 wind-powered generating experiment farms in 
Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Guangdong, Zhejiang, Fujian, Shandong, 
and other provinces and autonomous regions that have installed 
67 large and medium-sized wind-powered generators with a total 
installed generating capacity of about 6.2MW. We have extended 
and applied over 1,600 wind-powered water lifting machines with 
a total power of about 2.1MW. 
  3. Biomass energy utilization: By the end of 1992 
China had extended household biogas pits to 4,982,100 
households. We have established 439 biogas centralized gas 
supply stations that use organic wastes from distilleries, sugar 
mills, poultry and livestock farms, and food processing plants 
as a fermentation raw material that can supply biogas to 73,300 
families. These two items can produce about 1.2 billion cubic 
meters of biogas a year, which has enabled 5.055 million 
households with a population of more than 20 million people in 
China to use a clean and convenient household fuel. Besides 
being used as a household fuel, biogas can also supply energy 
for production. China has now established 186 biogas motive 
power stations with a total power of 3,458.5 kW and 115 biogas 
power generating stations with a total installed generating 
capacity of 2.342MW that generate about 3.01 million kWh of 
electricity annually. China has now established 19,355 city and 
town household waste water purification biogas pits that, 
besides providing household energy to 97,200 households, have 
also cleaned up the environment and reduced the fecal intestinal 
microorganisms and parasite eggs in the discharged waste water 
to sanitary standards. The development of comprehensive 
utilization of biogas has also moved ahead extremely quickly. In 
1992 China used biogas to store 219,500 tons of grain, which 
reduced grain losses by 29,500 tons and saved costs of 220,000 
yuan. Bioliquid was used to feed 838,700 hogs, which conserved 
about 52,900 tons of feed. Bioliquid is being used on a 
fish-raising water area of 465,000 and it increased fresh fish 
output by 14.413 million kg and increased income by 43.239 
million yuan. Bioliquid was used to soak 13.60 million kg of 
rice seedlings and increased grain output by 379,000 tons. Now, 
over 60 percent of China's households use biogas and more than 3 
million peasant households have developed the courtyard economy 
using biogas as a link, increasing peasant incomes by more than 
900 million yuan. Research and experiments concerning biomass 
gasification and liquefaction technology are now actively being 
carried out. 
  4. Geothermal energy utilization: In the area of 
geothermal power generation, we have now completed the 
world-renowned Yangbajing Geothermal Power Station which 
currently has an installed generating capacity of 25MW and has 
generated a total of nearly 400 million kWh of electricity. Its 
power output now accounts for 40 to 50 percent of the Lhasa 
Power Grid, so it is playing a decisive role. Two 92C 
moderate-temperature geothermal power stations built earlier, a 
200 kW one at Dengfang in Fengshun and a 300 kW one at Huitang, 
have been operating normally and generating electricity for 17 
years. China now ranks fifth among the world's 17 geothermal 
power generation countries in the number of geothermal 
generators and 12th in installed generating capacity. In the 
area of direct utilization of moderate and low-temperature 
geothermal water, we have now extended and applied it in over 20 
main projects including bathing, therapy, aquacultural breeding, 
heating, breeding, seedling raising, flower cultivation, 
vegetable cropping, incubating poultry, swimming pools, leather 
processing, food product processing, silk fermentation, laundry 
and dying, earthquake monitoring, hot mineral springwater 
beverages, and others. According to statistics, China now has a 
geothermal heating area of 1.90 million square meters, more than 
660 mu of geothermal greenhouses, over 630 hot spring baths, 
over 180 hot spring sanitoria, and 2,520 mu of total geothermal 
breeding area. At the end of 1990, the scale of moderate and 
low-temperature geothermal direct utilization in China was 720 
trillion calories/year. 
  5. Marine energy utilization: We have completed 
seven tidal power stations and one tidal flood power station 
with a total installed generating capacity of 11MW. One of them, 
Jiangxia Tidal Power Station, has an installed generating 
capacity of 3.2MW and generates about 10 million kWh of 
electricity a year, ranking third in the world. Small wave 
energy power generation devices used as power sources for ship 
signal lights have now entered the application stage and are 
being produced in small amounts, and they have attained advanced 
international levels. We have also actively undertaken 
experimental research on marine temperature differential power 
generation, seawater concentration differential power 
generation, sea current power generation, and other things and 
made significant advances. 
<H5>  IV. Proposals for Accelerating China's Development of New </H5>
Energy Resource Technology 
  To accelerate the development of new energy resource 
technology in China, I will now offer proposals regarding policy 
issues. 
  1. Compile a comprehensive, concrete, and feasible new 
energy 
resource 10-year development program, include it in the Eighth 
5-Year Plan and Ninth 5-Year Plan, and actively organize its 
implementation. I propose that consideration be given to these 
points in the program: 1) Agriculture is the foundation of our 
national economy, so we should make a major effort to solve the 
power supply problems of rural areas, especially the power 
supply problems of peasants in regions not supplied with 
electricity. This is not just an economic problem but a 
political problem as well. Thus, during the Ninth 5-Year Plan, 
new energy resource development should be an important task that 
we give ourselves for basically achieving rural electrification 
by the year 2000. To eliminate counties that do not have 
electricity, we must contribute forces to achieve the goal of a 
peasant household electrification rate of more than 95 percent. 
2) In compiling a new energy resource development program, we 
should have a prominent focus on power generation using new 
energy resources, and in particular we should consider using 
wind-powered electricity generation as an important aspect of 
electric power construction. Strive during the next 10-plus 
years to complete several 10 large and medium-sized wind-powered 
generating fields with unit generator powers of 100 to 300 kW 
and installed generating capacities of 1 to 10MW that operate 
connected to power grids. In Tibet, Qinghai, Xinjiang, Ningxia, 
Inner Mongolia, and other regions with abundant solar energy 
resources, we should also develop a variety of photovoltaic 
cells as an important way to solve the small load and scattered 
power use problems of regions distant from power grids. 3) Make 
major efforts to develop solar houses. China's heating area 
covers about two-thirds of our total national area. This 
includes the "three norths" (northwest, north, and northeast 
China) frigid regions which are the focus of heating. In these 
regions, the structural area in cities and towns is now more 
than 3 billion cubic meters and each year 130 million cubic 
meters of new city and town residences are being built. We have 
about 700 to 800 million cubic meters of rural residences. 
China's structural energy consumption each year is more than 217 
million tons of standard coal, equal to more than 22 percent of 
total energy consumption in China. This includes more than 94 
million tons of standard coal that is consumed each year for 
town heating in the "three norths" region, about 45 percent of 
our total structural energy consumption. The development of 
passive solar energy heated houses will play an important role 
in improving the residential environment, conserving 
conventional energy resources, and reducing environmental 
pollution. 4) Use our existing foundation to actively develop 
geothermal power generation, establish new geothermal power 
stations, and expand the installed generating capacity of 
existing geothermal power stations. In regions with abundant 
moderate and low-temperature geothermal resources, we should 
actively develop direct geothermal utilization, comprehensive 
utilization, and cascade utilization. 5) Zhejiang Province has 
extremely abundant tidal energy resources with several ideal 
station sites that have large tidal differentials, good 
utilization conditions, and significant benefits. We should also 
carry out substantial preparatory work. I propose that we build 
a large tidal energy power station bigger than 500MW during both 
the Ninth 5-Year Plan and Tenth 5-Year Plan to provide electric 
power to coastal regions that have energy and power shortages. 
6) Biomass energy gasification and liquefaction and construction 
of large and medium-sized biogas projects and urban wastewater 
purification biogas projects is the development direction for 
biomass utilization and we should provide them with focused 
support and actively develop them. 
  2. Make major efforts to strengthen scientific research work 
for new energy resource technology. New energy resource 
technology is one of the supporting technologies for the world's 
new technological revolution, and there are many questions that 
should be studied and explored, many technical problems that 
should be attacked, and many new products that await 
development, so we should make a major effort to increase 
investments. Based on China's realities, I propose that we focus 
on the following prominent scientific research and technical 
problems: 1) On the basis of importing, digesting, and 
absorbing, move ahead quickly with research to solve key 
production technology problems with the 100 kW, 200 kW, 300 kW, 
and other wind-powered electricity generators that China has 
been focusing on developing and place them into commercial 
production as soon as possible. 2) Organize forces to do 
research to improve the photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 
monocrystalline silicon solar cells, strive to increase the 
conversion efficiency of cell assemblies to more than 14 to 15 
percent prior to the year 2000, and substantially reduce the 
cost of monocrystalline silicon cells. 3) Strive to overcome the 
photodegradation problems of non-crystalline silicon solar cells 
and try to be able to use them in photovoltaic power station 
construction prior to the year 2000. 4) Do additional research 
on corrosion, backflow, environmental pollution, and other 
prominent problems that exist in geothermal energy utilization, 
strive to make breakthrough advances as quickly as possible. 5) 
We should pay sufficient attention to developing the 
special-purpose materials and equipment required for new energy 
resource utilization and make the corresponding arrangements. 6) 
Actively undertake research and experiments on new biomass 
gasification, liquefaction, and solidification technologies, 
products, and equipment, and strive to make breakthrough 
advances prior to the year 2000. 
  3. Focus on new energy resource industry construction. 
Although China already has several new energy resource 
production enterprises, most of them are of a small scale and 
have weak technical forces. While some do have imported 
production technology and rather good equipment conditions, for 
various reasons there have not been enough construction starts. 
Overall, China's new energy resource industry has still not 
truly taken shape. In the future we should strengthen 
construction of key production enterprises for new energy 
resources, make China's new energy resources achieve an 
industrial scale, continually improve product quality, increase 
product varieties and specifications, reduce costs, provide good 
after-sales services, create more name-brand products that users 
trust, and open up a broad market. 
  4. The state should provide substantial support for new 
energy resource utilization and implement preferential policies. 
Because new energy resource technology is high and new 
technology is now being studied, explored, and developed with an 
eye to replacing energy resources in the future, much new energy 
resource construction involves poverty assistance activities to 
make the people of poor and backward regions prosperous while 
many new energy resource utilization projects involve public 
welfare activities to reduce environmental pollution and protect 
the ecological equilibrium. Thus, China like other countries in 
the world should actively encourage and support new energy 
resource R&amp;D, extension, and applications by implementing tax 
exemptions and reductions, subsidies, no-interest or 
low-interest loans, and other preferential policies. 
  5. Actively undertake international cooperation, fight for 
assistance from foreign countries through a variety of channels 
and in a variety of forms. China already has several projects 
assisted by foreign countries in wind energy, solar energy, 
biomass energy, and other areas and the results have been 
excellent. However, compared to Brazil, India, the Philippines, 
and other countries, the assistance projects and capital that 
we, as a large developing country with a population of 1.2 
billion, have fought to obtain are extremely few. We should 
liberate our ideology, take action, and fight for more 
assistance for new energy resource projects from foreign 
countries through a variety of channels and in a variety of 
forms to spur the development of new energy resource utilization 
in China. The state and local areas should provide the matching 
capital support for projects receiving international assistance. 

