Moves   Forward 

   SUMMARY:  South Korea's indigenous reconnaissance satellite 
program has been approved by the country's Science and Technology 
Council, according to recent ROK press reports.  Billed as 
"multipurpose," the spacecraft will use a high-resolution device to 
return images of the Korean Peninsula and surrounding areas and 
carry other equipment designed for mobile communications and 
"scientific experiments."  The medium-sized satellite will be 
launched in 1998 by an indigenous booster developed through the 
"Korean Scientific Rocket" (KSR) program, or by a Hyundai rocket 
made with Russian technology. 
   The 18 May CHUGAN MAEGYONG reported that South Korea's plan to 
build an "indigenous multipurpose satellite for practical use" was 
approved on 9 May by the Combined Science and Technology Council, 
clearing the way for work to begin at once.  The Seoul magazine 
stated that unlike the "Rose of Sharon" communications satellite 
scheduled to be launched in 1995 which has little local content and 
a strictly defined function, the present project is aimed at 
producing an "indigenous" spacecraft with "multiple purposes." 
These reportedly include "monitoring the oceans, scientific 
experiments, and experimental satellite communications."  The 
satellite's "high-resolution cameras" will return imagery of crop 
failures, floods, forest fires, and other disasters and keep track 
of oil spills and changes in fishing areas, the magazine said. 
Development will be completed in 1997 in preparation for a March 
1998 launch. 
   According to CHUGAN MAEGYONG, the satellite will weigh between 
350 and 500 kg, have a hexagonal shape that measures 1.2 meters both 
in diameter and in height, and follow a "low earth orbit" at an 
altitude of 400-800 km for a service life of three to five years. 
The 16 April MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN, CHUGAN MAEGYONG's parent 
publication, provided similar figures but gave the weight as 300-500 
kg and added that the payload will include two systems:  one "for 
monitoring the Korean Peninsula and surrounding oceans," and another 
"for scientific experiments to measure ozone and for space science 
observations."  MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN reported that the project has a 
budget of 165 billion won ($206 million).  The 18 April CHONJA 
SINMUN, an electronics trade journal, noted that 141.5 billion won 
($176.9 million) of that amount will be paid by government and 23.5 
billion won ($29.8 million) will be contributed by private industry. 
   Citing "knowledgeable sources," CHONJA SINMUN stated that the 
"struggle" between the ROK's Ministry of Science and Technology 
(MOST) and Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) for 
control over the country's satellite program has been settled "for 
the time being" by putting space development on an "interagency 
footing."  More specifically, MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN reported that 
MOST will be given the "leading role," assisted by MOTIE and "other 
government agencies," which CHUGAN MAEGYONG identified as South 
Korea's Economic Planning Board, the Ministry of Communications, and 
several institutes, including the Korea Aerospace Research Institute 
(KARI), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology's (KAIST) 
Earth Satellite Center, the Electronics and Telecommunications 
Research Institute, and the Korea Electronic Parts Combined Research 
Center.  According to CHONJA SINMUN, friction between KAIST (which 
directed the "Our Star" program) and KARI (which has overall control 
of the "Rose of Sharon" project) was resolved in the latter's favor 
and KARI is now the "single focus" within the Science Ministry for 
satellite development.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG noted similarly that KARI 
will "take charge" of coordinating research. 
   According to MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN, MOST will handle overall 
design, develop the payload systems, and design and operate a ground 
control station; it will also apportion jobs between government 
agencies.  MOTIE will design the satellite bus and its components. 
MKS reported that "in order for South Korea to indigenize its own 
particular form of multipurpose satellite and parts," the bus will 
be divided into five systems, including "electronics and attitude 
control," and "assigned to selected companies and agencies for 
concentrated development."  Some 60 percent of the satellite bus 
will be indigenous. 
   South Korea's "multipurpose satellite" was first mentioned in the 
ROK press on 13 March 1993, when HANGUK ILBO reported that an 
indigenous satellite would be developed to redress a "major concern 
about being dependent on large foreign corporations."  The paper 
listed South Korea's Ministry of Defense among those agencies 
involved in the project (see FBIS Foreign Media Note FB PN 93-464 
dated 22 Dec 93).  Other press reporting, including an article in 
the October 1993 KUKBANG KWA KISUL written by a KAIST employee, 
listed "military applications" as a chief purpose of the program and 
drew parallels between this and the experimental "Our Star" 
satellites, which were launched in 1992 and 1993 into near-polar 
orbits.  KUKBANG KWA KISUL described the more sensitive of Our Star 
II's two imaging systems as a charge coupled device with a 12-degree 
aperture and resolution of 200 meters.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG stated that 
the new multipurpose satellite will have electronic imaging 
equipment with a resolution of 20 meters, a ten-fold improvement. 
   Press reports also indicate the multipurpose satellite may be 
orbited by an indigenous booster.  An article in the 8 October 1993 
HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN stated that South Korean satellites "beginning 
about the year 2000" will be launched by an "indigenous three-stage 
rocket that is under development," a probable reference to KARI's 
KSR program, which is budgeted through 1998.  An article in the 9 
May MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN reported that the Hyundai Group may also 
build a space-capable rocket with Russian technology through its 
subsidiary Hyundai Technology Development Corporation.  MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN explained that Hyundai, which has a joint venture 
agreement with the Russian firm Yakovlev to build airplanes, "in the 
long term" will also be involved in aerospace development including 
a "launch vehicle for earth satellites." 
   (Author:  Hannas.  Questions and/or comments, please call Chief, 
Southeast Asia/Korea Branch at (703) 733-6522. 
EAG/9JUN94/MILF/TNDF/ASIA DIVISION CS 09/1443z jun 

