Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Starikevich report: "Fixture Between the Strike </F>
Committee and the Government Postponed Until 22 February"] 
  [Text] Minsk -- The events of 15 February showed that the 
workers' movement in the republic is not yet strong enough to 
dictate its will to the authorities or even to make them heed 
the opinion of the strike committees. The situation could 
change in the very near future, however, if the monetary systems 
of Russia and Belarus are not united. 
  The participants in the protest action handed demands for 
the 
government's resignation and for the holding of early 
parliamentary elections to Supreme Soviet Chairman Mechyslaw 
Hryb. The speaker was instructed to reply before 22 February. 
The next demonstration by strikers is scheduled for that day. 
But for the time being the strikers intend to utilize Polish 
experience and hold local strikes -- at two or three enterprises 
each day -- and to postpone mass measures until the said 
deadline expires. 
  Summing up the results of the first day of the strike, it is 
possible to point out that the government succeeded in keeping 
the situation under control thanks to simple measures: the 
payment of wages, the sending of potentially dangerous people on 
compulsory leave, etc. But the ground under its feet is 
becoming increasingly shaky. A social explosion could be 
provoked by any incident, even an insignificant one. It was no 
coincidence that the Supreme Council became hysterical over the 
recent increase in bread prices. The prime minister declared 
from the parliamentary rostrum at the time that the Council of 
Ministers had nothing to do with it and promised to reduce 
prices and to punish the guilty persons. It is hard to guess 
when and where "holes will appear" next time, and there is still 
a question mark over whether the government will have time to 
"stop up the holes." If the suspiciously delayed signing of the 
agreements on uniting the monetary systems does not take place 
or produce the desired results, then it is most likely that no 
additional grounds for the people to voice their displeasure 
will be required: Too many promissory notes for this economic 
miracle have been given out. 
  So far officials have made no comment at all on the first 
day 
of the strike. But their viewpoint on what is happening is 
already known. Prime Minister Vyacheslav Kebich has called the 
strike a "loathsome step." He was, as usual, supported by the 
communists -- which shows once again who sits [zasedayet] in the 
government. The mass media controlled by the Council of 
Ministers have declared that the strike committees' action 
failed. But the government seems thereby to be trying to 
reassure primarily itself. 

