Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 8 Jan (AFP) -- The Revolutionary 
Workers Clandestine People's Union Party (PROCUP-PDL) has 
claimed responsibility for a grenade explosion at the Acapulco 
mayor's office this morning, saying it was an act of solidarity 
with the Chiapas rebels, according to a telephone call to AFP 
today. The explosion did not cause any casualties. 
  In addition to the explosion in Acapulco, a car bomb 
exploded 
today in a mall in southern Mexico City, damaging 20 stores but 
causing no casualties. There was also a bomb scare at the 
Secretariat of Roads and Safety, which is responsible for 
security in the capital. 
  The armed clandestine PROCUP-PDL staged actions during the 
eighties, but in 1990 its leader and 90 members were imprisoned 
in the wake of an operation staged after two guards of the 
newspaper LA JORNADA were killed during a skirmish over the 
delivery of a document. 
  In a communique released to AFP, the group expressed support 
for the actions by the Zapatista National Liberation Army (EZLN) 
in Chiapas and said that the Mexican Army, "under the counsel of 
U.S. imperialism and exceeding the powers of the union, is 
carrying out a strategy of extermination against the insurgents 
and the people, showing no respect for the Geneva convention." 
  "Breaking the chains of fear with which the bourgeoisie 
attempts to immobilize and subjugate our people, we have taken 
up arms and refuse to allow society to be used as a hostage by a 
military dictatorship wearing a civilian democratic mask, which 
has the Mexican Army as its fundamental pillar," the PROCUP 
states. 
  In an appeal to the "Mexican people," the PROCUP-PDL states 
that "we are at war and join the revolutionary armed struggle 
being waged by the EZLN, our parties, other organizations, and 
revolutionary groups." 
  Authorities have beefed up security measures in Mexico 
City's 
international airport and have ordered a check of vehicles 
entering public parking lots to forestall any attack, according 
to a spokesperson for the terminal area. 
  Airport authorities are constantly checking airport 
terminals 
and pedestrian crosswalks and ordering vehicles that linger more 
than five minutes to drive away. 
  City Mayor Manuel Aguilera on Friday ordered security 
measures to be increased in office and public buildings after it 
was learned that two electricity towers were toppled in the 
neighboring states of Puebla and Michoacan, an act for which the 
EZLN claimed responsibility. 

