Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Leonid Nikitinskiy article: "Will the `Spirit of </F>
Parliamentarianism' Take Root in the New Russian Parliament?"] 
  [Text] Ushering in a new epoch in the development of 
parliamentarianism in Russia, Georgiy Lukava, elder of the Duma 
and of civil aviation, very soon saw for himself that it is 
harder to control parliament than an airliner. Without having 
had time to gain height, the State Duma seems to have already 
gone into free-fall.... 
  Behind the outwardly chaotic nature of the events during the 
first days of the State Duma's work two trends can, nonetheless, 
already be divined and merit our attention. These are the 
Duma's desire to structure itself internally in a somewhat 
different and more complex manner than the preprogrammed 
presence of the eight victorious election blocs seemed to 
suggest, and the fact that its possibilities are limited by the 
framework of the Constitution adopted in the referendum. 
  Viktor Chernomyrdin reminded the Duma deputies of this in 
his 
brief speech and defined the Duma's tasks with a characteristic 
verb: to "finish building," referring to the edifice whose 
foundations have already been laid and whose parameters were set 
in advance by the Constitution. Boris Yeltsin was still more 
terse: He simply did not come to the Duma. 
<H5>  1. Purport of the Structuring of Factions </H5>
  The question of the size of the factions and deputies' 
associations was the first stumbling block and attested that a 
compromise in this hall will be difficult. 
  The line of the three largest factions on this question 
depends on their assessment of their own strength and of that of 
their rivals: whether they hope to "drag asunder" competitors 
(which is easier with a minimal threshold for the creation of 
alternative associations), or fear an internal split of their 
own and seek to prevent it with the help of a high threshold. 
The unequivocal support by the followers of Zyuganov and 
Zhirinovskiy for a maximal numerical qualification for the 
creation of new factions (50) attests, rather, to their leaders' 
lack of confidence in their own strength and to their 
orientation not so much toward parliamentary persuasion as 
toward rigid party-factional discipline. 
  Before the break the Liberal Democratic Party and the 
Communist Party, which had united on this question, succeeded in 
securing 220 votes in favor of their version of a solution 
against 189, and some people were already on the point of 
celebrating victory. But then Sergey Kovalev delicately 
reminded them that in the Duma it would no longer be possible, 
as previously in the Supreme Soviet, to experiment in the matter 
of a quorum, which is rigidly defined by the Constitution 
itself. His quiet retort sounded like a warning shot to the 
parliamentarians, who have developed a taste for debate. 
  After the break Zhirinovskiy attempted in a highly despotic 
manner to "squeeze out" the few missing votes, but here the 
obverse side of tough party tactics became clear: Almost 200 
deputies refused to register, and wrecked the quorum. Since the 
number of obstructionists is twice the size of "Russia's 
Choice," this attests, rather, to a protest by independent 
deputies. 
  Attempts should soon be expected in the Duma to implement 
the 
principle of the so-called imperative mandate, which consists in 
the right of a faction to recall its deputies and replace them 
with others in the event of a vote in defiance of the faction's 
fundamental decisions. But the Constitution could once again 
rise up in the way of the "imperative mandate." 
  Intermediate versions of a "semirigid" mandate are 
possible, but any decision which prevents or hinders the 
possibility of voting in defiance of the line of one's own 
faction will also mean little prospect of a further struggle for 
the votes of individual deputies. 
  There remains far less room for a power struggle in the 
State 
Duma than was the case in the Supreme Soviet. In particular, 
with the best will in the world, it will be difficult to blow up 
the speaker of the Duma into a figure like Khasbulatov: The 
Constitution will not permit this. The president has also 
ensured in advance that in financial and technical respects the 
apparatus of the Federal Assembly is dependent on the 
president's administration, and this also makes a struggle for 
apparatus posts in parliamentary structures less attractive. 
<H5>  2. Legislating for Purposes of Self-Publicity </H5>
  The creation of new factions in the Duma or the rejigging of 
existing ones and also the struggle for the posts of speaker, 
vice speakers, and chairmen of parliamentary committees -- posts 
which in themselves do not have very good prospects -- are not 
an end in itself but a means of occupying positions a little 
closer to the microphones. They will be the cause of a decisive 
game, in which the prize will be better chances in the 1996 
presidential election and also in the new parliamentary 
elections due in the foreseeable future. 
  For these purposes there is absolutely no need of real 
power, 
within whose framework it is necessary to resolve specific 
everyday problems, leaving little chance of pleasing the voters; 
nor is there any need for real control over the government, 
which is tantamount toassuming responsibility for its unpopular 
decisions. 
  But the Duma's legislative powers, like the initiatives of 
its individual factions, might be used not so much for positive 
legislative work as in the hope of preelection propaganda. The 
submission of draft laws which are deliberately populist and 
beautifully packaged but devoid of any inner meaning and real 
substance could serve as the most convenient and safe form of 
struggle for the votes of the electorate -- a form approved 
repeatedly in the former Supreme Soviet. 
  But the rigid framework of the Constitution will constantly 
inhibit the State Duma not only in resolving its own internal 
problems but also in legislative improvisations. There will be 
two methods of struggle against the Constitution, which promise 
undoubted publicity success regardless of whether real 
amendments to it are made or rejected. These are, 
conventionally, the "frontal attack" and "sabotage in the rear." 
  Zyuganov's bloc will evidently make it a rule to remind 
people that the Constitution was adopted illegally and is 
invalid ("Carthage must be destroyed"). Zhirinovskiy's bloc, 
which, out of tactical considerations, rather, tied itself to 
preelection approval of the constitutional draft, retains the 
possibility of torpedoing the Constitution by means of extending 
borders or, conversely, sabotaging current legislation. The 
field for such activity, in which all the blocs opposed to the 
government -- from extreme right-wing ones to extreme left-wing 
ones -- can graze widely and freely and put on weight, is marked 
by the totality of draft laws which the government intends to 
propose to the Duma: the Civil Code, the Fundamentals of Land, 
Labor, and Housing Legislation -- approximately 100 draft laws 
in all. 
  Finally, the defense of the provisions of the Constitution 
and of the draft laws in the "package" which conform with it -- 
this is the bridgehead marked out by fate itself for the 
legislative publicity campaign of the pro-government "Russia's 
Choice," from which it cannot retreat without running the risk 
of losing face with that part of the electorate which supports 
it. But it is so disadvantageous tactically that the process of 
desertion could start from here. We are afraid that the 
government itself will go over "in opposition" to "Russia's 
Choice." 
<H5>  3. Digression on the "Spirit of Parliamentarianism" </H5>
  The first days of the State Duma's work, like the 
preparatory 
period, have been quite symptomatic but do not enable us to make 
more precise operational forecasts. Therefore we will yield to 
the temptation to discourse a little on broader topics -- 
parliamentarianism in general, for example. 
  No one, in actual fact, can explain exactly what 
"parliamentarianism" or the "spirit of parliamentarianism," 
which is in general use, is. Therefore it is harder to point to 
an example of its presence than its absence. There is no need 
to prove that this very "spirit of parliamentarianism" did not 
even exist fleetingly in Khasbulatov's Supreme Soviet, at least 
in its last phase of development. Comparing, in hindsight, the 
congresses of Russian and Union deputies, we conclude in 
amazement that the latter were more in keeping with this very 
"spirit of parliamentarianism," although they were sincerely 
reviled by as yet unfledged parliamentary journalists. 
Therefore, on meeting Anatoliy Lukyanov, for example, in the 
lobby of the State Duma, these same journalists, but now with 
experience (for politicians come and go, but journalists 
remain), have nostalgic feelings, as if the "spirit of 
parliamentarianism" had suddenly materialized before them -- not 
in its entirety but in one of its guises. 
  Parliamentarianism, in actual fact, is not form but 
content, a system of concepts and relations which entails, above 
all, cooperation, partnership, compromise, and deference to 
another's opinion. The outward "architectural" devices of the 
constituting of power, such as the system of "checks and 
balances" or the very sophisticated electronic voting system, 
are designed merely to make the physical house of parliament 
more comfortable in the hope that the "spirit of 
parliamentarianism" will finally settle here as a welcome guest. 
But parliamentarianism has evidently had a parting of the ways, 
for a little while, from those institutions which we call 
"parliamentary" primarily on the basis of their outward form. 
  In the former Supreme Soviet it was frightened off by the 
clear predominance of politics over law. Expressed as a 
fraction, this correlation, which actually characterizes the 
level of parliamentarianism in each specific parliament, was 
approaching zero. If the laws which were produced there 
sometimes took into account the vector of the public good, it 
was only by virtue of a chance coincidence with the factional 
interests of individual groups captivated by the struggle for 
power. 
  Will the "spirit of parliamentarianism" get on with the new 
deputies in the State Duma? At present there is very little 
hope of this, and the reasons, in general, are the same. The 
factions' preparatory maneuvers already attest that the new 
generation of parliamentarians is at once starting where the 
previous generation left off: with a struggle for power and 
influence waged by apparatus methods, instead of at least 
outlining a list of priority law-drafting and legislative work. 
  And yet, however great the temptation to turn the new 
parliament, following the former one, into a showground of 
political struggle, the rigid constitutional limitation of the 
possibilities of waging that struggle "under the carpet" will 
suddenly cool the interest in it and make the most sober members 
of the State Duma turn their attention to positive legislative 
activity. Of course, this routine work will not suit everyone: 
It requires skill and patience and outwardly is by no means as 
effective as appeals from the parliamentary microphone to wage 
war in the interests of great Russia on, let us say, Kuala 
Lumpur. 
  In my view the deputies of the State Duma, as of the 
Federation Council and also of all other conceivable and 
inconceivable parliamentary institutions, should be responsibly 
aware of their role in Russia today, neither belittling it nor, 
on any account, exaggerating it. Russia is certainly not a 
democratic country, at any rate not in the sense of the form of 
rule, at any rate not at the present phase of its historical 
development. 
  Russia today has become presidential in form or, rather, 
authoritarian in terms of the inner content of power not thanks 
to nor despite the rather illogical actions of Yeltsin and his 
team but by virtue of the circumstances which have taken shape 
and which obey different, not subjective, natural laws of 
historical development. 
  The State Duma will also have to obey them. The Duma has a 
worthy occupation which conforms with both the demands and the 
opportunities of the present day: to improve legislation from 
the viewpoint of its form, not its political content, without 
trying to confront the presidential structures in this area. 
Attempts to go against the tide (apparently against Yeltsin, 
but essentially against the vector of history) could end, most 
likely, only in the Duma's sharing the fate of the Supreme 
Soviet. 
  But even if Boris Yeltsin suffers defeat in another clash 
with pseudoparliamentarianism and with "factions" which actually 
aspire to still more monopoly power, this certainly will not be 
a victory for true parliamentarianism. Any leader who replaces 
him (at what price?) in this or another post designated somehow 
differently, except in a presidential election, will be doomed 
to become a dictator -- what kind of dictator and how cruel a 
dictator will depend, inter alia, on his personal qualities and 
the promises with which he has managed to bind himself. 

