Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Josef Joffe editorial: "Diplomacy With an Iron Fist"] </F>
  [Text] "This is a good beginning," Bill Clinton announced. 
"Every time NATO shows determination, this bears fruit." The 
U.S. President is right. Before the alliance made its decision, 
the Serbs announced the withdrawal of heavy artillery from 
Sarajevo. Things like that have happened before. Every time the 
West thought publicly about air strikes, Karadzic and Milosevic 
behaved as though they had learned diplomacy from the 
appeasement specialist Neville Chamberlain. 
  The NATO ultimatum threatening with a military intervention 
was a good beginning, both morally and in terms of realpolitik. 
We should not forget what has been happening in Sarajevo in the 
past 22 months. "This is no civil war but a war against 
civilization, against coexistence in a multicultural and 
multireligious society characterized by tolerance," the chief 
editor of OSLOBODJENJE ("Liberation") wrote in Sarajevo. This 
kind of society existed indeed, and the fact that such 
experiments are so rarely successful makes this crime against 
civilization all the more vile. 
  Every shell that does not hit Sarajevo in the future, and 
every human being that is not killed will justify the NATO 
ultimatum. Sometimes politics is reduced to its essential core, 
which is not to create heaven on earth but to prevent Cain from 
slaying Abel. 
  Yet what will happen afterward? If the goal were only to 
destroy the Serbian artillery and to interrupt the supply lines, 
the strategists, who are watching the war from their homes, 
would not have to worry. NATO has prepared itself for day X for 
many months. It knows the targets and possesses the required 
equipment (slow, low-flying aircraft with high-precision target 
systems) for attacking the Serbs in the mountains without any 
risks. Once the television-controlled missiles and the 
laser-guided bombs are launched, the risk for Radovan Karadzic's 
supporters in Belgrade will change. Slobodan Milosevic should 
know that he cannot survive an escalation. The NATO planes can 
paralyze the remainder of Serbia's economy within a short period. 
  One thing should be clear: Those who determinedly dust off 
the slogan "political problems cannot be solved by military 
means" forget that sometimes violence can only be answered with 
violence. Of what use is the most subtle diplomacy if it is not 
supported with an iron fist? If they were honest, the 
frustrated mediators Owen and Stoltenberg would admit that in 
the event of the Bosnian war. During negotiations, reason 
prevailed only so long as the threat was there. 
  The basic problem is: To use an oft-quoted formula of Max 
Weber, politics not only has to do with ideology but also with 
responsibility. On Wednesday evening [9 February], NATO assumed 
responsibility for Sarajevo. Bosnia has become the alliance's 
ward. Yet neither the guardian nor the ward will be happy about 
the relationship. 
  What happened in Brussels was commitment by committee; in 
the 
aftermath of a massacre, the 16-member body assumed an 
obligation that such a committee can hardly fulfill -- neither 
militarily nor politically. Besides (simple) air strikes, a 
tactical nightmare is opening up. Once the Serbs are punished, 
the next target might be the expansionist Croatians and Muslims. 
Would the democratic public understand such considerations of 
balance? Military force would have to serve a political goal: 
The establishment of a more or less stable order among the 
three groups. The ultimatum was preceded by a seemingly endless 
agony. How much unity is to be expected when the mixture of 
diplomacy based on the use of force must be newly adjusted every 
day? 
  This list could be extended endlessly. Still, the most 
clever arguments expressing concern cannot be the last resort. 
It is true that a responsible policy must also explore the 
consequences, but worries about possible water damage should not 
prevent the fire brigade from the most urgent action: The fire 
must be extinguished immediately, and the lives of the people 
must also be saved immediately. Which is better: Nonviolent 
negotiations and watching how the ward is being killed, or first 
fending off the murderers and then developing a policy with the 
support of weapons? The answer is quite obvious. 
  For this reason, the NATO ultimatum was a "good beginning," 
despite all the ifs and buts. This was confirmed by the Bosnian 
Serbs before the adoption of the decision when they vowed to 
withdraw their heavy artillery. It is now important to ensure 
that the Serbs keep their promise: The threat must continue to 
exist and be carried out if need be. Otherwise the old game -- 
a short break and then even more violent attacks -- will start 
again. 
  It is true that bombs do not create a political order. Yet 
bombs can ensure the grain of credibility that the policy on 
Bosnia has lacked over the past 22 months. The combat aircraft 
must remain in the air -- and the allies will have to 
demonstrate staying power. 

