Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Wolfram Engels: "Negative Tax"] </F>
  [Text] A similar development has been apparent in all 
industrial countries since about 1970: The demand for poorly 
qualified labor is declining. The elimination of unskilled labor 
has two causes: rationalization and competition from low-wage 
countries. The more unskilled the work is, the more easily it 
can be performed by machines. Automation of factories has 
eliminated the requirement for a large portion of the unskilled 
workers who were formerly needed. When it comes to simple and 
labor-intensive products, industry in the developed world is no 
longer competitive: They are being imported from low-wage 
countries. These trends can be easily projected into the future. 
With the improvement and reduction in cost of data processing 
technology, rationalization will continue and increasingly take 
hold in the service sector. The displacement of production to 
low-wage countries will increase in tempo and threaten even jobs 
requiring higher qualifications. 
  There are two responses to this challenge. In America, the 
result was an ever greater wage spread. Since 1970, the real 
wage for unskilled labor has declined by about a quarter while 
it has increased for skilled work. The unskilled workers let go 
by industry have, for the most part, found jobs in the service 
sector: In America windshields are still cleaned at gas stations 
and purchases are still bagged in grocery stores. 
  In Germany on the other hand, as in the other countries of 
Europe as well, an ever growing base of unemployment among the 
unskilled is being formed--a hard core that continues to grow 
even in a period of economic recovery. In contrast to America, 
wage policy sought to reduce wage differences. The lower wage 
groups were assisted with base wage supplements to a greater 
extent than were the upper groups. The incentive was thus 
correspondingly greater in Germany than it was in the United 
States to replace unskilled labor with machines or to eliminate 
it entirely. There are hardly any full-service gas stations here. 
  The parties to collective wage bargaining did not choose 
this 
path entirely voluntarily. There was ever greater overlap 
between incomes in the lower brackets and social welfare 
payments--particularly in the case of families with children. In 
Germany therefore, wage spread such as in America would only 
have resulted in more workers going on welfare and achieving a 
higher income with a little off-the-books work. The results of 
German policy then were simply unemployment for the unskilled 
and ever more welfare recipients. In 1970, only 1.5 million 
people were receiving welfare; today, their number is about 4 
million in the old laender alone. The increase consists almost 
exclusively of persons of working age and their children. 
  That is expensive for society as a whole. The average 
household in the old laender must pay about 1,500 German marks 
[DM] in taxes each year just for welfare. The costs of 
unemployment among the unskilled are not much less. Moreover, 
their social environment produces increasing crime. Yet it is 
not the high costs, but the fate of these people on the 
periphery of society that is the real scandal. 
  If we are not willing to accept the American solution to the 
problem--increasing differences in incomes--and yet, on the 
other hand, the market is not producing high wages for unskilled 
labor, then only a single solution remains: Wages must be left 
up to the market and unsuitable discrepancies must be corrected 
later. The instrument for this is the so-called negative tax. It 
has been advocated in politics for years by the Greens; some 
months ago it cropped up in the campaign platform of the Free 
Democratic Party (FDP), and last week it was adopted into the 
Christian Democratic Union's (CDU) party program. For all that, 
the impetus for latter-day discussions of it comes from Social 
Democracy. The inventor of the negative tax, Lady Rhys-Williams, 
was an active member of the Fabian Society, a leftist 
intellectual British club. Of course, since arch-free-marketeer 
Milton Friedman has been advocating the instrument, it has 
become disreputable in the ranks of the Social Democratic Party 
of Germany (SPD). 
  In its simplest version, the matter looks like this: The tax 
scale is composed of a proportional percentage--30 percent, for 
example--and a fixed amount to be claimed as a deduction 
("standard deduction") of DM8,000, for example. For an income of 
DM60,000, there would then be a tax obligation of DM18,000 minus 
DM8,000, which calculates out to [a total obligation of] 
DM10,000. If the taxpayer earned only DM20,000 annually, the 
same calculation would result in a DM6,000 tax obligation minus 
the DM8,000 standard deduction and therefore a negative DM2,000. 
The taxpayer then does not have to pay tax: He gets back DM2,000 
from the revenue office. 
  The genius of the idea is that today a welfare recipient's 
supplementary income from work is added almost fully to his 
welfare receipts; the implicit marginal tax rate is close to 100 
percent. For that reason, wages below the level of welfare 
payments are not feasible. With the negative tax, however, wages 
can be below it because the worker is still considerably better 
off than with welfare alone. 
  Originally, the negative tax was recommended for a different 
purpose: It was supposed to bring order to our chaotic 
redistribution system--a system in which no one can know any 
more who is paying how much to whom. It seems today that it is 
also the only idea that offers a prospect of success in 
combating unemployment among the unskilled. 

