BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Walter van Hulst: "Automobile Flywheel Saves One </F>
Third In Fuel"] 
  [Text] Eindhoven -- The combination of a hybrid drive, a 
high-speed rotating drive wheel, a combustion engine, and a 
continuous variable transmission (CVT), can save 30 to 40 
percent of fuel in private cars without any loss of performance 
or comfort. 
  E. Spijker, who hopes to obtain his doctorate at the 
Technical University of Eindhoven on Friday 15 April, includes 
in his thesis solutions for the regulation and control of such a 
hybrid transmission in combination with a CVT, using some 
electronic measurement and control engineering but based mainly 
on mechanics. Spijker conducted his research in collaboration 
with Van Doorne's Transmission in Tilburg. In the Traffic 
Technology Group's laboratory, run by Professor Dr. Ir. R. 
Kriens in Eindhoven, a working model is being tested. According 
to Spijker, enough experience has now been obtained to be able 
to build a moving prototype. There will probably be a follow-up 
to his research. 
  The hybrid transmission, when combined with the CVT, is more 
or less an alternative to the electric car, which has a short 
driving radius and is really only suitable for use in urban 
areas. The research carried out in Eindhoven is aimed at the 
curbing both consumption by and emissions from the ordinary 
gas-driven car. 
  In the past, much research has already been carried out on 
both the CVT and the use of a drive wheel, and also on a 
combination of the two. Initially the CVT was known for its 
rather weak transmission, certainly when combined with a drive 
wheel. Van Doorne's Transmission has, however, developed it to 
become an extremely dependable technology. 
  Control and regulation of the combined CVT and drive wheel 
was another problem, partially due to vibration and possible 
peak torque. Such a flywheel continues turning when something 
goes wrong. Allowing smooth changes in revolutions was also 
quite a job. Today's spoilt driver is, after all, used to a 
vehicle that does not vibrate. 
  The research institute CCM in Nuenen, collaborates with 
Novem 
on a drive wheel for use in buses and trains. Dr. Ir. F. 
Thoolen, the company's project leader, obtained his doctorate at 
the end of last year at the Technical University in Eindhoven on 
an electronic regulation. The CCM design is at the moment 
undergoing endurance tests, the results of which are expected by 
the coming Spring. In his design Spijker uses a 
fiber-reinforced plastic drive wheel developed by CCM which is 
light and small, and suitable for very high revolutions, but he 
solves the problem of regulation mechanically. He is very 
enthusiastic about the practical applications. It will be 
possible to drive a prototype within a few years, without any 
space problems. "The whole system has already been built once 
into a Volvo 480 which did indeed have a very sloping hood. But 
that was not a problem. The only problem was the air filter." 
  The Eindhoven Traffic Technology group is primarily focused 
on the themes of safely and the environment. According to 
Spijker and his supervisor, Ir. R. van der Graaf, as far as the 
environment is concerned, the automobile industry refuses to 
cooperate when it involves long-term, speculative research. 
Competition is cutthroat and investment has to produce quick 
returns, particularly now that the sector is in a deep 
depression. A disappointment for the Kriens group was the 
withdrawal two years ago of Volvo as a research partner. But 
the Eindhoven Technical University has decided to continue by 
itself in the field of variable transmission, wherever possible 
with the support of third parties such as Novem [Netherlands 
Association of Energy and the Environment]. 

