BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Yasushi Akashi, special </F>
representative of the UN secretary-general, by editorial staff 
writer Atsuko Yamamoto, at the office of the UN Protection 
Forces in Zagreb on 17 May: "Isolationism in the United States 
Obstructs Peace"] 
  [Text] He has been criticized as weak by the United 
States, which has felt strongly about using military power. But 
in mid-February, the United Nations Protection Forces and NATO 
(North Atlantic Treaty Organization) succeeded in lifting the 
siege of Sarajevo, using the pressure of "bombing." Through the 
skillful use of carrots and sticks, they gained good results. 
Akashi told me this frankly. 
  "The analyses of the UN Protection Forces and NATO were 
exactly the same. We could have taken collaborative steps for 
Gorazde in April, too." 
  In late April, the shelling of the eastern town of Gorazde 
by 
the Serbian forces continued. NATO gave a bombing ultimatum, 
and Akashi, on the other hand, obtained a truce agreement from 
the leadership of the Serbian forces. NATO Secretary-General 
Woerner strongly pressed for carrying out the bombing, but 
Akashi did not consent. That is one of the reasons for the U.S. 
criticism. 
  "The removal of heavy artillery by the Serbian forces from 
within a 20 km radius of Gorazde was progressing in the right 
direction. Though we would expose violations as such, we could 
distinguish violations which would be critical to the truce 
agreement from other violations. I am positive that NATO, too, 
would not want to start bombing prematurely, when a weapon, 
which was totally useless, was found." 
  All sorts of risks accompany the use of military power. Even 
though the United States wants to demonstrate its leadership 
through bombing, Akashi cannot make up his mind so easily. 
  "If the UN Protection Forces abandon the character of being 
an objective third party, provision of humanitarian assistance, 
which was the original objective, cannot be realized. Even if 
military personnel were to remain, if the people engaged in 
humanitarian activities and the NGO's (non-governmental 
organizations) were to be viewed with hostility, then they could 
no longer remain in the area, which would be at odds with our 
priorities. It is necessary to look after the Protective 
Forces, which numbers over 30,000 personnel, and the people 
engaged in humanitarian aid. 
  When military power is to be used, we must always think 
about 
what would follow. Even the limited bombing in mid-April gave a 
great shock to the Serbian forces. About 150 Protective Forces 
personnel were consequently detained, and we had difficulty 
securing their release. 
  Those considerations are now ignored, and "rewarding good 
and 
punishing evil" permeates the atmosphere. In the democratic 
nations, it is an increasing phenomenon that the mass media has 
fallen into such a line, and the political leaders also have 
been influenced accordingly. It may make one feel good for 
awhile [to use military power], but then what happens afterward?" 
  Akashi's view did not match that of NATO. 
  "As a result of the Somalia experience, the expectations for 
the United Nations, which had grown in the post-Cold War era, 
have faded. If we fail in the former Yugoslavia, I believe that 
it will take us back about 10 years. We bear that 
responsibility. No matter how insistently we discuss this 
matter with NATO people, however, there are things they 
apparently fail to understand." 
  On 13 May, a conference of foreign ministers conference 
involving the United States, Russia, and five major EU countries 
was held, and the Bosnia situation entered a new phase. The 
foreign ministers conference set the ratio for territorial 
division at 51 percent for the Federated Moslem and Croatian 
forces, and 49 percent for Serbian forces. 
  "In Cambodia it made our work easier because the major 
countries were in agreement. But in the former Yugoslavia, 
there have been problems because they cannot keep in step. It 
is really great that the United States changed its policy on the 
decision of the 13th." 
  The premature recognition of independence by the former EC 
(European Community) headed by Germany and the frequently 
changing American responses led to the war becoming a quagmire. 
  "Last summer, the United States insisted on bombing, though 
it did not send to Bosnia any ground forces and had some 
disagreement with the United Kingdom, France, Canada, and other 
nations that had sent troops. 
  Moreover, the U.S. Government believes that Europe is too 
accommodating to the Serbs. It feels that it is not right to 
ignore their aggressive character and simply pursue peace. It 
wants to help the victim, the Bosnian Government side. It is a 
very good thing that such a gap has been filled. 
  Some observers believe that U.S. support is preventing the 
Bosnian Government from compromising and putting off peace. The 
U.S. Senate has adopted a resolution calling for the lifting of 
the arms embargo against Bosnia. 
  "Hmm. I decline to make any comment on that. It concerns 
a nation's domestic politics, and the U.S. Government has become 
touchy about my comments. Whatever I say will be misunderstood." 
  In late April, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations 
Albright 
strongly protested Akashi's remark that "the United States has 
been hesitant and timid since Somalia" as "a statement totally 
inappropriate for an international public servant." 
  "I have been equally critical of isolationism both within 
the 
United States and in Japan. I was not criticizing the U.S. 
Government. Rather, I am frustrated by the inward-looking 
attitude that has been emerging both in the United States and 
Japan. I expect that everyone with good sense understands this." 
  The Bosnian Government once demanded his dismissal because 
it 
felt he was partial to the Serbians. 
  "A neutral mediator is destined to be criticized by everyone 
in a dispute. I am philosophical about it and am prepared to 
see things through. Anyone who wishes to be praised by everyone 
can never take up such a task." 
  Before he assumed his post, he had said that chances for 
peace would not emerge in the absence of a feeling of 
war-weariness. Is the war-weary feeling now spreading? 
  "The Serbian forces probably feel that they have taken all 
they can take. They probably also feel it all right to cough up 
a portion of the territory taken. Croatia, which wishes to 
concentrate on domestic building, also wishes to pull out soon." 
  "But the Bosnian Government, basically the victim, strongly 
wishes to continue insisting on recovering territory while 
expecting support from the United States and other countries." 
  The Bosnian Government has expressed its dissatisfaction 
with 
its 51 percent share of territory. Some in the international 
community are also apprehensive that such a decision will result 
in the recognition of aggression by the Serbian forces. 
  "The issue is quality rather than quantity. Which land and 
which cities go to which side? What about access to the 
Adriatic Sea? It is possible to satisfy sufficiently each 
other's interests in a rough ratio." 
  But even if peace is achieved, if dissatisfaction remains 
there is the danger that the war will start all over again. 
  "The people must feel strongly about their own land where 
their ancestors have been buried. To leave such land behind is 
a great hardship. But otherwise, peace will never come." 
  "In addition to territories which are clearly divided, in 
some areas, mutual inter-mingling must be possible. It is 
important to advance somehow the coexistence among peoples while 
respecting popular nationalism." 
  "There is no clear theoretical solution for the 
contradiction 
of popular self-determination and coexistence. How do you let 
both have their way? As for the Serbian issue in the Claina 
Region in Croatia, I think that the Serbians will abandon the 
idea of independence if there are good prospects that their 
autonomy on a wide scale is guaranteed in the constitution." 
  It has been decided that peace-keeping forces will be sent 
to 
Rwanda, where about 200,000 people have been massacred during 
the civil war. The danger of regional strife is swirling 
throughout the world. To what extent should the United Nations 
get involved? 
  "It depends on where the general consensus of the 
international community is. The other day, Secretary-General 
Ghali said in Paris that Europe and the United States become 
exited and seek to intervene when seventy people are killed in 
the market place in Sarajevo but would not lift a finger even if 
hundreds die in Africa. 
  "The time will come when the issues of security and peace 
will be viewed from a global perspective rather than in terms of 
a single country. But that is a winding road, and it may take 
one to two centuries. Until then, each country will view things 
with a regional distortion." 
  As the sending of peace keeping forces to Rwanda was stalled 
because of U.S. opposition, the United Nations today can not 
take actions transcending the national interests of its member 
countries. 
  "I have been daily struggling, acting with the thought of 
showing the unique UN capabilities. I also receive all sorts of 
criticism because of it. The United Nations is a living 
organism. It is not a perfect one, but it is not a totally 
defective one. I think Japan, too, should participate in the 
process of creating the ideal United Nations. 
  What do you expect from Japan? 
  "Japan, reflecting upon the war, shifted to pacifism and, 
under the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, has grown like bean 
sprouts in a green house. Japan has not been tossed around by 
the rough waves of international relations." 
  "But the time has come for Japan to pay the cost of peace. 
Desiring to become a permanent member of the Security Council is 
fine. But unless Japan defines what it wants to seek, what it 
wants to achieve, it will run the risk that its diplomacy will 
be detached from the people." 
  "At this point, Japan should participate actively in 
peacekeeping activities. Unlike Germany or Turkey, which have 
historical ties, Japan's hands are clean when it comes to the 
former Yugoslavia. Japan has even fewer problems politically 
sending forces there than in sending them to Cambodia." 
  "If Bosnia is difficult, it would be good if Japan were to 
consider sending them to Macedonia and Croatia." 
  Akashi said that when we send troops for peacekeeping 
activities, we have to expect some degree of loss and sacrifice. 
  "For a police officer, dying in the line of duty, whether in 
Japan or abroad, has the same meaning. To say that dying for 
the United Nations is bad is, I think, an example of Japanese 
self- righteousness and an insular mentality." 
  Is a police officer killing someone in self-defense the same 
as a Japanese sent to a foreign country as a member of an 
organized group killing a foreigner in self-defense? 
  "The point is in self-defense. I am against Japan alone 
deploying overseas. But in the former Yugoslavia, under the UN 
flag, it will act along with 35 other countries. If we consider 
the United Nations in its international and global dimensions, 
and can agree, then we should send people." 
  It has been about half a year since he arrived at his post. 
He is obliged to make decisions on daily developments in the 
situation while being the target of criticism from different 
directions. It is a lonely duty. 
  "I may be a masochist. The other day, Mrs. Sadako Ogata (the 
UN High Commissioner for Refugees) said on the phone that 'you 
are really hanging in there. You are probably so tenacious 
because you are from the Tohoku region.' I do not feel the 
pressure much. I may be optimistic, or perhaps insensitive. I 
act according to several somewhat simple principles." 

