BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on "exclusive" interview with ANC President Nelson </F>
Mandela by David Beresford in Johannesburg; date not given] 
  [Text] Nelson Mandela spelled out his philosophy of 
government as he prepared yesterday to take over the leadership 
of South Africa, saying: "Let bygones be bygones. Let us heal 
the wounds of the past." 
  The African National Congress president, whose triumph in 
the 
majority-rule elections is expected to be confirmed this 
weekend, placed emphasis on rule by multi-party consensus. 
  Interviewed in the Johannesburg hotel he is using as a 
temporary headquarters, Mr Mandela looked relaxed and confident 
as he outlined his approach to the presidency which will crown 
his life-long battle against the last outpost of 
institutionalised racism. 
  The ANC leader said both police and military commanders had 
swung behind him, and he was confident of achieving the goal of 
national reconciliation. 
  Mr Mandela said it would be an executive presidency, 
dismissing speculation that he would go into semi-retirement as 
a ceremonial head of state. But he said it was crucial that the 
entrenched power-sharing government should not be an empty shell. 
  "If we bring in a political party which has succeeded in 
winning 5 per cent and more of the total votes cast in an 
election, they must feel they are part of a government; they 
must feel they are part and parcel of wielding power," he said. 
  "Even if we emerge with a landslide victory, we have to be 
very careful not to create the fear that the majority is going 
to be used for the purpose of coercing the minorities." 
  The intention, Mr Mandela said, was to maintain in 
government 
the tradition of consensus that had proved so successful in 
constitutional negotiations. Policy had to be "the collective 
responsibility of every political party that is involved in the 
government of national unity". 
  He denied this would lead to governmental parallsis, 
pointing 
out that the negotiations had involved 26 political parties 
"pulling in different directions", but had made "extraordinary 
achievements". 
  "I keep on warning against one organisation -- no matter how 
strong -- taking unilateral decisions in regard to matters that 
require the consultation of all political parties. We have made 
progress since 1990 precisely because we have not forgotten the 
principle that consensus in addressing major national issues is 
critical." 
  Whites, with their training and skills, were vital to the 
future of the country, Mr Mandela said. "That is why we are 
saying to them: `South Africa is your country.'" All South 
Africans, bound together by "a common loyalty and a common love 
for their common fatherland", had to be part of society's 
transformation. 
  The process of consultation should apply even to such issues 
as re-naming streets and landmarks, he said. Changes to symbols 
should be subject to "very intense and patient and serious 
discussions with all the parties that are involved", so as to 
avoid frightening or antagonising minority communities. 
  Mr Mandela hinted that the world's longest-serving foreign 
minister, Pik Botha, might keep his job, indicating which 
members of the National Party would be welcomed into his cabinet. 
  He named Roelf Meyer, the minister of constitutional 
development, Kobie Coetsee, the minister of justice and defence, 
and Leon Wessels, the minister of manpower, as "genuine South 
Africans who want problems solved realistically". He described 
Mr Botha as one of the most enlightened members of the National 
Party. 
  Showing a striking change of attitude towards the security 
forces, Mr Mandela said their "lack of credibility and 
legitimacy is now being wiped out". He said they should be seen 
as representing "the nation and the community". 
  Mr Mandela disclosed that he had addressed the general staff 
of both the police force and the South African Defence Force and 
had held strategy discussions with the police commissioner, 
General Johan van der Merwe, at his home. 
  Once branded a terrorist, Mr Mandela said the police and the 
defence force, as well as the national intelligence service and 
the civil service, would "play an important, if not decisive 
role"in this transformation, and anyone who wants to demonise 
them is rendering a disservice to South Africa". 
  On the question of indemnity, he confirmed that people who 
had committed crimes in the defence of apartheid before October 
1990 would be guaranteed a pardon on the same basis that it had 
been granted to antiapartheid activists. 
  Indemnity for offences committed between October 1990 and 
December 1993 would be subject to the discretion of the new 
parliament. He said his own view on such offenders was that "we 
must consider granting them indemnity". He added: "But you must 
appreciate, of course, that People have lost their families and 
are feeling very bitter, and we will have to consider the 
question case by case in so far as that category is concerned." 
  "But my approach is let bygones be bygones...And we will 
adopt a solution in regard to each case that is influenced by 
that principle." 
  He said the ANC still wanted to set up a truth commission to 
investigate civil rights abuses during the anti-apartheid 
struggle. "The truth commission (and I say we may change the 
name if it creates concern on the part of the security forces) 
is intended to collect evidence to deal with those people who 
want to be indemnified -- not for the purpose of having a 
Nuremberg trial, but for the purpose of granting an indemnity on 
an individual basis." 
  Asked whether this meant the commission would hear evidence 
but keep it secret, Mr Mandela said: "That is what happened when 
we [ANC members] were granted an indemnity. There was no 
disclosure that so-and-so committed this offence. The same 
thing must happen to those who committed offences in defence of 
apartheid." 
  "I don't think we should expose people," he added. 
Confessions would be required only to identify the offence for 
which the indemnity application was being made. "That is the 
end of the matter; he will be granted an indemnity. No [public] 
indication is going to be made what crime he committed." 
  Asked how he intended dealing with rightwing extremists, the 
ANC leader said: "We must never forget that the National Party 
of Mr De Klerk was once in exactly the same position as the 
right wing today." 
  The most important weapon against the right wing, he said, 
was the "dialogue, persuasion, criticism, not coercion", that 
had proved successful against the Nationalists. 
  Mr Mandela disclosed that he had held talks with the 
secretive Broederbond, conservative leaders of the main 
agricultural organisations, and the guru of the right, Carel 
Boshoff. He met the leader of the Freedom Front, General 
Constand Viljoen, four times, the Conservative Party leader, 
Ferdie Hartzenberg, three times, and the whole leadership of the 
Dutch Reformed Church twice. 
  He had done this, he said, "because I wanted this process to 
be inclusive. And I have done well." 

