CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Fang Fang [2075 2455]: "Guizhou </F>
Accelerating Development of Wu Jiang's Hydropower, Nine Large 
Hydropower Stations To Be Built on the Trunk of the Wu Jiang"] 
  [Text] Construction and development of southwest China's Wu 
Jiang Hydropower Energy Resource Base Area will be further 
accelerated. The State has now approved construction of the 
Hongjiadu Hydropower Station with an installed generating 
capacity of 540MW on the trunk of the Wu Jiang. 
  This is a "spigot" station on the trunk of the Wu Jiang, an 
important tributary of the upper reaches of the Chang Jiang, as 
well as the third hydropower station being built for cascade 
development of the Wu Jiang as a whole. After its completion, it 
will play an important role in increasing power output in 
downstream cascade power stations. 
  The trunk of the Wu Jiang is a big hydropower "motherlode" 
with a developable total installed generating capacity of 
8,560MW. The State has now formally approved construction of 
nine large hydropower stations on the trunk of the Wu Jiang. 
Wujiangdu Hydropower Station, with an installed generating 
capacity of 630MW, has been completed and is generating power, 
and construction of the Dongfeng Power Station with an installed 
generating capacity of 510MW will be completed in 1994 and will 
be placed into operation. China plans to complete the Wujiang 
Hydropower Energy Resource Base Area with a total installed 
generating capacity of 6,390MW and annual power output of up to 
40 billion kWh within the next 25 years. 
  The Wu Jiang river basin is one of 19 key development zones 
proposed in China's overall territorial development program. The 
largest coal mine base area south of the Chang Jiang, it has a 
full complement of coal varieties and 30.8 billion tons of 
reserves. The river basin also has abundant aluminum, 
phosphorous, manganese, mercury, and other mineral resources, 
including 207 million tons of bauxite, and comes in third place 
for resources in China. It has 2.58 million tons of phosphorous 
ore reserves, which holds second place in China, and it holds 
first place in China in superior-quality phosphorous ore 
reserves. 
  Experts feel that these resource advantages form a rather 
good group of matching configurations and give it comprehensive 
advantages for developing the high energy-consuming raw 
materials industry. 

