Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Daniel Chabbert and Michel Vilnat: "Machine Tool </F>
Industry Still Innovating"; introductory paragraph in boldface 
as published] 
  [Text] The World Machine Tool Fair [EMO] has lived up to 
its reputation as a technological showcase. But the industry is 
in crisis. Mergers and takeovers of firms are increasing. 
  Linear spindle driving motors, very high-speed steel 
machining, and the integration of PC's [personal computers] into 
numerical control were all part of the 10th EMO, which was held 
in Hannover in mid-September and which lived up to its 
reputation as an international technological showcase. But 
economic conditions are not conducive to optimism, especially 
among European manufacturers. 
  A sign of the times: CECIMO [European Cooperation Committee 
for Machine Tool Industries], the organization representing all 
European machine tool manufacturers associations, has just 
presented the European Commission with a document--the first 
ever--in which it makes proposals for maintaining the 
competitiveness of its firms in the world market. The crisis is 
affecting German manufacturers in particular: They are facing a 
wave of mergers and takeovers that has been growing steadily 
stronger in recent months. 
  Following the announcement of Maho's merger with Deckel, 
there is already talk of their joining the Gildemeister group, a 
company that has been sharing its worldwide marketing network 
with Deckel since the beginning of the year. Another German 
merger, that between Traub and Hermle, is being limited solely 
to the marketing network for the time being. In the field of 
large machines, the Doerries-Scharmann group is becoming the 
world leader by acquiring several moribund companies around the 
world in a short period of time (Wohlenberg, Skoda Machine 
Tools, Schiess, and the RD&amp;D). Kennametal, the number one 
American maker of cutting tools, acquired 81 percent of the 
Hertel Company's capital as recently as last August. 
  But that very lively situation is not preventing some 
manufacturers--and not necessarily the biggest--from continuing 
to innovate. Among the most outstanding innovations presented at 
the EMO, those involving numerical control will certainly have 
an important impact in all machine tool sectors. Most of the 
major manufacturers have sought to integrate PC's into their 
numerical control systems. One example is the French 
manufacturer Num, whose PCNC, the fruit of a union between a PC 
and a CNC [computerized numerical control] system, will have 
applications in turning, milling, and so on. The marriage of 
those two technologies opens up numerical control to the OS2/2.1 
multitasking system. It improves versatility considerably. 
Numerical control directs the work process as well as the path 
of the automatic mechanisms. In the meantime, the Intel 486 
microprocessor supervises the man-machine interface. For 
example, it manages the programs and tools, helps with 
maintenance, and makes it possible to use advanced CAD/CAM 
[computer-aided design and manufacturing] programming languages. 
"A detail of interest to future customers is the fact that this 
introduction of the PC into numerical control will have a very 
slight effect on prices," says Jean-Luc Gely, Num's marketing 
and product director. This new development is not restricted to 
Num. GE Fanuc is offering a similar improvement in its CNC-16, 
which has been renamed 16M in honor of the occasion. Like the 
French product, the 16M uses an Intel processor. 
<H5>  Operation Display </H5>
  For its part, Grundig Electronics is also unveiling a new 
generation CNC using three 32-bit processors with Risc 
architecture. Christened the CNC EPL Turn Plus and intended for 
turning operations, it also uses PC-type Windows programming. As 
an example, it can take charge of the entire machining process 
on a two-spindle lathe without the operator's having to concern 
himself with transferring the workpiece from one spindle to 
another. It is also used on the Electro Pilot Turn Plus, a lathe 
that makes it easier to program the numerical control system. 
The workpiece is first machined in the conventional manner using 
electronic levers, and the CN uses that to automatically set up 
the corresponding program. 
  For its part, Siemens is exploring an original path: 
multimedia using its CNC Sinumerik 840C. With this system, the 
operator can observe the operation continually on all or part of 
the screen. Doerries-Scharmann is offering the same arrangement 
on one of its Contumat vertical lathes. 
  Long considered unattainable, the high-speed machining of 
hard materials is beginning to become an industrial reality. 
"Mass-produced" machines of that kind are now being offered to 
users. With its Heynumill 2500-GS portal milling machine, 
Germany's Heyligenstaedt is representative of that trend. For 
semifinishing operations, its machine uses a 20-kW, 10,000-rpm 
spindle with a feed speed as high as 15 meters per minute. For 
finishing operations, it is equipped with a high-frequency 
(25,000 rpm) 16-kW head. 
  Naturally, the Germans are not the only ones to have 
developed high-speed industrial machines. After several years of 
research, Forest Line is offering two lines of portal milling 
machines, both equipped with a 25-kW spindle running at up to 
30,000 rpm. Their main applications are in the finishing of 
molds or pressing dies. An expert at Forest Line says: "Compared 
to a conventional machining cycle, we have reduced the total 
fabricating time by half and even two-thirds in the case of 
complex workpieces." That gain is due partly to faster cutting 
speed and partly to improvements in the geometry and surface 
condition that eliminate the need for manual polishing. 
High-speed machining is not limited to large workpieces. For 
working with small items, Switzerland's Mikron has designed its 
line of HSM machines. They use the architecture of portal 
milling machines and are equipped with high-speed spindles 
capable of running at up to 75,000 rpm in finishing operations. 
  The machining of hard materials, steel in particular, is the 
object of research by manufacturers. One objective is to 
eliminate the grinding phases by machining with the CBN [cubic 
boron nitride] tool. With that in mind, the Hembrug firm 
unveiled its Slantbed-Mikroturn 100-CNC, a highly accurate lathe 
capable of producing workpieces with a tolerance better than 1 
micron and a surface roughness (Ra) of less than one-tenth of a 
micron in hard steels of 60 to 62 Hv. That performance is 
achieved by the use in particular of a Num 1060 numerical 
control system connected to a measuring device permitting a 
resolution of 0.01 micron. A spindle mounted on a gas bearing 
and hydrostatic guides complete the picture. Even more original 
is Kugler's latest offering, the Hydro-air HP-100, which is also 
outstanding in achieving tolerances down to one-tenth of a 
micron and even less. Movement is achieved using linear motors. 
Guiding is handled through the harmonious combination of a 
hydrostatic journal bearing that absorbs stresses and a gas 
bearing that provides high-speed guidance. 
  Innovations also exist in other areas besides that of 
machining with the aid of cutting tools. Charmilles Technologies 
unveiled a new concept in the field of electrical discharge 
machining [EDM]: spark machining by milling. This technique 
combines EDM for forming holes with milling. It uses a system of 
traveling standard cylindrical electrodes to machine the 
workpiece layer by layer. It is no longer necessary to cut 
graphite electrodes in complex forms. "The more complex the 
workpiece, the larger the gain in productivity," says Jean 
Martin, marketing director for Charmilles Technologies. 
  New products for sheet metal work also seem to be synonymous 
with productivity. In the case of Finn-Power, that productivity 
is the result of the impact capacities of its new generation of 
nibbling and punching machine, which achieves and exceeds 1,000 
cps per minute in nibbling operations and over 500 cps per 
minute in punching operations. For its part, Mazak Nissho Iwai 
is focusing on the feed system in its laser cutting tables (now 
with stationary optics). The system consists of a fork whose 
teeth, spaced 50 mm apart, pass between the notches on the 
table, making it possible to unload workpieces automatically if 
they are at least 100 mm long. "Stopping time is comparable to 
that with a table using mobile optics and equipped with a 
palletization system," emphasizes Xavier Rouchaud, marketing 
director for Europe. 
<H5>  Increased Productivity </H5>
  To increase the productivity of bending presses, Amada is 
offering a handling robot that can replace a night crew. 
Suitable for small pieces (from 15 mm to 350 mm), this robot on 
rollers can be placed in front of any kind of press. It is a 
solution that can be considered when retrofitting a machine. 
  For its part, Trumpf is presenting a punching/bending unit 
combining a Trumatic 500 Rotation punching machine with a 
"panneauteuse" manufactured by the Ras Company. This unit's high 
degree of automation and flexibility predestine it for the 
manufacture of workpieces in small and medium-size runs. 
  The Bokoe Company, a German PME [small or medium-size 
business] specializing in the manufacture of flow turning 
machines, is offering a technology for generating boring without 
machining--a technology developed in cooperation with Chemnitz 
University. It consists of boring steel bars that are being 
rotated as though on a lathe. Two types of tools are necessary: 
The first, in cylindrical form, presses against the forward 
surface of the bar while the second, consisting of three 
tangentially placed knurling wheels, gradually crushes the 
periphery of the bar. The operation is comparable to turning on 
a lathe, but without the removal of cuttings. It produces a 
hollow form matching the geometry of the first tool. Smooth or 
grooved holes can be produced in this manner in a single pass. 
Moreover, the surfaces of the bores are similar to those 
obtained by grinding. 
<H5>  Machining Centers At Affordable Prices </H5>
  Not everyone is looking for sophistication. The American 
giant Cincinnati, for example, is aiming at the market for 
"cheap" machining centers with its new Arrow line. Despite a 
price below 400,000 francs, these machines possess very 
interesting characteristics: a displacement speed of 12 meters 
per minute, accuracy of plus or minus 4 microns, a spindle speed 
of up to 6,000 rpm, and a 21-tool changer. This machining center 
is equipped with a specific but nevertheless high-performance 
numerical control system. The American firm is not the only one 
exploring this niche in the market: Switzerland's Mikron 
unveiled its new VCE line, which has very similar architecture. 

