BFN 

<F P=106> ["F.Z."-signed interview with Ferenc Gazdag, director of the </F>
Strategic and Defense Research Institute; place and date not 
given: "We Must Increase Our Military Budget"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [PESTI HIRLAP] How regular 
are your contacts with the Defense Ministry? How often does the 
Defense Ministry request analyses from your institute? 
  [Gazdag] Unfortunately, the system of bilateral relations 
has not yet fully developed. We prepare an annual work program 
and then all the ministry departments and state secretaries 
approve it. So, we have an accepted plan based partly on the 
type of research needed by the ministry and partly on our own 
offers in various fields. [passage omitted] 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] What research programs are currently under 
way? 
  [Gazdag] I think is it enough for me to only describe the 
major ones. The first such major project comprises the 
prevailing issues of the armed forces of the Hungarian Republic, 
as well as the security of Central Europe and Europe as a whole. 
We are now preparing a conference and a bigger publication 
entitled "The Security of Central Europe 1994." We call the 
third major research trend new challenges, new threats, and new 
risks. We must acknowledge the fact that, although the bipolar 
system has collapsed, the time of large-scale military threats 
is over, and there is no longer a NATO-Warsaw Pact 
confrontation, the world has not become much safer either -- at 
least, not around us. Instead of a big nuclear threat, a lot of 
small but real threats have emerged, including many issues that 
are typically not military in nature; nevertheless, the 
researchers must take them into consideration. The refugee 
issue, for example, is such an issue, and it also has security 
elements. The modernization of military technology and the 
structure of armed forces is the fourth area of our research 
activity. This applies exclusively to the Hungarian Defense 
Forces. We have a fifth area, a new area of research, namely the 
relations between the armed forces and the society. [passage 
omitted] 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] As far as I know, you recently visited 
Ukraine. What experiences did you gather? 
  [Gazdag] Our cooperation is extremely varied, including the 
mutual exchange of research materials, analyses, and studies. 
For example, a delegation of the scientific department of the 
Ukrainian Army General Staff held consultations in Hungary for a 
few days in the autumn of 1993. Reciprocating this meeting, 
Hungarian security policy experts held talks in Kiev on 26-28 
April 1994. A member of the Hungarian delegation, Colonel 
Laszlo Nagy, also held talks with the heads of the International 
Research Institute on Global and Regional Security and the 
military policy advisers of the Ukrainian defense minister. In 
the course of these consultations, our experts learned a lot of 
useful things regarding the security policy situation of Ukraine 
and the state of the Ukrainian Armed Forces. They concluded that 
the situation of Ukraine is extremely difficult: a big drop in 
economic performance, inflation, insolvency, and dependence on 
Russia. However, most of our negotiating partners were slightly 
more optimistic than six months ago. They told us that the drop 
had stopped in some areas and the many crisis situations did not 
break the country up. Inflation has also slowed down a little. 
[passage omitted] 
  [PESTI HIRLAP] In the case of Ukraine, the issue of nuclear 
weapons presents a separate problem. 
  [Gazdag] That is true. The tripartite 
Russian-Ukrainian-U.S. agreement signed in January, an agreement 
on Kiev joining the START I agreement, diffused the fears. Two 
shipments of nuclear warheads have been sent to Russia since 
then, and Ukraine received the nuclear fuel for its power 
stations. Kiev took it upon itself to dismantle its nuclear 
devices at a rate stipulated by the START agreement. At the 
same time, Ukraine does not yet intend to join the 
nonproliferation agreement, although the initial antipathy 
toward this agreement seems to be decreasing. It is possible 
that Ukraine will reexamine its position in the near future. 
There is yet another factor in the Ukrainian policy regarding 
the issue of nuclear weapons. In connection with the tripartite 
agreement signed in Moscow, there is a Ukrainian concept that 
seems to be spreading among the military policy experts. 
According to this concept, only the mediation of a third party 
can lead to progress in solving the existing conflicting issues 
between Ukraine and Russia. The supporters of this concept 
would like to include a third party in the ongoing debate on 
Crimea and the Black Sea fleet. The United States would be the 
ideal third party but, if it does not accept this mission, the 
United Nations or other international organizations could also 
be considered. This concept is dangerous inasmuch as Ukraine 
might try to force Washington to join the Ukrainian-Russian 
debate by delaying the dismantling of its nuclear weapons. 
Although the United States repeatedly declared that it does not 
allow itself to be blackmailed, one cannot exclude the 
possibility that Kiev will turn to this doubtful method to 
achieve its goals. Such a step would considerably destabilize, 
first of all, Russian-Ukrainian relations, and this would also 
affect Hungary. [passage omitted] 

