CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Anis Qasim, the legal advisor to the </F>
Palestinian delegation, by Mufidah al-Jaza'iriyah; place and 
date not given--first paragraph is AL-SHARQ introduction] 
  [Text] Cairo--The surprises of the Gaza-Jericho Agreement 
have not ceased since its unexpected birth. Implementation of 
the agreement has been suspended and postponed many times. The 
mood has swung sharply from strong optimism about the imminent 
establishment of a Palestinian self-rule authority to despair 
over the fate of the agreement following the Hebron massacre; 
the continuation of the aggressive, racist, Zionist policy; and 
U.S. resolve to erase Jerusalem's Arab character and to make 
Jerusalem Israel's unified capital. Far from the surprises, on 
the other side of the hill, AL-SHARQ met with Dr. Anis Qasim, 
the legal advisor to the Palestinian negotiating delegation. It 
examined with him drafts of the proposed "constitution" of the 
Palestinian self-rule authority scheduled to be established in 
Gaza and Jericho. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] We first asked Dr. Qasim whether we needed 
a 
constitutional charter at this stage. He said: 
  [Qasim] I am not yet certain of the answer. The Palestinian 
people are entering an experiment in the unknown in the Oslo 
agreement boat. Its land, as established in this agreement, is 
undefined, contrary to the living, historical reality. Even the 
element of the population and sovereignty are intentionally 
"absent" from this agreement, which is mined with enigmas. There 
can be no talk of a constitutional charter in the clear absence 
of these three elements. 
  The question is, why should the Palestinian people fetter 
themselves in rigid constitutional provisions, for any 
constitutional charter is a social contract. Also, the proposed 
constitutional charter is being recommended to the Palestinian 
people from abroad, whereas it should flow freely from the 
interior. The intifadah is the best indication that the 
intifadah leadership has proved its ability to put social values 
into effect without the so-called Palestinian police, which is 
an innovation that did not find its way into that charter. 
  The third point revolves around the relation between the 
banished authority in the interior and the authority of the PLO 
abroad. This relation is extremely complex in its content and 
applications. Will the Palestinian state declared in Algeria in 
1988 answer to the elected authority in the interior or will the 
latter answer to the former? Or, is there a new formula? Are the 
elected representatives of the national authority equal to the 
appointed members of the National Council abroad? and how? Will 
the PLO sacrifice all of the diplomatic accomplishments it has 
achieved over the past 25 years by committing suicide in the 
elected authority, which has been prohibited from engaging in 
any diplomatic activity or international relations during the 
transitional phase? These are three difficulties that I am 
unable to reconcile or resolve. However, I believe that we must 
stimulate discussion on these issues and resolve the 
contradictions before a constitutional charter is drafted. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] However, what are your observations 
regarding the content of the draft constitutional charter to 
which I referred initially? Is it correct that the document is 
tailor-made for Chairman Yasir 'Arafat, as some Palestinian 
politicians maintain? 
  [Qasim] I do not wish to enter into observations regarding 
the provisions of the draft charter. Each provision has its pros 
and cons. The biggest problem regarding constitutional 
provisions is that they must define a vision for the people 
regarding the mapping out of its future. I tend to maintain that 
it may perhaps be more useful for the Palestinians to pursue the 
freedom to experiment, not stipulations that are imposed on 
their experiment. If the PLO leadership wishes use foresight in 
its examination of a method for developing the new entity's 
constitutional status, it must always have in view that it is 
called upon to follow a new norm, constituting a constitutional 
precedent, that enables the Palestinian people to prescribe this 
experiment. The more the experiment expresses the Palestinian 
people's interests and aspirations, the more it will take root 
as a constitutional principle. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Do you mean that you have fears that the 
laws of the Palestinian authority coming from abroad contradict 
and conflict with the aspirations of the Palestinians of the 
interior? 
  [Qasim] Precisely, and I am afraid that we, in our 
forthcoming entity, will repeat the experience of the Third 
World, as represented in the "disengagement" of the executive 
authority at the expense of the legislative and judicial 
authorities, to the degree that the legislative authority 
becomes a hostage of the executive authority's absence. The 
greatest fear faced by the near-term Palestinian future is the 
clash between the Palestinian authority coming from abroad, 
which has flourished by putting on executive muscles and issuing 
executive decisions, and the Palestinian public, which has lived 
in the interior and has made its own laws on an almost daily 
basis in the absence of a national authority. 
  This probable clash will be resolved only through elections 
in which everyone submits to a free electoral process that is 
under international supervision. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Palestinian proponents of democracy fear 
that the elections for the Palestinian authority, which are 
supposed to be held in July 1994, will be postponed. Others fear 
that the elections will be held against the backdrop of an 
election law that would embrace certain political groups or 
forces. What is your comment? What features do you regard as 
appropriate for the crucial elections law? 
  [Qasim] It is essential to hold elections, because the 
process of holding them, particularly general national 
elections, is the first step in building a national authority 
and in demonstrating legal sovereignty. By contrast, I do not 
believe that raising a Palestinian flag or even posting a 
Palestinian policeman at crossings or a joint guard with the 
Israelis is a manifestation of sovereignty. Sovereignty concerns 
the building of institutions, not raising a flag. Elections must 
be held under the supervision of a credible international 
agency. The reason for this proposal is that such supervision 
would prevent control by one party and one leader in the 
upcoming elections. The people must be allowed to vote freely, 
in order to bring to the next legislative authority those people 
who best express the aspirations, interests, concerns, and 
causes of the Palestinian people, who have has suffered directly 
from the occupation. 
  As for the features of the electoral law, the law must be 
selected carefully. In reality, no electoral law is devoid of 
shortcomings. However, our aspiration is that it at least be an 
electoral law that easily accommodates the Palestinian people in 
the interior. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Which is the best system, election by list 
or districts, or a combination thereof as is the case in the 
German system? In other words, would it be preferable to adopt 
the British or American model? 
  [Qasim] Both of these two models have shortcomings. In any 
case, we must establish a law that is devoid of discrimination 
on the basis of religion, guarantee women the right to vote and 
run for office, not divide candidates into Christians and 
Muslims, and lower the voting age to 18. Elections should be 
general and direct. This will preclude groups from controlling 
elections through their material capabilities. In this way, we 
will not fall into the tribulations of a single party, and we 
will protect the people from the intimidation of the Palestinian 
authority and the Israeli authority. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] You are among those in charge of framing 
and 
building a democratic union with a view toward a successful 
Palestinian transition from the revolution phase to the state 
phase. Do you believe that this activity can succeed in 
achieving its goals? 
  [Qasim] I believe that the reform movement will be 
significant, provided that two conditions are met. First, its 
base must be in the interior or the occupied territories. 
Second, Palestinian intellectuals and shapers of Palestinian 
public opinion abroad must support reform without hesitation and 
without straddling the fence between the executive authority in 
the PLO and the reform process. I believe that there is a good 
chance for reform to succeed if these two conditions are met. 
Also, Palestinian circumstances, especially in the contest of 
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, indicate that reform has 
become vitally necessary. The recent Cairo agreement posed this 
problem in a fundamental way, for it showed that we have no 
negotiating method or strategy. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Apropos the Cairo agreement, what is your 
assessment of it from a legal and political standpoint? 
  [Qasim] The Cairo agreement is one manifestation of the Oslo 
agreement. The Oslo agreement symbolized the Palestinian 
leadership's dilemma in the negotiations. The Cairo agreement is 
one manifestation of this dilemma. The Cairo agreement clearly 
constitutes a first, official, Israeli interpretation of the 
Oslo agreement. The contiguity of the occupied territories is 
broken by the settlements. The Cairo agreement was intended to 
further legitimize this dismemberment. The Gaza Strip has been 
divided into three sections. We are therefore agreeing to 
dismember the occupied territories to a degree that is even 
greater than their current state of dismemberment, in search of 
delusive symbols of sovereignty! 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Do you therefore disagree with the view 
that 
the Oslo agreement possesses an automatic mechanism for arriving 
at an independent Palestinian state? 
  [Qasim] Although the Oslo agreement says no to a Palestinian 
state, a state is not built by raising a flag. Nor is it built 
by a policeman at a crossing. The Palestinian state shall be 
built through the establishment of institutions and the popular 
participation of all segments of the Palestinian people for the 
sake of making and implementing decisions. We must avoid symbols 
and emphasize substance. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] Did you not once say, at the start, that 
the 
Oslo agreement would not lead to a Palestinian state? 
  [Qasim] I dealt with this agreement as if it were a type of 
fate and divine decree. At the time, I said that the 
Palestinians's mission was to think of a way to get out of the 
dilemma. I believed that popular sovereignty on the ground is 
the building of institutions. It is the only way to change the 
bad reality that the Oslo agreement will entrench. 
  I believe that the greatest danger in the Oslo agreement 
lies 
not so much in what it stipulates, but in what it does not 
stipulate, namely sovereignty. According to my interpretation, 
the Israelis replaced sovereignty with "cooperation and 
coordination" in all aspects of life, as stated in the 
agreement, including land. 
  The legal interpretation of these words is that, at the end 
of the transitional period, the Palestinians will find the 
Israelis having joint sovereignty with them over their land, 
agriculture, water, trade, and everything. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] I understand from this that the Oslo 
agreement does not even offer the possibility of a Palestinian 
entity confederated with Jordan. 
  [Qasim] The Oslo agreement eliminated the Arab dimension of 
our cause. This is indicated by the fact that the Arab countries 
began to host Israeli delegations days after the signing of the 
agreement, not after its implementation. We lost the Arab world 
and destroyed its resistance in exchange for the signing without 
implementation. In the Oslo agreement, we are a part and a tool 
in the Zionist enterprise, inasmuch as we--we and the 
Israelis--have taken it upon ourselves to develop the region, 
even though we are not equal partners in this partnership 
process. The Oslo agreement legally and politically precludes 
any type of federation or confederation with Jordan or another 
country. It requires the Palestinians to "coordinate and 
cooperate" primarily with Israel, before Jordan, Syria, Egypt, 
and any other Arab state. 
  [al-Jaza'iriyah] It is rumored in Palestinian circles that 
Chairman 'Arafat has been guaranteed the presidency of Palestine 
up to 2004. Is this true? What is the legal basis of this 
conclusion? 
  [Qasim] The third section of the constitutional charter 
states, in the clause dealing with executive authority (Article 
4 pertaining to the president) that the chairman of the 
executive committee shall be the supreme president of the 
executive authority and exercise the powers established for him 
in the PLO charter and in resolutions of the national and 
central councils and the executive committee, in addition to the 
powers established in this law. Article 6 in the same section 
states that the term of the presidency shall be five years, that 
no person may hold the presidency for more than two consecutive 
terms, and that the first president's first term shall begin as 
of his taking of the oath. 
  Article 12 states that the president shall exercise his 
authorities through resolutions, which he shall issue according 
to the law and legal regulations, and that he is the supreme 
commander of the Palestinian security forces or forces that are 
subject to orders. Consequently, 'Arafat will remain the 
president until 2004 if elections are held this July. 

