Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 17 KYODO -- Three outside experts 
recommended by the ruling and opposition parties to give their 
views on political reform bills urged the Diet on Monday [17 
January] to enact the measures during the current session. 
  They made the plea to the House of Councillors on the first 
day of hearings in which members of the public give their views 
on the issue -- a prerequisite before the bills can be out to a 
vote on the floor of the upper chamber. 
  The bills, designed to rid politics of corruption, cleared 
the more powerful House of Representatives last November. 
  The ruling coalition last month extended the current Diet 
session by 45 days until January 29 to achieve Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa's target to get the reform bills into law by 
the end of the parliament session. 
  Osamu Nishi, a professor at Komazawa University, Miyagi Gov. 
Shiro Asano and former upper house member Mitsuyoshi Yajima 
expressed their views on the issue at the morning session of the 
public hearing held in Tokyo prior to Tuesday's hearings in five 
provincial cities. 
  Nishi, recommended by the main opposition Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP), said that if the Diet fails to legislate the bills, 
which could be enacted with a little more effort, the people's 
distrust in politics will deepen. 
  Nishi urged both ruling and opposition parties to move 
closer 
to each other, saying, "it is important to find a compromise." 
  Asano, recommended by the ruling coalition, said "there is 
no 
system that is 100 percent perfect, but if (the bills) have an 
ounce of ideals, I want (the Diet) to enact them during the 
current session." 
  Yajima, also recommended by the coalition, rapped movements 
in the Diet against the bills. 
  On amending the bills, however, Yajima urged the Diet to 
take 
enough time to make whatever improvements are possible, 
suggesting the next regular Diet session, slated to start in 
late January, should tackle the matter. 
  The bills call for replacing the current multiseat 
constituencies for the 511-member lower house with a mixture of 
274 seats elected through single-seat districts and 226 through 
nationwide proportional representation, as well as tightening 
curbs on fund- raising activities. 
  The existing electoral system is believed to be a major 
cause 
of lavish campaign spending because of competition among 
candidates of the same party in single districts, while the 
current political fund control law is seen as having loopholes 
that make it possible for politicians to escape punishment for 
wrongdoing. 
  Meanwhile, the coalition reaffirmed Monday that it will call 
a vote on the bills at Wednesday's session of the upper house's 
political reform committee, a crucial step prior to a vote of 
the full house. 
  At a meeting of leaders from the government and coalition 
parties, Wataru Kubo, secretary general of the largest coalition 
member, the Social Democratic Party [of Japan] (SDP) [SDPJ], 
reaffirmed a desire to conclude upper house debate on political 
reform on Wednesday, Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio 
Hatoyama said. 
  Kubo, who heads the coalition's task force on political 
reform, was quoted as saying the date to put the reform measures 
through the upper house panel should be decided Monday even if 
the opposition disagrees. 
  The coalition will have to set the date by submitting an 
emergency motion to the upper house panel, Kubo was quoted as 
saying. 
  The LDP, on the other hand, will propose to the coalition 
the 
holding of a meeting aimed at amending the bills so that the two 
sides can come closer on the political reform process, LDP 
officials said. 
  Senior LDP members of the upper house committee are expected 
to make the proposal to their coalition counterparts on Monday 
evening, they said. 
  The ratio of single-seat districts in the dual system, the 
electoral unit for proportional representation, and corporate 
political donations are major contentious issues between the two 
sides. 
  In the 252-seat upper house, the ruling coalition has 131 
seats, while the LDP holds 99, the Japanese Communist Party 
(JCP) 11, the Niin Club five and independents five. 
  Several upper house members of the SDP have expressed 
opposition to the bills and could vote against them or abstain, 
greatly weakening the coalition's chances of passing the bills 
in the upper house. 

