BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, 28 Jun -- (JANA) -- The brother leader of 
the revolution [al-Qadhdhafi] has underlined that the proposal 
to put on trial the alleged defendants in the so-called 
Lockerbie case at the International Court of Justice is not a 
Libyan proposal. Rather, it was a suggestion put forward by 
international legal quarters. He explained that the proposal 
was endorsed by the Arab League and the OAU. 
  During a press conference held yesterday at the end of 
Egyptian President Husni Mubarak's visit to the Great 
Jamahiriyah, the brother leader said that this proposal 
represents the only solution to this issue. He pointed out that 
this proposal is convincing and would satisfy all the concerned 
parties [words indistinct]. 
  The leader added that following its adoption by the Arab 
League and the OAU, this proposal is expected to be submitted to 
the UN Security Council [UNSC] in the form of a draft resolution 
for endorsement. The leader indicated that if the world is 
searching for a solution, the way is now open and clear 
following the surfacing of irrefutable evidence which confirms 
that there were other parties which admitted carrying out this 
act. He pointed to the recent confession of the Palestinian 
Sha'ban before a Lebanese court. These confessions sent shock 
waves through the UNSC and international public opinion 
regarding the justifications for maintaining sanctions against 
one country with no reason. 
  The brother leader stressed that the confessions of the 
Palestinian citizen Sha'ban before the Lebanese court put the 
UNSC in a dilemma, when he admitted carrying out this act. 
Sha'ban said: "This is a sacred conflict between us and Zionism 
and imperialism. I carried out this act for the sake of my cause 
and the Arab cause." This frank admission caused the UNSC to 
have strong doubts that Libya was not the only accused side, but 
there were other parties that have now become accused of his 
act. 
  In the press conference he held yesterday, the brother 
leader 
pointed out that the team of lawyers for the two Libyan 
suspects, which is composed of Libyan and foreign lawyers 
including Americans, and the Union of Arab Lawyers, are 
following up the confessions of the Palestinian citizen Yusuf 
Sha'ban. 
  The brother leader pointed out also that Libya was accused 
in 
the past of blowing up the Berlin club, which was used as a 
pretext to carry out an aggression against it in April 1986. 
Then it was confirmed afterward that Libya was innocent of those 
accusations. The innocence of the person accused of carrying out 
the explosion at the club on behalf of Libya was declared by the 
issuance of a legal verdict stipulating his innocence. 
  The brother leader of the revolution stressed in the press 
conference that if it were not for the interests of European 
states in Libya, with companies, investments and Libyan projects 
on Western companies are based, the stance would have been 
stronger, particularly during the days of Bush and Reagan. 
  Libya is [word indistinct] strategic projects and European 
[word indistinct] are needed to implement them. If there were 
no European companies, other companies from China, India, 
Malaysia, or North Korea would carry out those projects. 
  The brother leader said that it is in the interest of 
Western 
states to adopt the proposal of the Arab League to try the two 
suspects at the headquarters of the International Court of 
Justice, particularly since they cast doubts on whether Libya 
would hand over [the two suspects] to a neutral court or a 
neutral venue. To confirm to them that their doubts are 
unfounded, we have held consultations with Egypt about the 
transfer of the two suspects to Egypt, so that they become at 
its disposal, and when the trial is held, Egypt will guarantee 
their arrival at the venue scheduled for their trial, which is 
other than America and Britain, and Egypt has agreed to this. 
  [Words indistinct] stressed the impossibility of handing 
over 
the two suspects to the United States or Britain because the two 
suspects refused to go to these two states voluntarily and said 
that those two states are staging a campaign against us and are 
hostile to us. Just as they cast doubts on Libyan justice, we 
cast doubts on British and American justice when it on their 
land. 
  The brother leader pointed out that the proposal regarding 
the venue of the trial of the two suspects will be decided at 
the UNSC through regional organizations which are the Arab 
League, the OAU, and the Nonaligned Movement which can submit a 
project to be adopted by the UNSC. 
  In reply to a question about the possibility of tightening 
the unjust measures against the Great Jamahiriyah, the brother 
leader underlined that these measures were unjustified since 
sanctions were imposed against Libya as if it were accused. 
Libya suffered from these sanctions before it was even accused; 
he indicated that this is a very important point. 
  He stated that Libya has lost a great deal because it was 
accused. If Libya was accused from the beginning it would not 
have paid a greater price than the one it is paying now as 
result of this embargo. He stressed that there is no longer any 
justification for any further escalation in this issue. He 
stressed that if they decide to boycott Libyan oil, they will be 
the losers at the end of the day; and that the oil embargo was 
an unhuman and decadent method. During the press conference 
held yesterday, the brother leader said that if the West 
boycotts Libyan oil, this act would represent the most barbaric 
and decadent act. Even if they threaten to use this method, 
this would make the West decadent and inhuman; this would in 
effect be an act aimed at starving people as they did in Iraq. 
  The brother leader said it is acceptable to boycott Libya 
diplomatically and impose an armed and transport embargo etc. 
As for starving the Libyan people, this is a barbaric and 
decadent act. This proves that the West is uncivilized because 
it has realized that the Libyan oil is the only source for this 
people. This is a threat against humanity because it is a 
threat to annihilate a people. 
  The brother leader indicated that the Libyan people took to 
the streets to declare its acceptance of the challenge, and 
announce its readiness to die because of starvation rather than 
submit and give in to anybody. 
  The brother leader stated that the unjust measures imposed 
against Libya have not only caused suffering for the Libyan 
people, but also for all of Libya's neighboring states; and Arab 
nationals are suffering a great deal because of this embargo. 
He expressed his regret about seeing a president of a state 
travel by plane, then being forced to walk across the borders 
onto another country. 
  During the press conference held at the conclusion of 
President Husni Mubarak's visit to the Great Jamahiriyah 
yesterday, the brother leader stressed that relations between 
the Great Jamahiriyah and Egypt are following the right path. 
Contacts will be direct and continuous between the two 
countries to boost these relations in the interest of the one 
Arab people in both countries. 
  Regarding the disappearance of Mansur al-Kikhya, the brother 
leader indicated that the appropriate apparatus in both Libya 
and Egypt are cooperating to uncover the ambiguity that 
surrounds this matter. He stated that the fingers of accusation 
have confirmed the involvement of U.S. intelligence services and 
Libyan spies who are cooperating with these services, to settle 
some scores among them. He underscored that this act carried 
out by these spies with the cooperation of U.S. intelligence 
services was not the first one of its kind, as they have in the 
past liquidated Libyan nationals who worked in the Libyan Arab 
People's Bureau in Rome. Then they tried to accuse Libya of 
having killed them. Afterward the perpetrators confessed that 
they were instructed by the stray dog spies. 

