Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cali Cartel drug trafficker Julio Fabio Urdinola has 
confessed to five crimes at the Prosecutor General's Office. 
  Deputy Prosecutor Francisco Sintura provided EL TIEMPO with 
this information, saying it was evidence that drug traffickers 
in this area of the country want to cooperate with the law. 
  Urdinola, who surrendered to authorities on 12 March, 
confessed to drug trafficking, conspiracy, illegal possession of 
weapons, illegal enrichment, and use of false documents. In his 
confession, Urdinola asserted that he had introduced more than a 
ton of cocaine into the United States. 
  Urdinola, who is currently under arrest at Palmira Jail, 
confessed to a faceless prosecutor in Cali that he was part of a 
powerful drug trafficking organization in Valle del Cauca. 
Urdinola also admitted that some of his properties were 
obtained through the illegal drug trade. 
  Sintura told EL TIEMPO that Urdinola initially expressed his 
interest in surrendering and receiving the benefits the law 
provides on 12 March. In announcing his desire to surrender, 
Urdinola expressed his willingness to provide authorities with a 
written confession of the crimes for which he is surrendering. 
  After Urdinola appeared before the judicial authorities, the 
prosecutor's office ordered a medical examination to determine 
his state of health at the time he entered Palmira Jail. 
Urdinola was also fingerprinted to confirm his identity. 
  Urdinola and his assistant, Ancizar Porras, will remain in 
custody at the Palmira Jail infirmary while the Justice Ministry 
completes its work at the installations where surrendering drug 
traffickers will be confined. 
  In contrast with the opinion expressed by Attorney General 
Gustavo Arrieta Padilla, Sintura said that Urdinola is a top 
leader in the cartel of northern Valle del Cauca, so his 
surrender is a very important achievement for the administration 
of justice. 
  Urdinola expanded his confession to the Prosecutor's Office 
during an interrogation on the afternoon of 14 March. 

