CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentator article: "Firmly Grasp New Economic Growth </F>
Points"] 
  [Text] While we are proceeding from the actual situation in 
Hunan to implement the "Decision" adopted by the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, a task deserving our 
serious attention is to firmly grasp the new economic growth 
points, that is, to make all-out efforts to develop township 
enterprises, the individually and privately owned economic 
sectors, the "three kinds of foreign-funded" enterprises 
[Sino-foreign joint ventures, Sino-foreign cooperative 
enterprises, and wholly foreign-owned enterprises], the tertiary 
industry, and the new-and high-tech industry. This is of 
strategic importance to our economic development and to the 
formation of a socialist market economic system in Hunan. 
  Though Hunan is a big agricultural province, we have a 
relatively poor self-improvement capacity for agriculture. Our 
industry has a certain foundation, yet the efficiency is not 
high. And since we are located in the interior, it is somewhat 
difficult to introduce foreign capital into our province for 
economic development. Because of this, we should make full use 
of our own conditions and take the cultivation of new economic 
growth points as an area to make breakthroughs and as a 
strategic task in expediting our economic development. In recent 
years, we are happy to note that new economic growth points in 
our province have developed from small and weak operations to 
big and strong undertakings and become a not-to-be-slighted 
force in our economy. Especially last year, we made some 
breakthroughs in developing township enterprises and the 
individually and privately owned economic sectors, and scored a 
rapid growth in the tertiary industry, the "three kinds of 
foreign-funded" enterprises, and the new- and high-tech 
industry. However, there is still a rather big gap between our 
economy and that of coastal areas. To close this gap, we must 
put in more efforts to develop our new economic growth points. 
  Firmly grasping the new economic growth points involves the 
question of further emancipating people's minds, renewing their 
values, and heightening their understanding. Now, few people are 
harping on the issue of "capitalism" versus "socialism." But, in 
dealing with questions, quite a number of comrades still have 
not truly changed their viewpoint from "whether it is pure" to 
"whether it is beneficial." They fear that giving a free rein to 
developing non-state-owned economic sectors, such as township 
enterprises, the individual and private economic undertakings, 
and the "three kinds of foreign-funded" enterprises, will impair 
socialist public ownership. Actually, this fear is unnecessary. 
The "Decision" of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee points out: We should adhere to the principle 
of taking public ownership as the mainstay and effecting a 
simultaneous development of all economic sectors. While striving 
actively to promote the development of the state and collective 
economy, it is necessary to encourage the development of the 
individually owned, privately owned and foreign-invested 
economic sectors. This is a correct policy decision based on the 
actual condition of development of China's social productive 
forces at the present stage. The mainstay status of socialist 
public ownership is manifested principally by its leading role 
in the national economy and its control over the national 
economic lifeline rather than by the overwhelmingly large number 
of state-owned enterprises. Taking public ownership as the 
mainstay is a nationwide principle. As far as each locality is 
concerned, there is no need to dispute about the status of 
public ownership, and still less should simple percentage 
figures be used to restrict the cultivation and development of 
the new economic growth points. All levels of leadership should 
overcome the idea that developing the individually and privately 
owned economic sectors runs counter to adhering to the principle 
of taking public ownership as the mainstay. Instead, they should 
firmly grasp the new economic growth points in a more daring 
spirit and with a new mindset and see to it that these new 
economic activities are spreading from a few places to many 
regions and then to the whole province like a prairie fire. 
  To firmly grasp the new economic growth points, we must 
persist in basing our actions on the actual conditions of 
various localities. This means that it is necessary to work out 
measures in line with specific local conditions so as to exploit 
strong points, sidestep shortcomings, bring advantages into full 
play, and make breakthroughs in key areas. In our province, the 
concrete situation is that different localities have different 
backgrounds and resources, and their manpower and financial 
capacities vary immensely. Some localities may find it feasible 
to develop the individually and privately owned economic sectors 
as the main undertakings. Other localities may have favorable 
conditions for developing the "three kinds of foreign-funded" 
enterprises or the tertiary industry. Still other localities may 
focus on developing new-and high-tech industry as their primary 
goal. This makes it necessary to conduct thoroughgoing 
investigations, step up the study of local conditions, and work 
out decisions in a scientific way. Generally speaking, we should 
focus on developing those growth points which have a sound 
foundation and great potential for development, which can make 
fast headway, and which are capable of yielding good economic 
returns. We should make breakthroughs in and pay particular 
attention to developing such growth points so as to turn them 
into our main enterprises and pillar industries. In particular, 
those areas that are relatively backward or late in cultivating 
the new economic growth points should do their utmost to tap 
local potentials and make use of their exploitable conditions. 
They should persistently apply the method of advancing from a 
few small projects using indigenous techniques to many big 
projects using advanced foreign technology. They should give 
priority to efficiency, launch more "short, level, and quick" 
projects [projects that can become operational in a short time, 
are suitable for small- and medium-scale operations, and can 
produce quick economic returns], and accumulate funds step by 
step for continued development. Of course, basing action on 
local conditions does not mean being limited by local conditions 
or rigidly adhering to a locality. What is also necessary is to 
be adept at drawing on successful experience from outside. 
Especially at present when funds, technology, and competent 
manpower are flowing and spreading continuously from 
economically developed coastal areas to the vast expanse in the 
interior, it is necessary to firmly seize this opportunity. We 
should, through various channels and measures, make full use of 
the outside funds, technology, equipment, and manpower in 
developing the new economic growth points in our province. 
  To firmly grasp the new economic growth points, we should 
have more flexible policies to strengthen the guidance for and 
ensure the implementation of the various tasks. Now, all 
departments, from the central to the provincial and municipal 
levels, have formulated policies to encourage, support, and 
develop township enterprises, individually and privately owned 
economic sectors, the tertiary industry, the "three kinds of 
foreign-funded" enterprises, and the new- and high-tech 
industry. These policies should be put into practice as soon as 
possible. Meanwhile, great efforts should be made to solve the 
problems of lack of a relaxed environment, no coordination 
between departments, and incoherent actions between the higher 
and lower levels. We should see to it that cadres and masses 
"always rest easy" and are free from worries so that they can 
work boldly and energetically. While allowing "flexibility," we 
should keep to the direction of the market economy and provide 
positive guidance and excellent service in matters concerning 
investment, operational strategies, production and marketing 
information, and utilization of successful research results in 
science and technology. In developing the new economic points, 
we should not only pay attention to the speed and scale of 
development but also ensure the quality of work with a view to 
raising the economic returns. 
  The year 1994 is the first year for us to push all our work 
toward the establishment of a socialist market economy. This 
year our reform and development will embark on a new course. As 
the saying goes, "despite the difficulties involved, your 
efforts will bring you to success." As long as we strive to 
explore the way ahead of us, advance courageously, and grasp the 
new economic growth points firmly without letup, we are sure to 
make new breakthroughs in developing our province's socialist 
market economy. 

