BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jiang Xianli (5592 7359 4409), director and </F>
editor-in-chief of HUNAN RIBAO: "Persistently Guide the People 
With Correct Publicity"] 
  [Text] This January, General Secretary Jiang Zemin 
emphatically pointed out at the National Conference on 
Propaganda and Ideological Work: "Our propaganda work must be 
aimed at arming the people with scientific theories, guiding the 
people with correct publicity, molding the people with noble 
spirits, encouraging the people with fine literature and art 
works, and at bringing up generations of well-educated and 
well-disciplined socialist new people who have high ideals and 
moral standards, thus providing a powerful ideological guarantee 
and opinion support for our great cause of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics." Comrade Jiang Zemin's remarks 
have not only pointed out the correct direction for the overall 
propaganda and ideological work but can also serve as a 
fundamental principle by which the press and media, including 
newspapers, radio, and television, can successfully keep a rein 
on the correct guidance of public opinion and persistently guide 
the people with correct publicity. 
  It must be admitted that during the great cause of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, the press and media in 
China have done a great deal of work in persistently guiding our 
people with correct publicity, providing a powerful ideological 
guarantee and opinion support. Party newspapers and magazines, 
in particular, have played a guiding role in this regard. 
However, it does not mean that we have done a perfect job and 
that there is no need for any improvement in providing correct 
guidance for public opinion. As a matter of fact, if we study 
the current situation in China's press and publishing circles 
with a sober mind, we can bring to light many things we do not 
wish to see. Over recent years, some people have been fond of 
reporting "hot issues" and seeking novelties with a view to 
creating so-called "sensational effects"; others are obsessed 
with the desire for gain and have engaged in providing 
"compensated news coverage" regardless of the adverse social 
effects these might cause; insisting on everyone going their own 
way, some have made irresponsible comments and violated the 
discipline of news reporting and propaganda; others have run 
counter to the policies on religion, impaired the unity among 
different nationalities, and affected the overall situation of 
stability; yet others have lowered their ideological guard and 
neglected the principle of "using different yardsticks for 
domestic- and overseas- oriented reports," leading to leakages 
of state secrets; some are involved in spreading "noises" with a 
low taste, having lost the main melody; and others have taken a 
subjective and one-sided approach to problems, failed to conduct 
thoroughgoing investigations, and engaged in making arbitration 
by default. All these show clearly that some of our comrades 
have failed to acquire a correct understanding as to how to 
guide the people with correct publicity. Therefore, there is an 
urgent need for us to restudy the issue, so that we can deepen 
our understanding and enhance our consciousness in implementing 
the guidelines from the National Propaganda and Ideological Work 
Conference. 
  Public opinion comprises those comments and remarks made by 
the majority of people in certain social circles and can 
therefore be regarded as the biased views of the majority on a 
specific situation or issue. Since they are of an open nature, 
such tendentious opinions will produce a strong spiritual 
strength once they are combined with the masses of the people, 
the main body of public opinion. This spiritual strength is 
irreplaceable by any material forces. Therefore, people in all 
social circles attach great importance to public opinion: They 
consciously or unconsciously become the recipients of public 
opinion and even directly involve themselves in creating public 
opinion, thus becoming the main body of public opinion. In real 
life, those who are involved in making public opinion include 
not only common people and mass organizations but also cultural 
and educational departments, literature and art groups, 
propaganda and ideological departments, and the press and other 
media. All these main bodies of public opinion are operated by 
people who are conscious of their responsibilities and act 
either carefully or impetuously in pursuit of certain goals. 
These people, or bodies and parties which represent the 
interests of these people, belong to certain social strata, 
social bodies, and political groups; moreover, due to their 
different experiences in life, they take different approaches to 
and employ different methods for problems which confront them 
and will have different views and opinions on the same social 
issue. All these views and opinions need to be strongly 
expressed through different channels or in different forms; as a 
result, differences in public opinion begin to shape up. These 
public opinions are both the outcome of people's reasoning and 
the outbreak of their feelings. Judging by the tendentiousness 
of public opinion, it can be roughly divided into two major 
categories, namely correct and incorrect public opinion. The 
official newspapers of party committees at all levels, for their 
part, should play their role as mouthpieces for the party during 
their participation in creating public opinion, accurately 
propagate the party's policies and principles, and make vigorous 
efforts to spread correct opinions. When the guidance of public 
opinion is correct, our people can work with one heart and one 
mind in high spirits; otherwise, the consequences will be 
disastrous. Both positive and negative experiences tell us that 
it is of vital importance to persistently guide our people with 
correct publicity. 
  To successfully guide the people with correct publicity we 
should first differentiate between correct and incorrect public 
opinion. Comrade Jiang Zemin has pointed out: "By raising the 
requirement to persistently guide the people with correct 
publicity, we mean to create public opinion which is favorable 
to deepening reform and opening up, establishing a socialist 
market economic structure, and developing the productive forces 
of the society; favorable to strengthening the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization, socialist democracy, and the 
legal system; favorable to encouraging and arousing people to 
carry out hard struggle and open new paths in order to make our 
country strong, our people rich, and our society prosperous; 
favorable to helping people differentiate right from wrong, 
uphold the true, the good, and the beautiful, and resist the 
false, the bad, and the ugly; and favorable to bringing about 
national reunification and unity among all nationalities, giving 
our people a contented life, and maintaining social and 
political stability." It can thus be seen that all public 
opinion favorable to our work in the aforementioned fields can 
be regarded as correct; otherwise, it cannot rated as correct. 
  It is decided by the party spirit of party newspapers and 
magazines to keep rein on correct guidance for public opinion 
and to persistently guide the people with correct publicity. 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping once pointed out: "Party newspapers and 
magazines must give unconditional publicity to propositions by 
the party." Here, Comrade Deng Xiaoping placed stress on "must" 
and "unconditional." That is to say, party newspapers and 
magazines should, and "must," propagate propositions by the 
party and such propagation must be "unconditional." The word 
"must" means that we are not allowed to hesitate or waver on 
this issue and the word "unconditional," tells us not to take a 
negative attitude or bargain with the party. We must uphold the 
party spirit of party newspapers and magazines conscientiously, 
translate this spirit into our practical work, and permeate 
every report with this spirit. Only by so doing can we 
correctly propagate the party's theories, line, policies, and 
principles; reflect in a vivid way the great practice of the 
masses of the people; arouse all positive factors and turn 
negative factors into positive ones; unite all forces that can 
be united; and strive to fulfill the grand goal of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
  It is a demand of the party's cause to keep a rein on 
correct 
guidance for public opinion and to persistently guide the people 
with correct publicity. Our mass media is a component part of 
the entire cause of the party. To give publicity to the party's 
propositions and fulfill the party's tasks, we must pay close 
attention to the work of the mass media. This is also decided 
by the roles of the press and other media. Comrade Mao Zedong 
once pointed out: "The reason why newspapers can play an 
important role is that they can most rapidly make accessible the 
party's program and line, principles and policies, and work 
tasks and methods to the masses on the most extensive scale." 
Therefore, making full use of and running newspapers properly 
is "an issue of great principled significance in the party's 
overall work which should not be belittled." The 
several-decade-long history of our party has clearly showed that 
our victories in both revolution and construction cannot be 
separated from the propaganda and ideological work or from the 
roles of the mass media. Today, China's reform, opening up, and 
modernization drive have entered a new development phase. 
During the course of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, we face new situations, new tasks, and new 
practices which require us to give play to the media role of 
party newspapers all the more. For instance, under the present 
new situation wherein packaged measures on the structural reform 
of finance and taxation, banking, investment, and commodity 
prices have already been put into effect, we should not only 
take into consideration the overall situation from a high 
strategic plane, give in-depth publicity to the party's line, 
principles, and policies, and make every effort to enable the 
masses to understand and master them but also provide the masses 
with convincing explanations on the new reform measures in 
simple language. We should summarize, spread, commend, and 
disseminate new experiences created by the masses and commend 
advanced individuals who have emerged in the practice of reform; 
conduct in-depth studies and research on all new subjects and 
contradictions cropping up during the process of reform, making 
every effort to resolve them as soon as they show up; and, 
through opinion supervision, try our best to overcome and 
straighten passive tendencies in our social life. To promote 
the reform, opening up, and modernization drive, we must let 
China know more about the world and let the world acquire a 
better understanding of China. However, we cannot realize this 
goal if we fail to guide the people with correct publicity. All 
this has clearly shown that doing a good job in propaganda and 
publicity and providing the people with correct opinion guidance 
is the demand of reform and opening up and also a requirement of 
our party in its effort to lead the people of the whole country 
in carrying out the grand cause of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. 
  It is the wish and demand of the masses of the people to 
keep a rein on correct guidance of public opinion and to 
persistently guide the people with correct publicity. Party 
newspapers should serve the people and socialism. Today, the 
people of the entire country are engaged in a drive for 
socialist modernization. This is a cause led by the party in 
which the people rely on their own strength and work for their 
own interests. themselves. Facing such a reality, our 
newspapers should understand that if they want to provide good 
services and become useful to this cause of the people and also 
to the socialist modernization drive, a primary condition is 
that they must provide the people with correct publicity which 
has a unifying force and can inspire people's spirits. This is 
a prerequisite for party newspapers to win the trust of the 
people. Marx once pointed out: "The trust of the people is the 
condition on which newspapers depend for existence. Without this 
condition, newspapers will be totally lifeless." (Volume I of 
The Collected Works of Marx and Engels, p 234) 
Therefore, to inject life into themselves, newspapers should 
provide publicity that can serve as the guidance for our society 
and a clarion call of our times. To this end, the press and 
media should act under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics as 
well as the party's basic line; implement the spirits of the 
14th party congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee in every field of endeavor; speed up the 
pace of building a socialist market economic structure; maintain 
a sustained, rapid, and healthy national economic growth; 
safeguard the political stability; and bring about comprehensive 
social progress. Only by so doing can we ensure that the press 
and media adhere to a correct orientation. 
  It is also an objective requirement of the development of 
both the domestic and international situations to keep a rein on 
the correct guidance of public opinion and to persistently guide 
the people with correct publicity. Under the present domestic 
and international situations, which are favorable to our efforts 
to push forward reform and construction, it is beyond doubt that 
we should seize this favorable opportunity, provide our people 
with correct publicity, and guide the enthusiasm of hundreds of 
millions of people toward the grand cause of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics. However, the cause of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics is one which needs the 
efforts of hundreds of millions of people and which can only be 
accomplished through hard struggle for several generations. 
Therefore, to maintain the vitality of this cause pioneered by 
our party, and to ensure that there is no lack of successors to 
carry on the cause, the official newspapers of party committees, 
as part of the party's propaganda and ideological organs, must 
view the matter from a high strategic plane and ensure that the 
publicity they provide is aimed at "training and bringing up 
generations of well-educated and well-disciplined socialist new 
people who have high ideals and moral standards." Meanwhile, 
our press and other media should also undertake the task of 
using truth and facts to expose certain foreign hostile forces 
which are stepping up efforts to lay an opinion siege to and 
vilify the image of China by means of propagating capitalist 
outlooks on value, human rights, democracy, and freedom. All 
this tells us that it is a must for us to attach great 
significance to the press and media work from the high plane of 
the future and fate of socialism and to provide our people with 
correct publicity with a strong sense of dedication and a lofty 
sense of responsibility. We should center our efforts around 
the goal of bringing up new people with "four have's"; carry out 
among the masses of the people, especially among young people 
and children, ideological and ethical education that is focused 
on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism; conduct education on 
building up the country through thrift and hard work, on 
occupational ethics and social morality, and on basic national 
conditions; and spread legal knowledge among the people. We 
must pay close attention to guiding people, especially young 
people and children, to establish correct ideals, beliefs, and 
outlooks on the world, life, and value; make every effort to 
oppose money worship, hedonism, pleasure-seeking, and 
out-and-out egoism; and resist the corrosive influence of 
decadent capitalist and feudalist ideologies. 
  The purpose in analyzing problems is to solve them. To 
persistently guide the people with correct publicity and realize 
the value of news during the course of adapting ourselves to the 
needs of the society, we must, in my opinion, handle the 
following relationships properly: 
  1. we should handle the relations between enlivening 
news reporting and keeping a rein on the correct orientation of 
public opinion./ It is an inherent requirement of the media to 
enliven news reporting because stereotyped news reports do not 
attract the attention of readers and will therefore prove 
lifeless. As a matter of fact, news reporting can also play a 
part in enlivening public opinion. This is because the 
objective reality is ever changing and it can present us with an 
infinite variety of fantastic phenomena; therefore, so long as 
we can catch these changes, make true reports, and "trace their 
sources, seek the truth, and find out the cause" (The 1979 
edition of "Correspondence During My Stay in Europe" by Zhou 
Enlai published by RENMIN RIBAO Publishing House, p 5), vivid 
news reports will appear in newspapers. 
  However, by urging 
people to enliven news reporting, we neither hope them to make 
so-called objective reports in an indiscriminate way; nor do we 
encourage them to report only "hot issues," hunt for novelty, 
and pursue so-called "sensational effects" in order to pander to 
the "novelty-seeking" tastes or the unhealthy mentalities of 
certain readers. What we mean by urging people to enliven news 
reporting is to encourage them to keep a rein on a correct 
orientation for public opinion and bring the new reporting more 
in line with the requirements of the party and the people for 
the fulfillment of the grand cause of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. Because party newspapers speak on 
behalf of the party and the government and enjoy a high 
authoritativeness, the masses of the people regard the reports, 
articles, and comments carried by party newspapers as the views 
of and propositions by the party and the government; by the same 
token, foreign countries also keep close watch on the moves of 
our country by analyzing party newspapers. Under such 
circumstances, party newspapers should proceed from the 
fundamental interests of the party and the country; consciously 
act in unison with the party Central Committee politically; have 
a firm grasp of the party's basic line; provide their readers 
with news reports they love to read with a view to seeking unity 
of thinking among the whole party and the people of the entire 
country; and render better services for the reform, opening up, 
and modernization drive. To uphold the party's basic line and 
never waver for 100 years, we need to have a good grasp of 
opinion guidance and maintain the continuity and stability of 
the keynote of propaganda. In the light of changes in the real 
situation during different periods, party newspapers will make 
appropriate changes to the emphasis of propaganda and news 
reporting. However, the basic contents of propaganda will 
remain unchanged and no one is allowed to change at will such 
standard terms as the party's basic line, centering around 
economic construction, upholding the Four Cardinal Principles, 
persistently carrying out reform and opening up, maintaining 
social stability, strengthening the building of socialist 
spiritual civilization, reinforcing the building of democracy 
and the legal system, and opposing corruption and advocating a 
clean administration. We must see to it that efforts to 
propagate these contents should not be relaxed at one time and 
tightened at another time; instead, all these contents should be 
publicized in a thoroughgoing and sustained way. This year, our 
news reporting and propaganda work should be subordinate to and 
serve the overall situation of "seizing favorable opportunities, 
deepening reform, expanding opening up, stepping up development, 
and maintaining stability." To this end, we must provide 
accurate propaganda on reform measures and aim our news reports 
at different readers; when reporting sensitive issues, we should 
have a good sense of propriety, pay attention to the tactics we 
employ, and give reports which are favorable to reform, 
development, and stability; when reporting issues about whioch 
the masses are most concerned or doubtful, instead of evading 
problems, we should promptly give correct answers and 
explanations to the masses, provide them with a positive 
guidance, and tell them in explicit yet sensible terms which 
understandings are correct and which are one-sided or even 
incorrect. In short, we should integrate healthy contents with 
the highest possible perfection of manifestation and try our 
best to help party newspapers cultivate their own specific 
features and styles. 
  2. We must handle the relations between critical 
reporting and positive propaganda. Doing a good job in 
critical reporting and strengthening opinion supervision is a 
manifestation of the combativeness of news reporting and also 
one of its indispensable functions. By providing necessary 
critical reporting, party newspapers can help people tell the 
good from the bad and the right from the wrong through 
comparisons and evaluations, thus safeguarding the truth and 
promoting healthy tendencies. As a result, party newspapers can 
exert an influence on the progress and promote the 
transformation of things. Therefore, critical reporting is a 
weapon for guiding social opinion, a weapon that should not be 
discarded. It is just as Comrade Jiang Zemin pointed out: "We 
should attach great importance to investigations into and 
studies of the social opinions and mentality of the masses, 
reflect the opinions and suggestions of the vast numbers of the 
masses in a positive manner, and strengthen our supervision over 
public opinion." However, we should and ought to rely mainly on 
positive propaganda when we try to provide opinion guidance. 
This is because the building of socialism with Chinese 
characteristics under the leadership of the party is an 
unprecedented cause and both the cause itself and the masses of 
the people who plunge themselves into the cause deserve 
commendation. During this historical process, the trend that 
the people create history always remains a healthy mainstream 
and the bright side always occupies a dominant position. Of 
course, it does not mean that we will stop exposing and 
criticizing things which should be exposed and criticized. What 
we should do is to make positive and constructive criticisms 
which are aimed at helping the party and government improve 
their work, solving practical problems, enhancing unity among 
the people, and maintaining social stability. 
  To 
successfully uphold the principle of relying mainly on positive 
propaganda, we need to center our work around the central task 
of economic construction at all times, guiding the enthusiasm 
and creativity of the masses toward the current campaign of 
deepening reform, expanding opening up, and promoting the 
socialist market economic development and also toward the 
fulfillment of all tasks in the modernization drive. We need to 
concentrate our major efforts on reflecting the reality that the 
socialist cause with Chinese characteristics is forging ahead 
and bringing about changes day after day and on enthusiastically 
eulogizing the noble spirit and glorious accomplishments of the 
masses of the people in transforming the world and creating a 
new life. To carry out the principle of relying mainly on 
positive propaganda, we should first master dialectics and avoid 
one- sidedness in propaganda and news reporting. In particular, 
we should refrain from "exaggerating things," for exaggeration 
of even good things will end up in adverse results or even 
create bias. Second, we need to enhance our propaganda and news 
reporting skills, improve the writing style and the literary 
grace of our reports, and try to "write on the impulse of our 
emotions," thus adding a greater appeal, inspiration, and 
convincing force to our news reports. 
  3. We should handle the relations between economic 
returns and social results. Under the conditions of the 
socialist market economy, party newspapers have not only the 
general attribute of commodities but also a special attribute 
not possessed by general material products. Party newspapers 
are used to satisfy the needs of the spiritual lives of the 
people. This feature of possessing two kinds of attributes 
requires party newspapers to attach a greater importance to 
social results while paying attention to economic returns. It 
stands to reason that organs running party newspapers should act 
in line with newspaper-running rules as well as the operational 
laws of the market; strictly separate reporters and editorial 
staff from those engaged in production and operations, allowing 
the latter to take charge of the economic operations of the 
newspaper industry; and see to it that party newspapers can 
enjoy a larger number of subscribers and a bigger distribution 
volume, lower production costs, and enhanced economic returns. 
However, the enhancement of economic returns must be based on 
social results. As an information carrier, newspapers should 
give expression to their value not mainly through their direct 
economic returns but through their social results, namely, 
through their role of giving a tremendous impetus to the 
development of social productive forces and to the comprehensive 
progress of society. To successfully realize the best social 
results in news reporting, party journalists are required to 
integrate the objective value of news with the demands of the 
party and the people, so that their news reports can not only 
satisfy the desire of society for information, thus realizing 
the value of news reporting, but also play the role of giving 
publicity to the will, aspirations, and requirements of the 
party and the people, realizing the propaganda value of news 
reporting. All one-sided concepts and moves which lay stress on 
one side to the neglect of the other are detrimental and might 
directly or indirectly hold up the realization of social results 
of news reporting. Over the past several years, certain news 
units have had a tendency to pursue economic returns 
one-sidedly, thus impairing the social results of news 
reporting. For example, proceeding from the interests of small 
units and bodies, certain units have violated the principle of 
providing true information by engaging in selling newspaper 
columns and in making "news reports for compensation"; as a 
result, such news reports have totally lost their true value to 
society. Driven by the desire for money and obsessed by 
"handsome rewards" offered by some localities and units, some 
reporters have brought out reports which are inconsistent with 
the policies and principles of the party; as a result, their 
reports have lost the glamor of their propaganda value. What is 
more, under the corrosive influence of individualism, egoism, 
and money worship, a handful of reporters and editors have gone 
so far as to violate political discipline and sell party and 
state secrets to people outside China, thus turning themselves 
into criminals. We should take warning from all these problems 
and phenomena. 
  4. We should handle the relations between bringing 
into play the key role of news units and arousing the enthusiasm 
of all sides. Comrade Jiang Zemin pointed out: "Party 
newspapers, party magazines, state news agencies, as well as 
radio and television stations, should all actively propagate the 
propositions by the party, playing a key role in providing the 
people with correct publicity." This is not only a great 
expectation of the party on the press circles but also our due 
responsibility. We must exert our utmost efforts to propagate 
correct public opinion, persistently guide our people with 
correct publicity, and live up to the great expectations of the 
party on the press circles. To this end, we should continue to 
strengthen the building of the press contingent and bring up a 
large number of reporters and editors who are politically 
qualified, proficient in professional work, and honest and 
upright in their ways. This serves as an organizational 
guarantee to our efforts to bring into play the pillar role of 
the press contingent. Moreover, the work of persistently 
guiding the people with correct publicity is not only the 
business of the press circles but also a task of overall 
importance for the party on its entire propaganda and 
ideological front. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to 
further reinforce the party's leadership over public opinion and 
mobilize forces from all sides to care about, pay close 
attention to, support, and participate in the work of guiding 
our people with correct publicity. Only by so doing can we 
create a sound opinion environment for the cause of the reform, 
opening up, and modernization in which we are currently engaged. 

