BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo with </F>
domestic reporters and unidentified moderator, at the Narino 
Palace in Santa Fe de Bogota; broadcast in progress -- live] 
  [Text] [Gaviria] ...obey the judicial decision. Not only 
do I not agree with the decision, but I believe that the effect 
will be serious. Consumption of substances that create 
addiction cannot be part of the behavior condoned as part of the 
free development of personality. Legislators must be given the 
option to ban and punish this, according to his criteria. 
  The government does not share the court's extremely 
individualistic interpretation of the Constitution in matters 
related not only to individual autonomy but also to obligations 
established in the Constitution. The government considers it 
its duty to promote the necessary decisions to fill the void and 
mistakes that might result from the court's decision. 
Immediately, using authority derived from laws now in effect, 
the government will issue decrees to prohibit and confirm 
prohibitions on the possession and consumption of drugs and 
psychotropic and hallucinatory substances in at least the 
following places and events: public places, places open to the 
public, schools, and places of work. Drugs will be banned among 
minors, pregnant women, drivers of vehicles, ships, or 
airplanes, those who bear firearms, and those in certain 
professions, such as doctors and dentists. 
  Likewise, we intend to establish penalties for violations of 
some of the preceding prohibitions, according to each case and 
the seriousness of the misdemeanor. The penalties will range 
from arrest, closure of public places, suspension of flight 
licenses, cancellation of work contracts, suspension or firing 
of public workers, deportation of foreigners, cancellation of 
firearm permits, and the suspension of licenses or professional 
cards. 
  The government reiterates that topics of such importance 
must 
take into account what the people have to say, thus the 
government calls on all Colombian society -- political parties, 
churches, economic associations, workers, peasants, social and 
community organizations, the academic community, parents and 
youths -- to present, together with the government, a draft bill 
with popular initiative to call a referendum to modify the 
Constitution to clearly establish the prevalence of the general 
interest, the possibility of penalizing citizens for not 
fulfilling their duties, and clearly stating the legislators' 
prerogative to ban and prohibit the consumption of drugs and 
psychotropic substances. 
  In the next few weeks, the president will call on 
representatives of the various institutions and organizations 
mentioned to form promotional committees and begin the necessary 
formalities for a popular legislative initiative. Given the 
reaction in the last few days, the national government is 
certain that it is correctly interpreting the feelings of all 
Colombians in support of the fight against drug trafficking and 
preventing youths from Colombia and the rest of the world from 
falling into the claws of today's most damaging perversity -- 
drug consumption. 
  I am ready for your questions. 
  [Moderator] First, we have Azucena Lievano from the "24 
Hours 
Newscast." Due to a time limit, we ask that reporters ask only 
one question. 
  [Lievano] Mr. President, in the court's decision, the 
magistrates also spoke of the need for the state to establish 
measures or ways to educate Colombians on this. What decisions 
will the government make to teach people not to take drugs? 
  [Gaviria] My suggestion was against the emotional part of 
the 
ruling, about which the government is very concerned. If the 
government accepts the emotional part of the Constitutional 
Court's ruling, this would mean that because citizens have a 
right to take drugs, campaigns against drug consumption 
themselves could be called into question at any time. In fact, 
if the emotional part of the sentence were accepted, it could 
serve as a basis for the judge to rule in favor of a petition 
for protection and say that not even antidrug campaigns are a 
legitimate civil right. 
  The government is very, very concerned about the effects of 
the Constitutional Court's decision. But it is even more 
concerned about what motivated this sentence making drug 
consumption a civil right. This is very risky for society. It 
endangers the very campaigns that society, other institutions, 
and the government are waging in an attempt to convince 
Colombians, especially the younger generation, not to take 
drugs. This is because of the enormous risk this poses to an 
individual's development and to peaceful coexistence. The 
effect this has had in developing a society with healthy 
citizens, forming healthy citizens, and not citizens who are 
addicts, not persons with habits [words indistinct] that the 
justices of the Constitutional Court have now considered as a 
personal right. This will cause great harm to individuals and 
society. 
  [Moderator] Diana Mateu, from Radio Santa Fe. 
  [Mateu] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Some nations have 
criticized Colombia's position on drug consumption as it seems 
to change so much. There is also the confrontation between 
powers that seems to favor a trend toward the decriminalization 
of drugs; something that the government of course opposes. Do 
you think that this could have repercussions on future relations 
with the United States? 
  [Gaviria] I believe this is basically an internal problem. I 
have never seen it as a problem with the international 
community. I see it as a matter that concerns Colombians alone. 
I have been witness to the Colombian community's almost 
unanimous reaction against the possibility that drugs could be 
used freely in Colombia. What is more, that decision almost 
exalts drug consumption; it is full justification for citizens 
to take drugs. This terrifies us. I do not believe one must 
[word indistinct] or tolerate international implications. 
  Let me take this opportunity to indicate that in other 
nations where [words indistinct] to say that drug consumption 
has been depenalized, let me say that in no country has this 
become a civil right. It is as if a specific antisocial 
behavior is considered [words indistinct] without the need to 
[words indistinct] that conduct of a penal nature. It is to 
that extent that there has been certain tolerance for accepting 
personal doses for drug consumption. It has not occurred to 
anyone to make this a civil right. [words indistinct] 
antisocial behavior. Right now, in no nation in the world, with 
the exception of Colombia, is drug consumption considered normal 
conduct or as an aspect of the development of an individual's 
personality. No, not at all. In all the nations of the world, 
drug consumption is a considered antisocial behavior. In some 
nations, in the vast majority, this incurs penal sanctions. 
There are some nations where there are no penal sanctions, but 
drug consumption is considered antisocial behavior, a behavior 
that should be dealt with as a health problem. [Words 
indistinct] civilian sector favors not penalizing drug 
consumption, but it is something totally different to turn drug 
consumption into a civil right. 
  [Moderator] A question from Flora Ines Torres. 
  [Torres] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Are you not playing 
your last card by calling for a referendum this close to the end 
of your administration? In addition, you need the votes of 5 
million Colombians. What is your opinion? 
  [Gaviria] I am acting in accordance with my duties. [Words 
indistinct] with my political nature. I believe I am behaving 
as most Colombians expect me to. We would have wanted to hold 
this referendum sooner. Due to the ruling's character, we have 
determined that most of the -- should we say -- limitations that 
could be established could be done by decree. To avert the 
constitutional consequences, however, and to try to avoid having 
this type of interpretation of the Constitution prevail, we have 
to modify the Constitution. 
  We believe the law that will be proposed to Congress on 
holding a referendum should come from a popular initiative, and 
we hope, in the coming days, to form a group to follow all 
procedures regarding the law on mechanisms for participation 
that will be sanctioned next week. We are only waiting for the 
signatures of some congressional chamber presidents because, as 
the Constitutional Court stipulates, Congress establishes the 
requirement that a popular initiative law must call a referendum. 
  I would also like to point out that, based on our 
consultations, our interpretation of the Constitution, and the 
law on mechanisms for participation, our opinion is that this 
referendum cannot take place concurrently with an election. It 
could not be held either during the first elections, the runoff 
elections, or possibly in the upcoming October elections. That 
referendum would have to be held on a separate date. We have 
not set a date for referendum nor have we agreed on its content 
because we want to reach a consensus with the sectors that come 
with us to collect the signatures. We want to get back on 
course and present this to the Congress during its regular 
sessions in June or in the sessions that are to start on 20 July. 
  We believe it would not be appropriate to present it before 
the law on mechanisms for participation is passed, or before 
hearing the views of the other sectors on which we have called. 
We will begin consultations next week in order to form a group 
of people to negotiate a popular intiative law with the 
Congress. I am positive we will be able to gather the 800,000 
signatures required to make this a popular initiative law. I 
have confidence we will collect several million signatures for 
Congress so that it becomes aware of what Colombians want. 
  [Moderator] Here is William Parra. 
  [Parra] Mr. President, why had we not heard until now about 
the government's reaction to this Constitutional Court decision? 
Why did the government not respond while the suit was pending? 
What justification can President Gaviria give Colombians when 
he strongly promoted the Constitution and now he wants to reform 
it? As the Constitutional Court president said yesterday, it's 
like having a new dress and changing it [words indistinct] three 
months later. 
  [Gaviria] First, I believe you did not listen to the 
statement I made the day after the Court's decision. I believe 
Colombians are clear on the fact that their government and their 
president reacted to the Court's decision. I do not believe my 
statement today is any different from the one I made at that 
time [two-minute break in reception] that our Constitution 
embraces fundamental rights, which have no limitations and must 
not be compared to these other rights. 
  Somehow, this is what is behind the Constitutional Court's 
decision [word indistinct] because obviously that was not the 
feeling of the four magistrates who cast a dissenting vote, thus 
responding to the arguments and motivations with which the 
majority of Constitutional Court magistrates reached this 
decision. 
  [Moderator] The next question is from Ricaro Canon from "The 
Noon" newscast. After that will be Jairo Gomez. 
  [Canon] Mr. President, as long as this decision is in 
effect, 
what position and actions will the government adopt to repress 
and penalize drug consumption and trafficking? Do you consider, 
as you pointed out, that the Constitutional Court's decision can 
be overturned by decree? 
  [Gaviria] No. No. We cannot overturn the Court's ruling by 
issuing a decree because it will violate the Constitution. 
Because the ruling has a paragraph that includes the same 
guidelines, decrees, and laws of previous police corps, we will 
establish some of the limitations that the Court believes are 
reasonable and could be established. The essence of the ruling, 
however -- drug consumption in Colombia -- will not be banned. 
This is a basic right that cannot be curtailed by issuing a 
decree. The only way we can curtail that right, should we want 
to, is to amend our Constitution by means of following the 
amendment procedures stipulated in the Constitution itself. 
  [Moderator] Next question is by Jairo Gomez from the "Seven 
O'Clock Newscast", followed by Antonio Jose Caballero. 
  [Gomez] Mr. President, according to the proposal you have 
just made, there will undoubtedly be a need for many steps, and 
most surely it will not be taken into account before your 
administration ends on 7 August. Why did you not leave this to 
the new president of the Republic? 
  [Gaviria] Well, for one thing, the new president of the 
Republic would have proceeded with this issue as he saw fit. I 
do not want to get involved in the decisions the new president 
would adopt. I am going to issue the decree and take the 
initiative in asking citizens to express their opinions. I 
believe that it was not only the president's opinion which I 
expressed in the early hours of the day after the Court's 
decision. In this respect, with regard to the next government, 
he will proceed as he deems appropiate. I believe that as a 
result of the Colombian people's generalized frame of mind with 
respect to this issue, the next president's government will work 
to have the people express an opinion on this issue. If we had 
had a president-elect now, I could have consulted him about the 
issue. Since we do not, I believe it is my responsibility to 
uphold the Colombian people's desire to keep working to prevent 
this situation -- which is of a legal nature -- from taking 
hold. This is the case not only because of what it represents, 
as far as drug consumption goes, which a great majority of 
Colombians reject, but also for other reasons that could become 
a reality if this type of decision prevails in Colombian society 
as an interpretation of the Constitution. 
  [Moderator] Here is Antonio Jose Caballero of RCN, and 
(?Clemente Dominguez) gets ready to ask his question. 
  [Caballero] Mr. President, once again we hear the expression 
I abide by but do not agree with in this explanation of the 
Colombian state branches. The prosecutor general [words 
indistinct] through the Constitutional Court. What is the 
government most concerned about? The image of Colombians abroad 
or the health and well-being of people here? 
  [Gaviria] With regard to what the prosecutor general thinks 
of the Constitutional Court's decision, that is something you 
would have to ask him, whether this was the sort of legalization 
he was proposing or something different, or whether he had 
another proposal to make to Colombia and the international 
community. I would prefer not to interpret the prosecutor 
general's view. I have clearly stated that I am concerned about 
this situation's impact at home, not for its impact abroad. I 
am fundamentally concerned about its impact at home on the 
health of Colombians, the social cohesion of Colombians, the 
need to punish the antisocial behavior in Colombian society. It 
concerns me whether it is advisable for Colombian society to be 
able to demand that drug abusers undergo medical treatment so 
that Colombian society can punish anyone who is a repeat drug 
abuser if he does not undergo medical treatment and give up 
drugs. These circumstances make this a serious matter. 
  Reaction abroad does not seem essential to me. Citizens' 
reaction, parents and young people, reflects concern for our 
children, our young people, and our society. I have not seen 
anyone worry about the consequences abroad. In fact, I do not 
think there will be consequences abroad. We have to focus on 
the impact this has on our families, our children, and our 
society. 
  [Moderator] Here to ask a question is (?Clemente Dominguez) 
of Todelar. Samuel Salazar of Caracol Radio gets ready to ask 
his question. 
  [Dominguez] Mr. President, why do you insist on a referendum 
rather than on a bill, as the Constitutional Court said, and why 
not include the proposal for an educational campaign for drug 
abusers since experts feel drug addiction is a kind of illness? 
  [Gaviria] Regarding the first issue, I would like to say the 
decree we will issue will in no way take the place of a 
statutory law that establishes limitations mentioned by the 
Court's decision. The Court said these are police norms, and we 
believe that by gathering a large amount of norms from the 
Minors Code and other kinds of legislation to which we will 
refer next, when we issue the decree, we will be able to 
establish those limitations. But we are concerned about the 
motivation behind the sentence, not so much about the decision 
that we can criminalize drug consumption, since what concerns me 
the most is motivation. 
  Why are we concerned about motivation, and why do I insist 
on 
this? We are concerned about motivation because it has turned 
drug consumption not into antisocial behavior that will not be 
penalized but into a civil right. These are two very different 
things. It is true that some societies have come to the 
conclusion that they do not want to penalize drug consumption or 
personal drug doses. No society, however, has said that drug 
consumption is not antisocial conduct. This is something 
exclusive to Colombian society and our Constitutional Court. 
Holland, Germany, Italy, (?Spain), and some U.S. states did not 
do this. That is not true. Drug consumption in all those 
countries is antisocial conduct. It is antisocial conduct. In 
some countries, it is punished by law, and in others it is not, 
but in all of them it is antisocial behavior. But here, our 
Court, in an interpreation that we described as excessively 
individualistic, has ruled that drug consumption is not 
antisocial behavior but actually a right. I think it does 
serious harm to Colombian society to coexist with that theory, 
with that underlying idea of the development of personality, 
which deep down... [pauses] In some way we agree with the 
dissenting opinion that showed this undermines life and the very 
argument used by the Court. It undermines human dignity, the 
development of personality, and social coexistence. 
  [Moderator] Here to ask a question is Samuel Salazar of 
Caracol Radio, and Pablo Arturo Paez gets ready. 
  [Salazar] [Words indistinct] [Ninenteen-second break in 
reception for station identification by station announcer] 
  [Gaviria] ...an arbitrary arrest. We could decide to 
arrest a driver for having taken drugs. We believe this conduct 
is evidently damaging to society. In addition, we would have to 
consider other than simple penalties. We believe such conduct 
warrants an arrest and our Constitution foresees it [words 
indistinct] not been declared as invalid by the Court. We 
believe that anyone who takes drugs in public places can be 
subject to arrest, more so if we are referring to any Public 
Force member. Quite frankly, I plan to fight with all my energy 
to prevent Colombian society from falling prey to situations 
where, for example, Public Force members or even doctors, take 
drugs right in front of their patients, or perform surgery while 
under the influence of drugs. I firmly believe that such 
conduct warrants an arrest. Don't you agree? 
  [Moderator] The following question is from Carlos Arturo 
Paez 
from [word indistinct] followed by Ana Fernanda Valderrama. 
  [Paez] Mr. President, the Constitutional Court's majority 
decision was made by taking Article 16 of the Constitution into 
consideration. When reading this article we notice that this 
article is very broad and difficult to regulate. Does the 
government have its own initiative as to what and how this 
article should be regulated? 
  [Gaviria] Most surely it is an article very difficult to 
regulate. Except for cases involving drug consumption, we have 
found no other angle to develop the article as part of a 
statutory law. We have thought -- and this would be one of the 
issues we would propose to the group working on the People's 
Initiative Law -- to include a proposal to add several 
paragraphs to the article establishing that the lawmaker can 
determine penalties, inclusive of criminal penalties, not only 
against those who take drugs under certain circumstances such as 
the ones I just mentioned. Most of all, to determine penalties 
even for those who take drugs on a personal basis. 
  [Moderator] Last question from Ana Fernanda Valderrama from 
"National Newscast." 
  [Valderrama] Mr. President, good afternoon. Through a 
decree, you plan to tell the Colombian people, as well as the 
country's mayors, that they are not allowed to take drugs in 
public places. You plan to tell doctors that they cannot do it 
in front of their patients. What everyone is wondering, 
however, is that most surely the people are going to do it in 
private and it is not going to be restricted to the average 
citizen, but it will also spread, even government workers. Do 
you not believe that this could foment the double morality 
standards already existing in the country? 
  [Gaviria] Of course, however, that is not as result of the 
decree the government is going to issue. It is a repercussion 
of the ruling by the Constitutional Court. I think we all 
agree, and I think that on this the Constitutional Court also 
agrees, that Colombians have the right to consume drugs but that 
there must be limitations. Which limitations? There are 
limitations on situations that endanger social coexistence, 
solidarity, and social order. Those limitations will 
undoubtedly have to be established anyway. Just imagine a 
society that condones situations such as a pilot flying an 
aircraft, or a driver under the influence of drugs. Situations 
such as those represent a peril to social order. I feel 
obligated -- regardless of the inconsistencies you just 
mentioned -- to issue a decree that includes those legal 
provisions. Thank you all. 

