Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Egyptian Foreign Minister 'Amr Musa held talks 
with his majesty the king and other Jordanian officials on 
Middle East peace during a brief visit to the Kingdom. [passage 
omitted] 
  Musa told reporters before he left Amman that he conveyed to 
his majesty a message from President Husni Mubarak, and that he 
had a long discussion with his majesty on the past, present, and 
future of the peace process, in addition to bilateral ties. 
  He said he agreed with Jordanian officials to convene a 
meeting of the Higher Jordanian-Egyptian Cooperation Committee. 
  Musa voiced hope that Arab relations could be reconciled, 
and 
called for speedy efforts to heal rifts among Arab states. Musa 
said his country's mediation had not yet succeeded in breaking 
the deadlock between Israel and the PLO over the implementation 
of the Palestinian autonomy document. 
  He said he expected further delay before PLO and Israeli 
negotiations could resume on ways to implement the self-rule 
deal. He said the Taba talks will resume very soon despite the 
stalemate which he described as not very serious. 
  He added that Egypt would not exercise any pressure on the 
PLO. 
  [Begin recording] [Musa] There is no pressure on the PLO by 
us. We listen to what the PLO leaders have to say. We try to 
help when our help is needed, and when we are called upon to 
help, but there is nothing at all that would pertain to, or be 
construed as pressure on the PLO. 
  [Reporter] Isn't it true that in fact agreement was reached 
in the last Cairo talks? What's your position on that? 
  [Musa] I believe there will be a meeting of the Gaza-Jericho 
committee, the liaison committee in Taba soon I hope, and 
therefore, it is not a question of what happened or what took 
place. The important thing is what should take place from now 
on. [end recording] 
  Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Talal al-Hasan also 
told reporters that Jordan and Egypt agreed to move ahead with 
strengthening bilateral cooperation. 

