BFN 

  [Text] Islamabad -- Despite a clear-cut Government of 
Pakistan policy to control spill over of Afghan refugees in the 
Federal Capital, refugee population here continues to be on the 
rise. 
  While there is not even a single Afghan refugee formally 
registered in Islamabad, over 30,000 Afghans are estimated to 
have moved into the capital city in the last six months alone. 
  Officials in the Interior Ministry believe that at least 
half 
of the refugees who have moved to Pakistan in the past six 
months are now residing in Islamabad. According to one estimate 
over 60,000 crossed over to Pakistan in the last six months. 
  As a matter of rule new Afghan refugees coming to Pakistan 
are not supposed to go beyond Attack, the Punjabi border town 
next to the NWFP [North-west Frontier Province]. They are 
required to get themselves registered at Commissionerate for 
refugees in Peshawar or at the Commissionerate office in Quetta. 
  To discourage the Afghans from coming to and settling in 
Islamabad, the government has apparently also instructed the 
United Nation's High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) not to 
provide any financial assistance to the new refugee population 
through its offices here. 
  But even this has not stopped the inflow of refugees who 
continue to pour in the Federal Capital. 
  These refugees, mostly Kabulites, are literate and 
well-to-do 
compared to those who fled to Pakistan in the early years of the 
Afghan war. Their resources, however, are limited. After 
exhausting the little finances they have, most turn to the UNHCR 
office here for assistance. 
  At the palatial UNHCR office on the Margalla Road the 
refugees are greeted by a blue notice board put on the wall 
outside. It says: "Notice To All Afghan Refugees. This office 
does not provide financial assistance or resettlement services 
to Afghan refugees." 
  Those who are desperate for help, ignore this notice. They 
plead their case with the man at the main gate who invariably 
directs them to the Chief Commissionerate for Afghan Refugees 
(CCAR) here. He hands them small chits which have the CCAR 
address printed on them. 
  From the CCAR refugees are again turned away without help 
since it is only a policy-making office. 
  Officials at the CCAR maintain that they have categorically 
conveyed it to the UNHCR several times that they are not there 
to assist refugees. Despite repeated messages, these officials 
say, the UNHCR continues to "misdirect" the refugees. 
  When contacted the UNHCR spokesman here told this 
correspondent that the office in Islamabad did not give 
financial or material assistance. This, he said, was in 
compliance with the Pakistan Government's policy. However, he 
added, that the Commission helped the refugees in other ways. 
  "We have a Social Service Section that attends to their 
security needs and also provides medical and legal aid to them," 
the spokesman said. 
  Meanwhile, an average three to four Afghans continue to show 
up at the CCAR in Islamabad. 
  "We want help, protection, and assistance," is usually what 
they have to say. "There are days when even a couple dozen turn 
up," notes an official. "The most striking aspect about them is 
that almost all are sophisticated urbanites, men and women, 
holding professional degrees," he adds. 
  These Afghans are concentrated in the rather thickly 
populated G and I sectors, where accommodation is available at 
relatively lower rents. Numerous apartments and flats in G-8 
Markaz, G-9 and G-10 have been taken by the Afghan urbanites, 
many of whom share them with their relatives and friends. Most 
new entrants have also rented out portions in sectors I-8, I-9 
and I-10. 
  In fact many real estate dealers in Islamabad attribute the 
current level of rents in these areas to the large presence of 
Afghans. "There has been a growing demand for flats and 
portions in the G and I sectors by the Afghans specially in the 
last six months," says a property dealer in G-8 Markaz. 
  Only recently the Federal Interior Minister also noted at a 
televised interview by journalists that house rents had gone up 
because of the Afghan refugees, which he believed was a good 
sign. 
  Like most parts of the G-9 and G-10 Markazes, these refugees 
virtually throng the three weekly bazaars -- Mangal [Tuesday], 
Itwaar [Sunday] and Juma [Friday] -- in G-8 Sector. It is there 
that one actually realises what a large number of Afghans dwell 
in the capital city. Buyers as well as sellers, they dominate 
the scene. 

