BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 20 KYODO -- The ruling coalition 
parties remained at loggerheads with one another during talks to 
narrow policy gaps over crucial elements of tax system reform 
and Japan's response to the suspected North Korean nuclear arms 
development program, coalition sources said Wednesday. 
  The coalition parties are trying to close their gaps before 
picking a successor to outgoing Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa, whose eight-month administration faced repeated 
difficulties due to an intracoalition rift over policies. As a 
result, a meeting of coalition chiefs to nominate Hosokawa's 
successor was not held Wednesday, and the Diet is expected to 
hold the prime ministerial election Friday or later, the sources 
said. 
  The prospect emerged after the House of Representatives 
Steering Committee agreed to postpone the vote-taking session 
scheduled for Thursday to Friday or later. 
  Representatives of the coalition partners held on-and-off 
bargaining Wednesday to reconcile their differences over 
proposed tax system reform and how to ensure Japan's safety in 
the face of alleged North Korean efforts to develop nuclear arms. 
  The secretaries general of the coalition parties banded 
together shortly after 7 P.M. [1000 GMT] in the latest bid to 
close the differences but adjourned only nine minutes later. 
  The deputy chiefs of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party], Komeito, Japan New Party, the 
Democratic Socialist Party, the Democratic Reform Party and 
Kaikaku no Kai, a parliamentary group of LDP defectors in the 
House of Representatives, decided to call another meeting 
Thursday morning. 
  The process needs to be completed before the group can 
select 
a replacement for Hosokawa, who said April 8 that he will resign 
due to the paralysis of Diet business over alleged improprieties 
regarding his personal finances. 
  The SDP, the alliance's largest group, and the coalition's 
core party, Shinseito, are continuing to wrangle over a proposed 
hike in the consumption tax rate and Japan's response to a 
possible U.N. Security Council resolution to slap sanctions on 
North Korea. 
  Shinseito Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa, the coalition's 
top 
strategist, has demanded the wording indicating a plan to 
approve a hike in indirect taxes be inserted into the 
coalition's policy platform document. 
  SDP Secretary General Wataru Kubo, however, balked at the 
stand and proposed alternative wording that calls for the 
abolition of the current consumption tax and for making up 
resultant revenue shortfalls with "the introduction of a new 
tax." 
  Kubo also called for inserting a further tough condition 
that 
mandates securing "public consent" before bringing in the new 
tax. 
  Ozawa blasted the SDP assertion for carrying a hidden 
intention to scuttle the proposed new tax later, saying, "a Diet 
member acts on the basis of public mandate." If public consent 
is mandated, they will have to conduct opinion polls for every 
policy proposal, he said. 
  Kubo said Shinseito's counterproposal to "hike the rate of 
an 
indirect tax" would open the way for raising the rate of the 
consumption tax from the current 3 percent, a move which has 
drawn the ire of the SDP, the sources said. 
  Shinseito also proposed drawing tax reform to a conclusion 
by 
the end of June and legislating a tax reform bill featuring the 
indirect tax hike by the end of this year. The SDP did not balk 
at the proposed timetable, but stuck to its condition calling 
for public consent. 
  In February, Hosokawa was forced to rescind a plan to 
replace 
the consumption tax with a new 7 percent "National Welfare Tax" 
because of strong opposition from the SDP, which threatened to 
pull out of the coalition. 
  Hosokawa proposed the imposition of the new tax partly to 
offset a 6 trillion yen tax cut and to secure budgetary revenues 
to finance growing government welfare spending for the elderly. 
  The SDP also withdrew its support for the agreed-upon 
wording 
on Japan's possible response to contingencies on the Korean 
peninsula if the United Nations moved to penalize Pyongyang for 
its continued refusal of full international inspections of its 
nuclear facilities. 
  The previous wording -- agreed upon Tuesday -- called for 
authorizing Japan to join the U.N.-approved "collective security 
measures." The SDP, concerned that such wording might obligate 
Japan to join collective security measures in the event of U.N. 
sanctions, proposed removing the wording "collective security 
measures." 
  The SDP also urged the coalition partners to approve its 
proposal to insert a condition that Japan be obligated to hold 
consultations not only with the United States and South Korea 
but with China if contingencies struck the Korean peninsula. 
  If the coalition representatives can forge agreement on the 
remaining policy gaps, their leaders will select Foreign 
Minister Tsutomu Hata as their candidate for an upcoming Diet 
election to name a successor to Hosokawa. 

