BFN 

<F P=106> ["P. Fr." report: "Micro-Achille, Mega-Massimo: The </F>
Progressives Are Fond of Venice's Mayor-Philosopher"] 
  [Excerpt] Rome -- Venice progressive Mayor Massimo Cacciari 
will not stand as a candidate to lead the progressives, at least 
not for the time being. Nor will he stand as a candidate -- it 
goes without saying -- to lead the Democratic Party of the Left. 
Instead, he made an appeal to set up "an organizational 
structure, a network, and strong coordination system" at once. 
Such a structure is to represent "all the forces within the 
Left," but it must also be genuinely open "to the Catholic 
Center and to social Catholicism," that is to say, to the 
Italian Popular Party and to Mario Segni's Pact for Italy. Who 
will lead the coalition will be decided later. 
  The mayor-philosopher explained: "The choice of a leader for 
the coalition cannot be linked to the choice of a party leader. 
Starting from the grassroots and the platforms, the 
coordinating structures will put forward their proposals, as the 
need arises, concerning who should stand for the mayorship in a 
given town, who should lead a given region, and who should lead 
the national government." 
  The battle is therefore postponed or perhaps it has just 
begun. The numerous participants in the progressive convention 
organized in Rome by Micromega had to make a virtue of necessity 
and to be satisfied with comparing the new Left's various 
possible leaders, who were presented to the public at the 
convention. Among them was Cacciari, of course. [L'UNITA 
editor] Walter Veltroni, however, was there too, although he 
proudly denied having any ambitions in this respect and, from 
the platform, spoke against the "implosion" which had taken 
place on the Left following the elections, and against 
"searching for a leader in the manner of a beauty contest, with 
hundreds of opinion polls in the newspapers." Among those 
present was also Naples mayor Antonio Bassolino, in whose town 
--contrary to what happened in the north, including Venice -- 
the Left was undoubtedly not wiped out on 27 March. Making it 
clear that the Italian Communist Party tradition, to which he 
belonged, was not just the garbage imagined by most observers, 
he forcefully explained how leaders cannot be invented sitting 
at a table after a defeat, and he even displayed a certain 
fastidiousness at the very word which was on everyone's lips 
within the Left: revenge. Finally, in order to complete the 
picture of the participants in this (so far) purely imaginary 
game, two potential outsider candidates were also on display: 
Rome Mayor Francesco Rutelli and Bologna Mayor Walter Vitali, 
who -- without his knowledge -- was nominated as a candidate by 
IL MANIFESTO a few days ago. [passage omitted] 

