Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yuriy Kostenko, Ukrainian environment </F>
minister and head of a parliamentary working group on START I 
and nuclear disarmament, by Vladimir Skachko: ```This Is Not 
Disarmament but Disrobing (razdevaniye, also meaning `robbing') 
of the State.' The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet Can Give a Legal 
Assessment of the Moscow Statement by the Three Presidents'' -- 
first paragraph is introduction; place, date not given] 
  [Text] Ivan Plyushch, speaker of the Ukrainian Supreme 
Soviet, has stated that the Supreme Soviet must decide on the 
question of compatibility of Ukraine's national interests with 
the statement signed by presidents of the United States, 
Ukraine, and Russia on the future of the Ukrainian strategic 
missiles and also consider a draft resolution on Ukraine's 
accession to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. According to 
Ivan Plyushch, because the resolution on joining the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty was prepared by the presidential 
services, the report on this matter should be made by President 
Leonid Kravchuk. Yuriy Kostenko, head of a special working 
deputies group on preparing the START I Treaty and on Ukraine's 
acquiring a nonnuclear status, and minister for environmental 
protection, commented for NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the deputies' 
decision to return to these matters. 
  Kostenko: The Moscow tripartite statement has 
actually offered quite a different scheme of nuclear disarmament 
for Ukraine than what was decided on this score by our Supreme 
Soviet. This scheme does not take many aspects into account 
either from the viewpoint of national security or from the 
viewpoint of our economic interests. Therefore the Moscow 
statement must be considered in full as a separate agreement and 
be given an appropriate legal assessment. 
  Skachko: But this is a statement, not an 
agreement. The parliament may neither ratify it, nor fail to 
ratify it. 
  Kostenko: I understand this. The statement has 
been made in such a way that it could not be submitted to the 
consideration of the Supreme Soviet. This is so-called legal 
chicanery. Now, Ukraine's supreme legislative body adopts one 
scheme of nuclear disarmament while the executive branch, 
contrary to this, proposes a totally different one. Therefore 
the Supreme Soviet, in line with the current constitution and 
entitled to consider all international agreements, is also to 
consider this document as well as give it a proper legal 
appraisal and establish whether it is good for Ukraine. 
Possibly, it will have to be vetoed as a document which 
contradicts Ukraine's national interests. 
  Skachko: And presumably the parliament resolution 
on this question must be enforced? 
  Kostenko: This is undoubtedly the power of the 
Supreme Soviet. Moreover, I would like to point out that the 
work conducted by the Supreme Soviet will allow, in my opinion, 
more or less to balance Ukraine's interests with the interests 
of those who insist that Ukraine become nuclear-free. In the 
Moscow document I do not see either the economic interests or 
guarantees of Ukraine's security that many are talking about so 
much. 
  Skachko: How would you comment on the view that 
neither the statement nor the appendix to it contains a word on 
compensation for the tactical nuclear weapons evacuated to 
Russia? 
  Kostenko: This only shows once again that there is 
a certain contradiction between what our Supreme Soviet has 
adopted and what our president has signed. The parliament 
resolution clearly says that compensation must be made also for 
the tactical nuclear weapons, while the Moscow statement does 
not say anything about this separately. As far as I know, 
Russia apparently promises to consider this issue and provide 
some compensation after all. 
  Skachko: In other words, compensation for tactical 
nuclear weapons is a subject of separate talks between Ukraine 
and Russia? 
  Kostenko: Yes, talks on this issue have been going 
on, but it has not been settled conclusively yet because experts 
have been tasked to consider it and establish how exactly 
compensation will be made. 
  Skachko: Has any time frame been defined for 
making compensation to Ukraine for the tactical nuclear weapons? 
  Kostenko: No, no term has been established. This 
is very difficult to do because no one knows with what funds 
compensation will be made. If from the proceeds of the 500 
tonnes of enriched uranium that Russia is to sell to the United 
States, then this can happen only after this uranium has been 
sold on the world market. Only then will Russia start partially 
to receive real money and, naturally, will be able to make some 
compensation to Ukraine. At present, however, no such funds are 
available. True, there is also another option (which, 
incidentally, would be the most adequate for Ukraine): to 
evaluate the cost of each warhead. This is possible because it 
is known how much uranium and plutonium there is in each 
warhead. Therefore, using an equivalent, one could estimate the 
value of the tactical nuclear weapons that we have transferred 
to Russia. According to our preliminary estimates, the value is 
$10 billion. Assuming this sum, Russia is already in debt to 
Ukraine -- not the other way around, as some are trying to have 
us believe today. And if we talk about energy, then, given that 
uranium and plutonium are very valuable energy carriers, an 
equivalent exchange scheme could be used: We deliver highly 
enriched uranium and plutonium to them, and they supply us with 
oil and gas. But unfortunately this option has not been used; 
moreover, during the talks the subject of ``plutonium'' was 
somehow lost altogether. And it is a very costly element: one 
kilogram of enriched plutonium, according to various estimates, 
can cost up to $1 million, and one kilogram of enriched uranium 
up to $100,000. Now you can imagine the value of the material 
assets that we have already transferred to Russia. 
  Skachko: How much uranium and plutonium have you 
transferred to Russia? 
  Kostenko: Approximately 10 tonnes of enriched 
plutonium and more than 90 tonnes of enriched uranium. 
  Skachko: What is the correlation in parliament of 
people who advocate a solution of the problem of Ukraine's 
nuclear weapons on terms favorable for it and those who are 
ready to give the missiles away? 
  Kostenko: Judging by the results of voting during 
the ratification of START I, it can said that the majority of 
parliament members are inclined toward organizing a normal 
nuclear disarmament of Ukraine. But what has happened in Moscow 
is not nuclear disarmament but the disrobing of the state. In 
the military, economic, and political sense. 

