Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Certain Thai banks in Cambodia, which reportedly 
will have their contracts revoked, pioneered banking in that 
country and have no connections with the Thai banking sector. 
The Cambodian Finance Ministry is seeking to reorganize the 
commercial banking system. 
  Cambodian Finance Minister Sam Rangsi informed PHUCHATKAN 
that his ministry is in the process of issuing an order that 
will immediately close local and foreign commercial banks that 
did not bring any capital into the country for their operations. 
  An inspection of licenses the commercial banks received from 
the Cambodian national bank during the Hun Sen government's 
tenure reveals that 50 percent of the existing 21 banks did not 
operate like real banks. Some sell lottery tickets, while 
others were established for the purpose of laundering money. 
  The Cambodian national bank early this week sent a circular 
to all commercial banks to transfer $5 million in registered 
capital to the national bank within 30 days. Failure to comply 
will result in the termination of their licenses. 
  Sam said: "We must change commercial bank regulations. Banks 
that have not operated like real banks or have done notorious 
business will have to leave. We will only allow reputable banks 
with capital to support their functions to operate in Cambodia." 
  The Cambodian finance minister said the Cambodian national 
bank will withdraw its shares in all commercial banks so that it 
can fully control the operations of commercial banks. 
  The new regulations have greatly displeased commercial banks 
because the transfer of capital to the national bank will 
deprive them of operational funds. 
  According to a source in Phnom Penh, a loosely-formed 
association of commercial banks is negotiating with the 
Cambodian national bank and the finance minister to use the 
capital that is to be transferred for their banking operations. 
The outcome of the negotiations is not known at this time. 
[passage omitted] 

