CSO 

<F P=106>   [Editorial Report] Recent issues of Croatian dailies have </F>
reported and discussed two Croatian Government decisions: to 
suspend the Statute of the County of Istria, including 
guarantees of minority-language equality to the indigenous 
Italian population, and to establish a Council for Istria as "an 
advisory body to the Presidency of Croatia." 
  The Ministry of Administration, according to its 18 April 
announcement, has suspended the implementation of the Statute of 
the County of Istria on the basis of Article 80 of the Croatian 
Law on Local Self-Management and Administration (VJESNIK, 19 
April; SLOBODNA DALMACIJA, 19 April). This was done, the 
ministry says, because regulations in several articles of the 
statute contradict the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, 
the Constitutional Law on Human Rights and Freedoms, the 
Constitutionsl Law on the Rights of Ethnic and National 
Communities or Minorities in the Republic of Croatia, and other 
laws. The announcement states that the Government of Croatia has 
obligated the Ministry of Administration to examine thoroughly 
the statute of every county, in accordance with the ministry's 
responsibilities under the Law on Local Self-Management and 
Administration. In cases in which a regulation in a county 
statute is found to be unconstitutional or illegal, charges will 
be brought before Croatia's Constitutional Court. 
  Reacting in the 19 April VJESNIK to the Ministry of 
Administration's decision, Dino Debeljuh, a member of the 
Istrian Democratic Congress (IDS) and a delegate in the Croatian 
Assembly, defended the statute but said the move by the Ministry 
of Administration was to be expected. "In any case, the opinions 
on the rights and protection of the Italian minority of the IDS, 
as the ruling party in Istria, are totally different from those 
of the top state leadership. With this statute, we 
simultaneously gave the top state leadership the opportunity to 
accept the standards of Western Europe and to recognize the 
right of the Italian minority to retain the level of rights it 
has had up until now. The Statute of the County of Istria merely 
sanctions the existing rights of the Italian minority and, in 
addition, harmonizes these rights with those of the Italians in 
the Slovene part of Istria, and all of this is in accordance 
with the memorandum signed by the Republic of Croatia and the 
Republic of Italy, by which Croatia promised that the Italians 
in the Croatian part of Istria would have the same rights and 
protection as those in the Slovene part. In no way does the 
Statute of the County of Istria exceed those rights. The statute 
does not contradict the Constitution or laws of the Republic of 
Croatia." 
  Asked how the inhabitants of Istria would react to the 
suspension, Debeljuh responded: "This is one more in a series of 
decisions by the top Croatian leadership that does not 
contribute to the improvement of its relations with Istria." He 
stressed that he found especially worrisome the fact that this 
was happening at a time when the right was gaining prominence in 
Italy and might use the "hardline" position of Zagreb to 
"promote its views toward Istria." This shows, he added, that 
such actions by the top leadership do not benefit Croatia. 
  The same issue of VJESNIK carried a report by the Croatian 
press agency HINA on the IDS response to the Croatian 
Government's decision to establish an advisory council for 
Istria. Following a meeting of the IDS Council in Pazin on 16 
April, the party issued a statement signed by its president, 
Ivan Jakovcic. The statement said that the IDS did not accept 
the manner in which this council was founded, pointing out that 
the assembly and government of Istria County had not been 
consulted. Thus, the statement continued, "the President of the 
Republic of Croatia, Dr. Franjo Tudjman, subconsciously 
confirmed the separateness of Istria in the Republic of 
Croatia." The IDS statement called on Tudjman "to set up 
councils for Dalmatia, Slavonija, Baranja, and other regions of 
the Republic of Croatia which need to be given more attention 
than Istria." 
  The 20 April issue of VJESNIK reports that the Istria County 
Government had also protested the suspension of the county 
statute and the founding of the council for Istria, saying that 
it considered the actions "unnecessary and incomprehensible," 
especially because "not a single legally elected member of the 
county government" had been appointed to the advisory council. 
The government, according to VJESNIK, also said it was 
"indicative" of the Tudjman government's attitude toward Istria 
that the local government had to "find out about all of this in 
the media." 
  The same issue of VJESNIK published "a message to Istrians 
from the Office of the President of the Republic of Croatia" 
stating that, "in view of the fact that the council had been 
founded as a nonpolitical, expert, and nonparty advisory body to 
the president of the republic, the Istria County Assembly and 
all other interested organizations and associations are invited 
to propose candidates for membership on the council of Istria." 
  SLOBODNA DALMACIJA in its 21 April issue reported that the 
Council of Istria has 17 members and that Monsignor Josip 
Pavlisic, retired archbishop of the Rijeka-Senj diocese, had 
been "elected" its president. The paper describes Pavlisic as an 
authority on Istria, where he was born 80 years ago. Pavlisic, 
asked by SLOBODNA DALMACIJA how he had been elected president of 
the council, stated that he had been contacted by telephone with 
the offer "several days ago" and had accepted, "although I have 
been absent from Istria for 42 years." He told the paper that 
the council members had not met yet, but "I was told that the 
council consists of many people who will advise the president of 
the republic regarding various sectors of life." Asked whether, 
as president of the council, he had influenced the selection of 
its members, Pavlisic responded: "The president of the republic 
nominated the members. All this happened for me out of the blue." 
  Discussing what Istria means to him, Pavlisic observed that 
the area had the potential for a bright future. He warned, 
however, that people in Istria are discouraged with the 
situation in Croatia and unhappy about their small salaries and 
pensions. He said that there is a danger that they may turn 
toward Italy "because they are not all idealists and they have 
to survive from day to day." Asked to comment on the "stormy" 
press reaction to the founding of the council, Pavlisic 
responded that charges that everyone on the council was a member 
of Tudjman's party, the Croatian Democratic Community, HDZ, were 
not accurate: "I, for one, am not an HDZ member, nor am I a 
member of any other party." 

