BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 18 June (XINHUA) -- China and Estonia 
issued a joint declaration here today. The text of the 
declaration follows: 
  At the invitation of PRC President Jiang Zemin, President 
Lennart Meri of the Republic of Estonia made an official visit 
to China from 12 to 18 June 1994. 
  In a friendly, frank, and businesslike [you hao tan shuai he 
qiu shi 0645 1170 0982 3764 0735 3061 1395] atmosphere, Chinese 
President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng had held separate 
talks with the Estonian president on the current state of and 
prospects for bilateral relations and other issues of common 
interest. 
  The two sides declare: 
  1. The mutually-beneficial cooperation between the People's 
Republic of China and the Republic of Estonia is progressing 
smoothly. China and Estonia reaffirm their desire to develop 
relations on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and 
territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, noninterference in 
each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and 
peaceful coexistence. 
  2. The two sides consider it essential to exchange 
information and experience in the fields of economy, science, 
technology, culture, and law through consultations. 
  3. The two sides will promote the activities of the official 
missions accredited to them, in accordance with the provisions 
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the Vienna 
Convention on Consular Relations 
  4. The Estonian Government recognizes that the Government of 
the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government of 
China and Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory. 
It affirms that it will not establish government relations in 
any form with Taiwan. 
  China respects the independence, sovereignty, and 
territorial 
integrity of Estonia. 
  5. The two sides consider it essential to help establish 
relations between social institutions, commercial structures, 
and cultural organizations. 
  6. To promote the continuous development of bilateral 
relations, officials of the two foreign ministries will hold 
political consultations on bilateral relations as well as on 
regional and international issues of mutual interest. 
  7. The two sides are ready to strengthen their cooperation 
within the United Nations and other international organizations 
in accordance with the UN Charter and universally-recognized 
norms of international law. 
  8. The two sides express their opposition to every type of 
international terrorism and their readiness to cooperate in 
fighting against international terrorism, organized crime, and 
the smuggling of arms, narcotics, artifacts of historical value, 
and works of art. 
  9. The two sides point out that each state has the right to 
choose a social and economic system and path of development 
appropriate to its interests and heritage. Differences in these 
areas should not be an obstacle to maintaining and developing 
normal relations between states. 
  10. The two sides affirm that the declaration is not 
directed 
against any third state and that it does not affect the rights 
and obligations of the parties deriving from the existing 
bilateral and multilateral treaties they have concluded with 
other states. 

