Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Granma Province is already reaching yields of 
5,000 quintals of potatoes per area [as heard]. Meanwhile, in 
Matanzas Province it will be impossible to reach the expected 1 
million quintals during the present season due to the plague 
that affects the crops. 
  These potato plantations are affected by the phytopdae 
[fitoptera], a fungus commonly known as late blight. Its 
appearance and rapid propagation is associated with weather 
conditions, temperature, and humidity, which are ideal for its 
development. The strict sanitary control of the crops allowed 
its rapid detection and the design of a program to minimize its 
effect. [passage omitted] 
  A great amount of resources is being used against the 
plague. 
They have applied tonnes of imported chemical products by crop 
dusting. The effort of the men and women has been decisive. 
Nevertheless, effects on the crops have already been seen, but 
the effects can only be evaluated once the season concludes. 
  Politburo member Yadira Garcia, first secretary of the 
Communist Party of Cuba [PCC] in Matanzas Province, toured the 
potato producing fields of Jovellanos Municipality accompanied 
by officials and specialists of the Ministry of Agriculture 
[Minag]. Angel Berriel, delegate of the Minag in Matanzas, 
reported that so far the majority of the crops have been 
affected: 23 caballerias severely affected, and 12 completely 
defoliated. In the midst of well-known economic limitations, the 
country's leadership has assigned the necessary resources to 
confront the situation. There has been a recovery in areas which 
were severely affected, and the harvest in those areas is 
promising. 
  Part of the strategy consists in optimizing the harvest as 
never before, making sure that not one potato is left in the 
fields. That has been the instruction given by the PCC. 
  [Begin Garcia recording] During the harvest, we must strive 
to do the best to ensure a good harvest. It must be a quality 
harvest. There are always challenges. That is something that is 
inevitable with the potato crops. Despite this we must work in 
the harvest with the dedication of all forces of each 
municipality, which is what we are doing now with the beginning 
of the harvest. We are giving a positive answer to the problem. 
[end recording] 
  It has been said that regarding agriculture, nature imposes 
its laws. But the dedication and the intelligence of men and 
women also has its effect. It will now be impossible for 
Matanzas to reach the 1 million quintals of potatoes. The 
phytopdea has affected the yields but has increased the effort 
and the desire to reach and exceed the goal of 750,000 quintals. 
The battle has just begun. 

