BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Hu Sheng (5170 4939): "What Is Socialism, How </F>
Should We Build Socialism? -- Studying the Selected Works 
of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3" -- second of two installments] 
  [Text] The establishment of a socialist society indicates 
that a people has created a new society with a high level of 
consciousness unseen in human history. This consciousness came 
from people's understanding of the general law governing 
historical development and shows that people can roughly discern 
the direction in which the new society will develop, though they 
are unlikely to know the specific law governing the development 
of the new society beforehand. Therefore, they cannot build up 
the new socialist mansion at one go without a flawless 
blueprint. In its lengthy historical process of existence, a 
socialist society -- like other types of societies -- is to 
change with the development of the productive forces and the 
change in various objective conditions. As the builders of 
socialism may make mistakes owing to erroneous thinking, the 
change in and development of the new society becomes all the 
more complicated. Historical facts have proved that when the 
objective conditions have changed, and thus call for a change in 
people's thinking, and if the builders of socialism fail to 
carry out reform in time, the cause of building a new society 
may go down the drain. 
  Therefore, the development process of a socialist society 
often calls for reforms; in other words, a situation that calls 
for reforms often occurs. Our current reform is based on our 
experience in building socialism in over 20 years, beginning 
late 1950's. Why the experience has generated a demand for 
reform and what reform program we should have are related to the 
experience in building socialism in many other countries, with 
the Soviet Union as the mainstay for a period of 60 years 
beginning in the late 1920's. In this period, socialist 
construction in various countries provided rich, positive 
experience, and also exposed people's distorted understanding of 
socialism, as well as weaknesses that a country in which 
capitalism had not been developed could hardly avoid in building 
socialism. On the historical signpost appeared an earnest 
warning: reform or appropriate reform, or else doom. 
  The shortcomings cropping up in socialist construction and 
in 
economic, political, and other relevant systems can be 
summarized as follows: 
  1. Unduly relying on centralized state power to manage and 
control everything. This gave the state a heavy burden that was 
beyond its power, and dampened or even suppressed the enthusiasm 
of all social quarters outside state power. 
  2. Failing to assimilate the advances of capitalist 
countries which are been useful for building socialism -- some 
advances can be assimilated directly, while others need to be 
reformed. 
  Such a formula for building socialism suggested that people 
had an incorrect or partly incorrect understanding of socialism. 
According to this formula, social productive forces could grow, 
but they could grow only to a limited extent and then clearly 
stagnated. 
  When beginning to build socialism following the victorious 
revolution, China indiscriminately copied the Soviet Union's 
formula for building socialism. This was because China lacked 
its own experience at that time, but also indicated that Chinese 
leaders were fettered by various concepts initiated by the 
Soviet Union in arriving at a correct understanding of 
socialism. Mao Zedong and other Chinese leaders once took a 
skeptical attitude toward the Soviet Union's formula and tried 
to carry out reform, but they failed to put their reform ideas 
into practice or made mistakes of a different nature in finding 
a correct reform program. 
  Deng Xiaoping said clearly in 1988: "Our past practice of 
indiscriminately copying the Soviet Union's formula for building 
socialism resulted in many problems. We discovered this problem 
a long time ago, but failed to find a good solution" 
(Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3, p. 261). 
In 1987 he also said: "There is no way out other than reform. 
The practice over several decades has proved that the old 
formula is unsuccessful. Our past practice of indiscriminately 
copying a foreign country's formula hindered the development of 
the productive forces, led to a rigid way of thinking, and 
prevented the people and the grass roots displaying their 
enthusiasm" (p. 237). He then added: "We have made other 
mistakes, too, such as the `Great Leap Forward' and the 
'Cultural Revolution.' We made these mistakes not because of 
copying other countries' formulas" (p, 237); indeed, the "Great 
Leap Forward" and the "Cultural Revolution" were created by none 
other than China itself. Naturally, such erroneous practices 
were useless in rejecting foreign countries' formulas that were 
unsuitable for China. Clearly, the two basic mistakes mentioned 
above also were found in these mistakes made by China itself. 
  Indiscriminately copying a foreign country's formula, among 
other mistakes, resulted in serious ramifications. Deng 
Xiaoping said briefly: "Our principal mistakes made since 1957 
are `Left' mistakes, and the 'Cultural Revolution' is extremely 
`Left.' In the 20-year period from 1958 to 1978, our society 
actually stagnated, the national economy barely grew, and the 
people's living standards hardly rose. Can we let this 
situation go unchecked?" (p. 237). As compared with traditional 
concepts of socialism, Deng Xiaoping's views on reform bear the 
following characteristics: 
  Deng Xiaoping stressed the need to build socialism with 
Chinese characteristics in line with China's actual conditions, 
while the traditional concepts of other people represented by 
the Soviet Union maintained that any country could copy the 
existing formula for building socialism because it is the ideal 
one. 
  Deng Xiaoping said: "Reform is self-improvement of the 
socialist system and it has brought about a certain degree of 
revolutionary change in certain areas" (p. 142). On the one 
hand, this means that reform represents a certain degree of 
revolutionary change and that it is carried out within the 
framework of socialism. On the other, it means that the 
socialist system has yet to be constantly improved. This view 
contrasts with the traditional idea that the socialist system is 
perfect once it comes into being, or needs only minor 
patching-up. 
  Deng Xiaoping stressed that reform must serve to promote the 
development of the productive forces of socialist society, as 
well as focus on developing the productive forces. So the first 
thing we did when we began the reform in 1978 was to shift the 
focal point of our work. He said: "Since the Third Plenary 
Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee, the entire party has 
shifted the focal point of its work to the socialist 
modernization drive. While upholding the four cardinal 
principles, we have concentrated on developing social productive 
forces. This means setting things right in a fundamental way" 
(p. 141). He also emphasized that reform serves to emancipate 
productive forces. This fundamentally contrasts with the 
traditional idea that only revolution can liberate productive 
forces, and that under conditions of socialism there is no such 
task as liberating productive forces. 
  Now let us discuss, in particular, the viewpoint that reform 
also serves to liberate productive forces. 
  Socialist society was established on the basis of productive 
forces created by the capitalist society, and it negates 
capitalism. The reason the capitalist system must be negated is 
that the capitalist system -- with the capitalist relations of 
production at the core -- can no longer promote the development 
of productive forces. The task of the socialist revolution is 
to liberate the productive forces from the trammels of the 
capitalist system. When a socialist society has been 
established, is there any situation in which efforts should be 
made to liberate productive forces? Is there any task of 
liberating productive forces? For a long period of time, many 
people in the world answered no to these questions, although the 
productive forces in socialist society actually stagnated. 
  In the past, it was Mao Zedong who gave different answers to 
these questions. When the "Great Leap Forward" in 1958 proved a 
failure, after seeing that socialist economic construction did 
not proceed rapidly as he had expected, Mao Zedong realized that 
there were some obstacles to be removed. He also was 
dissatisfied with the practice of indiscriminately copying the 
Soviet Union's experience, and hoped to open up a path of our 
own. Although he did not make an adequate, scientific analysis 
of the failure of the "Great Leap Forward," his abovementioned 
ideas clearly have a few points to recommend them. He did not 
find a correct path later because he gave an entirely incorrect 
answer to the problem of where lay the obstacles or trammels 
hindering the development of productive forces in socialist 
society. He believed that the failure to make a thorough 
socialist revolution, namely, to thoroughly combat the 
capitalist class and capitalism, was where the shoe pinched, and 
that the capitalist relations of production and their 
superstructure died hard in socialist society. So he maintained 
that our tasks were to constantly identify capitalist things in 
socialist society, and to wage a struggle against them. Such 
thinking contradicted objective reality and brought about 
disasters in practice. Following this guiding ideology, people 
regarded all things that did not bear the mark of public 
ownership, as well as all types of individual ownership, as 
capitalist. This guiding ideology then found expression in 
"chopping off the tails of capitalism" in the countryside and in 
"discovering capitalist-roaders in the party," entailing serious 
consequences. To sum up, Mao Zedong's mistakes were due to the 
theories of "taking class struggle as the key link" and of 
"continued revolution under the dictatorship of the 
proletariat." Although the idea of "continued revolution under 
the proletarian dictatorship" was not advanced by Mao Zedong 
himself, he agreed with it and it conformed with his own 
thinking. His thinking was that to develop the socialist 
productive forces, people must constantly free themselves from 
the trammels of capitalism. 
  After the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, our party drew a conclusion from historical 
experience: Though class struggle will exist within certain 
areas, it is no longer the principal contradiction in our 
society; though we must continue to oppose the tendency of 
pulling China toward capitalism -- meaning the tendency of 
bourgeois liberalization -- we cannot develop productive forces 
mainly through class struggle. The trammels hindering the 
development of productive forces do not come from capitalism, 
but from the inappropriate economic system, which is related to 
a misunderstanding of socialism under certain historical 
conditions. In the circumstances, it is wrong to free 
productive forces through making a revolution, as we did in the 
past. 
  Deng Xiaoping stressed: Revolution serves to liberate 
productive forces, and so does reform. He clearly distinguished 
between the tasks of the two in liberating productive forces. 
He said: "Overthrowing the reactionary rule by imperialism, 
feudalism, and bureaucrat-capitalism to liberate the productive 
forces of the Chinese people was the goal of our past 
revolution. So revolution serves to liberate productive forces. 
Basically changing the economic system that is hindering the 
development of productive forces to set up a dynamic socialist 
economic system to promote the development of productive forces, 
once the socialist system has been basically set up, is the goal 
of reform. So reform serves to liberate productive forces" (p. 
370). 
  The reform that is needed in the present stage of socialist 
development must serve to basically change the economic system, 
which is related to various types of rigid ideas, a system 
belatedly relying on centralized state power. This task 
certainly cannot be accomplished through revolution against the 
capitalist class. Moveover, the theory of "taking class struggle 
as the key link" cannot help us learn useful experience from 
various foreign countries. 
  Historical experience has proved 
that "taking class struggle as the key link" in dealing with 
domestic matters is related to closed-doorism. Deng Xiaoping 
said: "Experience over the last three decades has taught us that 
it does not work to engage in construction with doors closed; 
the economy cannot develop in this way" (p. 64). "To seek 
development and to shake off poverty and backwardness, China 
must open to the outside world" (p. 266). He also said: "Many 
years of experience have indicated that we cannot rely on the 
old economic system to develop the economy, so we must 
assimilate useful methods created by the capitalist countries to 
develop productive forces" (p. 149). Daring to assimilate 
useful methods created by the capitalist countries shows that 
socialism has great vitality, rather than suggesting that it is 
weak. Of course, while insisting on pursuing the open policy, 
Deng Xiaoping also stressed the need to reject all the decadent 
things of capitalist countries. 
  Reform represents self-improvement of the socialist system, 
so it is different from revolution, in which one class topples 
another, but both serve to liberate productive forces. Deng 
Xiaoping said: "Like our past revolution, reform aims at doing 
away with obstacles hindering development of productive forces 
so as to enable China to shake off poverty and backwardness. In 
this sense, reform can be seen as revolutionary transformation" 
(p. 135). Since the traditional socialist system has existed 
for several decades and has struck root deep in the people's 
hearts, it is not easy to make a breach in it, either 
practically or ideologically. However, as far as the present 
deep-going and comprehensive reform is concerned, it is a 
revolution in a sense. 
  Deng Xiaoping said: "We regard reform as a revolution, which 
is of course different from the `Cultural Revolution'" (p. 82). 
He continued: "The reform we are carrying out is a bold one, 
but if we do not act this way, we will have difficulties making 
progress. Reform is the second Chinese revolution. This is an 
important thing we must do, though we take risks in doing so" 
(p. 113). Clearly, he meant that though reform is a revolution, 
it is entirely different from the "continued revolution under 
the dictatorship of the proletariat" or the "Cultural 
Revolution" because it is not a simple continuation and 
extension of the past victorious revolution, but is "the second 
Chinese revolution." 
<H5>  IV. The Socialist Market Economy </H5>
  In a socialist society, in order to liberate the productive 
forces it is necessary to shake off the trammels of centralized 
state power and the all-inclusive planned economy. Deng 
Xiaoping said: "We have been practicing the planned economy, 
but many years of practice has taught us that the planned 
economy, in a sense, hindered the development of productive 
forces" (p. 148) 
  In the past, we used to equate the socialist economy with 
the 
planned economy. Some people believed that a socialist society 
can and must practice the planned economy. This has something 
to do with the misunderstanding of socialism. They believed 
that in a socialist society, because people have a high level of 
consciousness, they can predict in detail how the production and 
economic activities will proceed and can reflect this prediction 
in their plans. In fact, however, this is impossible. Man's 
high level of consciousness finds expression mainly in having a 
general understanding of the laws governing social development. 
It is impossible, however, for people to know every detail of 
social economic activities. If you obstinately want to work out 
such a plan and give it the power to control everything, you 
certainly will make the mistakes of subjectivism and 
bureaucratism. When every locality, social group, enterprise, 
economic entity, factory, or every person taking part in 
economic and productive activities is required to act strictly 
according to a unified plan formulated by the state, there is 
enthusiasm displayed only by the central government, and the 
enthusiasm of other social quarters is dampened. Clearly, this 
runs counter to the essential requirements of socialism. 
  Deng Xiaoping was fully aware of the shortcomings of the 
planned economy, and maintained that reform must serve to 
mobilize the enthusiasm of all quarters. He said: "We have 
formulated the opening-up and reform policies because our past 
lessons have taught us that the situation in which China is 
closed to international intercourse must be reversed, and that 
the people's enthusiasm must be aroused" (p. 224). He also 
said: "The goal of our economic reform -- to put it briefly -- 
is to enliven the domestic economy and open China to the outside 
world. Enlivening the domestic economy means lifting 
restrictions on the domestic economy and arousing the people's 
enthusiasm through opening up. As soon as restrictions on the 
rural economy were lifted, the enthusiasm of 800 million 
peasants was aroused. Likewise, the enthusiasm of enterprises 
and all social quarters in urban areas will be aroused as soon 
as restrictions on the urban economy are lifted" (p. 135). 
  Mao Zedong was also aware of the defects and mistakes of the 
Soviet Union's planned economy in 1956. At that time, he tabled 
a basic principle that every positive factor at home and abroad 
should be brought into play to serve the socialist cause. This 
basic principle is undoubtedly correct, but how should it be put 
into effect? Mao Zedong attempted to carry out this principle 
by political means, as shown by his later practice and theories 
-- such as "taking class struggle as the key link" and starting 
mass movements in a big way, which caused serious ramifications. 
In light of this lesson, at the central working conference held 
immediately before the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee in 1978, in other words, at the outset of the 
reform, Deng Xiaoping said: "We must learn to manage the 
economy by economic means. If we know nothing about it, we 
should learn from those who know, and from the advanced 
management techniques created by foreign countries" 
(Collected Works of Deng Xiaoping--1975-1982, page 
140). 
  What are the economic means that can correct the mistakes of 
the planned economy? It is unlikely that such economic means 
will emerge from sheer imagination; we must seek them from 
historical experience in the cultural development of 
mankind. 
  Deng Xiaoping said: "In comparison with 
capitalism, the strong points of socialism (Note: Socialism here 
clearly refers to the socialism under which the planned economy 
prevails) are that it can coordinate all the activities of the 
nation like pieces in a chess game and can amass all resources 
to ensure that key projects will proceed as planned, while its 
shortcomings are that it is unable to make good use of the 
market to enliven the economy. How can we solve the problem 
concerning the relationship between the market and planning? A 
good solution will contribute to economic development; otherwise 
the economy will suffer" (pp. 16-17). In this speech, Deng 
Xiaoping took an analytical approach to the planned economy, 
instead of totalling negating it. While listing its strong 
points, he pointed out its basic shortcoming: Inability to 
enliven the economy, thus dampening enthusiasm of various social 
quarters. This speech was contained in one of the first 
articles in the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, in 
which Deng Xiaoping puts the market in an important place and 
attributes the stagnated economy to inappropriate utilization of 
the market. 
  People also used to equate the market economy with the 
capitalist economy, believing that the market economy can be 
practiced only in a capitalist society, and that practicing the 
market economy means restoring private ownership and capitalism. 
These concepts have been supported by several generations of 
Marxists, as well as by the capitalist media and academic 
circles in the Western world. In socialist society, negating 
commodities and the market economy and practicing the product 
economy controlled by the state plan were regarded as essential 
measures for rejecting capitalism. 
  Commodities and the market have existed in human society for 
a long time, and the argument that they did not appear until the 
capitalist society is untrue. However, it was the capitalist 
society, especially the fully fledged capitalist society, that 
made it possible for commodities to cover the whole society and 
thus form the market economy, and even the mature market 
economy. The developed market economy and its mechanism are the 
product of socialized mass production. Since socialist society 
builders plan to set up a brand new society on the basis of the 
civilization created by mankind throughout history, they must 
absorb all useful things left over by the capitalist society, 
including production technology, the mass production system, and 
of course, the market economy, which emerged along with the mass 
production system. Since socialist public ownership must be 
based on the developed socialized mass production, there is no 
reason socialist society cannot accommodate the market economy, 
which is related to socialized mass production. Many people 
used to believe that the market economy was unacceptable to a 
socialist society, so they misunderstood that the market economy 
was unique to capitalist society and that it was inseparable 
from privatization. They also believed that between public 
ownership and the market economy, meaning between socialism and 
the market economy, we could choose only one or the other. 
  Since the October revolution, the traditional concept of 
socialism, in general, has been that the market economy is 
incompatible with socialism. Apart from the reason that the 
founder of Marxism thought that future society would organize 
society-wide production and economic activities in a planned way 
and that there would be no commodity exchange, this is mainly 
because the principal countries practicing socialism, restricted 
by social and historical conditions, have not experienced the 
stage of developed capitalism. Before their respective 
revolutions, the market economy did not extend to the whole of 
society, and various mechanisms related to the market economy 
were immature. After the revolution, fairly great achievements 
were made under the planned economy. The reasons were: 1) 
These countries, taking advantage of the popular enthusiasm 
ignited during the revolution, used state power to enforce 
unified arrangements and unified allocations; and 2) The level 
of economic development of these countries at that time was low, 
the scale of construction small, and the economic structure 
simple. However, the popular enthusiasm could not play a role 
for a long time if new fuel was not added. With the economy 
growing to a new level and the economic structure becoming more 
complicated, there was a change in the social and economic 
situation which revealed more and more clearly the defects of 
the planned economy. Under these circumstances, if we did not 
carry out radical reform of the planned economy and if we 
refused to acknowledge the strong points of the market economy, 
economic contraction and political instability would ensue. 
  In the 20-year period since 1956, when China entered the 
socialist stage, we practiced the planned economy to the 
exclusion of the market economy. Facts, however, showed that 
commodities and the market cannot be annulled. Practice over 
the last 20 years indicated, however, that when we acknowledge 
commodity production and respect the law of value, our economy 
grows pretty well. Under the guidance of the "Left" 
deviationist ideology, efforts were made to reduce the scale of 
commodity production conducted by the small producers, such as 
changing the people's commune into a self-support unit, banning 
country markets, and changing the wage system into a free supply 
system. Facts have proved all these are impossible and can 
result only in retrogression. 
  The Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee 
held in late 1978 ushered Chinese economic development into a 
new period. In this new period, by initiating the economic 
reform, the area where the market regulation is brought into 
play has been expanded continuously, the function of the market 
mechanism has been strengthened, and the area where state 
planning -- especially mandatory planning -- holds sway has been 
reduced. Since we took these measures, the people's enthusiasm 
and initiative have been constantly brought into full play and 
the market mechanism has played an increasingly clear basic role 
in the allocation of resources. In short, we made achievements 
we could not have made under the planned economy. Naturally, 
changing the planned economy into a market economy will involve 
many difficulties, but the orientation has been defined and the 
path opened up. 
  While adhering to the principle of taking public ownership 
as the mainstay, we allow the development of other economic 
sectors, including the private sector, but we will not encourage 
privatization because of the setting up of a market economy. To 
develop a socialist market economy, we must adhere to the 
principle of taking public ownership as the mainstay and must 
bring the positive role of the market economy into full play so 
as to facilitate the development of socialist social productive 
forces. 
  The experience of capitalist countries practicing the market 
economy indicates that the state is not passive and inert in 
developing a market economy. On the contrary, capitalist 
countries also rely on macrocontrol to atone for the 
shortcomings and weaknesses of the market economy. To develop a 
market economy under the socialist system, a socialist country 
is in a better position to exercise macroeconomic control in the 
interests of the large numbers of laboring people and in the 
long-term interests of the social development because it has 
shaken off the arduous task of arranging economic activities at 
the microeconomic level -- a task beyond its ability. Of 
course, the state also will be able to focus on those projects 
regarding which it must pool national resources in order to 
achieve success. 
  In line with all this historical experience, Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping pointed out: "There is no fundamental contradiction 
between socialism and the market economy. What is at issue is 
what methods we can apply to more effectively develop productive 
forces" (p. 148). "Why do some people invariably say the market 
belongs to capitalism, while insisting that only planning 
represents socialism? Planning and the market are nothing but 
methods; as long as they can help develop productive forces, we 
can use them. When they serve socialism, they are socialism; 
when they serve capitalism, they are capitalism" (p. 203). 
These two remarks were made by Deng Xiaoping in 1985 and 1987, 
respectively. During his south China tour in 1992, he said 
again: "Whether the emphasis is on planning or on the market 
mechanism is not the essential distinction between socialism and 
capitalism. A planned economy is not socialism; there is 
planning under capitalism too. A market economy is not 
capitalism; there is market regulation under socialism too. 
Planning and market regulation are both means of controlling 
economic activity. In essence, the objective of socialism is to 
liberate and develop the productive forces, to eliminate 
exploitation and polarization, and ultimately to achieve common 
prosperity" (p. 373). 
  By advocating the breaking down of superstitions concerning 
the planned economy, as well as taboos against the market 
economy, and thereby affirming that a socialist society can 
utilize the market economy as an economic means and that to 
serve socialism a socialist society should use all experience of 
the market economy accumulated under the capitalist system which 
helps to develop socialized mass production and promote economic 
development and social progress, Comrade Deng Xiaoping made an 
extremely important contribution to the theory of socialism. 
(Written March-April, 1994) 

