BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Union Radio News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Braulio Sanchez, judge of the 26th Criminal Trial 
Court, ruled on the cases of the Construction, Barinas, and 
Bancor Banks at 1715 this Friday. He also issued arrest warrants 
for the Construction Bank Board of Directors, including its 
president, Jose Dimase. 
  [Begin Sanchez recording] I decree the legal arrest of 
citizen Jose Gustavo Dimase Urbaneja for the crimes of 
preparing, signing, authorizing, certifying, presenting, and 
publishing inaccurate balance accounts or financial statements, 
which are contained in and penalized under Article 293 of the 
General Banking and Other Financial Institutions Law. He is also 
charged with repeatedly obtaining benefits and continuously 
diverting money granted by public organizations. These actions 
are penalized in accordance with Part 2, Article 61, of the 
Protection of Public Property Law. 
  An arrest warrant has been issued for Elio Tamir Maracano, 
former executive vice president of the Construction Bank at the 
time, for the same crimes described above. 
  An arrest warrant has been issued for Saul Uribe, vice 
president of accounting of the Construction Bank, for the crimes 
of preparing, signing, authorizing, certifying, presenting, and 
publishing inaccurate balance accounts or financial statements, 
which are contained in and penalized under Article 293 of the 
General Banking and Other Financial Institutions Law. 
  An arrest warrant has been issued for Carlos Alberto Blanco, 
vice president of operations of the Construction Bank, for 
preparing, signing, authorizing, certifying, presenting, and 
publicizing inaccurate balance accounts or financial statements 
and for obtaining benefits and diverting money granted by public 
organizations. 
  An arrest warrant was issued for (Mauro McNeil Yak Jones), 
Construction Bank director, for continuously obtaining benefits 
and diverting money granted by public organizations, penalized 
under Part 2, Article 61, of the Protection of Public Property 
Law. 
  A judicial arrest warrant has been issued for Carmen Elisa 
Sosa Perez, manager of the Intercom Financial Bank N.V. of the 
Construction Bank, for obtaining benefits and diverting money 
granted by public organizations. [end recording] 
  Judge Braulio Sanchez said the arrest warrants do not mean 
these individuals took funds granted to their organizations by 
Fogade [Deposit Guarantee and Banking Protection Fund] but, 
rather, that they did not use them properly. He said the Fogade 
funds, concerning the Construction Bank, were used to purchase 
dollars on the exchange market. 

