BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 8 Jun (XINHUA) -- The China Society for 
Human Rights Studies [zhong guo ren quan yan jiu hui 0022 0948 
0086 2938 4282 4496 2585] today published a long article 
pointing out that, in the U.S. State Department's human rights 
report for 1993, the part on China is not earnest, is unfair, 
and lacks objectivity; and it is fundamentally based on rumor 
and subjective conjecture. 
  In the U.S. State Department report on human rights for 1993 
published on 1 February this year, the U.S. Government 
criticized China for having so-called "extensive... [ellipses as 
received] trampling down on human rights." In this respect, the 
China Society for Human Rights Studies, which is a 
non-government academic organization, spent more than three 
months investigating and checking up on related people and 
events mentioned in the U.S. human rights report, and wrote an 
article entitled: "Commenting on the U.S. State Department's 
Human Rights Report on China." Using factual material and 
objective analysis, the article refutes the U.S. State 
Department's criticism of China's human rights situation. 
  The article is composed of four parts. The first deals with 
the U.S. Government's dual criteria on the issue of human 
rights; the second exposes the U.S. human rights report's 
self-contradictory nature and fabricated charges; the third 
comments on the groundless criticism against China in the U.S. 
report; and the fourth points out that the report only attacks 
certain things and disregards the overall situation. 
  Citing a series of facts, the article points out that the 
U.S. State Department's human rights report (hereafter "report") 
uses dual criteria on the issue of human rights. For example, 
the "report" devotes extensive space to attacks on China's 
arrest and imprisonment of counterrevolutionary criminals. 
According to China's Criminal Law, the crime of 
counterrevolution actually refers to any acts which endanger 
state security. In the world today, every sovereign state 
enacts strict laws to deal with criminal activities that 
endanger state security and society. For example, the "United 
States Code" explicitly prohibits rebellion, revolt, rioting, 
instigating riots or advocating the overthrow of the government. 
Article 2383 of the "United States Code" under the heading 
"Rebellion or Insurrection," stipulates: "Whoever incites, 
carries out, assists or engages in rebellion or insurrection 
against the authorities of the United States or the law, or 
gives aid or support to the above-mentioned acts shall be fined 
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 10 years, 
or both, and shall be incapable of holding any office in the 
United States." Article 2385 of the "United States Code" 
stipulates: "Whoever knowingly or willfully advocates, abets, 
or advises the overthrow of the United States Government" shall 
be imprisoned for a period of not more than 20 years. The 
article points out: Since the United States enacts strict 
punishment against anti government activities, what right does 
the U.S. State Department's "report" have to charge China with 
punishing criminals who endanger state security? 
  On the accusation of China's "indiscriminate and wanton 
arrests" and "maltreatment of criminals" in the "report," the 
article points out that according to statistics, the proportion 
of imprisoned criminals in China in 1993 was only 103 per 
100,000 of the total population, while that in the United States 
was 455 per 100,000. China has used prisons as schools to 
reform criminals. As a result, the rate of released prisoners 
going back to crimes is only six to eight percent, while that in 
the United States is above 40 percent. China has been a 
longtime signatory to the "Convention on Banning Tortures and 
Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment," 
adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1984, which the United 
States has yet to join. 
  On the reported accusation that China discriminates against 
women, the article points out that achieving the goal of full 
equality between men and women still requires tremendous efforts 
by various countries of the world. In this regard, China too, 
still has many shortcomings. But a comparison between China and 
the United States reveals that Chinese women enjoy far better 
status and rights than their American counterparts. The article 
says that the United States has not joined the "Convention on 
Eliminating All Forms of Discrimination Against Women," adopted 
by the UN General Assembly in 1979, while China has already 
joined. From 1990 to 1993, the proportion of women deputies to 
people's congresses at various levels in China exceeded 20 
percent, while in the United States, the proportion of women 
members at legislatures of various levels was only 18.4 percent 
in 1992, the "Year of Congresswomen." According to a survey 
among urban Chinese workers and staff members, the average 
income for women employees was 77.4 percent that of their male 
counterparts, while the income of rural women was 81.4 percent 
that of men. On comparison, wages of American women constituted 
only 51 percent that of their male counterparts. In 1992, the 
proportion of Chinese female undergraduates and postgraduates 
accounted for 33.7 percent and 24.8 percent of the total 
respectively, while the total number of female graduates 
majoring in engineering stood at 27 percent, a figure much 
higher than that of 15 percent in the United States. In 1993, 
China had nearly 8.1 million women scientific and technological 
personnel, or 35 percent of the total number. The rate was much 
higher than the 12.2 percent in the United States for the 
corresponding period. 
  The article points out that the description of China in the 
"report" as a country where the life and safety of the people 
cannot be guaranteed is untrue. It says that the Chinese 
people's living standards continue to improve, and their lives 
and safety are guaranteed. However, in the United States, the 
world's richest country, the lives and safety of many people are 
being threatened. On 20 January this year, the eastern part of 
the United States was hit by a severe blizzard, with 
temperatures plunging to 20 degrees Centigrade below zero. 
According to a UNITED PRESS [INTERNATIONAL] report on 21 
January, more than 130 people froze to death in Washington D.C. 
alone. Harbin, a city with a population of several millions in 
a developing country like China, was unusually cold this year 
with the temperature dropping to 34.5 degrees Centigrade below 
zero on 5 January. Yet, no one froze to death in the city 
throughout the entire winter. 
  The article says the tragedy involving the freezing to death 
of more than 130 people in the capital of the United States 
occurred on 21 January. Yet, the U.S. State Department 
published the "Human Rights Report" 10 days later, criticizing 
and accusing human rights situations in China and many other 
countries. This is truly a very great irony. 
  Citing a host of facts, the article exposes one by one the 
parts in the U.S. human rights report which are 
self-contradictory, which contain framed-up charges, and which 
do not conform to facts. 
  The article points out: In scientifically assessing the 
human rights situation of a country, one should not solely focus 
on isolated incidents or a small number of people in disregard 
of the overwhelming majority of the people; one should not limit 
oneself to a single incident at a given time; instead, one 
should make a general assessment on the basis of objective 
viewpoint, historical perspective, and in the light of 
development. The article says: At present, no country in the 
world can claim its human rights situation is perfect. The key 
to the question is to view a country's human rights situation as 
a whole, as well as its trend of historical development. 
China's human rights situation should also be viewed on this 
basis. However, the U.S. State Department report makes a 
comprehensive assessment of China by focussing isolated, trifle, 
or temporary issues. In China this is often referred to as 
attacking somebody for a single fault without considering his 
other qualities. To be just, since the People's Republic of 
China's founding in 1949, the Chinese people have become the 
masters of their country after freeing themselves from the 
situation in which they could be bullied and slaughtered at will 
and in which human rights did not exist at all. In the past 
four decades since the founding of New China, particularly in 
the past ten years or so, the nearly 1.2 billion Chinese people 
have basically solved the problem of having adequate food and 
clothing and are beginning to work toward a comfortable standard 
of living. Their days are gradually getting better. Throughout 
the country, a situation has appeared where there is political 
stability, economic development, and people live and work in 
peace and contentment. In 1993, China's domestic gross product 
topped 3 trillion yuan, and the country's average amount of 
per-capita income that city dwellers used for living expenses 
increased 10.2 percent over 1992. Along with this, there has 
been a big improvement in the Chinese people's human rights 
situation, and progress is being made continually. China is 
vigorously striving to improve socialist democracy and the legal 
system. Since 1979, it has promulgated many basic laws, 
including the Criminal Law, the Criminal Procedure Law, the 
General Rules of Civil Law, the Civil Procedure Law, and the 
Administrative Procedure Law. There are over 1,000 laws on 
human rights enacted by the central and provincial authorities. 
Law-enforcing organs always enforce laws strictly; supervisory 
and procuratorial organs promptly correct the erroneous acts of 
some law-enforcing personnel; mass organizations seriously take 
part in supervision; the people have various means to file their 
appeals; and the mass media are playing the supervisory role.... 
[ellipses as received] China has made marked achievement in 
safeguarding human rights. This is universally recognized. 
  The article points out: The U.S. State Department's human 
rights report has not made an objective and impartial appraisal 
of these basic facts and good development trend. Instead, it 
makes accusations of China with hodgepodge materials based on 
hearsay, and is particularly based on slanders made by a handful 
of people who attempt to subvert the Chinese Government and 
overthrow China's socialist system. 
  The article says: Human rights are an issue which people all 
over the world are concerned about. Enjoying human rights fully 
is the common ideal and objective of the people in the world. 
The "United Nations Charter" attaches great importance to human 
rights issues. Article 2 of the "Charter" unequivocally 
stipulates the principles which all member states should uphold. 
One of them is the "principle of sovereignty equality of all 
its members." Another principle is "not to intervene in matters 
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any 
state." The U.S. Government, considering itself to be a "world 
judge for human rights," publishes reports on its examination of 
other countries' human rights situations year after year and 
criticizes the political, economic, social, cultural, and 
judicial systems of other countries. In doing so, it violates 
the spirit of the "United Nations Charter" and adds more factors 
of instability to the world which has already lacked 
tranquility. Of course, such a report evokes criticism and 
condemnation from many countries. 
  In conclusion, the article says: Because of their different 
historical, cultural, social, and national conditions, different 
countries always hold different viewpoints on human rights. 
Members of the international community should conduct dialogue 
on the basis of equality, carry out international cooperation, 
and seek common ground while reserving differences. Only in 
this way can they benefit the protection and improvement of 
human rights in the world. The China Society for Human Rights 
Studies is opposed to hegemonic practices which impose 
viewpoints on others and uses the human rights issue as a 
pretext to interfere with other's internal affairs and to exert 
pressure on others. 

