CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S. Stepanova: "City Life in Figures and Facts; </F>
Deviation From What Was Planned--General Failure?"] 
  [Text] One of the important moments in the report of 
the city administration on work in 1993 was the information on 
the construction-investment complex, finances, and ecology. 
  Last year, R193.6 billion of capital investments (in prices 
in effect) were used by the city at the expense of all sources 
of financing. Of this, R136.1 billion were used for production 
facilities and R57.6 billion, for nonproduction facilities. 
Construction-assembly operations were implemented to the extent 
of R143.6 billion. 
  Capital investments in the construction of housing amounted 
to R40 billion (of this, R1.6 billion was found for housing for 
servicemen, and just as much for workers in public education; 
R6.9 billion, for health services; R8.2 billion, on municipal 
construction; R0.2 billion, on the construction of cultural 
facilities; and R0.8 billion, on various other facilities). 
  Last year, 155,662 square meters of housing were introduced 
(including 3,231 square meters for servicemen discharged into 
the reserve). 
  The construction of all objects was conducted basically on 
resources of enterprises: 84 percent of all capital investments 
for the year. Capital investments of the city's capital 
construction administration amounted to R23 billion; of this, 
R2.5 billion was directed from the federal budget, R2.7 billion, 
from the oblast budget, and the remaining R14.9 billion, from 
the city budget. 
  Besides housing in the last year, children's preschool 
institutions for 600 seats were built in the settlements of 
Pritomskiy and Sadoparkovyy, a food and trade shop in 41-42 
quarters in Tsentralnyy Rayon, and storm sewers (KMK) [Kuznetsk 
Metallurgical Combine] and a public health zone (ZSMK) [Kuznetsk 
Metallurgical Welding Plant]. 
  Work was continued on facilities that were a priority for 
the 
city: the reconstruction of the Kuznetsk TETs [Heat and Electric 
Power Station], the construction of another sewer line, a 
boarding home for old people and invalids in the Novoilyinskiy 
micro rayon, a junction of the Bungur highway crossing, and 
medical and sanitary units for construction workers, and others. 
  Not all of the facilities of the municipal order were put 
into operation. There was one reason: the inadequacy or lack of 
financing. 
  Meanwhile, as for finances, last year the budget of the city 
was filled by 104 percent. This means that the resources 
received and expended on the city's needs were more than what 
was planned. 
  The city received incomes of R85.3 billion. And while 116 
percent of the planned level of the tax on profit was received, 
there were shortages in all of the other taxes. This entails 
income tax from the population (91 percent of the planned 
level), VAT (77 percent), excise taxes (74 percent), and land 
tax (92 percent). 
  There was an ecological program based on financing from the 
ecological fund and the municipal budget. 
  Out of 34 planned measures, only 22 were fully or partially 
completed. There are several reasons for this. One of the main 
ones: There were not enough financial resources. Therefore, for 
example, a municipal socioecological improvement project was not 
established that was supposed to be financed from the federal 
budget within the scope of the federal program "Ecology of 
Russia" (R50 million). Three million rubles were not found in 
the oblast ecological fund for correcting the project for the 
organization of a sanitary zone for the protection of the 
Dragunskiy water intake. 
  As for the city budget, an ecology expenditure line appeared 
in it for the first time in 1993. Instead of R266 million for 
ecological programs, R25 million was allocated last year. The 
fact is that, on examination of the budget, the inner city 
council, after approving the given sum in the expenditures part, 
did not determine the sources of financing. Therefore, spending 
on ecology last year was conducted to the extent possible. 
Purely organizational aspects also had an effect on the 
implementation of the program. For example, the status of the 
Targayskiy coniferous forest, which made it impossible to 
develop a recreational zone there. A decision on the question of 
the establishment of a municipal ecological control service in 
the city was postponed. The city administration and the oblast 
environmental protection committee were unable to arrive at a 
mutual understanding on the Sibgipromez joint-stock company as 
the developer of the city volume of maximum permissible wastes 
(the oblast organization did not vote for this organization in 
the indicated capacity). 
  From what was done, that is, brought to an end, the 
following 
can be named. Drinking water filters were set up and tested in 
schools of the Tsentralnyy Rayon. A working draft was produced 
for installation for purifying sewage of carbomide-formaldehyde 
tars for the furniture factory. One other study concerned the 
organization within the confines of the city of a forest park 
area and the protection of city forests from fires. 
  Analyses were conducted last year of storm waters and snow 
from snowfalls. Instruments were acquired for the health and 
epidemiology inspection and hydrometeorological services, tests 
were conducted on the soil, and an ecological map of the city 
was created. For the future, work is being done to equip a city 
ecological education center and an experimental school for 
general ecological education (on the basis of school No. 4) 
  But, of course, important expensive measures were not 
implemented... 

