Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Chen Chieh-hung (7115 3381 1738): "CPC Putting </F>
Together Fourth-Generation Leadership"] 
  [Text] Last spring, the First Session of the Eighth 
National People's Congress [NPC] had hardly ended when the CPC 
Central Committee put the selection, training, and grooming the 
new (fourth) generation of successors into the daily work agenda 
of the State Council and its Secretariat, and set up a "leading 
task group for new central cadres" with Jiang Zemin as group 
leader and Hu Jintao as deputy group leader. 
  An informed source revealed that at a briefing in early 
December 1993, former NPC Chairman Wan Li announced for the 
first time that members of a fourth generation of China's 
leadership were being raised and trained in parties, 
governments, and the military. Wan Li said that selecting, 
training, and grooming successors always has been a great 
concern for Comrade Xiaoping. In early 1980, Comrade Xiaoping 
pointed out at a central Political Bureau session that we must 
select, train, and groom successors in party building, and that 
the past frameworks would have to go. Today, 13 years later, 
the third-generation successors with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the 
core have shown themselves capable of party, government, and 
military leadership, and have been tested by turmoil within and 
beyond China. Training a new (fourth) generation of successors 
has been made a key agenda for the party. These potential 
successors also are playing roles in various party, government, 
and military leadership groups. 
<H5>  Jiang Zemin Heads the Effort To Train the Fourth Generation </H5>
  The informed source also said in the spring of 1993, the 
First Session of the Eighth NPC had hardly ended when the CPC 
Central Committee put the selection, training, and grooming of 
the new (fourth) generation of successors into the daily work 
agenda of the State Council and its Secretariat, and set up a 
"leading group for new central cadres" with Jiang Zemin as group 
leader and Hu Jintao as deputy group leader. Other members 
include: Ding Guangen, Wen Jiabao, Zhang Wannian, Ding Henggao, 
Lu Feng, Song Defu, Zeng Qinghong, and Luo Gan. CPC high level 
resolutions specify: "Even at the provincial level, a leading 
group for new provincial-level cadres -- to be headed by 
provincial party secretaries -- must be set up before October 
1993." This task should be part of parties' daily agenda and 
should reported to the CPC Central Committee Secretariat. 
  Last year, after convening the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee, Jiang Zemin made a point of talking 
with provincial party persons-in-charge about the problem of new 
cadres, saying: This is a very important strategic arrangement 
for the party and state, and it must be pursued vigorously. He 
also said that they must banish the thought of "waiting a while 
and slowing down a little." 
<H5>  Successors Must Pass Five Requirements </H5>
  The informed source continued: The CPC lists five 
requirements for the new cadres: 1) Loyalty to the party cause 
and socialism; 2) great enthusiasm and a great sense of 
responsibility for socialism with Chinese characteristics; 3) a 
certain level of intellectual professionalism; 4) a good 
character; and 5) he must enjoy certain authority within the 
party and with the masses. It also specified that the following 
three kinds of people are excluded from consideration: 1) The 
"three kinds of people" in the Cultural Revolution; 2) backbone 
elements in the 1989 spring-summer political turmoil (namely, 4 
June) and those found to have made serious mistakes in turmoil; 
and 3) those who have made serious economic or moral mistakes. 
Those recruited and trained do not have to be party members. 
  The leading group demands that every year central 
ministries, 
commissions, officers, provinces, cities, and autonomous regions 
pick 20-25 distinguished talents to study at the Central Party 
School. These people will be put into provincial leadership 
groups, and from there sent down to the local level for study 
and training. Ministries, commissions, offices, and 
provincial-level leaders are required to seek out, promote, and 
train talented young cadres when inspecting localities and grass 
roots areas. In selecting, training, and grooming successors, 
they must ensure a certain proportion of non-party members 
working in governments at various levels, including the 
provincial vice governor level. Those found qualified can be 
promoted to the central ministerial level. 
<H5>  More Than 1,000 Successors Are Being Trained </H5>
  The informed source also said: At present there are more 
than 1,000 people studying at advanced central party schools and 
military academies to become future cadres at the ministerial 
and commission level or with army rank. Their average age is 
47, and all are university-educated. A good many of them were 
spotted or picked by Central Committee Political Bureau members 
and State Council leaders over the last two years during 
inspection tours. The majority of these 1,000 or so people have 
certain work experience at localities, enterprises, and units, 
or some merits in troop units. Many are at the deputy 
prefectural or deputy bureau level, or have divisional, deputy 
district commander, or deputy political commissar rank in the 
Army. Some are departmental cadres at central ministries, 
committees, offices, or are general managers or party 
secretaries at major enterprises, 

