BFN 

  [Text] On 17 June, while carrying out an inspection tour 
in Longli County, provincial party Secretary Liu Fangren said: 
Spring plowing and production in our province this year are 
basically over. In the next step of our agricultural production, 
we must grasp field management, the diversified economy, 
township and town enterprises, and the prevention of natural 
disasters to strive for a bumper harvest. 
  Liu Fangren added: Doing a good work in planting and 
transplanting rice seedlings is a prerequisite for a bumper 
grain harvest. After this, we must grasp field management well. 
In some localities, the task of planting flue-cured tobaccos 
has not yet been fulfilled this year, and the acreage devoted to 
tobacco crops has dropped. However, as long as we can do good 
field management work, our production output can also be 
increased despite this reduction in acreage. When the busy 
season of spring production is over, the mass rural work force 
can focus on work in the diversified economy, provided that 
field management is not affected. We must strive to increase 
grain output as well as the peasants' incomes. 
  Liu Fangren continued: We must solidly foster the idea of 
preventing and fighting natural disasters to strive for a bumper 
agricultural harvest. We must draw a lesson from the past, and 
make early preparations for fighting drought. We must on no 
account lower our guard or become careless. Ponds, pools and 
reservoirs must be full of water, and efforts must be made to 
examine and repair drought-fighting equipment and facilities as 
quickly as possible. Oil to be used in the fight against 
drought must be promptly allocated and transported. Where 
precautions have been taken, there is no danger. In the 
meantime, we must also pay attention to preventing and curing 
diseases and eliminating insect pests from farm products to 
strive for another bumper grain harvest this year. 
  Comrade Liu Fangren also made a special trip to Guiding 
County to visit cadres and workers at the 353 Farm, 353 Chicken 
Farm, and the Eighth Military Industrial Hospital of the 
People's Liberation Army. He expressed thanks to all the cadres 
and workers for their contributions to Guizhou's invigoration 
and local development over the past 28 years. 
  Secretary Liu Fangren asked in detail about how military 
industrial enterprises are exploiting their strong points under 
market economic conditions and their situation since moving from 
military to civilian production. He also asked how military 
industrial enterprises are participating in the mass discussion 
of the emancipation of the mind in light of their practical 
conditions, are developing and invigorating themselves, are 
strengthening their training program for qualified personnel, 
are increasing their staying power, and are striving to gain 
market share. He also asked about the livelihood, income, and 
health conditions of retired veteran comrades who had made 
contributions to the establishment of their enterprises. 
  Secretary Liu Fangren said: Military industrial enterprises 
are technically strong and posses a veritable galaxy of talent. 
They must gain a foothold in the market and exploit their own 
exceptional strong points. They must manufacture famous-brand 
and high-quality products and expand Guizhou's influence, so 
that people know more about Guizhou and its military industrial 
enterprises. Cadres and workers in military industrial 
enterprises must work with people throughout the province to 
make still greater contributions to invigorating Guizhou and 
enriching its people. 

