Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Vasiliy Gilovnin] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo January 24 TASS -- In response to a request 
made by the Russian Foreign Ministry the Japanese authorities 
have began an investigation into an incident which occurred on 
January 21-22 when several dozens Japanese trawlers crossed into 
Russian territorial waters near the south Kuril island of 
Kunashir and remained there for a long time despite repeated 
warnings from the Russian side. 
  Director of the 2nd Russian Foreign Ministry department, 
Nikolay Solovyov, told ITAR-TASS that on January 21, over 50 
Japanese vessels entered Russian territorial waters near the 
island and remained there for over five hours despite warnings 
made by Russian border guards demanding that Japanese vessels 
leave the area. 
  On January 22, the incident was repeated with 30 Japanese 
vessels crossing into Russian territorial waters and 
subsequently staying there for five hours. According to 
Solovyov, three vessels belonging to the Japanese Department for 
Safety at Sea were close to the area where the incident occurred 
but made no attempt to prevent Japanese vessels from violating 
the border. The high-ranking Russian diplomat particularly 
noted arrogant conduct of Japanese crews towards Russian border 
guards. 
  The Department for Safety at Sea and the Japanese Foreign 
Ministries are investigating the circumstances under which the 
incident occurred. At present, fishermen who were directly 
involved in the incident near Kunashir, are being questioned, 
sources from both departments told ITAR-TASS. 
  According to the Japanese Foreign Ministry, to begin with, 
Tokyo has to make sure that the incident really took place and 
find out whether Russian border guards fired warning shots. The 
investigation has been deliberately slow and there are many 
grounds to suppose that the Japanese side would like to hush up 
the incident. This is evident from the position assumed by the 
Department for Safety at Sea on the island of Hokkaido adjoining 
to the Kuril islands which, in response to an inquiry made by 
ITAR- TASS, denied the very fact of the incident near Kunashir. 
  Tokyo regards the south Kuril islands to be its "northern 
territories" which were illegally occupied by Moscow in 1945. 
Stemming from this position, Tokyo does not recognise the 
Russian state border in this area and rejects accusations of 
violating it. 
  Last year, Japanese fishermen illegally entered Russian 
territorial waters in the area of Kuril islands over 5,000 
times. However, the scale and arrogance of the recent violation 
made the incident conspicuous in an endless chain of similar 
incidents which occurred before. 

