CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by reporter Chong Hui-sang] </F>
  [Text] Breaking through front lines covered by the 
clouds of war... 
  Sisa Journal held an interview with Sai Chan 
(alias), an MTA intelligence official in charge of over 300 
reserve troops who was seeking to ascertain the movements of the 
Burmese Army's 88th Division from behind the Shan Plateau in 
Burma. The meeting with him was brought about, on the condition 
that no pictures would be taken, through a Thai of Chinese 
ancestry who had long engaged in the border smuggling of this 
area. Of course, additional conditions were that the magazine 
would objectively present the Khun Sa camp's justifications for 
the independence of the state of Shan and that a considerable 
amount be provided in dollars as payment for the interview. The 
interview was conducted through the Thai and English 
interpreting of the Chinese guide. 
  Interviewer: To us, Khun Sa is known as the "Drug 
King." Why is Khun Sa risking the criticism of the world press 
to continue to supply drugs to the outside world? 
  Chan: Khun Sa did not get involved in drugs from 
the beginning to come on the stage as [the head of] an evil 
gang, as you understand it. When the army of Chang Kai Shek was 
push out of China by that of Mao Tse-tung in 1949, its main 
force fled to Taiwan, but the 93rd and 96th Divisions, unable to 
make the crossing, came into the Burma region. Afterwards, the 
Chinese Communist Party dispatched Communist troops to Burma. At 
that time, Khun Sa started taking up arms full-scale against the 
Burmese government. There are many ethnic minorities in Burma, 
such as the Karen, Lahu, Wa, Taiyai, and Kachin. Khun Sa came to 
align himself with these peoples as the Burmese government 
withdrew its original promise of independence for ethnic 
minorities. The outside world having isolated us, and in a 
situation without freedom, we had no choice but to trade in 
heroin to get the money to defend ourselves. 
  Interviewer: It is our understanding that from the 
very beginning Khun Sa abused the ethnic minorities of this 
region with the goal of engaging in the drug trade. 
  Chan: That is wrong. In no way did Khun Sa conquer 
or rule ethnic minorities. I'm Lisu, not Taiyai, but I'm not 
doing this because I was conquered by him. I was able to work in 
Khun Sa's shadow for the last 25 years, even though I belong to 
a minority, because I judged Khun Sa to really be the one to 
bring us independence, our cherished wish. When Khun Sa would 
stop by the village of an ethnic minority, he always gave pigs, 
chickens, rice, and such to the people of that village suffering 
from hunger, providing a way for them to live without going 
hungry. Because of this, when in the past Khun Sa went into 
northern Thailand, chased by the Burmese military, the numerous 
ethnic minorities of the border region started maintaining a 
cooperative relationship with him. At that time, Khun Sa stayed 
in Thailand using the name Tongko. Even now, his unit name is 
Tongko and we still call Khun Sa, Tongko, among ourselves. We 
wanted to survive, cultivating opium and buying the weapons Khun 
Sa needs to protect us. As long as the Burmese government sealed 
us off and attacked us, opium was our sustenance and our 
strength. 
  Interviewer: If the residents of this place 
cultivate opium, how much profit goes to them? 
  Chan: Farmers trade poppy latex using units of 
one jyoi (1.2 kg). One jyoi is about B10 thousand in Thai 
currency. Two - three jyoi of poppy latex are produced from one 
lai. 
  Interviewer:[Interviewer] How does the Khun Sa 
organization process poppy latex collected in this way? 
  Chan: Refining it into heroin, we have been 
raising funds for providing food, clothing, and medicines to the 
farmers producing it. We have refining factories in several 
locations. You have to process 8 jyoi of poppy latex to make one 
jyoi of heroin. If leaves and stems are mixed in the latex, you 
can get one jyoi of heroin from 12 jyoi of latex. One jyoi of 
heroin made in this way sells in Bangkok for about $12 thousand. 
It is my understanding that if this goes over to Americans, 
people from Hong Kong, Koreans, etc., the transaction is made 
for about $20 thousand. 
  Interviewer: We want to visit and cover a 
heroin-processing factory. Can you give us a location and make 
connections for us? 
  Chan: We are now in the middle of a war. The 
facilities of a few factories have already been closed because 
of bombing. If I were to introduce you, we would all be in 
danger. Even if you approach that place through some other, 
high-level route, now chances are 90 percent that you would be 
shot. If you want to go despite this, I will show you a few 
places on a map, because the precise position is a 
closely-guarded secret. Passing through Thailand, cross over 
following the northern border in straight lines from the Mae Sa 
Rong and Naiso areas. Then you will come the closest. 
  Interviewer: It is my understanding that 
high-level technology is needed for refining heroin. Are there 
many such technicians in the Khun Sa region? 
  Chan: Asian chemists, whose names I cannot reveal, 
helped us. After putting a fine-mesh metal net over a very 
large, jar-shaped tank and filling it with chemicals secretly 
obtained in Bangkok, poppy latex is put on top of it and heat is 
applied. Then foam like tallow floats up in the tank. This is 
collected and dried, producing heroin. 
  Interviewer: The governments of Thailand, Burma, 
Laos, and China, and even the American CIA are keeping watch on 
the drug trade of the Khun Sa organization. How is trade 
possible under such circumstances? 
  Chan: I'm not going to give you details. This is 
because if I were to disclose this, the fact would become known 
in a concrete way that almost all the surrounding nations have 
taken payment for allowing the drug trade. Just know that the 
surrounding countries have helped us unofficially. About a month 
ago, an article came out in an American newspaper saying that a 
three-star Thai general delivered drugs in the U.S. and used the 
money to garrison Thailand's border. We know people who can work 
on both sides of the fence among the officials of all the 
nations of the world. At one time, I was sent to China for a 
heroin deal. When I got there, I was only an errand boy; 
government officials of surrounding nations were decisive in 
making sure that the deal was successful. 
  Interviewer: Are there also Korean government 
officials among those secretly helping Khun Sa? 
  Chan: I can't know that. But it is a fact that 
several Koreans work with us here. 
  Interviewer: Are they from North Korea or South 
Korea? 
  Chan: They are South Koreans. 
  Interviewer: Please tell us their names and 
concrete details of their activity. 
  Chan: That is a closely-guarded secret. But as 
long as the subject has come up, I'll give you the examples of 
three people only. In our organization, there are people 
responsible for the affairs of each country, the U.S., Taiwan, 
Japan, Korea, etc. Each of them a native of the country for 
which they are responsible, they have mastery of that country's 
language. However, I cannot reveal their names. Another one of 
the Koreans frequently visits our area and is ranked fifth among 
international merchants dealing in heroin. He was staying in a 
hotel in Bangkok sometime early last year, about to make a hefty 
transaction, when intelligence of it leaked out to the Thai 
police. But there was someone with whom we have connections in 
the Bangkok police, so he was able to escape 20-30 minutes 
before the police raided the hotel. At that time, the Korean 
merchant, connected with a high-level route, made use of a 
helicopter and safely crossed over into Burma. Another Korean is 
an intellectual who had been living in Manchuria when he came 
over to our organization. He is helping improve our region's 
backward education. 
  Interviewer: We really want to meet these Koreans. 
We will provide you with everything you need, no matter what it 
is, so please enable use to meet with these people. 
  Chan: If we meet the Koreans in the present 
circumstances, me, you, and the Koreans will all be in danger. I 
don't need anything. If you really want to meet the Koreans, 
then do it yourselves. 
  Interviewer: Please give us information on at 
least one person that would make approach possible. 
  Chan: Okay. I'm not going to get directly 
involved, so you meet him on your own. There is one Korean in a 
Chinese village in the region of Thailand's Mae Hong Son 
Province and the Burmese border, about 1 thousand km to the 
southwest from here. 
  Interviewer: What does he do there? 
  Chan: As a person within our organization who is 
fluent in Korean, he writes for the media of Thailand's northern 
region. Khun-Sa-related information reported in Korea also goes 
though this. He began the work of preparing to buy Thai 
citizenship about three months ago. He plans to visit Korea as a 
Thai citizen in a little while. 
  Interviewer: Does this mean that if he visits 
Korea, someone will be waiting for him? 
  Chan: Yes. He is presently supported with money 
from Korea. 
  Interviewer: Do you mean the Korean government is 
supporting him? 
  Chan: No. He is given private support. One other 
Korean is presently working with him in his office. In Korea, 
this person is known to be a foreign news correspondent. 
  Finishing this statement, with a tense expression on his 
face, he suddenly stopped the interview and spoke for some time 
with the news team's Chinese guide, whispering in Thai. Later on 
they learned that the intelligence official thought he had 
disclosed something which might bring danger on himself and that 
he requested that no more questions be asked concerning the 
Koreans within the Khun Sa organization. In consideration for 
the safety of all, the news team decided to stop asking those 
questions. As for the information he provided concerning the 
Korean in the Khun Sa organization, the news team was able to 
establish its accuracy by infiltrating into the western Khun Sa 
region, 1 thousand km away, four days later, meeting his family 
and actually confirming his name. 
  Interviewer: You said the Khun Sa organization 
carries on the drug trade in order to struggle for independence. 
How are drugs and weapons exchanged. 
  Chan: Major weapons are brought in from the U.S. 
Americans supply us with weapons as payment for drug deals. And 
there are American weapons specialists in our area. They set up 
a munitions factory and are supplying us with ammunition. 
  Interviewer: Does this mean that the U.S., which 
has a warrant out for Khun Sa on drug offenses, is cultivating 
Khun Sa's military power? 
  Chan: They have no relationship with the U.S. 
government. They are men who participated in the Vietnam War, 
but were unable to leave Vietnam after the fall of Saigon. In 
the U.S. they were probably listed as missing, but they fled 
communized Vietnam, moving north through the jungle until they 
met with us. The have helped us for the 20 years since then, 
manufacturing weapons. They receive the very best special 
treatment. 
  Interviewer: How many of these Americans are there? 
  Chan: That is a secret. Let's just say there is a 
considerable number of them. During the Vietnam War, U.S. 
Military Headquarters was located in Thailand and U.S. military 
recreation centers were concentrated there. Some American 
soldiers married Thai women and settled down at that time, but 
later moved north to make money. There were many such cases. 
  Interviewer: Is this fact also know in the 
American government? 
  Chan: Of course. From a certain point of view, it 
can be said that the U.S. too has helped us with this problem up 
to now. Even social workers living in Thailand behave in the 
public eye as though they have no connection at all with Khun 
Sa, but in actuality they have helped us a great deal. I can't 
say anything more. 
  Interviewer: Korean soldiers also participated in 
the Vietnam War. Are there also Korean soldiers listed as 
missing who live in the Khun Sa region. 
  Chan: It is my understanding that there are some. 
Don't ask anything else about Koreans. 
  Interviewer: We want to meet Khun Sa directly. 
Will you connect us? 
  Chan: We are now in the middle of a large-scale 
war. It is impossible. 
  Interviewer: It has come out in foreign news 
reports that Khun Sa lives in a one-story concrete house in 
urban Homong. Will it work out if we go there? 
  Chan: Major figures of our independent country, 
including Khun Sa, have already moved to the combat 
headquarters. He is directing the war from a large, subterranean 
cavern, even equipped with an airfield. Nobody can approach him. 
  Interviewer: The world is calling this war the 
"Drug War" and carefully watching its outcome. The general 
offensive of the Burmese military is continuing. Are you certain 
of victory. 
  Chan: If Burma is attacking us to stop the 
production of heroin, and all the nations of the world give it 
their support, then this war is a mistake. Our leader now 
directing the war from an underground bunker is not the Khun Sa 
of whom you speak. Many drug-lord Khun Sas such as you are 
talking about exist in northern Burma, Bangkok, Hong Kong, and 
Macao. Unable to be free, we traded in drugs for independence 
and survival. But if the world were to recognize our freedom and 
independence, and give us economic support, all the opium fields 
of northern Burma would change into land for cultivating new, 
highly-realizable crops. The government of our independent 
nation is truly hoping that you rich Asian nations like Korea 
and Japan will help banish drugs. In return for this, our 
government has already revealed that it would offer the 
limitless minerals and jewels within our region. 

