Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Rauf Denktas has said that the Turkish 
Cypriot side is ready to hold contacts on the 
confidence-building measures. He added that the Turkish Cypriot 
goal is to attain results. 
  Denktas received Robert Lamb, the U.S. State Department's 
special Cyprus coordinator, this morning and conferred with him 
for about an hour. Also present at the meeting were Atay Ahmet 
Rasit, foreign affairs and defense minister; Ozer Koray, under 
secretary of the Foreign Affairs and Defense Ministry; 
presidential advisers; U.S. Ambassador in Lefkosa [Nicosia] 
Richard Boucher; and Joe Merante, head of the U.S. State 
Department's Cyprus desk. 
  In a statement after the meeting, Denktas said that the 
meeting was held within the framework of the letters sent to the 
UN secretary general. Pointing out that the committees 
assessing the confidence-building measures from a technical 
viewpoint are expected to submit their reports by 15 February, 
Denktas added that the essence of the issue will be determined 
in the light of these reports and that steps will be taken 
accordingly. Commenting on the meeting, Denktas said: We had 
questions and we received replies. They had questions and we 
replied. He added that the problem cannot be solved by issuing 
statements. Pointing out that the Turkish Cypriot side has 
accepted the principles of the confidence-building measures, 
Denktas added, however, that the people must see what the 
package consists of before they accept it. He noted that the 
agreement to be reached should please both sides, adding that it 
is only through negotiations that one can realize whether such 
an agreement can be concluded. 
  Assessing Greek Cypriot leader Kliridhis' objection to 
Denktas' use of the logo "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" 
in his letter to the UN secretary general, Denktas recalled that 
he has been signing letters with logos for the past 20 years and 
added: Kliridhis has probably been losing sleep over them for 
the past 20 years. 
  Denktas stated that all the political parties in south 
Cyprus 
are opposed to the confidence-building measures, stressing that 
this opposition is the real source of Kliridhis' concern. 
Denktas drew attention to the fact that Kliridhis, who declared 
his consent to discuss the measures because he thought Denktas 
would reject them, is in a difficult position as a result of the 
positive Turkish Cypriot response. 
  In reply to a question, Denktas said that if the necessary 
foundation is built following the indirect talks, they can then 
go to New York. He added that he may visit Turkey, depending on 
the developments in Cyprus, but that a date has not yet been 
fixed. 
  In turn, Lamb said he held a beneficial and constructive 
meeting with Denktas but did not want to make a statement at 
this stage. He added that he may hold a news conference at 
Ledra Palace tomorrow in order to give information on his 
contacts in Cyprus. Lamb, who held a meeting with Kliridhis 
this morning, is expected to leave the island tomorrow. 

