BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, May 9 (AFP)--Egyptian security forces 
tortured to death a Moslem fundamentalist lawyer who defended 
the spiritual leader of the outlawed al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah 
militants, Cairo lawyers said Monday [9 May]. 
  The death of 'Abd-al-Harith Madani a week after he was 
arrested was "a premeditated murder, and the torture he suffered 
was an odious crime," a statement from the Order of Cairo 
Lawyers said. 
  Madani was a leading member of the defence committee set up 
for al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah (Islamic Group) spiritual guide 
Shaykh 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman, who was sentenced to seven years in 
jail by the state security court last week. 
The al-Jama'ah has been waging a bloody two-year campaign to 
topple the secular government of President Husni Mubarak, in 
which more than 380 people have died. 
  An interior ministry official said he was "in no position to 
comment" on the lawyer's death. 
  The statement said Madani was arrested on April 26 and taken 
to a secret destination. "Not even his family knew where he 
was. They only heard about his death on Friday." The lawyers 
said they were "horrified" by Madani's death, describing it as 
"an act of aggression against all lawyers." 
  Security forces arrested Madani during a four-hour search of 
his office, in the presence of four colleagues. 
  The 40-year-old lawyer from Qina in northern Egypt was 
married with two daughters. 
  President of the Order of Egyptian Lawyers Ahmad al-Khawajah 
asked state prosecutor Raja' al-'Arabi to conduct a new autopsy 
on Madani's body Sunday in the presence of a doctor chosen by 
the order. The Egyptian Human Rights Organisation made a 
similar request two days after Madani's arrest, when it heard 
that the lawyer had been transferred to special wards in Qasr 
al-'Ayni hospital in Cairo reserved for prisoners, where 
according to unconfirmed reports Madani was killed. 
  The organisation also condemned the jailing of a journalist 
working for a pro-fundamentalist newspaper, AL-SHA'B, by a 
military court. The journalist, Abu-Husayn, was sentenced to a 
year in prison for "revealing military secrets," although the 
information -- about military manoeuvres and arms purchases -- 
was officially announced two weeks later, the organisation said. 
  Mubarak two years ago ordered that suspected Moslem 
militants 
appear before military courts to expedite their trials. But the 
human rights organisation said that Husayn's case showed that 
journalists and other opinion makers could also be tried before 
these courts. 

