Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional drug seizures and arrests related to drug 
trafficking monitored through 23 January. Source is cited in 
parentheses following each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  The Narcotics Police on 15 January seized 550 kg of pressed 
marijuana in southern Santa Fe de Bogota. This is the largest 
marijuana seizure in the capital to date. It included 4,000 
pairs of blue jeans among which the drug was to be concealed and 
shipped to the United States. A 30-year-old man was arrested. 
(Paris AFP in Spanish 1811 GMT 16 Jan 94) 
  The Administrative Department of Security and Interpol this 
morning arrested two extraditable Cubans who are facing drug 
trafficking charges in the United States. Meanwhile, the 
Persecuted by Pablo Escobar group reappeared through a letter 
sent to the mother of Pablo Escobar requesting the creation of a 
fund to help victims of narcoterrorism. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1730 GMT 19 Jan 94) 
  The police on the weekend of 15-16 January captured Alberto 
Urdinola Grajales, brother of Ivan Urdinola Grajales, who is 
housed in a high security section at the Modelo Prison in Santa 
Fe de Bogota for drug trafficking crimes. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL 
NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 18 Jan 94 p 7) 
<H5>  Ecuador </H5>
  General Oswaldo Galarza, commander of the Guayaquil Police, 
today reported the seizure of more than half a ton of cocaine 
that a group of Colombian drug traffickers had brought into 
Ecuador with the intent of shipping it to the United States via 
the port of Guayaquil. Galarza added that the drug was hidden 
among several Colombian products, including coffee, cookies, and 
candies. Three Colombians and four Ecuadorans were arrested. 
Colombian Alfredo Arturo Benavides Corral handed the cocaine to 
Ecuadorans Luis Fernando Mejia Tarupi and Nelson Orlando 
Benavides Medina, who transported the drug to Guayaquil, where 
it was in the custody of Ecuadorans Kleber Delgado Delgado and 
Ivan Pineda Flores. (Paris AFP in Spanish 1949 GMT 19 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  The 3d Court of Appeals on 17 January confirmed a 15-year 
noncommutable prison sentence handed to Dr. Enrique Godoy Monroy 
for the crime of international drug trafficking. Godoy was 
caught last year at the La Aurora International Airport while 
bringing in cocaine from San Andres. (Guatemala City PRENSA 
LIBRE in Spanish 18 Jan 94 p 6) 
  Official sources today reported that Lieutenant Byron 
Roberto 
Lopez Lara, who was arrested last week in Nicaragua for cocaine 
trafficking, had been discharged in 1983 for misconduct. 
Defense Minister General Mario Enriquez denied reports that 
Lopez is on active duty as an identity card found on him 
suggests. Enriquez added that this card is false or was 
illegally obtained. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 2015 GMT 18 Jan 
94) 
<H5>  Nicaragua </H5>
  The National Narcotics Police have arrested four alleged 
members of the group know as the Guatemalan Connection, 
including Marcelo Sanchez Mejia, the presumed chief of this 
group in Nicaragua. Sanchez was arrested on 17 January in Las 
Piedrecitas. Former Army Lieutenant Marvin Cuadra was also 
arrested. Guatemalan Velmar Espina Novo, considered by 
authorities as the kingpin of the connection, was arrested in 
Managua on 16 January. Besides Espina, three other Guatemalans, 
namely, Byron Lopez Lara, Guillermo Celada Luna, and Alvaro 
Obregon Veras, were arrested. The Guatemalan Connection, which 
is under the Cali Cartel, is considered to be the largest drug 
trafficking organization in Central America. (Managua BARRICADA 
in Spanish 18 Jan 94 p 5) 
  The Nicaraguan police, with the aid of DEA agents, on 12 
January seized 275 kg of cocaine that drug traffickers tried to 
introduce via the Pacific Ocean aboard a small plane from 
Colombia. The drug belonged to a group of the Cali Cartel. 
This cocaine was headed for Guatemala, according for the 
authorities. Two Guatemalans and four Nicaraguans were 
arrested. The police also seized 175 kg of cocaine belonging to 
the Cali Cartel on 18 January in southern Managua. Four 
Nicaraguans and a Guatemalan were arrested. The authorities 
have seized more than 100 kg of cocaine in Puerto Cabezas, at 
the extreme northeast of Nicaragua. (Panama City ACAN in Spanish 
1202 GMT 19 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Justice Minister Fernando Vega on 17 January confirmed the 
existence of about 50 hectares of poppy in the Peruvian 
Amazonian region. The plantations were detected in several 
valleys of San Martin Department. They are cultivated by 
natives under the direction of Colombians. General Walter 
Taboada, chief of the National Narcotics Directorate, reported 
that Colombians offering poppy seeds to peasants were detected 
in the Huallaga highlands. Minister Vega said that the 
government approved a law to punish poppy growers with 
eight-year prison terms and confiscation of the land used. 
(Paris AFP in Spanish 1645 GMT 17 Jan 94) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  The National Guard and Metropolitan Police seized more than 
40 kg of drugs in the past few hours. In Caracas the 
Metropolitan Police arrested a 15-year-old girl with 20 kg of 
cocaine sulfate paste. The National Guard discovered a marijuana 
plantation within a half- hectare farm owned by Venezuelan 
Erasmo Rangel Uzcategui in Andres Bello Municipality. The 
authorities reported the seizure of about 14 kg of drug at the 
Simon Bolivar Airport in Maiquetia and the Arturo Michelena 
Airport in Valencia. Alberto Delgado Sierra and Maruja 
Villamizar Manrique were arrested in Valencia. (Caracas EL 
UNIVERSAL in Spanish 18 Jan 94 p 4-26) 
  The Judicial Technical Police, PTJ, on 16 January seized 10 
kg of cocaine and arrested nine people on drug distribution 
charges. Venezuelans Gabriel Romero Heredia, Alfredo Centeno, 
Denis Sanz, Rafael Moreno, Jose Tovar Diaz, Wilber Arias 
Rodriguez, Freddy Azuaje Munoz, Jose Luis Campos, and Juan 
Escalona were arrested. The PTJ also seized 500 grams of cocaine 
and arrested Osvaldo Vega Garcia and Jose Luis Rojo, who were in 
charge of transporting the drug from Colombia via the DHL 
Company. (Caracas Venezolana de Television Network in Spanish 
2350 GMT 19 Jan 94) 

