Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: Israel, once again, has used the 
pretext of Lebanese resistance to launch large-scale aggression 
against south Lebanon and inflict heavy damage on installations 
and property. Once again, it sought to lay the blame at the 
doorstep of the Lebanese and Syrian Governments, when only the 
occupation -- the one huge obstacle hampering Middle East 
peacemaking efforts -- can be held responsible. 
  For more than two years now, in the context of the Madrid 
conference and the Washington talks, Syria and Lebanon have been 
unsuccessfully attempting to convince Israel to adhere to UN 
Security Council resolutions relevant to the peace process. To 
date, Israel refused to be bound by full withdrawal from the 
Golan, and raises an endless string of security concerns to hide 
its shifty expansionist policies. On the Lebanese front, its 
behavior has not been any different. Syria and Lebanon now find 
themselves faced with negotiations in which Israel wants to 
focus solely on security issues. Peace is what the negotiations 
should be about -- the kind of peace under which the occupied 
territory is liberated. The impossible security terms set by 
Israel substantially compromise Syria's sovereignty over the 
Golan and Lebanon's sovereignty over southern Lebanon. Their 
demands also entrench the occupation in various ways and remain 
completely at odds with relevant UN Security Council resolutions 
and the land-for-peace formula. 
  Contrary to all international norms, Israel deems it 
permissible to commit aggression on neighboring Arab states, 
appropriating territory in one place and raising security 
concerns in another. In either case, the bottom line is one and 
the same -- and that is expansionism. The Israelis use security 
as a pretext to justify expansion, when, in reality, they are 
the aggressors whose aircraft bomb Lebanese towns and villages 
and it is their artillery that shells Lebanese civilians and 
drives them from their homes. It is Israel that has been piling 
up weapons, holding an arsenal bursting at the seams with all 
types of conventional and unconventional arms. On the other 
hand, the Arab states have, since 1948, been on the receiving 
end of Israel's recurrent acts of aggression. It is the Arabs, 
therefore, that can advance a better case for security 
guarantees. It is Arab territory that is under occupation, and 
it is Arab civilians who are targeted by Israel's savage raids. 
  Typically, however, Israel turns things upside down and 
falsifies facts. Instead of pursuing peace as the true 
guarantee of security for the region's states, Israel is 
pursuing expansion and aggression. It is an established fact 
that occupation triggers resistance, that the practices of 
occupation only intensify resistance, and that peace will remain 
elusive until occupation ends and rights are recognized. 
  The United States has accepted the fact that the Syrian and 
Lebanese tracks at the Washington talks complement each other. 
Plainly speaking, this means that Middle East peace is 
contingent upon Israel vacating the Golan Heights and south 
Lebanon. The Syrian and Lebanese Governments have made it 
abundantly clear that there will be no ceding of a single inch 
of the occupied Syrian or Lebanese territory. They have made it 
equally clear that they will never set any store by Israeli 
blackmailing tactics. 
  If Syria and Lebanon have held out hopes for this latest 
round of the Washington talks, this is because the United States 
has given an unambiguous commitment to a just and lasting 
settlement, grounded in UN Security Council Resolutions 242, 
338, and 425, on all fronts of the conflict. To date, however, 
equivocation continues to be the bedrock of Israel's policies. 
Israel couples its equivocation with the strong-arm tactics it 
is now applying in south Lebanon. However, this foolish policy 
proved ineffectual in the past and is hardly likely to succeed 
now or in the future. Peace and stability in the region will 
remain dependent upon a total Israeli withdrawal from the 
occupied Arab territories. 

