BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Alex Fishman] </F>
  [Text] Mustafa al-Dirani's interrogators are unlikely to 
spend the next few weeks sorting papers. Their main problem 
will probably be to sort through the fantasies and the lies the 
man has been so ably fabricating and to try to find a genuine 
clue. Extracting the truth from an interrogatee is an almost 
scientific project nowadays, but with professionals like 
al-Dirani, polygraph wires often go up in smoke. 
  When senior security sources defined al-Dirani this week as 
"a hard nut to crack" or as "a mature, stable personality, a man 
with experience in interrogation and who cannot be manipulated," 
they did not intend to imply that the man was groaning under the 
pressure of interrogation but keeping his silence nevertheless. 
Al-Dirani, who saw his life pass before his eyes more than once 
in his 46 years, is not exactly what one would call a model of 
health. He has used a cane since his serious injury in the 
early 1980's, which, by the way, guaranteed that he would be 
unable to flee his captors by adeptly climbing up the balcony or 
disappearing through another getaway in the Qasr Naba house in 
which he was sleeping. 
  It can be assumed that with his medical record, he has no 
intention of getting to the stage of facing moderate physical 
pressure. His type generally adopts the "negative cooperation" 
technique -- namely, to swamp his interrogators with answers 
that will force them to work very hard to verify them. 
  Al-Dirani's known biography indicates that in the late 
1980's, he was interrogated at a Syrian interrogation facility 
for several months. In those days, when Amal, from which he had 
been ousted, and Hizballah were waging a savage war, the Syrians 
were interested in neutralizing him. His Israeli interrogators 
are hardly likely to be able to surprise a man who served his 
apprenticeship -- at some level or another -- in a Syrian 
interrogation facility. 
  The first intimation of al-Dirani's fertile cooperation with 
his interrogators was given by the Intelligence Branch chief a 
few hours after al-Dirani was brought to Israel. Speaking at a 
news conference, Major General Uri Sagi said that Israel had 
verified some preliminary information about the navigator's 
whereabouts throughout the period he was held by the head of the 
Believers Resistance organization, Mustafa al-Dirani. 
  The most efficient interrogation usually takes place during 
the first hours, when the subject is still in shock. It can be 
safely presumed that al-Dirani -- still groggy with sleep, 
finding himself in a strange, hostile, menacing environment 
merely hours after the 'Id al-Adha meal consumed in cozy family 
surroundings -- talked. The interrogators' problem was to 
maintain this momentum until the abducted man found his bearings 
and organized his thoughts. Apparently, al-Dirani recovered 
rapidly. 
  The interrogators, who are engaged in a war of minds with 
their subject, "suffer" from excessive information about the 
man. After he got hold of Ron Arad, in the two years in which 
he held him, and after that, al-Dirani was a prime intelligence 
target, and each detail about his actions was meticulously filed 
away. For years, information about POW's and MIA's, along with 
warnings concerning war plans, has been a permanent feature in 
the alert chapter of the daily circular which the Intelligence 
Corps distributes among its men. Therefore, al-Dirani's 
interrogation could be a rerun of the "This Is Your Life" 
program. 
  Israel was able to study al-Dirani's colorful life story -- 
the story of a moderate Amal member who mutated into a radical 
Islamic terrorist -- almost firsthand when his nephew from Sidon 
miraculously popped up inside the Green Line in 1988. Since 
that time, by the way, junior has been able to develop very 
nicely in Israel, according to foreign reports. 
  The technique of bringing in relatives to exert pressure on 
an interrogatee is controversial. In Ahmad Jibril's case, the 
abduction of a relative mellowed him and enabled the recovery of 
Nahal Brigade soldiers who had been kidnapped during the Lebanon 
war. In the case of al-Dirani, however, his clan was 
unimpressed by their nephew's sudden disappearance. 
  On 15 December 1988, in the framework of the effort to 
uncover information on the POW's and MIA's -- mainly Ron Arad 
and servicemen Fink and Alsheikh -- the IDF [Israel Defense 
Forces] brought in four al-Dirani organization activists, 
including Jawad Kasafi, from the village of Tibnin. According 
to material amassed at Tel Aviv University's Unit for the 
Research of Political Violence, the kidnapping was designed to 
put pressure on the organization and to use the kidnapped men as 
bargaining chips in an exchange deal. At that time, Israel was 
not certain whether al- Dirani was still holding Arad. Only in 
1989 did Israel learn that al-Dirani had handed Arad over to 
people close to him, members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards 
in al-Biqa', either for temporary safekeeping or for a payment. 
Kasafi, a senior Believers Resistance activist, was included in 
an Israeli proposal for an exchange deal submitted on 31 July 
1989. Since the proposal was rejected, we can assume the man is 
still living at the Israeli taxpayer's expense. 
  Qasr Naba, a small, obscure Lebanese village, lies at the 
feet of a mountain ridge as tall as Mount Hermon. Nights are 
cold there, even in the summer. In addition to the hostile 
forces deployed in the area, the approach to the village entails 
quite formidable technical difficulties, such as flight in thin 
atmosphere, which requires expert pilots. When the Ministerial 
Committee on National Security Affairs approved the abduction 
operation on Thursday, the target was ripe. The graphic 
descriptions of the kidnapping published in the Lebanese press 
-- similar to descriptions of other operations attributed to 
Israel, such as the killing of Abu-Jihad [Khalil al-Wazir] -- 
were only close to the reality that developed on the ground. 
  According to foreign reports, since 1987 the complacent 
victim had been spending his time in Beirut, from where he ran 
his organization, which was scattered over four permanent 
locations. He used to spend 'Id al-Adha in the village of Qasr 
Naba, far away from Beirut. 
  His abduction was planned six months ago and was to be 
carried out four months ago, but was aborted. Thus the IDF 
troops -- the General Staff's elite commando unit, according to 
AFP, with a high concentration of officers, according to the 
chief of staff -- were well acquainted with the game plan. They 
merely had to await the government's go-ahead. 
  On Friday, at about 0900 in the morning, Rabin gave the 
final 
approval from his home. The troops stealthily made their way to 
the cottage on the outskirts of the village. According to the 
testimony of family members, the operation lasted only a few 
minutes. It can be assumed, therefore, that the attack forces 
were well acquainted with the plan of the house. Al-Dirani 
himself did not get a chance to reach out for the gun he always 
keeps at hand. Al-Dirani's brother, who must have been awakened 
by the racket made by the family members roused by the break-in 
and by the sound of the soldiers running about, fired a gun on 
the other side of the wall. 
  The secret of the operation's success lay in the surprise 
and 
the speed, which required precise, up-to-date information about 
every inch of the house. The information had been painstakingly 
collected bit by bit by various teams over a long period. To 
compile a "dossier" that could satisfy the Intelligence Branch 
chief and the operational unit commander and help them decide 
that the troops would be running a reasonable calculated risk, a 
lot of lackluster work was invested -- the kind of work that 
never makes the headlines. 
  When the soldiers and their catch passed the staircase 
separating the two parts of the cottage, gunfire coming 
apparently from the brother's entrance door was directed at 
them. One officer was injured in the thigh. The village woke 
up. It was the dead of night. A massive number of armed troops 
were a few kilometers away from the site. At about 0200, after 
midnight, officers in the operations room in central Israel 
could sigh in relief. The helicopters carrying the kidnapped 
man were in the air, heading out to sea. They came under 
undirected antiaircraft gunfire, and after a flight that took 
over an hour, the raiding troops landed in central Israel to 
bask in deserved glory. 
  Even before landing to a warm reception from their 
commanders, they abandoned al-Dirani to his interrogators, who 
had spent so many years studying and analyzing his personality, 
movements, acts, and intentions. Some of them must have felt 
they were finally being reunited with an old acquaintance. 
  The sense of relief among the defense establishment 
leadership last Saturday, when they learned that al-Dirani's 
kidnapping had been an unqualified success, was in a way 
reminiscent of Friday, 18 October 1986 -- the day after Ron Arad 
dropped from his aircraft into south Lebanon. A big sigh of 
relief was heard in Israel then, too, after Amal officially 
announced that it was holding the navigator. Nabih al-Birri, 
who headed Amal at that time, had been banished from his country 
and was a persecuted refugee, a Syrian protegee, a terrified man 
staying at the Damascus Sheraton with his Jordanian wife and 
small children, yearning for prestige and money. Contacts were 
held, there were negotiations, there was a mediator, three 
letters were received from Ron Arad. The emerging deal was much 
cheaper than the one with Jibril. 
  Who would have thought then that an obscure man by the name 
of Mustafa al-Dirani, a former Amal security chief in the Tyre 
and Sidon area, who had not been particularly respected even by 
his colleagues, would reshuffle the cards. 
  In 1985, when he established the Believers Resistance as 
Amal's military apparatus, al-Dirani was still his loyal and 
pragmatic self. In 1987, he started showing signs of 
ideological independence from the organization's traditional 
leaders. As a result of this attitude, he was ousted from his 
position of Amal security apparatus chief in February 1988. 
According to foreign reports, he was banished, along with his 
associates Zakariya Hamza, 'Aql Hamiya, 'Ali Muhammad 
al-Husayni, 'Ali al-Jabar, Muhammad Faqiyah, Abu-'Ali Khalil, 
Muhammad Mubarak, Ahmad Harb, and others. Together with their 
supporters, they blended into the fundamentalist terrorist gangs 
that surround Hizballah and draw power either from the 
Revolutionary Guards in Lebanon or directly from the Iranian 
authorities. 
  During the Amal-Hizballah fighting in Beirut in May 1988, 
al- 
Dirani was already on the side of Hizballah. Together with his 
men, he took over one of the Amal commands in the Hariq area in 
southern Beirut, where, according to indications, Ron Arad was 
being held. Of all the prisoners in that installation, al-Dirani 
took one: the captive navigator. Since then, absolutely no 
negotiations for his release have been conducted. Hizballah, 
with Iranian consent, held contacts regarding the two 
servicemen, Fink and Alsheikh. For them, Ron Arad is 
untradable. He is a nest egg for a rainy day. 
  There is no reason for the Iranians to change their attitude 
as a result of al-Dirani's abduction. After Israel forms a 
genuine picture of the situation based on al-Dirani's 
interrogation, his fate will probably be similar to that of some 
of the previously kidnapped men: a television appearance, in 
which he will tell the world about Iran's direct involvement in 
the Ron Arad affair. That, too, is something. The Iranians are 
already preparing for such a possibility. In recent days, they 
have been using the Hizballah leaders, their emissaries in 
Lebanon, to convey a message: We have seen nothing, heard 
nothing; we do not know; he may be dead. 
  The enlightened world has slightly eased its pressure on 
Iran. A televised document featuring a terrorist of al-Dirani's 
stature may shake off a few layers of hypocrisy -- mainly that 
of West Europeans -- concerning cooperation with Iran and force 
them to renew the pressure on Tehran in the matter of the 
Israeli navigator. If it works -- after Ron Arad's seven years 
in captivity -- it will be a considerable achievement. 

