CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Michael Peter and Christa Friedl: </F>
"Dioxin from Metallurgical Works: Industrial Facilities Seen as 
Dioxin Source"] 
  [Text] VDI-N, Duesseldorf, 15 April 94 - The dioxin 
question has taken on a new life. For years, waste incineration 
plants were branded the main source of such pollutants. Now iron 
and metal producers are being examined more closely. However, 
the mechanisms for dioxin formation are still not clear. 
  Although Dietrich Schulz, a staff member in the Berlin 
office 
of the German Federal Environmental Agency, has had a lot of 
experience with dioxins, he admits that "further surprises with 
dioxins cannot be excluded in the future" and that "we have 
consistently underestimated existing sources". No sooner is one 
dioxin source eliminated than another pops up. Last year the 
dioxin detectives, after first examining the waste incineration 
plants, then focussed their attention on sintering plants. The 
results of measurements far exceeded the worst expectations of 
the examiners. For example, the sintering plant of the 
Hoesch-Westphalia Works in Dortmund showed a dioxin value of 
43.2 ng pro m[.sup]3[/] of exhaust air. Another facility even 
recorded 70 ng/m[.sup]3[/]! By way of comparison, in 1990 the 
maximum value for dioxin emissions from new incineration plants 
was set at 0.1 ng/m[.sup]3[/]. 
  The dioxin values found in Dortmund not only alarmed the 
city 
residents but have also embroiled Klaus Matthiesen, the North 
Rhein Westphalian environmental minister, in the scandal. He 
apparently let these alarming measurement results gather dust in 
his office desk drawer for six months. His ministry had even 
sounded an all-clear in late December. The emissions from the 
Krupp Hoesch Plant were said not to constitute a health hazard 
to the residents in the area. Both blood and soil tests were 
said to indicate that the dioxins in Dortmund "did not exceed 
the general background level." 
  "We really cannot yet say what the reasons were for such 
surprisingly high dioxin values," Viktor Braun, spokesman for 
Krupp-Hoesch Stahl AG, confessed. The measurements had only 
recently been concluded and the results were still being 
evaluated. Meanwhile the burning of coke in the Dortmund 
sintering plant has been optimized, and the use of 
chlorine-containing top gas dust discontinued. Through the use 
of these measures, the emission values were reduced to the 
"normal measure" of from 2 to 4 ng/m[.sup]3[/] for such 
plants. Nonetheless, the enormous volume flow rates result in a 
troublesome yearly discharge volume. 
  Moreover, the measurements made in North Rhein-Westphalia 
led 
to a second, no less explosive, conclusion. The estimates of 
dioxin emissions, made in the former West Germany in the early 
1990's, have to be substantially corrected upwards. As Peter 
Bruckmann, director of the emissions surveillance board in the 
Duesseldorf Environmental Ministry, explained: "It must be 
concluded that the prescribed acceptable yearly amount of 1 kg 
has obviously been exceeded since our State-operated program 
alone has ascertained more than 500 g." This year, Bruckmann and 
his team will undertake the examination of chemical plants. 
Bruckmann, however, does not expect to encounter any bad 
surprises. "Usually chemical processes proceed without oxygen, 
thereby preventing the formation of dioxins," he explained. 
  On the other hand, household ovens and stoves are one of the 
greatest sources of dioxin. This has been confirmed by recent 
investigations made in Switzerland. Up to 114 ng/m[.sup]3[/] 
of dioxins have been detected in the exhausts from domestic 
heating fuels and the concomitant burning of household refuse. 
  While Schulz maintains that the current policy with regard 
to 
domestic heating fuels rests solely on appeals made to the good 
sense of the consumers, in the past other dioxin sources have 
been shut down or reduced by law. Thus, for example, the 
technical instructions with regard to the maintenance of pure 
air contain a general regulation on minimizing dioxin emissions. 
"In the case of organic substances, which are difficult to 
decompose but easily enriched and which are of high toxicity, 
the emission mass flow must, observing the principle of 
proportionality, be limited as far as possible." 
  Under the 1988 law regulating small heaters and stoves, 
wood, 
which has been treated with a protective agent or coated with a 
halogen-organic compound, cannot be burned. The emission limit 
value for dioxins and furans was set at 0.1 ng/m[.sup]3[/] in 
the 17th ordinance of the 1990 German Federal Emissions Law. It 
is hoped that by the end of 1996 the dioxin discharge from such 
units will be reduced from the yearly 400 g recorded in 1988 to 
4 g a year. 
  In addition, the Scavenger Ban of 1992, forbade the use of 
chlorine- or bromine-containing additives in gasoline containing 
lead. Furthermore, since 1989 the production of 
pentachlorophenol and consumer products containing polychlorided 
biphenyls has been forbidden. 
  However, the policy has not yet set any strict regulations 
in 
this regard for the steel industry. To be sure, in April 1993 a 
working group of the State Committee for Emissions Protection 
strongly advocated a target value of 0.1 ng/m[.sup]3[/] for 
industrial plants as well. Klaus Toepfer, the German Minister 
for Environmental Affairs, and his State counterparts have so 
far not reacted. It is very clear, however, that the dioxin 
discharge from industrial plants has to be reduced. From the 
health point of view, the precautionary value for the daily 
dioxin intake, which the Federal Health Department has set at 
0.1 picograms (trillionth of a gram) per kg of body weight, has, 
according to Federal Environmental Agency data, been exceeded by 
a factor of two in Germany. 
  The dioxin debate now revolves around the alternative target 
value or fixed limiting value as in the case of waste 
incineration plants. Claus Meyer-Wulf of the Kayser AG 
Metallurgical Works suspects that in future practice the 
permissible dioxin emission will be decided by testing 
individual cases. But Lower Saxony has already decided 
differently. In December 1993, a decree directed at the 
industrial and trade sector set a limiting value of 0.1 
ng/m[.sup]3[/]. The industrial oversight offices were ordered 
to investigate suspect plants for their dioxin emissions. A 
spokesman in the Lower Saxony ministry said: "We are only 
requiring what is possible on the basis of the state of the 
technology and the minimization ordinance, in other words, what 
is technically and economically possible." 
  Since the unusually high values have become known, an 
intensive search has been underway in the Dortmund plant for the 
dioxin sources. Fine ore has been baked together with coke and 
lime in the sintering plant at about 1200 to a cake, then 
broken up again and smelted in the pig iron blast furnace. 
Sintering plants have the additional function as a recycler of 
residual and recirculating materials from rolling mills and 
steel-processing plants. 
  It is quite possible to reduce the dioxins in sintering 
plants. Guenter Ziegenbalk of Kloeckner Stahl GmbH in Bremen can 
demonstrate that in his iron ore sintering plant. In Bremen, 
they focus, first of all, on minimizing dust emissions by means 
of a double filter. As a desirable side effect, the dioxin 
discharge fell off by two-thirds to 2.2 ng/m[.sup]3[/]. This 
year the value will be pushed further down beneath the 1 
ng/[.sup]3[/] mark through the use of hearth incinerator 
coke. Finally, the Bremen team hopes to undercut the limit value 
for waste incineration plants further by means of exhaust gas 
recirculation techniques. 
  Of course measures to protect the environment cost money. 
Investments in woven filters in the Kloeckner Steel Works in 
Bremen now run to DM16 million. The exhaust gas recirculation 
techniques will cost about the same amount. The Ministry for the 
Environment in Bonn is sharing the costs of these pilot plants. 
  Meyer-Wulf is also appealing to the politicians to examine 
the problem of dioxin reduction themselves. To date, Meyer-Wulf 
asserts, there are no ready-made, technically perfected 
solutions. Each plant requires its own solution which, in turn, 
means that the costs are high. And, finally, it must be stated 
that high dioxin discharges from sintering plants are not a 
problem that is unique to North Rhein-Westphalia or Germany. 
  According to data provided by Dr. Uwe Lahl, senator for 
environmental protection in Bremen, about 40 sintering plants 
are now in operation in West Europe, of which only 14 are in 
Germany. Lahl notes further that very little is known about the 
plants in other European countries, some of which are much older 
than those in Germany. 

