BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Muhamed Sacirbey, Bosnian ambassador to the </F>
United Nations, in New York, by Zeinab Badawi in London on 7 
April -- recorded; from the "Channel 4 News" program] 
  [Text] [Badawi] Why does it seem that it is the Bosnian 
Government that is now holding up the peace talks? 
  [Sacirbey] I'm afraid the whole issue here isn't any more 
talks; we've had over a hundred cease-fires called for in 
Bosnia. We have still one town that is under severe attack by 
Serbian forces. Those forces have refused to allow General Rose 
to go into that town, and I'm afraid that until in fact they 
stop there attacks on Goradze, there is no assurance that 
Serbians are any more serious about this cease-fire than any 
other. It seems that every time someone utters the words 
cease-fire the whole world thinks that means magic, that all of 
a sudden we have peace. There is an opportunity for the Serbian 
forces to prove their goodwill in Goradze; they have failed to 
do so. They have said countless times that they will stop the 
attacks on the city; they have not. That is really the issue 
here. 
  [Badawi] But your real concern therefore, Mr Sacirbey, is 
that by signing a cease-fire now you may freeze Serbian lines as 
they stand now? 
  [Sacirbey] That is of course a real issue and a real concern 
for us, but it doesn't do us any good to sign cease-fire 
agreements if in fact the attacks continue. Why should we give 
the Serbians any more public relations ammunition in meeting 
their calls or their demands for cease-fires, when in fact they 
have no intention of honoring cease-fires. And I must also say I 
find it rather disappointing that the agenda this time, as in 
almost any other case, is being set by the Serbian forces. 
General Rose had in fact stated that he was going to go to 
Goradze; the Security Council had endorsed his trip to Goradze. 
The next day the Serbian forces prevented him going to Goradze 
and Serbian forces then called upon him to hold a meeting at 
Sarajevo airport and he agreed. Are we now having the Serbian 
forces setting the agenda, are they in fact going to tell not 
only the Bosnian's but the United Nations, a British general, 
what is the next process that we are to undertake to reach peace 
in Bosnia? 
  [Badawi] But if you want the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw to 
the 
positions that they held 10 days ago, you're not talking about a 
cease-fire, you're actually talking about maps again and that's 
only decided on the ground, not at the negotiating table? 
  [Sacirbey] Those are not maps. That is a boundary for 
Goradze 
established by the UN as a safe area. It has nothing to do with 
maps. It has to do with the safety of the town; it has to do 
with the demand of the UN established over a year ago as to how 
that safe area would be defined in terms of what kind of 
positions the Serbians could maintain outside of that area. 
  [Badawi] But as General Rose has said, we have to have a 
cease- fire before the political process can begin. 
  [Sacirbey] Well we agree, except there is no cease-fire in 
Goradze and it's he himself that has called for the cease-fire 
and we request that he go to Goradze to ensure in fact that the 
cease- fire is maintained. Obviously, he is being prevented by 
Serbian forces from doing so and until there is a cease-fire in 
Goradze, we don't see any use to talk about any broader 
cease-fire in the rest of Bosnia. 
  [Badawi] Mr Sacirbey, the cynical mind could say that since 
the Bosnian Government forces are doing rather well in the north 
of Bosnia, that it is not in the Bosnian Government's interest 
to talk peace now. 
  [Sacirbey] We have opened the doors for peace; we have 
reached an agreement with the Croatians and obviously we look 
for the Serbs to come in and speak of peace with us of a 
federation, of a sharing of power. On the other hand, they 
continue to insist not only on the partitioning of our country, 
but the continued ethnic cleansing of our population in places 
like Prijedor and Banja Luka. I'm afraid the cynical mind that 
you're speaking about has been far behind the times. The 
process in Bosnia the Serbs have started, the ethnic cleansing, 
the genocide, continues and I'm afraid that any further talk of 
cease-fires is not going to accomplish much until the Serbians 
in fact show their goodwill in places like Goradze, in places 
like Prijedor, in places like Banja Luka. 
  [Badawi] There was talk earlier today that the truce talks 
could resume in Sarajevo tomorrow, is that not now the case? 
  [Sacirbey] They certainly can, but the question is will in 
fact they stop their attack on Goradze. I spoke to the people 
in Goradze only an hour ago and I was told that, in fact, 
Serbians had continued their assault and had broken into some of 
the suburbs, including the suburb of (Visca Vicha). From our 
perspective obviously we're very far away from any substantive 
talks, from any good faith talks on a cease-fire. 

