BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gisela Yanez in Guayaquil from the "The Reporter" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] The ministerial meeting of banana exporting 
countries -- Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, and 
the Dominican Republic -- ended in Guayaquil. The participants 
analyzed the framework agreement on bananas signed by the EU 
commission and representatives of several Latin American 
countries to [word indistinct] the import of bananas to EU 
markets. 
  [Begin unidentified speaker recording, in progress] ...the 
market of agricultural products in general and bananas in 
particular. [Words indistinct] regional unity, formulas must be 
found to help guarantee equitable and adequate access to the 
European market by all suppliers. Within that context, the 
representatives of Guatemala, Mexico, Honduras, Panama, the 
Dominican Republic, and Ecuador approve the following 
ministerial declaration of Santiago de Guayaquil: 
  1. Reiterate their disagreement with the clearly 
discriminatory attitude toward our countries that has 
characterized the actions of the EU commission throughout the 
negotiations that concluded with the framework agreement for 
bananas in March. 
  2. Emphasize to the international community the fact that 
the trade policy in Regulation 404-93, which has been termed a 
violation of GATT by the special group, is not [words 
indistinct] acceptance by some countries. 
  3. Invoke the spirit of legality and justice that inspires 
the EU member countries so, in exercising their rights and 
powers, they will reject the procedure adopted by the EU 
commission on this issue and therefore reject the aforementioned 
framework agreement for bananas because it does not constitute a 
lasting, legal, or equitable solution. 
  4. Bring to the attention of the trade negotiation 
committee of the GATT Uruguay Round, which will meet in 
Marrakech at the ministerial level, (?our logical rejection) of 
the so-called "improved offer" on bananas because it does not 
resolve the illegalities of Regulation 404-93, does not resolve 
the problem of discrimination, imposes new barriers [words 
indistinct], and disregards the recommendations of the GATT 
special group. [end recording] 

