BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by Ian Mather; </F>
place and date not given] 
  [Text] Q: Would you like to see the Bundeswehr invited by 
Russia to play an active role in solving security problems in 
the former Soviet Union? 
  A: A solution to the acute security problems on the 
territory of the former Soviet Union is important, not only for 
Russia and the other directly involved states, but for all CSCE 
countries. In individual cases the stationing of peace-keeping 
forces in a conflict area as part of UN or CSCE peace efforts 
can be an appropriate step. 
  In this regard it is also feasible for Russian forces to be 
employed in co-operation with the CSCE. The principles and 
considerations laid down at the CSCE council meeting in Rome at 
the end of 1993 must apply in this case, including the 
recognition of sovereignty and territorial integrity, the prior 
agreement of the conflict parties, the multinational character 
of the force and a clear mandate for action. 
  Participation by the Bundeswehr on this basis would not be 
ruled out on principle, provided the constitutional debate is 
favourably resolved. Let me also point out that several 
Bundeswehr officers have already been involved in CSCE 
peace-keeping missions in Georgia. 
  Q: Would participation be under UN or Western European Union 
[WEU] auspices? 
  A: Participation by the Bundeswehr in peace-keeping missions 
would always be within the scope of a multilateral operation. 
The precondition would be a clear mandate from the UN or the 
CSCE as its regional arrangement. We would have to decide in 
each individual case to what extent the Bundeswehr would 
participate in missions under the auspices of other 
organisations such as NATO or WEU. 
  Q: Do you favour German military involvement in the Balkans? 
  A: No, for constitutional and historical reasons. That 
said, the Bundeswehr participates in numerous humanitarian 
measures, such as mercy flights to Sarajevo and air drops of aid 
over east Bosnia as well as helping to monitor the UN embargo 
against the Serbs in the Adriatic. 
  Bundeswehr soldiers form part of the crews of the NATO AWACS 
aircraft which monitor and indirectly enforce the flight ban 
over Bosnia and Herzegovina. But the federal government has 
repeatedly stated that, due to the special historical situation, 
Germany cannot make a greater commitment by sending more blue 
helmets to the former Yugoslavia. 
  This applies whatever the result of the constitutional 
debate 
on this issue. In any case Germany does share the burden of the 
conflict in the former Yugoslavia in that over 400,000 refugees 
have been admitted to Germany. 
  Q: Would you agree that because of its size and economic and 
political muscle Germany must be in the forefront of European 
defence as it evolves? Can this be reconciled with Germany's 
reluctance to participate militarily in operations outside 
Germany? 
  A: The federal government has never claimed a leading role 
in the European security and defence structures developing on 
the basis of the Maastricht treaty. For any of the partners in 
the EU [European Union] to make such a claim would be absurd, 
quite apart from the fact that the decision-making mechanisms in 
the EU and WEU do not allow for it. 
  On the contrary, our priority has always been to point out 
that the European Union's common foreign and security policy 
would not be complete unless it was complemented by a common 
defence policy. For this reason Germany has always seen itself 
as a catalyst for major steps towards security and defence 
integration in Europe. These include the creation of 
multinational formations, the Eurocorps and the consistent 
development of WEU into the EU's defensive arm. This in no way 
affects our firm conviction that the Atlantic alliance is and 
will remain our anchor of security and stability. 
  There has never been the slightest doubt concerning 
Germany's 
willingness to fulfil its obligations within the NATO area 
arising from the NATO and WEU treaties. This is in fact 
expressly permitted by our constitution. 
  However, there are differing views about the extent to which 
our constitution allows for the deployment of German armed 
forces for peacekeeping and peace-making missions outside the 
NATO treaty area. The matter is pending at the federal 
constitutional court. We expect a final decision at the 
beginning of July. 
  More than six months ago, the government parties placed a 
draft law before the Bundestag designed to create a clear 
constitutional basis for such deployment. The opposition has, 
however, continually prevented a consensus which would amend the 
constitution on this point. 
  Q: What will be the aims of the German presidency? 
  A: As I see it there will be four main aims: first, Europe 
must regain its economic dynamism. Only in this way can 
unemployment be reduced on a long term basis and Europe be able 
to hold its own as a base for business against other growth 
regions, especially Asia. 
  The instrument for achieving this will be the realisation of 
the Brussels European Council meeting's plan of action. By 
doing so we hope to ensure that Europe has a bright future. 
  Second, we must bring our neighbours in Central and East 
Europe closer to the EU. Subsequent admission of these states 
is one of our contractual objectives. We seek to give the 
Baltic countries the same opportunity. 
  Third, we need to make swift progress in co-operation on 
justice and home affairs so that we can solve the urgent 
problems facing EU internal security. This cooperation includes 
above all the fight against cross-border crime, the 
harmonisation of the material right to asylum and the 
formulation of a common immigration policy. 
  Fourth, we must make consistent use of the new instruments 
and mechanisms contained in the treaty on European Union. We 
want to see the subsidiarity principle put into practice in a 
way visible to the citizens in Europe, greater transparency and 
a Europe closer to the people. 
  Q: Are the countries of East Europe ready for EU membership? 
  A: Not even the possible candidates themselves claim that 
they fulfil the necessary preconditions. On the other hand, it 
cannot be right for us to call for decades upon the central and 
eastern European countries to join our western community of 
peace and freedom, and to say now that there will be no room for 
them in the European house in the foreseeable future. 
  On the contrary, bringing these states closer to the EU is 
an 
historic task. It is an aim we have always set ourselves and 
have always wanted to achieve. Therefore we will make these 
issues a focus of our presidency. 
  Q: Do you think German unification should have been handled 
differently? 
  A: There were no blueprints for reunification. The fusing 
of two different societies and economic systems which had been 
separated by the wall for more than 40 years is a unique feat in 
history. Looking back, we would have done many things 
differently. 
  Without a doubt our greatest error during reunification was 
the false assessment of the quality of the capital stock in the 
former GDR. 
  In fact, we found that industrial plant, infrastructure and 
the environment were in a much worse state than we had assumed. 
This resulted in much higher than expected spending on 
reconstruction. 

