BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ivan Yermakov, chairman of the "Union- </F>
Prosperity in Unity" association, by V. Glinskiy; place and date 
not given: "Union-Prosperity in Unity"] 
  [Text] The "Union-Prosperity in Unity" 
[Soyuz-Protsvetaniye v Yedinstviye] association has recently 
been registered in Sevastopol. It brings together political 
activists, deputies, economic leaders, workers, businessmen, 
servicemen, culture workers, and artists. What goals does the 
union pursue? Ivan Fedosovich Yermakov, chairman of the 
association, answers this and other questions. 
  [Glinskiy] Ivan Fedosovich, there are dozens of parties, 
civil organizations, and movements in the city, and now another 
one has appeared. What goals does the union pursue and why was 
it established? 
  [Yermakov] Currently, when the overwhelming majority of our 
city's residents live below the poverty level, all who have 
ended up in poverty are looking for salvation, for a way out of 
the abyss. In the first place, the people were appealing to the 
Ukrainian president, Supreme Council, and Cabinet of Ministers 
with requests and demands to halt the pilferage of our country, 
to not break ties with neighboring countries, and to actively 
implement reforms, in this way preventing a further decline in 
production and inflation. The people's voice was not heard by 
the people in power. 
  Currently, it seems that the state is unable to protect its 
citizens, in terms of social and legal protection. The old 
bureaucratic elite is neither able to conduct reforms nor handle 
state processes. For a long time, there has been a situation 
when the upper class cannot, and the lower class does not want 
to live in the old way. We have been talking about democratic 
society for almost 10 years. What do we have? The great 
Russian author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who has recently returned 
to his motherland, termed this period pseudo-democracy. He was 
right. 
  The people are still carrying the heavy burden of violence, 
bureaucracy, and corruption, and they actually do not have any 
control over the authorities. This lack of control has untied 
the hands of the ruling elite, which has sold out its people. 
Currently, to maintain its power, it is inspiring interethnic 
hostilities and destroying the centuries-long unity of the 
Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, and other people. 
  [Glinskiy] As I understand, a new stage of the battle for 
real democracy, based on popular rule, has recently begun. This 
has been reflected in your association's platform. 
  [Yermakov] Our association considers the unification of 
Slavic states -- Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus -- as well as 
nations inhabiting them, to be a priority. Polls indicate that 
about 80 percent of these countries' people want to live in 
friendship. They are united not only by Christianity and a 
common alphabet, sanctified by the names of Cyril and Methodius 
[inventors of the Cyrillic alphabet], but also by family ties. 
They are united by the huge economic and geopolitical 
territory, which was conquered by their ancestors in a hard 
struggle, and which must be preserved for their children and 
grandchildren. The Slavic people's prosperity and security lie 
in their unification... 
  [Glinskiy] Ivan Fedosovich, while reading your platform, I 
paid special attention to the excerpts concerning economic ties 
between countries and regions, the establishment of regime 
supporting revival of economy and new and old economic ties, the 
liquidation of quotas, licenses, exhausting taxes, etc. 
  [Yermakov] Our union has a precise program. It provides 
answers to such urgent questions as halting the decline in 
economic and agricultural production, integrating Sevastopol's 
economy with the Crimea, and improving Crimeans' living 
standards and ecological situation. The stabilization and way 
out of the crisis is based on the recognition of all forms of 
property, development of medium- sized and small business, 
entrepreneurship, competitive production, and access to markets. 
Ideas of the "Union-Prosperity in Unity" are close to those of 
other public organization. For example, a conference of 
Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarusian democratic forces has 
recently been held in Kharkov. In the interests of the Slavic 
people's rapprochement, the governments were requested to adopt 
legislative acts on the establishment of unified economic zone. 
As everybody knows, 12 bordering oblasts of Russia and Ukraine 
have set up transparent borders. Cultural and sport ties are 
also developing. The city of Sevastopol, for instance, 
strengthens its ties with Moscow, Krasnodarskiy Kray, St. 
Petersburg, Minsk, and Kiev. 
  [Glinskiy] The actions of your union and other democratic 
forces call forth discontent among the bureaucratic elite and 
nationalists of all breeds, who are currently playing the last 
card, to preserve themselves in power. This card serves to 
scare people. They openly talk about a new Karabakh, 
Yugoslavia... 
  [Yermakov] Conflicts are imposed on the people against their 
will. The countless army of bureaucrats, feeling neither the 
government's bridle nor responsibility before the people, flexes 
its muscles at all levels. Let us look at the current conflict 
between the Crimea and Ukraine. As everybody understands, the 
Crimean people have the right to defend their political, 
economic, and personal interests through the adoption of their 
own Constitution. This is being done in accordance with 
international norms and agreements recognized by the entire 
civilized world. 
  I personally recognize Ukraine's western oblasts' right to 
self- determination, and I am ready to support them. This is 
their right, and it should be unconditionally respected. 
  [Glinskiy] Is your criticism of the Ukrainian president and 
highest authorities not a result of personal resentment against 
Kravchuk, who removed you from the office of presidential 
representative and Sevastopol City Administration chairman? 
  [Yermakov] I would like to remind the readers that before 
that, I was chairman of the City Council and Executive 
Committee. Moreover, I was a deputy chairman of the Crimean 
Supreme Council. In my work, I did not abandon my conscience, 
and I was trying to protect the interests of Sevastopol 
residents. Therefore, I have a clear conscience. The only 
thing that bothers me is that I could have done more for the 
city, had I not been removed.... 
  [Glinskiy] Is this why you are again running in the upcoming 
elections for City Council chairman? 
  [Yermakov] I have been thinking a lot about whether I should 
again be involved in political battles and join the electoral 
marathon. I have already seen all that. But, during these 
three years in power, I understood many things: the ruling 
cadres, their professional qualities, the capabilities of 
state-owned and commercial enterprises, or alignment of 
political parties and movements. I know what must be done, and 
how, to implement reforms, and to make the city begin to earn 
its life. 
  I now have a clear, considered program to lead the Crimean 
Republic and Sevastopol out of the crisis. There are the 
executors of this program as well. While supporting the majority 
of ideas advocated by the "Rossiya" bloc, I stand on the 
centrist positions. Only together will we be able to extricate 
ourselves from the current crisis. 
  I have already formed a team comprising talented people who 
are able to think and work for the good of Sevastopol residents. 
  My goal, as either the "Union-Prosperity in Unity" 
association chairman or the City Executive Committee chairman, 
is a peaceful life of Sevastopol residents within a brotherly 
union of Slavic states: Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. 

