BFN 

<F P=106> [Aitor Guenaga report: "ETA Announces New Attacks And </F>
Affirms: `We Will Win'"] 
  [Text] Bilbao -- The terrorist organization, ETA [Basque 
Fatherland and Liberty], yesterday claimed responsibility for 
the latest attacks, issuing a victorious statement via the daily 
newspaper EGIN far removed from defeatism. "We will win," 
assured the text published by the Guizpucoa newspaper. "The era 
of resistance, the doubts, and the false expectations" are all 
over, according to the armed gang. ETA defended the need to 
continue the attacks in order to achieve its oft-repeated goal: 
Basque independence. "We cannot keep on hoping, nor can we 
place our hopes in miracle solutions. We must obtain new 
results on the road to liberty through our daily struggle." 
  In the two-page press release, written entirely in Basque, 
ETA claimed responsibility for the attack which took the life of 
Civil Guard member Fernando Jimenez Pascual on 4 April in 
Bilbao. Similarly, it said it was responsible for the grenade 
attack carried out on 18 April against the Military Command in 
Barcelona, which cost the life of compatriot Vicente Beti 
Montesinos, who was close to the organization, and whose death, 
the terrorist gang said, was unfortunate. 
  Lastly, the group claimed that it set the devices which 
caused the 20 April explosion on the railroad line linking 
Madrid and Irun, as well as the action against a branch of the 
Caja Vital [bank] in Salvatierra (Alava). Herri Batasuna 
[United People] is waging a battle with that bank because of 
failure to pay a debt. 
  In addition to its triumphalist rhetoric, ETA made a wager 
on 
the unity of the nationalist left: "This is not the time to 
seek out differences, but to develop the issues and sectors in 
which we can work jointly at the same pace and with the same 
initiatives." However, he repeated his speech about the double 
model used for the Basque Country: the model of those who 
condemn the people to disappear, and the model "proposed by the 
nationalist left, which seeks a new society in an independent 
Euskal Herria [Basque Union]." 
<H5>  "Jabotxa" Still Being Detained </H5>
  In the meantime, the editor in chief of EGIN, Patxi Xabier 
Fernandez Monje, or "Jabotxa," who was taken into custody 
Saturday afternoon for his presumed links with ETA, was still in 
custody yesterday at the Indautin police station. Herri 
Batasuna's legal representative, Arantza Zulueta, went to Bilbao 
to defend him. On Saturday night, the police searched the 
dwelling of the EGIN editor without, apparently, taking 
anything, according to one of the newspaper's employees. 
  The detention of EGIN's editor in chief is linked to the 
open 
operation against ETA following the downfall last Thursday of 
the leader of the Barcelona commando and a former member of 
Herri Batasuna's national board, Felipe San Epifiano, known as 
Pipe. Jabotxa and Pipe were sentenced in 1985 by the high court 
to six months and one day in prison for public disorder, along 
with six other members of Jarrai (KAS [expansion unknown] youth). 

