BFN 

<F P=106> [Nikolay Myakinnik report: "Dual-Purpose Technology Helping </F>
to Produce Competitive Goods"] 
  [Text] Conversion 
  Having started on the new stage of conversion three to four 
years ago, America and Russia have since gone their separate 
ways. In 1989, according to the evidence of Viktor Glukhikh, 
chairman of the Russian Federation State Committee for the 
Defense Sectors of Industry, weapons formed 30 percent of the 
total U.S. export volume but by last year the figure had already 
risen to 60 percent. In our country, however, that indicator 
has fallen from 38 percent to 5 percent. A strange combination 
of processes, is it not? Who stands to gain from this? What is 
the best way to use market conditions to sustain the efficiency 
of the defense complex assuming indeed the task is not to wreck 
it entirely? 
  It seems that the program for the conversion of defense 
enterprises in the Moscow region is proving a good support for 
the corresponding all-Russia program. It could serve as model 
for it or even a prototype. This would seem natural after the 
examination of the question at a joint session of the Moscow 
Government and the Russian Federation State Committee for the 
Defense Sectors of Industry collegium which was held at Moscow 
city hall. 
  What is the basis of this proposition? Primarily the 
principled aspect of the matter. We are talking about close 
cooperation between interested departments at all stages of the 
formation and implementation of the program. There is a clear 
orientation emerging toward the economic efficiency and social 
importance of projects. The balanced nature of the sides' 
priorities is in evidence. It is proposed that national 
economic tasks be resolved not by destroying the defense 
enterprises but by making intelligent use of their potential. 
  The implementation of the "Conversion -- to the City" 
program 
will make it possible, among other things, to retain around 
15,000 jobs in the scientific sphere at defense enterprises and, 
consequently, around 65,000 jobs in production at large. All 
this will be accompanied by additional growth in the production 
of output. 
  The significance of the Moscow region's conversion program 
for the whole of Russia is also due to the fact that over half 
of the industrial potential and over one-third of the scientific 
potential of the entire defense complex is concentrated here. 
  The program's features include the extensive use of 
dual-purpose technologies in the design of military hardware and 
civilian output and the creation and modernization of capacities 
for the manufacture of competitive consumer goods. It is 
planned to resolve some major urban problems pertaining to fuel 
and energy, transport and communications, ecology, health care, 
and security. The agenda includes the flotation and 
privatization of defense enterprises, the active attraction of 
foreign investments in conversion, and the competitive selection 
and expert appraisal of projects. 
  Nevertheless, past mistakes meant that specialists had to 
focus their attention equally on ensuring the creation of 
conversion projects and on their implementation. It is the 
emphasis on part two which distinguishes the present program 
from its predecessors. Success will undoubtedly be predetermined 
by the implementation of mechanisms for supporting the promotion 
of projects, monitoring and prompt regulation, and informational 
and analytical support. 
  The "Conversion -- to the City" program includes over 1,000 
scientific research and experimental design projects. Funding 
for them amounts to 160 billion rubles [R]. There are 396 
projects envisaging starting industrial production of products 
and delivering them to the consumer. Financing amounting to 
R259.1 billion is guaranteed here. 
  The considerable increase in funding for defense projects 
compared with last year was received with satisfaction by the 
defense enterprises' general directors who took part in the work 
of the collegium. However, it is difficult to rebuild what has 
already been destroyed in the military-industrial complex, of 
course. But a thrifty attitude not only to the scientific, 
technical, and cadre potential of the military-industrial 
complex but also to the unique experience of the management of 
that complex, which effectively ensured its efficient work in 
the past, should help to guard against new losses. 
  Experience, incidentally, warns against haste in the 
implementation of the privatization program in the defense 
sphere. Taking that experience into account, Moscow Mayor Yuriy 
Luzhkov warned of the danger that state secrets will be in 
danger if the controlling block of shares in a defense 
enterprise is owned by people providing finance from abroad. At 
the very least the process of privatizing such enterprises must 
not be hurried. The best thing to do is to give the producers 
and scientific collectives the right to settle their own future 
themselves. Igor Fedorov, rector of the Bauman Moscow State 
Technical University, urged government organs to ensure that 
question of privatizing state higher educational institutions 
should not even be raised. 
  Despite the present depth of study of conversion problems, a 
depth achieved largely the hard way, there are still questions 
which need to be reviewed. Conversion, sometimes applied to 
technologies whose level is low compared with the potential of 
the military-industrial complex, is proceeding as if by horse 
and cart. But that cart can and must be like a tank, an 
aircraft, or a missile, where our technologies are unsurpassed. 
  At the same time it is necessary to bear in mind that the 
whole arms trade on which reliance is now being placed can at a 
later date turn out badly. Germany, for example, bought a 
modern tank from us and then took out dozens of patents on the 
basis of that tank. The fear is that in a few years' time we 
will have to pay for the right to use our own asset. But this 
suggests the way ahead. The intelligent organization of patents 
and licenses and the skillful protection of this country's 
inventions and know-how together with their subsequent sale in 
the market could produce more than the sale of any commodity. 
  Conversion is not a mountain stream which goes on flowing 
regardless of our will but a complex production, organizational, 
economic, and social process demanding skillful management. It 
would be best for Russia if this were done not from Capitol Hill 
(prompting us toward unilateral disarmament) but from a hill in 
Moscow. 

