CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vlada Stankuniene, head of the Demography </F>
Department of the Institute of Philosophy, Sociology, and Law: 
"The Demographic Crisis: What is its Significance Today, and 
What does it Portend for the Future of Our People?" 
  [Text] The demographic changes that have taken place in 
Lithuania during the last four or five years have broken with 
long-term trends and have created a new demographic situation. 
Its very newness is as frightening as are its unclear 
implications. More and more often we hear the warning cry: Will 
we survive? 
  For the first time ever in peacetime, in 1992 the population 
of Lithuania began to decline: It dropped by ten thousand in 
1992, and by 12.6 thousand in 1993. This decline is not 
infrequently used to illustrate conclusions about fateful 
demographic changes and even about the disappearance of the 
nationality. However, as the overall population declines, the 
numbers of rural and urban dwellers are shifting not only in 
different, but in what are to us unaccustomed directions. The 
number of rural residents, which heretofore had declined, has 
been growing for three years, while the number of urban 
residents has declined. Therefore, before we draw similar 
conclusions, it would make sense to analyze the causes and 
meaning of these changes. Furthermore, there is the danger of 
overestimating secondary phenomena, of attaching special 
importance to them while overlooking the primary ones. It is 
important to lay bare the nature of the recent demographic 
changes. Which of them will determine our demographic prospects, 
and how well do they conform with our demographic vision? Is it 
very important that the population keep growing? Perhaps it is 
more important to know why it grows, and what sort of 
demographic future will be brought about by the changes that are 
taking place? 
  Prior to the end of the last decade, Lithuania was 
characterized by a constant and, by the standards of other 
European countries, fairly large growth in population. However, 
almost half of this growth consisted of migration from the 
republics of the late Soviet Union, primarily from Russia. The 
annual net immigration used to amount to 7-8000 people. That was 
hardly cause for rejoicing. We would have been happier with a 
lower level of population growth. With the change in the 
political situation, population growth began to slow in 1989, 
and to decline by 1992. With the restoration of independence, 
the patterns of migration underwent fundamental changes. Greatly 
increased emigration considerably exceeded the declining rate of 
immigration, and the net balance became negative. 
  Some, without bothering to analyze who is going where, draw 
the conclusion that many of us are leaving our homeland. 
However, statistical data shows that the emigration consists 
primarily of Russians, Belarusians, and Ukranians. In 1992, the 
net balance of migration to the ex-republics of the Soviet Union 
was minus 21,100 people, and in 1993, minus 12,000. We can take 
pleasure in the fact that repatriation is taking place 
peacefully and uncoerced; even a significant decline in 
population due to this reason is hardly cause for concern. Back 
to the subject. 
  Thus far, emigration to the countries of the West has not 
been great. In 1989-1993, the Lithuanian population declined by 
5,600 due to migration to the West. This constitutes only 12 
percent of the total decline in the number of inhabitants due to 
migration. Jews constitute the primary migrants to Western 
countries. During the last five years, the Lithuanian population 
was reduced by 900 due to migration to the West. However, it 
must be emphasized that the official statistics are incapable at 
this time of completely pinning down the total emigration to the 
West. It seems that we will have to determine later how many did 
not return from short trips abroad. Anyway, due to emigration to 
both East and West during the last five years, the population of 
Lithuania was reduced by 51,800 people. As a result, from 1989 
to 1993 the number of Russians in Lithuania declined by 33,600, 
that of Ukranians by 7,400, that of the Belarusians by 7,000, 
and that of the Jews by 5,300. At the same time, 5,400 more 
Lithuanians immigrated than emigrated. With the return home of 
the Lithuanians who had for various reasons been scattered 
across the late Soviet Union, their numbers are growing. The 
percentage of Lithuanians in the general population is also 
growing: They constituted 79.6 percent in 1989, and 81.1 percent 
in 1994. 
  Since the number of inhabitants and its growth are not ends 
in themselves, the currently observable decline in population 
due to emigration cannot be viewed as a serious demographic 
problem. It especially should not be permitted to overshadow 
those demographic problems that demand special attention and 
resolute action. 
  While natural increase has thus far remained positive, 
during 
the last few years, and especially in 1993, as the death rate 
rapidly increased and the birth rate decreased, it approached 
that fateful boundary at which fewer are born than die. During 
the last couple of decades, natural increase accounted for an 
annual increase of 20,000 in the population; in 1993, it was 
only 600. In 1993, almost 7,000 fewer children were born, and 
4,600 more people died, than in 1992. The number of births 
declined from 53,600 in 1992 to 46,700 in 1993 (i.e., by seven 
thousand, or 13 percent), while the corresponding number of 
deaths rose from 41,500 to 46,100 (by 4,600, or 11 percent). 
  Without a doubt, 1993 will enter Lithuanian demographic 
history as a year of demographic decline. Lithuania has never 
experienced such a sudden and spectacular decrease in the birth 
rate and increase in the death rate in a time of peace; at 
least, not in this century. It would be nice to believe that 
this will be the last such "record" set. However, it may be that 
the near future will bring even more "impressive achievements." 
  Such demographic fluctuations are usually the results of 
economic crises. Such crises affect the birth rate fairly 
quickly and noticeably. The public reaction to a deteriorated 
standard of living and uncertain prospects first manifests 
itself in the decision of families to wait for better times. 
Marriages are delayed. Fewer children are born. Many countries 
have experienced this in times of economic crises. However, the 
effect of crises on deaths is usually considerably smaller. Such 
a great increase in an already high, by the standards of 
developed countries, death rate betrays a public inability to do 
anything to save lives. 
  The public health and death rate are currently affected by a 
number of new and, to us, unfamiliar factors. We were taken 
unawares by the sudden change in the conditions and modes of 
life, as well as by the changes in interpersonal relationships, 
by unstable employment, and by a changed standard of living. 
  It is very difficult, especially for the older generation, 
to 
adapt to new conditions. That increases stress, and thereby 
affects the related illness and death rates. The death rate from 
circulatory and psychiatric illnesses is rapidly increasing. 
Last year, the death rate from circulatory diseases increased by 
13 percent. More and more often, we are losing middle aged and 
even young people to these diseases. The death rate has also 
increased due to reasons directly linked to a lack of normal 
living conditions, medical care, and medicines. In the period 
from 1990 to 1993, the death rate from infectious and parasitic 
diseases increased by 45 percent, deaths from tuberculosis 
almost doubled (increased by 1.87 times), and deaths from 
diabetes, diseases of the endocrine system, and digestive and 
metabolic disorders increased by 50 percent. The death rate due 
to malignancies continues to grow. 
  The worsening crime situation carries off its victims. Never 
have we had so many unnatural deaths. In 1993 alone, murder 
increased by 18 percent, and suicide by 12 percent. The number 
of deaths caused by auto accidents is also increasing. 
  Within this complex human environment, the fruits of a 
long-term deterioration of the public health are being 
harvested. During the last five years, the average life 
expectancy has declined by 3.4 years, from 72.4 years in 1988 to 
68.95 years in 1993. In 1993 alone, the average life span was 
reduced by 1.5 years. Statistics on the average life span have 
only been collected in postwar Lithuania since 1959. At that 
time, the average was 69.4 years. Thus, we can only say that we 
have slipped back by more than thirty years. This change was 
primarily the result of a greatly increased death rate among 
men, especially in the countryside. The average life expectancy 
of men declined in the period 1988-1993 by 4.6 years (from 67.7 
years in 1988 to 63.1 in 1993), and that of women by 1.7 years 
(from 76.6 years to 74.9 years). In 1993, the life expectancy of 
rural men was 4.3 years shorter than it had been in 1959, having 
declined from 64.7 years to 60.4 years. 
  The difference between the life expectancy of men and women 
grew to nearly twelve years, and in rural areas up to 13.4 
years. A few years ago, the average male life span, then shorter 
by nine years, was held up by foreign demographers as a 
characteristic phenomenon of Soviet mortality. To what can we 
attribute the situation in 1993? 
  Some cold comfort can be taken from the fact that the 
decline 
of the average life span coincided with a change in the 
statistical methodology. Up until 1991, stillbirths were dealt 
with in accordance with Soviet methodology, which meant that 
many infants that died soon after birth were not included in the 
mortality statistics. However, that should have had more or less 
the same effect on the average life expectancy of men and women. 
It would be nice to believe that this jump in the death rate is 
a temporary phenomenon, the outcome of an accumulation of 
causes. The birth rate, which had sharply declined during the 
first postwar decades, then stabilized itself and for twenty 
years remained at replacement level, i.e., the generations made 
way for one another, without an increase in the overall 
population. However, during the last few years, and especially 
in 1993, the birth rate fell to a level lower than had ever been 
recorded in Lithuania. In 1993 there were only 12.5 births per 
thousand inhabitants, versus 15-17 in the 1970-1990 period. 
  The average number of children that a woman has in her 
lifetime declined in 1993 to 1.66 (it had long been at about 2). 
What does that mean? Are we shifting from fairly widespread 
two-child families to one-child or even childless ones, is it a 
result of poverty and instability? 
  There can be no doubt that a greatly deteriorated standard 
of 
living forces families to make hard choices as to whether to at 
least temporarily forego the desired number of children. For 
many, having as many children as they would like to have has for 
the present become a luxury. 
  Usually, once a crisis is past and conditions begin to 
improve, the birth rate rebounds to its previous level, often 
even manifesting a compensatory effect, i.e., it temporarily 
becomes higher than before. 
  However, it is unlikely that we can count on such changes in 
the future. The effect of the crisis on the birth rate is only 
one of the causes. In recent times, the conditions, ways, rules, 
and value orientations have been fundamentally changing. A 
strong spread of Western culture can be sensed, especially among 
the young. What effect will that have--or is already having--on 
the behavior of families? Will small families, created late, 
also become widespread in our country? Will the numbers of 
unmarried couples, widespread in Western and especially Northern 
Europe, along with their often illegitimate children, begin to 
increase? 
  The first indicators of the development of these processes 
have appeared. As the overall birthrate declines, the number of 
illegitimate children grows. They constituted nine percent of 
births in 1993, while previously the illegitimacy rate had 
remained at the prewar level of 6-7 percent. The increase in 
illegitimate children may be the result of temporary factors. 
  However, it is not rare in Lithuania for the long-standing, 
formal, Catholic-inspired family relationships to be replaced by 
informal ones. Ordinarily, an increase in illegitimacy is a sign 
of an increase in illicit relationships. 
  Since 1991, a fairly rapid decline in marriages has been 
evident. Marriages prior to age 25 are becoming rarer. As it is, 
divorce has been fairly common for some decades; it has become 
more common in recent years. Even scanty data about the family 
and birth rates testifies to the fact that the family is 
undergoing a crisis. Clearly, families are becoming 
destabilized. Common sense and the experiences of other 
countries indicate that difficult conditions are not the only 
causes of the aforementioned changes. Thorough research is 
essential if we are to answer the questions of what ultimately 
determines changes in the family, what those changes are, what 
kind of help families expect from the state and how they could 
be helped. It has not been grasped thus far that these changes 
in the family and in birth rates will determine the time of the 
onset as well as the magnitude of depopulation (an absolute 
decline in population, with the death rate exceeding the birth 
rate). Furthermore, it must be understood that an unstable 
family is not only a consequence, but also a precondition of an 
unstable society. It is therefore not a secondary problem. 
Depending upon our solution to this problem is our demographic 
future and the manifestations and consequences of depopulation, 
which we shall no doubt begin to experience as early as next 
year. 
  The situation is very serious and calls for resolute 
decisions. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-93A>      The Lithuanian Population, by Millions </FIG>



<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-93B>      Migration to and from the Republics of the Former USSR, by Thousands </FIG>



<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-93C>      Natural Increase, Per Thousand </FIG>



<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-94A>      Average Number of Children Per Woman (Fertility Rate) </FIG>



<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-94B>      Marriage and Divorce, Per Thousand </FIG>



<FIG ID=JPRS-USR-066-94C>      Average Life Expectancy, by Years </FIG>



