Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A great deal is expected of the draft project, whose 
fate will be decided the day after tomorrow [25 January] when 
its content will be put to the national concord conference. 
Here is Lutfi Charait to talk about this draft project: 
  [Begin Charait recording] The interim period is defined by a 
preliminary project which will be presented the day after 
tomorrow at the national concord conference. The project, after 
having been the subject of a widespread debate, was amended in 
the last few days and presented to the parties to the dialogue. 
  However, what the does the project contain? The draft 
project defines the political, economic, social, and security 
aims. It also provides the basis for allocating powers during 
the interim stage and preparing the conditions and necessary 
laws enabling a return to the electoral track. 
  The project includes 53 articles on allocating powers. The 
general measures confirm that the interim stage will extend to a 
maximum of three years. The constitution remains the legal 
basis for the draft project. 
  The general powers of the state during the interim period 
are 
embodied in the presidency of the state, the government, and the 
provisional national council. 
  The presidency of the state will be composed of a chairman 
and two deputies. The bureau of the conference will recommend 
leaders after consultation between the authority and the parties 
to the dialogue. 
  If the chairman dies or resigns or if the chairman is unable 
to carry out his duties, he will be replaced after consultation 
with the Higher Security Council and the chairman of the 
provisional council. 
  The provisional national council consists of 180 members who 
would be approved by the conference. The government is 
responsible to the provisional council. 
  The project in its new formula calls for the Amezeghian 
dimension to be considered as an essential basis of national 
heritage. In addition, religion cannot be used for partisan 
purposes. [end recording] 

