CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Bekker and Lyudmila Moskalenko under </F>
the rubric "Underpinnings": "The MASS Has Proposed a Draft for 
the Revival of Siberia: The Local Authorities Intend To Hold 
Their Positions"] 
  [Text] Novosibirsk--The two years of economic reforms in 
Russia have indicated that the "strategically structured but 
market-ineffective economy of Siberia is being destroyed too 
rapidly by the processes of disintegration"--such is the 
conclusion of the Interregional Association "Siberian Agreement" 
(MASS). The presentation of the draft strategy for the 
development of Siberia was attended by Sergey Shakhray and Yuriy 
Skokov, which, in view of the ambitions of these politicians, is 
very significant. 
  The initial premise of the MASS concept is that, instead of 
evolving in keeping with the laws of the market, the economic, 
military-industrial, and scientific complexes of Siberia were 
formed by the party and state apparatus. Actually, in the 
opinion of the authors of the draft, it was precisely owing to 
the natural and geostrategic resources of the region that the 
Soviet Union became a world power. However, the peculiarity of 
Siberia is such, says the draft, that Gaydar's monetarism does 
not fly there because of the "impossibility of rapid and 
bloodless reintegration of the Siberian regions into the 
national economy." The authors believe that by persisting in 
continuing the present course, the Center will "finish off" the 
economy of the Urals, Siberia, and the Far East, which will 
become the target of claims by pan-Islamists, Chinacentrists, 
and the G-7. A change in the map of the country--such is the 
price, in the opinion of "Siberian Agreement" analysts, Russia 
may pay for reformist extremism. 
  Active interference by the state in the process of 
transformations is needed in order to avoid a catastrophe. Under 
the conditions of the region, the need for a firm steering hand 
is amplified by the fact that it is necessary to maintain the 
viability of the fuel and energy complex and at the same time 
restructure it by accurately adjusting prices; to prevent the 
disintegration of transportation systems and a break with the 
European section of Russia; and to support single-industry 
production in the "off-limits" cities of Siberia which 
originally were not adapted to market competition. The same 
applies to the scientific and educational complex of the region. 
  The developers of the MASS are convinced that Moscow would 
be 
making a fundamental mistake if it failed to take into account 
the peculiarities of Siberians, for whom "the meaning of life 
should be set forth on a noneconomic, geostrategic plane. The 
population of Siberia will be able to endure the forthcoming 
privation only having grasped its global mission. Only after the 
population is rallied around the noneconomic and economic 
concepts of development of Siberia will it become possible to 
offer to it economic studies in the hope that they will not be 
tacitly ignored by the majority." 
  Previously, the regional associations of Russia have, 
without 
further ado, asked for or demanded money from the government, 
emphasizing the idea of republics from time to time. Experts on 
the mentality of Siberians and world trends from "Siberian 
Agreement" were the first to use the trump card of geopolitics: 
"At present, financing comes from Moscow, but the geostrategic 
resources of Siberia are no less significant. It is necessary to 
preserve Siberia--the Achilles heel of Russia--and to deprive 
everyone of an opportunity to make Siberia the location of 
Russia's political fiasco." 
  The MASS concept offers no proof of the necessary 
degradation 
of the region as a result of reforms. The provided statistics of 
the growth of the death rate and fall in the birth rate and the 
proportion of able-bodied population cover the period from 1979 
to 1992 and, one would think, are not directly related to 
monetarism. Under Gorbachev, the energy of regional leaders was 
dispersed in the struggle for material quotas and was restricted 
by the mechanism of coercion by directive, too. At present money 
is the most important issue, and industries and regions fight 
for it. This is precisely why monetarism has been proclaimed to 
be the greatest evil. The concept does not in any way expand on 
this term itself; it appears as the same kind of an ideological 
cliche as imperialism once was. In essence, the MASS offers the 
authorities in the capital city some kind of division of labor 
by way of its draft for the development of Siberia: Moscow will 
retain the geostrategic resources of the region, and the region 
will be assigned, on a permanent basis, various allotments, 
licenses, quotas, and other restrictions on economic and 
commercial activity, the right to build over parcels of land, to 
open production facilities and bank branches, to grant tax 
relief, and so on. 
  Therefore, the same material and financial content appears 
in 
a new packaging. Siberian politicians of the latest crop want to 
lay their hands on territorial resources in order to firmly take 
power and become full-fledged partners of foreign companies and 
national private capital in investment projects. The intentions 
of the real authors of the concept--people who might be wrong 
but who sincerely feel for Siberia--notwithstanding, the draft 
will be used by the local management elite in its own interests. 
  As they haggle with Moscow, the local authorities proclaim 
the creation of an "economic mechanism for the revival of the 
economy of Siberia under the aegis of the 'Siberian Agreement' 
Interregional Association." However, one would think that the 
MASS carries the genetic imprint of the old bureaucratic system, 
being the flesh and blood of administrative socialism. While 
furiously criticizing Moscow on account of Gaydar's monetarism, 
the new elite is ready at the same time to hide out under the 
wing of the Center, fearing the rapid development of private 
capital in Siberia. However, the latter is already strong enough 
to hold its own but for now lacks the potential to solve the 
global problems of the region. 

