Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Z. Malbakhova: "Situation Under </F>
Control: From an MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs] Press 
Conference"] 
  [Text] A press conference took place in the assembly hall 
of the KBR [Kabardino-Balkaria Republic] Ministry of Internal 
Affairs. The republic's Minister of Internal Affairs, Kh. A. 
Shogenov, and his deputies: Chief of Criminal Militia M. Kh. 
Zhigunov; Investigation Directorate Chief M. Kh. Abrokov, Chief 
of Personnel Management V. S. Popov, and MVD agency leaders 
answered questions posed by journalists from newspapers, 
television and radio. 
  In a brief address, Kh. A. Shogenov presented the primary 
results of the previous year's progress. Most importantly, he 
said, in the overall fight against crime they managed to keep 
the situation under control, although there was no dramatic 
change for the better. 
  In 1993, 7,681 crimes were recorded. Analysis has shown, 
said 
the minister, that offenses under ordinary law decreased by four 
percent, street crime and apartment theft indices went down, 
auto break-ins decreased by 11 percent, and auto theft by 37.6 
percent. 
  Kh. A. Shogenov noted that grave offenses, which grew in 
number during 1993 by 41.9 percent, were a cause for particular 
concern for the MVD. We are not satisfied with the work we have 
done, noted the minister. During the coming year we have a real 
opportunity for improvement. 
  Having noted that the number of homeless people on the 
streets has increased, and weapons have spread throughout the 
republic, a ZAMAN newspaper correspondent questioned the 
minister about how the MVD plans to combat these phenomena. 
  With a growth in the number of people out of work, the 
number 
of crimes will also increase, answered Kh. A. Shogenov. A big 
problem and a major task is to assist those previously convicted 
returning from detention camps to find employment. It is namely 
these people, unable to find a place for themselves in our 
society, who retrace their steps back to the world of crime. 
  The minister also stated that an average of 20 firearms are 
confiscated each day. Where they once originated in Abkhazia, 
firearms are now primarily coming from Ossetia, Ingushetia, and 
the Chechen Republic. 
  A second question asked by the newspaper ZAMAN touched upon 
the MVD's work on repatriating the Balkarian people. 
  The ministry's work on this issue was acknowledged by its 
leader as being most productive. In no republic is activity of 
its kind proceeding at such a rapid pace as in 
Kabardino-Balkaria. 
  In response to a question posed by a KABARDINO-BALKARSKAYA 
PRAVDA newspaper journalist about how much organized crime rings 
have decreased this year over last, the minister said that there 
are no exact figures as to their overall number because the 
rings themselves have an unstable character. One of the reasons 
the fight against organized crime has not yet taken on an 
offensive posture is that the main MVD department handling this 
type of work is understaffed. 
  There are three stages of combating organized crime. The 
first is to gain knowledge and control of such groups, and break 
them up. The second is to arrest and try, and the third is to 
execute. In 1993 several members of organized crime rings were 
executed. Several others were put out of commission, convicted, 
or are under investigation. 
  "Where is the counterfeit money in the republic 
originating?" 
In a response to this question posed by SEVERNYY KAVKAZ, it was 
said that the "goods" were primarily being brought in from the 
Chechen and Ingush Republics. Quite recently 75 million 
counterfeit rubles were discovered in the city of Prokhladnyy. 
Three women were among those dealing in the latter. 
  The range of problems touched upon at the press conference 
was quite broad. The newspaper SINDIKA INFORM reproached the 
forms and methods of work applied by the MVD when ethical norms 
for behavior are ignored. The republic minister of internal 
affairs replied that the militia is a part of society, which 
reflects the trends and processes occurring in society as a 
whole. However, he said, at present it has become possible to 
cease recruiting employees, and implement a selection process 
that will invariably help to put the best people in the job. 
  A SOVIETSKAYA MOLODEZH correspondent asked about an incident 
during the MVD's pursuit of the criminal Malkanduyev in the 
Volnyy Aul region, when one of the people involved in the chase, 
A. Iritov, was injured from an explosion. The minister explained 
that the incident was the result of an accident, and that the 
ringleader was not successfully apprehended. However, another 
well known criminal, Bashiyev, nicknamed "Spartak" was arrested 
and is being examined. 
  "How is the MVD combatting racketeering?" This question was 
given by a republic radio journalist. 
  If enterprise leaders, from whom criminals extort huge sums 
of money, turn to us for help, as did the chemical plant 
"Iskozh," they will in the future be protected from these types 
of offenses. However, we have no pity for those leaders who 
allow themselves to be led around by racketeers. We know the 
reasons why these people do not turn to the militia for help. 
  "The figures for auto theft are quite high in our republic. 
What is being done in this regard?" asked a radio broadcast 
journalist. 
  Success in this area of our work, as perhaps in no other, 
said Chief of Criminal Militia M. Kh. Zhigunov, depends on 
coordination and close cooperation between agencies. At the 
present time a new subdivision is being created which will serve 
to coordinate this type of MVD activity. 
  "Could the Ministry of Internal Affairs give its own answer 
as to why it is virtually impossible to obtain credits at the 
bank? After all, large sums are being appropriated to fill this 
need." A KABARDINO-BALKARSKAYA PRAVDA correspondent touched upon 
this problem. 
  In giving an explanation, the chief of the MVD Directorate 
for Economic Crimes, Yu. Kokov, said that virtually all credit 
resources at commercial banks are, in one form or another, state 
funds. The latter is comprised of centralized credits from the 
bank of Russia, deposit funds from enterprises and 
organizations, and the free balance in accounts, with the 
exception of the small portion which comes from the population. 
  However, bank employees do not carefully review letters of 
guarantee or insurance coverage. They do not verify the 
reliability or credit worthiness of clients, their guarantors, 
or even the existence of firms themselves. 
  There have been incidents in which nonexistent structures, 
land parcels, cars and other property have been used as a 
security and considerable credit funds have been granted. 
  As a result on January 1 this year past due debt on bank 
loans came to more than 11 billion rubles. 
  Khakimov, a Chechen Republic resident, for example, 
temporarily registered in community housing in the city of 
Nalchik. He registered the "Martan" firm at this address, having 
opened an account at the "Evraziya [Eurasia]" commercial bank. 
However, having received credits in the sum of 20 million 
rubles, he absconded with the money. 
  Unfortunately, there are many examples of these types of 
incidents that one could give; incidents that have occurred at 
virtually all of the republic's commercial banks. 
  Having squandered funds, yet convinced that they were 
deceived, bank leaders are turning to us for help. For the 
commercial bank "Nalchik" alone we secured the return of 224 
million rubles that had been given up as unrecoverable debt. A 
considerable sum, however, still remains irretrievable. 
  For these reasons criminal proceedings have been instituted 
and a search initiated for debtors throughout all of Russia and 
the CIS countries. 
  Difficulties with obtaining credit and searches for such 
"clients" are problems created by bank leaders and employees. 
However, it does not have to be this way, in which case we more 
than likely would not have to ask why all these bankers took 
such risks. 

