Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Korean Military Academy professor On Man-kun] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] In this article, we will 
examine North Korean [DPRK] nuclear development, the reality of 
our society--rampant with indifference and optimism concerning 
the DPRK threat--and the background of this reality. Through the 
present state of the DPRK's development of weapons of mass 
destruction, to include nuclear weapons, we will examine the 
DPRK's intentions, the extent of its threat to us, and our 
posture concerning this threat. 
  First, we will consider the optimistic view of DPRK nuclear 
development and discover where it originates. In some sectors of 
our society today, a view of the DPRK is gaining acceptance 
which is not easy to refute. According to this view, as one of 
the poorest nations in the world, there is little reason at 
present for concern over the DPRK's war-fighting capability and 
intentions, and even if it is actually attempting to develop 
nuclear weapons, this is only to maintain the DPRK system and 
make diplomatic gains, not for military use. 
  As a basis for this viewpoint, we can point to the DPRK's 
weak economic and military capability and its diplomatic 
isolation, as seen through various indicators. With its switch 
from barter trade to hard-currency settlements due to a change 
in its trade relations with the Soviet Union and China, the 
DPRK's economic situation has daily grown worse. The state of 
its economy is so serious that it has recorded continued 
negative growth for the past several years. DPRK food shortages 
are an already well-known fact. The present DPRK GNP, at a 
little above $20 billion, is one-fifteenth of South Korea's 
[ROK]. At about $1,000, its per capita income is about 
one-seventh of ROK's (See "North Korean Abstract" [Pukhan 
Kaeyo], 1993: North and South Korean Social and Cultural 
Indicators [Nambukhan Sahoe Munhwa Chipyo], 
Unification Board, 1992). 
  Weapons possessed by the DPRK are out of date and it also 
lags behind in technology. Although superior in numbers, when 
consideration is given to quality, its military capability 
cannot be said to surpass that of ROK, it is argued. 
Furthermore, its traditional allies, including the Soviet Union, 
having disappeared with the collapse of the communist bloc, 
there is now no longer any nation to actively support the DPRK. 
Because of this, the argument goes, it is unthinkable that the 
DPRK would start a conflict as it did the Korea war (quoted from 
O Kwan-chi, Korea Forum [Hanguk Nondan], December 
1993). It is a fact that the DPRK is in an economic slump, that 
much of its weaponry and equipment is outdated, and that it is 
diplomatically isolated. With such a reasonable foundation, some 
aspects of our society's indifference and optimism concerning 
DPRK war-fighting capability and nuclear development appear 
convincing, 
  Where can we find the source of this attitude, which ranges 
from indifference to optimism? Influential views on DPRK nuclear 
development are divided largely into two categories. The first 
is the position that the DPRK's nuclear development is 
ultimately to enhance war-fighting capability by developing 
nuclear weapons. The second is the opinion that the DPRK is 
using the nuclear issue as a political and diplomatic lever, for 
political negotiations whose objective is normalized relations 
with the United States and Japan, discontinuance of Team Spirit 
exercises, the withdrawal of U.S. forces from the ROK, removal 
of the U.S. nuclear umbrella over the ROK, and elimination of 
nuclear threats to the DPRK. Of the two views on DPRK nuclear 
development, optimists seem to particularly accept the latter. 
Also reinforcing the optimistic position is the undeniable fact 
that several statesmen in the past have frequently used security 
issues as a means for maintaining power. In the past, when 
political instability had deepened, incidents involving DPRK spy 
rings or military provocation were opportunely reported. As a 
result, people grew to distrust or be indifferent toward 
official government announcements or opinions on the DPRK threat 
or national security. This is also the background reinforcing 
public indifference toward the DPRK nuclear issue. 
  Then, is DPRK war-fighting capability weak and its nuclear 
development only for achieving political and diplomatic 
objectives? To obtain the answer to this, we will examine its 
strategy toward the South, its military capabilities, and in 
particular, its chemical and biological weapons and nuclear 
program. 
  To overcome recent economic difficulties, the DPRK has 
opened 
up some areas and is promoting the introduction of foreign 
capital and technology. It is also trying to break through its 
international isolation and economic crisis by establishing 
diplomatic relations with advanced countries. One thing that has 
not changed despite this is its unification strategy toward the 
South. An overall analysis of the DPRK's unification-related 
strategy would be that the DPRK is sticking to its line, 
"revolution in South Korea first, unification of the fatherland 
second." As always, the ROK is a land to be liberated and the 
ROK Government is an object to be toppled. The reasons the DPRK 
is adhering to its unification strategy despite its various 
difficulties are that it has used this to encourage its people 
and that it has been the foundation making preservation of the 
regime possible. 
  Military capability is an absolutely necessary precondition 
for liberating the ROK. The DPRK is an armed camp with the 
military making up 4 percent (10.1 million) of the total 
population. If reserve forces are included, it has the largest 
per capita armed force in the world (6 million of a total 230 
million). After 1960, military spending made up over 30 percent 
of the DPRK national budget. It continued this way for some 
time, but then was suddenly reduced. This is because it is 
concealing military spending under other items. At present, 
actual military spending is estimated to be at the 30-percent 
level ($5.6 billion of $18.5 billion) (Unification Board, 1993). 
  More important is the fact that, as a result of its 
persistent development of chemical and biological weapons since 
the 1960's, the DPRK has the third-largest stockpile of chemical 
and biological weapons in the world. At Sariwon and other 
locations, the DPRK stores chemical weapons made of blister 
agents, nerve agents, and asphyxiating agents, and strong 
bacteriological weapons that use the infectious bacteria of 
cholera, bubonic plague, and anthrax. Eclipsed by the nuclear 
problem, these chemical and biological weapons have not become a 
diplomatic issue, but their danger is actually tremendous. 
Bacteriological weapons in particular are dangerous, so 
dangerous, that one kilogram could incapacitate the whole 
population of the ROK (DONGA ILBO, 1 November 1992). Even in its 
economic slump, the DPRK appears to be using chemical and 
biological weapons as an important card, along with nuclear 
weapons. This is because it can manufacture them, because they 
have a great killing and wounding effect, and because evidence 
of them is easily destroyed. 
  According to the 1993-1994 National Defense White Paper 
[Kukbang Paekso], the DPRK is at the stage immediately 
before the development of nuclear weapons: It already has 
nuclear reprocessing facilities and has completed detonator 
testing. The reasons the DPRK rejoined the nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and refused special nuclear inspection 
by the IAEA [International Atomic Energy Agency], it is judged, 
is that it is about to develop nuclear weapons and is trying to 
earn time and make diplomatic gains. If the DPRK mounted nuclear 
weapons or chemical and biological weapons on a Nodong 1 or 
Nodong 2 missile, which it has finished testing, we, along with 
neighboring countries including Japan, would fall within its 
firing range and thus be in danger. Because of this, Japan and 
the United States are deeply concerned about the DPRK nuclear 
program. Ultimately, we can see that DPRK nuclear development is 
not for negotiation purposes alone, but aims at both enhancement 
of war capability and diplomatic concessions. Thus, rather than 
making a distinction between strong and moderate responses, we 
need the wisdom to block its nuclear development by the 
appropriate use of both, according to the DPRK response. 
  Also, security issues must not again be seen at the 
government level as means for political maneuvering. The story 
of how none of the townspeople tricked by the mischief of the 
shepherd boy went running to help him when the wolf actually 
appeared is extremely common, but speaks to us of truths. 
Debating the security of a nation is itself an important 
national objective and the government must accurately inform the 
public of those portions of security-related information not 
requiring secrecy. [passage omitted] 
  To pass on the economic prosperity and security we enjoy and 
to prepare a peaceful living space for our descendants, we must, 
individually and socially, guard against excessive indifference 
or optimism on security issues. Preparing for war is the most 
effective shortcut to preserving the peace. [passage omitted] 

