Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Professor M. Reshetnikov and analyst V. Vasilyev </F>
under the "Analytical Research" rubric: "Democracy. 
National-Populism. Extremism. Fascism? Problems of Spiritual 
Leadership"] 
  [Excerpts] Facts: Known and Hypothetical. 
Historical Notes, No. 1 
  Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovskiy was born 25 April 1946 in 
the 
capital of Kazakhstan, Alma-Ata (now Almaty), to the family of 
an office worker; he was the family's sixth child (his father 
died the same year). He graduated from a Russian school with 
rather a high standard of teaching for the Central Asian 
republic; during his education he displayed special aptitude for 
foreign languages. His personality developed in conditions where 
the indigenous population took priority in socioeconomic matters 
and Russians suffered relative discrimination in the 
national-territorial formations. (This was the so-called 
Leninist nationalities policy, the essence of which was to 
artificially maintain privileges for the indigenous population 
of the republics of the USSR in their historical territories, as 
camouflage for a strategic goal which was never openly 
proclaimed -- "nonviolent creeping" Russification). He is a 
Russophile by conviction and mentality. 
  He graduated from the Moscow State University Institute of 
Oriental Languages (diploma with distinction) and later the 
Moscow State University Law Faculty (evening studies 
department); he speaks four foreign languages. He himself 
believes his personality was formed by the age of 21. In the 
senior grades he was described as a rather "obstinate young man." 
  During his studies at the Institute he spent a period in 
Turkey, where he was involved in an incident with the police in 
connection with his distributing badges depicting Soviet 
symbols. After graduating from the Institute he served in the 
Army, in the Transcaucasus Military District. On completing his 
service, he returned to Moscow. He worked at the Soviet 
Committee for the Defense of Peace, and later at the office of 
the dean for work with foreign students at the higher school of 
the trade union movement, at the Foreign Law Collegium, and at 
the "Mir" Publishing House (as a legal consultant). In the 
Soviet period all the above posts were filled, as a rule, by a 
specific type of minion, although there were exceptions. He has 
no experience of state, administrative, economic, or management 
activity. 
  He is married, with a grown-up son, lives with his family in 
a two-room cooperative apartment, and his personal car is a 
Moskvich. 
  His critical attitude toward Soviet life began to develop 
after the age of 30. In the period of "perestroyka" he was 
sympathetic to the activity of M. Gorbachev and, later, B. 
Yeltsin. It is to this period that he dates his first signs of 
dissatisfaction with the reformers' activities and the awakening 
of the desire for active political work and for power (1990). 
He is not acquainted with the burden of power and 
responsibility, his actual administrative potential is not 
known, so the motive behind his desire for power may be assumed 
to be the desire for self-fulfillment, which, combined with a 
marked inclination to express opinions in a peremptory manner, 
could, if that desire was fulfilled, create a situation of 
dangerous unpredictability in his decisions of authority. 
  He is organizer and chairman (since 31 March 1991) of the 
Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union (the LDPR [Liberal 
Democratic Party of Russia], after the breakup of the USSR), 
which, unlike other party formations in Russia, has ancient 
Russian traditions and parallels in virtually all the developed 
countries of the world. In view of V.V. Zhirinovskiy's lack of 
any previous political experience, it appears highly dubious 
that the idea of forming this party arose spontaneously. 
  He is inclined toward a certain arrogance, unconventional 
behavior, and political risk-taking. In 1991 he was nominated 
by the LDPR as candidate for the post of president of the RSFSR; 
under the legislation existing at that time whereby candidates 
could be registered either by collecting 100,000 signatures or 
on the basis of a vote of deputies of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet. 
He chose the latter option for nomination and, to everyone's 
surprise, received 477 votes, which amounted to more than 50 
percent of those present and was more than twice the number 
necessary to achieve nomination (213 votes). According to the 
participants in the vote, who were themselves stunned by these 
results, he impressed them by the absolutely fascinating 
unconventionality of his expressions and opinions and his 
"almost magical effect," a "fusion" of shocking peremptoriness, 
extreme radicalism, and unabashed self-publicity. In May 1991 
the mass media described him as "an entirely unknown candidate 
as yet." He had not formerly belonged to any political 
organization or participated in elected soviet organs. At the 
same time he was mentioned in certain narrow circles as one of 
the authors of the program of the "Democratic Union," of which 
he was never officially a member. 
  In the elections for RSFSR president he received 6.2 million 
votes. Defeated, he announced his decision immediately to start 
his next election campaign, and has consistently implemented 
that decision since 1991, systematically addressing various 
population groups at rallies, in labor collectives, at higher 
educational establishments, etc. (As a result he was certainly 
the best prepared -- both in terms of practical experience, and 
methodologically -- for "surprise" parliamentary elections). He 
is a master of the art of persuasion and polemics. The sources 
of finance for a rather prolonged election campaign are unknown. 
  By political conviction he is a "liberal democrat" and an 
advocate of authoritarianism ("tough" power), including in 
foreign policy (while at the same time ostentatiously 
dissociating himself from totalitarianism, which it is hard to 
reconcile with his well-known public statements, for instance: 
"...If I become president, the Estonians will be satisfied. 
Those who are not satisfied will leave -- for Sweden, 
Finland..."). According to his official statements, which are 
also hard to identify with the theses put forward in his public 
utterances, he considers himself an opponent of anticommunism 
and an antifascist. (Two mutually exclusive illustrations: 1. 
"For me, fascism is the most repulsive thing. Almost all of my 
father's family was shot by the fascists..." 2. "Everything will 
go to the devil, because the Russian people will take revenge 
for all those years of desecrated life, for the genocide, for 
all the humiliations"). He declares his commitment to the ideas 
of the convergence of various socioeconomic systems; he does not 
share the values of either socialism or capitalism. He has a 
complex about the "nationalities question," rooted in his early 
childhood. (From his school years: "...The Russian kids come 
crying. If he answers the question, he gets two marks. If a 
Kazakh answers -- the same question, the same preparation -- he 
gets four"; and another well-known example: "My mother was a 
Russian, my father was a lawyer"). 
  In international relations he is inclined toward 
unpredictable political extremism. (Asked how he would tackle 
the problem of our prisoners of war held in Pakistan, he 
replied: "I will call the Pakistani envoy and give him 72 
hours. If our Russian boys do not arrive at Sheremetyevo 
airport within the 72 hours, I will send the Pacific Fleet to 
the shores of Pakistan, and it will start by wiping Karachi off 
the face of the earth"). 
  Attitude toward the family: He advocates restoring the 
patriarchal way of life and minimizing women's participation in 
public life and production work: "We would like to create a 
system of relations in which the man will be the head of the 
family." Also characteristic is the answer he gave when asked 
whom the LDPR is nominating for parliament: "99 percent men." 
  State program: Equality of all forms of ownership; an 
adaptable tax policy; assistance for production; state 
incentives for the creation of new jobs and restrictions on 
middlemen; abolition of national-territorial formations and the 
principles of promotion on ethnic grounds; restoration of the 
administrative division of Russia into governorates, which was 
introduced by Peter I and existed until 1924; and deletion of 
the "nationality" section from all documents, with everyone 
retaining equal rights to freedom of movement and the right to 
elect and be elected, to preserve and develop the national 
culture, and to decide for oneself on one's allegiance to a 
given culture (nation). 
  A point worthy of special mention is that of the 
expediency of maintaining a certain minimum level of 
unemployment as an incentive to ensure the maximum work 
capacity, reduce personnel turnover, and counteract strike 
activities by working people. He is a supporter of lockouts 
(the closure of enterprises and mass dismissal of workers in the 
event of strikes) and of encouraging strikebreaking (ending 
strikes by hiring workers who may be less skilled, but are more 
moderate in their demands). 
  On territorial problems, he has repeatedly put forward an 
idea that is irresponsible in present conditions, that of 
restoring a unified Russia within the 1975 borders (on the basis 
of the 1975 Helsinki agreement on the inviolability of the 
borders of states party to the agreement), which can only be 
assessed as total political extremism, failing to take account 
of the changed military-political realities and fraught with the 
threat of the outbreak of a series of local wars or even a new 
world war. 
  He is opposed to loans or the acceptance of any form of 
financial aid from the West. In 1991 he stated that in the 
event of his being elected president he would repay no debts to 
anyone: "Let those who borrow, pay" (the Leninist version of 
nonrecognition of debts). In the light of this statement 
(unless it is disavowed) and the LDPR's success in the 
elections, major changes in the West's financial and investment 
policy toward Russia can be predicted in the near future. 
  He is a consistent advocate of unlimited power for the 
president, to whom the government (divorced from politics) is 
entirely subordinate and accountable. He participated actively 
in the drafting of Russia's new (1993) Constitution, 
demonstrating a constructive and sensible approach that came as 
a surprise to many other participants in this work. 
  He deems it expedient to ban all types of political activity 
for a "transitional period." 
  The party's program statements and V.V. Zhirinovskiy's 
personal statements are in most cases effectively incompatible. 
  Political sympathies: Historically, Peter I. Social base 
and support groups: The military-industrial complex, the Army, 
the impoverished section of the former Soviet middle class, 
pensioners, a section of the working class, Russians in the 
nearby foreign countries, young people. 
  Individual characteristics: He has undoubted linguistic 
ability; he is resourceful, sharp-witted, and extremely 
emotional; he easily makes contact with any audience; he is an 
excellent orator and improviser; his public utterances are 
generally provocative; he tends toward metaphorical thinking and 
terse, short sentences; he has a unique personal image and a 
high capacity mentally to "infect" his audience; he is extremely 
self-confident, with a pronounced desire for recognition, 
insatiable self-esteem, and a high opinion of himself; he is 
uncritical, often to the point of irresponsibility; he virtually 
always speaks in the first person and never cites other 
authorities; his preferred conversational style is imperious. 
He has the capacity to transform himself with artistic 
virtuosity. His capacity for work is high. 
  He has repeatedly demonstrated a unique political intuition 
and a capacity to make unerring predictions whose sources can 
only be guessed at. Three weeks before the RSFSR presidential 
elections, he announced: "I will come third" (and he did come 
third, with 7.8 percent, whereas virtually all the analytical 
centers were predicting 0.5 percent); two weeks before the State 
Duma elections, he stated: "We will get 24 percent of the 
votes, not 6 percent, as some people say... There will be six 
factions in parliament: `Russia's Choice,' the agrarians, the 
`Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin' faction, Shakhray's party, the 
Communists, and us." (SANKT-PETERBURGSKIYE VEDOMOSTI, 24 
November 1993). The figures were predicted with absolute 
accuracy, and the list of blocs omitted two which only collected 
the necessary minimum with difficulty. 
  He participated actively in the drafting of the new Russian 
Federation Constitution and in the mass campaign for its 
adoption. 
  He has repeatedly been the target of attempts to discredit 
him; among other things, he was said to be a KGB agent 
(officially refuted by the KGB in a special statement on 28 
August 1991). In the election period he was in effect beyond 
the criticism of the main parties and blocs, and since the 
elections he has been described in a number of the mass media 
and in statements by political figures as a fascist. [passage 
omitted defining liberalism as historical tradition, chronicling 
development of political turmoil which set tone of election 
campaign] 
Historical Notes, No. 3 
  Populism: A transitional type of political 
consciousness which emerges at turning points in history, when 
the old (obsolete) foundations have already been destroyed but 
the new ones have yet to be formed. The first mention (the 
movement of the "populares [people's party]") goes back to the 
first and second centuries B.C. and is characterized by the 
expression of the interests of the common people (the plebs) by 
the nobility (the sympathetic aristocracy). It was revived in 
the United States in the late 19th century in the form of the 
Populist Party. 
  Its chief sign is the emergence of populist figures, whose 
typical characteristic is: Direct contact between leaders who 
have a marked capacity to influence people's minds and hearts, 
with an orientation primarily toward the least adaptable (to 
change) social groups, whose vital interests are damaged. 
  Populist thinking is marked by utopian irrationality, 
simplistic pragmatism, an uncritical faith in economic and 
political panaceas (the confidence that one or several simple 
measures can radically change the entire socioeconomic situation 
for the better), and also typical notions of various social 
cataclysms as the consequence of a conspiracy by external forces. 
  In the sphere of political actions, populism takes the form 
of acts of civil disobedience, protests, and "campaigns" 
directed against power structures. 
  Extremism: An adherence to extreme views and 
methods. Political extremism is the desire to achieve an 
objective by the use of the most radical methods, including all 
forms of violence and terror, going beyond the bounds of the 
generally accepted norms and principles of international 
relations. The basis for the development of extremist 
manifestations is provided by various kinds of deformation of 
political structures and institutions, errors and 
miscalculations in the pursuit of ecological, social, or 
nationalities policy, slowness in carrying out urgently needed 
changes, and misdemeanors in the activity of organs responsible 
for economic and legal regulation. 
  Fascism: A political current which emerged during 
a period of socioeconomic crisis in the early 20th century and 
expressed the interests of the most reactionary circles of the 
haute bourgeoisie. It differs from other reactionary 
dictatorships in having broad links with a fairly large active 
section of the population which does not belong to the ruling 
classes, and in having the capacity to mobilize and politically 
galvanize that section of the population in its own interests. 
The chief social base is the petite and moyenne bourgeoisie, 
declasse and criminal elements, and backward strata of the 
working people. Characteristic features: The use of extreme 
forms of violence, state regulation of the economy, chauvinism, 
racism, and nationalist myth-making. 
<H5>  Commentary </H5>
  Anyone who has carefully studied the definitions cited, and 
still more anyone who has directly encountered V.V. 
Zhirinovskiy, will probably agree that the statements of certain 
politicians regarding his fascism are premature at the moment. 
But we have deliberately arranged the above-mentioned 
definitions in a certain order so as to ensure that both the 
origins and the sliding borders between the first, second, and 
third [populism, extremism, and fascism] are sufficiently clear. 
  Russian nationalism, which was silent for so long and of 
which so much has been said in this article, which is -- once 
again -- inherent in and therefore certainly impacts on the main 
bulk of the population, has, in the specific economic conditions 
of the disintegration of the unitary state and the difficulties 
of the transitional period, engendered a fundamentally new 
phenomenon -- national-populism. What it turns into in future 
will of course depend both on our politicians and on the mass 
media, which have yet to show much inclination for considered, 
substantiated assessments. But to an even greater extent its 
hard-to-predict dynamic development will be determined by the 
realism and social orientation of economic and political 
programs, and also by the factor of the population's involvement 
in their implementation in meaningful terms. 
<H5>  Conclusions </H5>
  V.V. Zhirinovskiy is undoubtedly a talented and gifted man, 
but it is absolutely clear to any professional that for all his 
"multifunctionality" and huge capacity for work, it would have 
been beyond his powers single-handedly to tackle simultaneously 
and with such a high degree of skill the program tasks, 
analytical and forecasting tasks, and practical tasks. 
  V.V. Zhirinovskiy, however attractive this simple view may 
seem, is certainly not the puppet of the forces behind him, he 
is an independent and active participant in the process that is 
being pursued, and is clearly and soberly aware of what is going 
on. His role in this process is far from unequivocal, and 
simplistic assessments of that role, including hysterics and the 
pinning of labels, are not permissible. 
  Unlike the very serious and highly significant, but as yet 
unconfirmed, information on Operation "Werewolf" [said to be 
Zhirinovskiy's election campaign plan], statements about some 
kind of special hypnotic technique simply do not stand up to 
criticism. It is simultaneously far simpler and far more complex 
than that. 

