Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [David Owen and Michael Cassell article: "U.S. Urged To Keep </F>
Ban on Adams"] 
  [Text] The government last night sent a clear signal to 
Washington that any decision to lift its ban on Mr Gerry Adams 
entering the U.S. would be unwelcome, unless the Sinn Fein 
president renounced violence. 
  In comments made less than 48 hours before a decision on the 
ban is due, Downing Street officials said they hoped a visa 
would not be given to Mr Adams unless he made "a clear and 
unequivocal renunciation of violence." It was "deeds not words" 
that were required, the officials emphasised. They said the 
government had been "in discussion" with the U.S. on the subject. 
  The signal came as the IRA left fire bombs at three stores 
in 
Oxford Street, London's busiest shopping street, in what was 
believed to be the first mainland terrorist action of the year. 
  Yesterday also saw Northern Ireland's first sectarian 
murders 
of 1994 when a Roman Catholic man was shot dead as he slept in 
Belfast. A second man was killed at Ballymena and a third was 
shot dead in Donaghadee, County Down. 
  The attacks came on the eve of the first session of the 
Anglo-Irish inter-governmental conference since the two 
governments unveiled their joint peace initiative in December. 
  The conference is likely to provide the opportunity for both 
governments to reaffirm their joint position on the peace 
initiative. 
  A display of unity over the progress of the political talks 
coordinated by Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland minister, 
may be harder to engineer. London has indicated that it intends 
to act, as promised, to give focus to the talks fairly soon, 
although this may come in bilateral and private sessions. 
Dublin is anxious not to divert attention from the peace 
process. 
  Mr Adams recently applied for a visa at the American Embassy 
in Dublin after receiving an invitation to attend a conference 
in New York on Monday [31 January]. 
  Under U.S. immigration law, he is still officially 
ineligible 
for a visa but a waiver can be issued by the attorney general on 
recommendation from Mr Warren Christopher, the secretary of 
state. 
  It is understood that President Bill Clinton has been 
involved in the decision-making process and that a series of 
meetings took place in Washington on Wednesday. A number of 
Irish-American politicians have lobbied on Mr Adams' behalf. 
  The leaders of the Ulster Unionists and the hardline 
Democratic Unionist party [DUP] have already declined an 
invitation to attend the conference. 
  The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the DUP, yesterday told the 
organisers that he would not attend a meeting "designed to give 
credibility and legitimacy to the apologist for IRA murder." Mr 
John Hume, leader of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and 
Labour party, and Dr John Alderdice, leader of the Alliance 
party, are expected to attend. 

