Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Daniel Santoro; copyrighted by CLARIN] </F>
  [Text] The Argentine Foreign Ministry and the Foreign 
Office (British Foreign Ministry) on 30 December released a 
joint communique stating that "the British Government authorizes 
fishing" in 1994 in the area known as the outside zone, which is 
located west of the Malvinas islands. The communique opens 
almost 100 percent of the fishing zone that London unilaterally 
imposed in 1986 around the islands. 
  The Argentine-British communique states that the Kelpers 
(the 
islanders) in 1994 may fish only 150,000 tons of squid, both in 
the 150-mile zone around the Malvinas (known as FICZ [expansion 
unknown], which is its English acronym), and in the outside zone 
(FOCZ [expansion unknown]). 
  This figure was agreed upon at the negotiations on 1 
November 
1993 (for Argentina, the maritime limit is 220 miles). Fishing 
and prospecting for oil are two issues intimately linked with 
the conflict over sovereignty over the islands. 
  The communique, which was simultaneously released in London 
and Buenos Aires on 30 December, takes into account the 
so-called sovereignty protection "umbrella" the two countries 
agreed upon in 1990. In its substantive part, the communique 
states: 
  "The Argentine and British Governments today declared that 
in 
line with the previous exchanges between the two governments, 
the British Government will authorize fishing during the 1994 
season in the maritime zone described in the annex to the joint 
declaration of 28 November 1990." 
  The short communique means that Great Britain has agreed to 
issue a joint communique to announce a measure that it was going 
to adopt unilaterally, in order to facilitate the Argentine 
Government's presentation to the nation of its new progress in 
the South Atlantic. 
  The complex diplomatic language, however, reveals that the 
decision to authorize fishing in the zone -- where all types of 
fishing were banned for two years -- was made by London, and 
that it was not a joint decision. 
  It is not merely a matter of semantics. The area that has 
been opened to third-party ships is as big as Rio Negro 
Province. In 1990, then-Foreign Minister Domingo Cavallo, 
shortly after the reestablishment of diplomatic relations, 
managed to release a joint communique in which the two countries 
decided to simultaneously ban fishing in the outside zone. 
  But, as CLARIN noted on that occasion, the fact that no 
ships 
with Argentine license are allowed to operate in that zone and 
National Prefecture ships cannot patrol it either shows that 
both joint communiques are a nice envelope for a bitter measure: 
the expansion of the British fishing zone around the Malvinas. 
In this regard, Kelper John Barton -- the Malvinas Fishing 
Department chief -- has clarified things to REDES magazine: "In 
the zone known as FOCZ, fishing will be allowed only with a 
license granted by our government." 
  The only British concession obtained in the last 
negotiations, along with the decision to release a joint 
communique, is to maintain the 150,000-metric ton ceiling for 
the licenses to be granted by the Kelpers. 
  [The same newspaper, on the same date and page, adds: "Vice 
Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella on 30 December said the 
Argentine-British joint communique was `very positive' for a 
series of reasons. 
  ``Petrella told CLARIN: `It is a text that was agreed upon 
by the two countries, and not a unilateral measure. Great 
Britain, which could have adopted a unilateral decision, 
preferred not to do it, thus preserving the level of bilateral 
relations.' 
  ``Petrella, who on 30 December replaced Foreign Minister 
Guido Di Tella, who went on vacation, emphasized that the 
communique `has the same value as a communique' [as published] 
and noted that the fact that it was issued within the framework 
of the sovereignty protection `umbrella maintains the validity 
of the fact that Great Britain admits that it is a disputed 
zone.'''] 

