Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ian Davidson: "Not As Bleak As It Looks"] </F>
  [Text] The London and Dublin governments are to give a new 
push to their initiative for peace in Northern Ireland. In 
their joint Anglo-Irish declaration, launched two months ago, 
they held out the explicit possibility of eventual unification 
of the two halves of Ireland, if that was what the people of 
Ireland wanted. But the essential precondition for setting this 
initiative in motion was that the IRA terrorists must first 
declare a ceasefire. 
  That precondition has not been met. The IRA has not rejected 
the offer, but the fact that it has not stopped the bombing and 
shooting suggests that a permanent ceasefire is not very likely. 
The UK and Irish prime ministers meet next week to see where 
they go from here; it looks as though they need to think again. 
  The rationale for the December declaration was a belief that 
the IRA was tired out after 25 years of fruitless terrorism, and 
might give up. Yet even if the terrorists are tired it requires 
great faith to conclude that they can now be converted to 
democracy. And even if most of the terrorists were prepared to 
give up, Whitehall officials seem to fear that they may be held 
hostage by the out-and- out extremists. 
  If the IRA does not agree to give up terrorism, the two 
governments must rethink their initiative from top to bottom. 
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, has said 
Britain will press ahead with new moves, including devolved 
local government in the province; perhaps it may. But a 
political process that leaves out the hard republicans, and 
perhaps the hard unionists will be a meagre affair beside the 
comprehensive agenda of the December declaration. 
  Yet the strategic position may be less bleak than it looks 
because various parts of the truth are now being made plain. 
First, the declaration gives explicit recognition not just to 
the undeniable old fact, that Northern Ireland is historically 
and geographically part of Ireland, but also to the new 
political fact, that its future will be decided not in London 
but in Ireland. In the introduction to the declaration, the two 
governments say their aim is a "new political framework founded 
on consent," and a purely British passage says "it is for the 
people of Ireland alone, by agreement between the two parts 
respectively, to exercise their right of self-determination, on 
the basis of consent, if that is their wish." Neither passage 
can give any comfort to rightwing nationalists at Westminster, 
let alone to die-hard unionists among Northern Irish Protestants. 
  Such an explicit recognition by the UK of the legitimacy of 
the claims of Irish unity (though only by consent) is 
unprecedented. But the corollary of the principle of consent is 
that terrorism, so far from advancing the cause of Irish unity, 
makes it impossible. The very premise of terrorism is a denial 
of democracy, the total negation of consent. In Northern 
Ireland, the two communities are too evenly balanced to admit of 
a victory of one over the other. IRA terrorism cannot lead to a 
political victory for the nationalists, because the immediate 
consequence would be more terrorism by extremist Protestants, 
most probably a civil war. 
  If the leaders of the IRA were to take up the offer of 
"reconciliation, leading to a new political framework," that 
would be wonderful; but it may be too much of a miracle to hope 
for. If they do not, then the IRA and Sinn Fein will both be 
politically dead meat. If they reject the opportunities offered 
by the declaration, they will have forfeited their claim to 
speak for the people of Ireland; and they will have shown that 
terrorism takes precedence over politics, and that Sinn Fein is 
ruled by the IRA, not the other way round. 
  But whether the IRA says yes or no, the central problem in 
the declaration is with the definition of the concept of 
consent. The reason for the terrorism by Catholics and 
Protestants is that consent is lacking; and even if the 
terrorism stopped, consent would still be lacking. In fact, 
there is never likely to be, in our lifetimes, the kind of 
political majority, either for keeping or for changing the 
constitutional status quo, which could be counted on to produce 
a permanent and peaceful settlement of the Northern Ireland 
question. 
  The corollary is that the medium-term future of Northern 
Ireland will be decided not by local parties or local 
majorities, but by agreement between the governments of Britain 
and Ireland. Sir Patrick Mayhew professes to rule out any idea 
of joint authority over Northern Ireland; but in strategic 
terms, that is precisely what is implied by the Anglo-Irish 
declaration. When the two governments say their aim is "a new 
political framework, within Northern Ireland, for the whole 
island, and between these islands," they are talking about 
shared authority, almost a de facto condominium. 
  One detailed study has argued for a "de jure condominium," 
through an Anglo-Irish treaty. This would be an extraordinary 
innovation in constitutional practice, and would have 
difficulties with the old-timers in the House of Commons. But 
it would make logical sense, because it would rule out, for 
ever, the only grounds for terrorism: the hope of total victory 
by one community at the expense of the other. And it could also 
make a creative political contribution to the development of 
interstate relationships in the context of the European Union. 
  But if London dare not admit the reality of condominium, at 
least let us have no more talk of self-determination. We have 
seen what it has achieved in former Yugoslavia, and we do not 
need that kind of self-determination in Northern Ireland. 

