CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpt from the stenographic record of the Federation </F>
Council Sixth Meeting on 1 June 1994: "Federation Council Deputy 
Ivan Ivanovich Indinok: `I Will Attend This Rally. I Will Be 
Held Accountable for My Work and Yours'"] 
  [Text] [Chairman] I give the floor first to Ivan Ivanovich 
Indinok for a statement that he wanted to make. 
  [I.I. Indinok] Esteemed deputies, I wanted to make this 
proposal at the beginning of our proceedings, but this is the 
way it worked out--everything moved ahead quickly, and I 
understood that today my presentation and proposal precisely 
coincide with the topic of the issue that we are now discussing. 
  We can listen today to agricultural machinery builders; we 
can listen to producers of medical equipment, we can listen to a 
representative of the military-industrial complex, we can listen 
to anyone at all--the problems will be the same everywhere, they 
will talk about one and the same thing. 
  This is what I would like to say. More than a year ago, a 
"Person Unknown" tossed a rag liberally soaked in acid into the 
face of the chief of the Central Bank Administration for 
Novosibirsk Oblast. The man was crippled. He has now retired. 
Another person was appointed, a very energetic woman. We found a 
common language, and she began to put the banking system of 
Novosibirsk Oblast in order. We took the path of creating 
fiduciary banks and other solutions. 
  On the night of 31 May, at 0145 hours, an assassination 
attempt was made on Yekaterina Ivanovna Zhabotinskaya, the chief 
of the Central Bank Administration for Novosibirsk Oblast. She 
is currently in the hospital with numerous shrapnel wounds. Her 
husband has been operated on; he has lost an eye, and it is not 
clear how this entire affair will end. The assassination attempt 
was made by way of a grenade thrown into their apartment through 
a window. 
  Esteemed colleagues! This was done by a "Person Unknown." A 
few months earlier this same man, by the name of "Person 
Unknown" (not to be confused with the well-known sculptor 
[Neizvestnyy, meaning "person unknown" in Russian--translator's 
note]) cruelly beat up and crippled the general director of the 
Novosibirsk Beer and Wine Combine. A great many names are 
unknown in Kemerovo, where leaders have perished.... 
  In April 1994, Lieutenant Colonel Tomsov, the chief of the 
missile and artillery weapons service of a military unit based 
in the city of Novosibirsk, was arrested. Since 1991, he has 
misappropriated and sold to criminal structures 60 units of 
firearms, 135 Kalashnikov assault rifles, nine grenade 
launchers, 16 Makarov pistols.... Am I speaking to the point? 
  [From the floor] To the point! 
  [I.I. Indinok] In May 1994, a group of servicemen who were 
selling ammunition and had already sold 50 million rubles' worth 
of it were apprehended in the marketplace.... 
  Esteemed colleagues! A "Person Unknown" killed a deputy, 
persons unknown beat up on the deputies. Is it not high time to 
give first and last names to these persons unknown? This is a 
Cataclysm, this is Irresponsibility against the background of an 
economy falling apart. How are we to go on living? Recently, a 
presidential edict on fighting crime in 1994 and 1995 was 
issued. May God help this edict to begin making any impact at 
all. 
  I take part in the proceedings of the Federation Council. 
Last night, I tried to sum up the results: What have we adopted 
during the day, esteemed colleagues? We extended yet again the 
Edict on the State of Emergency in North Ossetia and Ingushetia. 
This goes on at each meeting of the Federation Council. 
  I appeal to you, Ramazan Gadzhimuratovich: Are there 
leadership principles? For some reason, I have not heard your 
report or your opinion on this issue once. One of the leadership 
principles is simple: When the going gets tough, when they 
revisit the same issue several times, the leader heads the 
effort to solve the problem. The director goes to the shop and 
"clears away" the logjam. To be sure, there is one condition: In 
this case, the shop chief does not come back to his work station 
anymore. 
  For example, I subscribed to this principle in my work: When 
two people cannot agree, both leave. You know, this was an 
excellent remedy, and we always found a common ground. How much 
longer can we listen to the two presidents? I respect both of 
them. However, at present I am convinced that they are not 
stabilizing the situation, they do not need this. Look at how 
they speak. They already speak with hatred for each other. I can 
only surmise that, as he nominated himself president, he said: I 
will not give an inch of the land to the other republic. 
Meanwhile, the other said: I will make sure that my land is 
returned! 
  Esteemed leaders, let us do work. I cannot take part in work 
when it gets nowhere and is in vain. In July, we will have a 
recess. So we have been working for a year. Let us sum up the 
results. What does our prestigious forum, in which among others 
the heads of administrations participate, have to its credit? 
  Being aware of this assassination attempt yesterday, I voted 
in favor of putting the issue "On the Procurator General" on the 
agenda. I will tell you this, esteemed colleagues: It is 
questionable who gave more thought to the honor and dignity of 
the president--those who voted in favor of putting this issue on 
the agenda or those who voted against it. 
  I signed the Treaty of Accord. It has wonderful words in it. 
I want this Treaty of Accord to be carried out. Some of the 
opponents rebuke me: What are you signing, this treaty will not 
be carried out yet again! And I try to prove to them: No, it 
will! 
  Esteemed colleagues, I did not come here in order to be in a 
humiliating condition and position, I did not come in order that 
some people might say: This is not our jurisdiction, and that is 
not within our jurisdiction. What is in our jurisdiction? You 
tell me. What decisions must we make in order to get out of the 
chaos and the crisis that has embraced the entire country, all 
sectors--industry, agriculture, culture, and science? 
  I am inviting you, esteemed colleagues, to a grandiose 
rally-demonstration in the city of Novosibirsk. By a decision of 
the trade unions and managers of many industrial enterprises, it 
will be held with economic demands being made. Come, let us 
learn democracy. I will attend this rally, I will be held 
accountable for, among other things, my work and yours. 
  Pardon me, I might be overly emotional; perhaps, I have not 
put the accents correctly in certain words. However, I would 
like nobody to count me either among the left or the right, 
among his people or outsiders--I am a citizen of Russia, and I 
am not indifferent to its fate. At present, I am trying to do 
everything possible in my position, the position I have been 
entrusted with. However, they do not want to listen to me. I 
speak, I make proposals; we have held a applied science 
conference in which 25 territories took part, including you, 
esteemed Valerian Nikolayevich. There has been no response! 
  We have now created the Regional Support Center for Russian 
Statehood, which was founded by academicians, presidents of the 
academies of sciences--we wish to change this situation. What 
about the Federation Council?... 
  [Chairman] Ivan Ivanovich.... 
  [I.I. Indinok] ....We are back to square one. I will now 
wrap 
up, Valerian Nikolayevich. It is good that they at least furnish 
information to us. There is a wonderful article by an excellent, 
great specialist on self-government, Taisiya Zaytseva, in 
ROSSIYSKAYA FEDERATSIYA magazine. As a vice president of the 
Union of Russian cities, I worked on this issue with her. We are 
back to square one, as if there had been nothing before us. In 
another magazine, DELOVYE LYUDI, there is an article by Natalya 
Fonareva. It is called "Wild Advertisement in a Wild Market." 
Look what is going on in the country! There is deceit all 
around: Yesterday, Yulya and Igor danced for joy because they 
purchased the shares of the MMM Joint-Stock Company. They danced 
so hard they fell down. A correspondent said: How could you.... 
  [Chairman] Ivan Ivanovich, you are already over the time 
limit. 
  [I.I. Indinok] I am wrapping up and making a proposal: to 
hear at the next meeting of the Federation Council a report by 
V.F. Shumeyko, the chairman of the chamber, on the situation in 
the country and on the role and place of the Federation Council 
in overcoming the crisis that is gripping our country (I 
understand that this proposal is tactless to a degree, because 
it is being made in the absence of the chairman of the chamber, 
but anyway). Currently, I do not understand our place or our 
role.... Why has a proposal concerning the third deputy not been 
made yet? Why have we created a working group that should work 
together with the government? I came back from Nikolay 
Nikolayevich, and he told me: Wait until after the 10th, we will 
go and meet with the prime minister concerning your proposal. 
So, I waited on the 10th, 11th, 12th, and 15th, and I told him 
yesterday: Nikolay Nikolayevich, I was waiting for a call from 
you, and it never came. 
  Listen, if we want to make our contribution now, and just 
half a term remains for us, then let us begin working and be 
accountable for what we have been elected to do.... 
  [Chairman] Ivan Ivanovich, you have gone over your time 
limit.... 
  [I.I. Indinok] Thank you for your attention. I ask that my 
proposal be put up to a vote. (Applause). 
  [Chairman] Esteemed colleagues, I ask that you make 
political 
statements at the end of the day, once the agenda has been 
considered (Commotion from the floor).... I ask that you go back 
to the issue under consideration. (Commotion from the floor). 
  Letter from Federation Council deputies to Federation 
Council Chairman V.F. Shumeyko. 
  Esteemed Vladimir Filippovich! In the course of the 
Sixth Meeting of the Federation Council (1 June), Deputy I.I. 
Indinok made the proposal to hear in the course of a regular 
meeting a report of the Federation Council chairman on the 
situation in the country and on the role and place of the 
Federation Council in overcoming the crisis that is gripping our 
country. 
  We, the Federation Council deputies, insist on this 
proposal, and consider it necessary to specifically open the 
Seventh Meeting with it. 
  Respectfully, 
  Federation Council deputies 

