CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sofiane Bensalem: "80 Civilians Murdered in Two </F>
Months"; first paragraph is EL WATAN introduction 
  [Text] Ahmed Asselah and his son Rabah died 
tragically yesterday, thus joining a long list of victims of 
blind terrorism. Since the beginning of the year, hundreds of 
people--women, children, the elderly, intellectuals, and 
ordinary unemployed people--have been targeted by killers who no 
longer deal in small numbers. 
  Jijel, Setif, Relizane, Mascara, Blida, Medea, Boumerdes, 
and 
Alger are the governorates most affected by this phenomenon. Our 
staff made a breakdown yesterday of the numbers for the period 
from 1 January to 5 March, and it shows that 11 war veterans, 
nine women (including a 94-year-old woman killed inside her home 
in Sidi Ali Boussidi in the Sidi Bel Abbes Governorate and two 
12-year-old girls killed in El Mouradia last 3 February), and 24 
citizens, among them two imams and two mosque caretakers, were 
killed during that period. 
  During the same period, 23 members of the security services 
were killed, mostly in Constantine and Annaba (a city where 
terrorism is making its appearance). Innocence is no protection, 
since four children were also killed. 
  The terrorists went so far as to rip off the head of a 
13-year-old child in the vicinity of Berrouaghia. 
  One DEC [expansion not given], three APC [People's Municipal 
Assembly] officials, and three school principals, including one 
woman, were killed. About 30 schools were set on fire. 
Intellectuals and athletes are favorite targets; three judges 
were killed in the western part of the country, as were the late 
Bouguetaya, vice president of the Judo Federation, boxer Said 
Azzeddine, and journalist Abdelkader Hireche. 
  Three other journalists barely escaped an attack on their 
lives. 
  Members of political parties, especially the FLN [National 
Liberation Front], the RCD [Rally for Culture and Democracy], 
and Ettahaddi, are also targets. 
  Rachid Tigziri, national secretary of Sadi's group, one 
member of that group, 10 rank-and-file members of the FLN, and 
four rank-and-file members of El Hachemi Cherif's party were 
killed in January. The lifeless body of the president of El 
Irchad Oua El Islah, Bouslimani, was found around the end of 
that same month. The terrorists also attacked four foreign 
nationals, including a French reporter. By our count, the number 
of civilians killed stands at around 80. 
  In addition, there were many operations by the security 
services during that period. For example, 191 terrorists were 
killed, and 144 others were arrested. Our count does not include 
the 70 members of the MIA [Armed Islamic Movement] who were 
liquidated by their "enemy brothers" in the GIA [Armed Islamic 
Group]. 
  As far as weapons are concerned, the security services 
recovered 58 automatic pistols, 121 shotguns (most of them with 
sawed-off barrels), 26 homemade bombs, 25 submachine guns, 24 
pump-action shotguns, and 20 walkie-talkies. Concerning the 
socioeconomic infrastructures, the terrorists attacked mainly 
APC offices, municipal enterprises, cultural centers, and 
schools. About 100 publicly owned trucks and about 15 APC 
offices were set on fire. 
  Those criminal acts were perpetrated particularly in the 
governorates of Chlef, Relizane, Ain Defla, and Jijel. Lastly, 
it should be noted that this report is based solely on 
operations and attacks whose details were made public. Because 
of that, the number of murdered civilians and police officers is 
much higher than the figure we knew about. It goes without 
saying that to some extent, a blackout has been imposed on 
security information. 


