CSO 

<F P=106> ["Edict of the President of Ukraine: On the Statute of the </F>
Ukrainian Credit Fund" and "Statute of the Ukrainian Credit 
Fund"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Edict of the President of Ukraine </H5>
  In keeping with the Edict of the President of Ukraine dated 
18 March 1994 No. 97 "On the Establishment of the Ukrainian 
Credit Fund," IT IS RESOLVED: 
  1. The Statute of the Ukrainian Credit Fund shall be 
approved. 
  2. This edict shall take effect on the day of signing. 
  [Signed] President of Ukraine L. Kravchuk 
  City of Kiev 
  31 March 1994 
  No. 118/94 
<H5>  Statute of the Ukrainian Credit Fund </H5>
<H5>  I. General Provisions </H5>
  1. The Ukrainian Credit Fund (henceforth, the fund) shall 
perform the function of attracting foreign loans for the economy 
of Ukraine. 
  By a decision of the state organ issuing the relevant 
securities, the fund may perform the functions of issuer of 
state securities for external circulation and administrator of 
proceeds from the sale of state security, as well as of borrowed 
monies attracted by the fund from other sources. 
  The fund shall be responsible for obligations entailed by 
the 
terms of issue of state securities, as well as for the borrowed 
monies attracted by the fund. 
  The monies of the fund shall not be part of the State Budget 
of Ukraine and shall not be subject to withdrawal. 
  2. In its operations the fund shall proceed from the 
Constitution, the laws of Ukraine, edicts and directives of the 
president of Ukraine, acts of the Cabinet of Ministers of 
Ukraine, other legislative acts of Ukraine, and the present 
Statute. 
  3. The fund shall engage in operations on the condition of 
full economic independence. 
  4. The fund shall be a legal entity, and shall have its own 
balance sheet, accounts at banking institutions, a seal, stamps 
and forms with the depiction of the State Emblem of Ukraine and 
the name of the fund, and particulars necessary to engage in 
operations. 
<H5>  II. Tasks and Functions of the Fund </H5>
  5. The main tasks of the fund shall be: 
  --performing the functions of issuer of state securities and 
discharging obligations entailed by the terms of their issuance; 
  --ensuring the liquidity of securities for which the fund is 
the issuer; 
  --searching for and attracting credit resources to the 
economy of Ukraine; 
  --participating in the implementation of state programs 
associated with the attraction of foreign investment; 
  --cooperating with foreign and international financial and 
credit institutions, investment organizations, unions, 
partnerships, and associations on issues of attracting 
investment to the economy of Ukraine; 
  --developing and carrying out investment projects and 
programs; 
  --facilitating the development of Ukrainian banks, 
investment 
funds and companies, and other credit and finance institutions 
and organizations. 
  6. The fund shall accomplish its tasks in cooperation with 
the National Bank of Ukraine, the organs of state executive 
power of Ukraine and the Republic of Crimea, banks, credit 
institutions, and other organizations and enterprises with any 
form of ownership. 
  7. In keeping with its tasks, the fund shall: 
  --ensure the issuance and circulation of state securities of 
which the fund is the issuer; 
  --accumulate proceeds from the sale of state securities of 
which the fund is the issuer, and channel them, in keeping with 
the terms of securities issuance, to finance investment projects 
and programs; 
  --set forth procedures for the use of the monies of the fund 
and ensure the monitoring of their special-purpose use; 
  --receive and service loans; 
  --establish insurance, stabilization, and other foreign 
exchange funds together with the National Bank of Ukraine (with 
its consent), the relevant state organs and institutions, as 
well as funds; 
  --engage in economic (commercial) operations with a view to 
accomplishing the tasks set forth in the present Statute; 
  --develop draft regulatory acts concerning the issues of 
using the monies of the fund with the participation of 
interested ministries and other organs of state executive power; 
  --form partnerships with other legal entities in order to 
engage in joint operations to use the monies of the fund; 
  --appoint authorized persons and agencies of the fund. 
<H5>  III. Guarantees of the Operation of the Fund </H5>
  8. State organs shall facilitate the operations of the fund, 
which the latter shall perform in keeping with the Constitution 
and laws of Ukraine, other legislative acts of Ukraine, and the 
present Statute, and shall not interfere with such operations of 
the fund. 
  9. The organs of state executive power may not make 
decisions 
concerning the use of the monies of the fund without its consent. 
  10. The fund shall not be responsible for the obligations of 
the state, nor shall the state be responsible for the 
obligations of the fund, except for cases in which the parties 
assume such obligations. 
  11. Decisions of the organs of state executive power 
concerning the operation of the fund may be appealed by the 
latter through judicial proceedings. 
<H5>  IV. Monies of the Fund </H5>
  12. The monies of the fund are generated through: 
  --proceeds from the sale of state securities of which the 
fund is the issuer; 
  --credit and other loans; 
  --payments for the credit resources provided by the fund; 
  --proceeds from economic (commercial) operations; 
  --voluntary donations by banks and other legal entities and 
individuals; 
  --other proceeds which are not banned by the legislation of 
Ukraine. 
  13. The fund shall be the sole administrator of its monies. 
  14. The monies of the fund shall be allocated: 
  --to meet obligations by virtue of state securities of which 
the fund is the issuer; 
  --to provide credit resources to banks and other credit 
institutions of Ukraine; 
  --to finance investment projects and programs; 
  --to establish insurance, stabilization, and other foreign 
exchange funds; 
  --to finance economic (commercial) operations; 
  --to provide financial assistance to banks and other credit 
institutions of Ukraine; 
  --to pay taxes and make other mandatory payments; 
  --to cover outlays entailed by the operation of the bank and 
the maintenance of its staff; 
  --to engage in sponsorship, charitable activities, and so 
on. 
  15. As a rule, the fund provides financing for investment 
projects and programs by making the monies of the fund available 
to banks, investment funds, and other credit institutions and 
organizations for the extension of special-purpose credit. 
<H5>  V. Management of the Fund and Monitoring of Its Operations </H5>
  16. The fund shall be headed by the president of the fund. 
  The president of the fund shall form the Board of the Fund, 
which shall be the supreme collective management organ of the 
fund. The board shall resolve all issues related to the 
operation of the fund. 
  The president of the fund shall be appointed by the 
president 
of Ukraine for a term of five years on the suggestion of the 
Board of the Fund. 
  The vice presidents of the fund and the chiefs of structural 
subdivisions of the fund shall be members of the Board of the 
Fund ex officio. 
  17. The Council of the Fund shall be the 
consultative-advisory organ of the fund. 
  Leaders of the Ministry of Finance of Ukraine, the Ministry 
of the Economy of Ukraine, and the National Bank of Ukraine, as 
well as those of the 10 leading banks of Ukraine, shall be 
members of the Council of the Fund. 
  18. The National Bank of Ukraine, the Ministry of Finance of 
Ukraine, and other relevant state organs shall monitor the 
operations of the fund. 
<H5>  VI. Final Provisions </H5>
  19. The Board of the Fund shall approve the structure, 
estimate of outlays on maintaining the staff of the fund, and 
conditions for labor compensation for staff employees. 
  20. Liquidation of the fund shall be effected through 
established procedures. Assets remaining after the claims of 
creditors have been satisfied and other obligations of the fund 
have been discharged shall be put at the disposal of the state. 

