BFN 

<F P=106> [TIDNINGARNAS TELEGRAMBYRA report: "Simple Question When </F>
Norway Votes on the EU"] 
  [Text] Should Norway join the EU -- the European Union? 
This simple formulation of a difficult question will be what 
the Norwegians will have to make up their minds about when the 
Norwegian referendum on EU membership is held on 28 November. 
The wording of the question is almost identical to that used in 
the Norwegian referendum on the EC in 1972. 
  "We are sticking with the same question as in 1972. It is 
important to have a question that is as simple as possible and 
to which the majority of voters can answer yes or no," Municipal 
Affairs Minister Gunnar Berge said. 
  This means that Norway has chosen a course different to the 
course that Sweden has chosen. The Swedes will instead have to 
answer the question: Do you think that Sweden should join the 
EU in line with the terms of the agreement between Sweden and 
the EU's member states? 
  In Norway protests would probably have been loud if the 
referendum had been about the agreement between Norway and the 
EU. Now both supporters and opponents of the EU have said that 
they are content with the wording of the question -- unlike the 
situation in Sweden where EU skeptics are irritated by the 
wording of the referendum question. They fear that the Riksdag 
will be able to circumvent the outcome of the referendum. 
  Yesterday also saw the official decision that the Norwegian 
referendum will take place on 28 November. In addition local 
authorities can, if they so wish, also give voters the chance to 
vote on the preceding day. 
  The draft legislation for the referendum has been so worded 
that those people who would have been able to vote in a Storting 
election this year have the right to take part -- that is, all 
Norwegian citizens who have reached the age of 18 by 31 December 
1994. 
  It is proposed that on 28 November polling stations be open 
between 0900 hours and 2100 hours. On Sunday, 27 November 
polling stations may open between 1300 and 1800 hours. 
  No results will be made public until all polling stations 
have closed nor may polls carried out among voters on 27 and 28 
November be made public before the polls have closed. 
  The minority Social Democratic government's proposal will 
have the support of the Conservative Party and the Progress 
Party in the Storting and will consequently be adopted. 
  No to the EU in Norway regrets that Finland intends to hold 
its referendum on EU membership on 16 November, before Norway 
and Sweden. The Europe Movement on the other hand hopes and 
believes that a possible future yes in Finland will produce a 
yes effect in Norway and Sweden too. 
  Both the yes and no sides will now take the initiative for 
greater cooperation with their sister organizations in these 
countries. 
  Eva Nordlund, deputy chairman of No to the EU, has followed 
the Finnish debate and noted that Prime Minster Esko Aho wanted 
the Finnish referendum to be held at the same time as Sweden's. 
But what will now happen is that the three Nordic EU applicants 
will hold their referenda at different times. The Swedes will 
vote on 13 November, the Norwegians two weeks later. 
  "It is what we have long been expecting. The pro-EU 
governments have wanted this sequence with Finland first, so 
that Finland can function as a crowbar for the yes side in 
Sweden and then Norway. We greatly regret the Finnish 
Government's decision," Nordlund said. 

