BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Mashtakov under the general heading "Who </F>
Is Kicking the Chair From Under President Dudayev?": "The View 
From Moscow"] 
  [Text] It would appear that the situation in Chechnya is 
beginning to acquire the hallmarks of a farce. The local 
authorities' decision on Sunday to deprive Ruslan Khasbulatov, 
the former speaker of the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet; 
Doku Zavgayev, the last head of the Checheno-Ingushetia party 
apparatus; and Yaraga Mamadayev, who heads the 
"government-in-exile of the people's trust"; of the right to 
reside on the republic's territory, is "an exclusively defensive 
action." This colorful company is united, in the opinion of the 
Chechen Republic's law-enforcement organs, by "activity against 
the Chechen people and a pact with the Russian imperial 
authorities." In practice this expressed itself, according to 
the same sources, in elaborating "plans to dismantle the 
independent Chechen state" with the Russian Government. 
  Meanwhile, Moscow's official refusal to sit down at the 
negotiating table with the Chechen delegation, delivered last 
Tuesday by Sergey Filatov, will evidently make the Groznyy 
leadership still more nervous and suspect Russia even more of 
hatching "occupation plans." In Yaraga Mamadayev's words, it 
cannot be ruled out that Dudayev's administration could stage an 
armed provocation on the Russian-Chechen border in order to whip 
up internal political tension in Chechnya and torpedo the 
elections to the federal parliament. 
  At the same time, according to Sergey Shakhray, despite the 
deterioration of relations between Groznyy and Moscow, the 
Russian Government is holding consultations with interested 
representatives of Chechnya in order to resolve a whole range of 
problems between Russia and this North Caucasus republic. 
Although the Russian vice premier does not clarify with whom 
these consultations are being held, there is every reason to 
suggest that it is the same "persona non grata" deported from 
Chechnya by President Dudayev last week. 
  Of course, the right to play the first violin for the 
Chechen 
side in the consultations by no means belongs to Ruslan 
Khasbulatov -- after the events of last October it would be 
naive to think otherwise. Yaraga Mamadayev, who today is well 
in with Sergey Filatov and Viktor Yerin, has more considerable 
chances of reaching agreement with the Russian authorities. 
However, the black spots in Mamadayev's biography -- for 
example, the support for his political activity from Chechen 
commercial structures -- and his personal friendship with Ruslan 
Khasbulatov -- cause the federal authorities to treat this 
figure cautiously as well. 
  Strange as it may seem, the Kremlin believes the most 
probable candidate for the post of the next leader of Chechnya 
to be Doku Zavgayev, who currently works in Boris Yeltsin's 
staff. Despite his defeat in September 1991 (following the 
August events he was forced to resign his post as chairman of 
the Checheno-Ingushetia Supreme Soviet), Zavgayev is today 
effectively the only Chechen politician who appeals both to 
Moscow and his own compatriots. 
  No one, it would appear, knows today how the Chechen card 
will be played. One thing only is known: In the next stage of 
the historical cycle the farce will inevitably slide into a 
tragedy. Whether it can be avoided is another question. 

