BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, April 6 (BTA) -- "We have to believe that 
the Berlin Walls between the Balkan states will soon fall. If 
we want that to happen between the Republic of Macedonia [The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM] and the Republic 
of Bulgaria, our statesmen should make more efforts to effect 
it," Mr. Ljupco Georgievski, leader of the most influential 
opposition party in the Republic of Macedonia (the Internal 
Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party of 
Macedonian Unity) [IMRO-DPMU] told a news conference here 
today. He arrived on a visit here Sunday at the invitation of 
the non-parliamentary Fatherland Union and met with President 
Zhelyu Zhelev, National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur Yordanov, 
the floor leaders and other MP's of the two major parliamentary 
forces (the Bulgarian Socialist Party and the Union of 
Democratic Forces), leaders of non- parliamentary political 
formations and representatives of the clergy. 
  "All political parties without exception declared clearly 
Bulgaria's support for the concept of an independent Republic of 
Macedonia. Bulgaria will uphold this position at all 
international forums," Mr. Georgievski pointed out. Bulgaria 
was the first country in the world to recognize officially the 
Republic of Macedonia in January 1992. Mr. Georgievski believes 
that the construction of a railway between Sofia and Skopje and 
the easing of border formalities on checkpoints along the 
Bulgarian-Macedonian border would allow a free flow of people, 
ideas and communications. "Macedonia should sign military 
agreements with all countries willing to cooperate with it," he 
said, answering a question about military cooperation between 
Bulgaria and Macedonia. 
  The leader of the IMRO-DPMU believes that Serbian influence 
in the Republic of Macedonia is still enormous but a downward 
trend can be observed. "UNPROFOR soldiers from the United 
States should stay as long as a Serbian-Greek alliance exists 
against the Republic of Macedonia," he said. Mr. Georgievski 
opposes the sending of peace- keeping forces from Eastern 
Orthodox or Muslim states to Macedonia. Macedonia has not taken 
a clear stand on the participation of Turkish troops in the 
peace-keeping forces in Bosnia. 
  The IMRO-DPMU hopes to win 51 percent in the forthcoming 
general elections this fall and be able to form a government, 
Mr. Georgievski pointed out, and reminded that in the previous 
parliamentary elections in December 1990 his party won 31 
percent of the votes. 

