Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 19 Jan (NOTIMEX) -- The Federal 
Government today decided to create the National Commission for 
the Overall Development of and Social Justice for Indian Peoples 
[Comision Nacional de Desarrollo Integral y Justicia Social para 
los Pueblos Indigenas], which will be in charge of promoting, 
protecting, and supporting the development of Indian communities 
and improving their living conditions. 
  A document issued by the Presidency and published in the 
official gazette established that the commission will guarantee 
the full administration of justice, as well as respect for 
individual and collective rights in favor of Indian peoples and 
communities in Mexico. 
  The commission will issue recommendations to the Federal 
Government for the definition and implementation of general and 
specific policies necessary for the proper attention to the 
Indian communities' social problems, with full respect for their 
identify, customs, traditions, and institutions. 
  The commission will be made up of representatives from the 
Government, Foreign Relations, Finances, Social Development, 
Agriculture, Communications, Education, Health, and Labor 
Secretariats. 
  It will also include representatives from the Secretariat of 
Agrarian Reform, the Attorney General's Office, the National 
Indian Institute, the Agrarian Prosecutor's Office [Procuraduria 
Agraria], the National Council for Culture and Arts [Consejo 
Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes], the Mexican Social 
Security Institute, the National Water Commission [Comision 
Nacional del Agua], and the Federal Electricity Commission 
[Comision Federal de Electricidad]. 
  The president of the Republic will appoint the commission's 
president, who in turn will appoint a technical secretary. 
  The document specifies that the commission members will hold 
the same rank as a deputy secretary of state, deputy prosecutor, 
or head of a decentralized agency, as applicable. 
  The new Commission will have an autonomous consultative 
council [Consejo Consultivo] as a mechanism that will allow 
consultation with and participation by the society. 
Representatives from Indian organizations as well as from 
social and private sectors will be able to participate as 
honorary members. 
  The functions the commission will perform include promoting 
and supporting the implementation of coordinated actions based 
on agreements, as well as conducting studies and analyses to 
support the overall development of Indian peoples and improve 
their living conditions. 
  The commission will also honor international commitments 
signed by the Mexican Government on the subject, and will 
receive, review, and, when pertinent, will propose the 
implementation of recommendations and suggestions received from 
the Consultative Council through the commission president. 

