Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Patrick Bulger] </F>
  [Text] Pretoria March 8 SAPA -- The Transitional Executive 
Council [TEC] on Tuesday [8 March] approved a measure aimed at 
curtailing government's independence of action in the seven 
remaining weeks before the election. In a resolution after 
National Housing and Public Works Minister Louis Shill had 
appeared before a full sitting of the TEC, the TEC said it 
called on: "All government ministers and senior officials to 
earnestly comply with the provisions of the TEC Act and not to 
initiate substantial policy changes or actions which impact on 
the elections in any way". 
  The resolution directed Mr Shill "to suspend any actions" he 
had intended in terms of the housing scheme he announced on 
February 28. 
  Government delegate to the TEC, Constitutional Development 
Roelf Meyer, opposed the measure. 
  The TEC said that the government and National Party were 
"guilty of flouting sections of the TEC Act" and resolved "to 
direct the np government to stop forthwith abusing its position 
in order to gain advantage in the electoral process". 
  Mr Meyer said the TEC should be aware that there were other 
governments represented in the TEC besides the South African 
Government. Their actions would also have to bear scrutiny. 
  The TEC's move to curtail government's freedom of action 
provided the first seriously divisive issue to come between 
government and the African National Congress since the TEC's 
inception in december. ANC Secretary General Cyril Ramaphosa 
spearheaded the TEC move. 
  He produced a document that appeared to be the draft of an 
NP 
election pemphlet. The draft had "surfaced" in the office of 
Housing Department Deputy Director General Neville Karsen, he 
said. The draft contained details of how the NP housing plan -- 
Mr Schill's scheme -- would provide housing. Mr Karsen denied 
that any party political pamphlet had been produced in his 
office. 
  Mr Shill, insisting during his at times tense hour and a 
half 
hearing that the TEC was not the government, said afterwards he 
would implement his policy as planned. He had argued that the 
TEC had no jurisdiction over his actions. 
  In a bitter clash, Mr Ramaphosa again called Mr Shill "an 
arrogant minister". He said the NP had to be stopped from 
abusing taxpayers' money to its own electoral advantage. "They 
are riding on taxpayers' money to win an election that they are 
going to lose," he said. 

