BFN 

  [Text] Quito, 9 Jun (EFE) -- It was reported today that the 
Quito criminal court has established that the Ecuadoran Armed 
Forces Bank had participated in the "laundering" of money coming 
from drug trafficking activities and confirmed the arrest of the 
bank's main officials. 
  The Quito Superior Court did not reveal the amount of money 
"laundered." It issued its conclusion prior to announcing the 
guilty verdict by two of its three members. Judge Janeth 
Calderon did not assign any responsibilities in this case. 
  The Ruminahui Bank manages the Ecuadoran Army, Navy, and Air 
Force resources. The verdict confirmed the arrest of Jose 
Racines, the former general manager of the military bank, and 
five other bank employees who were arrested in 1992 after the 
so-called "Magi Kings" group was dismantled. This is the only 
organization that, according to the police, has the 
characteristics of a drug cartel in Ecuador. 
  Racines and his subordinates, all of them civilians, were 
discharged from their posts by the military command after the 
Bank Superintendency [Superintendencia de Bancos] investigated 
the operations of the Ruminahui Bank, now in the process of 
being privatized. 
  Its new manager, General Gustavo Herrera, declared recently 
that bank operations had returned to their former standards. He 
added that up to last month, at least 10 Ecuadoran and foreign 
banking institutions had expressed interest in purchasing 30 
percent of the bank's stock. In the coming days, the Ruminahui 
Bank will decide on the best offer. It will favor the financial 
group which guarantees a sound consortium that will provide the 
technology and capital "to compete with other private 
institutions in the country and abroad," Herrera said. 
  Defense Minister Gen. Jose Gallardo has asserted that he 
does 
not dismiss the possibility that the group selected will be 
foreign. However, he emphasized, this "has to be studied in 
detail due to the origin of the banking organization." 
  Eighty-one percent of the bank's shares--whose reserves 
amounted to $3.6 million through June 1993--belong to the Armed 
Forces and 19 percent to the remaining 2,500 minority 
shareholders. 

