BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Abarinov report under the "Security" rubric: </F>
"Americans Insist on Observance of Conventional Forces. Moscow 
Intends To Work for Higher Quota in Caucasus"] 
  [Text] NATO will decline all of Russia's attempts to alter 
the terms of agreement on conventional forces in Europe that 
limit Russian military presence on the Northern and Southern 
flanks. This was stated on Sunday by U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Perry in the NBC "Meet the Press" program. He advised 
that he had discussed this topic with the leaders of countries 
which the possible changes may affect most, and met with no 
support. 
  Limits on arms under the Conventional Forces in Europe 
treaty 
go into effect next November. Under the document, Russia is 
entitled to keep on its Northern (Leningrad military district) 
and Southern (Caucasus) flanks not more that 580 armored 
personnel carriers, 700 tanks, and 1,280 artillery pieces per 
flank. Moscow, however, is pressing for a revision of the flank 
quotas so as to be in a position to increase its military 
presence in the Caucasus region. According to THE NEW YORK 
TIMES, Russia does not agree to make up for the strengthening of 
the Caucasus grouping by making corresponding cuts in the 
Northern flank. The newspaper also reports with reference to 
sources in the American intelligence service that Russia would 
like to get its Southern quota increased by 2,000 armored 
personnel carriers, 400 tanks, and 500 artillery pieces. 
  Oleg Sokolov, head of the Russian Federation Foreign 
Ministry 
defense department, to whom your SEGODNYA correspondent turned 
for clarification, stated that the question of flank quota 
revision is still on the agenda. He pointed to the circumstance 
that the conventional arms treaty was signed in 1990 during a 
standoff between the military blocs. Today the situation in 
Europe has radically changed. We count, Mr. Sokolov said, on 
understanding of our concern and will continue consultations 
with those parties to the treaty who have to do with solving the 
question. Precedents of these kinds of exceptions already 
exist, the diplomat pointed out. 

