CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Li Jianmin [2621 1696 3046]: "Southwest </F>
China To Build Electric Power Corridor; Preferential Policies 
Implemented To Encourage Foreign Businesses To Become Involved 
in Energy Resource Base Area Construction"] 
  [Text] By the end of this century, southwest China will 
finish building an "electric power corridor," an energy resource 
development deployment to "transmit power from west to east 
China" will have basically taken shape, and China's largest 
cluster of hydropower bases will arise in southwest China. 
  This information was revealed by representatives from the 
four provinces of southwest China attending the 2d session of 
the Eighth National People's Congress. 
  He Rong [6320 2837], a Yunnan representative to the National 
People's Congress and assistant general manager of the Chang 
Jiang Three Gorges Development Corporation, said during a visit 
by Xinhua news agency reporters that southwest China is a region 
with China's most abundant hydropower resources, with 194,000MW 
of total developable and usable hydropower, equal to 57 percent 
of China's total hydropower. For a long time, this area has 
consistently been an important base area providing energy 
resources to all of China, especially the coastal regions of 
east China. 
  Representative Wang Zhaobang [3769 0340 6721], deputy chief 
engineer in the Guangxi Hydropower Engineering Bureau, told 
reporters that construction of the southwest China energy 
resource base area will mainly be focused on cascade development 
of six large river basins in the region, the Jinsha Jiang, 
Yalong Jiang, Dadu He, Lancang Jiang, Wu Jiang, and Hongshui He, 
and that a cluster of hydropower bases is now taking shape. 
  He said that 65 large hydropower stations have been planned 
for the trunks of these rivers alone with a total installed 
generating capacity of 120,000MW. This includes 11 hydropower 
stations that have already been completed or that are now under 
construction with a total installed generating capacity of 
10,810MW and annual power output of 51.92 billion kWh. 
  These two experts revealed that seven additional large 
hydropower stations with a total installed generating capacity 
of almost 20,000MW will be built there during the Ninth 5-Year 
Plan (1996-2000). 
  He Rong said that the large-scale construction of energy 
resource base areas in southwest China is an important strategic 
step being taken by the Chinese Government to deal with the loss 
of coordination in China's national energy resource structure 
and the electric power shortages of the coastal region of east 
China. Now, the Guangxi, Yunnan, and Guizhou power grids have 
begun transmitting power from the Tianshengqiao Second Cascade 
Power Station, recently placed into operation, to Guangdong, and 
this is an initial realization of the State's long-term idea of 
an energy resource development deployment to "transmit power 
from west to east China." 
  He said that the southwest China region will use foreign 
capital to accelerate energy resource base area construction. 
The provinces of southwest China have now formulated a series of 
preferential policies to encourage foreign businesses to come to 
southwest China for joint investments in electric power 
development or independent investments to develop electric power. 
  According to the information, Yunnan, Sichuan, Guangxi, and 
Guizhou will sign more than 10 joint investment electric power 
development projects with companies from the United States, 
Thailand, and Hong Kong. Furthermore, the four provinces and 
autonomous regions of southwest China will also bring in World 
Bank and Asian Development Bank loans of more than $1 billion. 
  The experts say they expect that with more intensive reform 
and opening up, the combination of rapid development of the 
southwest China energy resource base area and the economic 
advantages of east and west China will lead to further 
developments in a substantial direction. 

