Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia -- On 24 March, General Gilberto Serra, 
chief of the Army Ministry Social Communications Center, said it 
is not incumbent upon the Armed Forces to resolve the crisis 
that erupted between the three branches of government. He chose 
to describe the crisis as "a slight disagreement." According to 
Gen. Serra, the atmosphere prevailing in the country merits 
concern but is not serious. The Army spokesman added that Army 
Minister Zenildo de Lucena would have rescheduled the Army High 
Command meeting, which began on 24 March, if the situation in 
the country were truly serious. Gen. Serra said: Had there been 
grave concern, the Army minister would have ordered his 
commanders to stay with their units, and he would have 
rescheduled the High Command meeting, which was scheduled last 
year. 
  The spokesman added that the military ministers believe they 
have already discharged their duty by meeting with President 
Itamar Franco last week to alert him to the atmosphere of 
dissatisfaction in the nation caused by Congress' and the 
Federal Supreme Court's decision to increase their salaries. 
Serra said: They created a group of public servants who, unlike 
the rest of the people, are not affected by the Real Value Unit 
(URV). 
  Serra characterized the meeting requested by the military 
ministers as " preventive action." He said the problem existing 
between the branches of government is of a political nature and 
that it may be solved at any moment through dialogue. He added: 
It is not incumbent upon the Army or the Armed Forces to resolve 
anything. The use of the Armed Forces to defend law and order is 
an exclusive power of the president of the Republic. The 
ministers already have said all that had to be said. The time 
has come to let things calm down. 
  The first day of the Army High Command meeting was devoted 
to 
discussing the list of officers eligible for promotion. Only 
today will Gen. Zenildo de Lucena attend the meeting with the 
eight regional military commanders; Gen. Benedito Leonel, the 
Army chief of staff; and the Army department chiefs. Lucena will 
discuss the national situation and announce the promotion of 20 
generals. 

