Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tony Dawe: "A TIMES Investigation Into Pollution </F>
and the Health of a Nation: Millions Face Air of Despair"] 
  [Text] The threat to the nation's health from increasing 
air pollution has prompted charities, research scientists, 
doctors and MPs to launch a concerted campaign for tighter 
controls on air quality. 
  They estimate that 10 million Britons, almost one in five of 
the population, are at risk from polluted air, including the 
elderly, pregnant women, children under two and those with 
respiratory illnesses. Asthma is increasing at an alarming rate: 
there are three million recorded sufferers and it is estimated 
that one in seven children is affected. It is the only treatable 
chronic illness that is becoming more prevalent in the western 
world, and 2,000 Britons die from it every year. Four in five 
deaths are avoidable. 
  A total of 7 million working days are lost because of 
asthma, 
at an annual cost of &pound;400 million to commerce and 
industry,&pound;70 million in sickness benefit and almost 
&pound;500 
million to the NHS. 
  Research, much of it funded by charities, has yet to 
establish that air pollution is a primary cause of asthma but, 
as Professor Robert Davies, consultant physician and reader in 
respiratory medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, central 
London, told The Times: "The current position which 
would be agreed by most people is that episodes of air pollution 
are a trigger to asthma." 
  Government research has shown that 19 million Britons a year 
are exposed to air pollution levels in excess of international 
guidelines. 
<H5>  The pollutants include: </H5>
  --Carbon monoxide, which deprives the body of oxygen by 
reacting with haemoglobin, causing drowsiness and headaches, 
slowing thought and reflexes and increasing pressure on the 
heart. 
  --Nitrogen oxides, which increase susceptibility to viral 
illnesses, irritate lung tissue and increase the risk of 
bronchitis and pneumonia. 
  --Ozone, which aggravates asthma and bronchitis but also 
affects normally healthy adults, causing coughing, eye, nose and 
throat irritation and headaches. 
  Figures gathered by Friends of the Earth show that in 1992, 
ozone levels exceeded World Health Organisation guidelines on 
269 days at 21 monitoring sites. 
  These disturbing statistics have been gathered despite 
Britain's poor record in monitoring air pollution, with only 
seven sites designed in compliance with European directives to 
measure nitrogen dioxide, compared with 200 in Germany. 
  The call for better monitoring of air pollution is one of 
the 
main themes of the new campaign because it would show where 
tighter controls need to be applied and alert those most at risk 
to the danger areas. 
  There are also widespread demands for greater research into 
the causes of respiratory illnesses so that doctors can be 
better informed about how to treat them. Dr Martyn Partridge, 
chief medical adviser to the National Asthma Campaign, said: "As 
far as asthma is concerned, the obsession is with preventing 
attacks, but what is much more exciting is the possibility 
through genetic research of identifying children, even a foetus, 
at risk. We could then plan what to do to alter that child's 
environment to prevent the disease developing." 
  The newly formed all-party asthma group of MPs is also 
campaigning for a greater awareness in Government of the scale 
of the disease and for it to be included in the next progress 
report on the Health of the Nation initiative. 
  More far-reaching reforms are demanded by organisations such 
as the British Lung Foundation, Friends of the Earth and the 
National Asthma Campaign. They want a transport strategy that 
takes account of health issues and greater encouragement for 
people to buy fuel-efficient vehicles. 

