BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Sun Zhanlin (1327 0594 2651) and Hu Xiaoguang </F>
(5170 2556 0342)] 
  [Text] Almaty, 28 Apr (XINHUA) -- After successfully 
concluding his 10-day tour of four Central Asian countries, Li 
Peng, premier of the State Council, left Almaty for Mongolia on 
the morning of 28 April. 
  Kazakh President Nazarbayev hosted a grand send-off ceremony 
for Premier Li Peng at the airport. Speaking to reporters at 
the airport about the outcome of Li Peng's visit to Kazakhstan, 
Nazarbayev stressed that Premier Li Peng's visit to Kazakhstan 
had deepened mutual understanding and Kazakh-Chinese friendship. 
He was very satisfied with that. Nazarbayev added: The 
signing of the Kazakh-Chinese border agreement by the two 
countries is the most important result of the visit. 
  Also leaving on the same airplane were Zhu Lin, wife of Li 
Peng; Ismail Amat, state councilor and concurrently minister in 
charge of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission; and Qi 
Huaiyuan, director of the State Council's Foreign Affairs 
Office, who are traveling with Li Peng. 
  Seeing Li Peng and others off at the airport were Mrs. 
Nazarbayev, other senior Kazakh officials, the Chinese 
ambassador to Kazakhstan, and other embassy personnel. 
  During the 10-day Central Asian tour, Li Peng had an 
in-depth 
exchange of views with the leaders of the four countries on 
bilateral relations, international issues, and regional issues. 
They reached a broad consensus and signed a set of 
intergovernmental documents, including the Sino-Kazakh border 
agreement. A delegation of Chinese entrepreneurs, who 
accompanied Li Peng on his visit for the first time, also came 
into wide contact with local entrepreneurs and signed 20 letters 
of intent, four agreements, and two contracts. 
  According to the local media, Premier Li Peng's tour of the 
four Central Asian countries had created new and even broader 
prospects for the further development of relations between China 
and the Central Asian countries. 

