BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "More Light, Less Heat on Xi Issue"] </F>
  [Text] While the fate of Hong Kong journalist Xi Yang 
remains obscure pending an appeal, the circumstances surrounding 
his case have been clarified to a certain extent. 
  Not everyone is satisfied with the official accounts that 
have been released by Beijing this week. In a reflection of 
public concern about the secretive way the case has been handled 
so far, local delegates to the National People's Congress (NPC) 
have signed a letter calling on China to give a full account of 
Xi Yang's trial. 
  A number of other people who are generally identified as 
supporters of Beijing have expressed concern about the severity 
of the sentence as well as the wider implications of the case. 
  Many of these people plainly want to be as charitable as 
they 
can towards China while trying to make clear to Beijing 
officials the need to be sensitive to public opinion in Hong 
Kong. 
  China has much to gain from listening to these concerned 
groups and individuals. It also has much to gain, in terms of 
its own credibility, from reconsidering the sentence when the 
appeal is heard. Apart from anything else, local journalists 
need to know where they stand in their dealings with the 
mainland. 
  We hope China will respond to the genuine and justifiable 
concerns that have been raised. 
  But we also hope that public opinion here will not be swept 
by a wave of emotion and indignation. No one disputes that the 
emotions that have been engendered are natural and genuine. But 
the case illustrates a different outlook on life. 
  The sentence was shocking to many people here, but the 
notion 
that China has a right to protect its state secrets should not 
be. 
  Nor should we be shocked by the fact that Beijing officials 
believe the sentence was lenient. 
  What some see as routine journalistic enterprise, Chinese 
authorities view as espionage--although a certain amount of 
confusion has been created by different interpretations of a 
Chinese word which can mean either "espionage" or "stealing 
state secrets". 
  The worst mistake anyone could make would be to adopt a 
patronising tone and point out to Beijing officials "the error 
of their ways". 
  Calm and rational arguments, not inflammatory rhetoric, are 
needed in complex, emotionally charged issues such as this. It 
may be difficult to keep an even keel, but people should avoid 
the extremes of debate. 
  No voice should be stilled for fear of sparking discussion. 
What is needed is more light and less heat. Exaggerating the 
issue serves no effective purpose. Let's aim for more reason 
and less volume. 

