Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, Feb 23 (AFP) -- NATO is in no hurry to 
extend its Sarajevo air strike ultimatum to other regions in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, sources at North Atlantic Treaty 
Organisation headquarters here said Wednesday [23 February]. 
  Speaking after a meeting of NATO ambassadors, one source 
said 
the "Sarajevo model" -- the threat of force to achieve an end to 
fighting -- could work elsewhere only if more ground troops were 
available to implement it. 
  NATO managed to produce a ceasefire around Sarajevo, plus an 
end to the bombardment of the Bosnian capital and a withdrawal 
of Serb heavy weapons, by threatening air strikes after a 
midnight deadline last Sunday. 
  Since then, there has been considerable pressure for taking 
the same action to stop fighting around other besieged Bosnian 
towns, such as Srebrenica, Mostar and Tuzla. 
  A diplomat said the "Sarajevo model" might not be used 
elsewhere, at least in the near future, because priority was 
being given to re-launching the stalled Bosnian peace process 
between Serbs, Muslems and Croats. 
  "Is it the right time to complicate things with the Russians 
and the parties to the conflict by waving a big stick?" he asked. 
  Earlier Wednesday, Russian President Boris Yeltsin suggested 
a five-power summit to deal with the conflicts in ex-Yugoslavia. 
  The NATO ambassadors also agreed that it was too early to 
consider making more Sarajevo-type air strike threats elsewhere, 
because the nature of fighting was different in each region, the 
sources said. 
  At Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia, road routes for 
humanitarian 
aid are blocked and Canadian peacekeepers are trapped in the 
town. 
  In central Bosnia, the fighting involves infantry rather 
than 
artillery, with civilians trapped in between. At the southern 
town of Mostar, Croats are battling Muslems. 
  In the northeastern town of Tuzla, the United Nations has 
given no official date for forcing open the airport which has 
been kept closed by Serb artillery. The NATO sources say they 
are waiting for UN instructions. 

