Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed "Roundup": "Multi-Economic Sectors Join Hands </F>
To Boost Shanghai's Economy"] 
  [Text] Shanghai, January 6 (XINHUA) -- Multi-economic 
sectors in China's largest economic center are joining hands to 
boost the economy. 
  Shanghai's financial income last year climbed to 24.23 
billion yuan, an increase of 30 percent over the previous year. 
  Economists here attributed the success to the efforts of 
state enterprises, which still serve as the backbone in economic 
development, and the expansion of other economic sectors 
including rural industries and foreign-funded and private 
businesses. 
  The Shanghai municipal government collected 3.65 billion 
yuan 
in taxes from foreign-funded enterprises and organizations last 
year, accounting for 16 percent of the city's total, and four 
billion yuan in taxes from rural industrial enterprises. 
  Starting business without a single penny from the state, 
more 
than 138,000 private businesses in China's most populous city 
delivered about 500 million yuan in taxes to the state last 
year, accounting for two percent of the industrial and 
commercial taxes in Shanghai. 
  According to the economists, China's policy to encourage 
other economic sectors to develop alongside the state sector 
since 1979, when the country began the reform and open policy, 
has paid off. 
  Coming into existence in the 1970s, rural enterprises in the 
Shanghai area have burgeoned since 1990 when the government 
allocated more flexible policies in favor of rural industrial 
development. 
  Last year saw more than 20,000 rural enterprises generate an 
output value totalling 80 billion yuan, accounting for 28 
percent of Shanghai's gross industrial output value of 280 
billion yuan. 
  "Rural enterprises have become a pillar in Shanghai's 
outlying counties," a municipal official in charge of 
agriculture said. 
  The annual income of farmers in the Shanghai area has taken 
the lead for ten years running, surpassing 2,600 yuan per capita 
last year, three times the country's average. 
  Shanghai began to import foreign investment on a large scale 
and improved its investment conditions in 1979. 
  By the end of 1993, the city had approved 6,939 
foreign-funded enterprises with contractual investment climbing 
to 13.7 billion U.S. dollars. Included were 3,650 projects 
involving seven billion U.S. dollars approved last year. 
  According to the municipal government, 3,500 foreign-funded 
enterprises which opened to operation generated output value 
amounting to 47.6 billion yuan last year, accounting for 17 
percent of the city's total, and exported 1.6 billion U.S. 
dollars worth of goods, up 50 percent and accounting for 22 
percent of the city's total. 
  "These enterprises are becoming a new force in the city's 
economy, particularly the high-tech industry," a municipal 
official noted. 
  Through 14 years of development, the private economic sector 
is displaying its talent in the service trade. 
  A survey shows that its retail sales volume occupies 11 
percent of the city's total. 
  So far Shanghai has more than 1,000 private businesses 
engaged in the development and consulting services for science 
and technology. 
  The economists predicted that these businesses will play a 
bigger role in turning scientific findings into productivity. 
  They agreed that the development of non-state economic 
sectors will not affect the main position of the state economy. 
  With the deepening of the national economic reform, the 
major 
state enterprises will fully display their superiority and 
continue to lead the municipal economic development. 
  To boost the market economy, according to the economists, 
economic sectors under different ownership arrangements are 
learning from each other. 
  Many major state enterprises have introduced the operational 
mechanism of foreign-funded enterprises. 
  In addition, rural and private businesses are striving to 
modernize themselves technically. 
  The economists believed that such multi-economic sectors 
will 
benefit social development and effectively promote the city's 
economic development. 

