Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Juan Pritsiolas] </F>
  [Text] [Retired] General Ruben Dario Paredes has confirmed 
that a group of [former] military officers is drafting a 
proposal to reinstate the National Guard within the structure of 
the Public Force. This proposal will be submitted to 
presidential candidates and to the Legislative Assembly. 
  Paredes disclosed that a group of military men, including 
Daniel Delgado, Carlos Arosemena King, Gerardo Garcia, Aquilino 
Sieiro, Juan Antonio Guizado, and Severino Mejia, is preparing a 
draft of the Public Force Law. He added that their purpose is 
to establish a foundation, in which professionals from various 
fields will participate, to offer the public a public security 
project. 
  Gen. Paredes, who retired on 12 August 1983, said he 
personally advocates the reestablishment of the National Guard 
as a component of the current Public Force. He explained that 
this component would be made up of 600 men and would be equipped 
with weapons that "would not threaten anyone." He said it would 
be in charge of the security of the Panama Canal and the defense 
of the borders. 
  The concept of the National Guard emerged in 1953, when 
President Jose Antonio Remon Cantera enacted a law that changed 
the national police into a national guard. In September 1983, 
Panama's former strong man Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega changed 
the National Guard into the Defense Forces, which the 1989 
invasion dismantled and changed into the current Public Force. 
  On 15 September 1992, Juan Chevalier, former government and 
justice minister, presented a 115-article bill to enact the 
Public Force's basic law. It establishes four components of the 
Public Force: the National Police, the Air Service police, the 
Maritime Service police, and the presidential police. 
  Gen. Paredes said the military men who are working on a 
proposal on public security matters must use the Executive 
Branch's bill as a foundation, but they must also incorporate 
the concept of a National Guard. He believes that 99 percent of 
military members have come to understand that the healthiest 
path for Panama is "the consolidation of democracy," but there 
is still a small number of people who "are yearning for the past 
alongside (Gen. Manuel Antonio) Noriega." 
  The former National Guard commander also warned that with 
the 
departure of the U.S. Southern Command, there is "danger" there 
will be a "power vacuum" in Panama. Paredes pointed out that 
by distorting the people's mandate, a government leader could 
take advantage of the situation to utilize the Public Force to 
hold on to power. He added that this situation could trigger 
the return of the "vicious circle" that existed in Panama since 
1903, when economic and political interests took over the Public 
Force. 

