Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Text] National Defense Minister Mehmet Golhan has said 
that, in comparison to previous years, regional developments 
have reached more serious dimensions, adding that Turkey is 
obliged to be constantly vigilant regarding its defense. 
  On his return from Tunisia, Golhan replied to reporters' 
questions at Esenboga Airport regarding the decision to 
postpone, on a one time basis, the discharge of soldiers and 
noncommissioned officers. Pointing out that the potential treat 
to Turkey is gradually increasing in light of recent 
developments, Golhan recalled that the government has decided to 
stop terror this winter and spring. He said: 
  [Begin Golhan recording] As you know, a cabinet decision 
last year decreased the term of military service. We reduced it 
from 18 to 15 months. We had also reduced some of our military 
units in accordance with the European Conventional Arms 
Reduction Treaty. We eliminated some of our units in various 
regions. We are in need of experienced privates and 
noncommissioned officers for a few more months. I would like to 
state that we need them because the potential threat against 
Turkey has increased. Furthermore, since we came to power we 
have been talking about an operation in the winter and the 
spring against domestic threat. We need this postponement for 
this operation as well. Had the normal discharges been carried 
out, our soldiers would have been released in another month and 
replaced by inexperienced ones. It would have been difficult to 
achieve the success we desire with our young boys arriving at 
their units after basic training and lacking regional 
experience. We would also have left them in a difficult 
position fighting terror. Taking all these reasons into 
consideration, we have postponed by four months the discharge of 
privates and noncommissioned officers. [end recording] 
  Golhan stated that local elections will be held in March, 
adding that sound elections cannot be held without eliminating 
terror in the east. Noting that the discharges have been 
postponed on a one time basis for four months, namely from 
February through May, Golhan stated that the decision was made 
in December. He said: The Turkish soldier values his life, but 
above all he values his country. Certain values are dearer than 
life. Love of country, flag, and nation are among these values. 

