Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Yuriy Lvov report: "Nuclear Waste Will Be Destroyed by </F>
Explosions"] 
  [Text] This news is not for those of a nervous disposition: 
It is possible that in the foreseeable future all Russia's 
radioactive waste and chemical weapons will be destroyed...by 
nuclear explosion. By several explosions, to be precise, which 
will be detonated deep within the permafrost of Russia's only 
nuclear test site on the island of Novaya Zemlya. 
  This program has been expounded by Major General Vladimir 
Loborev, academician and chief of the Ministry of Defense 
Central Physics and Technical Institute, and Aleksandr 
Chernyshev, deputy director of the Federal Nuclear Center 
(Arzamas-16), in reports to a closed scientific seminar held at 
the "Uran" Science and Production Association, which your 
KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA correspondent managed to attend. 
Representatives from our most important organizations in this 
field attended the seminar: the Ministry of Defense, the 
Ministry of Atomic Power Engineering and Industry, the Federal 
Inspectorate for Nuclear and Radiation Safety, the Ministry of 
Environment and Natural Resources, the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, and the Academy of Natural Sciences. 
  There are several ways of recycling radioactive waste. The 
idea of sending waste into space is the most utopian of these 
schemes, according to Vladimir Loborev. However, the most 
practical method is plunging the fatal waste into glass and 
burying it in "deep geological formations." The largest 
vitrification plant is located in France. It cost $500 million 
to build. 
  According to Loborev, to destroy all of Russia's waste would 
require 20 such plants, each of which would have to operate 
continuously for 10 years. The Russian economy would be unable 
to bear costs of this magnitude. But the problem is becoming 
increasingly acute -- obsolete ships with nuclear reactors that 
can neither be used nor scuttled are piling up at the piers of 
Severodvinsk and other ports.... 
  A nuclear explosion would be far less costly. And the 
authors of the plan claim that after the explosion the waste 
would be buried in accordance with all the regulations -- the 
extremely high temperature would turn the rock and the 
radioactive waste housed in underground passageways into an 
large vitreous mass which would be covered by a thick layer of 
compacted soil and rubble. Thus embedded, the waste would never 
be able to "surface"; besides, all around there is permafrost 
which, according to the specialists, would present no threat for 
many centuries, even if a subtropical climate were to occur on 
Novaya Zemlya. 
  The chemical weapons situation is somewhat more complex. In 
Russia it is kept in seven large storage facilities, some of 
which are located near major cities. They must be destroyed as 
soon as possible in accordance with international conventions 
and following the dictates of common sense, but the technology 
to do this does not exist at the present time. Scientists 
believe that in this case the "nuclear explosion" method looks 
more promising, although it would require some extremely complex 
chemical calculations. 
  The authors of the plan assure us that the program is at the 
scientific development stage and will under no circumstances be 
implemented without thorough expert assessments, international 
monitoring, explanations to the population, and, of course, 
presidential and government approval. In order to obtain the 
last item on this list, the plan would have to do the rounds of 
a number of competent departments. The seminar decided that it 
would be submitted for examination by the recently established 
Scientific Council under the Russian Federation Security Council. 
  We can only hope that amid all the current confusion in 
Russia, these important "formalities" will not be forgotten. 
After all, we already possess experience of the unpredictable 
behavior of the peaceful atom in Russia. 

