Language: <F P=105>Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Slovak president Michal Kovac to the Slovak </F>
parliament in Bratislava--live] 
  [Excerpts] Esteemed National Council [parliament] of the 
Slovak Republic! This is the first time in the post of 
president that I am going to deliver to you the report on the 
state of the Slovak Republic. [passage omitted] 
  We should not forget the negative foreign political 
consequences of our actions and decisions, such as the 
statements and actions of Slovak politicians abroad, which are 
not always precisely formulated and adequately coordinated, and 
sometimes even contradict each other. Such occurrences are 
given considerable and frequently exaggerated coverage in the 
foreign media. What is more serious still, such actions give 
rise to doubts about our foreign political orientation in the 
decisive political centers of the Western world. 
  This is most clearly demonstrated in the relatively frequent 
ignoring of Slovakia in West European politicians' addresses 
concerning the gradual integration of the postcommunist 
countries in European economic, political, and security 
structures. I think that so far we have not done enough to 
achieve a proper coordination of our foreign policy and 
diplomacy with the needs of Slovakia's economic development and 
international standing. 
  The frequency of official high-level bilateral political 
contacts is a good indicator of the international standing of 
our Republic. On the level of government contacts, in 
particular, such contacts are less frequent than in comparable 
countries of our region. This, too, demonstrates a certain 
tendency to wait-and-see by representatives of, above all, 
traditional democratic states. [passage omitted] 
  We know that the democratic policy of both the state and the 
political parties must focus on the citizen. It should be based 
on his needs and interests, and it should serve him. But the 
mood among the public, which I have noticed and which has also 
been confirmed by the regular opinion polls, testifies to the 
great dissatisfaction of the general public with the state of 
public affairs in our Republic, with the activity of politicians 
and political organizations alike, and with the functioning of 
the highest state bodies. We all must, therefore, collectively 
and very seriously consider what causes our citizens to feel 
such profound distrust in our state institutions and in the 
actors on our political stage. [passage omitted] 
  I have said repeatedly that, at the moment, when we are 
still 
going through the stage of building our independent state and, 
at the same time, through a major transformation process, the 
country should be governed by a government of a broader--or 
broad--coalition. What I have in mind is a coalition based on a 
proper agreement on the most important goals that must be 
achieved in order to have a consolidated state and public life, 
a coalition that could work systematically and consistently on 
developing and improving our country. 
  However, I am not ruling out other options for solving the 
current crisis, either--above all, through early parliamentary 
elections. In a democratic regime, such a step is perfectly 
legitimate; it is a proven method of arriving at a new 
parliamentary majority, and it may have a successful application 
in our couuntry, too. 
  The path to early parliamentary elections can lead either 
through a decision made by the deputies in parliament, or 
through a referendum on early elections. Personally, I am 
convinced that there is still enough time to decide this matter 
in parliament, on the basis of a sensible compromise. 
  We should not forget, however, that even a referendum will 
not make it possible to hold the elections any earlier than some 
time in the fall. [passage omitted] 
  The issue of national minorities, the Hungarian national 
minority in particular, has been at the forefront of attention 
practically from the very beginning of the great political 
changes in our country. The Constitution of the Slovak Republic 
provides guarantees to members of national minorities, who are 
equal citizens of our state, regarding all rights and liberties 
and the rights connected with their belonging to a minority in 
particular. [passage omitted] 
  I believe that we will promptly fulfill our pledges given on 
the occasion of our state's admission to the Council of Europe. 
I am convinced that such issues as the language used for names 
and the currency, or spelling local names in the language of the 
nationality living there, should be concluded as soon as 
possible. [passage omitted] 
  We cannot ignore the position of those Slovaks who live in 
ethnically mixed areas--above all, in southern Slovakia--and who 
are in a minority. I have received a number of communications 
stating that, within such an ethnically isolated environment, 
our citizens feel isolated and abandoned, their own state is not 
looking after them adequately, and, in their own country, they 
do not feel at home. I consider this situation unacceptable, 
and it is necessary to say quite clearly that responsibility 
here belongs to the state bodies of our Republic and to no one 
else. 
  The Slovak state must guarantee all human and civic rights 
for all citizens on the state's territory, including Slovaks 
living in an ethnic minority anywhere in Slovakia. These 
Slovaks, too, must enjoy the state's guarantee that they can 
consider any place in this Republic their homeland. 
  The problem of the Romany nationality, or rather the Romany 
ethnic group, has some particular characteristics. It is well 
known that, in the case of the Romanies, the ethnic and cultural 
issues are dominated by very serious social problems. Over the 
past 10 years, the government has tried various social 
experiments concerning the Romanies, but the results have not 
satisfied anyone. At the moment, the Romanies frequently become 
the first victims of the rising unemployment, and their social 
situation is beginning to show signs of further dramatic 
complications, a fact that is reflected in their state of 
health, too. [passage omitted] 
  In assessing last year's economic developments, we note that 
the pessimistic expectations of a collapse of the Slovak economy 
have not materialized. [passage omitted] 
  A closer analysis of the processes determining macroeconomic 
development reveals, however, a number of negative trends. 
First of all, the structural adaptation of our economy has been 
slow. In the course of the transformation process, production 
in sectors with a higher degree of added value recorded a 
considerable drop. The manufacturing sectors involved have not 
managed to compensate for the drop in domestic demand and in 
demand in the former Eastern markets by higher exports based on 
more exacting criteria. 
  Both the volume and number of investment projects have also 
been on the decrease. As an illustration: Since 1990, the 
volume of investments has dropped by 20 percent when price 
increases are taken into account. This further aggravates the 
technical and technological backwardness of the Slovak economy 
in comparison with foreign competitors, which in turn makes 
further significant positive structural movement impossible. 
  The worst manifestations of our economy's problems have been 
experienced in the development of the foreign trade balance and 
the state budget. In 1993, the state budget deficit was the 
most negative economic indicator. Its size was influenced by a 
number of factors, but the main cause must be seen to be in the 
objectively low performance of the Slovak economy. The current 
economic performance is too poor to create adequate means for 
the state to pay for services, even at the level to which 
citizens were accustomed. It also makes the financing of public 
investment projects impossible and does not leave enough 
resources for the further development of the private sector. 
  In 1993, our foreign trade ended up with a negative balance 
to the tune of 26 billion Slovak korunas. This goes to show 
that the export performance of our economy is not yet good 
enough to generate foreign currency levels sufficient to cover 
Slovakia's import needs. [passage omitted] 
  If a more pronounced contribution is to be made by foreign 
capital, we must make sure that the world finds in us a reliable 
partner. But I am afraid--and this has been confirmed by my 
talks with foreign representatives--that we have not sent out 
the right signals regarding this issue. [passage omitted] 
  The fact that, when we compare 1993 with 1992 we see an 
absolute drop in the volume of foreign investment in Slovakia, 
serves as a serious warning. [passage omitted] 
  For some time, the issue of internal security in our 
country has been attracting particular attention as well as 
causing considerable concern. Citizens are particularly 
sensitive to this problem because guarantees of personal 
security and the security of property belong to the foremost 
tasks of every state. 
  The growth of crime concerning property, which accounts for 
more than three-quarters of the total volume of crime committed, 
is alarming. The brutality of the crime committed, as well as 
the ever-lower age of young delinquents, is also causing 
concern. True, crime is concentrated mainly in large urban 
areas, but the sense of personal danger is beginning to be 
widespread. 
  The growth of corruption, which also affects state offices 
and banks, is also a worrying phenomenon. We must do all we can 
to prevent Slovakia at every level--from the highest offices 
down--from becoming a country of mafia gangs and corrupt 
officials. 
  I am mentioning these issues because, so far, these things 
have been only whispered, even in front of me. Instead, using 
thorough evidence, the issue should be dealt with openly and 
very specifically. The gradual elimination of the causes and 
factors contributing to the high level of crime therefore 
belongs to one of our fundamental tasks. On the one hand, the 
bodies of legal protection must get our wholehearted support, 
and, on the other, it is necessary to deepen social control over 
their activity because they must act within the limits defined 
by our Constitution and the law of our Republic. 
  Similarly, it is necessary to nourish the legal awareness of 
our citizens because the relatively low legal awareness in 
society makes a considerable contribution to the current poor 
state in law observance. 
  In the sphere of external security, we follow a singular 
orientation toward NATO and the Western European Union. Some 
citizens have written to me asking whether we are doing the 
right thing when, soon after doing away with one military 
alliance, we are showing interest in close cooperation with 
another, and whether this is being done for opportunistic 
reasons--that is, joining the stronger side. 
  True, such questions are atypical, but I would like to 
answer 
them nonetheless. Modern European cooperation means, above all, 
the utilization of all of the proven structures operating in 
Europe--and NATO, too, belongs to Europe. Our interest in 
cooperation with this group is therefore a part of our interest 
in a fully fledged integration of our sovereign state, with 
arrangements reflecting basic values. We have no enemies and no 
one endangers our state. We are convinced of the need for close 
cooperation with NATO not because of fears but because of the 
recognition of the fact that it is essential that we create a 
reliable security system around us. 
  The further we are from the memorable November 1989, the 
more 
apparent it is that the chronic economic crisis, and also the 
repeated crisis phenomena in political life, are a part of 
deeper processes that affected the countries of the Soviet bloc 
after its disintegration. In the rapid developmental process, 
the accepted principles and mechanisms of the social life of 
advanced Western countries were being inorganically linked to 
the prevailing mechanisms, habits, and overall mentality of the 
totalitarian era. 
  As a result of this, below-standard and hybrid conditions of 
life came into being in the countries of Central and East 
Europe, which, in a certain sense, also surprised Western 
experts and politicians. They called this hitherto unknown and, 
in its own way, incomprehensible fact postcommunism. In its 
substance, it remains the continuing version of state society, 
where the material and spiritual sources of dynamism have been 
exhausted. 
  Our public life now is portrayed by permanent political 
struggle. Its accompanying signs often are random verbal 
attacks, mutual accusations, various half-truths, and even 
downright lies and deviousness, which have only one aim: to 
discredit the political opponent. 
  Our internal political scene ceases to be a place where 
there 
is a constructive exchange of views, a search for common ways 
out of a complicated situation. It is changing into an arena 
with a number of duels leading nowhere, in which many lose their 
judgment, their own face and character. Zealous fighters for 
their own truth often put their own interests above the needs of 
the state. They do not see or do not want to see the 
difficulties to which Slovakia is being led by the 
confrontational line they nurture. 
  Unfortunately, we are witnessing how the nervousness of the 
political parties is increasingly being transferred to the 
citizens. On the other hand, it causes apathy toward internal 
political events, disenchantment, and mistrust of politicians. 
[passage omitted] 
  Today we are not only facing the task of definitively 
breaking away from the practices of the pre-November regimes, 
but we must also carry out the vitally important maneuver of 
dissociating our country from postcommunism. This objective can 
be achieved only if we rely on the broadest basis of social 
change, newly awakened citizenship. [passage omitted] 
  I propose that the National Council, the government, and 
the president's office nominate their own specialists to a group 
of responsible people who would set up a committee for dealing 
with questions of the strategic development of Slovakia [vybor 
pre otazky strategickeho rozvoja Slovenska]. The committee's 
task would be to ensure, in the organizational and conceptual 
sense and on the principles of the [word indistinct] system, the 
preparation of the necessary concept of modernization. 
  At the same time, I appeal to banking circles and nonstate 
organizations to support this entire project as much as they can. 
  I am turning to you, deputies of the National Council of the 
Slovak Republic, chairmen of committees and groups of deputies, 
leading officials of political parties and movements, 
representatives of the state authorities, leading officials of 
the state administration, and elected representatives of towns 
and village governments; I am turning to all of the citizens of 
the Slovak Republic who have the fate of their homeland at heart: 
  Let us stop seeing one another as enemies only because we 
have different views. Let us not seek only mistakes in one 
another. Let us not argue about trifles that are being 
uselessly blown up by some politicians at speakers' tribunes. 
This is a path that leads us to the brink of an abyss and might 
destroy us. Let us seek conciliation--political, national, and 
civic. Let us remember that the citizens of the Slovak Republic 
are partners, that they live in a common country, and that is 
why they must jointly bear all of the successes and losses of 
life. Let us seek paths to one another. Let us not give up, let 
us work on ourselves and our work. 
  Our joint success and the success of our country will be our 
reward. It is in the name of these ideals, esteemed deputies, 
that I decided to adopt a standpoint in the next part of my 
address on serious questions concerning our internal political 
situation. [passage omitted] 
  Many point to the autocratic way of the prime minister's 
governing. Whoever voices a different view or a different 
standpoint is gradually disloyal, lacking solidarity, and, in 
the end, becomes a traitor. 
  The conflict in the government, unfortunately, was 
transferred to the entire society. I get letters from citizens 
in which they express dissatisfaction with the fact that 
relations between the president of the Slovak Republic and the 
prime minister are not good. Some citizens blame me for being 
against the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS], that I do 
not support the government and its prime minister. 
  Before explaining the situation and the causes of our tense 
relationship, I should like to say that I have not been and I am 
not against the HZDS and I have not been and I am not against 
the government. However, I have serious reservations about the 
style and ethics of Mr. Meciar's policies, about the way he 
conducts government and about the practices that create a 
confrontational atmosphere in political life. [applause] 
  The prime minister, since a certain time when he found out 
that I wanted to perform the presidential role in an assertive 
way, in the spirit of the Constitution, gradually started to 
ignore me, questioning my work and, gradually, he started to 
blame and discredit me so much that I thought it was designed to 
lead toward my being prematurely removed from the post of 
president. 
  I want to assure you in this connection that I never did 
anything against the prime minister. I only defended the 
autonomy and independence of the president of the Slovak 
Republic as the official head of state. [passage omitted] 
  You may well remember that, during my first visit to 
parliament after being elected president on 27 October 1993, 
there was no one from the government present in this room; today 
there are at least a few ministers here. [applause] The public 
understand it as a loss of esteem for the office of the 
president. You also certainly noticed how protocol is being 
infringed when the president is on official visits abroad and 
when he returns. The prime minister and often the chairman of 
the National Council of the Slovak Republic [parliament] ignore 
the state ceremonial, which is normal practice all over the 
world. [passage omitted] 
  The HZDS accused me of surrounding myself with people who 
were against the birth of the Slovak Republic, that I was 
setting up a new government, that some people from my office 
took part in secret talks in Prague on the possible setting up 
of a new Slovak Government, that I ganged up with the 
opposition, with representatives of the Hungarian political 
parties in Slovakia, even that I have been bought from abroad. 
  Following my New Year's address, the prime minister accused 
me of destabilizing the HZDS and the government of the Slovak 
Republic. 
  I resolutely and totally reject these and other accusations 
as being misconstrued and untrue. The main culprit in our 
internal political instability and unfortunate situation is not 
the president. 
  Allow me now to recall some events that characterize the way 
they behave toward me: 
  On 28 February, with Mr. Gasparovic, chairman of the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic, present, I told the 
prime minister of my decision to accept the resignation of Mr. 
Roman Kovac and Mr. Jozef Moravcik, provided I do not accept the 
proposal to fill the post of the minister of foreign affairs 
with Mr. Prokes. [passage omitted] Then I was asked by the prime 
minister whether it was true that I intended to invite the heads 
of districts to talks. I explained to him that I intended to 
visit some districts personally. I wanted to invite to 
Bratislava those whom I did not visit. The prime minister did 
not agree with this, claiming that I had no business to invite 
the heads of the district offices. He said that, wherever I 
went, I created the impression of being an enemy. He threatened 
that the heads who accept my invitation will be immediately 
sacked by him. After that, he accused me of being responsible 
for the current internal political situation. 
  I will not engage in deep analysis of the prime minister's 
viewpoint to the prepared visit of heads of district offices 
now. I only note that I must assess it as an unheard-of 
limitation of the constitutional rights of the head of state. 
[applause] [passage omitted] 
  So far, there have been only two meetings at which the prime 
minister briefed me on government sessions. It was not my 
fault. I waited for him many Tuesdays in vain, but the prime 
minister did not even bother to announce that he would not come. 
The prime minister also accused me of causing decay, while he 
was striving to unite and harmonize everything. The prime 
minister got the expected response from the audience for this 
misleading accusation against the president, accompanied by 
exclamations such as: Recall the president, and other offensive 
statements. [passage omitted] 
  The view of the foreign partner is an important factor in 
assessing the success or otherwise of the president's foreign 
trips. I can assure you that I know the assessment of my 
foreign trips at least as well as the prime minister, and, what 
is more, I have it directly from competent foreign 
personalities. I can state with full responsibility that their 
official assessments, including those on the talks with 
President Clinton and the visit to Poland, have been positive. 
  But why should anyone want to cast doubt on these objective 
facts? Particularly because, personally, I am pleased at every 
success achieved by the prime minister or by the speaker of the 
Slovak parliament--in fact, everyone who represents our Republic 
abroad. 
  I have always recognized and appreciated some particular 
abilities of Mr. Meciar: his industriousness, enthusiasm, 
brilliant memory, quick response, vehemence, above-average 
rhetoric, and ability to maneuver. I have no intention of 
questioning these abilities now. At the same time, however, I 
have had to accept many reservations pointing to his negative 
qualities, which must be mitigated so that his abilities might 
be used for the good of our society. [passage omitted] 
  The prime minister is not willing to cooperate as a partner 
and to conduct a correct dialogue. He cannot unite the varied 
groupings of citizens and amplify the political energy of the 
state. In view of his suspiciousness, he is capable of 
cooperating only with the people who are in some way obligated 
to him. Mr. Meciar does not need advisers, cocreators, and 
opponents, but only helpers in implementing his intentions. 
[passage omitted] 
  It is a pity that the prime minister is not here, but I do 
turn to him: I ask you, prime minister, for the sake of the good 
name of Slovakia, for the sake of democracy; think, without 
anger and hatred in your heart, about all that I have said here. 
Remember that Slovakia also belongs to different-thinking 
Slovaks and all of our citizens, that they have the right to 
their views, to their convictions. [applause] 
  But I ask that this sincere attempt and appeal of mine might 
not be explained as a weakness. All those who think that the 
president of the Republic can be intimidated are wrong. 
[applause] So are those who think that he can be discouraged 
from fulfilling his duties, which he festively undertook to 
fulfill. 
  The president will remain in the service of the people, of 
the citizens of the Republic until the end. He will remain 
faithful to the promise that he will see to the well-being of 
the Slovak people, national minorities, and ethnic groups, that 
he will observe and defend the Constitution and other laws. 
  Michal Kovac, president of the Slovak Republic, will never 
betray the Slovak Republic, his people, or his reason and 
conscience, even if he has to drink the bitter cup to the dregs. 
[applause] 
  I do not know how to hate anyone. I do not want to engage in 
intrigues against anyone, and I am determined ato responsibly 
fulfill all of the duties and use all of the rights of the 
president. 
  Esteemed deputies, in November 1989 we promised one another 
that we would speak the truth, that we would try to call things 
by their right names, that heads would not roll any longer, that 
we would be tolerant and decent, and that the bearing of grudges 
and hatred would come to an end. 
  In the spirit of these ideals, I am not asking Mr. Meciar to 
resign. But I appeal to all of you, including the prime 
minister, to unite forces and take steps that will start a stage 
of political, national, and civic reconciliation. I appeal to 
everyone to stop attacking one another, accusing one another, 
dishonoring one's opponents, and escalating the tension in 
society. Let us help everyone to help create a peaceful 
atmosphere for the early parliamentary elections and let the 
citizens decide about us. 
  We always have the chance to sit down together and agree on 
the rules and conditions for political, national, and civic 
conciliation in the interest of Slovakia and its citizens. 
  Thank you for your attention. [applause] 

