Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Daniel Kwan in Guangzhou and Elisabeth Tacey] </F>
  [Text] Guangdong Governor Zhu Senlin confirmed yesterday 
that at least two more nuclear power plants, much bigger than 
the existing station at Daya Bay, would be built to meet the 
province's electricity demand. The Government had already 
decided to add four more reactors at Daya Bay, Mr Zhu said 
before a session of the Guangdong People's Congress. "Yes. 
That's right. The second nuclear plant will be at Daya Bay," 
he said. The third, which will have six generating units will 
be at Yangjiang City 226 kilometres west of Hong Kong. Each 
generator will produce 1,000 megawatts. "We would like to build 
more according to our plans, but it is still difficult to say 
when we will build the fourth and the fifth." 
  It is believed Guangdong wants the second Daya Bay station, 
to be built about five kilometres away at the village of Lingao, 
to come on stream within four years. Confirmation of many more 
nuclear facilities so close to Hong Kong could deal a severe 
blow to confidence in the territory where many people still have 
doubts over the safety of the first reactors, which went into 
operation last month. Hong Kong's environmentalists and 
legislators fear poorer safety standards and cost-cutting will 
make the new power plants more dangerous than the existing Daya 
Bay plant. Although Daya Bay has already started operation, the 
Hong Kong Government still had difficulties reaching a full 
agreement with Guangdong on how to deal with nuclear accidents. 
  It was understood that Prime Minister Li Peng had given his 
consent to the construction of the second plant at Daya Bay. 
Each reactor will have a power generation capacity of 900 
megawatts. Liang Zhenyuan, party secretary of Yangjiang, 
confirmed that road construction and site surveys for the third 
nuclear plant had been completed. The mayor of Yangjiang city, 
Wen Paotian, said the plant would cost about 100 billion yuan 
(HK$88.8 billion) and would be financed mainly by foreign 
investment. Mr Liang insisted nuclear plants built in China 
would be safe as did Mr Zhu. "There is no need to worry about 
safety. We have very secure safety measures. Many Hong Kong 
representatives have visited (Daya Bay)," Mr Zhu said. "We have 
a very comprehensive set of safety measures for areas located 
five or 30 km from the Daya Bay nuclear plant. "On this point, 
put your heart at ease," he said. 
  Executive Vice-Governor Lu Ruihua confirmed Guangdong was 
awaiting final approval from Beijing for the expansion of 
nuclear generation facilities. Mr Lu said nuclear energy was 
preferred because it was "pollution free". "We still have a 
power shortage even if we add all our existing energy resources 
together," he said. The nuclear plants would be financed by the 
Central and provincial governments. When asked whether 
Guangdong would consider foreign investment, Mr Lu said: "We 
will make that decision when the time comes." 
  However, Legislative Councillor the Reverend Fung Chi-wood 
said the Chinese Government decided in its 1980s feasibility 
study that Lingao, five kilometres northeast of Daya Bay and 
about 55 km from Hong Kong, was a less suitable site than Daya 
Bay for a nuclear plant because it was more prone to 
earthquakes. Because Hong Kong is unlikely to need any 
electricity from the plant after the Black Point power station 
comes on line, the territory's companies might be less 
interested in playing a role. Daya Bay provides 70 per cent of 
its output to Hong Kong. China Light and Power which owns 25 
per cent of the Daya Bay plant through its subsidiary Hong Kong 
Nuclear Investment Co, said that it had yet to consider becoming 
involved. But spokesman Dominic Tai Kwan-kuen said that "the 
theory is correct" that the company's interest might be reduced 
because it would not want to buy the electricity. 
  Mr Fung and colleague Emily Lau Wai-hing said they thought 
China would try to use the little knowledge learned from the 
Daya Bay plant to cut out foreign firms. Ms Lau said that 
considering how jittery Hong Kong people were about Daya Bay: 
"Why can't they build it somewhere else; why do they need to 
provoke the situation?" But Ms Lau and Christine Loh Kung-wai 
cautioned against trying to tell the Chinese what to do. It was 
none of Hong Kong's business where the mainland chose to build 
its power plants. 
  Friends of the Earth representative Lisa Hopkinson said it 
was "the height of foolhardiness" to go ahead with another plant 
before any disposal programme had been worked out for the waste 
that would be generated. She also said the probability of 
accidents increased with the number of plants built. And 
without any idea how to decommission old plants, China was 
building up a huge liability for the future. 

