CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Majid 'Atiyah] </F>
  [Text] The Finance Ministry received the largest number of 
recommendations to remedy problems stemming from fees, customs, 
and stamps. Following a meeting last Wednesday evening, Finance 
Minister Muhammad al-Razzaz told me that he is in the service of 
the "exporters," because export has become a national strategy 
and a priority in the development plan. 
  The finance minister said that finance policy has been 
greatly concerned with promoting exports, making efforts to 
remove all barriers facing exporters, and eliminating or 
reducing burdens on exports. The Finance Ministry is remedying 
any problem impeding exports. The pertinent agencies, such as 
Customs and Sales Tax, now go to production sites at exporters' 
requests to effect customs procedures regarding exports. Also, 
warehouse construction is being expanded in new urban areas to 
simplify and facilitate measures, especially those concerning 
exports. 
  Recently, two resolutions were issued to overcome obstacles 
and relieve exporters. The first resolution was made following 
complaints regarding delays in exporters' receipt of rebates of 
customs and sales tax paid on exported goods which have been 
exported. Under this resolution, exporters will recover the 
customs and sales tax they pay on Egyptian exports through an 
immediate rebate system. This system dispenses with long waits 
and the requirement to submit documents. A committee has been 
formed in the Customs Agency to determine the customs and 
general sales tax that must be returned under this system. The 
committee is comprised of representatives of the Customs Agency, 
Sales Tax Agency, and the Industrial Supervisory Agency, and a 
member of the Federation of Industries appointed by the chairman 
of the board of the Federation of Egyptian Industries. 
  This committee will have a technical secretariat. The 
secretariat will receive requests and data from brand-name 
manufacturers who import production materials, produce products 
on production lines, and export these national products under 
the drawback system. The technical secretariat will study these 
requests and present them to a committee formed to determine the 
value of the customs and sales tax to be returned to each 
national producer who exports under this system. The taxes are 
then returned based on the export customs previously authorized 
by the committee. Exporters will thus not have to submit 
documents for each shipment separately. 
  The second resolution concerns reducing the burden of 
guaranties that must be provided for goods cleared to enter 
Egypt or be transported from one place to another under special 
regulations--which are the "temporary permission," "transit," 
"warehouses," and "temporary clearance (except for passenger 
vehicles)" regulations. The following guaranties can be provided 
in lieu of payment of customs and general sales tax: 

  -  Monetary security or bank guarantee. 
  -  Pledges of governmental ministries and agencies, and public 
authorities. 
  -  A guaranty document, equal in value to the taxes due, issued 
to 
the credit of, and callable by, the Customs Agency and the Sales 
Tax Agency. 

    Under the "temporary permission regulation," payment of 
taxes 
due can also be guaranteed by a declaration guaranteed by not 
more than 80 percent of the net worth of a firm's assets and 
subsidiaries according to its most recent authorized balance. 
  All of these measures are designed to reduce the burdens on 
exporters and thus enable them to stand up to foreign 
competition policies. 
  These facilities are not limited to exporters. The customs 
committees can implement procedures at production and loading 
sites based on the exporter's request. The commodity will be 
exported directly from the relevant customs house--without the 
repetition of customs measures with respect to it. This will be 
done in conjunction with the establishment of a centralized, 
specialized administration for temporary permission and 
drawback, and the shortening of procedures to recover fees, 
taking into account that exported commodities are not subject to 
the sales tax. 

