Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Mario Chimanovitch] </F>
  [Text] The use of nuclear energy is by its nature a 
controversial issue. It becomes still more controversial when 
the discussion is about whether the government or the private 
sector should be in charge of nuclear activities. A document 
drafted by the Strategic Affairs Secretariat (SAE), to which 
this magazine had access, has added fuel to the atomic bonfire. 
SAE Memo No. 109, dated 11 February and signed by SAE head 
Admiral Mario Cesar Flores, favors the privatization of certain 
stages of the nuclear process and opposes the position 
traditionally defended by the Brazilian military of maintaining 
absolute government monopoly over the field. The document, which 
was handed to the SAE under secretary for plans and programs, 
was drafted to guide governmental action in the constitutional 
revision. It states: "There is no reason why private 
concessionaires should not be in charge of mining work, 
concentrates manufacturing, trade, and many other related 
activities. The same applies to electrical energy production." 
  Adm. Flores believes that one of the activities that could 
be 
performed by the private sector is nuclear fuel production. In 
his opinion, the government should only control the most 
sensitive sectors such as uranium enrichment. Private companies 
could, for example, participate in uranium mining or import 
certain components for the final fuel. He points out, however, 
that the National Nuclear Energy Commission [CNEN], i.e. the 
government, must preserve "its regulatory, supervisory, and 
licensing" role. He also suggests that the civilian sector 
should accompany nuclear activities through the establishment -- 
by the national Congress -- of a joint committee. This 
suggestion is in accordance with another bill proposed by Flores 
to reorganize the intelligence service, which also would be 
closely followed by a joint committee established by Congress. 
  Several countries such as the United States and France have 
adopted the policy of partially privatizing nuclear projects. 
Nonetheless, many still criticize Flores' proposal. Professor 
Bernardino Pontes, who acted as surveyor of the 
Vienna-headquartered International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
for 12 years, said: "The so-called nuclear fuel cycle must 
remain in Brazilian hands to protect it from international 
oligopolies." Pontes agrees nonetheless that private enterprises 
can be more effective in mining. He insists, however, that they 
should work under CNEN control "because there is a great deal of 
international greed now that Brazil is beginning to stand out in 
the extremely select club of countries that have nuclear 
technology." 
  In the opinion of Everton Carvalho, vice president of the 
Brazilian Nuclear Energy Association (Aben), Flores' proposal 
makes Brazil vulnerable. "The most serious thing is that the end 
of the monopoly would make it easy for foreign groups to 
accurately design a chart of our reserves," he said. It is 
believed that Brazilian uranium reserves total 280,000 metric 
tons. 
  Former CNEN President Rex Nazareth, who is a colonel and an 
engineer, believes the private sector's resources might 
contribute to reducing Brazilian backwardness in the nuclear 
field. 
  Another expert, Brigadier Sergio Xavier Ferolla -- who has 
been director of the Sao Jose dos Campos Aerospace Technical 
Center and is now commander of the Superior War College -- 
believes the government should give up only its monopoly over 
uranium exploitation. He includes the nuclear field among those 
that have "a highly strategic role and should therefore remain 
under government control on behalf of Brazilian sovereignty and 
society's interests." 
  In the eye of the storm, Adm. Flores remains calm and 
asserts 
that most of the controversy results from a "misunderstanding." 
Be as it may, the situation will become hotter this year because 
Brazil's strategic interests in the nuclear field will be 
analyzed by the Superior War College. This makes us forecast a 
new -- and more serious -- confrontation among those who defend 
and those who oppose absolute governmental monopoly over the 
nuclear field. 

