BFN 

<F P=106> ["Delayed NPT Accedence Hampers Ukraine's International </F>
space Research Cooperation" -- UKRINFORM headline; From the 
"Business News Weekly" feature No. 12, March 14-20 94] 
  [Text] On March 20 and several days on, a team of NASA 
experts is supposed to work in Kiev within the framework of U.S. 
Defense Secretary William Perry's visit to Ukraine. 
  Vladimir Gorbulin, director-general of the Ukrainian 
National 
Space Agency, believes that a NASA-UNSA dialogue will rule out 
bilateral cooperation in what involves space rocketry 
manufacture, because of Ukraine's failure to accede to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT]. 
  According to Mr. Gorbulin, Ukraine with its unique space 
rocketry technologies lost a year when its parliament refused to 
accede to NPT, while Russia managed to establish large-scale 
international cooperation in space research, primarily with the 
USA. 
  The Ukrainian National Space Agency together with the 
Ministry for foreign economic relations have been mustering 
support for Ukraine's prompt accedence to NPT. 
  During its crucial talks with NASA officers UNSA intends to 
discuss likely opportunities for joining efforts in Earth remote 
probing, satellite telecommunications and similar domains. 
  The Ukrainian side reportedly intends to offer NASA its 
side-vision radars for scanning oceanic surfaces, which were 
designed by the Yuzhnoye (Southern) designers, and the Paton 
Institute's technologies for arc welding and construction 
assembly in space. 
  Following the USSR's collapse Ukraine's space industry has 
sustained heavy losses. In particular, the Yuzhnoye designers 
personnel reduced by 3,000 over the two last years. (Mr. 
Gorbulin refused to specify the number of personnel currently 
employed by the Yuzhnoye Bureau, saying only the personnel loss 
was tremendous). 
  Luckily enough, as Mr. Gorbulin hastened to add, there has 
been no brain-drain in that case, since the relieved personnel 
remains in Ukraine. 

