BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report on opinions of officials from various </F>
political parties on the need to reorganize the government: 
"Party Opinions About Government Reorganization"] 
  [Text] Would you reduce the number of ministries and would 
you change the system of ministers without portfolio? Do you 
plan to set up a top economic ministry? 
  Gabor Kuncze, Alliance of Free Democrats [SZDSZ]: 
  Yes, but this will depend on the coalition negotiations. 
  Tamas Isepy, Christian Democratic People's Party [KDNP]: 
  We can give the same answer to both questions because, in 
addition to streamlining the system of government institutions, 
our political program also includes the creation of an economic 
ministry in charge of carrying out a uniform management of the 
economy. The reduction in the number of ministries is a direct 
consequence of the implementation of this program. 
  The KDNP would definitely change the system of ministers 
without portfolio. Ministers without portfolio can be put in 
charge of carrying out tasks that can adjust to the tasks and 
authority of various ministries only with difficulty. The 
presence of a minister without portfolio in charge of national 
security services continues to be justified, but the institution 
of minister without portfolio should be eliminated in places 
where their task can be adjusted to the authority of a given 
ministry. 
  Zoltan Gal, Hungarian Socialist Party [MSZP]: 
  In every country, the number of ministries and the number of 
government members was also determined by political 
considerations, in addition to government rationale. Therefore, 
for the purpose of a rational government, the MSZP would reduce 
the number of ministries, but it is also ready to face the fact 
that the coalition agreement would not permit this. This 
applies to a reduction in the number of ministers without 
portfolio and to the setting up of a top economic ministry 
alike. A strong and coordinated government activity is our goal. 
  Karoly Herenyi, Hungarian Democratic Forum [MDF]: 
  The reduction or increase in the number of ministries is a 
practical question. The decisive viewpoint is which way the 
government operates the most efficiently. From this viewpoint, 
it seems rational today to merge certain ministries. The MDF 
agrees in principle with the setting up of a top economic 
ministry because we endeavored to do this in 1990, but the 
crisis management at the time demanded the special treatment of 
certain "areas." Today, after the elections, the conditions for 
a top economic ministry have matured. 
  Laszlo Urban, Federation of Young Democrats [Fidesz]: 
  Yes. We are planning to set up a top economic ministry on 
the basis of the current Ministry of International Economic 
Relations, the economic policy department of the Finance 
Ministry, and the Industry Ministry. We would even subordinate 
the government institution in charge of carrying out the 
privatization to this top economic ministry. We also suggest to 
eliminate the position of minister without portfolio. 

