Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] VILNIUS, Feb 03, BNS - Skeptical and negative 
attitudes toward Lithuanian economic reforms have completely 
vanished, Lithuanian Prime Minister Adolfas Slezevicius said, 
commenting on the World Economic Forum that was held in the 
Swiss town of Davos last week. 
  At a press conference Thursday, Slezevicius said Lithuania's 
macroeconomic indexes started to approach Czech, Hungarian, 
Slovakian, Polish, Estonian and Latvian ones. The rate of 
inflation is the principal index, and "Lithuania is no longer 
considered a country with an average [as received] rate of 
inflation," he said. 
  Discussing his meetings in Davos, Slezevicius pointed out 
the 
meetings with Baltic and Scandinavian leaders. He said Swedish 
Prime Minister Carl Bildt invited the Baltic premiers for a 
meeting with their Nordic counterparts in early March. 
  As regards the way Latvian and Estonian premiers assessed 
the 
Davos meeting, Slezevicius said he is unwilling to make any 
critical remarks on any statements by Lithuania's neighbors. 
Slezevicius said there were no discussions in Davos "purely 
about Estonia" or that Lithuania's economy depends on Russia. 
  But the Lithuanian premier admitted that Estonia does not 
depend on Russia as much as Lithuania. In his opinion, this is 
so only because Estonia gets around 65 percent of its energy 
from local shale, while Lithuania has to buy Russian oil and 
nuclear fuel. 
  Commenting on relations with Russia, which were on of the 
key 
issues in Davos, Slezevicius said Lithuania is unable to 
establish a normal dialog with Russia and to solve a number of 
problems. The premier said the Lithuanian government tries to 
arrange a meeting with Russian leaders, but all attempts have 
failed so far. "I have asked several times to speak to Mr. 
Chernomyrdin, but the instable situation in Russia really stops 
us." 
  The Lithuanian premier said the dialog with Poland and 
Belarus, on such problems as border delimitation, is very 
difficult, as well. 

