Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed "K.B.": "The Embargo Against Serbia Is Being </F>
Breached"] 
  [Text] Cologne, 20 January -- Customs Service investigation 
bureaus have launched 346 probes into possible breaches of the 
trade embargo against Serbia and Montenegro since the beginning 
of the year. The figure was provided by the Customs Service 
Criminal Investigation Department in Cologne, which has a 
coordinating function and gathers information in the course of 
overseeing German foreign trade. 
  The EU [European Union] embargo, which followed UN sanctions 
resolutions, has been in force since June 1992. The embargo has 
applied to UN Protection Areas in Croatia and Serbian-controlled 
areas in Bosnia since April 1993. In a conversation with the 
FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE, the Customs Service Criminal 
Investigation Department stated that the undoubtedly high number 
of cases must be seen in perspective. At the same time, however, 
their importance should not be played down. Apart from a large 
number of minor breaches, there are also a several serious cases 
involving German companies. 
  A total of 180 investigations have been launched into bus 
companies alone: They are alleged to have transported Serbian 
citizens to their home country or to have collected them from 
there. Journeys by bus, like travel generally, also come under 
the extensive embargo covering services. Apart from Serbian 
businessmen, there are also several German businessmen involved 
in operating such services. This has led the Transportation 
Ministry to appeal to the relevant associations to warn their 
members about the consequences of violating the embargo. 
  Of the four convictions that have been obtained in the 59 
criminal proceedings instituted by the Customs Service Criminal 
Investigation Department on suspicion of violations of the 
embargo, one involves the Serbian owner of a bus company in 
Germany. He received an 18-month jail sentence and a period of 
probation. Violations of the embargo can be dealt with under 
Paragraph 34, Article 4, of the Law on Foreign Trade and such 
offenses carries a minimum sentence of two years imprisonment. 
In cases of lesser violations, at least a fine has to be 
imposed. 
  Minor cases involve Serbian citizens attempting to bring 
food, liquor, or tobacco products into Germany. They do not 
include the normal provisions that people take with them on 
journeys. The 60 kg of beef, 18 kg of wool, 435 kg of cabbage, 
and 192 liters of spirits that have been in found in the 
possession of Serbs entering the country are treated as 
violations of the embargo. 
  Serious cases currently under investigation or already under 
criminal proceedings involve German companies importing millions 
of German marks worth of frozen fruit, shoes, and cables. 
Former Yugoslavia has traditionally supplied large quantities 
of fruit for processing. Since the imposition of the embargo, 
however, investigations have not been initiated against firms 
involved directly in processing, but against trading companies. 
Of the 364 investigations that have been launched, 167 concern 
imports and 65 concern exports. 
  Investigations indicate that many of the companies based in 
Germany against whom proceedings have been instituted are in 
Serbian hands. Deliveries of magnesium are a special case. 
They could only stem from Serbian plants, which have supplied 
German industry for many years. The customs service has 
established that magnesium continues to be delivered, but 
Macedonia is being given as the country of origin. 
  Of the 52 criminal proceedings that were instituted by 
Customs Service investigation bureaux following the conclusion 
of investigations, the state prosecution service has only 
decided not to continue with proceedings in nine cases according 
to the Customs Service Criminal Investigation Department. The 
Customs Service Criminal Investigation Department has not been 
fully informed about the outcome of the criminal proceedings, 
because the prosecution service and courts are not obliged to 
pass on such information to federal agencies. 
  With regard to the weapons embargo that was imposed by the 
United Nations on all of former Yugoslavia in 1991, the Customs 
Service Criminal Investigation Service has received no 
indications of violations involving weapons or ammunition. The 
embargo also covers other forms of military equipment. 
Investigations have revealed that used equipment has been 
supplied by Germany. Initially, this also involved trucks that 
previously belonged to the former National People's Army. In 
1993, for example, criminal proceedings and monetary penalties 
have been instituted in cases of deliveries of belts, boots, 
tents, steel helmets, and berets. 

