Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Matsushita Electric Industries has developed a low 
noise, red semiconductor laser which will be a light source for 
the next generation of optical disk devices. The noise has been 
reduced to one-tenth compared to conventional devices, and this 
can meet the standards for image signal and data memory 
equipment for Hi-Vision video. Also, the circuit configuration 
may be simplified because it is a positive power source drive. 
Samples of a joint record and playback device (light output 35 
mW) and a playback only device (light output 5 mW) in a compact 
package with a diameter of 5.6mm will begin shipment in January 
of next year. Red light sources have a shorter wavelength 
compared to the current near infrared light sources, and the 
recording density is 1.3 times higher. 
  This same red semiconductor laser emits a laser light with a 
wavelength of 680 nm. The device has been made multibeam which 
has little noise generated from interference with reflected 
light compared to single beam oscillation, and the signal to 
noise ratio has been dropped to approximately one-tenth (a 
relative noise strength of -120 dB). By doing this, a high 
product quality laser light was obtained which records and plays 
back image signals and data. The operational temperature range 
is between -10 and +50&deg; C. Samples of the joint record and 
playback device (operational current 90 mA, threshold value 
current 45 mW, sample price &yen;70,000), and the playback only 
device (35 mA, 25 mW, &yen;10,000) will be shipped from January 
of next year. 
  Also, the drive power source was made into the same positive 
drive voltage environment as the +2.5V of the surrounding 
circuits. In addition, heightening the thermal release 
efficiency also contributes to making a simpler, more compact 
and thinner configuration of the light pick up parts, allowing 
assembly into a package with a diameter of 5.6mm 
(conventionally, a 9mm diameter). 
  Red light reduces the spot diameter 30&percnt; compared to 
the near 
infrared laser that is the light source of current optical disk 
devices (wavelength 780 nm). For this reason, the recording 
point can be made smaller, and the recording density per unit 
surface area can be enlarged. 

