BFN 

<F P=106> [By Joe Studwell] </F>
  [Text] Over the past 18 months, a procession of Hong Kong 
newspaper proprietors, as well as news controllers from the 
colony's two television stations, have been royally entertained 
in Beijing. Invitations to Hong Kong's media grandees to visit 
the Chinese capital were extended by the Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office, a unit of the Chinese Government with special 
responsibility for Hong Kong relations. The stated reason for 
the visits was to improve contacts and understanding between the 
Hong Kong media and its future overseers in Beijing. 
  In reality, Beijing's agenda was a little broader. The 
actual host of the visits was not the Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office but the Chinese Communist Party's Department of 
Propaganda. The underlying objective was to pursue a policy, 
agreed at the highest party levels, to increase Beijing's 
influence and support among Hong Kong's media proprietors as the 
1997 resumption of Chinese sovereignty approaches. 
  The policy has been discussed since at least 1991, when the 
Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and senior Chinese ministers 
reportedly identified increasing China's influence among the 
Hong Kong mass media as a key objective. What has surprised 
observers is the rigor with which the policy has been pursued. 
With the exception of the recalcitrant, pro-democracy owner of 
the financial paper Hong Kong Economic Journal, everyone who is 
anyone in Hong Kong media has been wooed to Beijing for talks 
with leaders from President Jiang Zemin down. 
  At Government House in Hong Kong, China's moves have been 
met 
with consternation and muted outrage. Under Governor Chris 
Patten, the Hong Kong Government itself has been conducting an 
effective media campaign in support of its proposals for greater 
democracy. Local journalists, who were once lucky if they ever 
saw the inside of Government House, are now regularly invited to 
the governor's residence for private briefings. Patten's press 
secretary, Mike Hanson, holds court in reception rooms 
redecorated with soft furnishings and soothing pastel colors. 
It is a slick operation and one, backed by Patten's 
man-of-the-people image, that has produced results. In local 
newspapers not directly funded by Beijing, the Hong Kong 
Government aims to have three column inches of copy sourced from 
itself for every one sourced from China's mouthpiece in Hong 
Kong, the New China News Agency (Xinhua). Under Patten, it has 
not had great difficulty achieving this. 
  China's overtures to Hong Kong's media proprietors have, 
therefore, been all the more galling for the Patten regime. The 
Hong Kong Government sees Beijing, unable to persuade local 
journalists of its case, bringing pressure to bear instead on 
their bosses. But it is no surprise. In the struggle for the 
Hong Kong media, China has tried everything from appeals to 
patriotic sentiment, to economic leverage, to measured amounts 
of bullying. The most potent weapon, of course, is the economic 
one. 
  Most of Hong Kong's media proprietors have been sizing up 
the 
China market; many are already in it. The potential rewards are 
dazzling. If China wants to get Hong Kong's media proprietors 
on its side, the best way is to offer its media market to them. 
This is where the problems begin. 
  Hong Kong has a free press. China does not; nor does its 
government want one. So the dilemma facing media owners who 
cooperate with Beijing is that they cannot predict how much 
leeway they will be given in their mainland media ventures. 
They know the downside of working with Beijing--pressure to 
bring editorial policy in Hong Kong in line with China's views. 
But they don't know the upside--how much money they can make in 
China. The situation has produced much maneuvering among Hong 
Kong's media moguls. As you would expect from people in the 
story business, their tales make an interesting yarn. 
  Of all Hong Kong's newspaper proprietors, probably the most 
important to Beijing is Sally Aw Sian. Her Sing Tao group 
controls the colony's third most popular Chinese paper, Tin Tin 
Daily News, the English language Hong Kong Standard, and the 
company's flagship Chinese language dailies: The morning Sing 
Tao Jih Pao and the evening Sing Tao Wan Pao. Together these 
publications are read by a large slice of middlebrow Hong Kong. 
  Aw is also a world leader in newspaper publishing for 
Chinese 
communities in North America, Australasia, and Europe. Sing Tao 
has an overseas edition that is published in nine cities 
worldwide with a circulation of 160,000. Since Beijing is also 
interested in influencing what overseas Chinese read, Aw is 
doubly significant. "Sally can deliver (the overseas Chinese). 
That is why she is important," says a former Sing Tao executive 
who knows her well. 
  When the Chinese Government began to look at ways of 
getting on good terms with Aw, however, it faced a huge 
obstacle. Not only is Aw an important publisher, she is an 
important Nationalist publisher. At least she was. Sally Aw's 
father, Aw Boon Haw, owned several newspapers in southern China 
and Singapore before 1949 and he and his editorials supported 
Chiang Kai-shek in the civil war. After 1949, when the press in 
Hong Kong split into factions supporting either the communist 
winners in Beijing or the Kuomintang losers in Taiwan, she 
remained a stalwart of the Nationalist cause. When Beijing 
first approached Aw in 1991, her Sing Tao daily still carried 
the old Republic of China date at the top of every edition--the 
standard means of identifying a Kuomintang newspaper. (Taiwan, 
or the Republic of China, dates itself from the fall of the Qing 
dynasty in 1911.) Such historical baggage did not bode well for 
relations between Beijing and Sing Tao. Aw's father was 
classified as a counterrevolutionary by the communists after 
1949 and his property was confiscated. For two reasons, 
however, there proved to be a way forward. The first was that 
Beijing was prepared to pay a high price to have Sally Aw as a 
friend. The second was that Aw wanted into China almost as much 
as China wanted to have her. 
  Sing Tao's room for profitable expansion among overseas 
Chinese communities has largely been used up. But Aw remains 
ambitious. "Sing Tao wants to be the biggest Chinese publisher 
in the world," says Alan Ng, media analyst for S.G. Warburg 
Securities (Far East) Ltd. The only place for the group to go 
is China. 
  Encouraged by Sing Tao's board, Aw responded to Beijing's 
early overtures through a newly recruited executive, Ung Gim 
Sei. Ung is the former general manager of Singapore Press 
Holding's Chinese newspapers division and gained experience in 
China when he was asked by Singapore to develop cultural and 
media contacts with Beijing. Ung put this experience to use by 
beginning negotiations for Sing Tao in 1992. Beijing, 
meanwhile, had already shown that it was serious about doing 
business. 
  In 1991, the Chinese Government decided that Aw's father was 
not in fact a counterrevolutionary but a patriot. He was 
rehabilitated. Property confiscated from him in Shantou, Xiamen, 
Fuzhou, and Guangzhou was offered back to Sally Aw. This was no 
small olive branch, as the case of one of the properties 
illustrates. Aw Boon Haw's large, colonial-style newspaper 
office on the banks of the Pearl River in Guangzhou was taken 
over by the Guangdong Provincial Labor Union after 1949. 
Compensation to get the labor union out, so that Sally Aw can 
have the property back, has cost the Chinese $3 million. 
  By November 1992 the stage was set for Aw's first-ever visit 
to China (she was born in Burma and had not lived in China even 
before 1949). The remaining question was how she would be 
received in Beijing. The reception, as it turned out, was 
extremely positive. As Aw's former colleague, quoted above, 
says: "They gave her a lot of face." 
  Aw traveled to Beijing with her mother, now in her 90s, and 
her elder brother's widow--the three Aw family chieftains known 
in their publishing group as "the three ladies of Sing Tao." 
They were housed in Diaoyutai State Guesthouse, normally 
reserved for senior visitors from foreign governments. They 
were met by Premier Li Peng and General Secretary and President 
Jiang Zemin. In a highly symbolic gesture, Li Peng's wife came 
forward to take Aw's mother by the arm and support her. China 
was showing itself more than willing to forget the past. The 
visit was even publicized on national television. 
  By the time Aw went home she had signed the first licensed 
media joint venture in China. It was for a 50-50 partnership 
with the People's Daily in Beijing in a small leisure magazine 
called Xing Guang (Starlite) Monthly. Two other ventures 
followed during 1993: For a television guide in Guangzhou and a 
financial newspaper in Shenzhen. 
  Back in Hong Kong, it was decided that on April 1, 1993, the 
Republic of China dating should be removed from all editions of 
Sing Tao. In the territory, this did little more than raise 
eyebrows. In the U.S., however, an outcry from Nationalist 
Chinese organizations forced the dating to be restored on two 
editions. 
  Editorial changes in the content of Sing Tao's Hong Kong 
newspapers have occurred more slowly but a year later are not 
difficult to discern. "The changes in Sing Tao (daily) can be 
seen by everybody," says the editor of one independent Hong Kong 
magazine. In the [Hongkong] Standard, the coverage of Governor 
Patten's first policy speech in 1992 is far different from 
coverage of his political reform efforts today. Where once 
Patten was in favor with the paper's editors, he no longer is. 
And when human rights group Asiawatch released a report in 
February detailing China's political imprisonments and 
executions, it was emblazoned on the front pages of the South 
China Morning Post and the Eastern Express. But the Standard 
ignored the report entirely. The Sing Tao group's newspapers 
have moved overtly in Beijing's direction. 
  In China, Ung Gim Sei has been joined by another Singaporean 
to negotiate more media ventures for Sing Tao. Aw's latest 
recruit is James Fu, a man with experience in controlled 
media--he was Lee Kuan Yew's press secretary for 21 years and 
director of the media division of Singapore's Ministry of 
Information and the Arts. 
  Singapore's government, besides maintaining close control 
over the local press, restricts the circulation of foreign 
publications that contradict or criticize it, or refuse it the 
right of unedited reply. Schooled in this media environment, Fu 
is undoubtedly someone that Beijing can trust. As Fu's partner 
Ung points out, when negotiating media ventures with the Chinese 
government: "It depends on how much they trust you." That is 
why, he adds: "We have been selected, in a sense, to do this." 
  The bottom line for Sing Tao in China is still unclear. 
There are many obstacles to be overcome before its ventures can 
be profitable. China limits advertising in newspapers to 25 to 
30 percent of their content (Sing Tao in Hong Kong, by 
comparison, is more than 60 percent advertising) and this 
restricts income. There are also caps on advertising rates, 
though Sing Tao may be able to circumvent these. Editorial 
control, in all Sing Tao China ventures, remains in the hands of 
its Chinese partners, making it difficult to serve the real 
demands of the audience. 
  "Theoretically, the China market has much better long-term 
potential than Hong Kong but it will probably be quite difficult 
to make money in the short term," says S.G. Warburg's Ng. 
Nonetheless, Aw has decided there is money to be made in 
Chinese media, and she is improving relations with Beijing. 
Just where those relations may lead is indicated by the fact 
that the Standard has become the Hong Kong carrier of the 
Chinese Government's English language newspaper, the China 
Daily. Thus, every Monday, Aw publishes the official, 
Beijing-censored utterings of the mainland press. 
  Why she would want to do this is unclear. A senior Sing Tao 
executive offers a clue when he gives his view of life beyond 
1997: "It's definite," he says, "there won't be freedom of the 
press any more." Sing Tao, as a commercial enterprise, is 
pragmatically planning to profit from Hong Kong's reunion with 
China. Says Roddy Yu, the group's associate director of 
marketing: "If we had a choice, we'd ask (Beijing) to let us 
freely distribute Sing Tao in China. That's what we want to 
do." In order to get Sing Tao daily and the group's other 
papers into China, however, Aw first has to make her editorial 
content acceptable. Beijing wins. 
  China's success in finding friends among the Hong Kong media 
reached a peak last October when Malaysian tycoon Robert Kuok, 
an official adviser to Beijing on Hong Kong affairs, bought a 
34.9 percent stake in the South China Morning Post. The Post 
and the Hong Kong Economic Journal are the only two papers in 
Hong Kong to have consistently championed Governor Patten's 
democratic reform proposals. Kuok's takeover of the Post was 
seen as helpful to Beijing's efforts to have a uniformly 
sympathetic Hong Kong media. Kuok, for his part, has denied 
rumors of Beijing involvement in the purchase (fueled by the 
fact that the Bank of China has lent him an unspecified 
proportion of the money). He has also stated that the paper's 
editorial policy will remain unchanged and to date it has. 
  The Post takeover, however, proved to be a complication in 
the struggle for the Hong Kong media. Just when Beijing 
appeared to have its people in place, Ma Ching Kwan (C.K.) 
crashed the party. Ma, chairman of the Oriental Press Group Ltd. 
(OPG), is Hong Kong's biggest newspaper publisher. He had long 
been on China's list of proprietors it wanted to talk to and he 
went to Beijing a couple of weeks before the Post sale was 
announced. 
  Ma must have realized his visit was important when he found 
himself sitting next to a senior official from the New China 
News Agency on the flight to Beijing. Ma refuses to discuss 
what happened in Beijing (it is known he saw Foreign Minister 
Qian Qichen and Jiang Zemin) but subsequent events make it clear 
he did not see a profit in backing China. Kuok's purchase of 
the Post caused him to decide there was more money to be earned 
from an independent approach. 
  The stock market was also wary of Kuok's long-term plans for 
the paper. Between Kuok's purchase and mid-December, the Post's 
share price underperformed Hong Kong's Hang Seng index by 29 
percent. "The market," says Charles Whitworth, media analyst at 
Wardley James Capel, "is preoccupied with the fact that Kuok 
owns the Post and nobody believes he is not going to change 
anything." 
  None of this would have interested Ma if the Post were not 
immensely profitable. Kuok's purchase valued the entire paper 
at $1 billion, reflecting the high advertising income that Hong 
Kong's English-language print media enjoy. The Post, with 
circulation around 100,000, had advertising revenues of $78 
million in the first six months of 1993. Ma's Oriental Daily, 
Hong Kong's best-selling newspaper with a circulation of 
600,000, managed just $50 million in the same period. Ma 
already had spare office space and printing capacity available. 
He wanted a piece of the English language action. 
  This was the genesis of Hong Kong's third English-language 
newspaper, the Eastern Express. The paper is not Ma's usual 
style. He is a mass-circulation publisher who speaks limited 
English himself. He took over the Oriental group in 1977 at age 
21, after his father and uncle jumped bail on heroin smuggling 
charges and fled to Taiwan. He rapidly expanded OPG's 
blue-collar market, proving himself an astute businessman. 
Having examined the economic argument in favor of cooperating 
with Beijing, Ma has found it wanting. Eastern Express is a 
better deal. 
  "Essentially, it's a profit-generated decision," says Ma's 
deputy Herman Hui, managing director of OPG. "The English 
newspaper business in Hong Kong is very well remunerated." Hui 
points out that while Robert Kuok paid $349 million for 34.9 
percent of the Post, Ma is putting up only about $3.9 million in 
startup costs for 100 percent of the Eastern Express. 
  Asked about the tactics of Sally Aw's rival Sing Tao group, 
Hui says: "How much is she making in China? The profit margin 
of my papers is much higher than hers. She thinks China is a 
gold mine? I don't know. China will be a gold mine? Maybe. 
I'm not going to give up making a profit here now and keep my 
fingers crossed for a possible profit in the future in China." 
  Hui's economic analysis may bring down the wrath of Beijing: 
"Whatever consequences there may be," he says, "we are prepared 
to face them." The group has made a calculated decision: "C.K. 
Ma feels big enough to stand up to Beijing," says one of the 
owners of a rival Chinese language newspaper. "It would be a 
worldwide scandal if they closed Oriental Daily News." 
  OPG also does not have any interests in China to which 
Beijing can apply pressure. The group is sticking to a straight 
Hong Kong operation. This makes it easier to throw down the 
editorial gauntlet to the Post. If the Post gives up its 
pro-democracy line, it will hand its readers to the Express. 
The Post's daily editor, David Armstrong, even found it 
necessary to make a speech to his own journalists reaffirming 
the paper's commitment to doctrines such as democracy and 
freedom of expression. If anything, says one senior Post 
editor, the paper is now trying to sound more pro-democracy than 
the Express. In the English-language market, Beijing's efforts 
to control the Hong Kong media have opened a Pandora's box. 
  Among broadcasters, China has fewer problems. Hong Kong's 
main broadcaster, Television Broadcasts Ltd. (TVB), will this 
year launch a satellite service in China that is entirely 
dependent on the cooperation of government-controlled cable 
networks. TVB, in which Robert Kuok is also a major 
shareholder, needs good relations with Beijing. So far, that 
hasn't been a problem. After it bought the rights to a 
controversial documentary depicting Chairman Mao as a tyrant and 
a womanizer, for example, it chose--apparently under pressure 
from China--not to broadcast the film. 
  TVB's smaller competitor, ATV [Asia Television Ltd], is also 
eyeing the China market. There is some evidence that China 
ambitions have already affected the broadcasters' Hong Kong news 
output. In one incident, both companies last year arranged and 
then suddenly canceled interviews with Chinese dissident Wei 
Jingsheng. Both stations rejected claims that this was the 
result of pressure from Beijing. But neither offered 
satisfactory explanations. TVB said it had already interviewed 
Wei. The interview, though, was not organized by the company's 
news editors but by independent journalists acting on their own 
initiative. One disenchanted Hong Kong television reporter, 
reflecting on the case, claims Beijing already has much 
influence in the industry: "You end up doing New China News 
Agency propaganda," she says. 
  While that may be exaggerated, China's willingness to use 
leverage to influence the Hong Kong media is not. Three and a 
half years before Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese sovereignty, 
just one Chinese language newspaper, the Economic Journal, is 
willing to contradict Beijing on political issues. Its editor, 
George Shen, says simply: "We are the only one left in the 
group." 
  Some observers of the Hong Kong media, however, are not as 
pessimistic. Johnny Lau Yui-siu, deputy editor in chief of 
China- watching magazine Contemporary Monthly, has personal 
experience with the problems China's media regulators face. For 
16 years he was a reporter for the Beijing-funded daily Wen Wei 
Po, until he and his paper published candid accounts of the 
killings of June 4, 1989. In effect, one of Beijing's own 
newspapers in Hong Kong turned against it. As Lau points out, 
controlling proprietors is not necessarily the same as 
controlling journalism: "The thinking of Beijing," he says, "is 
often frustrated." 
  Lau argues that China's media task in Hong Kong is more 
difficult than has been made out: "I think even if the bosses 
are accepting the call of the so-called United Front (in support 
of China)," he says, "if the demands of the audience remain the 
same, new papers will come out." The arrival of Eastern Express 
appears to prove Lau right. 
  Express editor Stephen Vines notes that a key advantage for 
publications that do not toe Beijing's line is that they find it 
extremely easy to recruit good journalists. "It's quite a 
popular option to come and work here given the state of the Hong 
Kong press," he says. The question, of course, is whether his 
journalists will still have a job after 1997. 

