BFN 

  [Text] THE political scene grew more volatile yesterday 
after prominent figures formed a task force to back hunger 
striker Chalat Worachat, with strong support from hardliners in 
the Phalang Tham Party. 
  An unlikely alliance also appeared to be taking shape 
between 
the newly formed "Thai Political Reform Organization" and 
opposition parties, which the pro-democracy movement toppled 
from power in the 1992 uprising. 
  The second biggest opposition party, Chat Phatthana, sent a 
representative to attend the inauguration at Thammasat 
University of the Thai Political Reform Organization (TPRO), 
which brought together leading pro-democracy activists who 
called themselves "Friends of Chalat". 
  A Phalang Tham hardliner, who did not want to be named, 
claimed the pro-Chalat movement was lobbying for the 
opposition's support. He said yesterday's development was part 
of a collaboration to isolate the ruling Democrat Party, which 
has rejected as impractical Chalat's demand for a totally new 
Constitution drafted by the House of Representatives. 
  A key member of the New Aspiration Party, the Democrats' 
most 
powerful ally, also joined the expanding campaign for a new 
charter. Deputy NAP [New Aspiration Party] leader Wira 
Musikaphong, who has been rumoured to be planning to defect to 
Phalang Tham, became one of 21 core members of the TPRO. 
  Yesterday was the ninth day of Chalat's hunger strike. 
Doctors who examined him said his condition had stabilized 
after the activist collapsed earlier this week. But they 
expressed concern that constant intravenous feeding of a glucose 
and saline solution could lead to a state of shock. 
  Phalang Tham founder Chamlong Simuang made his strongest 
show 
of support yet for Chalat yesterday and criticized the 
government for claiming that the only way to comply with 
Chalat's demand was to stage a coup against itself and abolish 
the present Constitution. 
  "Chalat has floated an intriguing idea for us, but people 
said a coup is the only way to implement it. How can we achieve 
full democracy with this kind of attitude?" Chamlong said. 
  He echoed Chalat's statements that present charter, no 
matter 
how much it is altered, will always remain a legacy of the 
military junta. 
  The government has insisted that the present charter 
prohibits the drafting of a new charter. The only way to 
promulgate a new Constitution is to amend the present charter to 
remove the obstacles, which is politically impossible unless the 
opposition co-operates. 
  Chat Phatthana leader Chatchai Chunhawan, who had earlier 
suggested that Chalat's demand was not feasible, seemed to 
soften his stand yesterday and insisted that the government "is 
responsible for Chalat's life". 
  "Opposition parties have not yet discussed how to help 
Chalat," he said. 
  The Phalang Tham hardliners' increasingly active role in the 
Chalat affair has strained the party's relations with the 
Democrats. Former deputy Bangkok governor Chaiwat Sinsuwong, who 
triggered a Democrat uproar on Thursday with a strong anti-Chuan 
remark, is now a TPRO member. 
  But Mana Mahasuwerachai, a Phalang Tham MP who had tried to 
broker a solution between Chalat and the government, yesterday 
distanced himself from the activist, whom he implied had 
breached an agreement made earlier with the Democrats and was 
being manipulated by anti-government elements. 
  Other key TPRO members include San Hathirat, chairman of the 
pro-Chamlong Confederation for Democracy; Dr Weng Tochirakan, 
secretary general of the Campaign for Popular Democracy [CPD]; 
ex-student leader Prinya Tewanaruamitkun, the deputy CPD 
secretary-general; and Chalat's daughter, Chitrawadi Worachat. 
  Anti-government activities by branch members of political 
action groups such as the Confederation for Democracy and 
student unions were held in the major provinces yesterday. 
  In Khon Kaen, a panel discussion was held at a hotel with 
New 
Aspiration deputy leader Wira, Phalang Tham MP Chaiwat and rock 
singer Yunyong Ophakun as guest speakers. 
  They discussed plans to stage a mass demonstration in Khon 
Kaen and other northeastern provinces to support Chalat's cause. 
Later yesterday, they were to appear at a rally at a teachers' 
training college in Maha Sarakham province. 
  In the southern province of Nakhon Si Thammarat, activist 
groups issued a statement praising Chalat for his "courage and 
sacrifice" to pressure the government to achieve fuller 
democracy in the shortest possible time. 
  At Thammasat University, when the TPRO was unveiled, the 
most 
upbeat speaker was one of the staunchest anti-government 
critics, controversial Sulak Siwalak. 
  "If the government can't reform the charter, we the people 
will do it ourselves," he said. 

