BFN 

  [Text] [no dateline as received] On June 11 morning, the 
boundary agreement will be signed between the Lao PDR [People's 
Democratic Republic] president and the Myanmar [Burma] SLORC 
[State Law and Order Restoration Council] chairman in the 
presence of the official delegations from both sides. After 
signing the agreement, the SLORC chairman and his delegation 
will visit That Luang temple in Vientiane, and in the afternoon 
will leave for Luang Prabang and will come back to Vientiane on 
June 12 afternoon. 
  Yesterday, Lao Deputy Foreign Minister Souban Salitthilat 
and 
Myanmar Ambassador to Laos U Maung Maung Lay signed two maps of 
the boundary, scale 1/10,000 and scale 1/50,000, between the two 
countries. The boundary, 236 km along the Mekong river, has 
been jointly surveyed since January 1991. 
  In connection with his visit to Laos, Senior General Than 
Shwe's biography and portrait was published in today's issues of 
the local dailies "PASASON" and "VIENTIANE MAI." 
  Senior Gen. Than Shwe was born on February 2, 1933. He 
completed his military study as a military officer. He joined 
the army in 1953 and since then had been promoted to several 
military ranks until he became deputy chief of staff of the army 
in 1980. In 1990 he became vice chairman of the SLORC, deputy 
chief of the general staff and deputy supreme commander. 
  He was appointed to the current posts as chairman of the 
SLORC, prime minister and army supreme commander on April 23, 
1992. He has been awarded medals on sixteen occasions. 
  On arrival at the airport, the Myanmar delegation issued a 
statement on its visit to the Lao PDR. 
  Following is the full text of the statement: 
  At the invitation of His Excellency Mr. Nouhak Phoumsavan, 
president of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, His 
Excellency Senior Gen. Than Shwe, chairman of the State Law and 
Order Restoration Council, accompanied by Madame Than Shwe, 
Secretary of the State Law and Order Restoration Council Lt. 
General Khin Nyunt and high-ranking officials of the government 
of the Union of Myanmar arrived in Vientiane on an official 
friendship visit to friendly neighbouring country, the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic, from 9 to 13 June 1994. 
  The leader of the Myanmar delegation conveys the greetings 
and goodwill of the people of the Union of Myanmar to the 
president, and through him, to the people of the Lao People's 
Democratic Republic. Reflecting the steady growth of friendship, 
cooperation and understanding between the two leaderships and 
peoples, exchanges of visits at the highest level took place in 
recent years providing further impetus for development of 
sharing experience and technology in the fields of agriculture, 
forestry, construction works and recreational facilities. There 
has been increasing contacts between the two countries in the 
religious fields by exchange of visits among Buddhist monks and 
donations of religious objects and materials in both countries. 
  Since December 1990, Myanmar [Burma] and Laos have been 
cooperating in the field of drug abuse control through the 
meetings of national commission. The cooperation has been 
further consolidated in the signing of the memorandum of 
understanding among the People's Republic of China, the Lao 
People Democratic Republic, the Union of Myanmar, and the 
Kingdom of Thailand on 26 October 1993 in New York. Ministerial 
level meetings also took place between Myanmar, Thailand, and 
Laos from 13 to 14 March 1992 in Bangkok, and from 9 to 11 
February 1994 in Yangon [Rangoon]. 
  As good neighbours, Myanmar and Laos have commenced the 
process of the demarcation of the boundary between the two 
countries since 1990 under the management of the joint boundary 
commission and successfully carried out the completion of 
drawing the agreement relating to the fixed boundary between the 
two countries in the Mekong river. The Myanmar delegation looks 
forward to sign the boundary agreement during the visit. 
  While in the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the Myanmar 
delegation will hold friendly meetings between the two heads of 
state and at other ministerial levels to exchange views between 
the two governments, thus contributing to the progress and 
stability of the region. 
  The spirit of friendship and cooperation between the 
neighbouring countries prevails between Myanmar and Laos and on 
various occasions Myanmar had donated rice, paddy seeds, salt, 
water pumps, teak seeds and other commodities to Laos in Yangon. 
The Laotian side donated 20,000 kips [Lao currency] on 5 
September 1991 for the victims of the floods in the Ayayarwaddy 
division. 
  The chairman of the State Law and Order Restoration Council 
and Madame Than Shwe will visit places of historical and 
cultural interest as well as economic centres during their stay 
in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. 

