Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Hiroshi Magami: "A Study of Morihiro Hosokawa: </F>
The `Alien' Prime Minister"] 
  [Text] Tadateru Konoe, vice president of the Japan Red 
Cross Society and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's younger 
brother, clearly remembers the occasion when he and Morihiro 
Hosokawa were invited to dinner by Ryoich Sasagawa. It was in 
1971, just after Hosokawa was elected a member of the House of 
Councillors. He ran for election for the national constituency 
against Shintaro Ishihara and could win by having some of the 
votes from Reiyukai [a religious group]--Ishihara's 
supporters--allocated to him. 
  After dinner Sasagawa reportedly made the following comment 
about Hosokawa: "He will never become a cabinet minister." 
  However, Morihiro Hosokawa, whom Roichi Sasagawa declared 
"unable to become a cabinet minister", has risen to the highest 
rank and become prime minister. 
  Konoe reflects that "Sasagawa, a politician who could become 
a cabinet minister, would have been capable of handling matters 
through haragei [implicit signaling], and would also have been 
capable of persuading people by intimidation." For example, 
Kakuei Tanaka might have been an ideal politician for Sasagawa. 
However, Kakuei Tanaka no longer exists, and the current age 
seems to refuse such politicians. 
  On the afternoon of 21 January 1994, Sakigake's [Harbinger] 
Shusei Tanaka, special assistant to the prime minister and a 
close associate of the prime minister, was summoned by Prime 
Minister Hosokawa. Though the prime minister wanted to see him 
at 1300, Tanaka happened to be out, and it was almost 1400 
before he returned to the official residence and reported to the 
prime minister's office. Reportedly, the prime minister 
received Tanaka standing in front of his office desk. 
  On this day, the political reform bills which would 
determine 
the fate of the cabinet were scheduled to be put to a vote at 
the House of Councillors's plenary session to be held at 1500. 
  According to Tanaka, the prime minister asked in a quiet 
manner: "When will be the proper time for, and what will be the 
proper contents of, our news conference?" 
  The prime minister's intention was to express his 
determination that "this is a very regrettable result 
considering the encouragement toward political reform grows 
stronger day after day. Under this situation, I would like to 
exert myself toward achieving political reform by employing 
every possible measure allowed under the Constitution." The 
prime minister conveyed his intention to Tanaka, asking for 
Tanaka's consent. 
  Later, it turned out Prime Minister Hosokawa actually made 
the same statement at the news conference. 
  Though the prime minister himself tried to persuade 
opposition Diet members over the telephone until late in the 
previous evening, by this time he had already foreseen the 
result of the vote at the House of Councillors plenary session. 
  As far as we know from close associates, the prime minister 
always deals with these situations in a quiet manner, with very 
few fluctuations in his attitude. We have never heard of him 
shouting with excitement, grieving, or being upset. 
  Even during the final phase of the situation where his own 
political life was at stake depending on the fate of the 
political reform bills, he quietly consulted with his assistant 
on how to proceed with the news conference in which he admits 
defeat. His attitude makes us feel he might be a monstrous 
fellow who is superior to the broad-minded politicians 
symbolized by Kakuei Tanaka. 
  According to a public opinion survey conducted by a 
commercial broadcasting station just after the political reform 
bills were disapproved by the House of Councillors, the opinion 
that the forcible attitude of the Liberal Democratic Party 
[LDP], the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ], and 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] were to blame accounted for as 
much as 30 percent respectively, whereas the opinion that the 
cabinet should be held responsible was less than 10 percent. It 
has become a pattern that, should an important bill be 
disapproved, the government which proposed the 
bill--particularly the prime minister--was supposed to be held 
responsible. However, as regards the recent case, there was no 
opinion at all that the cabinet should take responsibility and 
resign as a body. 
  Hosokawa's popularity has not declined at all. 
  He is a man of good breeding, being the 18th master in 
descent of a former princely family. He is a modern young noble 
and is not inferior to the President of the United States when 
it comes to being a good dresser. He offers a "clean" image, 
which appears totally different from that of ex-Prime Ministers 
Kakuei Tanake and Noboru Takeshita, ex-LDP Vice President 
Kanemaru, and others. 
  However, do such television images conveyed to the people 
reflect the real image of our prime minister? 
  People are gradually beginning to doubt him because of his 
willfulness to change the interior design of the prime 
minister's official residence, spending over 10 million yen; the 
internal troubles revealed by the fact that his comrades who had 
been with him since the formation of the Japan New Party [JNP] 
are leaving him one after another; and his association with 
Sagawa involving the political funds scandal. However, there 
have only been imaginary stories and rumors about him, and no 
positive study has been made so far. That is the reason I felt 
it necessary to study in detail the real image of Morihiro 
Hosokawa. 
<H5>  Relations With Kiyoshi Sagawa </H5>
  Since last year, Hosokawa has been severely accused by the 
Diet of borrowing 100 million yen from Sagawa Kyubin. To be 
related to Kiyoshi Sagawa does not fit the image of a Hosakawa 
who claims: "I am going to conduct clean and clear politics" 
("Reform With Responsibility - JNP"). What is the truth? 
  To tell the conclusion first, the relationship between 
Kiyoshi Sagawa and Hosokawa seems to be particularly close when 
compared to Kiyoshi Sagawa's relationships with other 
politicians around him. 
  For instance, we can see an exceptionally close relation 
between them just by visiting the Hosokawa home built on a vast 
site of 1400 tsubo [4600 square meters] near Nanzenji Temple in 
Kyoto. This home has become popular because Hosokawa is charged 
with accepting a 100-million-yen loan from Sagawa. 
  On the front gate, with thick board fences on both sides, a 
name plate has been put up which reads: Hikaru Sagawa. 
  Hikaru Sagawa is the second son of Kiyoshi Sagawa as well as 
representative director and vice president of Sagawa Kyubin. 
Hikaru Sagawa lives in this Kyoto house owned by Morisada 
Hosokawa, father of Morihiro Hosokawa. Before Hikaru Sagawa 
came to this house, Masaaki Sagawa, the first son, lived in 
Hosokawa's Kyoto house. 
  According to the contract, the Kyoto house is being rented 
by 
Morisada Hosokawa to the former Seiwa Shoji (with Kiyoshi Sagawa 
as chairman), a control company of the Sagawa Kyubin group. 
However, originally it was Morihiro Hosokawa--who was in his 
second term as a memeber of the House of Councillors--who 
proposed renting the Hosokawa house to Sagawa. 
  His younger brother Konoe testifies: "We have had trouble in 
maintaining the Kyoto house following the war. We could barely 
pay the real estate tax through the monthly income earned by 
renting the house to the prefectural people's association and 
others. Then we rented to a tenant connected with gangsters, 
and were not allowed access to the house. It took us 10-odd 
years of lawsuits to take back the house. However, the house had 
been terribly ruined while bieng occupied by the tenant. Being 
financially weak, we were unable to repair it. It was while 
suffering such a situation that Sagawa proposed to us, through 
Morihiro, to rent the house. Sagawa said: `We will repair the 
house and pay for it'." 
<H5>  Providing 1 Billion Yen </H5>
  In 1979 Kikuzo Komoto, a member of the House of Councillors, 
was living next door to Kiyoshi Sagawa's house. Komoto was a 
Diet member from Shiga Prefecture who belonged to the Tanaka 
faction. Kiyoshi Sagawa, who wanted to rent the Hosokawa house, 
asked Komoto to recommend him to Morihiro Hosokawa. JNP Bureau 
Director Ryozo Nagata states: "Komoto asked, `Mr. Hosokawa, 
please rent your father's house,' to which Hosokawa answered, 
`Alright, let me talk to my father.' At that time, both 
Hosokawa and Komoto belonged to the Tanaka faction." 
  Concerning the problem of "Sagawa's paying the expenses to 
repair the Hosokawa house" as revealed by Konoe, we questioned 
Sagawa's close associate. It is clear that as far as he has 
confirmed, it cost one billion yen to repair and remodel the 
interior of the house. This person is a Sagawa Kyubin former 
executive officer who at the time controlled the accounting 
related to the lease of the Hosokawa house; he affirms the 
figure was definitely one billion yen. 
  JNP Bureau Director Ryozo Nagata also admitted that the 
repair expenses were paid by Sagawa, though he did not confirm 
the amount. 
  It is exceptional that a tenant should repair the building. 
Although presently the lease with Sagawa is renewed every two 
years (at a rent of 1.8 million yen), the house is to be 
returned to Hosokawa sooner or later. Actually, in January 1993 
a request for termination of the lease was submitted to Sagawa 
by Hosokawa through an attorney. 
  It means Hosokawa had his residence repaired by the one 
billion yen donated by Kiyoshi Sagawa. 
  Since around 1980, when the lease for the Kyoto house was 
concluded with Sagawa, Morihiro Hosokawa was seen from time to 
time in the company of Kiyoshi Sagawa. No. 105 [September 1980 
issue] of the Sagawa Kyubin group's in-house organ "Fureai" 
reports Hosokawa was the only Diet member invited to the opening 
ceremony of the high-class resort "Hawaii Ezansu" [as published] 
which Sagawa Kyubin opened in Hawaii in September of the same 
year, and that Hosokawa celebrated the opening of the golf 
course with Mr. and Mrs. Sagawa. 
  Then Morihiro Hosokawa was frequently seen visiting Kiyoshi 
Sagawa at the completely repaired Kyoto house. 
  A former executive officer of Sagawa Kyubin testifies: 
"Since the Kyoto house was rented, Hosokawa visited Chairman 
Sagawa four times every year. On New Year's Day in particular, 
he seldom failed to visit Sagawa. After he became governor he 
visited Kyoto alone, not taking his secretary with him, when he 
visited Osaka on official duties. The chairman hated to wear a 
tie (it is customary to wear a tie when people meet 
politicians), and though he may meet a politician once, in many 
cases he let others take care of his guests. It is considered 
an exceptional case if the chairman personally meets a 
politician more than twice. Although it might have been partly 
because Hosokawa owned the rental house, the chairman viewed 
Hosokawa as a politician whom he met more often than usual. It 
was not that the chairman invited Hosokawa to Kyoto. Their way 
of meeting was Hosokawa first notified the chairman of his 
visit, and then the chairman invited Hosokawa to the Kyoto 
house." 
  The two men dined together at the Kyoto house, with Sagawa 
Kyubin's executive officers often joining in, and sometimes 
hired "maiko" [dancing girls] from Miyagawa-cho (Gion). Then it 
was customary for them to go together to club "Ezansu" in Gion, 
which Sagawa owned. 
  Around this time the Sagawa group began to make political 
contributions to Hosokawa. According to Hosokawa's comment, 
contributions by the Sagawa group began around 1982 and 
continued until 1992. Reportedly, the amount of contributions 
totaled approximately 25 million yen. It has been confirmed 
that in 1992 a donation of 1.3 million yen was made by Tokyo 
Sagawa to the Hosokawa political group Shin-Showa Kenkyukai 
(with Masatoshi Miyama in charge of accounting). 
  For Hosokawa, 1982 was a turning point. After serving as a 
member of the House of Councillors for two terms, he was 
determined to run for the governorship of Kumamoto Prefecture, 
the land of his ancestors. At about that time, Hosokawa 
proposed a 100-million-yen loan to Kiyoshi Sagawa. The Diet 
members of the nongovernment parties are focusing their charge 
against Hosokawa, saying this 100 million yen might have been 
used as a maneuvering fund to win nomination for the Kumamoto 
governorship race. 
  At that time, the LDP's Issei Sawada (presently a member of 
the House of Councillors) had been scheduled to run for the 
governorship for his fourth term. There was an extremely keen 
competition to win the nomination, with Hosokawa entering the 
race. Hosokawa is being accused of using the 100 million yen as 
a campaign fund to win nomination--that is, as a maneuvering 
fund to bring the prefectural assembly members into his camp. 
  A former executive staff member of Sagawa Kyubin, who is 
very 
familiar with the situation involving the election, testified: 
"What I can say for sure is that, concerning Hosokawa's election 
for the governorship, Sagawa offered full support both 
physically and spiritually." 
  Yet it is not possible to fight the election for 
governorship 
with 100 million yen. Sagawa Kyubin owns over 300 operation 
offices throughout the country. If the company collects one 
million yen per office, it could easily collect an illegal fund 
of 300 million yen. Such an amount is not big money for Sagawa. 
  Hosokawa claims that "by all means, the 100 million yen was 
not a contribution but a loan which I have already repaid." 
Submitted as evidence to the Committee on the Budget of the 
House of Representatives was a receipt for 10 million yen from 
Sagawa. However, this receipt is a cheap one, such as you can 
buy at a stationery shop, with a revenue stamp missing. It 
raised a laugh among the Diet members of the opposition parties. 
  A former Sagawa executive staff member guessed the 
riddle: "Though it may take the form of a loan, the chairman 
never thinks the money will be repaid. It is true that at first 
politicians come to him saying, `Please lend me money.' 
However, they have no intention of repaying it, and the 
chairman himself does not expect the money to be repaid. We do 
not require receipts for money delivered to politicians, and it 
is impossible for Sagawa to issue receipts even if the money is 
repaid." 
  At any rate, following a keen competition with former 
Governor Issei Sawada to win the nomination, Hosokawa won the 
LDP's nomination and was elected governor of Kumamoto Prefecture 
in February 1983. 
  After that, Sagawa Kyubin began to rapidly expand its 
business in Kumamoto. In 1985 alone, the company opened 
operation offices one after another--the Kita-Kumamoto office in 
March, the Yatsushiro office in April, and the Hondo office in 
October, as well as a plan to build a truck terminal. 
  In 1987 when Hosokawa entered his second term, the Sagawa 
Advanced Science and Technology Foundation was established in 
Kumamoto. Though this foundation was reportedly established for 
the purpose of providing assistance to the study of the 
"Technopolis Plan" which Hosokawa had been promoting as a key 
project of his policy, the full amount of its capital--310 
million yen--was borne by the Sagawa group. With Kiyoshi Sagawa 
as chairman, prefectural personnel at the director level 
together with persons related to Sagawa Kyubin--such as Masaaki 
Sagawa, Hikaru Sagawa and others--have been appointed directors; 
Nobuhiko Sekigami, who was Hosokawa's private secretary, and 
Hiroshi Ando, one of Hosokawa's advisers (an ex-reporter for the 
ASAHI SHIMBUN) assumed the posts of chief secretaries. 
  The foundation is supposed to tenant a building owned by 
Diaauto Co., Ltd. [as published] in which Namio Yatsuka, 
Hosokawa's secretary, and his clan work as directors. In other 
words, the rent paid by the foundation flows back to the company 
owned by Hosokawa's secretary and his family. 
  We understand Hosokawa is a most beloved politician for 
Sagawa as evidenced by the payment of the repair costs in the 
amount of one billion yen; the 100 million yen loan; the 
material and moral support at the time of his election for 
governorship; and the establishment of the Sagawa Advanced 
Science and Technology Foundation. Why then did Kiyoshi Sagawa 
lavish such a large amount of money on Hosokawa who was merely a 
young member of the House of Councillors? What compensation did 
Sagawa expect by making such a large offer? 
  At the national Diet held at the beginning of last year in 
which the Sagawa scandal was charged, the JNP also got into the 
act by requesting witnesses be summoned. However, the witnesses 
the JNP requested to be summoned were Shin Kanemaru, Kanemaru's 
secretary Masahisa Ikuhara, Fukushima Kotsu Company's Chairman 
Rekiji Kobari, and others. Kiyoshi Sagawa, a key person, was 
not included. However, it was not a benefit Sagawa expected. 
  Kiyoshi Sagawa's motive to approach Hosokawa seems to be 
closely related to Hosokawa's personal image. I will hereafter 
explain Hosokawa's profile in detail. 
<H5>  Hosokawa's Financial Manager </H5>
  At the close of my story involving the Sagawa money, let me 
relate the story of Hosokawa's ex-secretary Masatoshi Miyama, 
who is now Hosokawa's financial manager. 
  At the House of Councillors' Committee on the Budget held on 
15 December of last year, the LDP's Minao Hattori asked the 
prime minister: "In 1982, did you put all of your private 
properties-- stocks, savings deposits, time deposits, and 
others, including your registered seal--under the care of 
Secretary Miyama?" 
  Hosokawa replied: "I kept the registered seal myself. 
However, Secretary Miyama took care of all other clerical work." 
  The Japan Communist Party [JCP] is requesting Masatoshi 
Miyama, a close attendant to Hosokawa who controlled the flow of 
money, be summoned to the Diet as a witness. 
  According to an explanation made by Hosokawa himself at the 
Diet, Masatoshi Miyama is supposed to have resigned as secretary 
in March 1991 when Hosokawa started his under-the-surface 
activities to form a new party. 
  However, it has been revealed through recent research that 
Masatoshi Miyama had been scheduled to resume his office from 1 
January this year to take charge of the accounting of Hosokawa's 
political group. This has also been confirmed by JNP Bureau 
Director Nagata. A friend of Miyama explains: 
  "With the JNP rapidly becoming a major household, it is 
difficult to operate the party relying solely on contributions 
from portions of the Diet members' annual allowances. From 
around the end of last year, when people were beginning to feel 
the Diet might be dissolved, it became difficult for the party 
to get along unless helped by Miyama, who was well-known as a 
capable financial manager. That was the reason Miyama resumed 
his office as explained by Miyama himself. He resigned from a 
company where he had been working and was ready to return to his 
former job. However, in the meantime the problem of borrowing 
the Sagawa money surfaced in the Diet, and Hosokawa ordered that 
`you do not have to come to the office'." 
  To my question to Nagata about what became of his salary, 
Nagata answered ambiguously: "It has not been paid yet." 
  Hosokawa may have thought he had better keep this financial 
manager within his control for if left free he might disclose 
undesirable facts. 
  According to Miyama's friend I referred to previously, after 
reading the "Declaration of the Founding of the `Liberal Social 
Alliance'"--which appeared in the June 1992 issue of "BUNGEI 
SHUNJU"--Miyama said: "What is being described here is totally 
different from what I have been doing. Hosokawa might be 
involved in trouble if I stay with him." He resigned from his 
post. It is an ironical incident. 
  Miyama worked for a long time as director of Hosokawa's 
Tokyo 
Office, taking charge of the financial management. When 
Kesatoshi Tsuru (an ex-assembly member from Takamori) visited 
the office in Tokyo, he noticed on the front wall a sun flag of 
a mosaic design in a gorgeous golden frame. 
  "To the question `You have a gorgeous item. Whose present is 
this?' Miyama answered, `Ah! It is from Sagawa.' When I said 
"Sagawa is a great man," Miyama replied, "The amount of Sagawa's 
contribution is enormous. Tsuru-chan [an intimate expression to 
call one's friend], it is money. Money. Money is everything in 
the world of politics." At least according to Kesatoshi Tsuru. 
  Incidentally, in the declaration of formation of a new 
party, 
Hosokawa wrote: "Contributions by enterprises shall be 
abolished, with contributions to be made by individuals. The 
duty to report both income and expenditures shall be 
strengthened to increase transparency." 
<H5>  Relation With Yoshiaki Tsutsumi </H5>
  Graduating from Sophia University in 1963, Morihito Hosokawa 
entered ASAHI SHIMBUN and was assigned to the Kagoshima Branch 
Office. In the branch office were Masataka Ito, who later 
became the chief editor of ASAHI (presently an editorial 
committee member of ASAHI SHIMBUN), and Hiroshi Ando, who later 
displayed his extraordinary shrewdness as a financial editor. 
While these ASAHI connections formed a strong brain support 
during the time Hosokawa founded the new party, Masataka Ito 
contributed an essay entitled "`The 30 Years of Hosokawa' That 
Only I Know" to the magazine "PRESIDENT" (May 1993 issue). 
  "Hosokawa disclosed his intention. `I want to form a new 
political party.' When asked if he had comrades, he gave the 
names of several LDP politicians. He also gave the names of 
several people from business circles who were ready to help him. 
One of them was Yoshiaki Tsutsumi of the Seibu Group. 
  As is made clear by Ito, who has been Hosokawa's friend 
these 
30 years, Yoshiaki Tsutsumi constitutes another pillar of 
Hosokawa's line of connection comparable with Kiyoshi Sagawa. 
  It will be easier to understand his relation with Yoshiaki 
Tsutsumi if we view it on the merits and demerits to the 
Kumamoto Prefecture administration as carried out by Morihiro 
Hosokawa after winning the governor's seat with Sagawa's 
assistance. 
  During his two-term eight-year tenure as governor, Hosokawa 
approved two Seibu resort plans. One is "Aso Kogen Resort" 
consisting of a hotel, a golf course, and a ranch for tourists, 
to be constructed at the foot of Mt. Aso. The other is "Amakusa 
Kaiyo Resort" consisting of a golf course, a hotel, and a marina 
to be constructed on the coastal area extending over Itsuwa and 
Hondo. 
  At that time, Governor Hiramatsu of Oita was being widely 
spotlighted for successfully introducing high-tech enterprises 
and manufacturing industries one after another. The dream-like 
resort plans framed by the "Great Seibu" introduced via 
connections with Governor Hosokawa, who replaced Governor Issei 
Sawada, made the people of Kumamoto feel as if they were 
dreaming. 
  Such exalted feelings are vividly conveyed to us if we read 
several editions of KUMAMOTO NICHI SHIMBUN issued in those days: 
  "The Seibu Railway is to create a large recreation center in 
Aso; a tennis court and a ranch for tourists will be 
constructed...; 20 billion yen will be invested; we aim to be a 
Karuizawa in Kyushu; an agreement to promote the project will be 
signed tomorrow." (21 June 1984) 
  "Seibu comes; the project will prime Aso tourism; the 
project 
appears promising to the local people." (22 June 1984) 
  "Construction begins; the Aso Recreation Resort--a hotel and 
a golf course--are to be constructed." (1 December 1987) 
  "President Tsutsumi visited Kumamoto in June last year. 
After inspecting the spot with Governor Hosokawa aboard a 
helicopter, he was determined to construct a comprehensive 
resort." (21 June 1984) 
  However, few people knew at the time that behind these showy 
performances, Hosokawa was taking special administrative 
measures for Seibu. 
<H5>  Addition of the "Resort Clause" </H5>
  Under his authority as governor, in April 1986 Hosokawa 
established the "Corporate Subsidy Code." Originally the code 
was established for promoting the introduction of 
enterprises--such as the manufacturing industries, software 
industries, and related research facilities--by granting 
prefectural subsidy. 
  Construction of the Aso Kogen Resort was begun in December 
1987, and four months later the clause "a resort which makes 
large investments" was abruptly added to Article I of the "code" 
which provides for a qualification of the enterprises to be 
subsidized. Further, as a qualification for "a resort which 
makes large investments," a clause was added to Article II 
reading "a resort located outside of this prefecture which plans 
to locate its new business office within this prefecture, and 
which makes investments for its facilities, etcetera, for over 
10 billion yen." 
  In short, these requirements were meant for Seibu. 
  In accordance with this resort clause, Seibu applied to the 
prefecture for a subsidy. A subsidy for the maximum amount of 
100 million yen was approved, and in March 1991 the 100 million 
yen was paid out of the tax of the prefectural people. 
  When Governor Joji Fukushima took over the prefectural 
government, this newly added "resort clause" was promptly 
terminated "according to Governor Fukushima's intention" 
(Corporate Location Section, Kumamoto Prefecture). The reason 
for the termination as announced by the prefecture was that "no 
prefecture in Japan grants a subsidy for resorts." Seibu 
happens to be the first and last corporation which received the 
subsidy by virtue of this "resort clause." 
  In the case of the Aso Kogen Resort, the project was not a 
total failure as it managed to begin operations in August 1990, 
and promoted employment in the region. "The Amakusa Kaiyo 
Resort" was deadlocked without any prospects of purchasing land. 
Because of the "unequal" agreement concluded between the 
prefecture and Seibu when Hosokawa was governor, the 
self-governing body is on the verge of going bankrupt. 
  Based on the relation between Hosokawa and Tsutsumi, an 
agreement was concluded in 1987 among the four parties--Kumamoto 
Prefecture, the city of Hondo, the town of Itsuwa, and 
Seibu--and "The Amakusa Kaiyo Resort Plan" was begun. 
  According to the agreement, it was agreed that necessary 
land 
was to be purchased by the city and town, not by Seibu; it was 
also stipulated that Seibu would purchase the land and begin 
construction of the resort when it is confirmed "there is no 
obstacle in applying for approval of the development project" 
and that "necessary lands are being secured." 
  Staff members from the city and the town were sent on loan 
to 
the development corporation; they exerted themselves in 
persuading the landowners. In the case of Itsuwa, even the 
staff members of the town office having no relation with the 
project were mobilized to persuade the landowners. 
  However, in December 1990, when about 80 percent of the 
land was finally secured, the agreement was abruptly modified. 
Article 15 of the modified agreement signed by Governor Morihiro 
Hosokawa, the president of the Seibu Railway, and Hondo's Mayor 
Yoshito Kuguyama stipulated: 
  "I. Party C (Seibu) may suspend this project in the event 
that it becomes clear that Party A (the city of Hondo and the 
town of Itsuwa) is unable to complete the purchase of land 
within the prescribed period; in the event there is a 
considerable change in the circumstances involving the 
development project; and in the event it is considered difficult 
to carry out the project due to a considerable change in social 
conditions. 
  "II. Suspension of this project shall not create any claim 
among Seibu, the prefecture, and the city of Hondo and the town 
of Itsuwa." 
  The intention of the modification becomes apparent if we 
compare the modified article to the same article before 
modification. 
  "Seibu, the prefecture, and the city of Hondo and the town 
of 
Itsuwa shall, upon consultation, review the project with regard 
to the disposal of the lands and the framing of the plan, 
etcetera, in case it is considered impossible to carry out the 
project due to the delay of the purchase of land and a 
considerable change in social conditions." 
  In short, according to the former agreement, Seibu was 
required to start the project by "reviewing the project plan" 
even if the necessary land was not secured. However, under the 
modified agreement Seibu can suspend the project entirely if the 
land is not secured. Even if land is secured, Seibu can suspend 
the project "in the event there is a considerable change in the 
circumstances involving the development project or in social 
conditions." It means a modification of the agreement--worse 
than the unequal treaty which existed in the last days of the 
Tokugawa Shogunate--was made with Hosokawa as witness. 
  The purchase of land was making little progress, being 
severely resisted by the landowners. In addition, "a 
considerable change in the social conditions" was created one 
month after the modification of the agreement, with the Japanese 
economy entering into a long-lasting depression as the price of 
stocks declined heavily and the price of land began to decline. 
For Seibu, there was now no reason at all to stick with Amakusa. 
  So far, Hondo and Itsuwa have borrowed 457 million yen and 
978 million yen respectively to purchase land. In addition, 
they have invested 30 million yen each in the Development 
Corporation. Personnel expenses for the staff members mobilized 
to purchase land totaled 100-odd million yen in the case of 
Mitsuwa, and approximately 50 million yen in the case of Hondo. 
  In the event the land for golf courses cannot be purchased 
within the prescribed period, the self-governing bodies will be 
brought to a deadlock, shouldering the loan of as much as 1.435 
billion yen in total and holding the mushikui land [description 
of a land with owners other than the self-governing bodies 
scattered here and there]. Particularly in the case of Itsuwa, 
the amount of the borrowing accounts for 20 percent of its 
annual budget, which is a little over 5.4 billion yen. When I 
talked to Itsuwa's Mayor Masato Nakamura, he was exhausted from 
successive negotiations and anxiety as the time of the payment 
drew near. 
  JPN Bureau Director Ryozo Nagata insisted they have not 
received any political contributions from Seibu. 
  But one week after 1 April 1988, when the "resort clause" 
was 
added to the "corporate subsidy rules," Hosokawa's family 
enterprise bought a resort house from Seibu in Karuizawa at a 
bargain price. 
  In April 1988, Kiko Enterprise [as published] (presently 
named Hosokawa and Associates), which is represented by 
Hosokawa's wife Kayoko, bought a summer resort of about 600 
tsubo [1,983 square meters] from Seibu Real Estate in 
Chigatake-Nishiku [as published] at the food of Mt. Asama. 
  Hosokawa bought the lot for 90 thousand yen per tsubo. 
However, a local real estate expert says: "At that time, the 
price of land around the area was about 200 thousand yen per 
tsubo. At minimum, the price cannot be below 140 thousand yen 
per tsubo". 
  It means Hosokawa gained about 30 million yen at least, even 
if the unit price per tsubo would have been 140 thousand yen. 
  Besides, the resort assigned to Hosakawa was a special 
division which was not open to the general public. Hiroshi 
Kumagai, minister of International Trade and Industry, and 
others besides Hosokawa have also bought lots within this 
special division at bargain prices. 
  This resort lot was not accounted for when the assets of the 
cabinet ministers were disclosed in September last year. It is 
unnatural that this resort lot, which Hosokawa himself was 
using, was not included in the list of disclosed assets, while 
other assets in the name of his family were disclosed. 
<H5>  Public Relations Expenses Were Doubled </H5>
  Hosokawa's predecessor--Governor Issei Sawada--exerted 
himself to improve the financial conditions of Kumamoto, which 
was in need of financial reconstruction. In order to emerge 
from financial difficulties, he drew up a reduced budget and 
reserved the end-of-year surplus as a financial adjustment fund. 
By the time of Sawada's retirement, the amount of the fund 
totaled over 48 billion yen. 
  However, by the end of 1989 when Governor Hosokawa retired, 
the reserve had been reduced by about 10 billion yen, making the 
balance 38 billion yen. In short, it means there was an 
excessive annual expenditure when Hosokawa was governor, making 
it necessary to make frequent withdrawals from the fund to 
adjust the year-end budget. 
  Ex-Governor Sawada points out: "Though it is all right that 
the financial adjustment fund has been reduced, the question 
will be asked `What is being left behind for the prefectural 
people to justify the reduced fund?'" During the Hosokawa 
administration, it was public relations expenses which showed an 
excessive increase. 
  Let us take a look at the trend of Kumamoto Prefecture's 
annual spending on public relations. 
  When Sawada was governor, Kumamoto Prefecture's annual 
spending on public relations was approximately 160 million yen: 
157 million yen in 1980, 165 million yen in 1981, and 170 
million yen in 1982. However, when Hosokawa assumed the post of 
governor, expenses suddenly rose by 60 percent, totaling 266 
million yen. Thereafter, during the period 1984 to 1990--the 
year of his resignation-- Hosokawa spent about 300 million yen 
on public relations, about twice as much spent when Sawada was 
governor. Kumamoto Prefecture's budget for public relations 
suddenly rose to rank first in Kyushu and 11th in the country. 
  Tetsushi Sakamoto (presently Kumamoto prefectural assembly 
member), who was a correspondent for KUMAMOTO NICHI SHIMBUN, 
describes the situation as follows: "Mass media came to 
Kumamoto from all over the country. 
  Correspondents from weekly and monthly magazines whom we 
never met before began to visit the Public Relations Division. 
Governor Hosokawa began to appear on the photogravures of 
weekly magazines playing motorcross and tennis, or at times 
stuffing his mouth with a rice ball. In the pictures he 
appeared as if he were a singer or actor. The basic idea of his 
performance was "to advertise Hosokawa and simultaneously 
advertise Kumamoto." 
  The Planning Section, which prepares data about Kumamoto to 
be offered to the mass media, also became quite active. While 
past data was prepared mostly in figures, they were now to be 
prepared using cartoons, illustrations, and photographs. Also, 
the traditional administrative methods were avoided in using 
figures, and the way of taking statistics was changed so as to 
be welcome to the mass media. 
  Dentsu Inc. was the organization which monopolized public 
relations for the prefecture. Through his association with 
Dentsu, Morihiro Hosokawa had gradually mastered the art of 
public relations as to how to make himself appear attractive. 
  When asked about Hosokawa's impression during his two-term 
eight-year tenure as governor of Kumamoto, the prefectural 
people said: "He was flowery, and seemed as if he displayed 
fireworks." He brought with him from Tokyo the Seibu's 
distribution and railway groups. He organized "Kumamoto's 21st 
Century Round-Table Conference" as the governor's private 
consultative organ, and had a fine array of celebrities such as 
Kisho Kurokawa (architect), Keizo Saji (then president of 
Suntory Ltd.), Seiji Tsutsumi (then chairman of The Seibu 
Department Stores Ltd.) Kenzo Uchida (then professor of Hosei 
University), and others join the conference. He proposed the 
"Technopolis Plan" and the "Campaign to Make Japan No. 1." The 
interest of the central mass media was focused on Kumamoto 
Prefecture, making the prefectural people feel as if they were 
on Main Street. 
  According to Tetsushi Sakamoto: "When he goes to Tokyo, the 
governor meets celebrities. The news is conveyed to the local 
people. Then the celebrities come to see the governor. There 
came Shigeo Nagashima and Ikuma Dan. Chieko Akiyama talks to 
personnel of the prefectural office during lunch breaks. To see 
such people visit the prefectural office one after another makes 
the people feel that the governor's connections are splendid." 
  Hosokawa left the governor's seat behaving nicely until the 
last moment, saying "one should not stay in power more than 10 
years." He challenged the central political world by founding a 
new political party. However, when the fireworks were over and 
the prefectural people awakened from the dream, the scene before 
them was really bleak, as was symbolized by the miserable 
failure of the "Amakusa Kaiyo Resort." 
  A landowner of the opposition said: "Our life will be 
destroyed if we lose the land inherited from our ancestors. 
Land is the basis of life. A politician like Hosokawa may 
appear gorgeous by displaying fireworks one after another. We 
have to take the responsibility of living in our home town." 
<H5>  Hosokawa Likes Memoirs </H5>
  Anybody who has ever talked with Hosokawa says without 
exception that "he has a memo-taking mania." With whomever he 
may be talking, he eagerly takes notes. Although it is easy to 
assume that it may be his experience as a correspondent which 
makes him do so, according to old acquaintances he takes notes 
whenever his partner makes a witty comment. He murmurs 
something like: "That comment may be useful". 
  According to Tadateru Konoe, from childhood Hosokawa showed 
strong interest in politicians. He loved to read Churchill's 
memoirs and others. When he became a university student, every 
member of his family was aware he wanted to be a politician. 
Strangely, Konoe does not remember discussing practical matters 
with him. A young man whose intention is to become a 
politician, but who will not make discussions--such is the 
distant view of Hosokawa in his younger days. Since then, he 
persistently followed the path to becoming a politician. 
Reportedly the motive of his taking the entrance examination to 
Kyoto University, and of his working for ASAHI SHIMBUN, was to 
prepare to be a politician. 
  Reportedly Hosokawa told Takayuki Suga, his classmate at 
Gakushuin University: "In Kumamoto we have a strong blood 
relationship, such as old retainer groups and others. If I run 
for governorship, it is definite I will win." There are a 
number of friends who remember hearing similar comments. 
However, none of his friends ever heard him say what he was 
going to do after becoming a politician. When his friends 
talked about Sartre and Camus, and discussed the possibility of 
applying existentialism to politics, Hosokawa did not join the 
discussions. In framing JNP policies, Hosokawa also leaves the 
discussion to others. During the founding of the JNP, the 
people who took charge of framing the party's policies were the 
academic group consisting of Kenichi Kayama and others; the 
ASAHI SHIMBUN group consisting of Hiroshi Ando and others; 
Shinano Namikawa and others from the Gyokakushin [administrative 
reform council] group; and Tetsuhisa Matsuzaki and others who 
hurried to join the formation of the new party. Since the new 
party was just being formed, there were heated discussions. 
Hosokawa not only refrained from taking part in these 
discussions, he seldom expressed his own opinions. 
  As a result, it turns out each participant appealed to 
Hosokawa that his is the appropriate opinion. For the time 
being, Hosokawa accepts those opinions. However, he does not 
have any firm standards of his own, so his statements and 
policies tend to sway from right to left. 
  That he does not have a firm standard is not the only reason 
his opinion sways. For example, it is an everyday experience to 
see the following instance take place within the JNP: When 
Kayama delivers his own policy plan to Hosokawa, Hosokawa 
conveys it to Ando without adding his own comments. Thinking 
Hosokawa is asking him to review the plan, Ando returns it to 
Hosokawa after pointing out problems and adding corrections. 
Instead of giving his own judgment, Hosokawa again returns the 
plan untouched to Kayama. Kayama becomes angry because the 
modified plan does not reflect his opinion. A reversed 
situation takes place the next time, and this time it is Ando's 
turn to become angry. A similar instance occurs involving all 
the members who take part in policy-making. The policy sways 
largely to both sides each time such an instance occurs. 
  This is called a "you-may-decide-it-as-you-like-it 
constitution." In short, it seems to be Hosokawa's intention 
that if the lord asks for opinions, those who have been asked by 
the lord are supposed to discuss the matter and make decisions 
as they please. 
  People who work for the JNP secretly say Hosokawa also 
possesses "dialogue-mania." Though the name implies he will 
talk to anybody, what it really means is he tends to make the 
same request to several persons. Since everybody is working 
toward a separate goal, it causes trouble when several orders 
are issued for the same item. Yet the person issuing several 
orders does not care. 
  Michio Akiyama, a media-producer contracted for the naming 
of 
the party and other business at the time of the JNP's 
initiation, was requested by Hosokawa to create a party image as 
a strategy to fight the House of Councillors' election; he even 
held a news conference. However, Hosokawa had issued the same 
order to Naoe Wakita [as published] of Dentsu EYE, and despite 
the fact he even had Akiyama hold the news conference, Hosokawa 
fired Akiyama and his group. 
  As we have seen so far, Hosokawa does not have a definite 
opinion and only accepts the opinion of the person whom he met 
last. Yet at a glance, he seems to be following a determined 
straightforward course without hesitation. This is because 
Hosokawa believes there is a more important quality for a 
politician than having a definite opinion. 
  Konoe analyzed Hosokawa's liking for "memoirs" as 
follows: "He always remembered that European and American 
politicians wrote memoirs once they retired, and he himself 
wants to follow the same path; thus he is always concerned about 
how the things he does now will be recorded by history. 
Therefore he is serious in everything he does, indulging in an 
imaginary world. Take his speech, for example. He knows for 
sure that a collection of his speeches will be issued. Then he 
becomes particular about his words to be recorded in the 
collection. Apart from whether he has intentions to advertise 
his book, it may be his idea that in order to be remembered he 
should not follow the customary pattern of making speeches, and 
he should not miss the valuable opportunity of leaving his 
unique speeches." 
  It is a well known fact Hosokawa is a follower of Kennedy, 
and reportedly since he assumed the post he has been hoping to 
directly talk from his office to the people through television, 
just like the President of the United States. Though at the New 
Year's news conference this year he expressed his hope to do so, 
his hope was not realized, being opposed by the correspondents 
assigned to the cabinet on the grounds that it is not acceptable 
to hold a news conference in a form totally excluding them from 
asking questions. 
  According to a staff member of the advertising agency which 
was asked for advice, Hosokawa first proposed following the 
example of the President of the United States and using a 
teleprompter, which he did at the news conference in which he 
announced the rice market was to be opened. As to the idea of 
the prime minister standing during the news conference, while 
the platform for that purpose had already been prepared by this 
advertising agency when the LDP was in power, the idea was 
realized for the first time with the birth of the Hosokawa 
government. There was also a plan to have Hosokawa appear on a 
disk jockey program of a commercial radio station on New Year's 
Eve and talk with Yumin [a singer]. Though the plan was not 
realized, Hosokawa was reportedly very enthusiastic about it. 
  As I mentioned at the beginning of this article, Hosokawa 
was 
preparing his statement to be delivered at the news conference 
even while the political reform bills were about to be 
disapproved, threatening his political life. He seems to place 
his first priority on talking to the people, particularly on 
talking to people personally. In that sense, Hosokawa's 
behavior should not be considered a mere performance, but should 
be considered to be his earnest attitude as a politician. 
  Here is Konoe's comment again: "To my brother, the scene 
with people talking to each other around a fireplace appears to 
embrace the fundamentals of the European and American democracy 
during the good days. Basically he cannot help longing for such 
a style." 
  Hosokawa seems to be firmly self-confident about his 
attitude 
of being particular with his words and style. We can even see 
his self-confidence in his attitude to stubbornly defend his own 
image. A staff member of the advertising agency says: "He 
stubbornly refuses our proposals to have him attended to by a 
stylist and to change his hairstyle. While all JNP members are 
being unified by an image color, he alone dresses like a 
salaried man. He has his own style. It is not that he is 
consciously exhibiting his performance, but he does not want to 
spoil his own style." 
  Referring to Hosokawa's way of appearing before the mass 
media, some people say he is good at handling the media. A JNP 
staff member was told by Hosokawa: "You should feed the news to 
the mass media a little at a time." He meant that by so doing, 
you can have the news appear frequently even if it is minor. 
  However, there was a person who expressed severe criticism. 
A producer who participated in establishing a strategy to 
create a party image at the time of the formation of the JNP, 
analyzed the Hosokawa style as follows: "We feel no reality in 
what he says, and we cannot see anything natural in what he 
does. He does not appear natural because he is not honest. 
From a creator's point of view, he seems to be fond of image 
control. By image control I mean creation of an image to defend 
himself." 
  Formerly the JNP won the grand prix at a radio commercial 
contest. The commercial runs as follows: "Here is the list of 
taboo phrases in the JNP: 1) I do not remember. 2) There is no 
such precedent. 3) Please grant me your patronage. 4) Everything 
was done by my secretary. 5) I sincerely regret... 6) I am not 
involved at all. 7) Well, I do not know what I should say. 8) I 
have been somewhat uninformed. We are here to change political 
language. We are the JNP." 
  Each of these phrases tends to automatically remind us again 
of Hosokawa's answers at the Diet concerning his relation with 
Sagawa! 
<H5>  About Kiyoshi Sagawa Again </H5>
  Why did Kiyoshi Sagawa approach Morihiro Hosokawa? 
  Tadateru Konoe explains: "Formerly, being asked by my 
brother, `Please have dinner with Mr. Sagawa', my wife and I had 
the opportunity of having a dinner with him. While I imagined 
he may be a very tough person, he was (in our presence) very 
tense and serious." 
  The wife of Tadateru Konoe is the eldest daughter of Prince 
and Princess Mikasa, and though she is now a private citizen, 
she was directly connected to the Imperial Family. 
  Hosokawa also helped arrange a trip (as testified by Mrs. 
Hosokawa to the mass media) to Sagawa Kyubin Headquarters in 
Tokyo by Prince and Princess Takamatsu in 1981. The house organ 
"Hikyaku" [The Courier] published a special issue describing the 
situation at that time on a large scale under the title 
"Honored, Impressed, the Best Day Ever." It conveys to us how 
very touched Kiyoshi Sagawa was. 
  Sagawa Kyubin is a company which has grown rapidly by 
operating its business without a license, by repeatedly 
violating the Labor Standards Law, and by frequently causing 
accidents. Consequently, the company has been frequently 
involved in troubles with right-wing groups and gangsters. It 
is highly effective to make people think that the company is 
closely related to the Imperial Family. 
  Most of all, Kiyoshi Sagawa was strongly yearning for 
Hosokawa's noble blood connected to the Imperial Family. 
  Kiyoshi Sagawa's devotion to the Imperial Family was an 
extraordinarily serious one. He ordered all Sagawa Kyubin 
Offices to hoist rising sun flags at half-staff when Emperor 
Hirohito died, and he also presented to the Shiogama Shrine 124 
portraits of the successive emperors painted by artist Hogen 
Mabori [as published]. 
  The Hosokawa family's Kyoto house was built in 1928 as part 
of the family's preparations for Prince Hosokawa's participation 
in Emperor Showa's enthronement ceremony, and in the past, the 
Akakura house was also used frequently for the entertainment of 
members of the Imperial Family. 
<H5>  Hosokawa Never Feels Timid Before Anyone </H5>
  We may say that it is because of his noble lineage that 
Morihiro Hosokawa never feels timid before anyone. 
  According to a news reporter who was assigned to the prime 
minister's official residence since Miyazawa was prime minister, 
and who has observed both Miyazawa and Hosokawa in detail, the 
attitudes of Miyazawa and Hosokawa toward dealing with people 
are totally different. Though Miyazawa tends to be haughty at 
times, Hosokawa never changes his attitude toward whomever he 
may be meeting. Hosokawa is never timid toward others, no matter 
whom he is meeting. 
  "Ex-Prime Minister Miyazawa became extremely tense in the 
Emperor's presence, but Hosokawa never appears tense and behaves 
in an ordinary manner," said the news reporter. 
  Hosokawa was not merely free from timidity, but, according 
to 
his friends, he keeps his distance from anyone with whom he 
associates. He treats his friends equally. Therefore, while he 
does not have a particularly intimate friend, he can speak with 
anybody. 
  According to Konoe, there were always about 50 people within 
the residence before the Hosokawa family moved to Kamakura. 
There was an office called "a public office" within the 
residence, and there were also many cooks and house maids. 
  "Those people were all from Kumamoto and, therefore, it was 
necessary to take their personal circumstances into account. 
The lord was on one side, and we were also there, though not as 
young lords. So we were not allowed to live in the world of 
children only. Some people might have thought we were conceited 
brats, yet they flattered us, as they knew they could not help 
but do this. Thus, we have often seen two sides of life. It may 
be that, being acquainted with a certain society from childhood, 
we tend to become sophisticated, eventually dealing with people 
with a somewhat unconcerned attitude. Our association with 
people becomes simple." 
  The two brothers, Morihiro and Tadateru, were bereaved of 
their mother in their childhood. According to Tadateru, when 
their mother died, they were just about the age when a child 
starts expecting his mother's love. Tadateru further explains: 
as we suddenly lost the person on whose love we were supposed to 
rely, and were brought up among many unrelated adults, both of 
us were afflicted with a feeling of loss. As a result, we 
always felt dissatisfied, thus forming Hosokawa's character 
"which cannot concentrate on reading and playing sports, and 
which cannot stick to one objective" (Konoe). 
  Konoe also said: "I think Kumamoto was a feudal clan 
favored with excellent retainers. It may be because of its 
stable history of sitting on such a hierarchy for generations 
that the Hosokawa people tend to be inconsiderate in taking care 
of their followers to a great extent." 
  Morihiro Hosokawa's unique sense of distancing himself from 
everybody may be a reflection of his consciousness of trying to 
remain on a higher level while dealing with his followers on an 
equal level. 
  One of the JNP's [Japan New Party's] staff members says: 
"Those who approach Hosokawa do so as if expecting something 
from him. But I think it is wrong to expect something of 
Hosokawa. He thinks it is natural for other people to do things 
for him. If they knew him, they would expect nothing from him." 
  Associating with everyone from the same distance means that 
he does not become intimate with anybody. It also means that he 
never fights with anybody. He does not expose himself, and 
maintains simple relations with everybody. Such a philanthropic 
person accepts persons from all backgrounds. Hosokawa might be 
a gift child born in the days of change, willing to accept 
various goals and expectations. 
  In the case of the coalition parties, there is an unlimited 
range of policies held within the seven parties and their 
factions. Now, we are apparently in the age of change. No one 
can take the initiative. [Hosokawa] can associate with everyone 
from an equal distance, and he does not have close 
relationships. It is because we are in the age of change, where 
strong personalities and all kinds of tactics are in conflict, 
that such an adhesive agent proves helpful. 
  A newspaper's leading reporter, who was assigned to the 
prime 
minister's official residence, attended the New Year's party and 
asked Mrs. Kayoko Hosokawa: "How is he? Has he changed after 
becoming prime minister?" Mrs. Hosokawa replied: "He first 
appeared to be the sort of person who would be prime minister a 
long time ago." In short, the lord seems to be a person who 
fits the current age well. 
  While both Ichiro Ozawa and Masayoshi Takemura are 
continuously fighting for the creation of an ideal nation based 
on their own policies, which they themselves believe ideal, 
Hosokawa is not as goal-oriented in this way. That is why his 
castle can become a place where brave warriors who are 
continuously dreaming different dreams can stay together. They 
are able to do so because we are in the process of destroying 
the 1955 structure symbolized by the creation of both the LDP 
and the SDPJ. 
  The pillars which have been supporting the 1955 structure 
are 
to be torn down through the opening of the rice market, 
political reform, and deregulation, and are to be restructured. 
When a crisis occurs, the people who are dreaming different 
dreams gather together in one castle to fight against a single 
enemy. For that purpose, the Hosokawa castle seems to be 
accommodating most comfortable beds for dreaming different 
dreams. 
  However, when a new castle is to be built after completely 
destroying the huge castle referred to as the 1955 structure, 
the brave warriors embracing different dreams will leave the 
Hosokawa castle, one after another. That will be the time when 
the historical role of the Hosokawa castle comes to an end. 

