CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Majid 'Atiyah] </F>
  [Text] The Egyptians are coming... 
  Ten Egyptian experts are on their way to the center of the 
United Nations. 
  UN Secretary General Dr. Butrus Ghali has selected the 10 
and 
nominated them to leadership positions in the areas of Bosnia, 
the GATT, renewable energy, and in other areas. 
  The international nomination of the ten experts has not come 
out of the blue. Behind each of the men there is a story of 
sweat and struggle, which started in Egypt and has culminated at 
the world's ceiling in New York. 
  Judges of the Administrative Court of the International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development have elected Dr. Ahmad Kamal 
Abu-al-Majd, an Egyptian professor of international law, 
chairman of the court. 
  The judges of the International Banks's Administrative Court 
knew Dr. Abu-al-Majd as a magistrate of the court in 1980 and as 
its vice chairman in 1988. He is the only Arab member of this 
court, which consists of a chairman, currently Dr. Abu-al-Majd; 
two vice chairmen, one American and the other British; and four 
magistrates, currently a Frenchman, a Chilean, a Ghanaian, and a 
Malaysian. 
  Lawyers and law circles in Cairo and the Arab world know 
attorney Kamal Abu-al-Majd, especially in connection with 
international trade adjudication. He is a professor of 
comparative law. Comparative law was the subject of the thesis 
for which he got his masters degree from Michigan University, 
the United States, in 1959. A year earlier, i.e., in 1958, he 
acquired his Ph.D. in international law from Cairo University 
Law School. After he abandoned "prosecution," Abu-al-Majd taught 
as a university professor until he was selected to be cultural 
adviser at the Egyptian Embassy in Washington. He then returned 
to assume the position of Egypt's information minister for 
several years. After leaving the ministry, he worked for a 
period as constitutional adviser to the Kuwaiti Government, in 
addition to teaching at Kuwait's Law College, which selected him 
later as its dean. 
  Dr. Kamal Abu-al-Majd was not nominated for any position 
because of favoritism but was selected for his various positions 
as a result of his education, his expertise, and his reputation 
in his field of specialization. This is why he advises Egyptian 
lawyers to study and read, especially material connected with 
comparative law and trade adjudication, so that we can develop 
what is known as the "international lawyer." This quality is 
gained only through special studies and skills that cannot be 
gained from colleges but from private effort. I hope that the 
Business Law Institute, established on agreement between Paris 
and Cairo, will perform the role of training the Egyptian 
"international lawyer." However, greater effort is required to 
train lawyers in this specialized field, especially since we 
face numerous international developments and since we live under 
intricate and involved international relations. 
  This is why Dr. Kamal Abu-al-Majd underlines the importance 
of training an Egyptian lawyer experienced in comparative law, 
international law, international arbitration committees, and in 
drafting contracts. All these are, of course, skills that are 
not gained by shrewdness but by study, practice, and experience. 
<H5>  Ambassador Muhammad 'Ali Niyazi </H5>
  Muhammad 'Ali Niyazi is a diplomat who has worked in the UN 
administrative apparatus for more than 20 years. Dr. Butrus 
Ghali selected him after receiving reports indicating the loss 
of millions of dollars and in the wake of a chain of accusations 
against a number of UN officials, especially in the area of 
peacekeeping. Matters reached such a point that a single report 
from Cambodia indicated the loss of $20 million as a result of 
"fraud." Another report from the former Yugoslavia indicates 
that peacekeeping forces have been selling food and fuel in the 
black market. This is in addition to other reports about 
corruption within the UN apparatus, all of which has motivated 
the UN secretary general to suspend eight officials pending 
investigation. It has been said that the issue concerns 
manipulation of contracts to lease aircraft for numerous 
peacekeeping operations. 
  Muhammad 'Ali Niyazi began his work early this month 
(September) [month as published] by examining and reviewing 
accounts and advisory and administrative services. He will 
submit his reports to Secretary General Dr. Butrus Ghali 
directly. Before Dr. Niyazi assumed his job, some circles 
launched a campaign to cast doubt on his neutrality, using the 
pretext that he has been an employee of the UN administrative 
apparatus for 20 years; that he has held several positions in 
the administration and audit sections at a time when rumors of 
corruption abounded; and that he has connections with the 
workers. This campaign wonders if Dr. Niyazi will be neutral in 
his private relations with some workers who could be subjected 
to investigation. 
  The Alexandria inhabitant, who has risen gradually in the UN 
administrative apparatus, has not paid much attention to the 
attempts to cast doubt on him. He has started his work as 
"inspector general" of the organization that awaits the outcome 
of his efforts to expose the corruption cases that have greatly 
disturbed the secretary general under the difficult financial 
circumstances the United Nations is experiencing. 
<H5>  Dr. George Michel </H5>
  When Dr. George Michel Sa'b graduated from Cairo 
University's 
Law School in 1954, his objective was to continue his studies. 
His young age (20 years at the time) did not stop him from 
acquiring two more diplomas from the same college. He went to 
Paris at his own expense and then to the United States in 1956, 
all in pursuit of a Ph.D. So he got one from Paris, a second 
from the University of Michigan, the United States, and a third 
degree from Harvard University, also in the United States. All 
his doctorates are in international law. The only exception is a 
masters degree he got in economics. Ultimately, Dr. Sa'b settled 
down as professor of international law at the Higher 
International Studies Institute of Geneva University. 
  Dr. George has gained an international reputation in 
international conflicts, especially in border demarcation 
issues. Tunisia selected him as the attorney representing it 
before the International Court of Justice in the al-Jurf 
[continental shelf] issue with Libya. He was also an associate 
magistrate in the International Court of Justice in the case of 
the border dispute between Mali and Burkina. Morocco selected 
him as the main attorney representing it in an international 
business case connected with enlarging an oil refinery in a the 
town of Mohammedia. 
  All Egyptians remember Dr. George Michel Sa'b, "Egypt's 
attorney" in the Taba case. In this case, he participated in 
drafting 800-2,000 pages of memoranda responding to Israel. 
  Dr. George Sa'b's selection to the Taba case was due to his 
reputation. At the time, Dr. Butrus Ghali assigned Dr. 'Amr 
Musa, who was then Egypt's alternate UN delegate, to look for 
Dr. Sa'b. When Dr. George Michel and Dr. 'Amr Musa got together 
at Dr. Musa's dinner table, the third party at the table was a 
direct telephone line with Dr. Butrus Ghali, the then minister 
of state for foreign affairs, who asked Dr. Sa'b to come to 
Egypt promptly. In Cairo, Dr. Michel pored over the case papers 
for nights with Dr. Butrus Ghali and Dr. Usamah al-Baz. 
  Israeli Prime Minister Shamir was so angered by some papers 
that Dr. George submitted that he said, "The Egyptian negotiator 
wants to win the case even before it starts." 
  Dr. George Michel Sa'b works by the hour and his rate in 
some 
cases is more than $500, never less. He worked on the Taba case 
for more than 500 hours, according to the estimates of Egyptian 
experts, meaning that he was entitled to $250,000. But his 
Egyptian identity motivated him to turn down any recompense for 
his efforts. He considered himself a "recruit" serving a 
national issue concerning his country's border. 
<H5>  Dr. Sharif Basyuni </H5>
  The selection of Egyptian legist Dr. Sharif Basyuni is 
because he is specialized in defending human rights everywhere. 
This led to his selection as chairman of the De Paul 
University's Human Rights Institute. Dr. Sharif is the grandson 
of Mahmud Basyuni, who was senate chairman and a leader of the 
Egyptian revolution against British occupation in Upper Egypt 
during the 1919 revolution. Mahmud Basyuni was sentenced to 
death, but then released when Egypt gained its independence in 
1922. Mahmud also participated in drafting the first Egyptian 
constitution in 1923. 
  Dr. Sharif began his life's voyage as a student in France in 
1956, the time when the Suez War erupted. For this reason, he 
returned to Egypt, joined the first National Guard Commando 
Division as a volunteer, and participated in the war. As an 
officer of the Egyptian Armed Forces, Dr. Basyuni trained a 
number of Algerians who had come to fight the French forces and 
to take part in the 1956 war. He took charge of training 25 of 
those Algerians and developed with some of them friendships that 
continue to this day. He also took part in the Port Said battle 
and then returned to France when the war ended. But these 
activities motivated the French security to watch Dr. Basyuni's 
activities closely, first because they knew that he had trained 
some Algerians in Egypt and, second, because he participated in 
Algerian national political action in Paris. This is why he was 
arrested in France. An international figure interceded with the 
French authorities, thanks to the connections of Sharif's father 
who was a diplomat at the Foreign Ministry. 
  Dr. Basyuni returned to Egypt, after living abroad for three 
years, during which he absorbed the principles of the French 
revolution and the concepts of liberty, fraternity, and 
equality. He was appointed as an official of the Egyptian 
Government and worked in the office of the president. But he 
then disagreed with the security agencies when the press 
reported his activity in the Port Said battle and his training 
of Algerians. Consequently, he was confined to Cairo. 
  One morning, Dr. Sharif Basyuni was surprised to learn that 
his parents had been placed under house arrest and that his 
father's passport had been withdrawn. 
  It so happened that circumstances dictated that his mother 
go 
to the United States for cancer treatment. She had to have a 
relative accompany her. Sharif had to go because he is her only 
son, and he found a way to leave and to stay abroad and out of 
the authorities' reach for a long time. 
  Dr. Sharif Basyuni credits Ambassador Ashraf Ghurbal for the 
restoration of his relations with the Egyptian authorities. 
Ghurbal went to Anwar al-Sadat and told him that this was a 
special case in which al-Sadat had to intercede personally. 
Another coincidence played a role in the issue. 
  Dr. Basyuni's mother was a member of the Red Crescent 
Society's Executive Council when Jihan al-Sadat wanted to join 
the council. The other women members of the council treated Mrs. 
al-Sadat haughtily at the time. Dr. Basyuni's mother learned of 
the story and found out that Mrs. al-Sadat had humanitarian 
inclinations. So, his mother helped Jihan join the council by 
inserting her name at the top of the candidate list. The mother 
was also the only executive council member who continued to 
associate with Jihan and to go out with her to lunch. President 
Anwar al-Sadat's wife remembered these facts when Dr. Sharif 
Basyuni's issue was raised with the president. Consequently, 
al-Sadat personally requested Basyuni's file and then sent him a 
personal letter asking him to return to Egypt. Dr. Basyuni 
responded to the call and returned to Egypt and met with the 
president. During their conversation, President al-Sadat told 
Basyuni about the details of his impending visit to the United 
States. Dr. Basyuni asked him: why don't you come to visit 
Chicago? Al-Sadat had thought that Chicago was the city of the 
mafia and of violent and criminal activity. But Dr. Sharif made 
the arrangements for a successful visit by President al-Sadat at 
a time when New York's mayor had refused to receive him. The 
Chicago mayor knew Dr. Basyuni well, because his son was one of 
his students. So, the mayor issued an immediate invitation to 
al-Sadat, who was given by Chicago a warm official welcome that 
touched him deeply. 
  This is why Dr. Sharif Basyuni has spent 20 years of his 
life 
working for legislation to protect human rights. He has 
countless writings in this regard, including 27 books and 
volumes and 125 legal articles. He has also written a book on 
Islam and has watched all human rights protection programs in 
the Arab world. 
  Dr. Sharif has held a total of 14 symposiums at Egyptian 
universities, which have been attended by 1,500 legists from all 
parts of the Arab world. Eight law colleges now teach the 
subject of human rights to some 10,000-12,000 students annually. 
Dr. Sharif believes that democracy is what will rescue Third 
World countries from their accumulating social and economic 
problems. 
<H5>  Ambassador Dr. Munir Zahran </H5>
  The final international [UN] position was the lot of 
Ambassador Dr. Munir Zahran who has been elected by the majority 
of the developing countries to be the 1994 GATT session 
chairman. This is the final year in the life of this 
organization, which has survived for nearly 45 years and which 
will change its name as of the beginning of 1995 to become the 
International Trade Organization. This organization will begin 
to operate in accordance with a charter and rules that were 
agreed to on 15 December 1993 and that will be signed finally at 
a conference which will be held in Marrakech, Morocco, this 
coming April. The conference will be headed by Egyptian 
Ambassador Dr. Munir Zahran who joined Egypt's diplomatic corps 
in 1958. He worked at the research, international organizations, 
economic organizations, and international cooperation sections. 
Dr. Zahran also worked as director of the office of the late 
Kamal Hasan 'Ali when he was foreign minister. He then became 
head of the international organizations department and was later 
selected to be the president's envoy to African leaders in 1989 
and 1990. Since then, Dr. Zahran has held the post of Egypt's 
permanent delegate to the UN's European headquarters in Geneva 
from 1991 to this time. 
  Dr. Zahran is well known to UN meetings, considering that he 
has represented Egypt at the United Nations, UNESCO, WHO, ILO 
[International Labor Organization], the International 
Intellectual Ownership Organization, UNCTAD [UN Conference on 
Trade and Development], GATT, the International Immigration 
Organization, the UN Higher Commission for Refugees, the 
International Red Cross Committee, the FAO [Food and Agriculture 
Organization], the International Atomic Energy Agency, the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the 
IMF. He has chaired several committees within these 
organizations, such as the UN Intellectual Ownership 
Organization's coordination committee and the committee of the 
countries participating in the Developing Countries' Most 
Favored Trade Partners Agreement. Previously, Dr. Zahran headed 
the [UN] Peacekeeping Commission and the Executive Council of 
the Islamic Trade Development Center. 
  This latest position at the GATT crowns Dr. Munir Zahran's 
long experience in this particular field. 
  Dr. Munir Zahran has been awarded two Egyptian medals, the 
Republic Medal, Second Class, in 1981 and the Medal of Merit, 
First Class, in 1983. He was also granted a Crown's Great Knight 
Medal by the king of Belgium in 1983 and the 'Alawite Medal, 
Commander's Class, by King Hassan II of Morocco in 1989 when he 
was Egypt's ambassador to Morocco. Now, he will return to 
Morocco as the GATT session chairman, which will terminate his 
post as chairman of the Disarmament Conference, a position he 
held from August 1993 until January 1994. 
<H5>  Dr. Muhammad Shawkat </H5>
  The United Nations has nominated Dr. Muhammad Shawkat to 
head 
the Commission on New and Renewable Energy for Development for a 
four-year term. This selection was made by the United Nations 
because of the capabilities that Dr. Shawkat possesses, because 
of his long experience with oil and energy economics, and 
because of his international ties. The latest office he held was 
the office of the oil minister's adviser on international 
relations and information. Previously, Dr. Shawkat was the Oil 
Authority's information affairs chairman. 
  During his career, Dr. Shawkat was been appointed a member 
of 
the Executive Office of OAPEC (Organization of Arab Petroleum 
Exporting Countries), and as Egypt's representative to the 
Association of African Oil Producing Countries (APA); and as 
Egypt's chief of delegation to IPEC [as published] and OPEC 
meetings. He also represented Egypt in the dialogue between 
producers and consumers. 
  Previously, Dr. Muhammad Shawkat held the position of chief 
editor of Egypt's AL-BATRUL [PETROLEUM] magazine and worked as 
energy economics professor at Egyptian universities. He has 
written several volumes and conducted research and studies in 
the area of oil and energy economics. 

