BFN 

  [Text] Luxembourg, Brussels, Warsaw, May 9 -- The Western 
European Union (WEU) granted on Monday "associate partner" 
status to Poland. The documents were signed in Luxembourg 
during the meeting of foreign and defence ministers of the WEU 
member states attended by Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej 
Olechowski and Defence Minister Piotr Kolodziejczyk. 
  "Although it does not meet all Poland's expectations, the 
status of the WEU associate partner gives a possibility for a 
concrete cooperation, brings Poland nearer to political and 
defence structures of Western Europe," Mieczyslaw Kuzinski of 
the Polish Foreign Ministry said on Monday. He also added that 
the status increases Poland's security by several percent. 
  The "associate partner" status was also granted to Hungary, 
the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Latvia, Estonia 
and Lithuania. These countries have concluded, or are 
negotiating, association accords with the European Union [EU]. 
Formally, the agreement will be implemented after ratification 
of Greece membership in the WEU. 
  As the WEU "associate partner" Poland can attend every 
second 
meeting of the WEU ambassadors' session at the organisation's 
head office in Brussels and suggest subjects for discussion. It 
will also get access to information and will be able to 
participate in joint manoeuvres and trainings. The "associate 
partners" will be also able to take part in humanitarian and 
peacekeeping missions organised by the WEU. 
  The status does not provide for any security guarantees. 
Nevertheless, it expresses WEU and EU interest in security 
problems in central and eastern Europe, Kuzinski said. 
According to the Polish Foreign Ministry, the distance between 
Poland and Western security structures is diminishing. 
  The WEU was created in 1954 and is to be a defence 
organisation of EU member states. After the fall of the Berlin 
wall, it has been turned into NATO's "European pillar". It 
groups all EU states except Denmark and Ireland which are 
"observers". 
  Poland was seeking the "associate member" status which has 
been granted to NATO members -- Iceland, Norway and Turkey. The 
term "associate partner" came up in negotiations only a month 
ago. 
  The French and German foreign ministers expressed their 
satisfaction with granting nine central Europe countries the 
status of "associate partner" and stressed that it is a joint 
success of French and German diplomacy. Klaus Kinkel also 
mentioned the Polish diplomacy. 
  Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski recalled that his 
predecessor Krzysztof Skubiszewski had been also striving for 
the association with the WEU. In November last year, foreign 
ministers of France, Germany and Poland issued a joint 
declaration on the matter at a meeting in Warsaw. Asked what 
has not been achieved, Olechowski said that the right of the 
associate partners to convene the WEU council when they consider 
it necessary. 

