Table     of Contents 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Retention of Large Retail 
Store Law Criticized; FEATURE:  Food Agency Under Severe Criticism 
Over Rice Panic; IBJ Capital Investment Survey Reveals 6.1 Percent 
Decline 

   Financial Issues - Chinese Provinces Urge Japanese Banks To Set 
Up Branches; China To Authorize Japanese Banks To Use Yuan; MOF Sale 
of 90 Tons of Gold Likely To Affect International Market; BOT 
Concludes Investment Agreement With Colombia 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - MALAYSIA:  Daiken, Itochu To Set 
Up Company To Manufacture Fiberboard; Mitsubishi Materials 
Establishes Ceramic Parts Subsidiary; Ichikoh Industries Expanding 
Production Operations 

   NORTH KOREA:  Japanese Hijacker Heads Firm Promoting Trade With 
Japan 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE: MT Companies Strengthening 
International Ties; Fanuc Pulls Robot-Programming Software Off the 
Market; Firm Develops New Machine To Process Aircraft Engine Parts 

   Petroleum/Energy - Firms To Participate in Indonesian Coal Mining 
Project 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  NEC, Samsung To 
Cooperate in 256M DRAM Research; Canon, NAL To Research Parallel 
Processing Technologies; JEOL Sets Up Semiconductor Equipment Sales 
Office in South Korea 

   Telecommunications/Satellites - FEATURE:  MPT-NTT Maneuvering on 
Next-Generation Communications; Communications Companies Begin 
Testing 'Personal Handy Phones 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - Guangzhou's 1993 Economic Growth 
Maintains Double-Digit Increase; Outlook for Auto Industry in 1994; 
Shenzhen SEZ Plans To Establish Auto Industry; Guizhou Defense 
Enterprises Support Rural Enterprises; Guangzhou Per Capita GDP 
Highest in PRC; Guangxi Regional Airline Set for 28 March Launch 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - FEATURE:  Shanghai's Successes, 
Efforts in Attracting Foreign Investments; Anhui Increases Foreign 
Investment, Enterprises in 1993; Shenzhen Foreign Trade Authority 
Announces New Tilt in Nine Policies; PRC-Funded Firms Boost Booming 
Hong Kong Real Estate Market; Hong Kong Investment Funds Created for 
PRC Investment; Hong Kong Dominates Foreign Investment in Beijing; 
Wholesale Grain, Oil Markets Show Rapid Development; Golden 
Resources Sets Up Rice Processing Venture in Vietnam; Guangdong 
Governor Wants More Foreign Banks, Cites Funds Shortage; South 
African Bank Opens Representative Office in Beijing; Shandong 
Reports Use of Foreign Government Loans; Danish Company Plans 
Investment in Tianjin Development Zone; Tianjin Plans To Build Four 
Projects With Singapore; Taiwan Shipping Giant To Invest in Mainland 
Facilities; Taiwan Company Invests in Fujian, Shanghai; Guangxi's 
Beihai City To Set Up Industrial City With Singapore Help; Shenzhen 
Reaches Agreement With South Korean Firm on Oil Refinery; 
Heilongjiang Imports Telephone Switchboards From Australia; 
Heilongjiang Uses German Loan To Upgrade Switchboards; Tianjin Signs 
First Joint-Venture Agreement With Poland; Hutchison To Build 12- 
Billion-Yuan Power Plant in Shenzhen; Fujian's Fuzhou City Uses 
Foreign Funds For Agricultural Development 

   Taiwan:  Taiwan's 1993 Mainland Investment Trend Outlined; 
Companies Planning To Invest in Mainland's Hainan Province; Minister 
of Economic Affairs Warns Taipei To Avoid Super 301; Plans To Export 
Arms, Planes, Missiles; Exports to United States Reverse Course, 
Increase in Dec 93, Jan 94; Competitive Edge in U.S., Japan 
Deteriorates; National Council Views Impact of Entry Into GATT on 
Local Industries; Profit Rate of Manufacturing Sector Declines 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  DPRK's Interest in 'Chinese-Style 
Economic Reforms' Noted; Efforts Marking Beginning of 'Adjustment 
Period' Reported 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Trade Ministry Announces New China 
Policy; FEATURE:  ROK Announces Decision on Mid-Size Aircraft; 
FEATURE:  South Korea Building Two New Research Institutes; ROK 
Advertises for Expatriate, Foreign Scientists; Steel Firm Imports 
North Korean Scrap Iron; Car Makers Consider New Production Method 
To Raise Productivity; China's Currency, Tax Reforms To Be 'Direct 
Blow' to ROK Exports; South Korea To Set Up 'KORNET'--Korea 
Internet; Government To Regulate Transport of Industrial Waste; 
Hyundai Motors To Market 'Fully Indigenous' Automobile; Sunkyong 
Industries Develops Biodegradable Film; Yukong Enters Power 
Generation, Liquefied Gas Business; Real Estate Company Becomes 
First Private Owner of Public Firm; Goldstar Signs Multimedia Deal 
With U.S. Company; Daewoo Electronics To Export Computer Monitors to 
U.S. Firm; Koryo Zinc To Develop Lead, Zinc Mines in Canada; Daewoo 
Motors Enters Partnership With Japan's Honda; Sambo To Export 
Personal Computers to Japan; Goldstar To Build Television Plant in 
Vietnam; Daewoo To Export Forklifts to United States; Korea Nambang 
Development To Advance Into PRC, Indonesia; Daewoo To Build Joint 
Venture Auto Plant in PRC; Il-yang, Chinese Firm To Build 
Pharmaceutical Factory in Jiangsu; Inchon Steel Receives Order From 
Indonesia; Dongbu Steel To Transfer Silicon Technology to German 
Firm; Daewoo Car Audio Plant in Tianjin Begins Operations 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  INDONESIA - Paiton Electric Power Agreement 
Signed; Increased Competition Expected in LNG Market; Batam Island 
To Be 'Center' for Taiwanese Investments; P.T. Pindad To Shift 
Production, Marketing Focus; State-Owned Gas Company To Receive 
$424-Million Loan; Increase in Trade With Taiwan Expected 

   LAOS: French Firm To Build Hydropower Station 

   MALAYSIA:  Mahathir Outlines Strategy for Space Industry; Telekom 
Malaysia To Provide Services in India 

   PHILIPPINES:  FEATURE:  Davao Focusing on Economic Growth; 
Consortium To Undertake Water Project; Increase in Money Supply 
Noted; Decrease in Foreign Investment Reported 
   SINGAPORE:  OCBC Launches Fund for Investment in China; Company 
To Build Oil Terminal in Nigeria 

   THAILAND:  Norwegian Company To Invest in Gas Venture 

   (Pacific Rim Economic Review FBPSP 94-06) 

   VIETNAM:  Joint Venture With Daewoo To Assemble Trucks, Buses, 
Vans; Malaysian Company To Build Industrial Compound in Dong Nai; 
Interior Ministry Firm Forms Venture With Hong Kong Firm; Venture 
With Russian Company To Produce Tractor Parts; Cardphone Company 
Inaugurates Center in Ho Chi Minh City; Industrial Output Increases 
to $1.9 Billion in 1993; Electricity Output Increases Reported; 
Export, Import Figures for 1993 Reported; Haiphong Tops Hanoi, Ho 
Chi Minh City in Industrial Growth; GDP Figures for 1993 Reported; 
Korean Oil Company Reports Offshore Discovery; Hanoi Airport 
Expressway Opens; Norwegian Company Discovers Natural Gas Offshore 

   JAPAN:  Economic Trends - FEATURE:  Retention of Large Retail 
Store Law Criticized -- SUMMARY:  The Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry (MITI) will revise the Large Retail Store Law to 
ease some restrictions while maintaining the basic framework of the 
law, according to press reports.  Several articles note that the law 
has survived because the U.S. Government did not pressure Japan to 
abolish it.  The positions of small retailers, who initially 
supported the law, and the large supermarket chains, which opposed 
it, now have been reversed. 

   Writing in the 22 February NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI), 
editorial staff writer Sumikazu Asakawa questions the Hosokawa 
Government's determination to promote deregulation and criticizes 
the recent draft revision of the Large Retail Store Law for "not 
even returning to the level of the original law" enacted in 1974. 
According to Asakawa, large retail stores with a floor space of up 
to 1,000 square meters--double the provisions of the current law- 
-will be able to open without restrictions under the revised law. 
But this change "is still far from deregulation," he notes, since 
stores with a floor space of up to 1,500 square meters were "free of 
restriction" under the original 1974 law.  The law was 
"strengthened" in the following 10 years. 

   Asakawa argues that the Hosokawa Government's retail store 
policies ought to respond to consumer needs by promoting the 
expansion of large discount stores, such as the American retailing 
chain "Toys R Us."  He notes that discount stores have increased 
their annual sales by almost 10 percent and thus have contributed to 
increasing personal consumption.  In contrast, overall sales by all 
other retail stores, including department stores and large 
supermarkets, have dropped.  While discount stores with a floor 
space of about 1,000 square meters specializing in men's clothing 
and liquor are increasing, Asakawa writes, there is an increasing 
need for factory outlet stores and home improvement centers that 
require more than 3,000 square meters of floor space.  He concludes 
that the Large Retail Store Law "continues to block the 
introduction" of these types of large stores, which consumers want. 

   Writing in the 6 March NIKKEI, Sueaki Takaoka, chairman of Seiyu, 
a large supermarket chain, notes that in addition to the Large 
Retail Store Law, there are many local ordinances that have been 
"added on top of the law" by local governments to further strengthen 
restrictions.  Takaoka notes that MITI began guiding local 
governments to repeal some local rules in 1992, when the revised 
store law was enacted.  But he states that without a national law, 
which generally takes precedence over local ordinances, large stores 
are concerned about how local ordinances will be enforced. 

   At MITI's direction, a joint commission of the Industrial 
Structure Council's Distribution Subcommittee and the Distribution 
Subcommittee of the Small and Medium Enterprise Policymaking Council 
has submitted a report recommending easing some restrictions while 
maintaining the framework" of the Large Retail Store Law, according 
to the 1 February NIKKEI.  A bill revising the law, based on this 
recommendation, will be submitted to the Diet in March, and the 
revision is expected to take effect in April 1994. 

   Law Has Survived Because No Foreign Pressure Exerted - In an 
article in the 6 March NIKKEI, Keio University Professor Atsushi 
Kusano observes that the Large Retail Store Law has survived 
"because of the lack of foreign pressure."  Kusano states that 
should U.S. pressure be stepped up," as was the case in the 
previous revision of the law following the 1990 Structural 
Impediments Initiative (SII) talks, the joint commission would have 
come to a "considerably different" conclusion.  He points out that 
the 1992 revision of the law was possible because of the SII talks, 
in which the Japanese Government accepted the U.S. demand to revise 
the law, and therefore the joint commission "automatically approved" 
the revision.  Thus, Kusano argues, the law could possibly be 
abolished "if the U.S. Government demands it." 

   Kusano's view is shared by NIKKEI editorial staff writer Asakawa 
in his 22 February NIKKEI article.  He notes that without foreign 
pressure, Japanese discount stores will continue to follow MITI, 
which wants to avoid any "disturbance" or change in the industry. 

   Seiyu Chairman Takaoka, who was an industry representative on the 
50-member joint commission, in his 6 March NIKKEI article notes that 
if a vote had been taken, "the majority of joint commission members 
would have agreed to abolish the law," since the commission included 
journalists, consumer group representatives, and labor union 
officials, all of whom were in favor of abolition.  However, Takaoka 
notes, since the joint commission must reach a unanimous consensus- 
-giving each member veto power--"only marginal revisions are 
possible."  NIKKEI editorial staff writer Asakawa writes that he was 
"shocked" that after discussions by the 50 commission members over 
three months, "the majority opinion was not reflected in the 
recommendation. 

   MITI Wants To Retain Law So It Can 'Control' Distribution Sector 
- According to the 7 February NIKKEI BUSINESS, MITI wanted to keep 
revisions within the existing framework of the law to protect 
"MITI's interests."  The article claims the law is an instrument 
giving MITI influence over the distribution sector.  MITI can 
"control" the opening of new stores--one of the most important 
concerns of retailers--" through its regional bureaus and local 
chambers of commerce" throughout Japan. 

   According to the article, before the joint commission began 
discussing revision of the law in November 1993, eleven 
organizations of small- and medium-sized retail stores held a rally 
in front of the Diet Building urging that no changes be made.  About 
20 Diet members from both the ruling coalition and opposition 
parties attended the rally.  The article quotes a senior member of a 
retail store organization as saying that MITI "organized the rally 
and asked Diet members to participate." 

   The article also quotes a member of the Hiraiwa Commission on 
governmental reform, who asserts that MITI "pressured" the 
commission to delete a recommendation "to abolish the law" from an 
early draft of the Hiraiwa Commission's report that recommended 
overall deregulation. 

   Reversed Positions of Small Retailers, Large Supermarkets - A 
"strange reversal" in the positions of small retailers and large 
supermarket chains has occurred concerning revision of the law, 
according to the NIKKEI BUSINESS article.  Because of sluggish 
economic conditions, small retailers are hurting and seek to survive 
in association with a large store or shopping center by inviting a 
department store or large supermarket to be the core of a large 
store complex or shopping center.  Therefore, the article maintains, 
"although small retailers want to abolish the law, they have to 
support it" because the law is their only "political bargaining 
chip."  Consequently, the small retailers do not want to "completely 
discourage" large stores from opening new outlets. 

   The article notes that the supermarket chains are also 
experiencing difficulties because of the recession and the 
increasing number of discount stores.  Under such conditions, the 
chains are inclined to feel that their interests are best protected 
"if no new large stores are permitted."  Thus, the large supermarket 
chains, which formerly were "the champions of deregulation," are now 
reluctant to abolish the store law and want protection under "MITI's 
umbrella."  The article quotes Isao Nakauchi, chairman of Daiei 
Store, a large supermarket chain, and chairman of the Japan Chain 
Stores Association, as stating: "It would be better to retain the 
law, or otherwise conflicts with local small retailers will 
increase."  NIKKEI BUSINESS observes that Nakauchi was one of the 
officials who helped then MITI Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone pass the 
original law in 1974. 

   FEATURE:  Food Agency Under Severe Criticism Over Rice Panic - 
SUMMARY:  In response to "panic buying" stemming from Japan's 
shortage of domestically-grown rice,, the Food Agency has issued 
"guidance" that imported Thai rice must be blended or sold packaged 
with domestic rice, according to press reports.  Japan's largest 
rice trading firm has criticized this policy as promoting the sale 
of black market rice.  Consumers are critical of the agency for 
denying their right to choose which rice to buy.  Also, press 
editorials have criticized the agency's policy of continued control 
of rice distribution and selling imported foreign rice at 
"considerably higher" prices to generate profits sufficient to 
compensate farmers who had poor rice crops last summer. 

   According to the 8 March issues of major Japanese newspapers, on 
the evening of 7 March the Food Agency urgently issued "guidance," 
based on Japan's Food Control Law, to Japan's rice retailers that 
domestic rice must be blended with at least 20 percent of imported 
Thai rice before sale.  The guidance is in response to "panic 
buying" that began in early March--with long lines of people forming 
every day at rice retail shops and supermarkets to buy whatever 
domestic rice that is available.  Japan's poor harvest in 1993 after 
unusually cold summer weather has triggered fears of a serious 
shortage.  The 8 March MAINICHI SHIMBUN attributes the rice shortage 
to Food Agency delays in importing Chinese rice, hoarding of 
domestic rice by farmers and some wholesalers waiting for prices to 
rise, and stockpiling by consumers worried about further shortages. 

   The 10 March NIKKEI RYUTSU SHIMBUN reports the Food Agency plans 
to allow rice retailers to package a bag of domestic rice together 
with a bag of imported rice and sell it for one price.  Despite the 
possible violation of a Fair Trade Commission rule prohibiting 
retailers from forcing consumers to buy unwanted products by 
"bundling" popular and unpopular products together, the Food Agency 
considers this necessary to sell the imported rice.  It is concerned 
that consumers will buy only domestic rice or California and Chinese 
medium and short-grain rice, which are close to Japanese rice. 
Japanese consumers consider Thai long-grain rice, the taste of which 
is generally disliked, as "unsafe" and having a "unique smell," 
according to the 6 March ASAHI SHIMBUN.  The Food Agency reportedly 
fears that the outcome will be a rice shortage in the midst of a 
glut of unsold Thai rice.  By forcing consumers to buy blended rice, 
ASAHI maintains, the Food Agency wants to make sure that all 
imported Thai rice is sold.  In an apparent public relations effort, 
the Imperial Household Agency announced that the imperial family 
will also eat blended rice (70 percent foreign and 30 percent 
domestic rice), the 9 March ASAHI reports. 

   Food Agency's Policy Raises Price of Black Market Rice - Seizo 
Yamazaki, chairman of Yamatane Corp., Japan's largest rice trading 
firm, comments in the 9 March YOMIURI SHIMBUN that "forcing 
consumers to buy blended rice is a policy to promote the sale of 
black market rice" (also called "free market rice," the sale of 
which is illegal).  Yamazaki asserts that prices of black market 
rice will surely rise, because the black market is the only place 
consumers can buy domestic rice not blended with Thai rice.  "Given 
the fact that the Food Agency has left black market rice merchants 
unregulated in the past," Yamazaki continues, it now has "no 
effective way to regulate them."  However, Yamazaki anticipates that 
the situation will improve beginning in April, when imported Chinese 
rice begins to arrive in Japan.  Also, the weather turns hot in May 
and farmers and black market rice merchants will have problems 
maintaining the quality of stored rice.  The situation will ease 
further in June when the new crop of Australian rice will come on 
the market. 

   According to statistics from the Rice and Grain Data Bank, cited 
in the 9 March SANKEI SHIMBUN, Japan's 1993 domestic rice harvest 
was 7.8 million tons (its annual consumption is 10 million tons), of 
which 4 million tons was collected and sold by the Food Agency, 
while 3.8 million tons presumably is being held by farmers or has 
been sold directly to black market rice dealers.  Of this 3.8 
million tons, 1.3 million tons will be consumed by farmers 
themselves, while 2.5 million tons already has been or will be sold 
on the black market.  The data bank estimates that at least 1 
million tons is currently being held by farmers and black market 
rice traders in anticipation of further increases in prices.  The 
data bank notes that the black market price of the best brand 
domestic rice has already jumped to 15,000 yen ($143) per 10 
kilograms, twice the 1993 price and triple the current price of 
imported California short-grain rice.  It warns that the tighter the 
Food Agency controls rice, the more rice will be channeled into the 
black market. 

   Consumers Criticize Food Agency's Guidance on Blended Rice - 
Consumers are critical of Food Agency guidance to blend domestic and 
imported rice, because it leaves them "with no choice," according to 
the 9 March SANKEI SHIMBUN.  According to a mid?February consumer 
                                              ? 
survey conducted by Seiyu, a large supermarket chain, 55.2 percent 
of consumers preferred "1O0 percent imported rice" over a "blend of 
domestic and imported rice."  Consumers want each type of imported 
rice sold separately so that they can cook each variety according to 
its characteristics. 

   Editorials in all major Tokyo newspapers on 9 March criticize the 
Food Agency's guidance.  For example, the NIKKEI editorial asserts 
that consumers have the right to choose which rice to buy, and is 
critical of the Food Agency's policy of selling imported rice at a 
"considerably higher price" to generate profits large enough to 
compensate farmers.  NIKKEI asserts that the market ought to 
determine the price of each variety of imported rice, and if Thai 
rice is unpopular, its price should be lowered.  MAINICHI's 
editorial asks the Food Agency to stop controlling rice distribution 
and leave it to market forces--after consumers use up all the 
domestic rice, they will eat imported rice, and if they do not like 
it, "they will eat bread and noodles instead."  ASAHI's editorial 
warns that if the Food Agency continues to insist on its policy of 
blending domestic and imported rice, despite strong opposition, it 
will only bring about further increases in the price of black market 
rice. 

   Consumers, Cooperatives Attempt To Secure Rice - As one 
indication of how far Japanese consumers will go to secure palatable 
rice, NHK Television in its 9:00 pm evening news program on 15 March 
shows Japanese tourists bringing South Korean rice, which is similar 
to Japanese rice, into the country aboard ferry boats running from 
Pusan to Shimonoseki, the closest Japanese port city to South Korea. 
The announcer states that some tourists are bringing in as much as 
50 kilograms of rice per person; Japanese citizens are permitted to 
bring in a total of 100 kilograms of foreign rice per year. 
Consequently, the amount of rice that has been seized and 
quarantined in Shimonoseki--normallY about 100 kilograms per month 
on average--increased to 18,000 kilograms in the first ten days of 
March.  Despite the seizures, the Customs Service states there is no 
way to keep track of how much rice is brought back by each tourist, 
the NHK announcer reports. 

   The 10 March NIKKEI notes that large consumer cooperatives, which 
earlier announced they would not sell imported rice because of 
"uncertainty concerning the safety of imported rice," have changed 
their position and have begun selling imported rice in response to 
widespread requests from their members.  While selling both imported 
rice and blended rice, the cooperatives are already taking measures 
to secure domestic rice for the next crop year.  They have begun 
talks with agricultural cooperatives from around Japan, which are 
authorized to sell a certain volume of rice at their discretion, 
about "direct contracts" for rice.  The consumer cooperatives also 
have had to diversify the regions from which they will buy rice next 
year.  Previously, they bought rice only from the Tohoku region, the 
area that produces the most famous rice varieties but which was hit 
hardest by last summer's cold weather. 

   IBJ Capital Investment Survey Reveals 6.1 Percent Decline - 
According to an Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ) survey of private 
sector investment plans for FY94, private sector capital investment 
is expected to decrease by 6.1 percent from FY93.  Consequently, 
Japan's capital investment will likely decline for the third 
consecutive year.  While capital investment by manufacturing 
industries is expected to improve gradually, capital investment by 
nonmanufacturing industries, excluding the electric power companies, 
is expected to decline further.  The IBJ also projects that surplus 
production capacity on the part of manufacturing industries is 
unlikely to fall to the level of demand during FY94.  If the yen 
appreciates further, the IBJ concludes, company capital investment 
plans might be lowered even further. 

   According to the survey results, capital investment by 
manufacturing industries will decrease 10.3 percent, an 
"improvement" from the estimated 17.7 percent drop of FY93.  Among 
manufacturing sectors, capital investment by assembly and processing 
industries will decrease "only" 4 percent, a "large improvement" 
from the estimated 17.9 percent decrease of FY93.  Reasons for this 
improvement include:  1) most electronics firms are planning to 
increase capital investment for liquid crystal displays (LCD) and 
semiconductors; 2) one automaker is planning model changes in FY94, 
and therefore needs to invest in new production lines; and 3) 
general machinery companies are planning to increase production 
capacity slightly in response to steady, large demand stemming from 
public works projects. 

   Capital investment by nonmanufacturing industries, other than 
electric power companies, will decrease 7 percent, an accelerated 
drop from the estimated 5 percent decrease of FY93.  The primary 
reasons for the decrease are the glut of office buildings and 
stagnant personal consumption, which has caused department stores 
and large supermarket chains to shelve plans to construct new 
stores. 

   Electronics--Most electronics companies are planning to increase 
their capital investment in FY94, resulting in an overall 4.5 
percent increase. Investment will be concentrated in the LCD and 
semiconductor sectors.  Toshiba will spend 150 billion yen ($1.43 
billion), a slight increase from FY93, to increase production 
capacity for 4 and 16 megabit (M) dynamic random access (DRAM) 
chips.  NEC and Hitachi plan to increase their capital investment 
slightly, from their FY93 totals of 160 billion yen ($1.52 billion) 
and 170 billion yen ($1.62 billion) respectively. 

   Automobiles--Toyota Motor is planning capital investment totaling 
to 240 billion yen ($2.29 billion), a 25 billion yen ($238 million) 
increase from FY93, largely to finance model changes for its Corolla 
and Crown models.  Nissan Motor, on the other hand, plans to 
decrease capital investment in FY94, limiting it only to new car 
development.  In response to the recession, other automakers, 
especially truck manufacturers, plan to decrease capital investment 
in FY94. 

   Steel--All steel manufacturers are planning to hold down capital 
investment in FY94 because of the slump in sales and poor prospects 
for an early economic recovery.  Steel manufacturers have surplus 
capacity, especially to meet the needs of automakers.  Nippon Steel 
plans a "drastic" decrease from the 170 billion yen ($1.62 billion) 
level of FY93.  NKK Corp. plans to cut total capital investment from 
FY93 through FY95 by 40 percent from total capital investment level 
of the FY90-FY92 period.  Kobe Steel's plans are similar to those of 
NKK.  (Tokyo ASAHI SHIMBUN 8 Mar 94 p 11) 

   Financial Issues - Chinese Provinces Urge Japanese Banks To Set 
Up Branches -- Provincial and municipal governments in China's 
interior areas have requested that Japan's major commercial banks, 
such as Sanwa and Sumitomo, establish branches and representative 
offices in their jurisdictions, according to the 10 March NIKKEI 
KINYU SHIMBUN.  In the past, Japanese banks have focused on China's 
coastal areas, where Japanese companies have made conspicuous 
inroads, but now they are responding to requests made by city and 
provincial governments in inland areas and are seriously looking 
into setting up offices there.  The major commercial banks have been 
"ardently" approached by the governments of Liaoning Province, 
Shenyang City, Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Municipality, Hubei 
Province, Wuhan City, Shaanxi Province, Xian City, Sichuan Province, 
and Chongging City, and others. 

   In their pursuit of economic growth, the local governments have 
been competing to attract foreign investment.  Their overtures to 
Japanese banks are thought to be part of their attempt to garner 
cooperation in capital financing from foreign financial 
institutions, not just from foreign investors in manufacturing and 
production.  Despite the fact that investment by Japanese companies 
in these regions is still rather limited, the banks are now 
seriously considering where to set up offices in China's interior 
areas. 

   Meanwhile, according to the 2 March NIKKEI KINYU SHIMBUN, five 
Japanese banks--Sumitomo, Sanwa, Industrial Bank of Japan, Bank of 
Tokyo, and Mitsubishi--are vying for permission to establish 
branches in Beijing.  The Chinese Government is moving toward 
allowing a few foreign banks to open branches in Beijing, but 
because only one or two will be Japanese banks, the competition is 
intense.  Sumitomo Bank is Offering seminars to financial 
institutions in Beijing to enhance its presence there, while the 
presidents of the Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank recently visited 
China and  appealed to the mayor of Beijing for authorization to 
establish branches. 

   China To Authorize Japanese Banks To Use Yuan - Japanese banks 
will be authorized to use the Chinese yuan, but initially only for 
deposit-taking functions, according to the 8 March NIKKEI KINYU 
SHIMBUN.  The People's Bank of China has not specified how deposits 
will be obtained or precisely when the deposit-taking functions will 
begin, but major Japanese commercial banks understand from 
discussions with the People's Bank that they will be able to start 
taking yuan-based deposits sometime in the spring or summer of 1994. 

   The Ministry of Finance has continued to press the Chinese 
Government to authorize Japanese banks to use the Chinese currency 
because the recent change in China's foreign exchange system is 
having an adverse effect on Japanese banks doing business there, 
according the 4 February NIKKEI KINYU.  Under the revision, foreign 
banks can only make loans and conduct foreign exchange transactions 
in dollars or yen, while foreign companies operating there can only 
use yuan.  When a Japanese company operating in China sells yuan and 
buys a foreign currency, it must first transfer the money to the 
People's Bank of China, where the Japanese bank has an account, 
thereby making it more troublesome for the company to use a Japanese 
rather than a Chinese bank.  According to the 8 March NIKKEI KINYU, 
some people assert that authorization to use the yuan is a "matter 
of life or death" for Japanese banks in China, and the recent 
indication that the yuan can be used for deposit-taking functions is 
being interpreted by Japanese banks as the "first step" toward full 
banking operations. 

   MOF Sale of 90 Tons of Gold Likely To Affect International Market 
- The Ministry of Finance (MOF) on 7 March announced that it will 
sell 90 tons of gold on the market during FY94, from which it 
expects to realize 120 billion yen ($1.14 billion).  This amount 
will help compensate for the shortfall in Japan's tax revenues.  The 
MOF will melt down 4 million 100,000-yen ($952) commemorative gold 
coins that have been returned to the Bank of Japan into 90 tons of 
gold.  The total face value of the coins is 400 billion yen ($3.8 
billion), but the book value of gold contained in the coins is only 
119.7 billion yen ($1.14 billion).  although the MOF is studying 
appropriate ways to sell gold so that market prices are not unduly 
affected, sale of such a large quantity of gold by Japan, a gold- 
consuming country, "is likely to affect the gold market." 

   The MOF issued 11 million 100,000-yen gold coins in 1986 to 
commemorate the 60th anniversary of Emperor Showa's accession to the 
throne.  Despite their low gold content, the coins were so popular 
that 50 million lottery tickets were issued to people who wanted to 
buy the coins.  However, because of the prolonged recession and poor 
prospects for appreciation in the coin's value as a collectible, 
"people have begun spending the gold coins in stores."  (Tokyo 
MAINICHI SHIMBUN 8 Mar 94 p 1) 

   BOT Concludes Investment Agreement With Colombia - The Bank of 
Tokyo (BOT) has concluded an investment-promotion agreement with the 
Invest in Colombia Corporation (Coinvertir, or ICC) to encourage 
Japanese investment in Colombia.  ICC is a joint government-private 
sector organization established by the president of Colombia.  This 
is the third such agreement the BOT has concluded with a south or 
Central American country, but is the first such agreement by any 
Japanese bank with Colombia.  The BOT's previous agreements were a 
1990 agreement with the National Finance Bank of Mexico and a 1991 
agreement with the Chilean Foreign Investment Committee. 
   Under the agreement, the BOT will introduce Japanese companies 
planning to enter Colombia's markets to the ICC and will hold 
investment-promotion seminars for them, while the ICC and the BOT 
will also jointly establish a forum for periodic information 
exchange. 

   Although Japanese banks shied away from investment in South and 
Central America in the first half of the 1980s because of the debt 
crisis there, the BOT now has decided to step up its activities in 
Colombia.  It sees South and Central America as "replete with 
potential for growth," especially with the implementation of trade 
agreements like the North American Free Trade Agreement.  (Tokyo 
NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 14 Mar 94 p 5) 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - MALAYSIA:  Daiken, Itochu To Set 
Up Company To Manufacture Fiberboard -- Daiken Corp., a manufacturer 
of wood and mineral fiberboard, together with the general trading 
company Itochu Corp. and other firms, will establish a company in 
Malaysia's Sarawak State to manufacture medium-density fiberboard 
(MDF), a plywood substitute manufactured from scrap wood.  The new 
company, Daiken Sarawak, will begin operations in the spring of 
1996.  0f the total 2.5 billion yen ($23.8 million) required for the 
new company, Daiken will contribute 50 percent; Itochu, 20 percent; 
Sarawak Timber Industry Development, a forestry development 
corporation operated by the Sarawak state governments 15 percent; 
Proexcel, 10 percent; and Linbang Trading, 5 percent. 

   MDF production is projected at 100,000 cubic meters per year, all 
of which will be exported to Japan.  MDF has gained popularity 
because it can be used as a substitute for plywood, the supply of 
which has become unstable due to increased efforts to protect 
tropical rainforests.  The interests of both Daiken and the 
Malaysian Government will be served through establishment of the new 
company--Daiken is seeking to ensure a stable supply of raw 
materials, while the government seeks the efficient use of its wood 
resources. (Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 19 Feb 94 p 8) 

   Mitsubishi Materials Establishes Ceramic Parts Subsidiary - 
Mitsubishi Materials Corp. (MMC) has established a wholly-owned 
Malaysian subsidiary, MMC Electronics Malaysia, to produce ceramic 
electronic parts.  Mitsubishi's total investment in the subsidiary 
will be 2.9 billion yen ($27.6 million).  The new subsidiary will 
serve as Mitsubishi Materials' production base in Southeast Asia, 
supplying Japanese manufacturers of home electronics equipment that 
have shifted their production to the region. 

   MMC Electronics Malaysia will build a 6,000-square meter plant on 
a site adjacent to Kamaya Electric Malaysia on the outskirts of 
Ipoh, where its production equipment will be housed until the plant 
is complete.  The new company, which will employ 300 workers, will 
begin operations in April with the anticipated production of 1 
million temperature sensors for air conditioners and 300 million 
laminated ceramic chip capacitors for videotape recorders and 
television sets per month.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 15 Feb 94 p 
15) 

   Ichikoh Industries Expanding Production Operations - Ichikoh 
Industries, Japan's second largest manufacturer of automotive 
lighting equipment, is increasing production in Malaysia to meet 
increased demand from Japanese auto manufacturers who have started 
operations in Malaysia to counter the effects of yen appreciation. 
Ichikoh Malaysia, its local subsidiary, is 90 percent owned by 
Ichikoh Industries and 10 percent by the general trading company 
Nissho Iwai. 

   Currently, Ichikoh Malaysia produces about 600 million yen ($5.7 
million) worth of interior lights for export to Japan.  However, 
over the next two to three years the firm plans to invest just under 
1 billion yen ($9.5 million) to begin the production of exterior 
lights and to increase the output of interior lights.  (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 4 Feb 94 p 8) 

   NORTH KOREA:  Japanese Hijacker Heads Firm promoting Trade With 
Japan - According to an article in the 12 February SHUKAN GENDAI by 
freelance journalist Koji Takazawa, who visited Pyongyang in 
December 1993, the North Korean trading firm "Project 21" is 
"steadily" promoting trade with Japan, even though Japan-North Korea 
normalization talks are at a standstill.  According to Takazawa, 
"Project 21," which was formerly named "21 Planning" ("21 Kikaku"), 
was founded in Pyongyang in April 1990 by Takahiro Konishi, one of 
the Japanese Red Army group that hijacked a Japan Air Lines jetliner 
and forced it to fly to Pyongyang in April 1970.  Konishi had been 
working as a Japanese instructor and translator in Pyongyang before 
he founded the company. 

   According to Takazawa, Konishi is particularly interested in 
negotiating contracts with Japanese firms to serve as their 
Pyongyang representative to promote trade between the two countries. 
To date about fifteen small Japanese companies have signed contracts 
with Project 21.  Konishi reportedly hopes to conclude contracts 
with larger Japanese firms in the future. 

   According to Takazawa, Project 21 is a general trading company 
with several dozen employees and annual sales of 1 billion yen ($9.5 
million).  It is housed in a six-story office building, which it 
owns, in downtown Pyongyang.  Takazawa reports that the firm, which 
initially exported only foodstuffs and ginseng tea to Japan, now 
trades in more than 30 products-- including construction materials, 
steel, cement, automobiles, and agricultural products--with Japan, 
China, and some Southeast Asian and European countries. 

   Machine Tools/Robotics - FEATURE: MT Companies Strengthening 
International Ties -- SUMMARY:  According to press reports, some 
Japanese machine tool (MT) companies have been expanding their 
international activities, including overseas production, increased 
exports, and service activities.  At the same time, some foreign 
firms are expanding their activities in Japan's MT market. 

   Activities in the United States - Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
(MHI) plans to increase its annual sales of MT products in the 
United States by 20 percent to more than 200 machines, according to 
the 1 March NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN.  In 1993 MHI sold about 180 MT 
products tools in the U.S. market--120 were made at its U.S. 
subsidiary and the remainder were imported from Japan.  MHI will 
fill some of the expected increase in orders with machines built at 
its Hiroshima MT Plant and sell them through its U.S. subsidiary, 
MHI Machine Tool, located in Hopkinsville, Kentucky.  MHI Officials 
state "it has become possible to combine increased exports from 
Japan with local production in the United States" with the lifting 
of the voluntary restraint agreement covering Japanese MT exports at 
the end of 1993.  NIKKEI SANGYO adds that to enable MHI Machine Tool 
to increase production of machining centers, computer numerically 
controlled (CNC) lathes, and CNC cylindrical grinders, MHI will ship 
a large, five-surface processing machine from Japan to its 
Subsidiary. 

   Ingersoll Milling Machine, a major U.S. MT manufacturer based in 
Illinois, will drop a Swiss trading company as its sales agent in 
Japan and will begin dealing directly with its Japanese customers 
through its subsidiary, Ingersoll Japan, according to the 14 
February NIKKEI SANGYO.  By eliminating the middleman, Ingersoll 
Japan expects to reduce distribution costs and to be able to gather 
information directly from customers.  Ingersoll Japan anticipates 
that sales for its first fiscal year will be 1 billion yen ($9.5 
million).  Ingersoll, whose specialty is large, five-surface 
processing machines, has sold aircraft parts processing machines to 
MHI in the past.  NIKKEI SANGYO characterizes Ingersoll's move as 
"threatening the very core of Japanese companies, which are pursuing 
the time-consuming recessionary countermeasure of expanding the 
volume production of high value-added general purpose machines." 

   Cooperative Ventures in Europe - Two German MT manufacturers, 
Waldrich Siegin and Waldrich Coburg, both of which belonging to the 
Ingersoll Group, have contracted with Okura and Company, a medium- 
size trading company, to become their MT sales agent in Japan, 
according to the 9 February NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN.  Previously both 
Siegin and Coburg used a Swiss company as its sales agent, but the 
two companies switched to Okura "because they plan to enter new 
product areas."  Siegin makes MT equipment primarily for steel and 
aluminum producers and manufacturers of paper and heavy electrical 
machinery, while Coburg makes MT equipment and extrusion molding 
machines for companies that process large parts.  Okura expects 
first fiscal year sales to reach 500 million yen ($4.76 million), 
according to NIKAAN KOGYO. 

   Okuramech, a company affiliated with the Okura Group, has 
contracted with the Swiss MT firm Fritz Suchard to be its sales 
agent in Japan to market Suchard's large 0.3-micron precision 
granite-bed cylindrical grinders, according to the 14 February 
NIKKEI SANGYO.  Okura anticipates demand for the large grinder in 
the metal processing, auto parts, and aerospace industries, NIKKEI 
SANGYO notes. 

   Fanuc, Japan's largest manufacturer of CNC equipment, and 
Charmilles Technologies, a leading Swiss manufacturer of electrical 
discharge machines (EDM), will expand their cooperative relationship 
to include die-cutting EDMs as well as wire EDMs, according to the 
14 February NIKAAN KOGYO SHIMBUN.  Currently Charmilles uses Fanuc 
CNC equipment on all its wire EDMs.  In the near future Fanuc will 
begin assembling Charmilles' latest wire EDM series, the "Robofile," 
at its Tsukuba plant.  This plant now assembles only CNC equipment, 
but Fanuc President Seiuemon Inaba states that "it also will be 
possible for us to carry out knockdown production of entire 
machines" at the plant.  Fanuc plans to make its Tsukuba plant "a 
production base for Charmilles in Asia." 

   In addition, Charmilles Fanuc, a joint venture company formed by 
the two companies three years ago, but which has been "inactive" 
until now, will soon begin operating, NIKKAN KOGYO reports.  A 
special unit will be activated to handle the administrative and 
process-control work required for operations to attach CNC equipment 
to EDMs. 

   Previous cooperation between Fanuc and Charmilles included 
Fanuc's original equipment manufacturing production of Charmilles' 
"Robocut Alpha-OA" and "Alpha-IA" wire EDM machines.  Charmilles has 
sold these machines in Great Britain, France, and Italy, while Fanuc 
supplied them for other markets.  Some types of wire EDMs which 
Charmilles' Japanese subsidiary, Charmilles Japan, sold in Asia were 
"mated" with CNC equipment at Fanuc's headquarters systems plant, 
NIKKAN KOGYO notes. 

   South Korean, East Asian Markets - Citizen Watch will begin 
exporting to South Korea small precision CNC lathes through G. Boley 
GmbH, the German MT company it bought in 1992, in response to 
changes in South Korea's import regulations, according to the 22 
February NIKKEI SANGYO.  In January 1994 South Korea eased 
restrictions on imports by reducing the number of products subject 
to its "Importers Diversification List." These changes covered 
numerically controlled horizontal lathes capable of speeds over 
12,000 rpm, including Citizen's "Shincom L" series.  However, 
because of the way import authorization procedures are handled, 
exports of high-speed lathes from Japan have became "impossible," 
thereby "wiping out in a single stroke" the South Korean market for 
Citizen's MT equipment. 

   In response, Citizen will export lathes made by G. Boley to South 
Korea.  Some parts for these lathes will be shipped from Japan to G. 
Boley and then exported from Germany marked "Shincom Made in 
Germany."  G. Boley already manufactures Citizen's lathes on 
consignment for the European market, NIKKEI SANGYO observes. 

   Mitsubishi Corp., one of Japan's largest general trading 
companies, will establish a South Korean corporation, Hanguk MC 
Shoji, to export South Korean "machinery," according to the 24 
February NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN (NIKKEI).  Mitsubishi could obtain 
permission from the Korean Government in March and begin operations 
as early as 1 May.  The wholly owned subsidiary will be capitalized 
at $4.5 million.  Mitsubishi anticipates sales of $30 million during 
the firm's first fiscal year.  Mitsubishi is the second of major 
Japanese trading company to establish a firm in South Korea, NIKKEI 
notes. 

   Toshiba Machine, one of Japan's largest MT companies, will 
establish an Asian network for after-sales service for MT equipment 
separate from its network of sales agents, according to the 28 
February NIKKEI SANGYO.  Toshiba Machine already has locally 
incorporated sales companies in Thailand, Taiwan, and Singapore, in 
addition to business offices in Hong Kong and Beijing.  However, the 
company determined that since this network could not adequately 
serve growing customer needs for maintenance and service, it would 
establish a separate network of locally incorporated service offices 
that will be directly managed from Tokyo.  Toshiba Machine has 
already opened service offices in Singapore and in Kuala Lumpur and 
Penang, Malaysia, and has plans for offices in Shanghai and 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 

   Exports are becoming more important for Toshiba Machine, the 
NIKKEI SANGYO article notes.  In the first half of FY93 (April 
through September 1993) Toshiba's ratio of exports to total sales 
reached 35 percent, up almost 10 percent from the same period in 
1992.  Exports of injection-molding equipment and machine tools rose 
30 percent.  China accounts for "just under 70 percent" of Toshiba's 
exports, NIKKEI SANGYO notes. 

   Fanuc Pulls Robot-Programming Software Off the Market - Fanuc, 
the world's largest producer of numerically-controlled equipment for 
machine tools and a leading manufacturer of industrial robots, has 
decided to stop selling FAST, its internally developed off-line 
robot-programming software, and replace it with Robcad, the robot- 
simulation software marketed by the Israeli firm Technomatix 
Technologies.  Fanuc will continue developing FAST for use in the 
development of intelligent robots and for intelligent manufacturing 
system (IMS) applications. 

   Fanuc's U.S. subsidiary, Fanuc Robotech, has signed a contract 
with Technomatix for rights to market Robcad in North America and 
Japan.  Robcad, characterized as "powerful" robot-simulation 
software, is used to verify a robot's movements and for off-line 
robot training.  This software is also used by Nachi-Fujikoshi, 
Komatsu, and Mitsubishi Electric Co., which also manufacture robots. 
(Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 14 Jan 94 p 11) 

   Firm Develops New Machine To Process Aircraft Engine Parts - Fuji 
Machine Manufacturing, a leading manufacturer of machine tools and 
specialized machinery, together with Daido Steel Co. has developed a 
spinning processing machine to process titanium and ultra-high 
temperature alloy parts, such as engine casings and compressors used 
in the high-temperature, high-pressure section of aircraft engines. 
To date these types of complex cylindrically-shaped parts have been 
formed by milling, but this method is time consuming because of the 
hardness of the materials. 

   The new machine processes and finishes parts by forming them on 
spinning rollers under a maximum pressure of 50 tons, while the 
parts are heated to a maximum temperature of 1,200 degrees.  This 
method reduces processing time to about one-third that previously 
required and reduces the areas requiring milling to one-fifth that 
necessitated by the old method.  (Nagoya CHUNICHI SHIMBUN 1 Mar 94 p 
11) 

   Petroleum/Energy - Firms To Participate in Indonesian Coal Mining 
Project -- Nichimen Corp., a general trading company, and Mitsui 
Matsushima Co., a Kyushu-based coal-marketing company, will 
participate in developing a 98,000-hectare strip coal mining project 
in central Sumatra together with the Indonesian firm PT Riau 
Baraharum.  Coal reserves in the area are estimated at 25 million 
tons, and Riau Baraharum plans to complete studies to confirm this 
figure by the end of 1994.  Commercial production will begin in 
1996, and from 1997 production is planned at a level of 1 million 
tons per year. 

   Costs for the project are estimated at $2.5 million for 
exploration and $25 million for development.  Nichimen and Mitsui 
Matsushima will equally divide their $1.5 million share of the 
exploration costs and $15 million in development costs.  In return 
for providing project financing, the companies will receive priority 
in purchasing the coal mined, which they will sell to Japanese 
electric power companies at a level of 800,000 tons per year.  Their 
goal is to ensure a supply base for the Japan market, where demand 
for coal from the electric power industry is expected to increase 
from the current 33 million tons per year to 72 million tons by the 
year 2000.  (Tokyo NIH0N KEIZAI SHIMBUN 5 Mar 94 p 1) 

   Semiconductors/Computers/Electronics - FEATURE:  NEC, Samsung To 
Cooperate in 256M DRAM Research -- SUMMARY:  NEC, Japan's largest 
semiconductor company, and South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co. 
have agreed to share the results of their research on next- 
generation 256-megabit (M) dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) 
chips, according to press reports.  Although cooperative relations 
between Japanese and South Korean semiconductor manufacturers have 
been increasing, this is the first relationship involving 256M DRAM 
chips.  In addition, NEC and Samsung are discussing possible 
cooperation in the actual production of the chip. 

   At a 1 March press conference, NEC officials announced they had 
reached agreement with Samsung Electronics to exchange information 
on 256M DRAM chips, according to the 2 March NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 
(NIKKEI).  The two companies are also proceeding with negotiations 
on joint development of the chip.  Although Samsung Electronics is a 
leading manufacturer of DRAMS, the company may have decided to 
cooperate with NEC because the estimated 100 billion yen ($950 
million) investment needed to develop the next-generation chip is 
big a burden for one company to bear alone.  The 2 March NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN notes that this is the first time Japanese and South 
Korean companies have agreed to cooperate concerning 256M DRAM 
chips. 

   The 2 March MAINICHI SHIMBUN observes that by cooperating, the 
companies hope to be the first to make 256M DRAMs, and "thus have it 
be the world standard."  The 2 March ASAHI SHIMBUN notes that NEC 
would like to begin mass production of 256M DRAMs from 1995, but the 
1 March YOMIURI SHIMBUN estimates that actual mass production will 
not take place "until 1998 or 1999." 

   Closer Relationships Between Japanese, South Korean Firms - 
According to the 2 March NIKKEI, the relationship between Japanese 
and South Korean semiconductor manufacturers "has shifted from one 
of Korean companies trying to catch up with Japanese companies to 
one of a system of cooperation."  This is illustrated by the growing 
number of agreements between semiconductor manufacturers of both 
countries.  Hitachi has provided 1M, 4M, and 16M DRAM technology to 
Goldstar Electron Co. in exchange for semiconductor products. 
Fujitsu and South Korea's Hyundai Electronics reached an agreement 
in October 1993 to produce 4M and 16M DRAMs under a reciprocal 
original equipment manufacturing basis.  Samsung Electronics is also 
cooperating with Toshiba on flash memory chips and with Mitsubishi 
Electric Corp. and Oki Electric Industry concerning high-speed 
memory devices. 

   The 2 March NIKKEI SANGYO asserts that such cooperation is not 
without some risk.  Cooperation like that between NEC and Samsung 
could be a "double-edged sword," because Japanese and South Korean 
companies have focused on DRAM chip production, whereas American and 
Japanese companies have differing areas of specialization and "thus 
are not in such a competitive situation."  There is a danger, the 
paper notes, that if Japanese companies cooperate with their South 
Korean counterparts, any benefit from this "could be turned into a 
weapon" that might be used against them later in their "competitive 
struggle." 

   Canon, NAL To Research Parallel Processing Technologies - Canon 
Supercomputing S.I., a wholly owned subsidiary of Canon Sales Co., 
has begun a joint research program in fluid analysis parallel- 
processing technologies with the National Aerospace Laboratory 
(NAL).  The NAL, an organ of Japan's Science and Technology Agency, 
is a "major user" of supercomputers, and parallel processing 
supercomputers are being more widely used.  By using software 
developed by the NAL, the program is expected to find a more 
efficient way of using parallel processing systems and "improve 
technological capabilities." 

   Technicians from Canon and NAL will use a "KSR1" parallel- 
processing supercomputer purchased by Canon from the U.S. firm 
Kendall Square Research (KSR).  The researchers will evaluate the 
system's efficiency using a "miscellaneous fluid analysis program" 
developed by NAL, and also will conduct research into the most 
suitable parallel processing technologies for the software. 

   The NAL already uses supercomputers made by Fujitsu and the U.S. 
firm Intel, but is looking forward to conducting research on the KSR 
parallel-processing machine.  For its part, Cannon Supercomputing 
hopes this research will strengthen sales of both supercomputer 
hardware and software.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 8 Mar 94 p 7) 

   JEOL Sets Up Semiconductor Equipment Sales Office in South Korea 
- JEOL Ltd., a maker of semiconductor manufacturing equipment (SME) 
and Japan's largest producer of electron microscopes, has 
established a joint-venture sales and service subsidiary in Seoul. 
Since South Korea is becoming a "large market" for electron 
microscopes and semiconductor manufacturing equipment, JEOL decided 
that it was necessary to strengthen its local sales ability and 
develop an after-sales service system.  JEOL, a member of the 
Mitsubishi Group, is the latest of a number of Japanese SME firms 
"advancing" into South Korea to take advantage of robust capital 
investments being made by Korean semiconductor makers. 
   The new company, "JEOL Korea," is a joint venture capitalized at 
300 million won ($380,000) of which 30 percent was provided by JEOL 
and the remaining 70 percent JEOL's Korean sales representative. 
They are aiming to expand sales of a wide variety of equipment 
including electron microscopes, photomask manufacturing equipment, 
and related medical and analytical equipment. 

   A number of major SME manufacturers, including Canon and Tokyo 
Electron, have already established service subsidiaries in South 
Korea.  Lasertec, another maker of photomask-related equipment, set 
up operations in February.  Korean semiconductor makers are 
continuing to invest to expand production capacity.  Consequently, 
Japanese SME makers are realizing that a strengthened presence in 
Korea has become "indispensable."  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 7 
March 94 p 9) 

   Telecommunications/Satellites - FEATURE:  MPT-NTT Maneuvering on 
Next-Generation Communications -- SUMMARY:  According to press 
reports, the Telecommunications Council, an advisory group to the 
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT), which has been 
deliberating issues concerning Japan's next-generation 
communications network for nearly a year, has "suddenly" decided to 
delay release of its final report from March until May.  The MPT 
explains that "things have changed" since Nippon Telegraph and 
Telephone (NTT) initiated its multimedia activities.  However, the 
press notes that the new report date "coincides" with a June 
decision on whether NTT President Masashi Kojima will be appointed 
to a third term, or whether Shigeo Sawada, NTT's senior vice 
president and a former MPT administrative vice minister, will be 
made NTT's new president. 

   According to the 4 March NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN, the 
Telecommunications Council's final report has been a matter of great 
interest within the communications and broadcasting sectors from the 
early stages of its deliberations, because its recommendations will 
determine the future direction of Japan's next-generation 
communications infrastructure. 

   Specifically, industry sectors are interested whether NTT or an 
MPT public corporation will be responsible for developing the next- 
generation communications infrastructure, according to NIKKEI 
SANGYO.  Executives of cable television companies have also been 
"looking forward" to the council's final report in March because the 
council has been deliberating on deregulating this industry.  NIKKEI 
SANGYO notes that people in the industry feel they are "the victims 
of evasive action" in having to accept the delay in the report, and 
feel they have been treated "unreasonably." 

   According to NIKKEI SANGYO, the MPT's explanation is that 
"multimedia activities are moving ahead very quickly," and it would 
like to study the current situation more "before presenting any 
conclusions."  The view in industry circles is that MPT's 
explanation may be "officially true," but that the ministry "is 
probably quarreling with NTT management."  The MPT reportedly had 
Shigeo Sawada, a former MPT administrative vice minister, "planted" 
in NTT as senior vice president and number-one candidate to succeed 
Masashi Kojima as NTT president when his current term expires in 
June.  By delaying the council's report until May, the MPT can use 
the report as a "bargaining chip" to acquire the NTT presidency for 
Sawada, NIKKEI SANGYO notes. 

   NTT Supporting Kojima For Third Term - The Osaka edition of the 
10 March MAINICHI SHIMBUN reports that NTT President Kojima 
expressed his desire for another term at a 9 March press conference. 
According to Kojima, "it would be inconvenient if I just suddenly 
abandoned the presidency."  He adds, however, that "this is 
something which is not decided by my desires but by society, which 
includes Nagata-cho (the Diet), the bureaucrats, and the 
corporation."  MAINICHI notes that in terms of a formal decision, 
all that remains is a consensus at NTT's shareholders meeting and 
approval from the MPT. 

   The 10 March NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN notes that NTT is supporting 
Kojima in his desire to continue as president because NTT needs to 
establish "superiority" over the MPT as a "precondition" to block 
possible MPT measures to further break up NTT as part of an its 
review of NTT operations slated for 1995.  On the other hand, 
according to the 6 March SANKEI SHIMBUN, the MPT has been "pressing" 
to have Sawada, an MPT "old boy," replace Kojima as president in 
conjunction with the upcoming MPT review.  Reportedly, this has 
resulted in growing support from within NTT for Kojima to continue 
as president for another term to "block" the MPT's "breakup 
efforts." 

   It also appears that NTT has planned another strategy to keep 
Kojima as president by carefully timing the submission of its 
application to raise local telephone calling rates for March, the 10 
March NIKKEI SANGYO notes.  In this way, the MPT would have to make 
a decision on the rate hike before its April or May decision on the 
next NTT president.  If the application is not approved, this could 
be the "springboard" for Kojima to stay on.  NTT executives, 
according to NIKKEI SANGYO, feel that Kojima's next term is "100 
percent guaranteed," because certain target objectives have already 
been established for solving pending issues at NTT. 

   MPT Not Actively Pushing Sawada's Candidacy - Kojima asserts 
"there have been considerable developments" in terms of a decision, 
but that he did not want to "reveal the details," according to the 
NIKKEI SANGYO article.   It states that there usually is a "flurry 
of maneuvering" within political and financial circles at the 
beginning of the year in which an incumbent NTT president's term 
expires, but that matters to date have been "especially dull" 
concerning NTT's case.  The MPT minister, who usually plays an 
active role in this maneuvering, thus far has been "inactive." 
According to NIKKEI SANGYO, it appears that the MPT continues to be 
"so involved with issues," such as U.S.-Japan trade friction over 
cellular telephones, that it does not have the time to "wrestle" 
with NTT's executive management. 

   Communications Companies Begin Testing 'Personal Handy Phones' - 
Tokyo Telecommunications Network (TTNet), Tokyo Electric Power Co., 
Mitsui and Co., and Mitsubishi Corp. began testing "personal handy 
phones" (PHP), the next-generation cellular telephone, for the first 
time in the Tokyo metropolitan area on 1 March.  The companies are 
collecting data on various performance factors, including functions, 
sound quality, and the efficiency of frequency utilization, by 
having 300 current TTNet customers use PHPs until March 1995 in a 
test area around the Marunouchi and Shimbashi train stations.  The 
test area is supported by TTNet's fiber optic network and about 90 
base stations set up by Tokyo Electric.  The data collected from the 
testing activities will be used to determine future PHP-related 
business activities.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 1 Mar 94 p 7) 

   Long-Distance Telephone Companies Begin Testing Activities - 
Japan Telecom and Kokusai Denshin Denwa (KDD) have also decided to 
team up to begin PHP testing activities from 30 March.  Japan 
Telecom and KDD will conduct testing activities in an area near 
Japan Railway's Sapporo station in Hokkaido.  The two companies will 
set up about 20 base stations in the area and lease PHP units to 
about 100 "monitors," who will test their performance over a period 
of six months.  While Japan Telecom and KDD will be testing the same 
performance factors as other companies involved in the ongoing 
testing activities, "they will also test PHPs on international 
service networks." 

   People in the industry are pressing to commercialize PHP 
services, and much "pulling and hauling" behind the scenes is 
expected between the service providers, who are involved in the 
testing activities, and equipment manufacturers in anticipation of 
future markets.  The new carrier companies, which offer long- 
distance telephone services, find PHP commercialization efforts 
"attractive" because once the PHP service networks are built, the 
new carrier companies will be able to independently own and control 
intra-city communications lines instead of having to rely on Nippon 
Telegraph and Telephone's (NTT) network, as they currently do. 

   However, many PHP issues have not been clarified, such as how 
many operator licenses the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications 
(MPT) will approve and how the MPT will define standards for service 
options and service fees.  The MPT is expected to use the results 
gained from the PHP testing activities in its deliberations on these 
issues.  (Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 11 Mar 94 p 6) 

   DDI, U.S. West To Cooperate in U.S.-Based PHP Testing - Beginning 
in April, Dainidenden (DDI) will cooperate with U.S. West by 
providing technical support for testing the communications system 
DDI developed to support PHP services.  The tests, to be conducted 
in Washington, D.C., are part of an effort led by U.S. West to test 
various PHP-compatible communications systems.  This cooperative 
testing effort resulted from an earlier venture between DDI and a 
U.S. West affiliate which involved renting analog-based portable 
telephones to DDI customers in Japan for use in the United States. 

   DDI's system may be considered in future cellular telephone 
commercialization efforts in the United States.  In Japan, both DDI 
and NTT have developed communications systems, but DDI's system 
covers a broader service area than NTT's, and DDI's ground stations 
have a higher transmission capacity--500 milliwatts--compared to the 
20-milliwatt capacity of NTT's ground stations.  (Tokyo NIKKEI 
SANGYO SHIMBUN 3 Mar 94 p 6) 

   CHINA:  Domestic Developments - Guangzhou's 1993 Economic Growth 
Maintains Double-Digit Increase -- Guangzhou City continued its 
rapid economic development in 1993 with the "overwhelming majority" 
of its principal aggregate production quotas achieving double-digit 
growth, thus overfulfilling the city's annual plan. 

   In 1993, Guangzhou City's total output value was 23 percent more 
than in 1992, reaching a total of 710 million yuan.  Of this total 
amount, the secondary industry (light industry) share increased by 
28 percent and the tertiary industry (service industry) share 
increased by 22 percent compared to 1992.  Guangzhou City's per 
capita gross domestic product (GDP) value exceeded 10,000 yuan for 
the first time, reaching 11,490 yuan, a 21 percent increase compared 
to the year before. 

   Guangzhou City's total amount of social commodity and retail was 
3.073 million yuan, an increase of 41.14 percent compared to 1992. 
Its bank deposit surplus by financial organizations reached 99.462 
billion yuan with a surplus loan value of 71.03 billion yuan. 
Guangzhou area's total freight volume via land, sea, and air reached 
11,900 tons and passenger volume was 9,656 persons, an increase of 
5.76 percent and 27.86 percent respectively. 

   The readjustment of the city's economic structure apparently 
resulted in higher economic benefits.  The composite index of 
industry and business economic profit by the village and above- 
village independent accounting entities was 133 percent, 22.8 
percent more than 1992.  The commodity selling rate increased 0.7 
percent to 97.84 percent, with a total realized profit tax of 10.175 
billion yuan, an increase of 50.35 percent.  The number of 
businesses suffering losses was reduced by 52 percent. 

   The economic and enterprise reforms and the opening up to the 
outside world have also resulted in new breakthroughs.  Of the 640 
enterprises in the city that have already opened up, 37 of these 
were set up as limited-liability companies with six of these issuing 
stocks.  The actual foreign capital used jumped to $1.464 billion, 
an increase of 32.63 percent compared to 1992.  The total commodity 
export value in foreign trade reached $3.263 billion, 32.34 percent 
more than in 1992. 

   The standard of living of the people of Guangzhou City has also 
continued to rise.  Per capita worker's wages annually were 6,272 
yuan in 1993, per capita city resident's annual income increased to 
4,984 yuan, and per capita farmer's annual income were 2,653 yuan, 
accounting for increases of 30.88 percent, 7.13 percent, and 23.24 
percent respectively.  (Guangzhou NANFANG RIBAO 13 Feb 94 p 1) 

   Outlook for Auto Industry in 1994 - China produced 1,280,000 cars 
in 1993, fulfilling 116.4 percent of the annual plan.  The gross 
value of industrial output was 130 billion yuan, sales income 
exceeded 150 billion yuan, and taxes and profits were 18 billion 
yuan and 12 billion yuan respectively. 

   Auto demand for 1994 will be about 1.3-1.4 million.  The 1994 
auto demand estimates are based on the following assumptions:  1. 
In 1994 the national economy will maintain a growth of 9 percent, 
industry 15 percent, investment in fixed assets 13 percent, and if 
several national construction projects begin operating this year 
demand for autos will be slightly higher than 1993.  2.  It will be 
difficult to alleviate the railroad transport capability problems 
before 1996, and automobile shipment will continue to be problematic 
in 1994.  However, because of an increase in railroad branch lines 
and highway improvements, demand for highway transport vehicles, 
especially heavy and medium-size freight cars, will increase.  3. 
The development of a car rental industry, a flourishing tourist 
industry, and prospering individual passenger transport businesses 
will increase the demand for minivans, limousines, and tourist 
buses.  4.  At present, tertiary industry accounts for 30 percent of 
the national economy and is a major auto consumer.  Expanding rural 
enterprises maintain a stable demand for heavy and light trucks.  5. 
At the end of 1993, China possessed 8,200,000 vehicles, but about 1 
million old vehicles need to be scrapped or replaced.  China plans 
to replace 250,000 vehicles in 1994, mainly mid-size freight cars 
and sedans.  6.  China has adopted severe measures to crack down on 
car smuggling, reorganize border and barter trade, and limit 
imports.  In addition, implementation of a guidance price policy 
will stimulate domestic sedan sales. 

   Based on regional, departmental, and enterprise production plans, 
domestic supply will be about 1.5 million, of which 850,000 will be 
freight cars, 320,000 buses, and 330,000 sedans.  The No. 1 Auto 
Group will supply 180,000 vehicles, the Dongfeng Group 210,000, the 
Heavy Vehicle Group 20,000, China Automobile Company 80,000, the 
Beijing Company 130,000, the Tianjin Company 110,000, the Shanghai 
Company 110,000, the Jinbei Company 40,000, and converted defense 
enterprises 140,000.  These enterprises account for about three- 
fourths of output.  In 1994 supply will exceed demand. 

   Factors restricting auto production are:  1.  Foreign exchange 
shortages.  Although domestic sedan production has rapidly 
developed, rising prices for foreign spare parts and steel has 
greatly increased the amount of foreign exchange used by the auto 
industry.  2.  Changes in the renminbi foreign exchange rates have 
increased production costs.  Production enterprises and consumers 
will share the increased costs.  Increased prices will dampen 
consumer demand, and the share absorbed by enterprises will restrict 
the volume of imports.  3.  Fund shortages are another factor 
restricting the auto market.  Major consumers are government and 
commercial offices, and their funds to purchase vehicles come from 
public funds.  In the last half of 1993 defaults on loans increased 
and funds diminished, which will restrict demand.  (Beijing JIDIAN 
RIBAO 1 Mar 94 p 3) 

   Shenzhen SEZ Plans To Establish Auto Industry - Shenzhen Special 
Economic Zone, Guangdong Province, has announced ambitious plans to 
develop an automobile industry from scratch by establishing a 1 
million square meter "auto town."  About 90 percent of the land will 
be used to build plants and the rest as residential areas to 
accommodate workers.  Negotiations are currently under way with 
several South Korean and Japanese auto makers to set up the 
necessary plants.  Baoan Automobile Services and Shenzhen Automobile 
Industry and Trading will take the lead in developing the area.  The 
target is an annual production capacity of 5,000 specialized 
vehicles for industrial, firefighting, and other purposes; 10,000 
medium-sized buses; and 50,000 cars.  A Korean company is to set up 
a plant to produce brake systems and Japan's two largest specialized 
automakers intend setting up assembly lines.  Chinese auto makers, 
including First Automobile Works and Second Automobile Works, have 
also been invited to set up assembly plants.  Officials say $2.5 
billion will be invested in infrastructure this year, up from last 
year's $2.1 billion.  Some 25 major construction projects include: 
An international passenger terminal and second runway at Shenzhen 
Airport; two major power stations; an oil refinery; four highways; 
and a large-scale integrated circuit manufacturing base.  (Hong Kong 
SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) 16 Mar 94 p 5) 

   Guizhou Defense Enterprises Support Rural Enterprises - Rural 
enterprises in Guizhou Province have set their sights on the 
personnel, technology, equipment, products, and market superiority 
of defense enterprises.  At present, 38 counties in seven 
prefectures and cities are using defense enterprises funds, 
equipment and technology, and have set up over 130 economic lateral 
associations.  Rural enterprises have become the financial pillar of 
these counties.  Rural enterprises in all areas have greatly raised 
their overall level by absorbing over 300 defense S and T 
achievements and new technology.  Defense enterprises have 
transferred spare parts and auxiliary equipment for a number of 
products, including refrigerators, cars, and TV satellite stations, 
to rural enterprises.  The Jiangnan Space Industrial Enterprise 
Group alone has transferred over 170 auto spare parts to support the 
specialization of rural enterprises.  The Jiangnan Enterprise Group 
has invested over 100 million yuan to set up seven rural 
enterprises, and has invested over 60 million yuan to set up four 
branch plants of the Jiangnan Machinery and Electronics Plant in 
Zunyi City.  (Chongqing XINAN JINGJI RIBAO 6 Feb 94 p 1) 

   Guangzhou Per Capita GDP Highest in PRC - Guangzhou City's per 
capita GDP in 1993 was 11,490 renminbi, leading the country for the 
second successive year.  Total GDP was 71 billion renminbi, an 
increase of 23 percent over the 1992 level.  Average annual growth 
in the city in recent years has reached 21 percent, greatly 
surpassing the original goal of 11.8 percent set for the 15 years to 
the turn of the century.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0811 GMT 5 
Mar 94) 

   Guangxi Regional Airline Set for 28 March Launch - Guangxi 
Province plans to establish a new regional airline company, Guangxi 
Airline Co. Ltd., a joint venture between Guangzhou-based China 
Southern Airline and the Nanning-based Guangxi Zhizhuang Holding 
Co., beginning operations 28 March.  The new airline will have a 
fleet of 10 Boeing aircraft and will initially operate regular local 
air services to and from Nanning, Guilin, and Beihai.  These 
operations will later be expanded to include 23 Chinese cities and 
regular flight services to Hong Kong and Thailand.  In the first 
year of operation the airline will operate 100 flights per week with 
a passenger volume of 6,000.  (Hong Kong AFP 0524 GMT 11 Mar 94) 

   Foreign Trade and Investment - FEATURE:  Shanghai's Successes, 
Efforts in Attracting Foreign Investments -- SUMMARY:  Attracting 
foreign investment has been an important objective in Shanghai's 
economic agenda.  The city has already succeeded in attracting a 
number of large international companies to establish businesses and 
is continuing to make strong efforts to attract new foreign 
investment. 

   According to the Shanghai WEN HUI BAO of 17 January, Shanghai 
Mayor Huang Ju stated that in 1993 Shanghai had actually received 
one-third of the $7 billion contracted foreign investments either in 
cash or equipment - a realization rate higher than the national 
average. 

   The SHANGHAI JINGJI BA0 of 18 January reported that in 1993 
Shanghai approved 3,650 new foreign investment projects, with 205 of 
them involving capital of over $10 million each.  So far, 54 
countries/areas have invested in Shanghai and 25 of the world's 100 
largest international conglomerates have set up businesses there. 
In addition, the authority to approve foreign investment projects 
under $10 million has been granted to district, county, and bureau 
authorities to improve efficiency.  In 1993, some 2,352 investment 
projects in Shanghai (excluding Pudong), or 64 percent of the total, 
were approved at the lower levels. 

   SHANGHAI JINGJIBAO also reported that foreign investment has 
expanded into the finance, real estate, commerce, food, and trade 
sectors.  Shanghai now has 26 foreign financial companies, the 
largest number in China.  Forty four of China's 500 joint ventures 
with the highest sales volumes are located in Shanghai.  The Beijing 
JINGJI CANKAO BAO of 13 February reports that Shanghai plans to 
allow foreign financial companies to engage in renminbi business on 
a limited basis.  Under the current conditions, foreign companies 
will first be allowed to conduct renminbi deposit and loan business 
with foreign-invested enterprises and those state enterprises that 
receive supplementary renminbi loans along with foreign loans. 
Statistics show that so far, Shanghai has approved over 6,000 
foreign investment projects and has already attracted over $13 
billion in foreign capital. 

   JINGJI CANKAO BAO also reported that this year, Shanghai plans to 
open approximately 100 industrial projects of over 10 million each 
in petro-chemical, metallurgy, power station, communications, tire, 
computer, and bearing sectors to attract foreign investors.  In 
addition to joint ventures, new methods of cooperation will be 
adopted.  The city plans to cooperate with foreign firms in retail, 
wholesale, capital goods, and trade businesses and will promulgate 
preferential policies to attract international finance companies to 
establish offices there. 

   Individual districts in Shanghai have also taken their own 
initiatives to attract foreign investments.  The Shanghai WEN HUI 
BAO of 1 February reported that the government has greatly lowered 
development costs in Shanghai's Nanshi District so that foreign 
investors can enjoy a good return.  In addition to holding weekly 
receptions for foreign investors, the approval period for foreign 
investment projects in Nanshi is being reduced from 62 to 40 days. 
   The WEN HUI BAO of 29 January reported that Shanghai's Hongkou 
District has also made major breakthroughs in foreign investment. 
Real estate renovation through land leasing--tearing down old houses 
and constructing skyscrapers--has become a major project.  In 1994, 
Hongkou plans to open a new section to attract foreign 
participation. 

   The SHANGHAI JINGJI BAO of 25 January reported Shanghai's Pudong 
New District further accelerated the pace of foreign investment in 
1993 and attracted 924 new foreign enterprises along with $3.125 
billion in capital.  Of these enterprises, 43.5 percent are engaged 
in production and 56.5 percent in service industries (now extending 
to over 30 different fields).  Sixty nine percent out of the 140 
export-oriented foreign enterprises approved in 1993 have already 
started to show a profit. 

   Anhui Increases Foreign Investment, Enterprises in 1993 - In 
1993, Anhui Province approved 1,039 new joint ventures, a 50 percent 
increase over 1992.  The total investment was $1.98 billion, and 
registered capital was $1.36 billion.  Foreign businessmen increased 
investment in energy and transportation projects, and the tertiary 
industry.  In 1993, joint ventures earned over $80 million in 
foreign exchange from exports, a 90 percent increase over 1992. 
Joint venture exports accounted for 8 percent of all exports, 
compared to 5.6 percent in 1992.  (Hefei ANHUI RIBAO 8 Jan 94 p 1) 

   Shenzhen Foreign Trade Authority Announces New Tilt in Nine 
Policies - In order to make more progress in Shenzhen City's foreign 
trade work and to carry out the  more export, more foreign exchange" 
policy promulgated by the State Council, Shenzhen City's Bureau of 
Trade and Development is promoting nine "tilt policies." 

   First, the tax rebate procedure will be simplified and unified 
state tax rebate policy will be implemented.  The tax rebate 
procedure will require only one invoice and one certificate instead 
of two invoices and two certificates as in 1992.  The audit and 
review process will also be strengthened. 

   Secondly, a loan policy favoring the expansion of exports will be 
introduced.  All banks will guarantee loans on the priority basis 
needed by export businesses and must favorably support the loan 
repayment and the use of foreign exchange from the foreign-owned 
projects in energy, communication, transportation, and the service 
industry. 

   The third policy calls for reducing the burden on export 
businesses and encouraging their competitiveness.  Starting in 1994, 
the regulation on taking back 0.05 yuan for every U.S. dollar that 
these businesses export will be cancelled. 

   The fourth policy is designed to encourage export businesses to 
better use and manage their regulating fund and to develop ocean 
shipping markets.  The Shenzhen city government will borrow 30 
million yuan from its financial revenue and, through the State 
Administration of Trade Development, give it to the export 
businesses to use for these purposes. 

   The fifth policy mandates public bidding on the distribution of 
permits and quota commodities and the creation of fair competitive 
environment. 

   The sixth policy seeks to reduce the export businesses' tax 
burden within the scope of financial policies and to lend support to 
them in developing export enterprises. 

   The seventh policy encourages the active development of import 
processing and re-exports operations and business operations that 
process imported raw materials.  Under the new system, export 
businesses will be allowed to sign contracts with each side deciding 
on its own prices. 

   The eighth policy is designed to relax restrictions on export 
businesses' scope of operations.  Under the new guidelines, except 
for the commodities covered by quota permits as stipulated by state 
regulation, all other commodities can be exported. 

   Finally, the process of evaluating import/export rights will be 
improved. Those businesses that do not meet the standards of exports 
and earning foreign exchange will have their export operating rights 
rescinded and tax refund privileges confiscated.  (Shenzhen SHENZHEN 
TEQU BAO 29 Jan 94 p 1) 

   PRC-Funded Firms Boost Booming Hong Kong Real Estate Market - As 
Hong Kong office and residential real estate prices reach further 
heights, with the territory projected to overtake Tokyo as the most 
expensive business center in the world, two Chinese officials have 
voiced concerns over the activities of PRC-funded enterprises in the 
Hong Kong real estate market. 

   On 17 March, EASTERN EXPRESS reports on page 26 that a new study 
by realtor Jones Lang Wootton points to further rent rises and 
rising capital values in all areas of the Hong Kong real estate 
market.  The study states that with chronic shortages of Grade-A 
office space, especially in Central district, and an equally serious 
supply crunch in terms of high-end accommodation to house incoming 
executives, office and residential rents are set to surpass Tokyo. 
The study says commercial and office rents rose 40 percent in 1993 
and rose another 10 percent in the first two months of 1994. 
Residential rents also surged, with rents rising by between 30 and 
70 percent depending on the quality and location of the 
accommodation.  The study credits mainland-backed investors with a 
23.2- percent share of the HK$57.5 billion of identifiable real 
estate transactions in 1993. 

   The role of PRC-funded firms in stoking the Hong Kong real estate 
market has attracted the scrutiny of Chen Yuan, vice president of 
the People's Bank of China and son of elder leader Chen Yun.  A 
report by the Beijing-based press agency ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE at 1442 
GMT on 17 March cites Chen Yuan declaring his opposition to 
speculative activities in the market by PRC-funded organizations. 
Highlighting concerns that badly needed capital is being diverted 
from China to earn quick profits in Hong Kong, Chen Yuan stated that 
China faced a shortage of foreign exchange and construction capital, 
and he had a "disapproving attitude" towards PRC-funded entities 
speculating in the Hong Kong real estate market.  However, Chen Yuan 
said that it was normal for PRC-funded enterprises in Hong Kong to 
buy office buildings and residences for their staff, adding that the 
Bank of China ran its banking business in Hong Kong independently, 
determining its scale of mortgage lending according to the market 
situation.  Chen Yuan also noted that the People's Bank of China was 
not paying any special attention to the issue. 

   Lu Ping, director of the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office, has also commented on the role of PRC-funded 
companies in the real estate market.  ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE at 1400 
GMT on 17 March cites Lu Ping, in remarks to a group of Hong Kong 
delegates to the National People's Congress, as saying that China- 
funded enterprises should refrain from actions detrimental to Hong 
Kong's prosperity and stability.  Lu said that these firms should 
not engage in real estate trading activities and that, as they were 
using state funds, they had an unfair advantage over other market 
players. 
   Hong Kong Investment Funds Created for PRC Investment - More 
investment funds are being established in Hong Kong to facilitate 
investment on the mainland.  Taiwan's Jun Tai Group and the Shanghai 
International Trust and Investment Company are organizing a 
"Shanghai Development Fund" with $150 million to invest in 
enterprises in Shanghai; the U.S.-based Boston Pacific Technology 
and Investment Fund is cooperating with financial organizations on 
the mainland to set up funds to invest in projects in Shanghai; and 
the U.S.-based multinational GE Financial Services has joined other 
companies to promote a $50-million China Industrial Investment Fund. 
In addition, a China fund aimed at investing in high-tech projects 
is likely to be established this year, while 34 state enterprises 
and financial organizations on the mainland are discussing the idea 
of establishing a "Chinese Enterprises Development Fund" in Beijing 
with a Hong Kong company.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1020 GMT 
15 Mar 94) 

   Hong Kong Dominates Foreign Investment in Beijing - Beijing by 5 
March of 1994 had approved 7,521 foreign funded enterprises of all 
types with contracted foreign investment of $18.5 billion and 
realized foreign investment of $10.24 billion.  Hong Kong interests 
were represented in 3461 enterprises, with a total capital 
investment of $5.76 billion.  Taiwan investors provided $878 million 
in 948 enterprises.  Together, Hong Kong and Taiwan investors 
accounted for 58 percent of foreign investment in Beijing.  (Beijing 
ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0808 GMT 5 Mar 94) 

   Wholesale Grain, Oil Markets Show Rapid Development - China's 
wholesale markets for grain and vegetable oil have shown rapid 
development and there are now two state-level markets, the Zhengzhou 
Wholesale Grain Market and the Shanghai Grain and Vegetable 0il 
Exchange.  There are also over 10 provincial-level wholesale 
markets, dozens of regional wholesale markets, and over 80,000 
primary grain markets.  According to statistics, 13 provincial 
wholesale grain markets from January to November 1993 showed a 
business volume of 55.53 million tonnes, 260 percent up from the 
similar period in 1992.  The Zhengzhou Wholesale Grain Market, since 
its inception, has had a business volume of 4.1 million tonnes and 
its prices have become the benchmark for the grain business 
throughout the country.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0810 GMT 5 Mar 
94) 

   Golden Resources Sets Up Rice Processing Venture in Vietnam - 
Golden Resources Development has taken a 55 percent stake in a $10 
million joint venture in Vietnam to process and trade rice.  Hong 
Kong's biggest rice distributor has signed a 50-year joint venture 
agreement with the four major rice producing provinces in Vietnam: 
Long An, Dong Thap, Tien Giang, and An Giang, which together account 
for 40 percent of the country's production.  Vietnam's trade 
representative in Hong Kong, Huynh Minh Hue, said the venture was 
the largest of its kind so far.  Golden Resources' share of the 
investment will be used to build a processing plant and to provide 
working capital.  The managing director of Golden Resources, David 
Lam, said the company hoped to raise the quality of Vietnamese rice, 
so as to command higher prices on the world market.  (Hong Kong 
SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST (BUSINESS POST) 8 Mar 94 p 3) 

   Guangdong Governor Wants More Foreign Banks, Cites Funds Shortage 
- Guangdong Governor Zhu Senlin says that his province is suffering 
from a shortage of funds and will try to absorb at least $10 billion 
in foreign investment.  He also said that Guangdong should try to 
attract more foreign banks and China-funded banks in Hong Kong and 
Macao to set up branches in the province.  At the moment, Guangzhou 
only has seven branches and 24 representative offices of foreign 
banks, falling far behind Shanghai.  Zhu requested the head office 
of the People's Bank of China to consider easing the number of 
foreign banks allowed into Guangzhou.  Zhu WanIi, governor of the 
Guangdong branch of the People's Bank of China, said that Guangdong 
should make better use of the fund management experience and skills 
of Hong Kong and Macao.  He also commented on the shortage of 
circulating funds that has landed many enterprises in dire straits, 
saying:  It is imperative to put an end to ill-planned capital 
construction and use available resources on efficient enterprises to 
speed up the circulation of funds in a positive direction.  (Hong 
Kong TA KUNG PAO Chinese 14 Mar 94 p 3) 

   South African Bank Opens Representative Office in Beijing - 
Nedbank, one of South Africa's big four banks, became the first from 
that country to set up a representative office in Beijing 16 March, 
despite the lack of diplomatic relations.  John Maree, president of 
Nedbank's parent group Nedcor, said bilateral trade has more than 
tripled from $200 million in 1992 to $660 million in 1993.  Beijing 
decided last October to lift trade and economic sanctions against 
South Africa after 30 years and trade this year is expected to reach 
$1 billion.  "South Africa is the gateway for Chinese firms into the 
huge African market," Maree said.  China mainly imports steel, coal, 
wool, gold, and raw materials from South Africa and exports textiles 
and electrical goods.  0ver 20 Chinese companies have opened 
representative offices in Johannesburg.  (Hong Kong AFP 0609 GMT 16 
Mar 94) 

   Shandong Reports Use of Foreign Government Loans - By the end of 
1993, Shandong had signed more than 160 contracts on the use of 
foreign government loans.  The actual amount of the loans used total 
$1.5 billion.  Most of the projects developed with the loans have 
created economic and social benefits.  (Jinan Shandong Radio 2300 
GMT 2 Mar 94) 

   Danish Company Plans Investment in Tianjin Development Zone - A 
Danish company plans to invest in a project producing enzyme 
derivatives for industrial use and insulin in Tianjin Development 
Zone.  The letter of intent was signed at the Tianjin Municipal 
Government 0ffice on 26 February with Mayor Zhang Lichang.  This 
project will cover an area of 170,000 square meters with an 
investment of about $200 million.  (Tianjin TIANJIN RIBA0 27 Feb 94 
p 1) 

   Tianjin Plans To Build Four Projects With Singapore - After two 
days of inspection and talks, Singaporean businessmen signed four 
letters of intent with Tianjin's relevant departments on 26 February 
on establishing four projects in Tianjin, including a plant to 
jointly produce plastic products with an investment of 32 million 
yuan; a company for handling and delivering containerized goods; a 
company for handling the storage of oil at Tianjin oil wharf; and a 
bonded goods circulation center with an investment of $100 million. 
(Tianjin TIANJIN RIBAO 27 Feb 94 p 1) 

   Taiwan Shipping Giant To Invest in Mainland Facilities - The 
Taiwan shipping giant Chang Jung Group has decided that its two 
subsidiaries will invest $50 million and $30 million respectively in 
mainland projects.  This is the first mainland investment ever 
undertaken by any listed Taiwan shipping company and will prepare 
for the opening of direct shipping links between the two sides of 
the strait.  The planned investments will concentrate on piers, 
container distribution areas, and trailers at ports such as 
Shanghai, Qingdao, and Shenzhen's Shekou.  (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO 
TONGXUN SHE 0953 GMT 13 Mar 94) 

   Taiwan Company Invests in Fujian, Shanghai - Taiwan's leading 
warehousing enterprise, Far East Warehousing Company, recently 
started setting up operation bases in mainland China.  Apart from 
the bonded warehouse project at Shanghai's Waigaoqiao which has been 
finalized, its next investment project will be aimed at Fujian's 
Zhangzhou Bay.  The company's investment in port-related projects on 
the mainland mainly covers facilities in the hinterland of the 
ports.  In cooperation with the mainland partners, it will first 
make small investments to establish footholds and prepare for direct 
links between the two sides.  In Shanghai, for example, it will 
cooperate with its mainland partner in running a bonded warehouse at 
Waigaoqiao.  The joint investment will be $3 million, of which Far 
East Warehousing will contribute 49 percent or $1.47 million.  (Hong 
Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE 1025 GMT 2 Mar 94) 

   Guangxi's Beihai City To Set Up Industrial City With Singapore 
Help - A Singapore business leader and the mayor of Beihai recently 
signed a memorandum on the construction of a Singapore Industrial 
City, which will occupy 10,000 mu of land in Tieshan Port Industrial 
Zone in Guangxi's Beihai City.  The land tenure offered by Beihai 
City Government is for a period of 50 years and is renewable with 
government approval.  The city government will provide all 
infrastructural facilities, while the Singapore side will be 
responsible for overall planning, leveling, waste disposal, 
attracting investment, property management, and so on.  This 
industrial city is intended as a base for the development of 
advanced industries, on a par with Singapore's industrial 
sophistication, and to create new jobs and import new technology and 
management techniques.  (Hong Kong LIEN HO PAO11 Mar 94 p 22) 

   Shenzhen Reaches Agreement With South Korean Firm on Oil Refinery 
- China Petrochemical Corp (Sinopec) has reached agreement in 
principle with Yukong Ltd, South Korea's leading refinery company, 
to build a $1.5-billion oil refining project in Shenzhen Special 
Economic Zone, Guangdong Province.  This is the biggest venture 
involving South Korea since diplomatic ties were established in 
1992.  The refinery will have the capacity to process 100,000 to 
150,000 barrels of oil per day.  Yukong will hold 40 percent of the 
equity, the rest being owned equally by the state-owned Sinopec and 
the Shenzhen City Government.  Yukong has a long-term agreement to 
import 10,000 barrels of oil per day from China. Sinopec is the 
largest industrial corporation in the PRC, with 690,000 employees, a 
registered share capital of $2.5 billion, and assets valued at $15 
billion.  It has investments in Japan, Hong Kong, and Thailand. 
(Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA SUNDAY MORNING POST (SUNDAY MONEY) 13 Mar 94 
p 2) 

   Heilongjiang Imports Telephone Switchboards From Australia - 
Qingan County in Heilongjiang Province formally put its program- 
controlled telephone switchboards with a total capacity of 6,000 
lines into operation on 15 March, thus becoming one of 
Heilongjiang's counties with advanced telecommunications equipment 
imported from Australia.  This equipment is jointly financed by the 
World Bank and Qingan County with a total investment of 17 million 
yuan.  After putting this equipment into operation, Qingan County 
will change its telephone number from five digits to six.  (Harbin 
Heilongjiang Radio 2200 GMT 14 Mar 94) 

   Heilongjiang Uses German Loan To Upgrade Switchboards - 
Heilongjiang Post and Telecommunications Bureau has decided to use 
$100 million of a low-interest loan from Germany to introduce 
program-controlled telephone switchboards with 79,600 channels.  On 
10 March, the China Post and Telecommunications Equipment Company, 
the Heilongjiang Provincial Post and Telecommunications Bureau, and 
a German company jointly signed this contract.  These telephone 
switchboards will be installed in 14 cities and counties in 
Heilongjiang, including Qiqihar, Mudanjiang, Jiamusi, Daqing, and 
Hulin.  It is planned that all these telephone switchboards will be 
put into operation prior to June 1995.  (Harbin Heilongjiang Radio 
2200 GMT 10 Mar 94) 
   Tianjin Signs First Joint-Venture Agreement With Poland - On 11 
March, Tianjin Alcohol Plant and a company in Poland signed a letter 
of intent to jointly building a brewery in Tianjin.  The brewery 
will produce vodka wine with alcohol material provided by the 
municipal plant and production technology by the Polish side.  The 
total investment in this joint-venture project is $1.5 million.  It 
is the first Sino-Polish enterprise in Tianjin.  (Tianjin Radio 2300 
GMT 11 Mar 94) 

   Hutchison To Build 12-Billion-Yuan Power Plant in Shenzhen - 
Hutchison Whampoa will build and operate a thermal power plant 
outside Shenzhen, according to an agreement signed with the Shenzhen 
Electricity Bureau.  Total output from the first phase of the 
proposed plant will be 2540 megawatts.  According to Shenzhen Vice 
Mayor Li Guangzhen, the Eastern Power Plant will be developed in 
several phases and will involve a total investment of 12 billion 
yuan.  Li Guangzhen's assistant, Li Jangguo, said an agreement had 
been signed with Hutchison earlier this year and site preparation 
work had already begun.  (HONG KONG STANDARD (FINANCIAL REVIEW) 16 
Mar 94 p 1) 

   Fujian's Fuzhou City Uses Foreign Funds For Agricultural 
Development - Last year, Fuzhou City agricultural and sideline 
products industries attracted $1 billion in direct foreign 
investment in over 450 items.  This investment helped the city earn 
$200 million in exports.  The city exported agricultural and 
sideline products valued at over 1 billion renminbi to over 20 
foreign countries and regions last year.  The foreign investors are 
mainly from Japan, the United States, France, Singapore, Indonesia, 
Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan.  (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 0810 GMT 
5 Mar 94) 

   Taiwan:  Taiwan's 1993 Mainland Investment Trend Outlined - By 
October 1993, China had approved more than 15,100 requests by 
Taiwanese enterprises to do business on the mainland for a total 
negotiated cost of $13.6 billion.  Many Taiwanese industry and 
business people pointed out that cross-Strait economic cooperation 
has contributed to the development of the Taiwan economy. 

   Taiwan's investment areas on the mainland have rapidly expanded 
from the southeast coastal area into all the coastal and some of the 
interior areas.  There was a sharp increase of Taiwanese investment 
in and around the Changjiang River, Bohai region, and inland areas, 
and even in the remote provinces and autonomous regions such as 
Qinghai and Tibet.  In the Changjiang River region, Shanghai alone 
had approved 482 direct Taiwan investment projects between January 
and September with a negotiated cost of $430 million dollars.  This 
amount has exceeded both the total number of investment projects and 
the total cost for the past five years.  Anhui Province has newly 
approved a group of Taiwan's investment projects whose total numbers 
and total investment amount have increased several fold.  Jiangsu 
Province has the largest number of Taiwanese businesses.  Taiwan's 
investment in the interior provinces such as Sichuan and Shanxi 
increased by a big margin.  The northeast region has also become a 
hot spot for Taiwanese investment; Liaoning Province alone has 
attracted investment from more than 300 Taiwan businesses between 
January and September, far exceeding the total combined numbers of 
the previous nine years. 

   Taiwan's cross-Strait investment in 1993 has the following 
special characteristics: 

   One, there has been an increase in long-term investment and an 
expansion of investment areas.  In addition to investing in labor- 
intensive processing industries, Taiwan businessmen have invested in 
the capital-intensive and new technology-intensive enterprises, and 
in basic infrastructure projects such as transportation, energy, and 
communications. They have also set up a whole series of new high- 
tech enterprises involving plasma slicers, laser products, 
biological projects, and computers in addition to expanding in the 
areas of finance and real estate.  In recent years, Taiwan 
businessmen have actively focused their mainland investments on 
long-term strategic development, investing in plants and factories, 
seeking land use rights, and even building built factories and 
employee housing themselves. 

   Two, investment scales have hit new heights and business 
structures have undergone drastic changes.  Estimates announced by 
the Council of Economic Planning and Development show that Taiwanese 
not only invest in the long-term capital-intensive and high-tech 
businesses, but also in all types of cross-industry, large-scale 
investments manifesting a pluralistic developmental approach. 
According to the same estimates, 64 percent of Taiwan's 
manufacturing industry investing in the mainland have already 
invested $2.65 billion in the first eight months of 1993, accounting 
for a 13-fold increase over the same period in 1992.  Taiwanese 
businesses investing in the similar industries have joined together 
and established their own industrial regions, processing zones, and 
other cluster-oriented areas on the mainland, such as a bicycle 
production region in Kunshan, Jiangsu Province, a "computer street" 
in Shanghai, and a Taiwan machinery-specialization zone in Xiaoshan, 
Zhejiang Province.  This large-scale and pluralistic grouping trend 
in Taiwan's investment in China will continue.  (Taipei CHING-CHI 
JIH-PAO 15 Jan 94 p 2) 

   Companies Planning To Invest in Mainland's Hainan Province - 
According to a 21 February NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN article by Yosahiko 
Sakurai, one of the paper's Hong Kong correspondents, private-sector 
Taiwan companies are planning large investments in China's Hainan 
Province.  A 200-man inspection group will visit Hainan in late 
March to assess investment areas, while a trade promotion group, the 
"Hainan-Taiwan Economic Cooperation Promotion Committee," has 
already been organized and is chaired by Hainan's vice governor.  At 
present Taiwanese investment in Hainan is primarily small in scale, 
such as investment in restaurants. 

   Sakurai notes that in January 1994, Lien Chan, president of 
Taiwan's Executive Yuan, visited Singapore and proposed to Prime 
Minister Goh Chok Tong that Taiwanese and Singapore companies 
jointly undertake investment projects in Hainan, a step that would 
help protect Taiwanese investments.  The outcome of Lien's visit 
reportedly heightened enthusiasm toward investing in Hainan on the 
part of Taiwanese companies. 

   The purpose of the trade promotion committee, which is based in 
Haikou, Hainan's capital, is to promote two-way economic cooperation 
and expedite the introduction of Taiwanese investment.  The honorary 
chairman of the committee is Du Qinglin, Hainan's NPC delegate, and 
the chairman is Vice Governor Mao Zhijun.  Hainan is seeking "large- 
scale Taiwan cooperation" in the petroleum, natural gas development, 
agriculture, fishing, and basic infrastructural sectors, Sakurai 
reports. 

   The 200-person corporate inspection group, Taiwan's "largest 
company inspection group ever," will visit Hainan from 25 to 30 
March.  For its part, Hainan's government has "growing expectations" 
concerning Taiwanese investment in the province, one of the five 
Chinese special economic zone, where foreign investment "has 
lagged." 

   Sakurai maintains that one uncertainty regarding investment in 
Hainan is "deep-seated opposition" to promoting trade with China 
among Taiwanese governmental officials.  Because of this, people 
involved in this issue reportedly feel "the situation remains fluid" 
whether large-scale Taiwan investment in Hainan "will progress 
smoothly." 

   Minister of Economic Affairs Warns Taipei To Avoid Super 301 - 
Commenting on 3 March on U.S. moves to revive super article 301 
against Japan and other countries, Minister of Economic Affairs 
Chiang Ping-kun said that even though the article is aimed at Japan, 
and despite the fact that Taiwan's foreign trade surplus against the 
United States declined in 1993 to $6.76 billion from a peak of $16 
billion, the not-too-open Taiwan market may still make it a possible 
U.S. target.  As the United States has been exerting pressure on 
Taiwan to open up its domestic market, Taiwan should properly 
restructure its market before joining GATT at the end of 1994. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 4 Mar 94 p 2) 

   Plans To Export Arms, Planes, Missiles - In a report to Premier 
Lien Chan on 7 March, Minister of Defense Sun Chen said the Defense 
Ministry plans to cooperate with the civilian sector in 
commercializing for export defense industry products such as 
missiles and planes.  Sun Chen noted that the shifting of the 
defense industry to manufacturing civilian products has been 
promoted for many years, adding that concrete results have been made 
in the manufacturing of communications equipment, radar, chemical 
weapons protection gear, and electronics equipment for military 
purposes in cooperation with the civilian sector.  (Taipei CHING-CHI 
JIH-PAO 8 Mar 94 p 2) 

   Exports to United States Reverse Course, Increase in Dec 93, Jan 
94 - After declining for six consecutive months in 1993, Taiwan's 
exports to the United States in December 1993 and January 1994 
reached $2 billion and $1.9 billion respectively, up 8.8 percent and 
8.7 percent respectively over the corresponding months in 1992 and 
1993.  The United States is the largest importer of Taiwanese 
exports, absorbing some 28 percent of the nation's total exports. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 3 Mar 94 p 2) 

   Competitive Edge in U.S., Japan Deteriorates - A quarterly report 
released on 7 March by the Industry Development Bureau shows the 
Republic of China's export competitive edge in the United States and 
Japan is deteriorating rapidly in terms of constant market share. 
In the U.S. market, the competitive edge declined by 42 percent 
compared with five years ago, while in the Japanese market it 
declined between 42 and 52 percent compared with six years ago. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO Mar 94 p 2) 

   National Council Views Impact of Entry Into GATT on Local 
Industries - According to Taiwan's Council for Economic Planning and 
Development, after Taiwan joins GATT and lowers its tariffs, it will 
import greater amounts of raw materials for the agricultural and 
industrial sectors.  While manufacturers' output will occupy a 
smaller proportion of the gross national product, the output of 
export-oriented manufacturers will increase.  Agricultural output 
and the number of related workers will drop considerably.  Both 
imports and exports will increase.  A large number of foreign 
competitors will join Taiwan's service industry, a situation which 
will result in the improvement of services because of fierce 
competition.  (Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 26 Feb 94 p 13) 

   Profit Rate of Manufacturing Sector Declines - The average 
selling price of Taiwan's major export products continued to decline 
in 1993, and the profit rate of the manufacturing sector averaged 
only 5.6 percent, the lowest in the past 8 years, according to the 
Council for Economic Planning and Development under the Executive 
Yuan.  The council noted Taiwan's exports grew only 4.3 percent in 
1993 and that the profit rate of its textile, timber, woolen, pulp, 
paper, and basic metal products averaged less than 4 percent.  Only 
the profit rate of nonmetal mineral products exceeded 7 percent. 
(Taipei CHING-CHI JIH-PAO 8 Mar 94 p 2) 

   NORTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  DPRK's Interest in 'Chinese-Style 
Economic Reforms' Noted - SUMMARY:  Since the 1980's, North Korea 
has ruled out the possibility of adopting "Chinese-style economic 
reforms" and even declared that "establishing special economic zones 
does not suit our interests" when it introduced its joint venture 
law in 1984.  However, in 1991, the government  changed directions 
by making Najin and Sonbong free trade zones and is now planning to 
do the same in other areas of the country, according to South Korean 
press reports.  A recent article in a Seoul journal features the 
views of two experts on North Korea on the DPRK's interest in 
China's reforms and the prospect for change in North Korea. 

   The 14 February CHUNGANG ILBO quotes an unnamed Chinese expert on 
North Korea who says that the DPRK is planning to make Sinuiju and 
Nampo special economic zones.  With Najin and Sonbong on its eastern 
shore, and Sinuiju and Nampo on its western shore, the DPRK expects 
to reap economic benefits from these areas "much sooner" than from 
the UN-sponsored Tumen River free trade zone project, CHUNGANG 
states.  The 1 March MUNHWA ILBO echoes CHUNGANG's views and reveals 
that Chongjin and Wonsan are also slated to  become special economic 
zones. 

   In the 3 February SISA JOURNAL, Kim Pong-tok, a professor at 
Northeast Finance University in China, gave the following reasons as 
to why North Korea would be interested in China's approach to 
reform: a) China has made economic reform a priority, allowing 
social changes when timing and conditions are right, in order to 
"minimize shock;" b) China has been able to maintain a "socialist 
structure" under "communist leadership;" and c) if reforms are well 
planned from the outset, they can take place gradually, as they are 
in China.  Kim notes several indications that the DPRK may be 
adopting "Chinese-style economic reforms:"  a) North Korea has 
relaxed the rules on private ownership; b) since 1985, the DPRK has 
slowly changed its centrally controlled and planned economic system, 
allowing various industries a certain degree of freedom; c) the 
government has reduced the scope of central management; and d) North 
Korea has opened special economic zones, under new investment 
regulations.  Kim points out that North Korea's joint venture law 
offers foreigners more favorable terms than China's law, and 
concludes by saying that "North Korea could rise as a new star of 
the Far East, if reform is properly handled." 

   SISA also reports the views of Ho Mun-yong, a prominent 
researcher at the National Unification Research Institute, regarding 
North Korea's outlook on China's reforms.  Ho believes that Kim Il- 
song's visit to China in 1982, Kim Chong-il's tour of the Shenzhen 
special economic zone in 1983, and the enactment of the joint 
venture law in 1984 are indications that the DPRK is moving toward 
Chinese-style reforms.  According to Ho, North Korea's interest in 
PRC economic reforms was "intense," but the government was "afraid" 
of following the Chinese Government's lead because of the risk of 
"ideological corruption by outside forces." 

   In Ho's opinion, the DPRK has "very little choice" but to make 
economic changes in order to maintain a political system that will 
allow Kim Chong-il to succeed his father.  Kim has to do something 
extraordinary" to establish his own credentials and "what better 
way to do that than to show leadership by boosting the economy and 
improving the standard of living through economic reforms?"  Ho 
notes that North Korea has marked "1990-1993 as a survival period, 
1994-96 as an adjustment period, and the post-1997 years as a well- 
to-do period."  He also predicts that North Korea will continue to 
change its economic policies. 

   Efforts Marking Beginning of 'Adjustment Period' Reported - 
Various industries are reportedly making "extraordinary" efforts to 
give  the "adjustment period" a "successful" start.  The 26 March 
Factory in Pyongyang has increased its productivity by utilizing 
industrial waste materials "effectively" and has found a way to 
produce insulators using common domestic raw materials.  Other 
industries in Pyongyang have already produced over 6,000 tons of 
steel and 106,000 of general material items in 90 different 
categories.  Also, over 90,000 small farming equipment items  of 20 
different types were distributed to Pyongyang area farmers to mark 
the opening year of the "adjustment period."  (Pyongyang NODONG 
SINMUN 20 Jan 94 p 1) 

   SOUTH KOREA:  FEATURE:  Trade Ministry Announces New China Policy 
- SUMMARY:  South Korea's Trade Ministry has issued a paper 
outlining the country's new plans for economic relations with China, 
according to ROK press reports.  Highlights include shifting from 
light to heavy industry, redirecting investment southward, and 
cooperating in five high-tech fields including nuclear energy. 
Seoul is backing its drive into China-with a full range of direct 
and indirect subsidies designed to give ROK firms an advantage over 
competitors. 

   On 17 February, South Korea's Ministry of Trade, Industry, and 
Energy (MOTIE) released a report entitled "Comprehensive Measures 
for Making Inroads into China," outlining the ROK's latest plans for 
economic relations with the PRC.  As reported in the 18 February 
MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS), the policy seeks to "build a 
comprehensive support structure for economic cooperation including 
trade, investment, and industrial cooperation."  Unlike previous ROK 
economic ventures into China which were "one-sided and impromptu," 
the current plan takes into account the experiences of Japan, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and other competitors in their dealings with 
China to help South Korea meet its challenges more effectively, the 
newspaper says. 

   Among the plan's concrete aspects, MKS reports the ROK Government 
will "greatly enlarge" its "Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund" and 
the Export-Import Bank's "Deferred Payment Export Fund" to "expand 
the scale on which our companies will be able to provide important 
plants and facilities which China needs to move forward with its 
plans for economic development."  The paper reports that the former 
fund is supporting China investors this year with some $50 million, 
and that the figure will grow to $5 billion by 1996.  At present, 
there are nine China-related deferred payment applications with a 
total value of $1.2 billion, according to the report.  MOTIE intends 
to "accelerate" this by making China "the main target for deferred 
payment export financing."  South Korea "through support measure 
like this will prepare an opportunity for itself to secure a 
favorable position vis-a'-vis competing countries," the ministry 
states. 

   MOTIE considers it "urgent" that South Korea build its own 
distribution network in China and is working on a plan to accomplish 
this, according to MKS.  The ministry aims to put a stop to "South 
Korean companies' indiscriminate investment in China, which has been 
lopsided by region," and will select "business sectors in which 
China investment will be encouraged," by dropping, for example, the 
requirement for prior approval.  "Other types of financial support" 
will also be given, such as raising the ceiling on "Overseas 
Investment Fund" loans from 70 percent for large firms and 80 
percent for small and medium businesses, to 90 percent for both. 

   Commenting on MOTIE's plan, the 18 February TONGA ILBO reports 
the government will enact measures to reduce the concentration of 
South Korean investment in Manchuria and redirect investment toward 
Shanghai and further south.  The newspaper also says that ROK trade 
offices, now limited to Beijing and Shanghai, will be expanded to 
Dalian and Chongqing.  Five particular areas of industrial 
cooperation will be pursued according to MOTIE's agenda: aircraft, 
automobiles, time-division exchange (TDX) switching equipment, 
nuclear energy, and high-definition television (HDTV).  TONGA ILBO 
reports cooperation in aviation will be in the form of a joint 
program to build a mid-size 100-passenger airplane.  (No mention is 
made of how this ties in with MOTIE's plans to produce a mid-size 
aircraft with a European partner.  See related article in this issue 
of the PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC REVIEW.)  In the automotive sector, 
TONGA ILBO reports MOTIE wants to export finished cars to China, in 
addition to producing them locally.  Plans for cooperation in the 
nuclear field include "operation and control" of a nuclear power 
station in Guangdong, exporting generating equipment, and building 
nuclear power plants.  MOTIE reportedly is also encouraging 
exchanges of technology and personnel. 

   The 19 February MKS reports on how South Korean conglomerates are 
gearing up for large investments in China in anticipation of 
government support for increased involvement.  ROK investments, 
which have been primarily in assembly and light industry, will shift 
to cars and other forms of heavy industry.  Major projects planned 
or under way are reported to include the following. 


                    Major ROK Investment Projects in China 
                         (figures in million dollars) 

Company    Project            Location       Scale        Investment 

Samsung    Heavy equipment    Liaoning   1,000 pieces         13.0 
           VCR factory                   600,000 units 
Hyundai    Auto assembly      Dalian     300,000 cars 
           Semiconductors     Shanghai                        50.0 
           Car audio sets     Tianjin    300,000 units         2.0 
Lucky-     VCR's              Shanghai 
Goldstar   Color CRT's        Changsha                       100.0 
           Audio equipment               1,000,000 sets 
           TDX factory        Shandong   1,000,000 units 
Daewoo     Cement             Shandong   2,400,000 tons      300.0 
           a/c compressors               150,000 units        10.0 
           Bus assembly       Shanghai                       900.0 
           Bus assembly       Guangxi    2,500 buses          35.0 
           Pipes              Guangdong  100,000 tons         29.0 
Sunkyong   Oil refinery       Shenzhen   150,000 barrels   1,100.0 
           Video tapes                   18,000,000 tapes      8.5 
Ssangyong  Cement             Shanghai   600,000 tons 
Daerim     Octanol                       100,000 tons        150.0 
Posco      Cold-rolled steel  Liaoning   300,000 tons 



   Other projects reported are tire cord, cotton spinning, 
polyester, cranes, construction equipment, transmissions, trash 
trucks, and beer. 

   FEATURE:  ROK Announces Decision on Mid-Size Aircraft - SUMMARY: 
The South Korean Trade Ministry's announcement that a single 
domestic firm will "lead" the development of the country's first 
indigenous commercial aircraft has drawn charges of "favoritism" 
among companies less likely to be selected, according to Seoul press 
reports.  The 50-100 passenger design will be pursued with technical 
support from a European aircraft manufacturer.  China's involvement 
on some level is being considered to facilitate overseas sales. 

   According to a plan made public on 7 February by the ROK's 
Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) reported by MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS) the following day, South Korea's government 
will sponsor development of a mid-size 50-100 passenger aircraft 
through a domestic consortium under one leading company, with 
technical help from a foreign manufacturer, probably European.  Work 
is scheduled to begin later this year, after a decision is made on 
what companies will participate, and will be finished by 1998. 
MOTIE's announcement reportedly ends months of speculation over the 
type of aircraft to be developed and how the project will be 
apportioned among domestic companies (see PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC 
REVIEW Vol 2 No 25, 15 Dec 93 pp 29-30 and Vol 3 No 1, 12 Jan 94 pp 
26-27 for earlier reporting). 

   MOTIE chose the 50-100 passenger design based on estimated 
domestic demand for 170 units of an aircraft this size by the year 
2000, with an export potential of another 100 planes, according to 
the 8 February CHOSON ILBO.  The ROK Government will pay half the 
279 billion won ($349 million) development costs as part of its goal 
to make South Korea 10th in aircraft worldwide by the next decade. 
The newspaper reports MOTIE will "direct and supervise" the project 
while private companies carry out the developmental work. 

   MKS reports the government will select by this May the "leading 
company" within a consortium of domestic manufacturers, whose stake 
in the project will be less than 50 percent.  The share of other ROK 
firms will depend on their actual roles.  All companies in the 
consortium will work together on design, equipment, parts 
manufacture, and mass production, but only the leading company will 
perform final assembly and afterservice, according to CHOSON ILBO. 
Except Samsung which reportedly is the "strongest contender," all 
other candidates, including Daewoo, Korea Air, Hyundai, and Halla, 
oppose the concept of a leading company as "favoritism." 

   Several of the firms cited above have already signed cooperative 
agreements with Asian countries and are "extremely dissatisfied" 
with the government's decision to limit foreign cooperation to a 
single firm.  Candidates said by MKS to be "under consideration" are 
all European: England's BAE, Spain's CASA, and Sweden's Saab, MKS 
reports.  MOTIE's quest for a foreign partner stems from its 
"concerns' that local technology is inadequate, and that the ROK 
would have trouble selling the plane overseas on its own.  CHOSON 
ILBO notes similarly that MOTIE's present plan is to invite only one 
foreign firm to participate in the plane's development, but that it 
may bring in a third country, "including possibly China," to 
facilitate marketing the aircraft. 

   FEATURE:  South Korea Building Two New Research Institutes - 
SUMMARY:  Two large research institutes will open this year in South 
Korea, each in its own way aimed at accumulating and disseminating 
information from and about foreign countries.  Kwangju is getting 
its first graduate engineering research institute, staffed with many 
foreign instructors and geared toward acquiring foreign technology. 
Samsung meanwhile has built the country's first "Industrial Business 
Research Institute" which will train employees in overseas business 
practices while doubling as a commercial intelligence collection 
facility. 

   South Korea will open two major research institutes over the next 
few months, one a government-sponsored S and T university in the 
southern city of Kwangju, the other a private business research 
facility in Yongin near Seoul.  Although different in location, 
affiliation, and ostensible function, the two institutes share a 
common goal of acquiring information on foreign commerce and 
technology, and disseminating this knowledge among the ROK's 
professional and managerial elite. 

   According to the 2 March CHUGAN MAEGYONG, construction of the 
Kwangju Science and Technical Institute will be completed this year 
and first classes will be held in March 1995.  Intended as a "first- 
rate" engineering college, the institute will admit 360 students 
into master and 224 students into PhD programs in five fields: 
information and communications engineering, new materials, electro- 
mechanical engineering, life sciences, and environmental 
engineering.  Before 1993, the school was operated as a branch of 
the Taedok-based Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST).  The decision to upgrade its status and facilities was made 
to attract better students and to integrate the south into the 
country's S and T network.  CHUGAN MAEGYONG reports the cost of the 
physical plant at 132 billion ($165 million).  The 1 January MAEIL 
KYONGJE SINMUN gives its 1994 operating budget at 23.97 billion won 
($29.96 million). 

   CHUGAN MAEGYONG describes the new institute as one of several 
projects undertaken by the ROK's Ministry of Science and Technology 
to foster the development of high-level technical personnel able to 
help South Korea "leap" into the ranks of advanced countries by the 
21st century.  The university will heavily emphasize research, with 
a planned faculty-to-student ratio of 1 to 5.  The magazine reports 
a "large number" of foreign professors will be hired.  It also says 
10 to 20 percent of the 120-member faculty will be "pure" 
foreigners, presumably to distinguish this group from ethnic Koreans 
overseas who will also be recruited.  The university will require 
faculty and students "to attend all types of international academic 
meetings and receive education from foreign professors."  Foreign 
languages will be taught to give students access to "theoretical 
work in their specialties." 

   CHUGAN MAEGYONG's 28 February issue reports that Samsung, South 
Korea's leading industrial conglomerate whose efforts to collect 
information on foreign commercial technology and businesses have 
been the subject of several ROK media reports (see PACIFIC RIM 
ECONOMIC REVIEW Vol 2 No 17, 25 Aug 93 pp 22-23 and Vol 2 No 20, 6 
Oct 93, p 25), will open an Industrial Business Research Institute 
this June in Kyonggi Province.  The facility is designed to produce 
"global businessmen" on the premise that Samsung's future depends on 
its employees' knowledge of foreign customs, business practices, and 
languages.  The institute, reportedly the first of its kind in South 
Korea, will cost 22 billion won ($27.5 million).  Some 220 trainees 
will be in residence at any one time. 

   According to CHUGAN MAEGYONG, Samsung's institute has three 
functions: (1) preparing international specialists for 
"globalization" (essentially, a group-wide effort to sell more goods 
overseas through better market research and products tailored to 
individual countries);  (2) The training facilities will double as a 
"professional information center" for storing and handling data on 
foreign countries; and (3) "Concentrated research" on different 
areas of the world will be carried out by more than 100 full-time 
area specialists, including former diplomats, overseas Koreans, 
Korea Trade Promotion Corporation (KOTRA) officials, and Samsung 
employees with experience abroad.  The results of this research will 
be "used fully" in the company's business activities. 

   "Globalization" training will include courses on international 
finance, taxation, investment, labor-management relations, 
marketing, languages, and customs.  Satellite receivers will pick up 
lectures in foreign languages on these and other subjects.  Samsung 
reportedly has consulted with Japan's SR International, the United 
States' Global Success, and other foreign firms on curricula. 

   ROK Advertises for Expatriate, Foreign Scientists - The following 
advertisement appeared in the 14 February Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE 
SINMUN on page 7: 

   Invitation To Apply for Employment in a Brain Pool of High-Level 
Overseas Scientists - The General Federation of Korean Science and 
Technology Organizations, in accordance with the Government's 
(Ministry of Science and Technology's) plan to employ high-level S 
and T personnel (a brain pool system), invites superior overseas 
scientists and technicians to South Korea for work in research and 
development, in order to achieve the supreme national task of 
helping South Korea enter the ranks of scientifically and 
technologically advanced countries by the 2000's.  We hope for your 
wide participation. 

1. Goals - To strengthen national competitiveness in keeping with 
the trend toward a global, worldwide, information society, we seek 
to employ superior overseas ethnic Korean and foreign scientists and 
technicians locally in domestic research and development, to 
contribute toward South Korea's entry into the ranks of 
scientifically and technologically advanced countries by the 2000's. 

2. Fields - All fields of science and technology which are the 
objects of national strategic development, including: 

   - basic fields (basic research, measurement, standards, 
astronomy) 
   - machinery and materials fields (machinery, ships, aviation, 
space, materials) 
   - electrical and electronic fields (electricity, power, 
electronics, computers, communications, optical technology) 
   - chemical engineering and biological fields (chemistry, chemical 
engineering, biology, agriculture and fishing, sanitation) 
   - resources and oceanographic fields (resources, oceanography, 
environment, construction) 
   - energy fields (atomic power) 

3. Positions To Be Filled - 100 or fewer 

4. Personnel Sought 

   a. Ethnic Korean and foreign scientists and technicians with 
five years or more experience working overseas from the time they 
received a PhD. 
   b. Ethnic Korean and foreign scientists and technicians who 
possess excellent, world-class R and D accomplishments or know-how, 
regardless of their degree or experience, as determined by the 
Selection Committee. 

5. Period of Employment 

   a. Between six months and two years (less than six months is also 
possible, as determined by the Selection Committee). 
   b. There is a possibility of extending the employment period 
beyond two years (as determined by the Evaluation Committee). 

6. Support and Expenses 

   a. Expenses incurred entering and leaving the country (airfare 
and personal expenses, etc.) 
   b. Costs in country (automobile and other support depending on 
one's experience, salary on a level higher than the compensation 
received in one's own country, to be decided by the Selection 
Committee) 

7. Institutions of Employment 

   a. Government-funded research labs (institutes) 
   b. National and private research labs 
   c. Universities (except ERC (Engineering Research Center) and SRC 
(Science Research Center)) 

8. Method of Employment 

   Conduct joint research as part of an existing or new R and D 
team, with the possibility of concurrently giving lectures in one's 
specialty, and making presentations in various types of academic 
meetings and seminars. 

9. Evaluation 

   The scientists and technicians who are hired will have their 
research results evaluated from the perspective of the type of 
employment at six-month intervals by the Evaluation Committee.  (If 
found "unsuitable," support will be discontinued and that part of 
the support paid will be recovered from the institution where the 
person is employed.) 

10. Application Period 

   14 February to 10 March (for the first half of the year). 
   * Remaining personnel look for a later notice in the second half 
of the year. 

11. Documents To Submit 

   a. Application for employment with the Brain Pool (in a form 
determined by the individual)    1 copy 
   b. Statement of plans (to be drawn up by the institution 
applying) 1 copy 
   c. Written introduction from the institution applying    1 copy 

12. Information Office 

   General Federation of Korean Science and Technology Organizations 
   (635-4 Yoksam-dong Kangnam-gu Seoul 135-703) 

13. Miscellaneous 

   a. Materials received will not be returned. 
   b. Please address detailed inquiries to the General Federation of 
Korean Science and Technology Organizations (Tel: 553-2181-5) 

                                   Director 

General Federation of Korean Science and Technology Organizations 

(Note: the 25 January MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN identifies South Korea's 
Ministry of Science and Technology as the sponsor of this organized 
effort to acquire foreign technology.  See PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIC 
REVIEW Vol 3 No 5 9 Mar 94 pp 33-34) 

   Steel Firm Imports North Korean Scrap Iron - ROK steel producers 
are actively moving ahead with importing scrap steel from North 
Korea.  In January, Inchon Iron and Steel Co., Ltd. (Inchon Steel) 
brought in on a trial basis 1,200 tons of scrap iron from Najin. 
The company tested the suitability of the iron, which was obtained 
from dismantled rail cars, and found that the quality was not as 
good as U.S. scrap iron.  Nonetheless, steel firms which use scrap 
steel as raw materials in their electric furnaces are actively 
moving ahead with importing scrap iron from North Korea.  Inchon 
Steel is already prepared to place a supplemental order for 8,000 
tons via a Japanese trading company.  North Korea has many scrapped 
rail cars and cracked rails.  If the nuclear issue is resolved and 
North Korea normalizes its foreign relations, ROK firms could 
possibly import 40-50,000 tons of scrap iron from North Korea 
annually. 

   In the long run, steel firms could even import scrapped Russian 
rail cars via Najin or Sonbong, where they could be disassembled. 
Realizing that North Korean scrap iron refining facilities are 
insufficient, ROK steel firms are considering plans to have a joint 
scrap iron refining facility in the Najin-Sonbong region.  In 
addition, they are considering plans to import pig iron directly 
from the Songnim region.  Currently, steel firms import 4-5,000 tons 
of North Korean pig iron each year via China.  (Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE 
SINMUN 16 Feb 94 p 9) 

   Car Makers Consider New Production Method To Raise Productivity - 
ROK auto makers Hyundai, Kia, and Daewoo believe that it is not 
possible to greatly increase productivity using current production 
methods and are looking at a method that most overseas car makers 
use.  With the "module" production method, a cooperating company or 
separate assembly line assembles individual parts in advance, and 
then a main assembly line assembles the semi-finished goods.  This 
method allows producers to check in advance for defects, and it 
requires fewer workers on the assembly lines.  Thus, companies can 
greatly increase their product quality, automation rates, and 
productivity by using this method.  Hyundai Motors has done a few 
experiments with the module method, and this year will prove to 
bring the process into its company.  Kia Motors is already using the 
method in some of its production, but there is still a big 
difference between its efforts and those of advanced car makers. 
(Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 13 Feb 94 p 4) 

   China's Currency, Tax Reforms To Be 'Direct Blow' to ROK Exports 
- China's moves to unify its two currency system (renminbi and 
foreign exchange certificates), adjust tariffs, raise the VAT, and 
impose a consumption tax will greatly weaken ROK export 
competitiveness in third country markets where ROK and Chinese goods 
compete.  The moves are also expected to be a "direct blow" to ROK 
exports into China.  China has devalued the yuan by 33.3 percent, 
fixed the VAT (which had varied between 8 and 15 percent depending 
on the type of good) at 17 percent, and set up a new consumption tax 
to restrain imports.  The estimated effect of these changes will be 
to boost the price competitiveness of Chinese goods by at least 20 
percent in overseas markets. 

   While China's reform measures bring its trade system in line with 
international standards, they also seem to reveal China's intention 
to curb imports.  The exchange rate adjustment and tax measures will 
act like a "double trap" to ROK exports to China.  For example, one 
ton of cold-rolled ROK steel, which cost a Chinese importer $400 
last year, would now cost close to twice that amount.  The VAT and 
tariffs on that ton, which last year equalled 592 yuan ($102.07 at 
$1/5.8 yuan), would now total 1009 yuan ($115.98 at $1/8.7 yuan) 
thanks to adjustments in the tax, tariff, and exchange rates.  The 
impact on ROK firms is not all negative, however.  ROK firms that 
manufacture in China and export to third countries will see their 
competitiveness rise.  Also, because foreign currency restrictions 
are being eased, there is a growing possibility that Chinese firms 
may expand their imports.  (Seoul HANGUK ILBO 11 Jan 94 p 9) 

   South Korea To Set Up 'KORNET'--Korea Internet - This year South 
Korea will put into service Korea Internet (KORNET), which can 
receive databases from "famous" overseas universities or research 
institutes.  In Korea Telecom's judgment, using an international 
scientific research network that can easily utilize high-tech S and 
T information in order to strengthen industrial competitiveness is 
an urgent matter.  It has decided to offer domestic commercial 
service for INTERNET, and wll set up the service so that customers 
can link up with the system using various methods, such as a LAN 
(local area network) or a modem.  Links with LAN units will use 56 
Kbps (kilobits per second) or 9.6 Kbps lines, while links with 
modems will use 2.4 or 9.6 Kpbs.  This year, Korea Telecom will set 
up T1-level (1.544 Mbps) backbone networks in six ROK cities (the 
article names only five--Seoul, Pusan, Taejon, Taegu, and Kwangju). 
Korea Telecom will upgrade the backbone network to T3-level (43 
Mbps) lines by 1997.  (Seoul HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 11 Jan 94 p 20) 

   Government To Regulate Transport of Industrial Waste - Beginning 
in June, ROK companies must receive advance permission from the 
Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy (MOTIE) before importing or 
exporting certain industrial wastes.  This procedure will apply to 
47 different items.  In addition, in March the government plans to 
formally join the Basel Convention regulating transboundary 
movements of hazardous wastes.  It also intends to establish its own 
regulations governing the shipment of waste between nations in mid- 
March.  According to the regulation prepared by MOTIE, the 
government will call for the forcible re-export of illegally 
imported waste.  The government also may, if necessary, prohibit the 
import of certain wastes to protect the environment or public 
health.  Furthermore, those who import waste without permission or 
who disobey the rules on exporting waste will face five-year prison 
sentences and fines of up to 30 million won ($37,500).  To more 
strictly regulate transport of these materials within South Korea, 
the government will set up recycling complexes to nurture recycling 
enterprises in places like Noksan and South Cholla Province's Yojon. 

   South Korea imports 50 different types of waste materials--worth 
$1.5 billion--each year for use as industrial raw materials (see 
table).  While MOTIE realizes that importing some types of 
industrial waste is unavoidable, it plans to regulate more strictly 
the transport of certain toxic materials within South Korea.  In 
addition, companies will be required to obtain permission from the 
Ministry of the Environment in cases involving extremely toxic or 
hazardous materials. 


                  ROK Imports of Industrial Waste, 1990-1993 
                                 (Unit: 1 ton) 

                                         Imported from: 
Product                   United States  England          Canada 

Nickel                    346            - 
Lead                      162.7          -                181.1 
Copper                                   4,669.5 
Zinc                      17.8           - 
Plastic                   38.2           -                35.5 
Aluminum                                                  4,503 
Toxic chemicals           -              23,331.5 
Metallic iron             3,064,185.9    749.5 
Non-ferrous metals        -                               2,634 
(Seoul HANGUK ILBO 4 Feb  94 p 2) 



   Hyundai Motors To Market 'Fully Indigenous' Automobile - Hyundai 
Motors will begin selling a fully indigenous, 1,500-cc passenger car 
next month.  The "Accent" was developed solely with domestic 
technology and is equipped with locally built components including 
engine, transmission, various metal casts, and electronic parts.  It 
is the first car built by South Korea without royalty payments to 
foreign component suppliers.  (Seoul YONHAP 0230 GMT 11 Mar 94) 

   Sunkyong Industries Develops Biodegradable Film - Sunkyong 
Industries has developed a type of polyester-based film for paper 
coating that can be fully dissolved by micro-organisms.  The film is 
used for coating paper bags and stationery.  (Seoul YONHAP 0223 GMT 
4 Mar 94) 

   Yukong Enters Power Generation, Liquefied Gas Business - Yukong 
Ltd. plans to enter the power generation and liquefied natural gas 
(LNG) businesses.  The oil refining company's move is in line with 
the government's policy of promoting the participation of private 
firms in electric power generation and LNG projects.  The action is 
also part of Yukong's long-term plan to become a general energy 
company by diversifying into other areas because of oil refining's 
growth limits.  (Seoul THE KOREA TIMES 9 Mar 94 p 8) 

   Real Estate Company Becomes First Private Owner of Public Firm - 
Keo Pyong Co., a real estate developer, has taken over the Korea 
Tungsten Mining Co. to become the first private buyer of a public 
corporation under the government's policy to privatize state-run 
companies.  Korea Tungsten, founded in 1916 as an exporter of 
tungsten ore, has recently focused on manufacturing processed 
products as China has emerged as the biggest supplier of the metal. 
The company's capital was 26.2 billion won ($32.75 million) as of 
the end of last year, with 60.2 billion won ($75.25 million) in 
sales and 8.5 billion won ($10.63 million) in net profits.  Its 
assets are valued at over 300 billion won ($375 million).  (Seoul 
THE KOREA HERALD 2 March 94 p 8) 

   Goldstar Signs Multimedia Deal With U.S. Company - Goldstar 
recently announced that it has signed a contract to cooperate with 
the U.S. company Oracle Corporation to develop and market multimedia 
equipment.  The contract will pave the way for Goldstar to 
participate in the U.S. information superhighway project and to 
enter the multimedia market there.  The contract calls for Goldstar 
to provide technology for producing compact disk interactive (CDI) 
equipment, which is designed to allow customers to select video 
movies on their televisions through telephone lines on a video-on- 
demand (VOD) basis.  The communicable CDI system, called "set top 
box," is a basic instrument for new media service firms such as 
Oracle.  (Seoul THE KOREA TIMES 18 Feb 94 p 8) 

   Daewoo Electronics To Export Computer Monitors to U.S. Firm - 
Daewoo Electronics has been designated the main supplier of monitors 
to the AST Research Company, a U.S. computer company.  Daewoo will 
supply over 500,000 units including 14-inch monitors for personal 
computer use and 17-inch monitors for CAD/CAM (computer-aided 
design/computer-aided manufacture) use.  Sales will reach $100 
million per year.  The contract is renewable annually as conditions 
warrant.  (Seoul MAEIL KY0NGJE SINMUN 26 Feb 94 p 8) 

   Koryo Zinc To Develop Lead, Zinc Mines in Canada - Koryo Zinc 
will invest $8.952 million to establish a corporation in Canada to 
develop lead and zinc mines there.  Koryo Zinc and a Canadian zinc 
refining company will take over two lead and zinc mines in Canada at 
a cost of Canadian $29.84 million.  Expenses will be shared 50:50. 
Koryo Zinc is also promoting development of lead and zinc mines in 
China.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 25 Feb 94 p 11) 

   Daewoo Motors Enters Partnership With Japan's Honda - Daewoo 
Motors is forming an overall partnership--in technical assistance 
and sales--with Japan's Honda.  After developing its "Arcadia" model 
based on the Acura "Legend," Daewoo signed a contract to import 
Honda's "Accord" in April or May this year.  Honda's former Korean 
import agent Daelim had stopped importing Accords since the end of 
last year.  Daewoo will also develop a compact car based on Honda's 
"Civic," and is negotiating to produce Civics in its PRC plant in 
Changchun.  Daewoo is expanding cooperation with Honda to save on 
development costs.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 8 Mar 94 p 10) 

   Sambo To Export Personal Computers to Japan - Sambo Computer 
Company recently concluded a contract with Japan's NEC to export 
NEC-9800 personal computers worth $200 million to Japan in the form 
of OEM (original equipment manufacturing).  Shipments will begin in 
1995. (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 8 Mar 94 p 22) 

   Goldstar To Build Television Plant in Vietnam - Goldstar will set 
up a color TV plant in Vietnam as a joint venture with two 
Vietnamese enterprises--Thang Loi and Sae Yang.  A contract will be 
signed at the end of April, with construction starting in September 
on a $6-million plant located outside Ho Chi Minh City.  The 
venture, which goes into operation in March 1995, will produce 
200,000 color sets per year with 14-, 16-, 20-, and 25-inch screens. 
Some 70 percent of the TV's will be sold in Vietnam and the 
remainder exported to neighboring countries.  Goldstar's parts 
making affiliates are also making plans to enter the Vietnamese 
market.  (Seoul THE KOREA TIMES 7 Mar 94 p 8) 

   Daewoo To Export ForkliftS to United States - Daewoo Heavy 
Industries will establish a sales corporation in the United States, 
DEC, to export its own model of forklift trucks.  DEC will be based 
in Cleveland, and a center for spare parts will be built in 
Brunswick, Georgia.  The company plans to set up distributors in all 
50 states.  Daewoo will export 9,000 forkliftS this year to the 
world market, and 15,000 units in 1995.  For the past 10 years, 
Daewoo has exported forklift trucks under the Caterpillar brand name 
through original equipment manufacturing   (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN 8 Mar 94 p 11) 

   Korea Nambang Development To Advance Into PRC, Indonesia - Korea 
Nambang Development (KODECO) will invest $500 million to begin new 
large-scale businesseS in the PRC and Indonesia.  KODECO established 
a joint-venture plywood company with an Indonesian firm (Pakati 
Wood).  With paid-in capital of $10 million, the 60:40 joint-venture 
acquired development rights for 30,000 acres of forest in Irian 
Jaya, Indonesia.  The company will produce 240,000 cubic meters of 
plywood a year. 

   KODECO also established a joint venture with the Forestry Bureau 
of Shanhe Village, Heilongjiang Province, China.  The operation, to 
be located in yingkou, near Dalian, Liaoning Province, will produce 
yearly 35 million cubic meters of plywood from pulp beginning in 
1996.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 4 Mar 94 p 19) 

   Daewoo To Build Joint Venture Auto Plant in PRC - The Daewoo 
Group will build a joint venture automobile plant in China in 
cooperation with China's Shandong Provincial Government and a 
Chinese motor company.  Daewoo and the Chinese side will each invest 
50 percent of the total fund of $1.5 billion.  Chairman Kim U-chung 
and other Daewoo managers will visit China soon to finish 
negotiations- and the project will be announced officially after 
approval is obtained from both governments.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE 
SINMUN 27 Feb 94 p 1) 

   Il-yang, Chinese Firm To Build Pharmaceutical Factory in Jiangsu 
- Il-yang Pharmaceutical Co. will establish a joint venture with a 
Gaoyou City pharmaceutical factory in China's Jiangsu Province.  The 
company, tentatively named Yangzhou-Ilyang Pharmaceutical Co., will 
be capitalized at $4 million, with the Korean company contributing 
32 percent.  Il-yang will build a plant as soon as it receives 
authorization from the Chinese Government and start manufacturing 
tonic drinks and digestives in the latter part of next year.  (Seoul 
YONHAP 0223 GMT 4 Mar 94) 

   Inchon Steel ReceiveS Order From Indonesia - Inchon Steel 
recently received an order for 500 tons of molding iron (worth $1.3 
million) from the Indonesian engineering company FPE (Flat Product 
Equipment Co).  The molding iron will be used to expand FPE's 
facilities for large-scale housing and housing parts.  Shipments 
will begin on 10 August.  (Seoul MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN 4 Mar 94 p 18) 

   Dongbu Steel To Transfer Silicon technology to German Firm - 
Dongbu steel will transfer silicon production technology to Wacker- 
Chemitronic of Germany for $3.84 million plus royalties.  The 
technique is for the production of multicrystalline silicon, an 
ingredient for semiconductors.  The German firm currently supplies 
30 percent of the world's demand.  Dongbu is entitled to a royalty 
of 1-2.5 percent for the technology it developed jointly with the 
Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, a government-funded 
research institute, over a period of 10 years.  The company said it 
opted for German production instead of domestic manufacturing 
because of the high costs involved in transporting the ingredient 
material, thricholosil.  (Seoul THE KOREA HERALD 10 Mar 94 p 8) 

   Daewoo Car Audio Plant in Tianjin Begins Operations - Daewoo 
Electronics expects to put its car audio plant in Tianjin, China 
into full operation on 11 March.  The plant will make 600,000 car 
audio systems a year, all for export.  Daewoo has a 100-percent 
stake in the plant with an investment of $3 million.  Annual 
capacity will be increased to about 2 million units by the year 
2000.  (Seoul YOHAP 0230 GMT 11 Mar 

   SOUTHEAST ASIA:  INDONESIA - Paiton Electric Power Agreement 
signed -- Indonesia recently signed an agreement with P.T. Paiton 
Energy Co., an international consortium, to produce electricity at 
the $2.3-billion, coal-fired Paiton power station in East Java. 
According to Indonesian officials, the two 615-mw units covered 
under the agreement are expected to be operational by 1998. 

   The consortium consists of Mitsui and Co. of Japan and Mission 
Energy of the Netherlands, each holding a 32.5-percent stake in the 
project; the U.S. General Electric Power Funding Corporation which 
has a 2O-percent share; and Indonesia's P.T. Batu Hitam Perkasa, 
controlled by Hashim Djojohadikusumo which holds the remaining 15 
percent. 

   Paiton Energy has agreed to sell the electricity it will produce 
to Indonesia's state-owned electric company PLN over a 3O-year 
period, based on a three-tiered rate structure--8.56 cents per 
kilowatt hour (kwh) for the first six years, 8.41 cents per kwh for 
the following six years, and 5.54 cents per kwh for the last 18 
years.  (Jakarta KOMPAS 14 Feb 94 p 8) 

   Increased Competition Expected in LNG Market - Pertamina Director 
for General Affairs Baharudin recently stated that even though 
Indonesia is the world's largest LNG exporter, it cannot ignore the 
emergence of several new competitors.  Baharudin said that five 
countries are vying for the Asia-Pacific region's LNG market, which 
is currently concentrated in Japan, south Korea, and Taiwan, with 
China and Thailand surfacing as potential markets.  Qatar, Alaska, 
and Australia are in the process of jncreasing their annual LNG 
production by 10 to 15 million tons, and Malaysia and Oman by 5 
million tons, Baharudin noted.   (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 19 Feb 94 
p 5) 

   Batam Island To Be 'Center' for Taiwanese Investments - Minister 
of Research and Technology B.J. Habibie recently stated that Taiwan 
has formed a-task force to encourage entrepreneurs to invest in 
Batam, as Taiwan plans to make Batam Island the "center" of its 
Southeast Asian investments.  In return, Habibie has requested that 
Chang, director of Taiwan's Evergreen Group, serve as his personal 
advisor in a $600,000 project to establish a container port in 
Batam, capable of handling 600 million containers annually. 
Evergreen has already completed a feasibility study on the project, 
at no cost to the Indonesian Government.  While Indonesia has 
of fered Evergreen the contract to construct the port, the company 
has not responded thus far.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 15 Feb 94 p 
6) 

   P.T. Pindad To shift Production, Marketing Focus - T. Sjamsu, 
senior executive vice president of P.T. Pindad, recently announced 
that the company is shifting its production and marketing efforts 
away from the military sector.  In order to boost revenues and 
defray the cost of producing military equipment for the Indonesian 
Armed Forces (ABRI), the company plans to devote 80 percent of its 
production capability to the manufacture of non-military equipment. 
In the past, P.T. Pindad was able to sell 40 percent of what it 
produced to overseas commercial markets, Sjamsu said. 

   P.T. Pindad produces ammunition, pistols, revolvers, and non- 
military equipment such as generators- machine tools, vacuum circuit 
breakers, and air brake systems.  (Jakarta BISNIS INDONESIA 14 Feb 
94 p 9) 

   State-Owned Gas Company To Receive $424-Million Loan - The state- 
owned gas company Perum Gas Negara will receive a $424-million loan 
for the construction of an 823-km pipeline from the Asamera gas 
field in south sumatra to the Duri oil field and Batam Island, Riau. 
The loan will come from a syndicate comprising the Asian development 
Bank, the Export-Import Bank of Japan, and the European Investment 
Bank.  (Jakarta THE JAKARTA POST 4 Mar 94 p 1) 

   Increase in Trade With Taiwan Expected - An official of the 
Taipei Economic and Trade Office in Jakarta recently announced that 
bilateral trade this year is expected to increase by $3.5 billion 
over 1993.  The estimate is based on historical growth trends, 
Taiwan's increased purchase of liquefied natural gas, coal, crude 
oil, and non-oil products- and Taiwan's increased investments in 
Indonesia.  (Jakarta THE JAAARTA POST 4 Mar 94 p 9) 

   LAOS:  French Firm To Build Hydropower Station - The state-run 
Electricite du Laos and sogreah of France recently signed an 
agreement for the construction of the Nam Leuk hydropower station. 
The project, to be funded by an Asian development Bank loan, is 
expected to generate 40 mw of power.  (Vientiane KPL 0830 GMT 15 Mar 
94) 

   MALAYSIA:  Mahathir Outlines strategy for space Industry - Prime 
Minister Mahathir has outlined a three-step approach to develop an 
indigenous space industry that can foster space-related commercial 
ventures in the country.  The strategy calls for local companies and 
institutions to participate in selected foreign space programs that 
are compatible with Malaysia's scientific and industrial capability 
to establish a networking system with space agencies in Europe, 
Asia, and the United States, that will facilitate Malaysia's 
participation in various programs and projects; and to promote 
closer relations among the countries in the region in order to 
develop scientific and commercial activities that would be mutual1y 
beneficial. 
   Mahathir remarked that Malaysia should break into the space 
industry, not only because of the impact it would make on 
international politics and the economy and defense worldwide, but 
also because new initiatives in the space industry can benefit other 
industrieS, such as aeronautics, aerospace engineering- and 
communications.  (Kuala Lumpur BERITA HARIAN 18 Feb 94 p 8) 

   Telekom Malaysia To Provide services in India - Telekom Malaysia 
recently announced that it has received an offer from the Indian 
Telecommunications Department to operate paging and cellular 
services in several major cities in India.  It has formed a joint 
venture company with Usha Martin IndustrieS (UMI) Ltd. of India, 
which is expected to be operational sometime this year.  The new 
company, Usha Martin Telekom Ltd., will be worth $40 million, with 
both sides holding equal shares.  (Kuala Lumpur BERITA HARlAN 17 Feb 
94 p 7) 

   PHILIPPINES:  FEATURE:  Davao Focusing on Economic Growth - 
SUMMARY:  Davao, the principal city on the island of Mindanao, is 
focusing on achieving economic growth, according to related articles 
in a Manila daily.  The city has turned its attention away from 
Manila, to a "triangle area" that includes East Indonesia, East 
Malaysia, and other parts of Mindanao.  Cooperative efforts between 
Davao and other cities are under way, cross-investments have 
started, and infrastructural improvements in Mindanao are being 
planned, the paper notes. 

   An article in the 11 February BALITA reports that just as the 
philippines feels "left out of booming southeast Asia," its southern 
island of Mindanao feels "left out of the rest of the country." 
However, the article adds, the island's main city, Davao, is trying 
to achieve economic growth by working with surrounding areas in 
Mindanao, East Indonesia, and East Malaysia. 

   The East Asian Growth Area (EAGA), patterned after the two other 
economic areas in the region (the Southern Triangle encompassing 
Singapore, Johor (Malaysia), and Batam Island (Indonesia), and the 
Northern Triangle, comprising Aceh (Indonesia), Penang (Malaysia), 
and southern Thailand), is designed to promote trade and development 
in the "triangle area" of Mindanao, East Indonesia, and East 
Malaysia, according to the 12 February BALITA.  Guided by the EAGA 
concept, Davao is focusing on its own economic progress, the paper 
says, citing increasing construction of new buildings and the recent 
opening of three shopping malls as indications of growth in the 
city. 

   The 11 February BALITA reports that, according to Merle Cruz, 
regional director of the Department of Trade and Industry, the 
private sector has led the way in establishing links between Davao 
and Manado, capital of North Sulawesi, Indonesia.  For example, 
Indonesia's Bouraq Airlines currently makes two weekly flights to 
Davao and Philippine Airlines is seeking landing rights in Labuan, 
which is being developed as Malaysia's financial center.  Cruz adds 
that cross-investments have also begun.  A Philippine fishing 
company, QBRO, has invested in a cold-storage facility and ship 
repair operation at Bitung, Indonesia, while the Indonesian company 
P.T. Intimas has bought into a soya oil processing plant in 
Mindanao. 

   Davao officials note other cooperative opportunities as well, 
says the 14 February BALITA.  These officials suggest, for instance, 
that Mindanao might ship its rice and corn to Sabah and Sarawak and, 
perhaps, benefit from the two Malaysian states' oil and gas 
reserves.  In addition, since Manado lacks colleges and private 
hospitals, its residents could use Davao's facilities which are more 
easily accessible and more affordable than the facilities in 
Jakarta.  Infrastructural improvements are also being planned, the 
paper adds, noting that the construction of overpasses and a four- 
lane road connecting Davao to the northern part of Mindanao, and the 
upgrading of Davao airport to international standards are all 
priority projects. 

   Syvelyn Tan, head of the Philippine Government-private sector 
group promoting investments in Davao, is quoted in the 12 February 
BALITA as saying that business confidence "has come slowly" to Davao 
because it used to be a battleground between Muslim and communist 
guerillas and government forces.  Furthermore, Davao had the 
reputation of being a "crime and murder center."  But now, Tan says, 
even the communist New People's Army has withdrawn, making room for 
peace and investment. 

   Most importantly, the 14 February BALITA concludes, the regional 
grouping is getting "full support" from the three governments 
involved.  Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir has endorsed the EAGA, 
while the Philippines and Indonesia have signed agreements for 
postal and shipping services between Davao and Manado, and have 
established a joint commission to handle border and customs issues. 

   Consortium To Undertake Water Project - Malaysian entrepreneur 
Eugene Campos will head a consortium that will  undertake a $480- 
million, build-own-operate water project in Metro Manila.  The 
project, expected to be completed in five to six years, will help 
accelerate infrastructure development and delivery of basic 
services, in line with the "Philippine 2000 Vision."  The project 
entails financing, designing, constructing, managing, operating, and 
maintaining a water treatment plant with a capacity of 1,000 million 
liters a day.  (Kuala Lumpur UTUSAN MALAYSIA 18 Feb 94 p 5) 

   Increase in Money Supply Noted - Money supply (M3), representing 
the total amount of currency in circulation plus savings deposits, 
time deposits, and deposit substitutes, stood at $17.14 billion in 
1993, an increase of more than 22 percent over the previous year. 
On the other hand, broad money (M2), which is the total amount of 
currency in circulation, savings, and time deposits, rose by 24.49 
percent to $17 billion.  (Manila MANILA BULLETIN 26 Feb 94 p B-1) 

   Decrease in Foreign Investment Reported - Foreign investment 
dropped to $327.942 million in 1993 from $328.012 million the 
previous year.  Less infusion from the major trading partners, Japan 
and the United States, accounted for the decline, but investment 
from Great Britain has risen.  (Manila MANILA BULLETIN 7 Mar 94 p B- 
1) 

   SINGAPORE:  OCBC Launches Fund for Investment in China - The 
Overseas Chinese Banking Corporation (OCBC) has launched the Savers 
China Growth Fund, offering investors a vehicle to invest in China. 
Initially, investors will have to buy $10,000 worth of shares, while 
subsequent purchases will be transacted in $5,000 lots.  OCBC is 
targeting retail investors and "wealthy individuals," and hopes to 
raise between $20 and $30 million.  (Singapore BUSINESS TIMES 10 Mar 
94 p 17) 

   Company To Build Oil Terminal in Nigeria - IPCO International has 
been awarded a $251-million contract to build an oil terminal in 
Nigeria.  The project will be carried out by IPCO subsidiaries and 
is expected to be completed in 20 months.  (Singapore BUSINESS TIMES 
16 Mar 94 p 17) 

   THAILAND: Norwegian Company To Invest in Gas Venture - Norway's 
national oil firm Statoil is investing $96 million in the Bongkot 
gas field development in the Gulf of Thailand.  This sum will be 
spent between 1994 and 1998 and represents the firm's 10-percent 
share in the project.  Other investors include PTT Exploration and 
Production (40 percent), the French oil firm Total (30 percent), and 
British Gas (20 percent).  (Bangkok XING XIAN RIBAO 14 Mar 94 p 3) 

   VIETNAM:  Joint Venture With Daewoo To Assemble Trucks, Buses, 
Vans - The Machinery Union Enterprise 7983, under the Ministry of 
Defense's General Department of Economics and Technology, and South 
Korea's Daewoo group have formed a 30-year joint venture to assemble 
trucks, buses, and vans in Vietnam.  The venture was licensed in 
December 1993, with an investment capital of $32.2 million. 
Prescribed capital is $10 million, of which the Vietnamese company 
is contributing 30 percent.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE VIET NAM 23-29 
Dec 94 p 3) 

   The new company, which is called Vidamco, has received approval 
from the State Committee for Cooperation and Investment.  It is 
expected to produce 500 cars this year and 10,000 cars in the year 
2000.  (Hanoi VNA 0605 GMT 10 Mar 94) 

   Malaysian Company To Build Industrial Compound in Dong Nai - The 
Malaysian company Hwa Leong Ltd. has been licensed to build a 
$242.7-million industrial compound in Dong Nai, about 50 km from Ho 
Chi Minh City.  The compound will consist of eight textile mills. 
(Hanoi TUAN BAO QUOC TE 20 Jan 94 p 7) 

   Interior Ministry Firm Forms Venture With Hong Kong Firm - The 
Interior Ministry's Thang Long Company, Vietranimex Co. from Hanoi, 
and Merry Dragon Development Ltd. from Hong Kong have formed a 25- 
year joint venture to produce license plates for motor vehicles, 
traffic signs, motorcycle helmets, and hard hats.  The new venture, 
called Vietnam Transportation Safepromotion Co. Ltd., was licensed 
in December 1993.  Investment capital in the venture totals $4 
million, while prescribed capital is $3 million, of which the Hong 
Kong firm is contributing 60 percent.  (Hanoi NHAN DAN 19 Jan 94 p 
2) 

   Venture With Russian Company To Produce Tractor Parts - The 
Engineering Command's Lung Lo Construction Company and Russia's 
Uraltrac company have formed a joint venture to provide services and 
supply parts for construction equipment and tractors.  Investment 
capital in the venture totals $1.8 million, while prescribed capital 
is $1.3 million, of which the two partners will have equal shares. 
The joint venture, called the Vietnam Uraltrac Construction Machine 
Joint Venture or Vu Trac Co., Ltd., was licensed in late October 
1993.  (Hanoi QUAN DOI NHAN DAN 9 Jan 94 p 4) 

   Cardphone Company Inaugurates Center in Ho Chi Minh City - 
Uniphonekad is a joint venture between the Ho Chi Minh City Post 
Office and Malaysia's Sapura Holdings Ltd.  Investment capital in 
the joint venture totals $5.12 million, of which the Malaysian firm 
is contributing 68 percent.  The new company recently inaugurated a 
cardphone center in Ho Chi Minh City. 

   As of August 1993, Uniphonekad has issued 79,000 cards in Ho Chi 
Minh City, with an average of 6,000 cards per month.  The company 
plans to open 200 new phone booths in the city in 1994 and increase 
the number of cards issued to 8,000 per month.  (Ho Chi Minh City 
THOI BAO KINH TE SAIGON 6-12 Jan 94 p 6) 

   Industrial Output Increases to $1.9 Billion in 1993 - According 
to the General Department of Statistics and the Ho Chi Minh City 
Bureau of Statistics, Vietnam's industrial output was worth 
approximately $1.9 billion in 1993, a 12-percent increase over 1992. 
The average increase in the past three years (1991-1993) was 13.2 
percent.  The output by sector breaks down as follows: about $968 
million from central state-owned industries (a 14-percent increase 
over 1992); about $539 million from non-state industries (a 9- 
percent increase over 1992); and about $374 million from local 
state-owned industries (a 10-percent increase over 1992).  (Ho Chi 
Minh THOI BAO KINH TE SAIGON 6-12 Jan 94 p 40) 

   Electricity output Increases Reported - Electricity output 
nationwide continues to show yearly increases: 8.9 billion kwh in 
1990, 9.3 billion kwh in 1991, 9.8 billion kwh in 1992, and 10.8 
billion kwh in 1993.  When the 500 kv north-south powerline is 
completed in April, it will provide the south between 200 mw and 300 
mw.  Currently, almost all districts in the Red River Delta receive 
electricity from the national power network.  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH 
TE VIET NAM 5 Jan 94 p 1) 

   Export, Import Figures for 1993 Reported - According to the 
General Department of Statistics, total exports were worth $2.08 
billion in 1991, $2.57 billion in 1992, and between $2.8 and $3 
billion in 1993.  Crude oil export reached 3.93 million metric tons 
in 1991, 5.4 million metric tons in 1992, and 6.31 metric tons in 
1993.  Rice export rose from 1.03 million metric tons in 1991 to 
1.95 million metric tons in 1992, but dropped to 1.7 million metric 
tons in 1993. 

   Total imports for 1993 amounted to over $3.3 billion, a 31- 
percent increase over 1992.  This does not include unofficial trade 
which, according to the Customs Department, reached approximately 
$390 million in the first eight months of 1993.  An increase in 
almost all essential imports was noted in 1993.  Total imports were 
worth $2.33 billion in 1991 and $2.57 billion in 1992.  (Hanoi OUAN 
DOI NHAN DAN 19 Jan 94 p 7) 

   Among the export products that registered an increase of over 20 
percent in 1993 are garments, textiles, ground nuts, tea, and 
aquatic products.  Export products that showed a decrease of over 20 
percent in 1993 include handicrafts, rice, and tin.  Several import 
products registered an increase in 1993, such as steel and iron 
(116.1 percent), electronic components (73.6 percent), and oil and 
gas (26.7 percent)  (Hanoi THOI BAO KINH TE 6-12 Jan 94 p 12) 

   Haiphong Tops Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City in Industrial Growth - 
According to the General Department of Statistics, industrial growth 
in Haiphong in 1993 increased by 30.1 percent over 1992.  Hanoi 
ranks second with an increase of 25.8 percent, followed by Ho Chi 
Minh City with 11.5 percent.  (Ho Chi Minh City THOI BAO KINH TE 
SAIGON 6-12 Jan 94 p 40) 

   GDP Figures for 1993 Reported - According to the General 
Department of Statistics, the gross domestic product (GDP) in 1993 
was about $11.6 billion, an increase of 22.78 percent over 1992. 
The breakdown by sector is as follows: agriculture and forestry(30.9 
percent); industries (22.7 percent); trade (12.07 percent); other 
services (12.6 percent); state administration, national security, 
and defense (12.1 percent); capital construction (4.57 percent); 
communications, transportation, and postal services (4.1 percent); 
and other material production (.96 percent).  (Ho Chi Minh City THOI 
BAO KINH TE SAIGON 6-12 Jan 94 p 5) 

   Korean Oil Company Reports 0f fshore Discovery - The ROK Petrol 
Development Company recently announced that it has discovered a well 
about 280 km southeast of Vung Tau Province, with a daily production 
capacity of 3,400 barrels of oil and 22 million cubic meters of gas. 
(Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 1430 GMT 7 Mar 94) 

   Hanoi Airport Expressway Opens - The recently opened $20-million, 
six-lane expressway linking Hanoi and Noi Bai International Airport 
is reportedly capable of handling up to 8,000 vehicles a day, 
traveling at 120 km per hour.  It goes through an industrial zone at 
the western end of the capital and is a part of the east-south 
beltway that is going to be built.  (Hanoi VNA 0614 GMT 10 Mar 94) 

   Norwegian Company Discovers Natural Gas Offshore - Norway's 
national oil company Statoil has discovered natural gas off the 
southern coast of Vietnam.  Decisions are expected to be made in the 
next few months on Statoil's $400-million gas project that includes 
a compression station, a liquefying plant, and a pipeline from Vung 
Tau to Ho Chi Minh City.  (Hanoi Voice of Vietnam 1000 GMT 14 Mar 
94) 

EAG/23MAR94/ECONF/TECHTF/EAST ASIA GROUP/CL 24/1945Z MAR 

