BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 21 (CNA) -- Taiwan will meet the four 
requirements set by a United Nations wildlife protection 
organization by the end of September, a Council of Agriculture 
(COA) official said Thursday [21 April]. 
  The UN's Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES) has asked Taiwan to make an inventory of all 
rhino horns, consolidate all rhino horn and tiger bone 
stockpiles, pass legislation to mete out harsher penalties for 
those involved in illicit wildlife product trade and effectively 
enforce all related wildlife conservation laws and regulations. 
  "We are determined to meet CITES requirements by the end of 
September," COA Vice Chairman Lin Shiang-nung said. 
  CITES will decide whether to sanction Taiwan for its alleged 
failure to eliminate illicit rhino horn and tiger bone trade in 
November. 
  "We hope our effort will spare Taiwan from CITES trade 
sanctions," Lin noted. 
  The COA will push the Legislative Yuan to pass a package of 
amendments to the country's wildlife conservation law, which 
propose stricter penalties for offenders, by the end of June. 
  "If the revised law can be passed soon, the United States 
may 
also lessen its trade sanctions against Taiwan," Lin said. 
  The Clinton administration decided to sanction Taiwan over 
wildlife conservation issues early this month. The decision 
will take effect within a month. 
  The COA has proposed a three-year plan for wildlife 
conservation, which will be implemented after being approved by 
the cabinet. 
  Under the plan, the government will spend NT [new Taiwan]$1 
billion (US$37.74 million) over the next three years to enforce 
the consolidation of rhino horn and tiger bone stockpiles, 
intensify the crackdown on smuggling of endangered species, 
increase conservation education and international conservation 
cooperation, establish an identification system for wildlife and 
wildlife products and a wildlife data bank, and train 
conservation specialists. 

