Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary from the "Report on Current Events" </F>
program: "Sino-U.S. Economic Cooperation and Trade Enter a New 
Era"] 
  [Text] Listener friends: In the past week, China and the 
United States reached a new agreement on textile products and 
resumed the Sino-U.S. joint economic committee talks, which had 
been suspended for six years. The opinion of Beijing is that 
the two events signify that the two countries have taken an 
important step forward in their march toward a new period of 
bilateral economic relations and trade. 
  Despite continuous trade frictions between China and the 
United States in recent years, an encouraging trend appeared in 
their bilateral trade. According to Chinese customs statistics, 
the bilateral trade volume increased by $10 billion from 1992 to 
reach $27.65 billion in 1993. The United States has always 
maintained its rank as China's third-leading trading partner, 
and the latter ranks as one of the major trading partners of the 
former. Meanwhile, the two countries have made gratifying 
progress in two-way investment and technical cooperation. To 
date, China has approved over 8,000 investment projects and a 
total agreed-upon amount of $10.8 billion by U.S. businessmen in 
China. In trailing only Hong Kong, the United States ranks as 
the second-leading nation in terms of its investment in China. 
A prominent characteristic of U.S. investment in China since 
last year is that increasing numbers of U.S. multinational 
companies are showing tremendous enthusiasm for investing in 
China. It has been learned that a number of companies among the 
top 500 U.S. firms have established considerably sizable joint 
ventures in China. 
  There is tremendous potential for the two countries to 
supplement each other in trade, for both sides can share each 
other's huge markets. The demand of China's domestic market 
will grow further as it enjoys economic development. 
  China's planned import volume for the period 1991-95 will 
exceed $400 billion. No one can deny that this import volume is 
very attractive to foreign enterprises, including U.S. firms. 
  Although a wide-ranging basis exists for China and the 
United 
States in their bilateral trade, people are soberly aware of the 
fact that the dispute raised by the United States every year 
over most-favored-nation [MFN] status for China from time to 
time casts a shadow on the development of bilateral trade. 
Chinese economists and businessmen say that the MFN issue must 
be solved once and for all if Sino-U.S. economic relations and 
trade are really to enter a new era. 
  The unfavorable trade balance is also a factor affecting the 
development of bilateral economic relations and trade. It is 
caused partly by differing statistical methods and partly by 
certain restrictions still imposed by the United States on its 
exports to China. It has been learned that both sides have 
agreed to establish a working group to settle their differences 
over statistical methods. Beijing figures believe that the 
momentum for a sharp increase in U.S. exports to China will 
occur if the United States scraps its policy affecting U.S. 
exports to China. 

