BFN 

  [Text] Ankara, May 25 (AFP)--Turkey accused Greece 
Wednesday [25 May] of training guerrilla units in the separatist 
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) to carry out attacks on economic, 
military and tourist targets. 
  Greek ambassador to Ankara Alexandros Philon was summoned 
May 
18 to the Turkish foreign ministry to be told of "confessions" 
made by a group of PKK members recently arrested by police in 
Istanbul, a Turkish government source told AFP. 
  The source said a group of 20 PKK militants arrived in 
Athens 
from Frankfurt last February to be trained for bomb attacks on 
targets in Ankara, Istanbul and Antalya, Turkey's main 
Mediterranean spa resort. 
  They entered Turkey by crossing the river Maritsa, which 
runs 
along the Greek-Turkish border. Turkish police had since seized 
documents relating to a series of planned attacks, the source 
added. 
  Unal Unsal, a junior minister in the foreign ministry, 
passed 
the information on to the Greek ambassador and demanded an 
explanation over what the government source called "a very 
serious development." He added that the British, German, French 
and U.S. ambassadors had also been summoned for a briefing on 
the issue. 
  Four bomb attacks, all attributed to the PKK, have been 
carried out at tourist attractions in Istanbul since March 24, 
killing two foreign tourists and injuring a total of 22 people. 
  In a related development, 14 Kurdish rebels have been killed 
in military operations since Tuesday in the provinces of Mus and 
Bingol in eastern Turkey, officials in Diyarbakir said, while 
the bodies of 28 rebels killed in recent clashes near the Iraqi, 
Iranian and Syrian borders were also reportedly recovered. 
  The latest deaths brought to at least 469 the number of 
rebels killed by security forces since May 1. Almost 2,000 
people, including 122 civilians, are believed to have died in 
unrest this year, while almost 13,000 have died in 10 years of 
conflict since the Kurds began their uprising. 
  President Suleyman Demirel called for PKK members to hand 
themselves in to the authorities, saying there was "no way out" 
for them in their battle with the state. 

