BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Guenther Pursch, Claudia Schute, Dirk Klose, </F>
Thomas Lillig: "For a Democracy That Is Capable of Defending 
Itself"] 
  [Text] "In 1993, the threat to the FRG's internal security 
from violent left-wing extremists was more serious than in the 
previous year," according to the Federal Office for the 
Protection of the Constitution [BfV] report presented by Federal 
Interior Minister Manfred Kanther in Bonn on 14 April. 
  All left-wing extremists want to abolish the existing state 
and social order. In seeking that, they pursue various 
ideological lines. At the end of 1993, almost 29,000 people 
belonged to a multitude of left-wing extremist organizations and 
groupings. This figure does not include the several thousand 
supporters of the Marxist-Leninist positions assumed by the SED 
[Socialist Unity Party of Germany] successor party, the "Party 
of Democratic Socialism" (PDS). Marxist-Leninists, Trotskyists 
and Marxist revolutionary formations that propagate class 
struggle and revolution have 22,000 members. The anarchists 
have about 6,000 members, including 5,000 independents who are 
prepared to use violence. 
  The most significant terrorist organization, the "Red Army 
Faction" (RAF), have once again demonstrated that it is prepared 
to use violence with the bombing of the prison building at 
Weiterstadt in Hesse. The report states: "The shooting of a 
police official at Bad Kleinen on 27 June during the attempt to 
arrest RAF member Wolfgang Grams showed once more how dangerous 
the underground command level members are." The struggle over 
what direction to adopt, one which became public, was unique for 
the RAF. This finally led to a split between the RAF command 
level and the majority of group members who were in prison and 
ultimately resulted in collapse of the so-called "prisoners 
collective." The report states that there are clear signs of 
"moves to form new terrorist groupings." 
  The "Revolutionary Cells" (RZ) have continued the discussion 
about concepts and conditions for future revolutionary policy. 
A group that has emerged from the RZ has carried out terrorist 
attacks. 
  The BfV officials further conclude that the greatest 
potential for left-wing extremist violence is to be found among 
independent anarchists. "The popularity of these organization 
is continuing to grow." In contrast to independent anarchist 
practice until now, which was based more on spontaneity and 
hostility toward organizations, there are calls now for closer 
coordination and organizational ties. Longer-term associations 
have above all developed as a result of the so-called 
"antifascist" struggle. Independent groupings' readiness to 
engage in violence has not waned. They are responsible for the 
majority of acts of violence that have a left-wing background. 
"Antifascism/antiracism" has remained the main field of 
activity and it has taken the form of militant action against 
right-wing extremists or suspected right-wing extremists and 
their structures as well against the ways in which asylum is 
granted and amendments to asylum legislation. 
  Marxist-Leninist and other revolutionary Marxist 
organizations have to a large extent assumed a more stable 
character. By means of "antifascism" and campaigning for social 
issues, they hope -- with only modest success -- to mobilize and 
attract those concerned. According to the report, their 
readiness to cooperate, extensively without ideological 
reservations, with both elements from the independent scene and 
those from RAF circles is "remarkable." The revolutionary 
Marxists are focussing their attention on election year 1994. 
They hope to improve their election prospects through links to 
parties, alliances, and "open lists." Sections of the PDS are 
also considering such moves. 
  According to the findings of the BfV officials, a 
Marxist-Leninist association, the "Communist Platform" (KPF), 
has consolidated its position within the PDS with the party's 
knowledge and approval. It openly espouses the "revolutionary 
idea of the socialist alternative." The report states that PDS 
speaker Hanno Harnisch confirmed that the KPF does not want to 
throw all the theoretical principles of communism overboard and 
takes a "glorified" view of the history of socialism to some 
extent. In June 1993, a representative of this tendency was 
elected to the PDS Federal Board. The KPF also sees itself as a 
bridge to other communist groupings. In an interview with the 
DKP [German Communist Party] newspaper UNSERE ZEIT, PDS chairman 
Lothar Bisky indicated that communists, including DKP members, 
would be able to appear as candidates on the open PDS lists for 
the 1994 elections. While the PDS has distanced itself from the 
"Stalinist" MLPD [Marxist-Leninist Party of Germany], it has "no 
reservations about contacts with violent extremists such as the 
independents." 
  According to the 1993 findings, no progress is being made in 
efforts to build a unified communist party for Germany. 
However, revolutionary Marxist organizations maintain active 
contacts with each other and with the PDS. Closer ties have 
emerged between the "Union of West German Communists" (BWK) and 
the PDS, but not between the "German Communist Party" (DKP), the 
PDS "Communist Platform," and the "Communist Party of Germany," 
(KPD, based in Berlin) which was still founded in the days of 
the GDR. 

<H5>    Right-Wing Extremism </H5>
  The total number of organized and nonorganized right-wing 
extremists hardly changed compared to 1992: According to the 
BfV report, at the end of 1993, there were about 42,400 (42,700 
in 1992) right-wing extremists in the FRG as well as 77 (82 in 
1992) extremist right-wing organizations and other associations. 
After making deductions for multiple membership, a total of 
about 41,500 (41,900) right-wing extremists belong to these 
organizations, including 5,600 (6,400 in 1992) militants, 
particularly skinheads. About 950 (800 in 1992) neo-Nazis are 
not members of organized associations. 
  There has been a slight decline in the overall number of 
right-wing extremist acts of violence: It was established that 
a total of 2,232 such offenses -- about 15 percent fewer than in 
1992 (2,639) -- were committed in 1993. Of that number, 1,609 
(2,277 in 1992) were motivated by hostility toward foreigners. 
According to the Interior Ministry, the decline is due to the 
resolute measures taken by the state, extending from greater 
efforts on the part of the police force and the prosecution 
service to the rapid conclusion of criminal proceedings. The 
end of the debate on asylum has also caused the wave of violence 
to subside. 
  However, the total number of violations of the law by 
right-wing extremists has risen by 37 percent to 10,561 offenses 
(7,684 in 1992). The report attributes the increase to a 
greater readiness on the part of the population to report 
offenses as well as police measures aimed "at bringing light 
into the darkness." 
  The neo-Nazi scene has been made to feel "very uncertain" by 
the seven bans on extremist right-wing associations that have 
been imposed by interior ministries at the federal and laender 
levels as well as numerous investigations and searches. 
Applications for bans have been filed with the Federal 
Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe against two parties ("Liberal 
German Workers Party," FAP, and the "National List," NL). In 
February and July 1993, law enforcement measures were 
implemented throughout the country against skinhead bands and 
music companies as well as the producers and distributors of 
right-extremist scene publications. Efforts by activists of 
banned organizations to form new structures have only be 
established in isolated cases. For example, supporters of the 
"German Alternative" (DA) have tried to establish a new 
organization called the "German Nationalists" (DN), which is 
being kept under constant surveillance by the security 
authorities. 
  Despite cooperation, right-wing extremist activities are 
clearly fragmented at the regional level: While the FAP is 
particularly active in North Rhine-Westphalia and the new 
laender, the NL, which was formed by supporters of neo-Nazi 
leader Michael Kuehnen, who died in 1991, concentrates on 
Hamburg. The "Direct Action/Central Germany" (JF), which has 
been active since later summer 1993, is primarily involved in 
neo-Nazi and social revolutionary propaganda in Brandenburg and 
Berlin. The "Relief Organization for National Political 
Prisoners and their Dependents" has been shown to be a "rallying 
point for neo-Nazis." With about 200 members, it is has one of 
the largest memberships among neo-Nazi associations on the 
right-wing extremist scene, which is greatly fragmented 
organizationally. 

<H5>    Extremism Among Foreigners </H5>
  Acts of violence committed by foreign extremists and 
foreigners associations still pose a "considerable" threat to 
the security of the FRG. Despite a slight drop in the number of 
members and supporters of such associations, the security 
situation in Germany has not been "defused," states the BfV 
report in its chapter on foreigners. The acts of violence 
committed in 1993 by foreign extremists rose to 66 (53 in 1992); 
five people died as a result. 
  According to the BfV authorities, at the end of 1993, 38,950 
(39,800 in 1992) people belonged to "foreigners' associations 
that were actively extremist or considerably influenced by 
extremism," including 6,800 supporters of organizations from the 
"Kurdish and Turkish areas of observation" that are banned in 
Germany. Turkish and Kurdish extremism is the most prevalent: 
The BfV also mentions 1,750 Arabs, 1,300 Iranians, and 2,500 
others. 
  In 1993, a total of 195 acts (141 in 1992) of violence were 
registered. They included 66 (53) serious acts of violence such 
as offenses, bombings, arson attacks. The most common act of 
violence (60 offenses) among the remaining 129 offenses is 
damage to property involving the considerable use of force. 
  The BfV describes the "Workers Party of Kurdistan" (PKK), -- 
it was banned in Germany in November 1993 -- which is seeking an 
independent Kurdish state and, according to the report, is 
openly waging a terrorist campaign against the Turkish state, as 
"by far the most militant organization" in Germany. Compared to 
previous years, there has been a "marked" increase in the PKK's 
readiness to use violence in Germany and it is linked to the 
escalation of the conflict in Turkey. "Its violent activities 
have assumed increasingly serious forms and have considerably 
impaired German security interests." In this context, the BfV 
report mentions the PKK attack on the Turkish Consulate General 
in Munich --a trial is currently in progress -- and 50 attacks 
on Turkish facilities in numerous German towns. In addition, 
the PKK has collected money in Germany for the struggle in 
Turkey "partially by using blackmail." 
  The report also includes under Turkish extremism the 
left-wing extremist organization "Revolutionary Left" (Devrimci 
Sol), which was also banned in 1993, the Turkish "Communist 
Party" (Marxist-Leninist), the Islamic extremist "Association of 
Islamic Associations and Communities" (ICCB) in Cologne, the 
Islamic "Association for a New World View in Europe" (AMGT). 
The last two groupings have about 19,000 members. 
  The Gaza-Jericho accord between Israel and the PLO has also 
prompted very differing reactions among the Palestinians living 
in Germany. For example, in leaflets distributed in Germany, 
the "Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" has been 
sharply critical of the agreement and emphatically rejected it. 
The "Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine" has 
expressed itself in similar terms. 
  In the case of extremism among Iranians, the BfV draws a 
distinction between supporters and opponents of the present 
Iranian Government. With regard to the latter, it has been 
established that the collapse and organizational and ideological 
disorientation of the Iranian opposition is continuing. 
  The only opposition group worth mentioning is the social 
revolutionary "Organization of the People's Mojahedin of Iran," 
whose supporters have also engaged in "vociferous propaganda" at 
several larger demonstrations in Germany. On the subject of the 
conflict between the peoples of former Yugoslavia, the report 
states that in 1993 in Germany, there were "threats and physical 
violence" on a massive scale including murder (20 March 1993 in 
Kehl in Baden- Wuerttemberg). In general, it is possible to 
ascertain a radicalization among the Bosnian Moslems living in 
Germany. 
  The number of periodicals distributed in the FRG by 
extremist 
foreigners associations fell from 96 (1992) to 68. Fifty-four 
of them were published by extremist left-wing groups, 11 by 
extremist Islamic organizations, and three by extreme 
nationalist groups. 
  In connection with extremism on the part of foreigners, the 
BfV points out "that the overwhelming majority of the more than 
6 million fellow foreign citizens reject extremist behavior and 
do not want to be involved with extremist political groupings on 
a long-term basis." At the same time, however, the marked 
increase in the number of acts of violence indicates that this 
tendency has "not simultaneously led to a decrease in moves 
endangering security." 
<H5>  Counterintelligence </H5>
  The FRG's political, economic, and technological importance 
is of continued interest to foreign intelligence services. 
According to the BfV report, 1,816 investigations into treason 
and the endangering of external security were instituted in 
1993. Arrest warrants were issued against 31 people; they had 
all been recruited by the former GDR intelligence service. 
  To perform its tasks, the FRG counterintelligence service 
also requires information on the structure and development of 
foreign intelligence services. The BfV focuses primarily on the 
Russian Federation and other Eastern European states. Following 
the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation had 
sought to base its civilian and military intelligence services 
and the Russian Security (MBR) on principles appropriate to a 
rule-of-law state. However, the Russian services are still to 
find their final form and could not make full use of their 
operational possibilities. In 1993, information gathering 
conducted by the Federation particularly concentrated on the 
economy, science, and technology and above all on the field of 
military strategy and technology. In addition, the Russian 
services sought to collect information on political parties, the 
strength of parties, and the development of extremism in Germany. 
  In 1993, the German counterintelligence service concentrated 
on secret service activities of the former GDR. It was possible 
to uncover almost the entire network of agents operated by the 
Foreign Intelligence Collection Main Administration (HVA) of the 
former Ministry of State Security (MfV). 
  In general, the federal ministry states in the BfV report 
that recently intelligence services have been operating more 
cautiously to avoid foreign complications as much as possible. 

