BFN 

<F P=106> ["Short commentary" by XINHUA reporters Gang Ye (0398 0396) </F>
and Wang Dajun (3769 1129 6511): "Keep the Door to Dialogue 
Open"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 18 Jun (XINHUA) -- At the juncture when 
dialogue between all the parties concerned on the Korea nuclear 
issue has reached a deadlock again, a favorable turn has 
reemerged on the Korean peninsula, over which a dark cloud hangs. 
  Korean leaders once again unequivocally expressed their 
positive desire for a peaceful solution to the confrontation 
caused by the nuclear dispute. On 16 June, when President Kim 
Il-song met with former U.S. President Carter, he pointed out 
that Korea [DPRK] and the United States have had some 
misunderstandings due to a lack of trust. He said that Carter's 
visit marked a new beginning in the relations between the two 
countries. One day earlier, Kim Yong-nam, Korean vice premier 
and foreign minister, said that all outstanding issues, 
including the nuclear issue, between Korea and the United States 
can be solved as long as the latter extricates itself from the 
concept of confrontation with Korea, respects Korea's 
sovereignty, and treats Korea on equal terms. He expressed the 
hope that Carter's visit could become a good turning point for 
Korean-U.S. relations to gradually change from distrust and 
hostility to friendliness and mutual respect. 
  Carter also said in his speech that the nuclear issue had 
led 
to a terrible misunderstanding between the United States and 
Korea; that the time has come for the two countries to establish 
friendship, understanding, and comprehensive relations, 
including trade and personnel exchanges; and that all the other 
issues will make progress as soon as the nuclear issue is 
resolved. He stated that the United States' leader and himself 
all believe that the Korean peninsula will surely achieve 
peaceful reunification. Meanwhile, after U.S. President Clinton 
learned that Korea is permitting the International Atomic Energy 
Agency [IAEA] inspectors and their inspection and monitoring 
equipment to continue to remain in Korea and that it hopes to 
use light-water reactor technology to replace its existing 
nuclear technology, he said: The United States is willing to 
conditionally resume high-level talks with Korea. 
  Several serious confrontations have occurred between Korea 
and the United States since the United States raised the Korea 
nuclear issue after the end of the Gulf war. Two rounds of 
vice-foreign-ministerial-level talks held between the two 
countries brought hope for a solution to the nuclear issue and 
for the improvement of Korean-U.S. relations. However, for want 
of sufficient trust and understanding on the part of the two 
sides, such a momentum for detente was unable to continue. The 
situation deteriorated. The IAEA announced a halt in aid to 
Korea; Korea announced its withdrawal from the organization; the 
United States planned sanctions against Korea. All these cannot 
but cause people to be worried. Many facts concerning the 
international [situation] show that using sanctions to threaten 
can only make a contradiction escalate, that bringing pressure 
to bear on the other side and confrontation are not helpful for 
solving an issue, and that only dialogue is the effective way to 
settle a dispute. 
  At present, both Korea and the United States have expressed 
their desire to hold a dialogue. This provides another rare 
opportunity for a peaceful solution to the nuclear issue. As 
long as [all parties concerned] treasure the opportunity and 
hold a dialogue in earnest, it will not be hard for them to find 
an effective way to solve the problem. 

