Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ovidio Bellando] </F>
  [Text] Although Margaret Thatcher's upcoming visit to Chile 
was not on the agenda of two-day talks in Santiago between 
Argentine Vice Foreign Minister Fernando Petrella and his 
Chilean counterpart, Rodrigo Jesus Diaz Albonico, the 
quasi-official treatment that Thatcher will receive on her way 
to the Malvinas Islands reportedly aroused Argentine curiosity. 
  Invited by the Industrial Development Association (Sofofa) 
and the Center for Political Studies, Thatcher will be in Chile 
between 20 and 23 March. 
  Thatcher will hold a 45-minute news conference on her 
administration's economic performance. A (projected) audience 
of 500 people will contribute with sumptuous fees. 
  Thatcher, her husband, and a small entourage will first 
visit 
Brazil, where she will also hold a paid lecture, which seems 
already to be regular practice for successful former heads of 
government. 
  Petrella's visit, which will conclude today, had been 
prepared before the iron lady's visit to Chile was disclosed. 
Thatcher will visit Chile shortly after President Frei's 
inauguration on 11 March. 
  Some Argentine circles believe this event represents the 
Chilean Christian Democratic Party's leaning toward the British 
Conservative Party's iron hand. The British Conservative Party 
supports the islanders' unyielding position at a time when our 
diplomacy is conducting various actions concerning the 
century-old Malvinas Islands issue. 
  Although this does not seem to be entirely the case, there 
is 
a real bias: The official facilities for Thatcher's visit to 
the Malvinas Islands. Nevertheless, based on pragmatism, the 
Foreign Ministry is minimizing her visit. 
  Experts say: "In the old days, the political willingness of 
government officials guided economic cooperation. Nowadays it 
is the other way around." 
  Trade with Chile was over $1 billion in 1993 (with a small 
surplus for Chile), not counting the $200 to $400 million 
contributed by tourism. After Japan and the EEC, Argentina is 
Chile's number three partner. Chile has invested $1 billion in 
Argentina. Why, then, these annoyed attitudes? 
  We don't know if Petrella, at his level and with 
interlocutors who are ending their tenure, managed to make his 
interlocutors understand "the Argentine surprise." 
  What Argentine diplomatic circles do actually trust in is 
the 
equilibrium that Carlos Figueroa, Frei's foreign minister, has 
demonstrated during his outstanding performance as Chilean 
ambassador to Argentina; and in Diaz Albonico, who, along with 
current Interior Minister Enrique Krauss and Edmundo Vargas, the 
current Chilean ambassador to Argentina, are included on a list 
of three candidates to occupy the embassy on Tagle Street. 
  Distrustful people associate Thatcher's visit to Chile and 
the Malvinas Islands with the possibility of counteracting the 
participation of four Malvinas Islands personalities, including 
the tourism director, in a conference sponsored by CARI 
[Argentine Council for International Relations] in Mendoza to 
review an improvement of the situation. 

