Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 19 KYODO -- The eleventh-hour talks 
between the ruling coalition and No. 1 opposition Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDP) went on and off Wednesday [19 January] to 
strike a compromise over LDP demands to modify a 
government-proposed political reform package, legislators said. 
The bargaining continued among Juro Saito, chief of the LDP's 
House of Councillors members, Manso Hamamoto, Saito's Social 
Democratic Party counterpart, and Hiroshi Tsuruoka, his Komeito 
[Clean Government Party] counterpart, they said. 
  The package of four bills are designed to completely 
redesign 
the mechanism of electing members of the House of 
Representatives of the two-chamber Diet, while unifying 
politicians' funds-raising channels into the coffer of a 
political party. 
  So far, the three have failed to reconcile a gulf between 
the 
two camps over the three demands, including the one calling for 
a raise from 274 to 280 the number of lower chamber seats to be 
contested at single-seat constituencies in an LDP-proposed, 
500-seat chamber, they said. 
  Coalition officials said Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa 
will seek to alleviate the remaining differences in a summit 
talk with LDP President Yohei Kono in a bid to secure the 
parliamentary passage of the package. The package cleared the 
lower chamber's plenary session on November 18. 
  The second of the three demands calls for splitting up the 
single nationwide electorate for the proportional representation 
portion of the 500-seat chamber into several regional blocs. 
  The third calls for authorizing businesses to donate up to 
240,000 yen annually to the two funds-raising organizations of 
individual politicians, while pegging the number of such 
organizations at two for a politician. 
  This compares with the government-proposed bill that would 
place a ban on donations to individual politicians, while 
obligating would-be corporate donors to donate to the coffer of 
each political party, which would be entrusted with distributing 
the money to party members. 
  Meanwhile, the two camps hammered out a few accords to 
effect 
minor modifications of the package, the party officials said. 
One such modification calls for softening a proposed legal 
requirement that only political parties that mustered more than 
3 percent of valid votes cast in the most recent general 
election or upper house election be recognized as a legitimate 
party. 
  The accord lowered the threshold of qualifications of a 
party 
to 2 percent, they said. Unless a party met the requirement, 
the package would not qualify it to receive a government subsidy 
to finance its activities to be appropriated out of a proposed 
30.9 billion yen fund. 
  The coalition and opposition camps are likely to end up 
accepting compromise proposals to create a 510-member lower 
chamber, at which 280 seats would come from single-seat 
districts and the remaining 230 seats be appropriated by 
proportional representation, Diet sources said. 
  The two camps are also likely to accept another compromise 
to 
authorize the legislators of prefectural and city assemblies to 
accept donations in person from businesses, while keeping a ban 
on acceptance of donations by Diet members except for by way of 
a party coffer, they said. 

