Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Edward Pilkington: "Doctor Claims She Caught </F>
`Gulf Syndrome' at UK Base"] 
  [Text] A doctor who worked on an RAF base in Stafford 
during the Gulf war yesterday raised fears that an unexplained 
illness known as Gulf syndrome could be contagious after she 
claimed to have contracted the symptoms in Britain. 
  The doctor, who asked not to be named, collapsed in June 
1991 
and was taken to intensive care after she developed symptoms 
similar to those suffered by about 500 British and 4,000 US Gulf 
veterans. She had trouble breathing, a high temperature, severe 
chest pains, profuse sweating and sickness. No explanation could 
be found. 
  Disclosures from America have prompted concern that viral or 
chemical component of weapons unleased during the Gulf conflict 
three years ago could have been transmitted genetically to the 
children of returning soldiers. The doctor's statement suggests 
that there may also be a risk of person-to-person contamination. 
  Studies by solicitors suggest there may be up to 500 British 
veterans suffering from the syndrome. Soldiers who participated 
in Operation Desert Storm have reported symptoms as diverse as 
kidney failure, hair loss and flaking skin that may have been 
induced, it is suggested, from agents contained in Iraqi Scud 
missiles or other arms used in the conflict. However, the 
Ministry of Defence says no evidence of Gulf syndrome has been 
found among British veterans. 
  In the months before she collapsed, the doctor had been 
treating six Gulf veterans from the RAF's tactical supply wing, 
which had been responsible for supplying all three services in 
the Gulf with food and ammunition. One patient was chronically 
ill with severe diarrhoea, sweats and pains. Neither she nor a 
district physician could reach a definite diagnosis. 
  The doctor believes she contracted the illness either 
directly from patients or from dead feral cats discovered among 
containers of equipment brought back from the Gulf at the end of 
the war. 
  The cats were found in May 1991 when the containers were 
unloaded at RAF Stafford, but not disposed of in line with 
hygiene regulations, she alleges. 
  "Soldiers at the base thought the discovery of dead cats 
from 
the Gulf was hilarious," she said. "They laughed about it and 
used the corpses as a football." Somebody wrapped one of the 
cats up in bread and put it in the canteen with a notice: 
"Special today -- cat sandwiches." 
  The doctor says she told officers that the cats posed a 
health hazard, but alleges her warnings went unheeded. She 
understands that the dead animals were eventually placed in 
plastic bags and disposed of by civilian rubbish collectors. 
  In response to questions from the Labour MP for Hemsworth, 
Derek Enright, the Ministry of Defence has confirmed that four 
dead cats from the Gulf were found in containers at RAF 
Stafford. But the Armed Forces Minister, Jeremy Hanley, said 
they were cremated and buried. "There is no evidence from the 
station of any health problems arising from the incident," he 
said. 
  On June 4, 1991, the doctor woke up feeling intensely sick. 
"I thought I was going to die. My parents were called to my 
bedside and they were convinced they were going to take me home 
in a coffin." 
  Tests conducted on her in hospitals in Stafford and 
Birmingham showed an unknown foreign virus. Since the initial 
illness she has suffered a range of unusual symptoms: memory 
loss, breathlessness and lack of muscular control. 
  "At times I was unable to walk straight and I slurred my 
speech as though I was drunk. 
  "My father, who was caring for me, also contracted the 
symptoms. He broke out in a rash of blisters and was in hospital 
for two weeks." 
  She has not worked for more than two years and lives on 
invalidity benefit of &pound;90 a week; the RAF terminated her 
civilian post after she was unable to guarantee that she would 
return to work full-time. She was warned by a senior air force 
doctor that if she disclosed details of her illness she would 
never work in the RAF again. 
  After 12 years as a civilian and military doctor, she is 
convinced that Gulf syndrome is more than a coincidence or a 
mere psychological complaint. "The symptoms are so peculiar and 
yet so similar between sufferers that I am sure it is genuine. 
  "What angers me is the cover-up. We signed up to serve for 
Queen and country, and we are prepared to take the consequences. 
But in return we expect to be protected and to be told the 
truth. It is the lies, more than the illness itself, that hurt." 

