BFN 

  [Text] Lome, April 23 (AFP) -- Opposition leader Edem Kodjo 
was named Friday [22 April] to be prime minister of Togo more 
than two months after legislative elections won by a coalition 
of opposition parties. 
  Kodjo, 55, who heads one of the smaller opposition parties, 
was a close aide to President Gnassingbe Eyadema before he 
distanced himself from the regime in the 1980s. He emerged in 
1990 as one of the leaders of the pro-democracy movement. After 
the national conference of 1991 which launched the transition to 
democracy, he founded the Togolese Union for Democracy (UTD). 
  In the February elections, he was elected to parliament in 
Lome as part of the opposition front which won an absolute 
majority of 43 seats. However, the UTD garnered only seven 
seats. 
  Although the president is bound by the constitution to 
choose 
a prime minister from the ranks of the parliamentary majority, 
the choice of Edem Kodjo came as a surprise. The leader of the 
Action Committee for Renewal (CAR) which won 36 seats, Yaovi 
Agboyibor had been considered the most likely choice for the job. 
  Eyadema said in a broadcast speech that he had asked the 
opposition to submit "several names" for the post of prime 
minister but it had not complied and "the country can wait no 
longer". 
  Kodjo said he had accepted the post in spite of an 
opposition 
decision to back Agboyibor because the political wrangling had 
gone on too long and there was "a risk that the parliamentary 
majority could be undermined". He called for a national effort 
to revive the country economically, and achieve reconciliation 
and social harmony. 
  A co-founder and deputy leader of the pro-Eyadema Togolese 
People's Rally, two years after the president seized power in 
1967, Kodjo was successively minister for the economy and for 
foreign affairs. But in 1978 he was appointed 
secretary-general of the Organisation of African Unity from 
1978, a post he held for five years during which he gradually 
broke with Eyadema. 
  He was the opposition parties' joint candidate in the 1993 
presidential election before they decided to boycott the poll. 

