Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Last week's agreement for Sweden, Finland and 
Austria to join the European Union [EU] could bring both 
benefits and costs to Thailand, experts say but the most 
pressing short-term issue could be trade quotas, according to 
one. Danai Dulampha, until last year Thai ambassador to Brussels 
and currently president of the Thai Tapioca Development 
Institute said Thailand should receive larger quotas for tapioca 
and other products since the EU market has been enlarged. 
However, this would depend on negotiations and to the degree of 
integration of the EU and its new members, he added. 
  A European ambassador, who asked not to be identified, 
predicted that one of the difficulties to arise from the EU's 
enlargement will be the increased complexity of the Union's 
decision-making processes because 15 countries' interests must 
be balanced instead of 12. This, he suggested, would mean that 
non-members would also face greater difficulties in negotiating 
with the EU. 
  Thai exports of textiles, garments and canned tuna to the EU 
are limited by quotas, but not those to the Nordic countries. 
Austria has some largely insignificant quotas on the small 
volume of textile products it buys from Thailand. 
  Mr Danai said Thailand must evaluate in detail the tax 
concessions provided within the Generalised System of 
Preferences (GSP). The EU and its three prospective new members 
grant Thailand different GSP concessions; therefore, benefits 
will increase or decrease if new members adopt standard EU GSP 
rates. 
  Thai agricultural products may also become subject to new 
health and sanitary standards. 
  Foreign Trade Department Director General Oranut Osathanon 
agreed that both positive and negative consequences would result 
from EU GSP standards. 
  Meanwhile, Mr Danai said some tariff rates, particularly 
agricultural items previously bound to GATT stipulations, may be 
lower than those of the EU. Integration may therefore mean 
raising tariffs. Should this occur, Thailand will be compelled 
to request compensation from the EU, he said. 
  He provided Spain as the example when that country 
integrated 
with the European community and raised its tariffs on maize to 
comply with EU rate, allowing imports of 200,000 tons of maize 
from the US to enter with low tariffs as compensation to the US 
which suffered from EU expansion. 
  Business Economic Department deputy director-general 
Aphiradi 
Tantraphon said in principal, the market for Thai products 
should expand as the EU membership expands, with a possibility 
of entering new markets such as in Eastern Europe. She said the 
Department had studied the impact of the expansion of the EU to 
include Sweden and found that the standard of imports for 
agricultural products would not be higher than current 
standards; therefore Thai products should face no greater 
difficulties in accessing that market after integration. 
  However, details of the expansion have yet to be released. 
It is simply too early to forecast accurately the integration's 
impact, she said. 
  A Business Economic Department source said the addition of 
those new members would have only a slight impact on Thai 
exports because those new members already hold membership to the 
European Free Trade Association, which is integrated with the 
European Economic Area. 
  Board of Trade of Thailand executive director Prayun 
Thaloengsi said the expansion of the EU may increase the 
difficulty of new members entering the EU market, requiring them 
to adjust standard quotas. The exporting members must adjust 
to the standards to remain competitive, he said. Mr Prayun 
opined that the bargaining power of Thai exporters with new 
members, who once were independent, may decrease after their EU 
membership. [passage omitted] 

