Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] The Greek press commented at length on 
the latest 17 November terrorist attack in which former National 
Bank of Greece Governor Mikhalis Vranopoulos was assassinated. 
<H5>  "Precious" Time Lost </H5>
  According to the 25 January Athens daily I KATHIMERINI, 
"precious" time was lost after the attack on Vranopoulos, 
allowing the perpetrators to run away unimpeded. In addition, 
many store owners or workers in the immediate vicinity of the 
crime scene refused to talk or alleged they "saw nothing." 
Finally, I KATHIMERINI notes that the fact that no driver 
passing by stopped to transport the victims to the nearest 
hospital is "disheartening." 
<H5>  Guilty Parties </H5>
  While questions such as "who arms the hand of 17 November" 
and "who profits at the political level from 17 November 
activities" have arisen in the wake of the Vranopoulos attack, 
their intent is to "disorient" people, writes Stamos Zoulas in 
the 26 January I KATHIMERINI. Even worse, he continues, is the 
fact that certain people cultivate the impression that "the 
existence and actions of terrorism in our country stem from 
concrete causes." This is like saying that if the "causes" are 
wiped out, terrorism will disappear: If "corruption in public 
life is wiped out, justice becomes impartial, and all social 
injustice disappears, then 17 November will necessarily put down 
its arms," Zoulas ironically notes. These individuals are 
legalizing terrorism by making it the "ultimate judge of our 
public and social life and the self-styled avenger of what it 
condemns." Such a train of thought would lead to the 
"extravagant" belief that politicians who hurl accusations at 
each other, newsmen who criticize public figures, and the legal 
system that does not intervene swiftly enough are the guilty 
parties. "Before casting the first stone on the police for its 
inability to arrest the terrorists, let us condemn the mindset 
that contributes nothing to the defeat of terrorism, but creates 
the ideal climate for rendering it endemic and long-lived in 
Greece," Zoulas concludes. 
<H5>  Older Generation Back </H5>
  According to the 27 January I KATHIMERINI, the 
"forty-something" generation has again become active in the 
20-year history of 17 November. Following the appearance of 
young people in other incidents (booby-trapped cars and bombs at 
income tax offices), antiterrorism officials believe, on the 
basis of descriptions of the perpetrators furnished by 
by-standers, that the older members of the organization have 
returned to action and to the "old 45mm gun." 
<H5>  Foreign Cooperation </H5>
  The 27 January I KATHIMERINI also cites government spokesman 
Evangelos Venizelos's reply to the question of whether the 
government will accept the participation of foreign secret 
services in antiterrorism activities. While stressing that the 
government believes in international cooperation to fight 
terrorism, he added that cooperation will always take place 
"within the framework of our country's national sovereignty." 
<H5>  PASOK Role Questioned </H5>
  According to Yiannis Lampsas writing in the 29 January 
Athens 
daily ELEVTHEROS TIPOS, while no one believes that 17 November 
carries out the orders of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement 
(PASOK), there are "deep "politico-ideological ties and mutual 
sympathy" between them. Lampsas provides the following reasons: 
  1. The terrorist organization's basic nucleus was probably 
formed by old members of the Panhellenic Liberation Movement 
(PAK), the organization that antedated PASOK, given that 
communists "prefer other forms of struggle against the bourgeois 
regime" and members of the New Democracy (ND) are the 
terrorists' main opponents. 
  2. Both PAK and PASOK maintained close ties with Third World 
regimes which "encouraged, trained, and armed all kinds of 
terrorists against the common enemy." 
  3. With the exception of Americans and former junta members, 
17 November victims always belonged to the liberal, free-market 
world, and most of them were murdered under PASOK 
administrations, notably when these governments were facing 
serious domestic problems. 
  4. PASOK opposes antiterrorist legislation and protests 
police investigations. Some of its members view terrorists as 
"social fighters." 
  5. More generally, PASOK encourages student sit-ins, blames 
policemen who defend themselves, and dismisses police officials 
with a distinguished record in the fight against narcotics. 
<H5>  Americans' Role </H5>
  The 3 February Athens weekly PONDIKI notes that according to 
some [unidentified] former ministers and police officials, 
Americans who come to Greece to provide antiterrorism assistance 
"usually ask for more information than they give." They seem to 
have integrated terrorism into Greek reality and just watch 
events, the newspaper comments. 
<H5>  Scenarios on Origins </H5>
  According to the 3 February PONDIKI, theories on the origins 
of 17 November include the following: 
  1. The terrorist organization is the creation of foreign 
secret services, which decided in 1975 to set up a "killing" 
unit in Greece for destabilization purposes. However, no such 
thing occurred, the newspaper argues, because those who believe 
this theory must also explain the number and choice of victims, 
some of whom were foreigners. 
  2. 17 November was created in 1975 by the Greek National 
Intelligence Service (EIP). However, this fails to explain why 
the first victim was an American, why PASOK was unable to 
determine the organization's origins, and why the EIP--then 
called Central Intelligence Service (KIP)--which in 1975-1981 
included a number of former junta followers, made such a move. 
In addition, the fact that the same course was followed under 
PASOK remains unexplained, PONDIKI comments. 
  The newspaper then reviews a third different scenario, under 
which: 
  1. PASOK facilitated terrorism for its eight years in power 
and never arrested a suspect even if it could do so. However, 
this allegation can easily be "stood on its head," PONDIKI 
comments, for the same is true of New Democracy (ND) in its 
years in power (1975-81 and 1990-93). 
  2. PASOK tolerated terrorism because it knows that 17 
November was founded by PAK members. While it is true that the 
terrorist organization began under the junta years and could not 
have sprung up from the Right, the PAK origin--if real--would 
mean that the party to which the assassins belonged bears the 
responsibility for the present situation: this is not 
acceptable, PONDIKI contends. 
  In closing, the newspaper notes that over the years, the 
terrorist organization had its ups and downs. Mistakes were 
made, such as Pavlos Bakoyiannis's assassination, which raised a 
"huge public outcry." There were innocent victims, following 
which 17 November gave up the use of rockets in favor of guns. 
There are also indications that one or more individuals with 
military training joined the organization, as evidenced by the 
theft of bazookas from the War Museum and rockets from the 
Sikourion base, subsequently used in "mini" military operations. 
Finally, PONDIKI concludes, there had to be a "renewal" within 
the organization, for even if its original members were in their 
20s, they are now in their riper 40s. 

