BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Le Kha Phieu: "Develop the Dien Bien Phu Spirit </F>
in Carrying Out the Renovation Undertaking"] 
  [Text] The Dien Bien Phu victory is the resounding victory 
of the Vietnamese nation in its struggle against colonialism for 
national independence and freedom in the 20th century. Although 
40 years have elapsed, the significance of this historic victory 
is still fresh in the memory of all people. In the past, we 
have had ample time to review more profoundly and 
comprehensively the experiences and lessons drawn from the Dien 
Bien Phu battle so as to apply them to the national construction 
and defense tasks. Beyond the military aspect, the Dien Bien 
Phu victory also provides us with valuable lessons that can be 
applied not only to the military and national defense fields, 
but to the political, socioeconomic, cultural, and diplomatic 
domains. 
  It can be said that the Dien Bien Phu victory is not only of 
great significance to the Vietnamese people, but also plays an 
important role in encouraging the struggles of other nations. 
During the past 40 years, the mention of Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, 
and Dien Bien Phu, as described by our friends,"has aroused the 
determination of billions of people struggling for national 
independence and freedom," and "has served as a martial song" 
for oppressed nations and other movements for national 
liberation. It also serves as "a reminding event" or "a great, 
significant truth that provides exalted hope for people 
struggling for their just cause." It can be said that although 
Dien Bien Phu is in a remote, rugged valley in the northwestern 
region of Vietnam, it has provided marvelous illumination for 
all. We, especially those who participated in the battle, have 
been astonished about its influence. Indeed, we are very proud 
to say that Dien Bien Phu is not only a valuable spiritual 
heritage of the Vietnamese people, but also the heritage of 
mankind. It is the duty of our generation to strive to protect 
this heritage while doing our best to bring the spirit of Dien 
Bien Phu into full play, especially in the national construction 
and defense tasks at present and in the days ahead. 
  Dien Bien Phu has symbolized our nation's earnest aspiration 
for national independence and freedom. The greatest truth of 
the Dien Bien Phu victory rests with the fact that a nation, 
although small and weak, can defeat whatever cruel imperialism 
and regain its independence and freedom if it knows how to unite 
its people to fight in true revolutionary spirit and in 
accordance with the correct orientation of the party and the 
proletariat. This has also proved as correct the brilliant 
truth that love and righteousness always wins over violence and 
tyranny. To realize this truth, several generations of our 
people have sacrificed untold blood and bone. President Ho Chi 
Minh condensed the definition of this truth into a phrase 
depicting our people's strong determination for their goal: 
"There is nothing more precious than national independence and 
freedom." From Dien Bien Phu to the protracted, heroic struggle 
against the U.S. imperialism, our people have fought in this 
spirit and impetus, and we have overcome all difficulties and 
ordeals to gain the final victory. During the more than 20 
years of carrying out our national liberation struggle since 
1954 and the subsequent period in the war for national 
salvation, we have never forgotten Dien Bien Phu. On the 
contrary, the spirit of Dien Bien Phu has been brought into full 
play, especially during the war of resistance for national 
salvation. At the most difficult conditions and decisive 
moments, the spirit of Dien Bien Phu has always served as an 
effective catalyst to encourage us to continue our struggle. 
Indeed, following the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, we won a 
similar battle in the air in December 1972. The name of Dien 
Bien Phu has manifested the unyielding nature of the Vietnamese 
people. No force, regardless of how cruel it is and how much 
sophisticated equipment it is armed with, can conquer the united 
and well- organized people who rise up to defend their rights to 
live in independence and freedom. 
  Forty years after Dien Bien Phu, our nation has gained total 
independence and freedom. The nation has been unified and our 
people are living in peace. They are striving to build and 
defend the country while doing their best to attain the goal of 
making our people prosperous, our country powerful, and our 
society just and civilized. In the process of building and 
developing the country, the spirit of Dien Bien Phu has always 
stayed in the memory of the Vietnamese people because national 
independence is still the vital issue of the nation. Only when 
national independence is firmly protected and maintained can our 
nation develop and advance further toward socialism. Forty-five 
years ago, through the August Revolution, our people smashed the 
yoke of slavery and regained our independence and freedom. We 
are now determined to protect our rights to live and enjoy 
independence, freedom, and happiness. The fact that our nation 
has set two strategic tasks of building and defending the 
fatherland is aimed at leading our nation to stability and 
development, gradually overcoming the socioeconomic crisis, and 
making preparations to enter the new developmental stage to 
attain national industrialization and modernization. 
  What have we leant from the Dien Bien Phu Victory? That 
question is asked today and it will be asked again by our 
descendants in the future because the vitality of the Dien Bien 
Phu spirit started from our national tradition of thousands of 
years of fighting and that tradition has been impregnated in all 
our generations. Each generation will find its most valuable 
and suitable ways to transform the Dien Bien Phu spirit to 
revolutionary actions to solve its own practical problems. 
  The Dien Bien Phu Victory, first of all, is the strength of 
the determined-to-fight and determined-to-win spirit of our 
entire people for the noble goal of independence, freedom, and 
socialism. From December 1946, in response to President Ho Chi 
Minh's appeal, our entire army and people entered a long and 
arduous resistance war with the determination to "sacrifice 
everything and resolutely not to accept the loss of our country 
and become slaves" and to "gain independence even all Truong Son 
Range will be burnt out". They, with a iron belief in the last 
victory, accepted all hardship and sacrifice to resolutely fight 
and win in Dien Bien Phu. 
  In fighting as well as in peaceful construction, a 
determined 
willpower is a driving force of uttermost importance. It also 
is one of factors to decide victory. We do not believe in 
voluntarism. But we are easy to fail, even a small task, if we 
do not carry out a work with determination. At present, every 
Vietnamese and the entire people must carry a high determination 
to win over poverty and backwardness and to take our country 
forward. At the same time, we must also have a strong 
determination to resolutely and firmly protect our national 
independence and territorial integrity in any circumstances. We 
do not give in to slavery, starvation, and poverty. We have 
determination and belief -- the belief in the party's line and 
leadership, in the Vietnamese people's intelligence, and in the 
strength of the great national unity. Now, despite Vietnam is 
still a developing country, thanks to its insistence in the 
renovation and the great efforts from our party and people, we 
have overcome the socioeconomic crisis in one step. Our economy 
starts to accumulate some internal savings and people's life has 
been improved. Together with the socioeconomic progress, we 
have maintained political stability and strengthened security 
and national defense. Vietnam's position in the international 
arena has been heightened. Lessons drawn from the reality of 
the renovation are the new development of the former Dien Bien 
Phu lessons. These lessons are the lessons about the 
determination in the goal, the insistence in revolutionary 
principles and strategy, the resolution to overcome 
difficulties, and the active creativeness to discover and solve 
on-going problems. The difficulties in Dien Bien Phu 
battlefield were very grave. They affected the thinking of our 
cadres, soldiers, and people. But thanks to our high willpower 
and determination, we overcame all those difficulties and 
challenges to gain victory. The same thing has happened to our 
current undertaking of national construction and army building. 
At every stage, new requirements and difficulties do occur, but 
if we are firm, resolute in our goals, and determined to fight, 
we will overcome all difficulties to accomplish our duty. 
  Dien Bien Phu is a brilliant lesson on the spirit of 
self-reliance. In an unbalanced situation of armed forces, 
means, and technical equipment, our army and people developed 
their activism and creativeness to an highest level to 
satisfactorily prepare for the campaign, including political and 
ideological preparation and preparations for the Army, 
logistics, technology, fighting planning, fighting tactics,... 
to continuously impose sudden and unexpected things on our 
opponent. Before every new stage of the campaign and every wave 
of attacks, so many complicated issues emerged. But we 
developed the collective intelligence to find suitable measures 
for those problems. Therefore, despite of numerous difficulties 
in unbalanced strength and military equipment, our army and 
people heightened the spirits of determined-to-fight and 
determined-to-win, self-reliance, and courageous sacrifice to 
invent many unique, intelligent, and sufficient fighting tactics 
to take our enemy by surprise and frustrate their 
counterattacks. It is possible to say that in the Dien Bien Phu 
Victory, we knew how to develop the precious ethics and quality 
of the Vietnamese people to improve our internal strength to 
fight and to win. 
  Today, the lesson on the spirit of self-reliance is still 
carrying its full value. With our party and state's correct 
policy on foreign affairs, we have more and more friends in the 
world, thus creating new advantages for our national 
construction and development. But we have always confirmed that 
in national development, we would mainly rely on our internal 
force. 
  If we rely on foreign countries, we will have to depend on 
them. Let us uphold the spirit of independence and sovereignty, 
grasp all advantages and new opportunities to cooperate with the 
outside world and gain its support, and combine these factors 
with the abundant source of strength at home to create a new 
impetus for development. Along with upholding the spirit of 
self-sufficiency and self-help, let us practice thrift, promote 
a vigorous movement against corruption and waste, make the 
optimum use of capital and other resources, and concentrate 
efforts on boosting production and generating goods for society. 
The current army-building task must also be based on the spirit 
of self-sufficiency and self-help. Let us make the best use of 
all local and national potential and strive to practice thrift. 
No country can achieve its development goals without practicing 
thrift. If they want to enrich themselves and achieve their 
development goals, each country, each establishment, each 
family, and each person must save money. 
  Speaking of the Dien Bien Phu spirit, one must also deal 
with 
the most basic lesson about the leadership and direction of 
party organizations and party members and the need to constantly 
strengthen leadership skills. Based on their correct assessment 
of the situation, scientific analysis of real-life situations, 
and timely review of the experiences drawn from each phase of 
the campaign, each offensive, and each battle, our party and 
Uncle Ho -- the beloved father of our Armed Forces -- made 
correct decisions, thus reflecting their sensitivity, wisdom, 
and solid knowledge. Based on the actual situations and by 
weighing the pros and cons of whether one should launch swift 
attacks to annihilate the enemy or just attack small objectives 
to be sure of victory, we made an objective and scientific 
analysis and opted for the second solution, thus successfully 
overcoming the tendency to achieve our goals overnight and 
creating conditions for victory. Through the wars of resistance 
and then the process of postwar national construction, our party 
has drawn more leadership experiences to benefit the revolution. 
Faced with new problems arising from real life situations, one 
must always make a very objective, correct, and timely 
evaluation to rectify shortcomings and develop strong points. 
This will guarantee that whatever the circumstances, the people 
still believe in the leadership and direction of the party and 
state. Once they are motivated by high resolve and belief, the 
people will unanimously concur with major party and state 
policies and measures and will turn them into revolutionary 
determination and deeds. 
  Our party directed the Bien Bien Phu campaign not only 
through guidelines and decisions that were cautious yet bold and 
clear-sighted, but also through the good examples and vanguard 
role of each party member. There were instances when the 
situation developed complicatedly and gave rise to pessimism, 
vacillation, haste, or worse still, negativism and low combat 
morale. Primary party organizations launched a movement to 
conduct straightforward criticism and self-criticism among party 
cadres and party members and henceforth, generated strength and 
confidence in the masses. Party members set good examples 
through their words and deeds and faced difficulties, hardships, 
and sacrifices. The good examples of party members had great 
power of persuasion. This constituted a very desisive factor of 
command and leadership success and of willingness to make 
self-imposed sacrifices among cadres, combatants, and the entire 
people. This lesson is still valuable today. The party wants 
to make its leadership role felt in society and earn strength 
and credibility in the population. Therefore, each party member 
must set good examples for the masses to follow. No elaborate 
and empty terms can help the party earn strength and 
credibility. In the wars of resistance, party members were 
willing to make sacrifices. Therefore, in the postwar era, they 
should also be willing to endure hardships, make sacrifices, 
look after the people's well-being first, and see to it that 
their words and deeds help enhance the party's image among the 
people. 
  It also needs to recall another lesson about Dien Bien Phu, 
as this may help inspire new creative impressions among us in a 
way suitable to the current circumstances. That lesson is about 
mustering and gathering the strength and wisdom of all the 
people. One of the important reasons for the the Dien Bien Phu 
victory was that our party and state had effectively mustered 
and exploited the combined strength of the entire nation in the 
spirit: All for the Frontline, All for The Dien Bien Phu 
Campaign, The Entire Country Is To Be Oriented Toward Dien Bien 
Phu, and All Battlefields Are To Be Coordinated With Dien Bien 
Phu. At decisive points, we knew how to direct the manpower and 
property of the entire nation, of various localities, and of 
various battlefields at resolutely achieving our target of 
destroying the Dien Bien Phu stronghold. Today, in the 
renovation process, our course of action and goal are clear. We 
have determined our course of action suitable for each 
particular period of time. It is important that that we must 
develop to the fullest the latent potential in manpower and 
wisdom of the entire country, and of every locality, people, and 
household to unfailingly achieve the goal of building a 
prosperous people, a powerful country, and an equitable and 
civilized society. We have created conditions and premises to 
advance the country to a new stage of development, but whether 
we can translate our goal into reality will depend on efforts 
and energy of every locality, of every echelon, of every sector, 
and of everyone under the party leadership and the state 
management. 
  The mid-term national party conference held in January 1994 
analyzed the national situation, pointed out new opportunities 
and challenges our our country is encountering during the period 
of renovation. In this juncture, we must study various lessons 
of experience about Dien Bien Phu. These lessons are, in fact, 
about exploiting to the fullest all the advantages of the new 
situation so as to overcome difficulties and ordeals in 
achieving our final victory. As for ordeals, all shorts of 
seemingly unsurmountable ordeals and difficulties can be found 
from the Dien Bien Phu lesson. Having been able to overcome 
difficulties and exploit accurately and effectively all the 
opportunities in each stage and each battle as well as in the 
entire Dien Bien Phu campaign, the Vietnamese people have 
demonstrated their military arts, willpower, and talent. In the 
current renovation process, to overcome all challenges and to 
seize opportunities to move forward in national construction and 
defense, we must develop the willpower, talent, and efforts of 
the entire people. 
  The Dien Bien Phu event was just part of the tradition of 
national construction and defense built up by our forefathers 
since time immemorial. The Dien Bien Phu tradition is of 
unmeasurable spiritual value. It must be preserved and passed on 
from one generation to another. As this tradition is not a 
object to be kept in a museum, it must be developed into 
vitality and a determination to surge forward. In every stage 
of history, we must view the significance of the Dien Bien Phu 
victory with new thinking and new revelations. In whatever 
situation, be it advantageous or difficult, we can always find 
from the Dien Bien Phu victory the most beautiful spiritual 
value: The determination to fight and to win of our nation, and 
the desire of the entire Vietnamese people to gain independence, 
freedom, and happiness. With our intelligence and energy, with 
our talents and creativity, we are totally able to transform 
that desire into reality. 
  With such thinking, the memory of Dien Bien Phu will live 
forever and the Dien Bien Phu spirit will, at any moment and in 
any stage, be permeated with vitality. Dien Bien Phu will 
forever be a source of confidence and pride of our nation! 

