Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Hashemi-Rafsanjani today received 
Professor (Andikhan), the special envoy of Pakistan's prime 
minister. The special envoy carries a written message from Mrs. 
Benazir Bhutto for our country's president. 
  In this meeting, Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani expressed concern 
over the present situation in Kashmir, and said: The Islamic 
Republic of Iran believes that the officials of Pakistan and 
India should act wisely and not allow the present situation in 
Kashmir to cause tension and insecurity in the region. This is 
because the continuation of tension and conflict in that region 
will not be in the interest of any party. 
  The president said: In their numerous negotiations with the 
officials of Pakistan and India, the Iranian officials have 
emphasized this important point during their discussions about 
ways to resolve the Kashmir problem. He added: The Islamic 
Republic of Iran is still ready to continue its efforts to help 
resolve the Kashmir problem with the aim of realizing the rights 
of the oppressed people of that region. 
  Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani then thanked the nation and the 
government of Pakistan, and said that strengthening of 
cooperation and friendship between the two neighboring countries 
was important for the region and the world. Moreover, he 
welcomed the further deepening of bilateral relations. 
  According to the Central News Unit's correspondent, at the 
beginning of this meeting, Pakistan's special envoy first 
conveyed the greetings of the nation and the government of 
Pakistan to the Iranian nation and government. He then said 
that the visits to Tehran and Islamabad by high-ranking 
delegations from both countries during the recent years were 
highly conducive to strengthening and consolidating bilateral 
cooperation amid a friendly and sincere atmosphere. He added: 
Millions of Pakistani Muslims have never forgotten the 
meaningful address of the Iranian president to the Pakistani 
parliament. They have etched those remarks in their heart. He 
added: The prime minister of Pakistan is also very happy about 
her recent visit to Tehran and the very positive outcome of her 
negotiations during the visit. 
  In addition, the special envoy of Pakistan presented a 
report 
about the status of the Muslim people of his country. 

