Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Takemura Takes Reticent Attitude </F>
Toward Plans To Form a New Party -- Looks for Right Opportunity 
To Respond to Sakigake-Ousting Plans"] 
  [Text] Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura is being 
forced into a corner as the Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] 
initiated plans to merge all of the ruling coalition parties 
into a large parliamentary group and to form a new political 
party gradually move forward within the ruling coalition 
alliance. The victory won on 27 March by the ruling 
coalition-backed candidate in the gubernatorial election in 
Ishikawa Prefecture is also expected to accelerate moves toward 
the formation of a new political party. It seems that Takemura 
has been forced to retreat in the face of the assault by 
Shinseito and other forces. However, Takemura, while continuing 
his "wait-and-see" attitude, apparently plans to respond to 
"Sakigake [Harbinger] ousting" plans which have emerged among 
some quarters of the ruling coalition parties by taking such 
steps as trying to restore his relations with Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa. 
  Prior to a meeting of government and ruling coalition party 
leaders around noon on 28 March, the results of the Ishikawa 
gubernatorial election became a topic of discussion among the 
leaders. Acting Shinseito Secretary General Kozo Watanabe and 
others were jubilant over the election victory, saying, "At 
first it was said that our candidate would win by 5,000 votes, 
but later his lead increased to 10,000." In contrast, Takemura 
simply said, "The Liberal Democratic Party's [LDP] candidate 
seems to have won in all districts except for Kanazawa (if the 
results were to be tabulated under the framework of a 
single-seat constituency system)." Although this statement 
later turned out to be incorrect, Takemura somewhat cut down the 
comments of Watanabe and the others by saying, "According to the 
results of last week's poll, our candidate was supposed to win 
by a much greater margin." 
  However, Takemura has not changed his attitude about 
devoting 
himself to his official duties after a plan to reshuffle the 
cabinet was scrapped in early March. While Shinseito Secretary 
General Ichiro Ozawa has successively been contacting Diet 
members from the Japan New Party [JNP], Takemura has restrained 
himself, even when accepting requests to appear as a guest 
speaker at gatherings of supporters of JNP Diet members, to 
merely giving simple speeches at such gatherings. He may be 
trying to "respond like an adult" in order to "avoid being 
provoked by Shinseito" (as stated by a senior Sakigake official). 
  At a time when Diet deliberations on the fiscal year 1994 
draft budget remain stalled, quite a few cabinet ministers have 
expressed the opinion that politicians should refrain from 
talking about a political realignment. Officials close to 
Takemura have recommended that "it would be more beneficial at 
this time for the chief cabinet secretary to devote himself to 
carrying out his duties." 
  Moreover, it is still uncertain as to whether the 
Shinseito-initiated plans to form a "policy study 
group/parliamentary group/new political party" will take off at 
once. Takemura is thus expected to remain reticent for the time 
being and to look for the right opportunity to make a comeback. 

