Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Greg Torode] </F>
  [Text] A ship missing for nearly three weeks after being 
boarded by suspected pirates off Taiwan has turned up under 
armed guard in a Chinese port. 
  The discovery just 100 kilometres from Hong Kong has 
prompted 
fears of a renewed crackdown by Guangdong security forces well 
outside their jurisdiction. Maritime rescue centres in Hong 
Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Japan had not heard of the Alicia 
Star since it sent secret cables on January 27 saying it had 
been hijacked by armed pirates on its way from Singapore to 
South Korea. 
  The reports, sent from a hidden transmitter unknown to the 
pirates, said the attackers were dressed in green and had taken 
control of the ship with automatic weapons. 
  The Hong Kong Marine Department had been informed of the 
missing ship and reported it to counterparts in Beijing, but no 
reply had been received. However, the POST has learned through 
London shipping sources that communications over the Lunar New 
Year revealed the 500-tonne ship was under detention in Shanwei, 
just east of Daya Bay. Its cargo, believed to be more than 
U.S.$5 million (HK$38.69 million) worth of cigarettes, has been 
seized by Shanwei port authorities, but the fate of its mainly 
Filipino crew is unknown. 
  According to the initial attack reports, the Panamanian- 
registered ship - a regular caller to Hong Kong was boarded near 
the Bashi Channel between Taiwan and the Philippines. The 
location is far outside China's 200 nautical mile economic zone 
but close to where a Hong Kong ship was attacked by a Guangdong 
customs patrol boat last April at the height of the last 
crackdown. 
  "This is the first such case for months, so everyone is very 
nervous that we are facing a new wave of attacks on local 
shipping...it's not helped by the fact we are powerless to 
anything over this one [as published]," a Marine Department 
source said. 
  Last year's apparent antismuggling crackdown saw at least 33 
ships attacked, many around Hong Kong waters, in raids by 
Guangdong authorities and suspected pirates. Both official and 
unofficial attacks stopped about the same time after 
international diplomatic and shipping industry pressure on China. 
  A Marine Department paper detailing Chinese official 
involvement in the attacks was circulated among the 
International Maritime Organisation's safety committee but 
watered-down on Foreign Office advice before being officially 
presented. 

