BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "ip": "High Price of State Debt; Budget Economy </F>
Reflects State of the Economy"] 
  [Text] Bratislava--On 10 May the Slovak Government 
approved the State Closing Account of the Slovak Republic for 
1993. Although it was expected that the budget deficit would be 
higher than indicated by the treasury balance, the reality is 
even harsher than expected. 
  The deficit indicated by the treasury balance--23 billion 
Slovak korunas [Sk]--must be adjusted to include some items that 
increase it, in fact. This includes, first and foremost, the 
deficit of Sk5.8 billion on the clearing account with the Czech 
Republic, which figures on the revenue side of the state budget 
even though it represents a liability that increases the Slovak 
Republic's debt toward the Czech Republic. Without the impact 
of the clearing account, the deficit would therefore represent 
Sk28.8 billion. Other items that have to be added are uncovered 
debts in health care (Sk1.8 billion) and education (Sk1.2 
billion). The actual budget deficit for last year therefore 
amounts to Sk31.8 billion. 
  Budget revenues fell Sk7.8 billion short of the projected 
sum 
last year. This was mainly the result of lower than expected 
contributions to pension and health insurance and to employment 
[not further specified]. The shortfall was also caused by lower 
than expected tax and customs payments. Tax arrears of Sk12.8 
billion still represent a potential source of state budget 
revenue. A frequent cause of the nonfulfillment of tax 
obligations is that entrepreneurial subjects, the existence of 
which is threatened, prefer the repayment of bank credits to the 
fulfillment of their obligations toward the state budget. 
  Projected budget expenditures were exceeded by Sk15.2 
billion. They increased following the abolition of regulation 
[of budget revenues] in October as a result of problems in 
health services, education, and social security and due to the 
growth of credit interest rates, which influenced payments 
associated with the state debt. Measures to increase state 
budget expenditures (by Sk10.9 billion) and to lower state 
budget expenditures (by Sk4.3 billion) were taken in the course 
of the year. The difference was used mainly in the social 
sphere and health services and to finance the transfer of 
activities from former federal authorities to Slovak authorities. 
  Payments of interest to the Slovak National Bank [NBS] 
amounted to Sk5.6 billion, which is about one-fourth of the 
reported budget deficit. Liabilities toward the NBS arose as a 
result of the current deficit for 1993 and uncovered deficits 
for previous years and as a result of the assumption of the 
former federation's liabilities connected with trade activities 
and with the financing of investment projects abroad. 
  The state of state financial assets and liabilities 
underwent 
a major change as of 1 January 1993. In accordance with the law 
on the division of federal property, the Slovak Republic assumed 
a large-scale bloc of state and Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka 
[Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Bank, CSOB] financial assets and 
liabilities (assets of Sk98.6 billion and liabilities of Sk69 
billion). 
  The state debt went up by Sk27 billion in the course of 
1993, 
and the Slovak Republic's aggregate debt reached Sk123 billion 
by the end of the year. 
  The deficit of the state budget for 1993 cannot be covered 
from state financial assets because of their low level of 
liquidity. The government will therefore propose to the 
National Council of the Slovak Republic that the deficit be 
covered by proceeds from the issue of state bonds. 
  [Bratislava HOSPODARSKE NOVINY in Slovak on 11 May on page 2 
carries a 300-word TA SR report on the Slovak Government's 
approval of the state closing account for 1993. The report 
notes that budget revenues reached Sk150.3 billion, Sk7.8 
billion less than projected, and budget expenditures Sk173.3 
billion, Sk15.2 more than projected. The report attributes the 
"disproportion" between budget revenues and budget expenditures 
to "the founding of the independent state, the introduction of a 
new system of taxation, the decline of economic performance, a 
moderate decline of final consumption, inflation growth, and the 
insolvency of entrepreneurial entities."] 

