BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Borhannodin Rabbani on the occasion of </F>
the 'Id al-Adha festival on 21 May; place not given -- read by 
announcer] 
  [Text] Dear listeners: Esteemed Professor Borhanoddin 
Rabbani, president of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, has 
delivered a radio speech on the occasion of the auspicious 'Id 
al-Adha. It was transmitted at 1200 today. Now we draw your 
attention to the Pashto text of the speech. 
  In the name of God the compassionate, the merciful. Faithful 
compatriots, brothers and sisters, peace be upon you. I 
congratulate you honorable, afflicted, Mojahedin, brave, refugee 
faithful and patient Afghans and Afghan Hajji who right now 
fulfill the sacred duty of Hajj, and all Muslims of the world on 
behalf of myself and the leadership board. 
  'Id al-Adha is the great day of success and test that God 
put 
before two of his true slaves, revered Ibrahim Khalilollah and 
revered Ismail Dhabihollah. The submission and full obedience 
of those two obedient slaves of God to fulfill the order of God, 
and also of those who truthfully make efforts to carry out the 
orders and instructions of God, is a manifestation of the 
kindness of God. By the better observance of this 'Id, the 
people of Afghanistan reaffirm their intent to carry out the 
orders and instructions of Almighty God. 
  Dear compatriots, the people of Afghanistan, especially the 
afflicted, patient, and faithful people of Kabul, mark the 'Id, 
which are naturally days of religious happiness, unfortunately 
in [words indistinct] conditions and a situation that is the 
product of the inhumane and anti-Islamic conspiracies of a group 
of traitors to the country elements. Since the establishment of 
the Islamic regime in our beloved country, basically the people 
should have been living in tranquillity and security. But those 
groups and elements who see their interests in problems and 
tense situations many a time prevented the establishment of 
stability and security in the country by conflagration of war, 
and have inflicted on our Muslim and afflicted people much pain 
and suffering. 
  The coup d'etat of 1 January 1994, which was an anti-Islamic 
and anti-nation failed criminal attempt, took place in such 
circumstances that the state was completely ready for 
understanding with related sides, while they were clearly right 
at the outset saying that they had started a coup d'etat. Those 
remarks of theirs are recorded in all home and foreign news 
networks. But after the failure of the putschists in their 
sinister goals, they now allege that the Islamic state continues 
the fighting, while the whole nation and the world are 
completely aware about who started the coup d'etat and the 
fighting by those elements. There are irrefutable documents in 
this respect. 
  The incidents of the past two years and especially the coup 
d'etat of the anti-Islamic and anti-nation triangle proved that 
fighting is not a solution. Those who insist on a military 
solution will gain no benefit from this other than the 
shortening of their political lives. Therefore, political 
understanding and talks for the solution of problems will be 
respected. While in a completely tangible military advantage, 
on the basis of a peaceful strategy, the state strongly believes 
that through talks and respect for the will and wish of the 
people a confident way can be found for the solution of 
problems. The Islamic state believes that the decision and view 
of the people is the best testing field to separate right from 
wrong, and can issue their resolution and determination about 
the circumstances of problems and their future. 
  The people strongly condemn war and warmongers. The people 
hate those who ruthlessly and savagely attack residential areas 
and innocent and defenseless people with heavy weapons. The 
people consider those who block roads to prevent the supply of 
material needed by the people in the cities and residential 
areas the enemies of Islam, the country, and the people. The 
people consider those who have are the cause of foreign 
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan a means in 
the hand of the aliens, and the enemies of independence, 
territorial integrity, and national sovereignty of the country 
and historic pride of Afghanistan. Therefore, it is not 
surprising that those kind of people who are afraid of the 
people's judgement and will, because they think if they 
respected the right of the people to determine their fate, will 
face political elimination. 
  The Islamic state is of the opinion that only the people 
have the right and power to decide about the election of their 
country's political leader. No group and force should attempt 
to count itself as the people, impose their will as the will of 
the people. Thus, in our opinion, the practical way to resolve 
the problems and the method of ensuring lasting peace and 
security are to go to the people's votes, because this act is 
customary in the whole free and contemporary world where people 
are referred to for the election of the future leader of the 
country and its political structure. 
  Therefore, a gathering of the representatives of people is 
to 
be convened that will be proportionally participated in by all 
nationalities and tribes of the country and the followers of all 
schools of thoughts [mazhab]. This gathering of the people's 
representatives can be called a Loya Jerga, [word indistinct] 
Shura, constituent assembly, or by another name. To convene 
such a assembly in [words indistinct] a commission will be 
formed of the impartial, peace-seeking, benevolent, and expert 
[ahl-e nazar] personalities. The commission will be financed by 
the United Nations and the Islamic Conference Organization 
[words indistinct]. Esteemed jihadi organizations, commanders, 
ulema and clergy, reconciliation councils, Islamic peace 
delegations, university teachers, and influential tribal and 
social personalities will cooperate in the formation of the 
commission. This commission will set the date of the convening 
of the council and its term of reference, set out the conditions 
and [word indistinct] of the leadership candidates, and will 
present to the council the list of candidates for this position. 
The state elaborates on a comprehensive draft in this respect 
that will be announced after consultation. 
  In order that this movement will continue speedily and 
effectively, it is necessary for a permanent cease-fire to come 
into effect and communication roads to be opened. The 
commission will supervise the openness of the roads and the 
cease-fire. For the sanctity of the 'Id al-Adha, the Islamic 
State declares a cease-fire as from Saturday [21 May] to the end 
of the week. It is to be mentioned that the Islamic State of 
Afghanistan appreciates the sincere and honest efforts that have 
so far been made to ensure peace in the country. The Islamic 
State of Afghanistan very much values the efforts made by the 
Conciliation Council, Ghazni Council, and other peace 
delegations, as well as the efforts of the UN delegation headed 
by esteemed Mahmud Mestiri, and the interest of friendly 
countries that want to play a role in ensuring peace in 
Afghanistan, and hopes for those efforts to be accelerated and 
harmonized so that they very soon lead to such a solution that 
guarantees the interests of the Muslim and free Afghan nation, 
and to ensure peace and security in this country for good. I 
should add that in connection with ensuring peace and security 
in Afghanistan, the Islamic State of Afghanistan welcomes the 
friendly country of Pakistan's sincere efforts that have 
recently been announced by the foreign affairs minister of that 
country. 
  Dear compatriots, as the accepted Islamic custom considers 
'Id days the days of happiness, consider them days of 
establishment of friendship and reconciliation, on the basis of 
this good custom, we too, once again ask those people who want 
to play a role in the solution of the current problems of the 
country and in bringing peace and tranquillity to this land's 
afflicted people, who deserve any pity and assistance, to 
sincerely and truly cooperate in reducing the pains and 
suffering of our country's Muslim and oppressed people, and not 
to try to increase bloody wounds on the body of the afflicted 
people of this land by firing bullets. We hold out our hands of 
sincerity and cordiality to them. We hope that they should too, 
use sensibility and thinking instead of emotions, and to render 
in the interest of peace their Islamic duty and their national 
and historic responsibility, which completely complies with our 
Islamic and Afghan seemly customs, for the cessation of the 
fighting and for all out peace in this country that has suffered 
[word indistinct] of the war and has no strength to endure any 
further (?domination) and pressure. 
  Once again I congratulate you on 'Id. I wish from Almighty 
God [words indistinct] and to enable the Muslim Afghan nation to 
mark the coming 'Ids in an atmosphere of peace, friendship, and 
fraternity [words indistinct]. I wish success and prosperity 
for you in this respect. This word uttered and may God forgive 
you and me. Indeed He is forgiving and merciful. 

