Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By XINHUA reporter Cong Yaping (0654 0068 1627)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 26 Feb (XINHUA) -- If we say "food is the 
people's no. 1 need," housing should be as important as food. 
Since the introduction of reform and opening up, China has 
exerted great efforts to build more houses for its people. 
  In the past, investments in public housing construction did 
not yield economic returns. As a result, we ran out of all 
resources for housing development. In recent years, China has 
initiated a new investment and loan system for housing 
development under which the government, units, and individuals 
jointly undertake responsibility for housing construction, 
thereby broadening investment channels for housing construction 
in all sectors and at various levels. 
  According to statistics, since reform and opening up, 
investments in China's urban housing construction have seen a 
momentous increase. From 1979 to 1992, over 400 billion yuan 
was invested in housing development, more than five times the 
total in the first three decades after the PRC's founding; and a 
total of 1.78 billion square meters [sq m] of residences were 
built. The urban construction department's estimate puts the 
present per capita living space of the urban population 
nationwide at 7.2 sq m. Compared with the years before reform 
and opening up, the urban residents' housing conditions have 
been improved markedly. 
  Since the beginning of last year, various localities have 
stepped up efforts to construct housing for middle- and 
low-income urban residents, thereby enabling large numbers of 
homeless households or households living in hazardous quarters 
or quarters with inadequate facilities to move into new houses. 
In the past eight years, housing problems have been solved for 
nearly 6 million urban households throughout the country. 
Chengdu city, after helping 8,361 households solve housing 
problems last year, has recently completed a housing complex 
with complete facilities covering 32,000 sq m of floor space at 
the "Anju Gardens" for 500 lucky households. Fuzhou city, 
promoting housing development in conjunction with housing 
reform, has revamped some 400 blocks of dilapidated houses of 
various sizes; and constructed 5 million sq m of houses of all 
types, 12 10,000-residents compact housing communities, and two 
dozen medium-sized residential villages in as little as three 
years. As a result, over 400,000 households have moved into new 
living quarters while 14,000 households' living conditions have 
been considerably improved. Xian city has achieved notable 
results in revamping hazardous houses in low-lying land over the 
past two years or so; and last year, 10,000 households moved 
from hazardous to new living quarters. Shandong Province built 
11 million sq m of urban houses, thus bringing the per capita 
living quarters to 8.1 sq m. 
  In spite of the efforts, housing shortage remains rather 
acute throughout the country in view of the continuously growing 
demand in material life and population pressures. At present, 
4-5 million households in China live in quarters with inadequate 
facilities, in addition to some 30 million sq m of hazardous 
houses awaiting to be repaired. The Construction Ministry is 
clearly aware of the need to take action. Commenting recently 
on pricing problems in commercial housing construction, Vice 
Minister Li Zhendong said: It is necessary to adopt different 
policies for people with various incomes to solve housing 
problems in a variety of ways, establishing a social 
security-type marketing system of "economy housing" for 
households with medium income, as well as a commercial housing 
marketing system for high-income families, with active 
assistance from the government toward economy housing 
construction. To keep housing construction prices as low as 
possible, especially the construction of housing with complete 
facilities, housing with minimum profits, and housing for people 
living in quarters with inadequate facilities, the government 
will adopt preferential policies to make housing sales prices as 
close to workers' wages as possible, and will provide assistance 
in terms of construction plans, land supply, funding 
arrangements, and loan interest rates. Meanwhile, the government 
will institute a policy-lending mortgage system for individual 
housing sales by providing long-term low- interest loans at 
government designated banks for the sales of housing with 
marginal profits and for people with housing problems. 
  On the quality of housing construction, Construction 
Minister 
Hou Jie recently said: To solve housing problems, it is 
necessary to build more and better quality houses and improve 
the management to provide comfortable, convenient, and 
satisfactory living quarters for people. Housing quality and 
environment should be the top priority in housing construction. 
  At the beginning of this year, the Construction Ministry 
urged all localities to solve housing problems by speeding up 
construction as well as housing and real estate development 
enterprises to concentrate their operations on building 
low-priced economy housing. It will be a year of housing 
construction this year in China and Chinese people's living 
conditions will be further improved. 

