BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel by Peter </F>
Ellgaard; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Ellgaard] I now welcome Foreign Minister and Free 
Democratic Party of Germany [FDP] Chairman Klaus Kinkel in our 
studio. Good afternoon, Mr. Kinkel. 
  The FDP Bundestag Group is already signaling a certain 
agreement to Ruehe's [Bundeswehr] plans. Why are you still 
against the reduction of the staff and military service? Are 
you only cross because the defense minister did not brief you in 
time? 
  [Kinkel] Well, the point is that an attempt has to be made 
to find a new concept for the Bundeswehr. Within the framework 
of this concept, the question of a reduction of the 370,000 men 
is also at issue. This would have internal and external 
effects. Internally, the question about the number of long-term 
servicemen, draftees, professional soldiers, and garrisons would 
arise. Externally, since the constitution has not been amended, 
we have so far been unable to participate in the United Nations 
and elsewhere in crises as it would actually be required. All 
that has to be reconsidered. Therefore, I insisted on discussing 
this in the coalition first and then making a decision afterward. 
  [Ellgaard] Is there an alternative to the financial 
framework of 47.5 billion German marks [DM]? There is hardly 
another choice than to reduce compulsory military service and 
the troop strength. 
  [Kinkel] Well, for the time being, Volker Ruehe has to cope 
with this financial framework of DM47.5 billion. I never said 
this was impossible. We really have to implement a reduction 
because there is no other way. However, as far as the concept 
is concerned, I would like to know and discuss whether there are 
any other possibilities. Once again, I would like to say that 
we will discuss this in the coalition talks on Tuesday [26 
April]. This is the correct way. I was mainly interested in 
that. 
  [Ellgaard] Will you make the Bundeswehr or the possible 
employment of the Bundeswehr abroad, for example, a topic in the 
election campaign? 
  [Kinkel] On no account do I want the Bundeswehr to become a 
topic in the election campaign, because the Bundeswehr has to be 
kept out of party quarrels. It must have safe plans for itself, 
the soldiers, and their families. We have to put an end to the 
continuous disorder. In the first place, one thing cannot be 
right -- that is, that we have this much money and we can afford 
this much of the Bundeswehr with it, but we have to say that we 
will need the Bundeswehr for defense and outside crisis 
management in the future. For this purpose, we need this many 
men and it must be possible to finance this. 
  [Ellgaard] Mr. Kinkel, regarding the topic of Yugoslavia: 
You have already advocated a tougher line toward the Serbs, but 
is there not the danger that the West will stumble into a war 
with an uncertain end, like in Vietnam? 
  [Kinkel] I hope not. However, it is correct that there may 
be military and political risks -- military risks in so far as 
we have to wait and see how the Serbian side will react and also 
with a view to the UN Protection Force deployed there. 
Political risks may arise with Russia, for example. I think 
that after the latest Security Council session, we can proceed 
on the assumption that Russia will agree to the Gorazde 
scenario. Regarding the measures that NATO resolved for the 
other security zones, we cannot yet say what will happen. 
  [Ellgaard] What about the Bundeswehr's involvement? You 
have been against it so far. Meanwhile, Mr. Yeltsin, but also 
Denmark, has been calling for something similar to what Mr. 
Schaeuble has suggested -- that is, the Bundeswehr's military 
involvement. 
  [Kinkel] First of all, we have our constitutional risk. Let 
us proceed on the assumption that the Federal Constitutional 
Court will give us the green light, so to speak, in June or 
July. Basically, I believe it will probably be difficult to get 
the German Bundestag's agreement to the employment of Bundeswehr 
soldiers in the former Yugoslavia. However, those who advocate 
it, like Schaeuble, also say that everyone would have to agree. 
Regarding the parties to the conflict, one can certainly 
proceed on the assumption that at least one party to the 
conflict would definitely not agree to the employment of German 
soldiers. 
  [Ellgaard] The Serbs? 
  [Kinkel] The Serbian side. 

