CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vadim Nekrasov: "'Trade Unions of Kazakhstan' </F>
Insist on an Increase in the Minimum Wage and Indexation of 
Citizens' Savings"] 
  [Text] Forty-three people's deputies signed an appeal 
of the "Trade Unions of Kazakhstan" faction, demanding a change 
in the schedule of the work session and, as a first order of 
business, an examination of questions that have disturbed the 
population for a long time. 
  The session agenda proposes to raise the question "On the 
Minimum Consumer Budget." The law by the same name that was 
adopted as far back as June 1991, in fact, did not go into 
effect, and it was "frozen" in March of this year by a 
presidential edict until better times--1 April 1997. 
  Meanwhile, the size of minimum wages and pensions (100 
tenge) 
and allotments have not even reached one-twentieth of the actual 
minimum, which, as is stated in the appeal, "causes only the 
amazement and displeasure of the people." 
  The parliamentarians are demanding the approval of "a 
thoroughly reasoned consumer budget," starting from which it 
would be possible to establish an even more objective scale of 
income from which the "poverty line" is calculated. It is also 
proposed to increase the frequency of wage payments and, as in 
the West, to issue them on a weekly basis. If, in addition, 
earnings could also be indexed, at least on a half scale of the 
real level of inflation... And, even if the present scanty wage 
of the majority of the Kazakhstan people is issued twice a day, 
it would not make things easier. 
  But the trade union representatives in the deputy corps are 
exactly implying such an indexation, insisting on a discussion 
of the question on the implementation of the Law on indexation 
of the monetary incomes of the population, taking into account 
the increase in prices for consumer goods and services." It is 
obviously clear that this law also is strictly "paper." 
  Another sore problem that could turn up at the session, 
among 
the most immediate concerns, is the indexation of citizens' 
savings in the savings bank. It will be recalled that the 
dissolved Russian parliament courageously attempted to resolve 
it, but it did not succeed. The juridical reasoning of the 
supporters of indexation will unlikely raise any doubts: Really, 
people turned money into the savings bank, also under the 
guarantee of the state, and this state depreciated their 
deposits by immediately freeing prices. The only problem is how 
to return to the population what was lost and at the same time 
not to provoke a new relentless increase in prices, which there 
and then will "eat up" the entire sum of compensation. 
  The trade unions have their own ideas on this score: As is 
stated in the appeal, they proposed a noninflationary mechanism 
of indexation to the government. 
  In any case, the subject deserves to be discussed, and it 
should not be rejected right off, after accusing the initiators 
of populism. In December of last year, with the approval of the 
draft Law on the internal state debt of the republic, the former 
deputy corps was at the point of taking revenge by insisting on 
a form of wording that credits received by the government at the 
expense of the depreciated citizens' deposits could become 
republic debt obligations. However, a reaction to this by the 
president followed: The law was vetoed. 
  The interest rate on deposits in today's People's Bank 
remains scanty: It does not even reach 200 percent per year, 
while the level of inflation, according to the estimates of 
experts, will be 10 times higher this year. 
  Should it be a surprise that an absolute majority of 
Kazakhstan people [two lines illegible] a little more than 20 
tenge? 

