Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "British Gas Arrives in Italy"] </F>
  [Text] Milan, 14 Mar (ANSA) -- British Gas, generally 
billed as the world's major privately owned natural gas company, 
opened up shop in Italy today with a press conference announcing 
a readiness to seek investment opportunities from the search for 
new gas fields to transport and distribution. 
  "We've come here with a load of money to spend," quipped 
British Gas Italia Srl's General Manager Fabio Fontana, at the 
head of a company boasting starting capital of 180 million lire 
(about 110,000 dollars) and only four employees, but great 
ambitions, including perhaps a role in the eventual sale of the 
public-sector oil and natural gas company, AGIP [Italian 
National Oil Company]. 
  One immediate aim will be to consolidate British Gas's 
consultancy role with municipal energy companies in Milan, 
Genoa, Trieste and Padua, while also seeking synergies with 
other municipal companies ready to become joint-stock companies 
and "head into new markets." 
  Another major area interest is to extend the company's role 
in co-generation, power-stations in which the thermal energy for 
generating electricity can come from alternative sources such as 
natural gas or coal. 
  A further point of interest for the company may be a 
government plan to open up the search for oil and gas in the Po 
delta to all comers by January 1997. Currently, the concessions 
there are a monopoly of ENI [National Hydrocarbons Corporation], 
the public- sector fuels group, as are contracts for building 
and managing gaslines, which should also be opened up to general 
tender. 
  "We aim to be partners right the way down the gas chain, 
from 
prospection to distribution and transport," confirmed Fontana, 
echoed by British Gas's Director for International Markets, 
Peter Lehmann, who voiced the hope that the gas markets "in 
other countries" would prove to be as open as the British one. 
  Fontana also said that British Gas is interested in full 
industrial partnerships, not "pure financial activities." 
According to Fontana, the aim will be "long-period" agreements 
in which British Gas's share could range from 25-50 percent of 
the capital. He added, however, that an exception to this rule 
could be the AGIP privatisation, thus hinting that British Gas 
could bid for a larger share of AGIP's natural gas or other 
interests. "We don't have a precise figure for investment in 
mind," said Lehmann. "It all depends on what's on offer and how 
good the offers are." 
  On the fringe of the British Gas press conference, Milan's 
Mayor Marco Formentini confirmed plans to privatise the city's 
municipal energy authority, starting with the flotation of 49 
percent of the stock. "We're only interested if we can play an 
industrial role," confirmed Fontana. 
  In other news on the press conference's fringe, the Industry 
Ministry's Director-General for Energy Sources, Giuseppe Gatti, 
confirmed that Italy would fall in line with European Union 
directives by eliminating the monopoly in gas and oil 
prospection by the New Year of 1997. 
  He also produced figures explaining why there was such 
foreign interest in entering the Italian gas market. He said 
that, while European and Italian energy demand fell last year by 
0.7 and 1.3 percent respectively, final-use gas consumption rose 
respectively by 7 percent to 260 Megapet (petroleum equivalent 
tons) and by about 5 percent to 41.7 Megapet. 
  Gatti also said the Industry Ministry's planned energy 
authority would be unveiled in the next few days: "I don't think 
a mega-authority is appropriate. For gas, we want to open up 
the market and make it competitive." 
  British Gas, which is present in 45 countries world-wide, 
has 
70,000 employees and reported turnover of about 10 billion 
pounds, with losses last year of 533 million. The company was 
privatised in 1986. 

