Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nicole Krau] </F>
  [Excerpts] Last Sunday, when the decision to define all 
right-wing movements as terror organizations was announced, 
Kakh's Tel Aviv branch closed down. The branch had been located 
on Hanegev Street in the old Central Bus Station in the past 12 
years, having moved there from Dizengoff. "We seem to be 
closed," one of the movement's leading figures says, "but in 
practice, the branch's entire activity has been moved to a safe 
apartment in downtown Tel Aviv, in which an activist family 
lives. The location of the branch will be changed occasionally 
to prevent exposure by the security forces." 
  The activist's remarks reveal that Kakh activists use five 
safe apartments in the Tel Aviv area. The apartments are 
situated mainly in south Tel Aviv, Hatiqva neighborhood, Bat 
Yam, and Ramat 'Amidar in Ramat Gan. The activist adds that the 
movement has hundreds of activists and supporters in the Dan 
District. According to Kakh activists, Kakh and EYAL [Irgun 
Yehudi Lohem] leaders and the heads of Kahana Hay have recently 
discussed consolidation. [passage omitted] 
  One of the Kakh leaders in the Dan District has said that 
the 
movement would suspend its activities until the High Court of 
Justice rules on the movement's appeal against the orders 
outlawing it. They plan later "to start taking care of the Arab 
problem in Yafo." At first they will distribute in Yafo 
leaflets demanding that the Arab residents leave the city, and 
later they will proceed to damage property. "We will burn their 
cars and houses, but we will not attack people for the time 
being," he said. 
  In addition, the Kakh people plan to act against the 
moderate 
right wing and the left-wing organizations in the city and to 
attack Meretz centers and the Labor building. The activist says 
that reporters, who attack the movement in media, will receive 
life threats. 
  According to Kakh activists, they expect to receive weapons 
soon. They maintain that the weapons will be smuggled in by 
movement activists who are due to immigrate to Israel from the 
United States -- people whose political views are unknown to the 
security services. "We are defined as a terrorist organization, 
and as such, we have nothing to lose. We feel as if we were 
ETZEL and LEHI [pre-state underground organizations], and we 
will use their methods in our operations," the activist sums up. 
The police say they have not as yet reorganized their approach 
to the Kakh personnel. For now, the issue will be addressed by 
the National Unit for Serious Crimes Investigation. 

