BFN 

  [Text] Speaking to reporters on the outcome of the just 
concluded ninth meeting of the Thai-Burmese Regional Border 
Committee at Bangkok's Siam City Hotel this morning, Lieutenant 
General Chettha Thanacharo, commander of the First Army Region, 
said that the delegations of the two countries discussed joint 
efforts to solve border problems and develop the areas along 
their common border. During the meeting, officials of the two 
countries signed agreements on cooperation in many areas such as 
fishing in the territorial waters of the two countries, 
prevention of disputes over unclear border lines, and promotion 
of good mutual understanding. 
  The First Army Region commander added that the meeting also 
discussed the problem of violations of the law by the peoples 
living along the common border of the two countries. The Thai 
side reaffirmed the Thai Government's policy of respecting 
Burma's law and sovereignty and proposed regular meetings of 
local officials of the two countries to prevent and solve all 
problems which may arise in the future. Lt Gen Chettha 
Thanacharo disclosed that at present there are some 350 Thai 
nationals imprisoned in different parts of Burma. During the 
meeting, the Thai side requested that all Thai inmates be 
transfered to Rangoon so that it will be convinient for Thai 
officials to visit them and so that they be treated in 
accordance with the principle of humanitarianism. The Burmese 
side has agreed to comply with the request and notified the Thai 
side about the release of the first batch of 30 Thai inmates. 
  Meanwhile, the Information Department of the Foreign 
Ministry 
reported that the release of the first batch of 30 Thai 
prisoners was announced during the closing ceremony of the ninth 
meeting of the Thai-Burmese Regional Border Committee today by 
Major General Ket Sein, commander of the Southeast Military 
Command of Burma and head of the Burmese delegation at the 
meeting. During his visit to Burma on 19 and 20 April, Foreign 
Minister Squadron Leader Prasong Sunsiri met with Senior General 
Than Shwe, chairman of the State Law and Order Restoration 
Council, and asked the latter to consider releasing or giving 
parole to Thai nationals imprisoned in that country. 
  Taking into account the good relations and friendship 
between 
Thailand and Burma and the success of the ninth meeting of the 
Thai- Burmese Regional Border Committee, the Burmese Government 
has decided to release 30 Thai prisoners, who will be handed 
over to representatives of the First Army Region by Burmese 
authorities at Kawthaung township. 

