BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 10 Jun (INA)--The newspaper AL-THAWRAH has 
stressed that the mean letter U.S. President Clinton has sent to 
the Congress, and the fallacies it contains, is evidence of the 
hidden rancor that stems from a political mentality devoid of 
any values of political credibility. 
  In an article entitled "U.S. Fallacies," the paper says: 
Clinton claimed that Iraq has not responded to the UN Security 
Council resolutions and is working against them. Here, we have 
the right to ask: How can this opinion fit in with the 
acknowledgments and credits given by the United Nations and some 
UN Security Council members, who agreed that Iraq has made 
positive, important, and basic steps in dealing with the UN 
resolutions? 
  The paper adds: We think Clinton has seen the periodic 
reports by Rolf Ekeus, chairman of the UN Special Commission, in 
which he clearly noted the positive Iraqi position in dealing 
with the UN resolutions; nor do we think Clinton is unaware of 
what International Atomic Energy Agency officials say, 
especially since the UN Security Council halls are not very far 
from the U.S. capital, Washington. 
  The paper explains that the only credible thing for the 
United States to do in order to confirm its objectivity and 
sound judgment is to hold the Security Council responsible for 
the delay in implementing Clause 22 of Resolution 687 and not 
deny what Iraq had achieved. 
  The paper says: What Clinton claimed, to the effect that the 
positions of all UN Security Council members on Iraq are united 
and identical, should be denounced. If he is concerned about 
accurate analysis, then he should acknowledge the changes that 
have taken place. 
  The paper wonders: Why did Clinton, in his letter, ignore 
what the Russians, French, and Chinese -- all permanent UN 
Security Council members -- have said about the need for the UN 
Security Council to change the way it is dealing with Iraq, 
following the great strides that have been made? Why did he 
ignore the opinion of the vast majority of the Security Council 
non-permanent members who called for lifting the blockade 
imposed on Iraq? 
  The paper says: Why did Clinton neglect the state of 
apprehension and concern his envoy to the UN Security Council 
was in while she was trying to promote her arguments, with 
feeble help from the British envoy, in the recent Council 
deliberations. 
  The paper concludes by saying: What Clinton has said is 
absolutely untrue and runs counter to the truth. It is a cheap 
attempt to jump to conclusions and deceive world public opinion 
into believing unfounded conceptions. If the U.S. 
Administration has made lies its daily political commodity, then 
it will certainly be a rotten commodity that cannot survive in 
the face of facts. 

