Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Nicolae Timofte by Ye. Podgornov; place and </F>
date not given: "As We Vote, So Shall We Live"] 
  [Text] An election is unfolding in Moldova. Parties, 
social and political movements, and blocs have begun the 
struggle for the electorate's vote. Election commissions, where 
the first meetings between the candidates for deputies' seats 
with the public are being held and visual material appealing for 
support for this candidate or the other is being displayed, are 
being manned locally. Things are getting busier for the Central 
Election Commission for elections to the republic's parliament 
by the day. 
  Our correspondent met with Mr. Nicolae Timofte, 
chairman of the Central Election Commission, and asked him to 
answer a number of questions. 
  [Podgornov] Mr. Chairman, tell us briefly about the 
particular features of the coming elections and how the makeup 
of your commission differs from previous ones. 
  [Timofte] The campaign itself has begun and will be 
conducted 
on the basis of the new Parliamentary Elections Act. The 
particular features of the elections are that they will be held 
on the basis of a multiparty system and under new conditions. A 
considerable amount of time has elapsed since the previous 
elections, and the socioeconomic situation has changed 
appreciably, as can be seen by everyone with the naked eye. 
  As you know, the Election Act had to be amended: It 
contemplated the campaign being conducted with a new 
territorial-administrative arrangement, but this matter has yet 
to be considered by parliament. For this reason, a single 
electoral district incorporating all of Moldova was formed. 
  The approach to the formation of the Central Election 
Commission was different also. According to the statute on the 
procedure of introduction of the Election Act, it included seven 
justices of the republic Supreme Court and representatives of 
parties, social and political movements, and blocs. The seven 
were elected by ballot at an open session of the Supreme Court. 
And then it elected from among its members a chairman. This is 
for me both a great display of trust and a great responsibility. 
  [Podgornov] How are relations between the justices and the 
representatives of the parties shaping up? 
  [Timofte] We are all members of one team. From the moment 
they become a part of the commission, the representatives of the 
parties must channel all their efforts toward fulfillment of the 
Parliamentary Election Act. They are called upon to be objective 
and to forget for the time being their own predilections. The 
justices, on the other hand, represent no parties or movements, 
we are depoliticized. All members of the commission together 
must adopt for the period of the campaign a dispassionate, 
neutral position. The Central Election Commission should and has 
already begun to exercise uniform application of the act 
throughout the territory of the district. 
  [Podgornov] What has the Central Election Commission done, 
in 
fact? 
  [Timofte] It has approved a plan of work for the whole 
campaign. We are now working on putting together various sets of 
instructions. We have approved the support groups of employees 
presented by the district soviet executive committees and city 
halls. These groups will maintain liaison with us and decide on 
operational matters. 
  A meeting of members of the commission and city and district 
leaders was held last week. Many organizational problems were 
studied. We shall be cooperating throughout the election period, 
and the first contact has now been made. Our commission has its 
own staff, manned by people who have taken part in similar 
campaigns earlier. And we have recommended that the leaders 
locally also enlist those who have experience, but lawyers, 
primarily. I feel that many have heeded our advice. 
  [Podgornov] And what is on the minds of the representatives 
of the local authorities? 
  [Timofte] Many matters, purely organizational, what is more. 
We have clarified the interpretation of certain concepts, 
conferred on the business of relations with the parties and the 
financing of various activities and the pay of the persons 
employed in this campaign, and so forth. We have had to respond 
quickly to everything, for we do not have that much time. I have 
already said that such elections are being held for the first 
time and that we are learning how to execute the new act as we 
go along. The meeting was useful for both sides. 
  Questions of the work of radio, television, and the 
newspapers on notification of the public and on all parties, 
movements, blocs, and independent candidates being accorded 
equal conditions on the basis of the Election Act were broached, 
for example. We should all keep an eye on compliance with the 
articles concerning the mass media. 
  The local authorities should also determine particular 
locations for the accommodation of visual campaign material. 
Equality must be assured here also. 
  And much work has to be done in respect to the financing of 
the campaign. We have to establish the upper limit of the 
election fund, which no one must exceed. The Central Election 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance will monitor this. 
  [Podgornov] But the parties, movements, and blocs, and the 
independent candidates, among whom, I assume, there will be many 
with tightly stuffed wallets, could use their resources for 
additional canvassing and propaganda of their platforms and 
programs. Who will monitor this? 
  [Timofte] I have already said that all this is entrusted to 
our commission and the Ministry of Finance. The work will be 
highly complex and scrupulous, but if malfeasance is revealed, 
the results of the elections could be called into question. In 
addition, everyone surely knows that it is not possible to use 
financial assistance from abroad. A procedure for the repayment 
of government loans has been specified also. If you have failed 
to muster the requisite number of votes, you will have to return 
the money in full. And this is spelled out in detail in the act, 
for that matter. 
  [Podgornov] And what if some people avail themselves of the 
services of private newspapers and radio? How is expenditure to 
be monitored there? After all, everything could be arranged 
verbally, and no one could prove a thing. 
  [Timofte] We will rely on the honesty of the candidates. But 
if it is discovered that money has been spent over and above the 
fixed amounts, the results of the ballot could be deemed null 
and void. In addition, this would be a scandal which would be 
remembered up to the next elections. It is hardly likely that 
anyone would want to undermine his reputation. 
  [Podgornov] How do things stand with the formation of 
election commissions locally? 
  [Timofte] We have begun and will continue to make contact 
with the local authorities within the framework of the act. We 
recommended at the seminar, incidentally, that the leaders make 
a careful study of it. Their main task is to help all candidates 
for deputy's seats to an equal extent. To single out no one 
specially or help any one person specifically more than another. 
Efforts obviously need to be made when organizing meetings of 
representatives of parties, movements, and blocs to ensure that 
not just one party or movement but several take part in the 
meeting. If some people need a meeting with the public only by 
themselves, they can organize this themselves within the limits 
permitted by act. This is their right. 
  [Podgornov] It may be assumed here that the activity of the 
electorate and its participation in the elections also will 
depend on the constructiveness of such meetings. What kind of 
guarantees of objectiveness of the actual ballot process and the 
counting of the vote are contemplated. It is no secret that 
during past elections quite aggressive canvassers, who would in 
two or three words make it understood what would await a person 
who voted against such-and-such a person, would frequently be 
sauntering through the polling station premises. What guarantees 
of the voters' voluntary expression will there be now? 
  [Timofte] The act specifies the actions of the law 
enforcement authorities on polling day. We and all those 
responsible for the voting will obviously have to adopt 
effective measures to put a stop to possible provocations, 
pressure on people, and so forth. 
  The participation of foreign observers and the press is 
planned at the elections themselves. It is contemplated inviting 
observers from Russia, Romania, Ukraine, the CSCE, and other 
countries and organizations. We want to impart to our elections 
glasnost in the broadest meaning of this word. 
  [Podgornov] And will elections be held on the Left Bank and 
in Gagauzia? 
  [Timofte] According to the act, they are to be held as in 
the 
rest of Moldova. This campaign will be a litmus test for the 
separatists, which should reveal or, more correctly, specify 
their political character. After all, the right to vote and run 
for election is guaranteed each citizen of Moldova. Let us see 
how it is realized in the Dniester region. We will see for 
ourselves together with the international community who is who. 
But I will not make predictions. I would like to hope for the 
best. We are a united country, and it would be desirable to 
confirm this unity. 
  [Podgornov] The campaign is only just beginning. All your 
work is still to come. But, obviously, the electorate should not 
be passive in this period either. What would you wish them at 
this time? 
  [Timofte] First, that people get to the heart of what is 
happening and probe the program of each party, movement, bloc, 
and independent candidate. May they vote from conviction, not 
compulsion. 
  Second, we all need to remember that we must elect the 
parliament we deserve. For as we vote, so shall we live. Let all 
voters ponder this. 

