BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Sun Desheng (1327 1795 3932): "Gu Jinchi </F>
Inspects Shenyang"] 
  [Excerpts] On 30 April, accompanied by Zhao Jincheng and 
Zhang Ruichang, leaders of Shenyang city; and responsible 
comrades of the province and Shenyang city, Gu Jinchi, Wang 
Huaiyuan, Zhang Guoguang, Xu Wencai, Liu Zhenhua, and Cong 
Zhenglong, leaders of the provincial party committee and 
government, conducted one-day investigation and study activities 
in Shenyang and also cordially extended festive greetings to the 
staff and workers, security cadres and policemen, and armed 
police commanders and fighters who were working on the holiday. 
[passage omitted] 
  In regard to the problems of alleviating the strain on 
capital, Gu Jinchi said: Shortage of capital is a general 
problem. But, there are two different kinds of attitudes toward 
this problem. Should we positively think of methods and measures 
and depend on own efforts or simply rely on higher levels and 
wait for higher levels' support? Different attitudes bring 
about different results. Some of the economically developed 
areas in the province are confronted with this problem, too. 
But, with a positive attitude, these areas regard the shortage 
of capital as a kind of opportunity, try every possible means to 
collect funds, and capture the precious time for development. 
So long as we are inspired with enthusiasm and rely on our own 
efforts will we be able to overcome the temporary difficulties 
in lacking capital. 
  Gu Jinchi stressed: Each and every province and each and 
every area should have its own image, so does a trade. The 
light industrial trade is one closely related to the people's 
livelihood. So, we should be inspired with enthusiasm, 
strengthen management, accelerate the pace of technological 
transformation, and foster new image of our own. Only by so 
doing will we be able to make contributions to doing the second 
pioneering work. Leading comrades, including Gu Jinchi, also 
asked, in detail, about the living situation of the staff and 
workers of light industrial enterprises and urged these 
enterprises to try every possible means to well arrange and 
stabilize the livelihood of the staff and workers. 
  After that, Gu Jinchi and his party also went to the Beihang 
country fair trade market in Huanggu District by car to inspect 
the supply situation of the market on the holiday. [passage 
omitted] 
  Gu Jinchi said: Viewing the general situation, we know that 
the market supply situation is good. But, we must pay high 
attention to the problems relating to excessively fast price 
hikes. We should proceed from safeguarding the interests of the 
people, approach from the high plane of stabilizing the overall 
situation, and do our best to control the goods prices within 
the levels which can be accepted by the masses. The goods 
prices must not rigidly be controlled. The key to controlling 
goods prices hinges on mobilizing the enthusiasm of producers 
and managers, increasing production, expanding goods resources, 
increasing wholesale and retail sale channels, and guaranteeing 
the masses' "vegetable baskets" and "rice bags." Gu Jinchi 
urged that the provincial and city commercial, foodstuffs, and 
pricing departments should be good advisers to the provincial 
and city party committees and governments in this regard, 
provide increasingly more accurate information for higher 
levels, and made more constructive opinions and suggestions for 
higher levels. [passage omitted] 

