Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Steady at Fifteen"] </F>
  [Text] Remember November 4, 1979? Iranian revolutionaries 
seized the U.S. embassy in Tehran and held some 100 spies 
hostage. Tons of documents, sophisticated spying equipment, the 
overall setup of the so-called embassy and statements by the 
`diplomats' confirmed to the people of Iran and the free world 
that the U.S. mission was grossly violating all norms of 
international law. 
  That was 14 years ago. The world's largest economic and 
military power then made an undeclared pledge to undermine the 
newly-born Islamic Republic of Iran to avenge the political 
humiliation. 
  And so a non-stop process began to destabilize the unique 
Islamic Revolution and its leadership. Aware of the fury and 
conspiracy in Washington and other allied capitals, the late 
Imam Khomeyni told the nation and other oppressed masses that 
"America can't do a damn." Time and again the father of the 
Islamic Revolution in Iran urged the deprived and downtrodden 
not to overestimate America's military, diplomatic and economic 
might -- now on the decline. 
  Now here we are. Islamic Iran is celebrating the 15th 
anniversary of the upheaval that brought down the region's most 
powerful monarchy. Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, America's 
staunchest ally was forced out of the country. His crime? 
Among all the evidence of injustice during the shah's rule and 
the lawlessness of his family members, the king's unquestionable 
subservience to Washington can be singled out as the stalk that 
broke the camel's back. 
  Save the direct bombing of Iranian cities by U.S. fighter 
planes, (the U.S. did shoot down one of our passenger planes in 
1988 killing all 300 civilians on board) the Carter, Reagan, 
Bush and Clinton White House did everything to first bring the 
Islamic state to its knees and then wipe out its name from the 
world's geographical map. For a decade and a half the U.S., 
closely followed by Britain, has spared no opportunity to 
sustain its Iran-bashing strategy. Engineering Saddam Husayn's 
full-fledged military invasion of Iran to sponsoring resolutions 
against "Tehran's human rights violations" at world forums are 
among the long-list of known plots of the great satan. 
  We absolutely do not want to convey that the 
Washington-London offensives failed at every turn. Our people 
know that these two hostile powers have on and off succeeded in 
making life difficult for the U.S. [as published] Depressing oil 
prices, difficulties in procuring technology for peaceful 
purposes, encouraging today's kings, sheikhs, 
presidents-for-life and military dictators to silence their 
peoples' calls for Islamic justice... are plots that temporarily 
disturb our lofty mission. 
  On hindsight we realize that from time immemorial everything 
has had a price. Today the stakes are much higher. Ours is 
basically a Muslim society that has unfathomable belief in 
justice of the kind practiced by our Imam 'Ali (A.S.) [as 
published]. Islamic Iran has, in the recent past, displayed 
some unprecedented levels of zeal, and resistance to arrogance 
and aggression. May be the U.S.-engineered war, sanctions, 
isolation and condemnation after the victory of the 1979 Islamic 
Revolution were a blessing in disguise. The majority of our 
people have learnt to endure and this is something what the 
loud-mouthed American and British leaders can't take away by a 
stroke of their hand. 
  We do not need to run away from the truth. Yes, our country 
has some problems. Which country doesn't? From the islands of 
Mindanao to the desert dwellings in Morocco nations are 
grappling with social, economic and political problems. And 
mind you, very few of these (governments) are on the U.S. black 
list. Iran is a thorn in the eyes of American leaders who fear 
the rise of Islam and its ramifications on Washington's 
illegitimate interests around the globe. 
  Contrary to what our western adversaries like to publicize, 
Islamic Iran has no identity crisis. As regarding our 
proclamations of peaceful coexistence, the international 
community once clearly, though reluctantly, endorsed this 
position (the U.N. admitted that Iraq started the war against 
Iran). Then again look at the Islamic Republic's normal and 
growing relations with all its neighbors. Fifteen years may be 
like 15 seconds in the history of a nation. Yet in this period 
we managed to come a long way and have little to fear. We have 
already accepted that the 21st century will be the century of 
Islam. With this in vision, we are minding our own business and 
expect the U.S. to do likewise. 

