BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed SK: "Total Ban on Chemical Weapons -- The </F>
Federal Council Wants To Ratify the International Convention"] 
  [Text] Bern, 20 Apr (ATSA) -- Switzerland should ratify the 
international convention banning chemical weapons and calling 
for their destruction. The Federal Council made this proposal 
to the Assembly in a message that was adopted on Wednesday [13 
April]. The convention is the first disarmament treaty for an 
entire category of mass-destruction weapons. Switzerland has no 
chemical weapons. 
  In January 1993, Switzerland signed the convention that bans 
the design, manufacture, storage, and use of chemical weapons. 
The participating states also pledged never to help anyone 
undertake activities breaking this convention. Besides, all 
existing stocks of chemicals weapons must be destroyed, as well 
as the plants innvolved in the making of such weapons and the 
weapons left by a state on foreign territory. 
  An exhaustive monitoring system -- extended to the civilian 
chemical industry -- will be set up to ensure that the 
convention is complied with. An international organization on 
banning chemical weapons will be established in The Hague to 
carry out this monitoring function. Over 150 states have signed 
the convention up till now, including Switzerland in January 
1993. 
<H5>  No Problem for Switzerland </H5>
  In its message, the Federal Council stressed that 
Switzerland 
itself does not have any mass-destruction weapons. It considers 
that the convention on chemical weapons is, together with the 
nonproliferation treaty, the most important multilateral treaty 
in the security field. The elimination of chemical weapons will 
reduce the risk of a serious military threat. The government 
further says that the destruction of such weapons will have to 
respect the environment. 
  The government underlines that the Swiss chemical industry 
unreservedly adheres to the objectives of the convention. 
Implementing this convention does not require creating new 
institutions or laws, but nevertheless implies considerable 
monitoring activities. 

