BFN 

  [Text] Belem do Para, 8 Jun (EFE) -- Today, OAS Permanent 
Council President Denneth Modeste said the Caribbean member 
countries of Caricom [Caribbean Common Market] have not ruled 
out any option for reestablishing democracy in Haiti, including 
military intervention. 
  During a news conference in which he spoke on behalf of 
Caricom members, Modeste said that "if the sanctions do not 
attain the desired objective, we do not rule out any option" for 
reestablishing democracy in Haiti, including the military option. 
  "We believe the flagrant human rights violations against the 
poor Haitian people have been going on for too long," Modeste 
said, adding that before considering a military operation one 
should wait for the strengthening of the embargo against the 
Haitian coupists to see if this is effective. 
  Modeste, who represents Grenada before the OAS, added that 
the Caricom members have sent "a strong message to the Haitian 
authorities, and we expect them to respect their people's will 
to reestablish President Jean Bertrand Aristide in power." 
  During the OAS General Assembly taking place in this 
Brazilian coastal city, the foreign ministers of the OAS member 
countries approved a resolution to intensify the trade embargo 
against Haiti, asking for total compliance. Regarding the 
express prohibition against launching armed action against other 
countries, which is specified in the OAS Charter, Modeste said 
"it did not prevent the reestablishment of democracy in Grenada 
through military intervention." He said this in reference to 
the U.S. invasion of Grenada in 1983. Modeste stressed the 
democratic progress attained in Grenada, adding that "for this 
reason Grenada does not rule out any action." 
  Despite the call for admitting Haitian refugees, as 
mentioned 
in the resolution on Haiti, Modeste said the Caricom countries 
cannot accept more of them because of the problems that many 
Caribbean countries have in offering them assistance and 
services. 
  "The problem of the refugees reflects what is going on in 
Haiti, and we must attempt to address the cause rather than the 
effects, and the cause is human rights violations in Haiti," 
Modeste said. 
  As for the possibility that Grenada could participate in a 
possible military operation against the Haitian coupists, who 
usurped power from Aristide in September 1991, Modeste said 
Grenada "does not have an Army," but would be willing to help 
train "a more responsible Haitian police" once the military 
return power to Aristide. 
  The Haitian crisis has been one of the central points 
discussed at the OAS General Assembly, which began on 6 June and 
could end tomorrow, a day earlier than scheduled, given the 
swiftness with which the various committees advanced in their 
work. 

