Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Myechyslaw Hryb, the new Supreme Soviet chairman, 
has started forming his team of advisers. 
  After a talk with his predecessor's foreign policy adviser, 
Valery Tsepkalo, the latter was told to resign. Tsepkalo 
himself told Interfax that his tense relations with Foreign 
Minister Petr Kravchenko, whom he had recently repeatedly 
criticized in the mass media, was one of the chief reasons for 
his resignation. 
  Hryb, "unlike his predecessor, has good relations with the 
foreign minister and would not like to quarrel with him because 
of me," Tsepkalo believes. 
  He agreed that "replacement of the team of advisers when a 
new head of state is elected is a normal and natural process" 
and added that he was not offended. He was thankful to the new 
speaker who "politely explained the situation, did not insist 
that I leave my position immediately, and allowed me enough time 
to find a new job." 
  By the latest reports, Tsepkalo is now in Tokyo to acquire 
first-hand knowledge of the Japanese banking system. 
  Another former adviser of Shushkevich, Professor Mikhail 
Kovalev, told Interfax that he was going to collect his last 
wage in the Supreme Soviet secretariat Thursday. He had not had 
a talk with the new speaker, but had "made up his mind to resign 
his position of an adviser and concentrate on work in the 
Belarusian State University" where he chairs a department and on 
the setting up of a Belarusian-German institute for systems 
analysis of market processes. He thinks that Dr. Anatoliy 
Mikhaylov will also resign and continue his scientific 
activities. 
  No decision has been made in the case of Ivan Stepura, the 
former speaker's adviser on interior matters and who has known 
Hryb personally since 1974. Stepura proposed abolishing 
regional structures and merging every five to six districts of 
the country into areas that would be managed directly from 
Minsk. He made numerous enemies among parliament deputies who 
represented agrarian sector managers and various local top 
officials by his demand that private ownership of land should be 
introduced, private farms encouraged, and all kinds of farmland 
property be made legally equal. 
  Stepura thinks that a decision on whether he should remain 
an 
adviser will be made once Hryb returns from St. Petersburg, 
where he will attend the CIS Inter-Parliamentary Assembly. 

