BFN 

  [Text] Managua, 7 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- The Nicaraguan 
Government today rejected demands made by two groups of former 
soldiers who peacefully and simultaneously occupied the Managua 
Cathedral and the Venezuelan Embassy in the same city. 
  According to Deputy Government Minister Frank Cesar, the two 
groups of former soldiers -- members of the Movement for Fair 
Compensation -- "are demanding compensation that is not due 
them." 
  The occupiers of both sites -- approximately 22 people at 
the 
Cathedral and a similar number at the embassy -- were Government 
Ministry employees. 
  "These are people who had asked for compensation, but were 
only entitled to severance pay" when they left active service, 
Cesar stressed. Cesar noted that during past Cathedral 
occupations -- in October 1993 and February 1994 -- an agreement 
was reached with 705 former members of this same group, under 
which they were to receive severance pay in accordance with the 
law, but, he added, only 587 former soldiers had received 
payment so far. 
  The deputy minister also said that appropriate measures will 
be taken if the occupants, whose leaders were negotiating this 
evening with human rights organizations and Venezuelan 
Ambassador Juan Jose Monsant, maintain their current position. 
  "We will act in accordance with the country's laws, because 
the situation is deplorable," [words indistinct] added that the 
embassy would have to give permission if the building were to be 
evacuated by force. 
  Cesar reported that there are four diplomatic officials 
being 
held along with the ambassador, following the voluntary release 
of two members of the embassy staff. At the Cathedral an 
undetermined number of nuns are being held. 
  The official did not deny the possibility that "people 
trying 
to create an atmosphere of instability" were behind these 
incidents. Based on this he asked the occupants to reconsider 
their actions and surrender. 
  Monsant, meanwhile, told the media this afternoon that he 
hoped the situation could be resolved within a few hours. 

