BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Affairs Minister Mohamed Salah Dembri, who 
has been in Washington since last Monday [20 June] on a working 
visit to the United States, has reviewed Algeria's domestic and 
foreign policies to the Arab and international media in the 
American capital. 
  We review Dembri's activities in Washington in the following 
report by Bechir Hedebel: 
  [Hedebel] On the third day of his visit to Washington 
Foreign 
Minister Mohamed Salah Dembri held talks with members of the 
U.S. Senate before going to a lunch banquet held in his honor at 
the foreign relations council. 
  The meeting gave Mr. Dembri the opportunity to explain the 
current efforts aimed at widening the national dialogue and the 
outcome of his talks with the American officials, in addition to 
the economic reforms in Algeria, particularly those concerning 
the transformation to a market economy. 
  During his meeting with Arab press representatives in 
Washington yesterday evening, Dembri expressed hopes of 
achieving better means for Arab consultations in view of the 
disarray noted in the Yemeni conflict, recalling the efforts 
made by Zeroual, the head of the state, to contain the crisis 
since its start by receiving Yemeni envoys or in his telephone 
calls and the telegrams he sent to the two parties, in which he 
warned them against the danger of resorting to arms. 
  During his meeting with the Arab journalists, the minister 
also focused on the current rapprochement of the national 
dialogue and the search for consensus. In this respect, he said 
that a frank exchange of views had taken place with the American 
officials, which was not in any means an interference in 
Algerian internal affairs. 
  On the issue of the Western Sahara, the minister pointed out 
the international commitments included in the UN peace plan, 
making it clear that Algeria would try, as much as possible, to 
help to achieve a political settlement between the two parties 
to the conflict within the framework of direct dialogue between 
Morocco and the Polisario Front. 
  In his assessment of the various talks, Dembri pointed out 
that the United States stressed its support for the economic and 
political reforms taking place in Algeria. 

