Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by F.J. Khergamvala: "Manmohan Completes Policy </F>
Agenda"; boldface words as published] 
  [Text] Limassol (Cyprus), Oct. 25. The Indian delegation to 
the 29th Commonwealth Summit headed back home on Monday evening 
content that it had at least attempted to satisfy a heavy 
bilateral and multilateral agenda. 
  Assisted by senior officials, including the Foreign 
Secretary, Mr. J. N. Dixit, the Commerce Secretary, Mr. Tejinder 
Khanna and Mr. Y. M. Tiwari, India's High Commissioner here, the 
delegation leader, Dr. Manmohan Singh's job included interaction 
with Pakistan's new leadership and a detailed presentation of 
India's views on the sub continent and the economic situation to 
every member of the South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation [SAARC], the Association of South East Asian Nations 
[ASEAN] and some others like Britain, Australia and Mauritius. 
It is learnt that due to the flux in the domestic situation in 
both Pakistan and India, especially the latter, the Foreign 
Secretary-level dialogue will not be held before January at the 
earliest. 
  So far as multilateral concerns go, India had wisely 
attached 
itself by prior consultation with Britain to maul the 
Commonwealth Secretary General's grand proposal for a New Global 
Humanitarian Order, laying out for the body an interventionist 
role. In fact the Indo-British consultation process here has 
been a revealing feature. Next, India was determined to argue 
for retaining the integrity of the Commonwealth Fund for 
Technical Cooperation, from which funds were being diverted to 
serve political ambitions and to press for preserving the 
autonomy of the Commonwealth Foundation. After realising that 
the initial draft on the Uruguay Round and General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade had not reflected its concerns India was 
strongly interested in having the Commonwealth incorporate its 
concerns. This, arguably, was largely achieved. 
  Pak not isolated: It is quite impossible at 
multilateral meetings to establish a success-failure ratio. As 
the Australian Prime Minister, Mr. Paul Keating, replied the 
other day to the press, "can one of you please enlighten me what 
a successful visit is." However, insofar as putting the Global 
Humanitarian Order into a coma, India can legitimately claim 
success. It is quite another matter than in claiming to do so, 
some found the need to highlight Pakistan's isolation. Islamabad 
did mention that there were several positive elements to the 
Secretary General's proposal and the paper was worth talking 
about, as did at least one third of the countries. By no means 
is this a state of isolation. 
  On Kashmir, delegates here are of the view that time and 
events on the ground will determine the course of events unless 
some imaginative and creative ideas are explored. Meanwhile all 
India can do is to contain what has undoubtedly been a 
successful attempt by Pakistan to internationalise the situation 
in Jammu and Kashmir. For those who have either attended or 
covered international conferences it is quite obvious that if 
one had to take a private poll of other delegates three facts 
would emerge. One, that the problem must be resolved, preferably 
bilaterally. Two, something more up to date than the Shimla 
Agreement is needed because the local Kashmiri element is a 
potent ingredient, not included in the Shimla pact. Finally, 
that India is on the back foot on the human rights situation. 
  Quite often India needs to direct its publicity to its own 
officials, indeed within the Ministry of External Affairs 
itself. It is quite extraordinary that while here in Cyprus the 
Indian team saw fit to acknowledge positive aspects in Ms. 
Benazir Bhutto's phraseology on Kashmir and found nothing 
objectionable in Bangladesh's general reference on waters, in 
Amritsar an official of the External Affairs Ministry was 
criticising Islamabad and Dhaka for these utterances. 
  Over the past few years the Ministry has had quite a few 
politicians of three types. One, those who do not ready their 
briefs or do not understand them. Two, those who feel no need to 
read them, either because they are facile in the language and 
feel they can waffle. The last category, those in whose minds 
the papers of the cold war era have been indelibly printed. 
Fortunately in Cyprus, all these species were absent and India 
sent a man who could not only absorb his papers but inject them 
with more wisdom and deliver and then make each delivery without 
reference to them. 
  Those who have seen the subject grasp of people like Mr. 
John 
Major, Mr. Paul Keating, Dr. Mahathir Mohammed and India's own 
Mr. Narasimha Rao would realise how important it is to send out 
at the head of India's delegations men who can hold five 
consecutive meetings in one day, interspersed with interventions 
in a general debate, without a break for revision or a siesta 
and also host a lunch on G-15 issues, not to mention a meeting 
with the Queen without any officials present. 
  In bilateral meetings or before the media Mr. Nawaz Sharif 
was a man who was tongue tied and a bumbler. But Pakistan's new 
leader is of a wholly different genre who can be taken on only 
by men that India sent to Limassol. Fortunately also, the 
Foreign Secretary and his officials kept themselves fully 
accessible to the local, Indian and the foreign media for 
background briefings, especially on economic subjects. But there 
is only so much that public relations can do. 

