BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 21 KYODO -- Former Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa on Tuesday [21 June] denied allegations that 
he falsely told the Diet he repaid both principal and interest 
on a 100 million yen loan from the scandal-ridden Sagawa Kyubin 
trucking group. 
  "What I said during a news conference (on April 8) is 
identical to my answers to legislators' questions at the Diet," 
Hosokawa told a session of the House of Representatives Budget 
Committee. 
  "I came to know the fact that my office had handled interest 
on the loan from Sagawa Kyubin as political donations based on 
my political office's report to me, shortly before my April 8 
announcement of resignation as prime minister," said Hosokawa 
who testified at the committee under oath. 
  While in office, Hosokawa repeatedly told the Diet that he 
had repaid both interest and principal on the loan from the 
Sagawa Kyubin group, which was involved in the 1992 
money-and-mobster scandal that led to the downfall of one-time 
political kingpin Shin Kanemaru. 
  However, he told the April 8 news conference that his 
political office had accepted the interest on the loan as 
political donations on the basis of an agreement with Sagawa 
Kyubin that offered to give up the interest Hosokawa owed to the 
trucking group as a form of political donation. 
  Hosokawa also denied allegations that he falsely told the 
Diet that his father-in-law Shohei Ueda initiated a deal to 
obtain 300 shares in Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp. (NTT) 
and he merely pledged his condominium in Tokyo as collateral to 
secure a loan to help his father-in-law buy the shares. 
  "I was negative, rather than positive, regarding a proposal 
to purchase the NTT shares, but I instructed my secretary 
(Masatoshi) Miyama to offer the condominium in (Tokyo's) 
Motoazabu area as collateral as my father-in-law asked me to 
provide collateral to help him buy the NTT shares," he said. 
  Hosokawa's sworn testimony comes as the country's two 
largest 
political parties, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the 
Social Democratic Party (SDP), are preparing to submit a 
no-confidence motion against the minority government of Prime 
Minister Tsutomu Hata. Both the LDP and SDP are in opposition. 
  Diet sources said both the LDP and the SDP want to secure a 
pretext that would justify their separate moves in tabling the 
no-confidence motion. 
  Hosokawa, leader of the Japan New Party, one of the 
coalition 
parties, and his coalition partners have long resisted demands 
from the opposition to appear before the Diet panel to testify 
on the allegations of his alleged financial irregularities. 
  The coalition maintained the panel's decision last Thursday 
to summon Hosokawa is invalid, noting that the committee's 
chairman Tsuruo Yamaguchi of the SDP contravened a parliamentary 
practice of deciding on a summons only through consensus among 
all the parties. 
  During Thursday's committee session, legislators of the 
ruling coalition voiced opposition to the proposal to summon 
Hosokawa. But Yamaguchi declared that his committee decided to 
summon the former prime minister without dissent. 
  Earlier Tuesday, Hosokawa told a hastily arranged news 
conference that he will not appear in Tuesday's committee 
session but will testify if the ruling and opposition parties 
agree to summon him. 
  But following backstage talks, both camps later agreed to 
summon Hosokawa on condition that the committee chairman explain 
about the summons. 
  At the outset of the panel's session, Yamaguchi said, "I am 
sorry for the current situation and the committee will not make 
it a precedent" to summon a witness without securing a consensus 
from committee members. 
  The ruling coalition's refusal to allow Hosokawa to testify 
over the 1982 loan from Sagawa and the 1986 purchase of NTT 
shares has stalled Diet debate on the long-overdue fiscal 1994 
state budget, whose quick passage has been deemed necessary to 
provide fiscal stimulus to the stagnant Japanese economy. 
  The Diet sources said the ruling coalition decided to 
withdraw its objection to the summoning of Hosokawa for fear 
that the opposition may accuse it of a cover-up over the truth 
about Hosokawa's alleged financial improprieties. 
  Such an accusation could become a pretext strong enough to 
justify a possible submission of the no-confidence motion, the 
sources said. 
  The House of Councillors is expected to pass the budget on 
Thursday. The budget has already cleared the lower house. The 
current regular Diet session is to expire on June 29. 
  Earlier in the day, LDP executives agreed to decide on 
Wednesday to submit the no-confidence motion, LDP officials said. 
  The SDP has demanded Hata and his cabinet ministers 
voluntarily resign en masse after passage of the budget to pave 
way for the formation of a new coalition government, in which 
the SDP would participate. 
  During the questioning which lasted for two hours and 45 
minutes, Hosokawa dismissed as a "misunderstanding" Diet 
testimony by investment consultant Shuzo Fujiki, who had 
interpreted the NTT share purchase as a deal initiated by 
Hosokawa himself and not by Hosokawa's father-in-law. 
  Fujiki said he helped Hosokawa acquire a huge loan to 
finance 
the purchase of the 300 NTT shares by introducing a Tokyo-based 
stock investment financing company ready to extend the huge loan 
in view of Hosokawa's creditworthiness as then Kumamoto governor. 
  Hosokawa also testified that he has already settled another 
controversy over his acknowledged failure to declare to tax 
authorities an income accruing from investment of his personal 
assets worth 57 million yen. 
  He said the problem has been alleviated as he submitted to 
the authorities a revised tax return that carries the accounts 
of the investment profits. 

