Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By special correspondent Fang Yuen (2488 0337): "Faced </F>
With Numerous Difficulties Combating Corruption, Central 
Military Commission Will Strengthen Leading Body"] 
  [Text] Due to differences of opinion on the anticorruption 
struggle inside the Chinese Army, the People's Liberation Army 
[PLA] is beset with great difficulties and faced with great 
resistance in unfolding the anticorruption struggle, according 
to a well-informed source in Beijing. News spread that, taking 
into consideration of the fact that the average age of the 
current leadership tier of the Central Military Commission [CMC] 
is on the high side, its leading body will be readjusted and 
strengthened within this year, with one or two vice chairmen 
added and its secretary general's office restored. Because of 
a shortage of funds, with the silent consent of the Central 
Committee, from the top down, the Chinese Army from the General 
Staff Headquarters, the General Political Department, and the 
General Logistics Department down to army units at regimental 
and battalion level, have all engaged in construction projects 
and business one after another in a wide range of diversified 
business including weapons exports, munitions, and karaoke, 
which have involved all of the armed services and which form a 
huge economic power, while establishing complicated relations 
with local warlord economies [di fang zhu hou jing ji 0966 2455 
6175 0186 4842 3444]. 
  It was disclosed that when China augmented macroeconomic 
readjustment and control and rectified the banking order last 
year, funds from many localities acquired from loans obtained in 
violation of rules and regulations actually went to army-run 
enterprises, and their recovery is impossible. At that time, a 
vice premier in charge of the economy required the CMC to go out 
and help recover those funds. A responsible person from the CMC 
ridiculed this, saying "money should be contributed" (referring 
to an increase in the military expenditure allotment) before the 
funds were recovered. 
  When the nationwide anticorruption struggle started last 
year, the CPC top echelon accepted suggestions from scholars and 
experts to strictly restrict Army businesses, while abolishing 
such practices step by step on the one hand and increasing 
military expenditure on the other, with large pay increases for 
officers and men effective 1 January. However, the 
implementation of this policy met with resistance in all of the 
services, arms of the services, and major military regions of 
the whole Army; consequently, the anticorruption struggle inside 
the Army came to a halt, whereas all sorts of Army-run companies 
continued to do big business, and the law-breaking activities of 
some Army units, such as smuggling and tax evasion, have 
continued despite repeated bans. 
  For this reason, the CMC called a work conference on 
discipline inspection for the whole Army not long ago. At the 
conference, Liu Huaqing, member of the Central Committee 
Political Bureau Standing Committee and concurrently vice 
chairman of the CMC, stated with unprecedentedly fierce and 
stern words that senior military cadres should acquire a concept 
of the overall situation and should strictly abide by political 
discipline. On all matters, instructions from the Central 
Committee and the CMC should be resolutely implemented; as for 
activities that are banned with explicit orders, they should be 
avoided absolutely; and for those matters covered by 
institutional stipulations, they should be faithfully carried 
out accordingly. 
  In addition, Liu Huaqing called on senior cadres of the 
whole 
Army to "genuinely maintain unanimity with the Central Committee 
politically, ideologically, and in actions." To make such a 
call to the most reliable PLA is rare in the history of the CPC. 
  Aside from the reaction of some special interest groups that 
have been shaped inside the Army, that the current leadership 
tier of the CMC is short of authority accounts for the great 
difficulties in unfolding the anticorruption struggle inside the 
Army; furthermore, Liu Huaqing and Zhang Zhen, the current vice 
chairmen of the CMC, are over 75 years of age. In view of this, 
the CPC top echelon is planning to "readjust the top-echelon 
leadership of the CMC, adding one or two vice chairmen and 
restoring the office of secretary general." It was disclosed 
that Chi Haotian, a member of the CMC and concurrently defense 
minister, is likely to become a vice chairman of the CMC vice 
chairman in addition to its secretary general's office. The 
65-year-old Chi Haotian falls in the category of an officer of 
the new generation, a typical professional soldier who has fine 
relations with both old generals and junior officers. Another 
source holds that there is presently a force inside the military 
calling for the return of Yang Baibing, former secretary general 
of the CMC and concurrently director of the PLA General 
Political Department. Whether or not such voices lead to the 
return of the "Yangs" [Yang Shangkun and Yang Baibing] will be a 
focus of attention in Chinese politics in the days to come. 

