Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zoya Korneyeva and Dinara Shugabayeva (AZIYA </F>
correspondents): ``The Health of Women is the Health of the 
Nation''; first three paragraphs are AZIYA introduction ] 
  [Excerpts]Pregnancy and birth of a child must be not only 
usual, natural, but also virtually safe and definitely joyous 
events. However, statistics show that this is far from true in 
many developing countries. Each year, about a million women die 
of complications arising during pregnancy and parturition. In 
the same countries, 10 million children die each year, and about 
half of them in the first month of life. Many children expire of 
the same complications that killed their mothers. These 
complications are directly related to the condition of maternity 
institutions, general physical condition of mothers and their 
diet even before they become pregnant. 
  As we have already reported, there was a seminar in the 
middle of January in Alma-Ata dealing with mother and child 
health. The US Agency for International Development (USAID) 
sponsored this seminar. The seminar assembled more than 70 
Central Asian health care workers and many prominent foreign 
specialists. The purpose of the seminar was to learn and 
exchange information with participants from the United States 
and Central Asia about the latest facts on matters of mother and 
child care, nursing and family planning. 
  This is what the seminar participants told AZIYA 
correspondents. 
Aman DYUSEKEYEV, deputy health minister of Kazakhstan: 
  In our republic, the index of women's health is dropping 
each 
year. Last year it constituted about 30 percent. This means that 
only 30 women out of 100 are in good health. Out of 1000 infants 
born, 146 are sick. Respiratory organ diseases are in first 
place, parasitic diseases in second, and nervous system diseases 
in third. The adverse ecological situation and deteriorating 
financial status of the people have an adverse impact. We are in 
second place among CIS states with respect to birthrate. In our 
republic there are 67.2 maternal deaths per 100,000 deliveries. 
Of this number, 38 die of abortions. Infant mortality is high in 
Shymkent, Semipalatinsk, Zhambyl and Kzyl-Orda oblasts. These 
indicators are considerably lower in northern oblasts. At 
present, development of a 5-year program to lower infant and 
mother mortality is being finalized in our republic. The 
government of the Kazakhstan Republic has spent much money to 
purchase drugs. In the summer, there will be a conference in 
Alma-Ata on the problem of diarrhea. 
Nina KAYUPOVA, director of Republic Research Center for 
Mother and Child Care: 
  Our Center, along with other research institutions of 
Kazakhstan, has carried out sampling studies. As a result, it 
was found that morbidity is very high among women in the region 
of Aral, Semipalatinsk, and oblasts with a large chemical 
industry -- Pavlodar, Zhambyl. The poor ecological situation is 
in first place among the causes of disease, child and mother 
mortality. We have developed a program to lower maternal 
morbidity and mortality which considers all risk factors. The 
heterogeneity of indicators of morbidity and mortality made it 
necessary to elaborate differentiated preventive and therapeutic 
measures to lower them. Kazakhstan is divided into four regions 
according to indicators of maternal mortality: low, average, 
above average, and high. Thus, the indicator is high in Shymkent 
and Alma-Ata oblasts, and in the city of Alma-Ata. It is low in 
Ural and North Kazakhstan oblasts. It should be noted that the 
quality of medical care plays a part in solving the problem of 
prevention of maternal death and morbidity. It is very obvious 
that we need to improve training and retraining of medical 
personnel. We are particularly alarmed by hereditary and 
congenital pathology of neonates. To solve this problem, a 
network of medicogenetic consultation offices has been organized 
in Kazakhstan. In our republic, much is being done to safeguard 
mother and child health: several laws have been passed that are 
aimed at improvement of labor safety and everyday life of women; 
institutions of a new type have been build -- perinatal centers, 
new maternity homes and gynecological consultation offices have 
been opened. 



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Estimate of maternal mortality rate (deaths per 100,000 live births)         | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Republic                              |Percentage                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Kazakhstan                            |67.2                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Kyrgyzstan                            |71.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Uzbekistan                            |72.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Turkmenistan                          |73.0                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tajikistan                            |75.2                                  | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  [Text]Sergey PUGACH, scientific associate at the Kazakh 
Scientific Research Institute of Pediatrics: 
  In Kazakhstan, mortality of infants and very young children 
is an important problem. Infectious pathology is one of the 
chief causes of maternal mortality and child mortality. Southern 
and western regions are characterized by higher infectious 
morbidity and mortality among children up to 3 years old. On the 
whole, in the republic, intestinal infections are in first 
place, sepsis in second, and meningococcal infection in third. 
The high morbidity level is related to unsatisfactory 
development of the social infrastructure, poor sanitation of 
populated centers, particularly rural ones, flaws in 
organization of potable water supply to the public, absence and 
unsatisfactory operation of sewer systems, water treatment 
installations, and inadequate role of the sanitary and 
epidemiological service. 
  The leading risk factors of mortality are medical 
organizational which are controllable (68.7 percent), then 
social (16.1) and biological (15.3). The most important medical 
organizational factors are: incomplete examination, lack of 
regularity in preventive observation, lack of urgent therapy at 
the prehospital stage and laboratory tests, extremely serious 
condition of patients when admitted, which is related to late 
hospitalization. The leading social factors reflect the 
sociodemographic distinctions of the region studied: large 
families (housewife mother), low level of mother's education, 
flaws in child care (no massage or exercise). The prevalent 
biological factors are: physical condition of the mother 
(anemia), inadequate postpartum rehabilitation related to short 
intervals between pregnancies, which is also the cause of low 
weight of the child. In all regions as a whole, 67.1 percent of 
deaths were deemed preventable. 
Lyudmila RYBALKINA, deputy director of the Kyrgyz 
Scientific Research Institute of Obstetrics and Pediatrics: 
  In our republic, infant mortality is high, 31.7 per 1000 
births. Maternal mortality constitutes 71 per 100,000 
deliveries. There are many causes involved and, first of all, 
the initially poor physical condition of women of child-bearing 
age which, in turn, is attributable to the difficult ecological 
situation and overuse of chemicals in the soil. Our women work 
in cotton and tobacco raising regions. One often observes women 
nursing infants right under the tobacco-drying awning. The 
Institute of Obstetrics and Pediatrics carried out studies in 
regions where there is particularly intensive use of pesticides 
and chemicals to stimulate growth of crop. We took blood and 
milk samples for testing from pregnant and nursing women. We 
found a close correlation between physical condition and 
environmental pollution. For example, 16 percent of the girls 
presented retarded sexual and physical development, 20 percent 
of the women revealed instances of sterility and premature 
delivery of infants. In such regions, the children suffered from 
hypotrophy. 
Talaybek BUYLASHEV, deputy director of the Kyrgyz 
Scientific Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology: 
  In our republic, as a rule, the number of children desired 
was born to the detriment of the mother. In 70 percent of the 
cases, mothers of many children suffered from anemia, 
parturition-related hemorrhages, and late toxicosis. In 
Kyrgyzstan, in urban areas, 30 percent of the women are 
multipara, and in rural areas, they constitute 50-55 percent. 
About one-third of the number of annual maternal deaths is 
referable to multipara from socially deprived families. In our 
republic, abortion has been the main form of family planning. 
There were 48 abortions per 100 births. The ethnic lifestyle 
distinctions made it necessary to search for new approaches to 
sociomedical aid to the family. For this reason, a new family 
planning and social protection service was created in Kyrgyzstan 
in 1989. The tasks for this service are to plan families and 
disseminate information about a healthy lifestyle, education, 
social and legal protection of families in the risk group. Of 
course, we realize that every family should decide on its own 
how many children it must have. But there must be an interval of 
2.5-3 years between them. At present, there are more than 56 
family planning centers in this republic. Maternal mortality has 
dropped from 81.6/100,000 births in 1990 to 76.4 in 1991. There 
has been a drop to one-third in percentage of women who give 
birth after the age of 30 years. 
Khamgeldy MAMEDOV, deputy health minister of 
Turkmenistan: 
  We have the highest mortality rate, as compared to other 
regions of Central Asia. The chief cause is the high birthrate. 
More than 80 percent of Turkmen women of child-bearing age are 
sick. Seventy percent of the pregnant women are anemic. The 
indicator of respiratory and intestinal diseases is very high. 
The ecological situation in the republic is poor. Tashauz and 
two rayons are in the Zone of the Aral disaster. Toxic chemicals 
that were used at one time are undermining the health of women. 
We raise a cotton monoculture, which requires an enormous volume 
of manual female labor. There are no healthy women wherever 
cotton is raised. This means that there are no healthy offspring 
either. The water shortage in some regions and lack of municipal 
services are also devastating factors. 
  In our region, servicing rural health care is an urgent 
matter, since the highest percentage of deaths is referable to 
residents of rural areas. It is difficult for Americans to 
comprehend that, for us, the main thing is to improve the 
material and technical base, and specialists. While in the 
United States midwives manage to perform their duties very well, 
in or country, the physician replaces both a midwife and nurse. 
We are also experiencing a severe scarcity of information. Nor 
are all opportunities used to run campaigns for a health 
lifestyle. 
  Free nutrition has been organized in Turkmenistan for pupils 
in the 1st-4th grades. Free drugs are furnished for infants up 
to 1 year old. Women are given 140 calendar days of leave before 
and after parturition, and the term is increased by 16 days for 
those with pathology. 
Svetlana NARZYKULOVA, chief obstetrician-gynecologist of 
the Uzbek Ministry of Health: 
  Of all women, the Asian woman is probably in poorest health, 
since the intervals between her children are the shortest. Our 
women give birth twice a year. About 70 percent of them suffer 
from extragenital pathology, and the lion's share is represented 
by anemia. 
  Women and children work in cotton fields, yet cotton 
contains 
many toxic chemicals. Not to mention the heavy labor involved in 
picking cotton. There is persistence of many toxic chemicals, 
which break down under the open sky. Hence the high levels of 
pesticides in mother's milk and the low frequency of breast 
feeding. As it is everywhere else, the ecological situation is 
``sounding an alarm.'' Uzbekistan has its own Chernobyl, the 
Aral zone. 
  As yet, maternal mortality is still high, but there has been 
a trend toward decline in recent years. Thus, while it 
constituted 73.3 in 1990, it was 65.3 in 1991, and according to 
estimates for 11 months, it dropped to 51/100,000 viviparous 
women last year. In 1991-1992, we carried out a program entitled 
``Urgent measures to improve the health of fertile women (from 
15 to 49 years old),'' because we have a large group of 
multipara. Teams equipped with the necessary instruments 
traveled to rural mountainous regions. General practitioners and 
gynecologists made observations. The women who required skilled 
care were referred to central medical institutions. 
D. ASADOV, director of the Uzbek Scientific Research 
Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology: 
  Until recently, there were four countries in the world that 
did not support the campaign for family planning. They included 
the former Soviet Union. For this reason, it is quite 
understandable that we are just learning about a concept such as 
``family planning.'' Are our people ready for family planning? 
At present, such terminology is not grasped in Uzbekistan. 
Evidently, planning in different industries in former years left 
its negative impact. We call it ``improving the health of 
children and mothers.'' First of all, our institute polled 
public opinion, men and women separately. Ten years ago, 70 
percent of the women and 100 percent of the men believed that a 
family should have 6-7 children or, as they say, ``as many as 
God gives us.'' Today, 55 percent of the women agree that there 
should be 2-3 children in a family. This is the belief of 
Muslims: Uzbek, Kazakh, Tajik and Kara-Kalpak women. More than 
50 percent of the men believe that there should be 3-4 children. 
Contraceptives are already used by 80 percent of the women and 
50 percent of the men. The population is morally ready to grasp 
the concept of family planning. At present we are, so to speak, 
rethinking our ideology, because the issue is still new to us. 


