BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 23 (XINHUA) -- The reform and opening 
up drive launched by China 15 years ago has not only brought the 
country huge economic progress, but also put it among the 
world's leading tourism powers. 
  According to world tourism organization statistics, the 
number of tourists visiting China increased by an annual average 
of 13 percent to 40 million in the last eight years -- the 
highest growth rate in the world. In addition, the annual 
average tourism revenue topped 4.67 billion U.S. dollars in 
foreign exchange. 
  Official statistics showed that between 1978 and 1993, the 
annual average increase of China's overseas tourism revenue 
stood at 21 percent, which is considered one of the highest in 
the world. 
  The above figures bear witness to the fact that China has 
really become one of the world's tourism powers. 
  Liu Yi, head of the State Tourism Administration, said in an 
interview with XINHUA here today that China has become one of 
the world's most important tourism markets, in the midst of 
fierce international competition. 
  According to the senior official, China has the advantages 
of 
rich natural tourism resources and numerous historical remains 
and sites. 
  He added that by now China has developed regular tourist 
relations with more than 100 countries. In the 15 main 
countries from which tourists have come to China, such as the 
Republic of Korea, Singapore, the U.S. and Australia, the number 
of tourists visiting China increased by a big margin in the 
first three months of this year. 
  The official statistics show that in the first quarter this 
year, China received a total of 1.59 million overseas tourists 
in group tours, up 9.2 percent on the same period of 1993. 
  Liu, the leading official in charge of China's tourism, also 
said that the foreign travel agents who specialize in organizing 
group tours to China have increased from 400 five years ago to 
over 60,000 at present. They help a lot in attracting overseas 
tourists to China, he said. 
  According to Liu, China has successfully launched a series 
of 
tourism years such as "Visit China '92", "China River and 
Mountain Tours '93", which produced effective results. 
  The administrator expects the ongoing "China Heritage '94" 
to 
have a greater success. 
  According to Liu, China is also planning Folk Customs Tour 
'95, China Vocational Tour '96 and China Travel Year '97, which 
are expected to further boost China's still growing tourism 
industry. 

