BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by K.C.: "The Census -- An Act of Great National </F>
Interest"] 
  [Text] Today's 75th session of the People's Assembly of 
the Republic of Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] is very important because it will review the 
proposal on the census, an act of great national interest. 
Adoption of the census document will help throw light on a 
number of dilemmas and the confusion that is constantly being 
spread by various circles, as new instruments endangering the 
internal stability of our country, with the intention of 
threatening the Republic of Macedonia. It will silence the 
stories and presentations about the size of some nationalities 
in the state. Holding a census is the only way to remove such 
declarations in a civilized way, and this time it is also 
supported by the international community. 
  This, among other things, was what Stojan Andov, chairman of 
the Assembly, emphasized at yesterday's news conference on the 
occasion of the draft proposal on the 1994 census on population, 
households, apartments, and farms, which is to be discussed by 
the delegates at today's 75th session. Underlining the 
importance of the census, Andov pointed out that the 
verification of the law and the holding of the census had the 
power of the referendum held in Macedonia in 1991. The national 
interest in the census, the Assembly chairman noted, extended 
beyond any party interest in scoring points among the public. 
That is why obstruction of the census would mean keeping "alive 
and active" all the confusion about the supposed structure of 
the population. 
  "It is very important," Andov underlined, "to create a 
different atmosphere in the Assembly today, an atmosphere that 
will coincide with the task that the legislature has to do. If 
the situation in the Assembly is not changed" -- by which he 
meant the interrupted 74th session on the election laws and the 
tumultuous discussion about the census document at a previous 
stage -- "it will mean there is a lack of awareness about the 
state's real interest." Chairman Andov also appealed to the 
parliamentarians to apply themselves and adopt the law so that 
the census can be carried out soon. At the same time he hinted 
that the new parliamentary session, scheduled at the 
government's request, could be a very tiring and difficult one 
if parliament did not show readiness to carry out its duties. 
  In that context it was stressed that it was unacceptable for 
people to use the census issue for such party ploys as were 
witnessed during the initial discussions on the census, in which 
everyone tries to prove his love for his own people, nation, or 
nationality, or how much he strives for Macedonia and its 
democracy. Parliament should be skilled enough to perform the 
duties of an executive body in the remaining months of its 
mandate, as it has done so many times before in appropriately 
adopting the right acts in conditions in which the atmosphere in 
the state was extremely tense. He said this was necessary in 
order to register the moment of maturity as an important 
milestone in the stability of the state of the Republic of 
Macedonia tomorrow. 

