BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Malgorzata Subotic: "Fight for Socialism"] </F>
  [Text] A campaign against the leftist government is being 
waged by those who want even more leftist solutions. This is how 
Economics Professor Waclaw Wilczynski evaluates the present 
situation. He adds that this is a fight for socialism. 
Sociologist Andrzej Rychard believes that both parties of the 
conflict are only seeking strategies of behavior and that their 
intentions are unclear. The opposition predicts that the Pawlak 
Cabinet will yield to the strikers and that economic policy will 
be decided by people in the streets. 
  "I do not believe that we might now be witnessing a mass 
social outbreak," states Zbigniew Siemiatkowski of the 
Democratic Left Alliance [SLD]. He adds that it would be absurd 
to compare the present situation to August 1980 because there is 
no one common idea that would be the guiding principle for the 
people. If we assume the very unlikely hypothesis that the 
strikes will cause the government and the prime minister to step 
down, the coalition of the Polish Peasant Party and the SLD 
would decide on "a new hand of cards." There will be no new 
elections because their result does not depend on the strikes. 
According to the SLD spokesman, the government should not yield, 
"in the name of responsibility." Otherwise, the country is 
threatened by a "black scenario"--a shattering of the budget, 
with all the consequences that entails. The demands of other 
groups would then escalate. 
  According to Mazowsze Solidarity ["S"] Chairman Maciej 
Jankowski, the government may decide on an option of 
confrontation. This would entail "breaking the force of 
employees, just as used to be done by communists and then by the 
liberals, for the sole purpose of remaining in power." However, 
"S" will not surrender. If the strikes continue for a longer 
period, they will be joined by the headquarters of the 
All-Polish Trade Unions Agreement because plant union 
organizations are already cooperating anyway. With such a 
scenario, we will witness a period of destabilization, with the 
participation of anarchist and semifascist movements. Jankowski 
does not want to try to predict whether the strikes will develop 
into a mass social protest. "If this happens, it will be 
possible to organize this wave of protest." Otherwise, it will 
turn into uncontrolled rage. However, the Mazowsze Region head 
does not rule out an optimistic solution: the establishment of a 
government commission that would define "a serious schedule for 
the implementation of union demands." "I do not know a person 
brave enough to try to predict what President Walesa will do," 
says Jankowski. Andrzej Smirnow, another "S" activist, in reply 
to the same question, merely says that he knows nothing about 
the president's talks with "S" leaders. However, he accuses the 
Pawlak government of taking over the viewpoint of Minister 
Miller, the policy of pushing "S" to the edge. 
  Will "S" prove effective? "The problem is that there is no 
alternative to the present government," Smirnow evaluates, and 
adds that there has been a serious political crisis in Poland 
for a long time now. Those who are in power are not prepared to 
steer the state; therefore, a new movement must be established. 
  "No matter how this conflict ends, we are incurring losses 
that practically cannot be made up," Prof. Wilczynski says. What 
is still more dangerous, however, is that the protest is being 
staged under the slogans of a return to communism to a state 
that is responsible for everything. 
  According to Deputy Jan Litynski (Union of Freedom), the 
strikes will force the government to make concessions but not to 
step down. What will be overthrown is not a workers' and 
peasants' government but a democratic system because economic 
policy will be decided in the streets and not in democratically 
elected bodies. 
  In Litynski's opinion, the current strikes are more 
dangerous 
than any strikes before them because "the negotiating area has 
been extended to the general policy of the state." 

