BFN 

  [Text] European cooperation will be reduced, but the 
reduction will be minimal thanks to the endeavors of a Bolivian 
mission headed by Foreign Minister Antonio Aranibar. The trip 
lasted 15 days and included key visits to Belgium, Germany, 
Spain, and the seat of the EU. 
  The foreign minister returned at 0600 on 2 May accompanied 
by 
International Relations Secretary Jaime Aparicio. He stressed 
that "the trip sought to minimize the reduction of cooperation 
that Bolivia receives from European countries. We believe we 
achieved that objective." 
  To emphasize the objectives achieved, the foreign minister 
mentioned the importance of a $31-million cooperation agreement 
that will be signed this year with the German Government. 
  He also announced that several contracts will soon be signed 
with the three communities that make up the Kingdom of Belgium. 
He said a Belgian mission will arrive in June to evaluate the 
implementation of the agreements reached by the 1992 joint 
commission and to make any necessary adjustments, but always 
"with the political desire to strengthen bilateral cooperation." 
  Negotiations with representatives of the EU regarding this 
year's cooperation are now concluded and the agreement will be 
signed in La Paz at the end of May. The most senior members of 
the EU commission, including Vice President Manuel Marin, will 
visit for this occasion. 
  Aranibar said European countries have projected a 
substantial 
reduction in their aid to poor countries due to their financial 
problems and to the ever-increasing need for cooperation with 
East European countries. 
  To palliate this reduction, the Bolivian diplomatic mission 
submitted a report on the state of cooperation and the benefit 
of cooperation programs for the country. It also highlights the 
implementation of government projects for change -- including 
the Popular Participation Program, educational reform, and 
capitalization. 
  The official Bolivian mission began its trip on 15 April in 
Brussels, the capital of Belgium, with meetings with government 
authorities and with representative of the EU, which is based in 
that city. 
  The foreign minister explained that new ties have been 
"knotted" with the French, Flemish, and Brussels communities, 
which make up the Federal Belgian Government and which have 
certain specific responsibilities for sectors pertaining to 
international cooperation and relations. 
  The Bolivian mission also extended President Gonzalo Sanchez 
de Lozada's invitation to the Belgian king to visit the country. 
"This invitation has been accepted by the Belgian king. His 
visit will most probably be made in 1995," Aranibar said. 
  The mission visited Germany between 24 and 27 April. A 
schedule has been established to carry out the preliminary steps 
to prepare the meeting of the joint commission that will be held 
before the end of the year in Germany. 
  A similar agreement was reached with the Spanish Government 
in which a schedule was prepared for meetings during the course 
of this year before the meeting of the joint commission. 
  The foreign minister explained that this trip served to 
promote the process of capitalizing state enterprises, in other 
words, to attract foreign investment to the country. 
  The construction of the gas pipeline to Brazil and the port 
of Ilo, two very important projects, were also explained to 
European investors. 
  The port of Ilo project attracted the interest of the 
enterprise that runs Hamburg Port and a German consulting firm 
and they will most probably carry out an overall study to 
determine the real possibilities of this port, which is very 
strategic for Bolivia. 

