BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Riga, 31 May (ITAR-TASS) -- Latvian Prime Minister 
Valdis Birkavs visited the Russian strategic installation near 
Ventspils Monday -- the space communication center, or to be 
more precise, the former space communication center, since the 
part which received satellite information has already been 
removed. But there remains a unique parabolic antenna, 32 
meters in diameter, which does not exist anywhere else in 
northern Europe and of which there are only 10 in the whole 
world. The engineers and constructors who built this complex 22 
years ago won state prizes for it. 
  Scientists in Russia and Latvia want to set up an 
international radio astronomy center here and signed a protocol 
of intentions a month ago. They believe specialists from many 
countries could use the scientific center for a wide range of 
fundamental and applied research. 
  It was the scientists who prompted the prime minister to 
visit the military center, which the Russian army will have left 
by 1 August. The costs must be weighed first and then a 
decision made as to whether Latvia has the means to maintain the 
complex, Valdis Birkavs said. "There are so far no grounds for 
going ahead," he said, adding that he is quite skeptical about 
the country having the means. 
  The Russian Academy of Sciences is offering to pay the main 
part of the bill in a joint venture. And it has been made clear 
that the complex cannot serve a military purpose since the 
special apparatus has been dismantled. But Latvia is not happy 
with the idea of Russian participation, viewing many of Russia's 
initiatives as a way of maintaining influence. A number of 
Russian specialists say the issue is being dragged out 
deliberately, so that this unique complex will just fall into 
Latvia's hands when the Russian military unit leaves. Some have 
expressed the fear that the antenna could be used against 
Russia's interests. 
  Representatives of the Russian Defense Ministry have said 
that if by July Latvia has still not made a decision to use the 
complex, everything will have to be dismantled. It will not be 
possible to recreate this enormous rotating dish to the same 
standard elsewhere, which would mean, regrettably, that no one 
would have the antenna. 

