Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Egyptian Islamic fundamentalist </F>
Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim by Charlotte Aagaard; place and date not 
given] 
  [Text] In the past week a hitherto unknown man, Tal'at 
Fu'ad Qassim, has come under media spotlight because, as a 
supporter of the militant Islamic group Al-Gama'a Islamiya, he 
has been accused of turning Denmark into a base for "terror" 
against the Egyptian Government and of having encouraged 
violence against foreigners in Egypt. 
  All of this has happened since Qassim obtained political 
asylum in Denmark. 
  In an exclusive interview with INFORMATION, however, he 
rejects the accusations, and asserts his right -- on an equal 
footing with thousands of other refugees in Denmark -- to 
maintain his involvement in political developments in his own 
country. 
<H5>  A Committed Man </H5>
  And committed he is. You sense it at once as he walks into 
the living room on the fifth floor of an apartment block in 
Valby. 
  Committed, reserved, shy, and worried. These are the words 
that come to mind as he sits down on the couch, keeping on his 
light brown, Afghan camel-hair hat, supplementing the Islamist's 
traditional uniform: long white robe, baggy trousers, long 
black beard and short hair. 
  It is Ramadan, the Islamic month of fasting, so it is only 
INFORMATION's reporter, the photographer and the six-year old 
son of the house who are offered juice, biscuits, and fresh 
dates in welcome. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim recounts the beginnings of his political 
activity in Al-Gama'a Islamiya during his student days at the 
university of Assuit, situated on the banks of the Nile in 
central Egypt. At that time Al Gama'a was a student movement, 
but today the group, which is thought to number 10,000 militant 
activists and a far larger group of sympathizers, is engaged in 
an armed struggle against the Egyptian government. In Assuit, 
Qassim was studying engineering, but was imprisoned for his part 
in student riots just after he had completed his exams. 
  He spent eight years in an Egyptian jail until December 
1989, 
when he succeeded in escaping, first to Peshawar in Pakistan, 
the Islamic Mujahidin's headquarters. Here he was the chief 
editor of the paper AL-MURABITUN, and head of the Arab press 
federation. There was no question of active resistance to the 
Communist enemy in Kabul, however. 
  In May 1992 he came to Denmark as a result of an invitation 
to hold a series of lectures, sought political asylum, and was 
granted it, partly on account of a death sentence passed on him 
in absentia by an Egyptian military court in January, 1993. 
  His view is that the accusations -- which range from the 
attempted overthrow of the government, complicity in the murder 
of politicians, to unlawful possession of weapons -- are the 
fabrications of the Egyptian Government. Amnesty International 
pronounced the trial unfair due to the absence of a defence and 
lack of the right to appeal. 
  Today, Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim describes his role in Al-Gama'a 
Islamiya as that of a source of ideological inspiration. 
  "I have not had any physical contact with Al-Gama'a in Egypt 
since I left the country. The link is on a spiritual level. 
Perhaps people read my publications or hear my speeches." 
Qassim stresses, however, that his knowledge of the 
organization makes him fully capable of speaking on its behalf. 
<H5>  Political Commitment </H5>
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim flatly denies the claim that he is a 
part 
of an international network of Al-Gama'a people who, from their 
position in exile, lead the struggle and organize violent action 
against Mubarak's government: 
  "It is an outright lie. It is an attempt on the part of the 
Egyptian Government to justify its actions towards Al-Gama'a 
activists and to take attention away from the government's 
failed economic and social policy." 
  However, he is not prepared to give up the right to 
political 
involvement. 
  "I came to Denmark to live in peace. I have no intention of 
creating problems here, but I cannot ignore what is happening in 
Egypt. I do the same as tens of thousands of Lebanese, 
Palestinian, or Iranian refugees. I do, after all, have the 
right to hold an opinion on what is happening in my home country 
-- and the right to express it." 
  Qassim told us he was disappointed that his right to asylum 
in Denmark has been publicly questioned. 
  "If I am unwelcome in Denmark, then I am ready to take the 
first plane back to Egypt and face my death sentence. But if I 
am handed over, no Dane will be able to look in the mirror 
without seeing hypocrisy staring him in the face." 
  For the moment, extradition to Egypt is impossible according 
to INFORMATION's sources, simply because Denmark is a 
co-signatory of a number of conventions which prohibit the 
handing over of people condemned to death. 

<H5>    Violence Against Foreigners </H5>
  Another claim which has been put forward by the media is 
that 
in the Egyptian newspaper AL-AHALI, Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim 
allegedly incited violence against foreigners, including Danes, 
who travel to Egypt as tourists, work, or invest there. 
  This includes, among others, F.L. Smith, A.P. Moller, and 
Aarhus Flydedok. Denmark also finances a number of aid projects 
in Egypt. 
  "I have never given an interview to the newspaper in 
question. It is a fabrication. Al-Gama'a Islamiya printed a 
communique warning foreigners against going to Egypt out of 
concern for their safety, because they are in confrontation with 
the government. It is every Muslim's duty to ensure the safety 
of visitors, and that safety cannot be guaranteed at the moment. 
Therefore it would be unwise to travel to Egypt." 
  "Would a tourist be likely to go on holiday to Sarajevo, 
Mogadishu, or Baghdad? It is the same in Egypt today. Egypt is 
involved in a violent confrontation and it would not be safe for 
tourists to go there." 
  He also finds it "difficult to imagine good Muslims being 
involved in attacks on innocent tourists." Instead, he accuses 
forces within the Egyptian government of being behind the 
attacks on tourists which until now have cost seven foreigners 
their lives and wounded dozens of others. The purpose of this, 
according to Qassim, is to justify the brutality used against 
the Islamic opposition and to discredit it. 
  Tal'at Fu'ad Qassim thinks that there is one good 
explanation 
for the furore caused by a series of articles on him. 
  "Since the end of the Cold War and the collapse of 
communism, 
Islamophobia, the fear of Islam, has spread like wildfire. I 
cannot understand why people here in the West are so keen to 
create a boogeyman. It only serves as a provocation." Qassim 
wants to see more objectivity in the descriptions of what is 
happening in the Islamic world. 
  Asked whether he is unable to understand Danes' fear of 
Islam, when they have the deaths of foreign tourists in Algeria 
and Egypt as well as the bloody Iranian revolution at the back 
of their minds, he answered: 
  "Yes, I can well understand that. But then the Danes must 
also appreciate how ordinary Egyptians feel. The Egyptians can 
be compared to a dove in a cage. Normally doves are very 
peaceful animals, but if they are put into a cage it is only 
natural that they peck your finger. When the Muslims in Egypt 
shake off the dictatorship and introduce an Islamic system, 
people will see that there is nothing to be afraid of." 
  When the Islamic forces take over power in Egypt, which, 
according to Qassim will happen "before most people expect it", 
foreigners will again be welcome and assured of their safety in 
Egypt, he promised. 

