Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Larisa Skorik, candidate for deputy of the </F>
Supreme Council of Ukraine, by NOVOYE VREMYA correspondent 
Georgiy Osipov, special for NOVOYE VREMYA; place and date not 
given: "Larisa Skorik: `I Wish Kravchuk Would Be Firmer'"] 
  [Text] Our correspondent Georgiy Osipov has discussed 
problems of Ukrainian statehood with the "Iron Lady" of 
Kiev. 
  Doctor of Architecture Larisa Skorik came to politics five 
years ago with the "perestroyka" wave, and has been one of the 
10 leading politicians of Ukraine ever since. She, the only 
woman in the political establishment of Kiev, has once again 
joined the election race: Parliamentary elections will be held 
in Ukraine on 27 March. 
  [Osipov] Larisa Pavlovna, as far as I know, you now have a 
lot of much more "eternal" business than current politics--the 
construction of several churches you have designed, students at 
the Art Institute, and, finally, three grandchildren.... 
Nonetheless, you are once again in the whirlwind of the 
political fight. What drives you? 
  [Skorik] We recall 100 times a day a dictum by Ivan Franko, 
who said that if something is to be done for the people, after 
all, then it should be out of a feeling of duty rather than out 
of love, because apparently there is nothing for which to love 
the people in their entire postcommunist variety. I feel that I 
must engage in politics and can do something genuine in the 
corridors of power, which few people are determined enough to 
walk to the end. During these four years I have completely lost 
all fear; my political rating is of absolutely no interest to 
me, and I allow myself to say things that may affect my 
political image quite adversely. 
  However, there is also such a thing as love for the lofty 
spiritual concept which is the driving force of all of my 
actions, which is called the statehood of the Ukrainian nation. 
  [Osipov] To your mind, what must be done for this abstract 
notion to acquire visible, specific features? 
  [Skorik] What is happening now in politics almost does not 
reflect what is happening "within." Look at Russia: A bitter 
power struggle is underway there, but there are no political 
forces that would have an unfavorable attitude toward the very 
notion of Russia as an independent state, whereas in Ukraine a 
majority in the parliament is almost hostile to the fact of the 
existence of Ukrainian statehood. 
  For many years the thirst for Ukrainian statehood was 
thoroughly suppressed in our society. This thirst is merely 
beginning to come back to one segment of the population, whereas 
the other is at best indifferent to the national idea. I am 
referring to the almost 10 million population in Ukraine whom 
Moscow has branded "the Russian-speaking population," and whose 
rights Russia, in keeping with its military doctrine, intends to 
defend at any point on the globe. It is not surprising that they 
gravitate somewhat toward Russia. 
  I often recall General Yermolov's words to the effect that 
fortresses are not taken by assault but rather by intrigue and 
bribery within. I see Ukraine as a fortress that they wish to 
re-annex to the empire in precisely such ways--certainly, 
peaceful ways! I think that this will not benefit either the 
"elder brother" or the "younger brother." 
  [Osipov] In Kiev I have already repeatedly heard from all 
kinds of people who sincerely feel for an independent Ukraine 
that the current "party of power" has managed to compromise the 
very idea of Ukrainian statehood for many years to come.... 
  [Skorik] These people are naive, although sincere. Many of 
those whom they mention unfavorably, including the speaker of 
the current Supreme Council Ivan Plyushch, are possessed solely 
by the instincts of their own lust for power, and are by no 
means bound by the idea of Ukrainian statehood. As far as the 
idea of Ukrainian statehood is concerned, it is impossible to 
compromise it for the simple reason that we have barely begun to 
implement it. 
  [Osipov] What would you like the Ukrainian state to be? 
  [Skorik] Europeans see the state as a protector of their own 
originality rather than a transgressor against it. This is 
precisely what I would like an independent Ukraine to be, 
because by all indicators it gravitates toward Europe rather 
than toward Asia, despite the fact that this feeling of 
belonging in Europe was thoroughly suppressed for many years. 
  In purely political terms, I see Ukraine as a presidential 
republic, not a presidential-parliamentary republic, because all 
our woes are rooted in this mix, but precisely presidential. The 
president should appoint the prime minister and form an 
effective government, rather than the Supreme Council with its 
comical notions of its powers. Separation of power should exist 
only at the highest, statewide level, whereas all other levels 
should be permeated by strong presidential power. 
  [Osipov] To your mind, on what does the greatness of a 
particular state hinge at present? 
  [Skorik] As I see it, on the percentage ratio of the entire 
mass of society and its elite; the higher the percentage of the 
elite, the greater the state may believe itself to be. To me, 
the elite is not just the intelligentsia; it is the people who 
have a highly developed feeling of their own dignity, they 
excel, they are virtuosos, if you will, in all endeavors, no 
matter what social stratum they belong to. However, the 
Ukrainian elitist tradition is not continuous. For many years 
the Ukrainian elite, like, say, the Georgian, Lithuanian, or 
Latvian, worked to create the Russian elite. 
  [Osipov] You were born in Galicia, which has always played 
an 
absolutely special role in the political and cultural life of 
Ukraine. How do you see this role at present? 
  [Skorik] About 40, and perhaps even 20 years ago, Galicia 
was 
a Ukrainian Piemonte of sorts. It held a particular position in 
terms of the level of national awareness and weight of the elite 
which I have already mentioned in its society. Galicia was 
considered to be the guardian of the Ukrainian spirit. This was 
due to the relative proximity of Europe and the almost 100 years 
of contacts with the cultured, developed, and, by the standards 
of its time, even relatively democratic state which was the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire. 
  However, the last useless decades have left an imprint on 
Galicia, too. I, a native Galician who has by now lived half of 
my life in Kiev, feel it particularly keenly. I am alarmed about 
people who have come to power there during the time of the 
latest changes, who call themselves democrats and who, not being 
such at all, have quite successfully compromised the idea of 
democracy rather than the idea of Ukrainian statehood. Galicians 
have been disappointed in the local authorities, but at the same 
time, they say deliberately: We are prepared to endure a great 
many things as long as we are certain that our state will not be 
betrayed, will not be lost, and will not be reduced to slavery 
again. 
  On the whole, I believe that Ukraine is one and indivisible, 
and I think that the division into Eastern and Western Ukraine, 
into Novorossiya, will disappear soon. 
  [Osipov] At one time you proceeded hand in hand with many 
politicians of a democratic orientation--your fellow Galicians. 
Please recall the case of Stepan Khmara, who was seized in 
November 1990 in an underground crossing at Independence Square 
(at the time, it was still the Square of the October Revolution) 
for allegedly attacking a militia functionary. You defended 
Khmara even when the OMON [Special Missions Militia Detachment] 
stormed his hotel room. Khmara now says that he has two 
opponents in the elections--the communists and Larisa Skorik.... 
  [Skorik] I have long known that Stepan Khmara is a person 
very different from myself; however, that feeling of duty, which 
stands above everything in my life, except for love of 
architecture and art, prompted me to defend him as "our" man. At 
the time, Khmara played the role of an innocently victimized 
national hero, which was very flattering to him and suited him 
very much. However, at the same time, the "Khmara affair" gave 
the authorities of the time a pretext to mount an attack against 
our entire democratic camp, by then quite extensive and 
relatively steadfast. I continued to fight when everybody had 
grown tired of manifestations and court proceedings and 
abandoned the struggle for Khmara's liberation. It was just that 
I needed to win this case for the overall democratic bloc. The 
personality of Stepan himself has never been a mystery to me, 
but at the time, he was one of our people. 
  [Osipov] One can also frequently hear it said about you that 
you have betrayed the overall democratic cause, gone over to the 
side of Leonid Kravchuk, and generally changed very much as a 
politician during the last two years.... 
  [Skorik] I have not changed one iota during these years. It 
is just that I am an advocate of statehood, and the building of 
a Ukrainian state is the objective and foundation for my 
political activities. Everything was very clear and precise when 
things that were preventing the budding statehood from gaining 
strength had to be swept out of the way. 
  When revolutions end, it is necessary to act in a different 
way. My relationship with Leonid Kravchuk did not get anywhere 
as long as he belonged to the Communist Party and headed the 
Supreme Council of a state belonging to the USSR. However, after 
the famous State Committee for the State of Emergency, he sensed 
that the [Ukrainian] state could become a reality. Kravchuk is 
not one to rattle his saber in vain. When I ascertained that of 
his actions were aimed at preservation of an independent 
Ukrainian state, I supported him. Moreover, no matter what my 
relationship with someone is, I am prepared to support everyone 
who acts to the benefit of the Ukrainian state. 
  I just laugh when our ultrapatriots or communists say that 
Kravchuk betrays the interests of the Ukrainian state. If so, 
why did he have to introduce the national currency, begin the 
building of the Ukrainian army, and refrain from signing the CIS 
Charter? Was it in order to bring Ukraine into a new Soviet 
Union on a new, Susanin-like path? 
  Incidentally, Mr. Zhirinovskiy has also acknowledged the 
credit due our president by saying that Kravchuk, who broke 
apart the USSR, is the very first person who should be destroyed 
in Ukraine. 
  If his activities begin to proceed in a different direction, 
I will undoubtedly join the ranks of his most categorical and 
intransigent opponents. Building a state is not like playing 
games; this calls for political maturity, a cool mind, and 
substantial training. It is a great pity that such politicians 
are extremely few among those who habitually call themselves 
democrats. 
  [Osipov] Will the situation in Ukraine change for the better 
after the elections of the parliament and the president? 
  [Skorik] I do not have any doubt that the new Supreme 
Council 
will be better than the present one, because it is impossible to 
conceive of it being worse. It will most likely be quite 
different, it will have a quite different sentiment--to not 
interfere with absolutely everything, from the dismissal of 
ministers to the appointment of joint-stock company directors, 
but instead to form firm executive structures. 
  To my mind, presidential elections are absolutely not needed 
at present: I do not see a single worthy candidate among those 
who crave the presidency. Being the president of Ukraine is an 
unenviable lot, and I would wish that Leonid Kravchuk would be a 
bit more decisive and firm in building a new system of power. 

