BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 13 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Vice-Premier 
Zhu Rongji met and feted here today a group of Hong Kong 
financiers who came to take part in the awards ceremony of the 
Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation, and held warm talks with them. 
  Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation was founded by Ho Sin-hang, 
honorary chairman of the Hang Seng Bank Limited, the bank's 
veteran directors leung Kau-kui and Ho Tim and Chairman of the 
Board of Directors Lee Quo-Wei, who together donated 100 million 
Hong Kong dollars. 
  The foundation is aimed at awarding Chinese scientific 
researchers who have made outstanding achievements and promoting 
the development of China's scientific drive. 
  During the meeting, Zhu praised the establishment of the 
foundation as a great and kind-hearted action, and expressed 
appreciation to the four donors on behalf of the State Council, 
president Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng. 
  Zhu said the Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation is the biggest one 
ever funded by overseas Chinese for China's scientific and 
technological cause, is a deed of "historic importance", and 
will help create a social atmosphere respecting science, 
education and talent. 
  The foundation, scheduled to hold an opening ceremony 
tomorrow, will issue prizes in the fields of mathematics, 
physics, chemistry, astronomy, meteorology, geology, biology, 
physiology, medical science, technological science and sciences. 
  There are an excellent prize and a foundation prize in each 
field according to the research level. 
  The Chinese scientific staff who are advanced in the world 
in 
their field will be awarded excellent prizes. However, no more 
than 10 people will get the honor annually, and they should be 
approved by two-thirds of the evaluating committee. 
  Among those present at the meeting were Ho Tim, Lee Quo-wei, 
world-known scholar and vice-chairman of the evaluating 
committee Chen Ning Yang and representatives of the Ho and Leung 
families. 
  Also taking part in the meeting were Song Jian, State 
Councillor and minister of the State Science and Technology 
Commission, Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office under the State Council, and Zhou Nan, director of the 
Hong Kong branch of the XINHUA NEWS AGENCY, all of whom are 
advisors to the Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation. 

