Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 15 (AFP)--Dissident Shao Jiang has 
sent an open letter to Chinese leaders calling for political 
detainees' release, press freedom and respect for citizens' 
rights. A copy of the letter dated March 12 was received by the 
foreign press in Beijing Tuesday [15 March]. Shao, who became 
famous during the 1989 student demonstrations in Beijing, sent 
the letter to Deng Xiaoping, President Jiang Zemin, Prime 
Minister Li Peng and delegates meeting at the National Peoples' 
Congress in the capital. 
  Shao's was the third open letter sent to Chinese leaders by 
democracy advocates within one week, in what some observers see 
as the most serious challenge to Chinese authorities since the 
1989 demonstrations. The letter denounced "corruption, social 
disorder, the economic imbalance between the interior of the 
country and the coastal regions, inflation and unemployment." 
  Shao also wrote that it was "important now to create a good 
social environment for the development of China." He called for 
"the liberation of all persons detained for their beliefs," "the 
halt of violations of dissidents' rights as citizens," the 
"suppression of points of law concerning beliefs," and "freedom 
of the press." 
  The dissident also asked that the public be informed of the 
"assets possessed by the (communist) party and state officials" 
and that the government "open a dialogue with all Chinese on 
society's problems." Shao's letter also demanded "official 
explanations of the deaths of June 4, 1989" when the military 
crushed demonstrations in Beijing. Officially, some 300 persons 
were killed in the capital, but according to most witnesses, the 
crackdown caused more than 1,000 deaths. 
  Shao, 24, is a mathematician. After the Tiananmen events, he 
spent 18 months in prison and was released in February 1991. He 
was questioned March 2 in Beijing and interrogated for 24 hours 
in a campaign of intimidation launched by police against 
dissidents. 
  Wang Dan, one of the 1989 Beijing student leaders, sent an 
open letter March 10 to NPC delegates calling for a debate on 
human rights. The same day, seven intellectuals sent another 
open letter demanding "the liberation of all citizens imprisoned 
because of their speeches or their ideas." Among signatories 
was professor Xu Liangying, 74, a long-time defender of 
individual liberties. 
  On March 8, the militant democrat Liu Nianchun officially 
requested to register an independent workers' union, called the 
League for the Protection of Working People, which claims to 
unite some 120 signatories. 

