Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Martin Winter report: "Iran and Bonn Plan To Revive </F>
Cultural Relations"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 24 February -- Germany and Iran want to 
approach each other cautiously again in cultural policy. During 
a meeting between Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmud Va'ezi 
and Foreign Ministry State Secretary Dieter Kastrup, the 
discussion focused on the establishment of an institute to 
promote the German language in Tehran, the reestablishment of a 
German archaeological institute, and the opening of a German 
school in the Iranian capital for children from German-Iranian 
families. 
  According to the Iranian minister, the language institute 
could perhaps be considered as a first step toward the reopening 
of the Goethe-Institute. Today, Friday, Va'ezi will also be 
received by Chancellor Helmut Kohl. 
  Agreement was reached on having the German-Iranian Cultural 
Commission, which met in December 1991 for the last time, 
convene again. According to the Foreign Ministry, this was 
primarily the wish of the Iranians. Va'ezi's statement that the 
commission members are to meet this year have not been confirmed 
in Bonn. The Foreign Ministry wants to think about a date only 
if there is "movement" in Tehran, which means, for instance, 
that children from mixed marriages get access to the German 
school. Va'ezi said after the talks that his government is 
willing to make this concession. 
  Agreement was reached on holding a joint seminar on human 
rights issues in Tehran in April. In particular lawyers, 
judges, and "practical workers" are to participate in it. Over 
the next few weeks experts are to negotiate on the German 
language institute and the archaeological institute. 
  According to the Foreign Ministry, State Secretary Kastrup 
broached the persecution of British writer Salman Rushdie by a 
death sentence in connection with Tehran's desire for closer 
ties with the European Union. 
  As long as this sentence is upheld, there cannot be any 
normal relations. According to the Foreign Ministry, Kastrup 
rejected Va'ezi's claim that the matter is exclusively the 
business of Iran and Great Britain by pointing out that this is 
something that concerns the entire European Union. 

