Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Caroline Monnot: "Following the European </F>
Commissioners' Meeting, Brussels Will Freeze 2.5-Billion-Franc 
Aid for Bull"] 
  [Text] Brussels is expected to freeze temporarily the 
second installment of the capital appropriation that the French 
government was planning to give to Bull. Karel van Miert will 
notify Paris of the decision on Wednesday 26 January, after the 
commissioners' meeting. The freeze applies to the 2.5 billion 
francs [Fr] that were to supplement a first contribution of 
Fr4.5 billion made available in December 1993. Actually, the 
government promised to pay Fr7 billion in new money to Bull 
during 1993 and 1994. To this amount should be added the 
contributions made by the other shareholders: France Telecom, 
which paid Fr1 billion of the planned Fr1.4 billion, and NEC, 
with a little under Fr400 million. IBM declined to provide any 
additional capital to the French state-owned group. 
  People in Brussels refuse to dramatize the freeze. "We are 
merely applying the regulations in force concerning aid. The 
French government did notify us of these payments. But part of 
the payments was made available before the Commission had 
decided on the case," they explained. The European executive 
branch denies any intention to engage in a power struggle with 
Paris: "It's a rather measured reaction. European Court 
precedents enabled us to suspend the payments already made. This 
option was not accepted." 
  According to the Commission, the freeze will give Paris some 
more respite. People in Brussels said they were still waiting 
for Bull's famous strategic plan, which Gerard Longuet promised 
at the beginning of summer. In an interview with LA 
TRIBUNE-DESFOSSES, on Wednesday 26 January, the minister of 
industry blamed the delay on the burden of the past. "We 
inherited 10 years of ambiguity in Bull's management," he said. 
"Do not ask us to correct a 10-year trend in just 10 months." 
And he added: "It will take us two years." 

