BFN 

  [Text] [No dateline as received] -- The Georgian Parliament 
today debated yesterday's signing in Moscow of a package of 
Georgian-Abkhaz documents on a peaceful settlement to the 
conflict. During the debate, radically different opinions were 
expressed about a number of clauses in the agreement, including 
those depriving the refugees who fought against Abkhazia -- and 
who are at present members of armed units ready to enter its 
territory -- of their rights to be repatriated. 
  Georgian Deputy Prime Minister Tamaz Nadareishvili, and 
former deputy chairman of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous 
Republic of Abkhazia, gave a sharply negative assessment of the 
documents signed in Moscow, and stressed that they deprive 
thousands of deported Georgians who had fought for the 
territorial integrity of their country of the right to return to 
their homeland. Tamaz Nadareishvili proposed three acceptable 
ways to settle the conflict in Abkhazia, one of which envisages 
an armed solution of the problem. Nadareishvili is convinced 
that the two other ways, which are based on peaceful, political 
principles, will not be accepted by the Gudauta government, 
which readily disregards with impunity any peace agreement. 
  Nodar Natadze, the leader of the People's Front of Georgia, 
and a member of parliament, described the documents signed in 
Moscow as Georgia's "unconditional surrender" to the 
separatists. He noted that such a "sacrifice" is totally 
unjustified, since it did not serve any long-term aims favorable 
for Georgia. 
  Irina Sarishvili, a leader of the National Democratic Party 
of Georgia, in her assessment of the signing of the 
Georgian-Abkhaz documents in Moscow, said that in their most 
important part concerning the return of refugees, the documents 
are a "political and psychological warning" to the Georgian 
population of Abkhazia, depriving them of the right to express 
any protest or disagreement with the activities of the Gudauta 
clique. Irina Sarishvili expressed the opinion that if, under 
the agreement, a "battle-worthy" population returns to Abkhazia, 
it will be crushed there. Georgians who are not "battle worthy" 
will "reregistered as Abkhazians," thereby increasing the number 
of votes which Abkhaz leader Vladislav Ardzinba needs to hold a 
referendum on Abkhazia's secession from Georgia. 
  The debate on the issue of Abkhazia continued at the evening 
session of parliament. 

