BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 9 Apr (ACAN-EFE) -- Guatemalan 
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio has urged U.S. congressmen to 
pressure the guerrillas and the U.S. Government to ensure 
compliance with human rights agreements and the signing of a 
firm and lasting peace agreement. 
  Government spokesman Felix Loarca today said a group of U.S. 
congressional advisers and officials headed by Robert White met 
privately with De Leon. Loarca added that the president and the 
U.S. officials discussed the human rights situation, the peace 
process, and the struggle against abject poverty that affects 
eight out of every 10 Guatemalans. 
  The congressional advisers asked the government to outline 
ways in which the U.S. Congress might help achieve the signing 
of a peace agreement. In response, De Leon urged them to put 
pressure on their government and the Guatemalan National 
Revolutionary Unity (URNG) guerrillas, Loarca said. The U.S. 
politicians, who also met with Peace Commission President Hector 
Rosada, were here on a private visit, the spokesman added. 
  Meanwhile, former U.S. Ambassador to Guatemala Thomas 
Stroock 
described the human rights situation in this country as being 
"serious," and he added that the future remains "uncertain" 
because of a wave of violence. Stroock arrived in the Guatemalan 
capital on Friday to receive the "Order of Quetzal, Great Cross 
Grade," which President Ramiro de Leon conferred upon him last 
night for his efforts to strengthen relations between the two 
countries. 
  The diplomat said he is "surprised" by the meager flow of 
tourists into this country, noting that some U.S. citizens have 
canceled trips because of prevailing security problems. Stroock 
recalled that in 1990 his government suspended military aid 
because of constant human rights violations, and specifically 
because of the murder of U.S. citizen Michael Devine at the 
hands of Army members. 
  In the wake of the political violence, the Guatemalan 
Congress has urged the United Nations to appoint a special 
rapporteur, but Rosada said the verification mechanism outlined 
in an agreement signed with the URNG is more efficient. Rosada 
contended that the deputies were showing their "ignorance" by 
making this request, because a rapporteur is tantamount to 
receiving a condemnation. 
  Foreign Minister Maritza Ruiz said the request for a 
rapporteur cannot be viewed as an isolated issue, but instead 
should be viewed within the general context of the situation. 
Ruiz thinks it will be difficult for the United Nations to 
appoint a rapporteur because the Commission on Human Rights 
ended its session in February. During its past session, the 
commission decided to extend the mandate of Argentine adviser 
Monica Pinto in light of the efforts being made by the 
government in the area of human rights. 

