BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish 
at 1600 GMT on 14 June carries a 15-minute edition of its 
regularly scheduled "Straight Talk" program, with Eloy 
Concepcion, from TRABAJADORES magazine, and host Osvaldo 
Rodriguez, from BOHEMIA magazine. 
  Rodriguez opens the debate by stating that the new 
agriculture organizational structure does not rely on the 
creation of the new Basic Cooperative Production Units [UBPC] 
alone. Rodriguez explains that the structure consists of 
individual farmers, farming cooperatives, Youth Labor Army [EJT] 
farms, in addition to a number of state enterprises. 
  Concepcion states: "Given the current conditions, it would 
be 
foolish, or ill-intentioned to expect to be able to fully supply 
the population with agricultural products overnight by grace of 
the Holy Spirit." 
  He goes on to explain that the shortage of resources has 
naturally resulted in a drop in agricultural yields, and adds: 
"The Cuban economy is still being dragged down; it carries a 
number of deficiencies; it makes a number of mistakes which I 
believe we are beginning to solve. They are well known, but are 
not foreign to the general national situation, namely, the 
excess of circulation which distorts the entire production, 
price, and commerce system. The second problem which I believe 
is vital and decisive is the enormous bureaucracy, which in a 
subtle and merciless manner limits initiative and development. 
It seems to me that Cuban agriculture faces a challenge. Given 
the current shortages and lack of supplies, spare parts, and 
equipment, the goal is to definitively break free from 
bureaucratic methods, centralized planning, state enterprise 
control over the UBPC, and the entire mechanism of paperwork and 
bureaucracy which determines where, how, and when to plant." 
  Rodriguez explains that the workers of the UBPC have to 
realize that they are in charge of production, not the state 
enterprise. He adds: "The best man was not always selected to 
head the UBPC. I believe that at times, the enterprise forced 
the selection of the worker in charge of the farm who was not 
the best suited in every case. The workers elected him, that is 
true, in a democratic manner, but we all know how this type of 
vote works when it is not done by secret ballot, and when, 
additionally, the process is not conducted properly." 
  Concepcion adds that autonomy is the key issue and limited 
only by the goal to supply the state with products. He adds: 
"The enterprise is a corpse; it has to disappear in terms of its 
previous and current functions, either that, or eliminate the 
provincial office of the Agriculture Ministry. One of the two is 
redundant in this type of structure. In agriculture, the 
decision levels must lie with the farm where the expertise lies." 
  Rodriguez and Concepcion go on to discuss the 
accomplishments 
of the EJT [Youth Labor Army] farms and the importance of 
workers welfare programs in order to motivate production. 
  Concepcion goes on to state: "Cuba has an army which has not 
needed to, nor would it ever, go around repressing the people. 
It has an army that has the virtue of being one with the people 
but is also an army that works to provide more food for the 
people. I believe this is the greatest merit of our army, of the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of which the EJT is part." 
  After further praising EJT efforts in agriculture, 
Concepcion 
adds: "We see images of repressive forces in the streets hitting 
the people during protests. Cuba is among the few countries in 
the world, I say this free of any chauvinism, where we do not 
see the armed forces using tear gas to repress the people. The 
image we see is that of our soldiers working the plantain crops, 
producing, harvesting potatoes, etc. I believe this is part of 
our pride as Cubans and also our independence." 
  Rodriguez closes by praising EJT efforts to reduce costs. 

