BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chip Tsao, political editor] </F>
  [Text] Millions of potential holders of British National 
(Overseas) (BNO) passports face having to apply for travel visas 
for almost all countries except Britain after 1997. China's 
refusal to cooperate with Britain in lobbying for recognition of 
the validity of BNO passports threatens to cause serious 
problems, a senior Hong Kong government official warned 
yesterday. 
  Seventy-one countries grant visa-free status to the BNO 
passport but such arrangements could be scrapped by all except 
Britain after 1997. 
  An absence of clear recognition of the BNO by China would 
leave countries with the fear that if a BNO passport holder was 
declared an undesirable person, Britain would not take 
responsibility for repatriation nor would there be any guarantee 
that person could be returned to the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (SAR). "The situation is really worse than 
most people seem to realise," the official said. "The main 
practical consideration of the third country is will Britain 
take these people back when they have problems?" 
  Britain wants an understanding with China that the British 
will lobby for the visa-free arrangements to continue for the 
BNO after 1997 as well as the Hong Kong SAR passports issued by 
China after 1997. SAR passports will be issued to Hong Kong 
residents who were formerly CI (Certificate of Identity) holders 
and the Hong Kong born who do not wish to carry BNO passports. 
  "What Britain will need is a letter from China to say that 
is 
no problem and BNO will continue," the official said. 
"Likewise, for China, they need the Hong Kong Government to 
tell the third countries that SAR passports are just as reliable 
as BNO. Otherwise they are going to get nowhere with SAR 
passports and the BNO is not going to be what they gave everyone 
the impression that it would be, which is a travel document 
which can be used after 1997." 
  He said there was no sign at present that Beijing saw the 
practical need to work together with Hong Kong. "What we are 
trying to do is to try to make a practical arrangement in 
advance of 1997. We are not fighting for BNO against SAR 
passports," he said. 
  The Hong Kong government has expressed a willingness to 
cooperate with China in issuing SAR passports before 1997 
because it would take two to three years for the new passport to 
be recognised by foreign countries. 
  The government official warned that Hong Kong's economic 
prosperity could be undermined if people's freedom of travel was 
affected. 
  Some 3.3 million people in Hong Hong are eligible for the 
BNO 
passport, the travel document that will replace the British 
Dependent Territory Citizen (BDTC) passport after 1997. More 
than 500,000 people already possess BNO passports, which give 
people right of entry but not right of abode, in Britain. 
  Countries offering visa-free treatment to BNO passports 
include Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Italy, Malaysia, the 
Netherlands, Switzerland, South Africa, and Thailand. Only 
Switzerland has said current arrangements will not change after 
1997. 
  A Thai consulate-general spokesman said the future situation 
"depends on the status of this passport (BNO) in the British 
system and how it will be treated by the UK Government itself". 

