Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 20 KYODO -- Japanese Prime Minister 
Morihiro Hosokawa pledged further economic commitments Sunday 
[20 March] to support China's liberalization and reforms. 
  Japan will push forward its already promised loans, support 
China's membership in an international trade body and take 
further measures to facilitate investment by Japanese companies, 
Hosokawa said at a news conference after meeting Chinese leaders. 
  Hosokawa held separate talks with Premier Li Peng and 
President Jiang Zemin on the second day of his three-day 
official visit to China. 
  "It is important for Japan and China to cooperate as 
responsible partners in international society," he said, 
predicting the two nations would realize "an unprecedentedly 
big" bilateral trade relationship in the world. 
  Hosokawa renewed his pledge to extend a fourth package of 
yen-denominated loans. 
  Hosokawa brushed aside concern that Japan's economic aid 
might have been used for China's military spending that is 
recently on the rise. 
  "I don't think it (higher military outlays) will become an 
immediate threat," he said. 
  Hosokawa said Japan's official development assistance is 
based on stern scrutiny and China's increased defense spending 
reflected recent high inflation, currency exchange and other 
technical factors as well as improved living standards for 
military personnel. 
  But Hosokawa said he urged China to make its military plans 
transparent for "international relief." 
  Hosokawa said Japan will support China becoming a member of 
the Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, an 
international organization to oversee free trade. 
  Meanwhile, Hosokawa faced criticism from the Chinese press 
over Japan's low-key, private-level direct investment compared 
with recent active entry by U.S. and European firms. 
  Hosokawa said the visit made him recognize that Japan 
"lacked 
efforts." 
  "I just wondered why Volkswagen cars were notable on the 
streets in Beijing," Hosokawa said. 
  But he said trade between Japan and China has increased 
steadily at an average annual pace of 10 percent. 
  Last year, Japan-China trade totaled 37.8 trillion dollars, 
jumping 33 times over the level in 1972, when the two countries 
restored diplomatic ties, Hosokawa said. 
  He said bilateral trade is expected to reach 70 billion 
dollars in 2000 and 190 billion dollars in 2010. 
  Hosokawa said President Jiang also showed a stronger outlook 
for bilateral trade. 

