BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  Most Rightwingers Likely To Vote for Viljoen -- "Whether or 
not the Conservative Party [CP] officially jumps on board 
(another sticker on the ballot form!?) it is now clear that the 
bulk of white right-wingers will turn up at the polls, probably 
to cast their X opposite the visage of General Viljoen," states 
Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 22 April in a page 18 
editorial. Although South Africa can "rejoice in the turn of 
events," "let's not run away with the idea that the right is 
disposed of." THE STAR believes "the core issue has not been 
dealt with. The constitution still fails to offer a place in 
the sun to nervous minorities. There are going to be renewed 
demands for unattainables -- Volkstaat [Afrikaner homeland], 
sovereign kingdom, whatever -- until the simple and attainable 
core need for real minority rights is met. South Africa has 
leaped a hurdle, not finished the race." 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Democratic Party `Watchdog Role' Needed -- Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 22 April in its page-6 editorial 
points out that "Nelson Mandela, [Trevor] Manuel and other ANC 
leaders are adept at making the statements calculated to assuage 
the concerns of businessmen, investors and those who rely on 
them. But the politicians' constituency is wide, and their 
pre-election strategy has been to target their promises to 
specific audiences. The ANC prides itself on its inner 
democracy. But that interaction of forces within the party has 
not led to open debate but to conflicting and contradictory 
statements on all manner of topics." Ahead of the 26 April 
elections, "the ANC realises that public airing of those 
contradictions would bring home the ambiguities of the party's 
economic policies. That is surely the message of the ANC's 
refusal this week to state how the modest cost of its 
reconstruction and development programme was calculated." 
BUSINESS DAY says "an experienced watchdog will be vital" for 
the economy to succeed. "Only the Democratic Party [DP] can be 
trusted to play the proper watchdog role. Its record and 
experience of opposition politics will be crucial to the 
functioning of a proper democracy." Every vote for the DP "will 
be a vote for the decent South Africa we all want." 
<H8>  SOWETAN </H8>
  Decline of Political Violence Welcome -- "It is probably 
still too early to start celebrating, but reports that political 
violence is on the decline are good news," maintains a page-12 
editorial in Johannesburg SOWETAN in English on 22 April. "No 
deaths were reported in Natal on Wednesday and calm seems to 
have returned to the East Rand after the SADF [South African 
Defense Force] replaced the National Peacekeeping Force on 
Tuesday night." "It might just be a coincidence that relative 
quiet has returned to our troubled land but this gap rekindles 
hope." 
<H8>  NEW NATION </H8>
  Buthelezi Joins Election To Raise `Legitimate' Complaints -- 
Johannesburg NEW NATION in English on 22 April in a page 20 
editorial has "grave misgivings" about the Inkatha Freedom Party 
(IFP) leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi's decision to join the polls 
and NEW NATION "advise the government, ANC and other interested 
parties to do all possible to ensure that Buthelezi does not use 
the election platform to discredit the process of democracy. We 
fear that he may be taking part in the elections in order to 
raise `legitimate' complaints with all and sundry that the 
elections were not fair because he did not have enough time to 
campaign; that some parts of Natal and the Transvaal were 
ravaged by violence; his supporters could not all come to the 
polls; and that the ballot papers may have been tampered with 
owing to the fact that Inkatha's name had to be stuck at the 
bottom of the form." NEW NATION also believes Buthelezi might 
claim "that he should be part of the government of national 
unity to avoid bloodshed from his dissatisfied supporters -- an 
easier route to public office than the confirmation of the 
vote." However, the paper does hope that Buthelezi has "no ill 
intentions, and will go out to prove us wrong." 
<H8>  WEEKLY MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN </H8>
  `Strong Mandate' for ANC Reconstruction Program -- 
Johannesburg WEEKLY MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN in English for 22-28 
April 
in its page-20 editorial says the priority for the new South 
Africa "must be reconstruction" through "development, job 
creation and the provision of basic services." The editorial 
examines the various parties to determine which one can most 
effectively deliver on this. "The IFP, NP [National Party] and 
DP, despite the changes they have gone through, still represent 
sectional interests. One strong advantage of the ANC is that it 
is a broad church: its election lists cross racial, class, 
gender and ethnic boundaries -- and that is an essential element 
in any government that is going to deal with the difficult 
problems we face. The NP is too burdened by its past, too 
untrustworthy in its born-again non-racialism." The 
Pan-Africanist Congress is "too willing to play a racial 
ticket," and its socio- economic policies "have not taken 
cognisance of the post-Cold War reality." The DP is "plagued by 
poor leadership, has been disappointing in its attempts to win 
over doubtful voters, particularly from minority groups." So, 
WEEKLY MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN finds it "appropriate to give the ANC 
a 
strong mandate to undertake its Reconstruction and Development 
Programme, without having to buy off sectional interests." But 
there are aspects of the ANC that "trouble" WEEKLY MAIL &amp; 
GUARDIAN, "particularly in the week when some of its staff have 
been accused of having detained and abused IFP supporters in the 
basement of its PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, Vereeniging] 
headquarters, more so when it is becoming apparent that Section 
29 detention without trial is being retained." The paper is 
also concerned that the ANC "has shown too great a willingness 
to give the security forces unfettered powers and indemnity in 
the Natal State of Emergency. This is not a good omen for 
dealing with political rivals." There are also some "senior ANC 
people who have a flexible commitment to human rights." 
Nevertheless, "the ANC is the only party that has thrown its 
weight behind reconstruction and development, and has an 
extensive plan to achieve it. That plan is not without its 
flaws, but it is the best one before us as we go to the polls." 

