BFN 

  [Text] San Cristobal de las Casas, 21 Apr (NOTIMEX) -- 
Manuel Camacho Solis, commissioner for peace and reconciliation 
in Chiapas, said here today that in the coming days the Zapatist 
National Liberation Army [EZLN] will provide "a clear answer in 
favor of resuming the dialogue" for peace. "Something new will 
emerge very soon in favor of resuming the talks," with the armed 
group, given the responsibility of the EZLN leadership, the 
commissioner said at a news conference in this colonial city, 
located 1,200 km southeast of the Mexican capital. 
  Camacho said there is confidence that there will be a 
negotiated solution to the conflict that began on 1 January when 
the self-styled Zapatist army occupied four towns of Los Altos 
de Chiapas in the southeastern part of Mexico. He based his 
opinion on the fact that the EZLN has honored the cease-fire in 
the certainty that channels for dialogue are open and that the 
leadership of the armed group is aware that the Mexican 
Government has issued statements promoting the talks. 
  On 3 March, Camacho Solis and EZLN delegates concluded the 
first phase of negotiations aimed at achieving a negotiated 
solution to the Chiapas conflict. 
  The peace commissioner recalled the agreement signed in the 
past few days with the State Council of Indian and Peasant 
Organizations (CEOIC), giving space and time to the peace 
process. 
  He stressed the importance of the Tuesday meeting between 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari at the official Los Pinos 
residence with leaders of southern Chiapas cattlemen's 
organizations and small landowners. They discussed the problem 
of land invasions. 
  Camacho said the Mexican Army's decision to maintain the 
cease-fire is in recognition and support of the peace process, 
as is the commitment of the Mexican Episcopal Conference in 
favor of resuming the talks. 
  He said statements by all the presidential candidates in 
favor of peace will help to establish greater guarantees for 
short-term fulfillment of the government's commitments 
established at the negotiating table in San Cristobal de las 
Casas. 
  Ernesto Zedillo, presidential candidate for the ruling 
Institutional Revolutionary Party, toured this colonial city 
today. 
  Camacho said it is important that the presidential hopefuls 
commit themselves publicly to strengthening the peace process in 
Chiapas. 

