Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, Jan. 11 (YONHAP) -- The Foreign Ministry is 
up for major self-surgery, but the doctors have different 
opinions on what to implant and what to excise. 
  Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu is said to be contemplating a 
restructuring to fit the Ministry more into the organizational 
mold of advanced countries. One close aide said that the idea 
was to "remove any bureau that no other country has and add new 
ones that most other countries have but we don't." 
  Two key proposals, prepared by different assistant 
ministers, 
agree on installing new bureaus while limiting staff overgrowth 
by reducing the number of superiors. 
  One of the proposals is to establish a diplomatic 
information 
bureau for more effective information gathering and in-depth 
analysis of developments around the world. 
  This proposal recommends what Foreign Ministry officials 
have 
long demanded -- trimming at the top and widening at the bottom 
-- by reducing the number of special-grade I and II ambassadors 
from the current 84. 
  The other proposal is to dramatically strengthen the 
Ministry's economic team by expanding from two bureaus into 
three. 
  Responsibilities will be divided to cover environment and 
technology issues, multilateral trade issues and bilateral trade 
matters. 
  To fill the added posts, the proposal recommends hiring 50 
to 
100 Koreans who have studied or reside abroad with high economic 
training backgrounds. 
  To balance out the bureau and staff increase, this proposal 
wants to merge the European Affairs Bureau with the Middle East 
and African Affairs Bureau. 
  The restructuring plan gained momentum soon after the 
foreign 
minister was retained in the cabinet reshuffle last month. It 
was one of the first things he said he will do after taking 
office in February last year. 
  But there is already opposition to both proposals, 
especially 
to the parts about merging the Regional Affairs Bureau and 
hiring overseas Koreans. The other recommendation, to diminish 
the number of special-grade ambassadors, has and will meet 
staunch opposition from high-level officials, according to 
insiders. 
  The Ministry tried doing this last year to pass the revised 
diplomat employment law by the National Assembly in the summer. 
But the plan was completely foiled when no agreement was 
reached within the Ministry. 
  "The suggestion of combining the European Bureau with the 
Middle East and African Bureau will be like a last blow to staff 
members who already feel neglected and dominated by their 
colleagues in the American and Asian Bureaus," said one 
working-level official. 
  Some insiders are extremely pessimistic about the proposal 
regarding overseas Koreans, educated and residing abroad, 
fearing that they will not only be unable to adapt to the work 
atmosphere but will build animosity with Korean staff who had to 
pass the highly competitive state exam to become diplomats. 
  "Some are saying, what's the point of taking all the trouble 
to pass the exam when foreign-educated people can easily enter 
without having to take the test and take away your career 
opportunities?" an official said. 

