Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Christine McGourty report: "Windscale Safety Below </F>
Standard"] 
  [Text] Serious clean-up problems remain at the Windscale 
nuclear reactor at Sellafield 37 years after the fire there, 
according to a report yesterday by the Health and Safety 
Commission. 
  "A very long programme of work" was needed to make the two 
reactors at the site safe, said the Commission's Advisory 
Committee on the Safety of Nuclear Installation (ACSNI). 
  The report described the state of the reactors as generally 
unsatisfactory. 
  "At present they fall far below the `as safe as reasonably 
achievable' criterion," it said. Great care would be needed to 
ensure no radioactivity was released from the reactors to the 
environment during the rest of the clean-up programme. 
  After the 1957 nuclear accident -- one of the world's worst 
-- undamaged nuclear fuel was discharged from Pile One, the 
military reactor where it occurred. 
  But the possibility of another fire still exists since 15 
tons of damaged fuel remain in the core, a further five tons in 
the water and air ducts and the graphite core of the second 
reactor -- known as Pile Two -- still stores vast amounts of 
energy. 
  Mr Eddie Varney, acting chief inspector of the Nuclear 
Installations Inspectorate, said it had been dissatisfied with 
the progress of safety work and had been forced to serve 
improvement notices on the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), which 
is responsible for the site, in 1992, to speed it up. 
  "What was worrying us was that the piles were connected 
through the stacks to the atmosphere," said Mr Varney. "We 
wanted air to circulate through so you could look for a fire. 
The Authority had proposed this but was taking too long to do 
it." 
  An improved ventilation system has since been installed at 
Pile One, reducing the possibility of a radioactive discharge, 
the AEA said yesterday. 
  It said work was underway to remove loose fuel from air and 
water ducts and improve fire detection and suppression systems. 
  ACSNI also criticised storage facilities for nuclear waste 
at 
AEA's Dounreay site. The site has been host to research into a 
new type of reactor but following the withdrawal of Government 
funding, the prototype fast reactor (PFR) is due for closure 
next month. 
  The Dounreay fast reactor (DFR) that was used to test fuel 
for the prototype has already been closed down and 
decommissioning is underway. But ACSNI said the site was "not 
well provided with waste storage capacity. As with the DFR 
breeder fuel, there are no reprocessing or disposal routes 
identified as yet for the PFR breeder." 

