Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" report from Sanaa] </F>
  [Text] Four Afghan Egyptians [reference to Egyptians who 
had fought in Afghanistan] arrived in Cairo international 
airport from Sanaa yesterday morning on board a Yemeni aircraft. 
They were escorted by a team of state security officers. 
  A ranking Egyptian security delegation is currently holding 
contacts with officials in Sanaa concerning the handover of 20 
Afghan Egyptians, who reside in [the guest house unit] "wahdat 
dar al-diyafah." This unit is forging passports, identity 
cards, and dollars and is training new Egyptians who arrive in 
Yemen either directly from Egypt or from Afghanistan. 
  The Afghan Egyptians are trained on how to carry out 
destruction and assassination operations using remote control. 
The trainer is called Sulayman al-Fahl, who is an expert on the 
use of remote control devices. The same devices were used in 
the assassination attempt against Dr. 'Atif Sidqi. 
  The official in charge of the Yemeni guest house unit is an 
Egyptian called 'Adil Yusri or Abu-'Ammar. He has strong ties 
with Gulf personalities, who finance this unit's various 
activities after Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri had convinced some 
influential figures in Yemen to make certain areas in the 
northern provinces safe havens for this dangerous unit. 
  Yemeni sources have revealed to AL-AHALI that some northern 
provinces in Yemen has more than one guest unit used as houses 
by Afghan Egyptians and non-Egyptians. A well-known guest unit 
is run by Shaykh Muqbil al-Wadi'i in Sa'dah. This unit includes 
groups of Egyptians, Sudanese, Algerians, and Libyans. 
Al-Wadi'i is opposed to Yemeni unity and is financing these 
groups. Another guest house is located in the province of 
Dhamar, 80 km south of Sanaa, run by some defunct royal families. 
  A Yemeni leader spent five hours in Cairo a month ago. 
During his short stay, the Yemeni official conveyed a complete 
file containing a list of the places and names of the Afghan 
Egyptians in Yemen. 
  The file revealed that Yemen and Turkey are used as centers 
for the Afghan Egyptians. According to security information, 
Turkey has become a link between the [extremist] leaders 
residing in Geneva and Copenhagen such as Ayman al-Zawahiri and 
Tal'at Qasim Hammam and the groups residing in Yemen. Cairo 
had, in the past, focused on Tehran and Khartoum as centers for 
the Afghan Egyptians according to the security reports, which 
previously focused on other topics. 
  Sanaa had previously denied that terrorist Egyptian groups 
were in Yemen until the newspaper AL-MITHAQ, the mouthpiece of 
the General People's Congress led by President 'Ali 'Abdallah 
Salih, revealed that such groups do actually exist in Yemen. 

