Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Wielowieyska: "Walesa Straight From the </F>
Belweder?"] 
  [Excerpts] The president wants to expand his authority as 
much as possible and dreams of a long presidential term. But his 
grades are falling. According to a survey by Demoskop, only 1 
percent of the population views his work as very good. This poor 
assessment is largely because of his latest moves, such as the 
business with Major Hodysz [chief of the General Staff, forced 
by Walesa to resign], his attempt to influence the selection of 
the new television chief, and the withdrawal of his support for 
members of the Radio and Television Council, whom he himself 
once recommended. However, there is no doubt that the Belweder 
is the left wing's next objective. 
  Traditionally, the president is self-assured. When he paid a 
visit to the offices of SZTANDAR MLODYCH, he was asked about 
Kwasniewski. His reply was: "Kwasniewski is a good and capable 
politician, but he stands no chance against me. He might become 
president in seven year's time. Before then, it is not even 
worth trying." 
  But one should not be too sure about that. Walesa has lost 
his greatest trump card. He has ceased to be a capable 
politician. It seems that things have gone so far that, if 
Kwasniewski and Walesa were to compete against each other in the 
next presidential election, the Solidarity electorate would stay 
at home. A part of it might even vote for Kwasniewski. 
  According to the latest surveys, from the middle of 
December, 
Walesa is only liked by some 25 percent of the population. Only 
1 percent consider his work very good. Sixty-three percent 
consider it bad or very bad. Only 22 percent approve of his work 
ethic. Sixty percent of the respondents even admitted that they 
sometimes feel ashamed of their president. Sociologists claim 
that this negative feeling has exited for many months. 
  These surveys illustrate the miserable condition of the 
Belweder camp, whose prestige has fallen even further as a 
result of the poor election performance of the Non-Party Bloc in 
Support of Reforms [BBWR]. "There would have to be a miracle for 
Walesa to win an election now," one moderate right-wing 
politician told me. 
  During the time of his greatness, Walesa surrounded himself 
with people of various political colors. He listened to various 
opinions and assessments, after which he reached decisions on 
the basis of a careful examination of the best suggestions. 
During the presidential campaign, he began to listen to people 
from only one political category; he began to make use of the 
ideas of the Center Accord's Jaroslaw Kaczynski. Whatever one 
might accuse Walesa of during this period, one cannot accuse him 
of lacking effectiveness. Today, there is no one who could 
suggest to Walesa some long-term plan of action, no one to 
create a good image for the office of president, no one to warn 
Walesa of the consequences of his actions. One can see this 
deficiency all too clearly. 
  Three years into Walesa's presidency, what has happened to 
his widely publicized political concepts, his promises of a new 
beginning and 100 million zlotys for every Pole, his idea of an 
EEC-2 and a NATO-2? Nothing but empty words. 
  Political oratory has dropped to an appalling level. These 
days, Prime Minister Pawlak is merely repeating Walesa's 
well-worn cliches about Poland being on the edge of the abyss 
and like a car with bad brakes. 
  Walesa himself is behaving as if he has lost touch with 
reality, seemingly oblivious to the fact that he is being 
assessed by public opinion just like any other politician. Did 
anyone tell him that recalling Maj. Hodysz could cost him many 
votes in the next election? 
  The president has very few people of his own. The result of 
this is that one person occupies several posts. Jerzy Milewski 
occupies no less than three managerial armchairs at the same 
time--in the Defense Ministry, the National Security Office, and 
the Presidential Chancellery. This is a violation of the 
Constitution, but that does not matter to the president. What 
matters to him is that he has someone from his entourage exactly 
where he needs him. 
  Walesa still creates the impression that he discovers for 
the 
press what the powers of the president are. 
  The 11 presidential advisory councils contain a total of 
several hundred people--"experts." Yet, somehow, the president 
is reluctant to use their suggestions. He ignored his very own 
Culture Council when it protested against the appointment of his 
candidates to the Radio and Television Committee. [passage 
omitted] 
  With the passage of time, the ex-Solidarity politicians have 
lost the flexibility and their ability to overcome their 
divisions for the sake of the common cause. As a result, the 
only "certain" competitors in a presidential struggle are Walesa 
and a strong left-wing candidate, probably Kwasniewski, to whom 
the presidential post is the logical culmination of his meteoric 
political career. 
  Three years into his presidency, Walesa can be sure that no 
one will deprive him of his place in history. But it looks as if 
he is finished. He will not be able to effectively oppose a 
candidate from the left wing. But, will the former Solidarity 
camp, if it still exists, realize this in good time? 

