CSO 

<F P=106> [Letter to BARRICADA editor by FSLN Commander Monica </F>
Baltodano--for related reporting on this issue see 
FBIS-LAT-94-104] 
  [Text] Managua, 24 May 1994 
  Mr. Carlos Fernando Chamorro Editor of BARRICADA Your Office 
  Dear Carlos Fernando: 
  In today's edition of BARRICADA, dated 24 May 1994, was a 
front-page story under the headline "New National Directorate 
Takes Aim at BARRICADA." On the third-page continuation of the 
story, under the headline "Purges Ahead in the Sandinist 
National Liberation Front (FSLN)," are my responses to questions 
asked of me by the press early the morning of Monday, 23 May. 
  To avoid any ambiguity, I would like to make the following 
clarifications: 
  1. At no time did I suggest changes in the executive 
positions at the daily BARRICADA, since that decision is and 
always has been up to the collective of the National Directorate. 
  2. I came out against any vengeful attitude and pointed out 
that if we were not vengeful with the Somoza National Guard, why 
should we be with comrades from our own ranks? I made it clear 
that it is not a question of turning away good will, but of 
attracting more good will. 
  3. I reaffirm my conviction, which I have defended at many 
party assemblies, that BARRICADA's editorial line must undergo 
substantial changes. I think that in saying that I am 
representing the opinion of the FSLN rank and file. But that 
does not necessarily mean that this opinion is shared by the 
bodies elected by the congress. 
  4. At no time have I ever thought, nor do I think now, that 
BARRICADA should become the official organ of the FSLN, much 
less a mere parrot for repeating party slogans or a political 
pamphlet. 
  5. In conclusion, I am totally convinced that BARRICADA will 
be able to defend and promote the political line that can be 
deduced from the desires expressed in the Program, Principles, 
and Bylaws agreed upon at the Special Session of the FSLN 
Congress. This will help strengthen the cohesion and unity of 
the Sandinist rank and file, which is of vital importance in 
confronting our eternal adversaries. 
  Fraternally, 
  Monica Baltodano 


