Language: <F P=105> Bulgarian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Statement by Minister of Defense Valentin Aleksandrov in </F>
the National Assembly on 11 March": "Dialogue Is Only Civilized 
Method Under Democracy] 
  [Text] Esteemed Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen: 
  Essentially, the petition of the Rakovski Officers Legion is 
largely addressed to parliament. The officers' intention was to 
convene in front of parliament after 13 March and submit the 
petition to the deputies. The petition contains three demands: 
  First: The demand to adopt the military budget requested by 
the experts of the General Staff. This involves the absurd 
figure of 37 billion leva. The matter has already been decided. 
The budget has been adopted. It is already law. Everyone must 
implement it. Whoever does not want to implement it has no place 
in the army. 
  Second: The demand to the people's representatives that they 
pass legislation to establish a concept of the "citizen in 
uniform." I think there will be a high degree of consensus on 
this matter with the adoption of the Law on the Armed Forces. 
  Such a concept exists in the German and Austrian armies. 
Other armies do not have such a concept. The concept would 
provide professional, legal, and social guarantees for the 
Bulgarian military. It is a very delicate issue, because it is 
a political-legal issue. 
  I must admit to you that as defense minister I am not 
inclined to accept the General Staff's interpretation in all its 
points, and say this for one simple reason, which is 
demonstrated by the fact that this is the thrid successive 
petition organized by the Rakovski Legion. Public awareness is 
not so high that we can allow complete freedom, especially in 
the armed forces. In one way or another, the army is based on 
subordination; it voluntarily accepts a certain limitation of 
individual rights, and anyone who becomes an officer should be 
well aware of this. 
  Third: A demand that was the basic element of this 21-point 
document, namely, that the president, the National Assembly 
chairman, the ministers of defense, internal affairs, and 
finance, and the chief of General Staff, discuss together with 
the trade unions the serious situation and our national security 
problems, and put forward real measures to deal with them. 
  This essentially is our job. Thus this third demand was no 
more than a storm in a teacup. 
  I do not think there is much point in reading the whole 
petition out here. It contains 21 points, some of which cannot 
be taken seriously. If we exclude the demand regarding the 
budget, which is essentially a political matter, there can be no 
doubt that the other demands, albeit debatable and poorly 
formulated, are justified to a point. This applies especially 
to the demands having to do with the social sphere and the 
material situation of the officers. 
  Another important thing is that these demands of the 
military 
are nothing new. I have twice made statements here in the 
National Assembly on these matters. The chief of General Staff 
has done the same. These demands have been put forward for 
public discussion since the legion was founded. I am sure you 
will support many of them. Their implementation as real policy 
requires several things. First -- goodwill. I am sure we all 
have a lot of it. However, there are two other things -- the 
law and finances. You certainly will soon debate the draft law. 
However, this year there will be no more money, and every army 
officer must understand this. There will be and cannot be any 
compromises in this respect. For me as minister of defense, 
these demands have another dimension, namely, the means used to 
try to resolve these problems. Unfortunately, the means by 
which some of the Legion officers decided to seek implementation 
of their absolutely correct demands are unlawful, and thus for 
me -- inadmissible. This is a clear case of violating the 
Constitution and military regulations, something that allows of 
no compromise. 
  Now for the second part of the issue. The reasons for the 
penalties. The basic reason was the attempt to eliminate once 
and for all the tendency to an increase in irregular and 
unlawful actions on the part of the military. 
  First, I would like to say that democracy has its limits 
and that will not allow those limits to be violated or crossed 
in the army. 
  Urgent measures had to be adopted because the lack of any 
reaction on our part when signatures were collected for a 
petition in defense of the former officer, Lyutskanov, created 
the impression among some people that they could act with 
impunity and total freedom -- something inadmissible under 
conditions of subordination. 
  Second, I would like to state this to the Bulgarian 
parliament with total clarity: Individual representatives of 
certain political forces are trying to manipulate from a 
political point of view some members of the Legion. Here the 
principle is clear: Every attempt to politicize the army, 
especially through its interference in the activity of state 
bodies or through issuing unrealistic demands to the detriment 
of other parts of society, must be finally eliminated. 
  It is easy to demand money. It is difficult to say where 
this money could come from. 
  Third, my order was not directed against the Legion and 
there 
is no conflict between the Rakovski Officer Legion and the 
Ministry of Defense. My order applies to officers, members of 
the Legion, who violated the laws of the country and the Armed 
Forces' regulations. There are and cannot be no compromises in 
this sphere. 
  The penalties that I imposed totally correspond to their 
specific violation. Captain Second Rank Vasil Danov was 
dismissed from the army on disciplinary grounds for systematic 
violations of discipline through instigation, and support of and 
participation in actions that undermine the prestige of the 
Bulgarian Army. 
  I would like to draw your attention to the fact that at the 
beginning of the year Nikolay Slatinski, chairman of the 
National Assembly National Security Commission, addressed an 
open letter to me with a request to draw the attention of the 
Armed Forces' prosecutor to the behavior of Captain Vasil Danov. 
Then I thought that he is a young man, he got carried away, 
etc., but now I see that this was a system of actions, and 
therefore, the consequences were clear. He was fired the same 
day. It was he who described the Rakovski Legion's letter as a 
"bloody letter," [referring to the letter written with blood by 
revolutionary Todor Kableshkov in April 1876, announcing the 
beginning of the April 1876 insurrection against the Turks], and 
as an overt rebellion. This was published in the newspapers, 
and I must say that the reaction in the army was none too 
positive. 
  Furthermore, Mr. Danov is a founding member of a new 
political organization, I do not know whether you have heard of 
it, called National Accord. As a rank and file officer he did 
not have the right to be a member of such organizations. He 
signed a declaration to this effect. This in itself is 
sufficient reason to fire him immediately. The participation of 
officers in such organizations creates unpleasant associations 
in areas related to the Ministry of Defense. I am convinced 
that I acted correctly, because it turned out that a large part 
of the people who signed the petition, especially in Khaskovo, 
were not aware of the complex character of the situation in 
which they found themselves. I must tell you that already on 
the following day three deputy defense ministers, three deputy 
heads of the General Staff, and military jurists visited the 
headquarters of the armies and talked to officers up to the rank 
of regimental commanders. Many things were cleared up during 
those talks. Obviously, the boys in Khaskovo have been 
manipulated. The Legion's leadership also has been manipulated, 
because only one of its members signed the declaration, while it 
was published on behalf of the entire Legion. This simply was 
not true. 
  Esteemed ladies and gentlemen, people's representatives, in 
the difficult situation that has developed in the country and 
the army we must not delude ourselves that there will be no 
officers, and civilians and politicians who would not sympathize 
with the officers whom I punished. The fear of restructuring, 
which is inevitable under this military budget, the cuts, and 
elimination of certain posts, prompt the military to express 
solidarity with anyone who demands a pay increase for the 
military. 
  In this manner one could speculate, implant harmful 
illusions, and turn the situation into an explosive one. 
  Yesterday we received the results of a sociological study in 
the army, which I commissioned. It shows that unfortunately, 
populism has found fertile soil in the army. This especially 
applies to garrisons, which are in a more difficult situation. 
I repeat, I cannot allow anyone to play with fire. I prefer 
the discontent with the penalties that I imposed, which could 
emerge among part of the officers and sergeants, to 
disseminating the delusion that more funds could be found 
through applying pressure on the cabinet, parliament, or myself. 
  The discontent with an order is less important than the 
possibility of polarizing the army through petitions, 
declarations, bloody letters, and so forth. 
  The situation in the army is very grave and if actions that 
are prompted by orders are not finally, radically, and once and 
for all stopped, the situation could become uncontrollable. As 
long as I am the minister of defense, I will not allow this. 
  With my order I only showed that their demands cannot be 
granted in this way, and that I will not allow the army to be 
led with petitions from the bottom to the top. 
  Dialogue is the only civilized method that is legally 
established in the army under conditions of democracy. I am 
always prepared for such dialogue. I have used this and I 
believe in it. This is precisely why I had a meeting yesterday 
with the leadership of the Rakovski Officer Legion. This 
organization is a legitimate organization, registered by the 
court, and not an handful of pretenders who write and sign 
"bloody letters" and declarations. 
  At that meeting four of the participants called the 
declaration an "immature act," and admitted its obvious 
political character. BULGARSKA ARMIYA has carried an extensive 
report on this matter and I do not want to bother you with it. 
  I would like to talk more often about those issues and I am 
always ready to come to parliament. I will present the demands 
and petition to the Secretariat, and we will do everything 
possible to adopt amendments at the second reading of the draft 
law that will prevent similar developments. I hope that we will 
be able to meet some of the officers' demands, but, let us not 
delude ourselves, we cannot meet all of them. 
  Thank you for your attention. 

