BFN 

  [Text] Santo Domingo, 21 May (NOTIMEX) -- Today, Dominican 
Republic electoral authorities announced they will verify the 
vote count of last Monday's general elections following an 
accord by contending parties to detect possible irregularities. 
  After reporting an alleged fraud in favor of the Christian 
Social Revolutionary Party (PRSC), which nominated incumbent 
President Joaquin Balaguer, the opposition Dominican 
Revolutionary Party (PRD) agreed with its government rival to 
review the vote count. 
  The Central Electoral Board (JCE) said next Wednesday a 
special commission will verify "vote by vote" the lists used in 
the presidential elections to corroborate the legitimacy of 
Balaguer's victory. 
  According to the official vote count, suspended Thursday 
following fraud reports by the opposition, Balaguer defeated PRD 
candidate Jose Francisco Pena Gomez by just 1 percent of the 
approximately 3 million votes cast. 
  The JCE awarded Pena Gomez 41.3 percent of the vote, but 
declared Balaguer the winner with 42.4 percent of the 94.8 
percent of votes counted. This would permit the incumbent 
president to begin his seventh term in office. 
  Pena Gomez demanded the cancellation of the elections in 
various parts of the country because of alleged irregularities 
in the preparation of the electoral register. These alleged 
irregularities reportedly prevented about 200,000 people from 
casting their votes, despite the fact they presented the 
required documentation. 
  The PRD candidate charged before the JCE that there were 
people who were not allowed to vote because their names did not 
appear on official government lists. "That advantage 
attributed to President Balaguer must be investigated," warned 
Pena Gomez, who accused the JCE of acting in complicity with the 
PRSC. This allegation was supported by international observers 
who witnessed the electoral process. 
  The Dominican elections were supervised by the international 
community because of the influence this Caribbean nation has 
over Haiti. Haiti and the Dominican Republic share the 
territory of the Caribbean island, Hispanola. Foreign concern 
is of particular importance in light of the "harsher" embargo 
imposed by the United Nations on Haiti, which will take effect 
at midnight this Saturday. 

