ONLY 
<F P=103> 944F0254A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow PROBLEMY DALNEGO VOSTOKA </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vyacheslav Nikolayevich Bunin, doctor of </F>
historical sciences, director of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
Far East Institute Center for Japan and Korea Studies: 
"Approaches of the Countries of Northeast Asia to the Problem of 
Ensuring Security After the Epoch of the `Cold War'"] 
  [Text] Many Russian and foreign researchers note that the 
beneficial consequences of the end of the "cold war" have 
seemingly not touched the extensive Asia-Pacific region, and 
primarily the region of Northeast Asia which is of vital 
importance for the Russian Federation. However, these statements 
bear a rather general character. Nevertheless, if we examine the 
situation in the region more closely, here too we may note some 
striking positive changes. First of all, this is reflected in 
the fact that, after many years of indifference to the Far East 
in Russia, a distinct foreign policy course for Northeast Asia 
has emerged for the first time. This course was formulated by RF 
[Russian Federation] President Boris Yeltsin during his visits 
to the Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of China in 
1992, as well as in the April (1993) "Foreign Policy Conception 
of the Russian Federation," which contains a section on 
Northeast Asia. 
  As for the United States of America, it was as if this 
region 
had remained at the back door of their geopolitical interests 
for a long time. They considered the Pacific Ocean to be their 
own specific lake, in which their national security was reliably 
guaranteed by a system of bilateral agreements. At the center of 
this system was the 1960 Japanese-American Agreement on 
Cooperation and Guarantee of Security. The treaties and 
agreements of the USA with the Republic of Korea, Taiwan, the 
Philippines, Thailand, Singapore and other countries were 
concentrated around it. Altogether, they comprised the firmly 
constructed so-called "American system of security," which, as 
Western political scientists maintain, brought Northeast Asia 
long-term peace, stability and economic prosperity. Quite 
recently, the Clinton administration also came to the conclusion 
that it was impossible to continue to live with the old baggage. 
The new world order persistently dictates the need for a review 
of the American position in the Asia-Pacific region and a 
transformation of the bilateral relations into some kind of 
multilateral structure or mechanism which would better 
correspond to the demands of the times. 
  In touching upon the Russian conception of security, we 
cannot overlook the article by the well-known scientist and 
China specialist, Dr. B. Zanegin, which was published in PRAVDA 
on 13 August 1993 under the title, "The `Cold War' Still 
Continues." In this article, he attacks the foreign policy 
course of the Russian Federation which stems from the 
above-mentioned conception. The author comes to the conclusion 
that Russia's diplomatic activity in Northeast Asia in practice 
"amounts to the implementation of an unfriendly, and even 
hostile, essentially confrontational, policy in regard to the 
socialist countries parallel to or in conjunction with the USA 
and other anti-communist regimes, and to gross intervention by 
Russia in the `cold war' in the Asia-Pacific region." [1] 
  After such a statement, one wants to ask how such a 
respected 
researcher risked negating all of Moscow's efforts in stepping 
up diplomacy in this geopolitical direction, which is so vital 
to it? The question arises, does Dr. Zanegin understand what 
constitutes Russia's national interests in this region? If so, 
he would hardly characterize Russia's foreign policy as "being 
built on the dogmas of anti-communism and synonymously oriented 
toward the USA." [2] 
  In fact, an unprejudiced analysis of Russia's "foreign 
political conception" speaks of the fact that it emanates from 
the general national interests of the Russian Federation, which 
consist of the following: 
  --in domestic policy, which is given a priority direction: 
Preservation of Russia as an integral, free, independent and 
democratic state, and for this it is first of all necessary to 
normalize the management of the state; Preservation and 
formulation of an economic space for business interaction within 
the framework of the former USSR; Stabilization of the economy 
and finance, creation of a socially oriented market economy, and 
ultimately the achievement of economic prosperity; Step-by-step 
implementation of conversion, with international support; 
  --in foreign policy: Maintaining the country's defense 
capability at the necessary level and ensuring its external 
security; Developing friendly political and mutually beneficial 
trade-economic ties, communiations and humanitarian exchanges 
with all states on a global and regional level, including 
especially in the Asia-Pacific region, where Russia has a rather 
extensive marine boundary; Preserving a stable and safe peace in 
the regions, including Northeast Asia, and on the planet as a 
whole; Constructive participation in the activity of the UN and 
other international organizations. 
  As we can see from this far from complete list of Russian 
interests, and simply to list them would take up several journal 
columns, it is unlikely that anyone would be bold enough to 
formulate them in full volume. Almost all of them are directed 
at ensuring internal stability and achieving prosperity of a 
multi-national state. This constitutes their basic difference 
from the confrontational foreign political doctrine of the 
former USSR of the "cold war" times. However, the Russian 
Federation does not deny in any aspect its geopolitical and 
strategic role in the Asia-Pacific region, and on the contrary 
intends to actively participate in all measures of this 
extensive region, including also in the creation of a reliable 
mechanism for ensuring collective security. However, this 
certainly does not mean that it is pursuing a confrontational 
policy. 
  What new challenges are being presented under current 
conditions to the states of Northeast Asia, including Russia, 
which oppose the national interests of the countries in the 
region and the prospects of creating a reliable system of 
collective security? This is primarily the emergence of 
tendencies toward hegemonism in the world arena and in the 
region. Here too we should mention the regional and ethnic 
conflicts also taking place within Russia and in its nearby 
foreign countries; the retention of existing and desire to 
create new closed military-political unions; and the 
presentation of territorial claims by a number of countries to 
other states. This concerns also the rather controversial 
Japanese encroachments on the so-called "northern territories" 
belonging to the Russian Federation. Undoubtedly, this list must 
also include the existing limitations on free trade and the 
obstacles to exchange of leading technologies. Although 
assurances were given at the July "Summit of the Seven" [G-7 
summit] in Tokyo that the limitations imposed by CoCom 
[Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls] in 
regard to Russia would be removed before the end of the current 
century, Moscow could not help but feel that the same mistrust 
is being exhibited toward it as had been during the period of 
the "cold war," whose rudiments are still seen in many things, 
but in any case not in the policies of the Russian Federation. 
  Any form of ideologization of interstate relations is also 
one of the varieties of new challenges which must be overcome by 
current diplomacy. Russia, as we know, does not speak out 
against the bilateral agreements existing in Northeast Asia 
which comprised the system of security for the USA and its 
allies in the period of the "cold war." At that time, this 
system, evidently, was justified. However, under the new 
conditions, after the end of the "cold war," a real need has 
arisen for the parties to declare in some form in the 
Japanese-American "security pact," which is central in the 
system of alliances in the region, that henceforth it will not 
be directed against other countries of the region. This is the 
will of the times! 
  To the list of new challenges we should add: The drug trade, 
expanding terrorism, piracy, as well as another legacy of the 
"cold war"--the continuation of large-scale joint training 
exercises by naval and other types of armed forces near the 
territories of other states. 
  The probability of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and 
other means of mass destruction takes on a particular danger. We 
cannot help but note the increase in conventional arms in the 
region, which undoubtedly leads to increased militarization of 
the developing countries. The effort undertaken by P'yongyang to 
withdraw from the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
has evoked considerable concern in Russia and other states of 
the region. In connection with this, the nuclear missile 
ambitions of the DPRK [Democratic People's Republic of Korea] 
are also cause for concern. Alarming voices are also resounding 
from Tokyo to the effect that, in case of appearance of nuclear 
weapons in North Korea, the Tokyo leadership may opt for a 
review of its defense conceptions. 
  The list of challenges and dangers presented above, which 
are 
an object of concern for the Russian leadership, invariably 
includes also ecological security. 
  In order to withstand these challenges and threats together 
with the other states in the region, Russia is implementing a 
broad complex of measures, understanding very well that no one 
state, no matter how mighty it may be, can independently solve 
all the problems which arise here. 
  First of all, Russia's leadership proceeds from the fact 
that 
its armed forces in the Far East must serve as a guarantor of 
stability and security, and not pose a threat to other states. 
The Russian Federation is implementing this policy by means of 
significantly reducing the combat contingent of the Pacific 
Ocean fleet; by removing part of its nuclear missile submarines 
and strategic bombers from combat readiness; by totally 
liquidating the medium- and short-range missiles located in the 
Asian part of Russia (we might add that today not one strategic 
missile is aimed against any Asian state); by reducing its 
military presence in the southern islands of the Kuril Ridge, up 
to its total liquidation; by reducing the level of the military 
contingent stationed along the Russian-Chinese border, and by 
steadfastly meeting its obligations under the Treaty on 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as the obligation 
not to be the first to use these weapons. 
  The policy on ensuring security is being realized by Russia 
in the course of such measures as strengthening and modernizing 
conventional armed forces with subsequent reduction in their 
numbers on the basis of the concept of defensive adequacy; 
retaining the nuclear potential at the level provided by the 
START-2 treaty and other agreements; prolonging the moratorium 
on nuclear testing for one more year, if either of the parties 
does not renew them first, and maintaining stable and 
multi-lateral relations with other countries in the interests of 
cooperation and security in the region. A model for such 
positive cooperation may be the Russian-Chinese talks on 
demilitarization of the common boundary between the two 
countries, as well as the agreements between the RF and the USA 
on questions of security and disarmament. The security of Russia 
is also ensured by the implementation of a course toward 
political resolution of crisis situations in the regions. Russia 
has supported the position of the G-7 at the "summit" in Tokyo, 
which spoke out in favor of creating a negotiation mechanism of 
control over the political resolution of conflicts in Northeast 
Asia. 
  If we conduct a more detailed examination of Russia's 
strategy in Northeast Asia from the standpoint of ensuring 
security and stability, peace and prosperity of the entire 
Asia-Pacific region, first of all we must proceed from the fact 
that the Russian Federation, being a Eurasian state, expects to 
have comprehensive participation in all the regional structures 
formulated for the purpose of ensuring the above-mentioned tasks 
in the sub-region of Northeast Asia. Moreover, not in the role 
of a junior partner, as B. Zanegin maintains, but as a state 
having equal rights with the other members. We might add that 
U.S. President Bill Clinton, in speaking of Russia's role in the 
Asia-Pacific region, called it a "great Pacific power." 
  In order to ensure its strategy in Northeast Asia, Russia 
needs international support of the transformations which it is 
implementing--moral, spiritual and ideological support. 
Moreover, Moscow is counting not so much on financial injections 
and humanitarian aid as on the regulation of large-scale 
business cooperation, and on the removal of all limitations on 
deliveries of high technologies, including from Japan. In 
speaking of the technological role of Japan within the framework 
of the region, a prominent Japanese political and social leader, 
the former prime minister of the Land of the Rising Sun, 
Yasuhiro Nakasone, in his work entitled "After the Cold War," 
emphasizes that his country will firmly establish itself on the 
world arena only after it regulates "the process of transferring 
technologies and adopting environmental protection measures." 
[3] Despite repeated announcements by USA President B. Clinton 
to the effect that he will eliminate the barriers in trade with 
Russia, the approaches by participants in the conference of the 
seven highly developed countries of the world [G-7] held in 
Tokyo in early July of 1993, as noted above, turned out to be in 
the spirit of the "cold war" in this regard. 
  Russia might have been able to make use of the experience of 
countries in which the processes similar to those which are 
currently noted in our country took place or are taking place: 
In Japan--in the 50's-60's, in the Republic of Korea, Taiwan, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia--in the 
recent past and up to the present day. 
  Moscow would not only like to safeguard its borders, 
including also its Far Eastern borders, but would also like to 
exclude any outside intervention in its domestic affairs. 
  Russia is not interested in isolating its Asiatic part from 
the outside world, including also from the states of Northeast 
Asia. In compiling its plans for development of the Siberian and 
Far Eastern regions, Russia is counting on the participation of 
the Pacific Ocean countries, and primarily the states of the 
northeastern Pacific, in developing its eastern regions, in 
assimilating huge natural resources, and in creating the 
infrastructure necessary for incorporation of this part of 
Russia into the system of economic relations in the Asia-Pacific 
region. 
  We must stress once again that the entry of the RF into the 
world community presupposes also its equal, and not some 
indirect or secondary, participation in all the processes taking 
place in the Asia-Pacific region. Unfortunately, certain 
countries of this region, and primarily Japan, fearing 
competition and reduction in its level of influence, are in no 
way interested in Russia's presence here. 
  It seems that, aside from Russia, other CIS republics have 
also begun to show an interest in the Asia-Pacific region. Thus, 
for example, Kazakhstan President N. Nazarbayev, speaking at the 
47th session of the UN General Assembly in the Fall of 1992, 
announced: "The second aspect which I would like to deal with is 
the problem of peace and security on our continent--Asia, and 
even broader--Eurasia. We are speaking of the initiative by the 
Republic of Kazakhstan on holding a Conference on Interaction 
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (SVMDA)". [4] According 
to Nazarbayev, this Assembly must be transformed into a 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Eurasia by the end of 
the 20th Century, and at the beginning of the 21st Century--it 
must prepare for the unification of continental systems of 
collective security for Asia, Europe, Africa and America into an 
integral world system of collective security and cooperation. 
However, the real state of affairs suggests that this idea is 
hardly realizable in the foreseeable future. Most likely it will 
soon be forgotten, as was the case with Brezhnev's idea of 
collective security in Asia and Gorbachev's idea of an Asiatic 
conference, since the conditions for formulating such a system 
have not yet been created. Many researchers have pointed this 
out. For example, as the Chinese scientist Van Guan writes in 
the journal LYAOVAN, despite the general stability in the 
Asia-Pacific region and in Eastern Asia, "many countries of the 
region, in the course of shifts in the world situation, are 
introducing corrections into their policy and plans, and deep 
changes are currently occurring in the relation and placement of 
forces in the region." Furthermore, Van concludes that "the 
tendency toward multi-polarity will continue to develop in the 
Asia-Pacific region." [5] 
  In turn, the very leadership of the largest Asian power--the 
People's Republic of China, believes that the occurrence of a 
new world war is unlikely in the near future. However, the 
military threat has not yet been entirely eliminated. Among the 
factors threatening the security of China, the country's 
leadership cites primarily the Taiwan problem; the lack of 
resolution to questions of the "disputed" areas along the state 
boundaries, primarily with India; the conflicts over the 
affiliation of a number of islands in the South China and East 
China Seas; the problem of the continental shelf in the marine 
areas bordering South Korea and Japan, and the possibility of 
intervention by neighboring states into China's domestic affairs 
(for example, the direct support of Tibet separatists by India). 
A large part of these problems relates to the sphere of 
territorial disputes, has deep historical roots and bears a 
long-term character. China is striving toward ever more active 
participation in the resolution of global and regional problems 
associated with international security. The country's leadership 
believes that this task corresponds to the greatest degree with 
such aspects of PRC [People's Republic of China] policy as 
non-participation in any military blocks and alliances, absence 
of military bases on the territories of other states, the 
obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to 
use them against non-nuclear zones and states which do not have 
nuclear weapons on their territories, as well as the 
unconditional prohibition of chemical and other types of weapons 
of mass destruction. An important place in the plan for ensuring 
regional security belongs to China's growing initiative in the 
course toward resurrecting good neighborly relations with all 
the states adjoining it, and with the ASEAN [Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations] states and other states of the region, 
including those entering into military-political alliances. 
  Based on the principles of "self-determination and 
independence" of foreign policy, as well as its continually 
growing economic potential (the PRC today retains the highest 
economic growth in the world--up to 12 percent per year), Peking 
is for the present rejecting the idea of collective regional 
security. 
  China is undertaking the modernization of its naval fleet. 
This is quite natural for a sovereign state which up until now 
has practically not had an ocean fleet. At the same time, this 
evokes apprehension among its neighboring Asiatic states. By the 
mid-90's, China will have the capability of "placing in the open 
sea naval forces consisting of many ships, supported by 
long-range bombers equipped with anti-ship missiles." [6] The 
neighbors are also apprehensive about China's expanding sale of 
ship-launched anti-ship missiles (to Thailand in 1990). [7] 
  There is an increasingly real possibility of China's 
becoming 
a large regional force which may significantly influence the 
situation not only in the region of Northeast Asia, but also on 
a global scale. 
  The efforts of the DPRK to withdraw from the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and P'yongyang's nuclear 
missile ambitions have seriously complicated the problems of 
security in Asia. The prevalent opinion in the Russian mass 
media is that the principles of collective security in Northeast 
Asia which had begun to be laid down have turned out to be 
significantly undermined. The demarche by North Korea, as 
KRASNAYA ZVEZDA affirms, has thrust Asia into unprecedented 
instability and strategic indeterminacy. [8] In connection with 
this, the supposition was expressed that the idea of realization 
of collective security in Asia seems improbable at the present 
time. Although these evaluations should be viewed as extreme, 
nevertheless this demarche by P'yongyang, undoubtedly, has 
significantly hindered political regulation on the Korean 
penninsula. 
  As for the USA, American scientists, and specifically James 
Goodby, a professor at Carnegie Mellon University, believe that 
a stable regional system in the Asia-Pacific region which 
includes the USA, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the DPRK 
and Russia may be based on four primary leading organizational 
principles: Hegemony, balance of forces, collective security and 
consensus (agreement). [9] According to Goodby, the current 
system does not correspond to any of the listed principles. Not 
one of the countries has the appropriate potential, and 
consequently cannot aspire to the role of the predominant 
hegemonic power in the region. Japan, aside from its economic 
might, has no other levers for manifesting hegemonic ambitions. 
The military-economic might of the USA as an attribute of a 
superpower has not grown into a hegemonic power in the region. 
China and Russia, which are involved in their own domestic 
affairs, do not aspire to hegemony, while the other powers, with 
all their potentials taken together, cannot act in this role. 
This opinion expressed by the leading American researcher is 
evidently close to the truth. In any case, many scientists from 
the countries of Northeast Asia believe that the USA, which has 
spoken out quite sharply on the results of formation of the 
European Community, is dubious about the idea of creating 
economic and political associations in the region of Northeast 
Asia, and has not defined a clear-cut attitude toward regional 
associations in the Asia-Pacific region. It is quite satisfied 
with the structure of security based on bilateral agreements 
which has existed up until the present time, and which should be 
only slightly modified under the current conditions. At the same 
time, it remains unclear what roles the USA ascribes to Russia 
and China. 
  The government of Japan supports the position of the USA in 
the preservation and partial modification of the American system 
of security based on bilateral agreements which has existed up 
until the present time. At the same time, in the opinion of the 
Japanese academic world, there has long been a need for a 
regional alliance for the collective provision of security, as 
well as for regional treaty relations. 
  In the case of creating a regional alliance for the 
collective provision of security, it is necessary, as the 
Japanese researchers believe, to first of all consider the 
measures for developing relations of true cooperation, or at 
least mutual understanding. Without this, a recognition of the 
danger of opposition of military blocks cannot be achieved. 
Speaking more specifically, contrary to the logic of the power 
politics which has existed up until the present time, individual 
influential states from neighboring alliances have ensured 
effective co-existence between each other. Perhaps we should 
think first of an "alliance capable of making serious 
decisions." [10] Moreover, it would be desirable to develop 
organizational decisions at a certain level between various 
alliances which are not neighbors (for example, a discussion of 
global problems of disarmament). Such a structure could be 
called the "Asiatic house," which would resolve the 
above-mentioned problems, as Japanese researchers believe. [11] 
  Many analysts concur in the opinion that regional alliances 
which do not include influential countries may perhaps exist at 
the will of small groups which have the power of veto. However, 
they cannot ensure security in the region with sufficient 
effectiveness. Perhaps ASEAN belongs to this type of alliance, 
as it enjoys the patronage of American military might (through 
the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore), which is one of the 
reasons for its success. ASEAN and the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Forum (APEF) have perhaps the greatest chances of becoming the 
centers of future regional structures in the Asia-Pacific region. 
  Among the successfully functioning institutions of ASEAN are 
the expanded conferences of foreign affairs ministers which are 
growing in scope. These operate according to the formula "6 + 5 
+ X," where 6 is the ASEAN "six" (Singapore, Philippines, 
Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Brunei), 5 is the Pacific 
"five" (USA, Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand), and X is 
the EC [European Community], the Republic of Korea, as well as 
possible other future members of the community. The inclusion of 
Russia and China in this forum, not as guests but as 
participants, is yet to come. In July 1992 and August 1993, the 
Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs (along with his Chinese, 
Vietnamese and Laotian colleagues) took part in the work of the 
expanded Conference of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the ASEAN 
Countries for the first time in the Soviet and post-Soviet 
period. As their membership increases in the future, the 
expanded conferences of foreign affairs ministers of the ASEAN 
member states present an almost ready-made structure for 
regional interaction in the Asia-Pacific region, capable of 
becoming the basis for formulation of collective security in 
Northeast Asia. 
  A unique model for the East-Asiatic order was proposed by 
Professor Yan Sun Chul of Seoul National University. [12] He 
called it a model of the "flying kite," or the eastern Asiatic 
regime of collective peace and prosperity. In the center of such 
a paper kite is the Korean penninsula with the two states 
located on it: The DKRP and the Republic of Korea, and on the 
four corners are the CIS (Russia), Japan, China and the USA. In 
the future it is presumed that, after unification, the central 
role will be occupied by a unified Korea. For the present time, 
the central functions could be assumed by the Republic of Korea. 
  The Korean scientist explains why specifically the Republic 
of Korea must occupy the central unifying role, citing the 
following factors: 
  First of all, the central organ of the region should not 
have 
an aggressive potential or present any threat in regard to other 
states which form the structure of the model. On this parameter, 
Seoul corresponds to the stipulated conditions; 
  Secondly, the central leadership should not be in conflict 
with the other four states. South Korea corresponds to these 
requirements. The other states, at various times in the past and 
the present, have been in conflicting relations with each other; 
  Thirdly, the Republic of Korea may act as a force of 
arbitration not only on problems of security, but also in the 
economic sphere. The country's dynamically developing economy 
allows it to fulfill this function. 
  However, the model of the "flying kite" is hypothetically 
possible only if the world does not follow the path of 
development of power politics and its concentration in the hands 
of the great powers, if regional order is built on such general 
values as democracy, protection of human rights, and respect for 
international laws, as well as such institutions as the UN. 
Although this model has received the positive reviews of 
opponents, at the present time it appears utopian. 
  A brief analysis of Russia's national interests and its 
approach to the problem of ensuring security in Northeast Asia 
shows that, in developing the foreign policy conception in 
Northeast Asia, the Russian leadership proceeded from the 
assumptions that after the loss of a number of Black Sea and 
Baltic ports and harbors, the Far East becomes the main outpost 
and maritime gateway of the RF to Asia. A review of the 
positions of the primary states in the region on the question of 
formulating a body capable of acting as a coordinating center 
which could unify the coinciding interests of all states of 
Northeast Asia and direct them toward the provision of 
stability, peace and prosperity testifies to the multiplicity of 
approaches. It demonstrates the fact that this process will 
follow a rather lengthy and complicated course, and that it has 
its own specifics which differ strikingly from the process of 
the CSCE, although certain European measures may be superimposed 
onto the general picture of formation of the negotiations 
mechanism in the Asia-Pacific region as a whole and specifically 
in the subregion of Northeast Asia. 
FOOTNOTES 
  1. PRAVDA, 13 August 1993. 
  2. Ibid. 
  3. Yasuhiro Nakasone et al. "Reysey igo (Kedo Kenkyu)" 
("After the `Cold War'." Joint study). Tokyo, 1992, 225 p. 
  4. KAZAKHSTANSKAYA PRAVDA, 9 October 1992. 
  5. The Asia-Pacific Region; Certain Questions of the Current 
Agenda. Informational Materials of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences Far East Institute. M., 1993, Vol 2, 78 p. 
  6. Gary Clintworth. "China's New Navy" Pacific Research, Vol 
2, May 1989, p 7. 
  7. The Asia-Pacific Region: Certain Questions of the Current 
Agenda... M. 49. 
  8. KRASNAYA ZVEZDA, 1 April 1993. 
  9. Goodby, E. James. Cooperative Security in Northeast Asia. 
Scientific Papers of Carnegie Mellon University. July 14, 1992. 
p 6. 
  10. Nakasone, Ya. et al. Ibid., p. 218. 
  11. Ibid., p 218-219. 
  12. Sino-Soviet Affairs. Vol 3, No 16. The Institute for 
Sino-Soviet Studies, Hanyang University. Seoul, 1992. p. 166-168. 

