Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria O'Donnell from the Falklands Islands] </F>
  [Text] The Argentine Government was able to obtain the 
results of seismic studies made around the Malvinas Islands, 
which is the first step in the search for oil. The results were 
obtained through Roman Oil, a U.S. company stationed in Houston 
that was used as a cover by Government Oil Deposits (YPF) to buy 
the maps. According to a top source in the Malvinas government, 
YPF is the first and only oil company so far to pay $3.2 million 
for the seismic maps. 
  Great Britain approved legislation two years ago allowing 
the 
Falklands Islands Government to start seismic studies in the 
area. Argentina reacted by sending "letters of discomfort" 
[preceding three words in English] to oil companies warning them 
that any activities carried out in the waters around the 
Malvinas Islands without its consent could lead to a legal 
conflict in the future. 
  Without taking the threat into account, the island's 
government granted the license to carry out the studies to Geko 
Prakla (U.S. company) and Spectrum (British), which put the 
study results up for sale late last year. 
  This daily was able to learn that it was suspicious to the 
island's government that the first oil company interested in 
buying the maps was Roman Oil, an oil company never heard of 
before by the island's advisers, the British Geological Survey. 
This is why the Kelpers did not hesitate to put a good method of 
investigation into operation. 
  Since the islanders believed the seismic studies could be 
very valuable to Argentina, they started investigating from that 
side. The first thing they learned was that Gaffny Klain, a 
British consultant with an office in Houston that advises the 
Argentine Government on oil matters, had recommended the 
purchase of the survey made by Geko Prakla and Spectrum. But 
they were not able to learn much about Roman Oil, which has a 
telephone not listed in the Houston directory. 
  Finally, their links to the companies that carried out the 
seismic studies turned suspicion to reality: YPF was the real 
name of the mysterious oil company that bought the maps, 
according to confirmation made unofficially by Spectrum and Geko 
Prakla to the Falklands Islands Government. 
  The Malvinas government gets a percentage of the survey 
result's sale. 
  There are no secrets on the island. A kelper said: "It is 
the type of community that when one goes to the supermarket and 
buys cereal the neighbor does not eat, he would come and ask if 
there is something wrong with your stomach." This is why the 
news spreads real fast among its 2,000 inhabitants. 
  Adviser Wendy Teggart said: "It is a rumor but it seems that 
YPF bought the seismic studies." But she immediately said it was 
true by adding: "It is better for us because if YPF decides to 
buy the license, it would mean a recognition in some way of the 
Falklands Islands Government's sovereignty over its waters." 
  When Great Britain began the search for oil in the islands 
without consulting Argentina, Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella 
said it would be impossible for Great Britain to continue the 
process on those terms because no oil company would risk 
millions of dollars in waters that are under disputed 
sovereignty. 
  The island's government members who were asked by this daily 
said that if there is indeed exploitable oil in large 
quantities, no international oil companies, and certainly not 
those that have no interest in Argentina, will be stopped by a 
juridical dispute. They said the first proof that business is 
more important than conflicts over sovereignty is the fact that 
the first company that bought the seismic studies was 
Argentina's YPF. At any rate, they said, this information will 
help the Argentine Government in the high-level meeting on 
hydrocarbons to be held with the Foreign Office late in March or 
early April in Buenos Aires. 
  The Argentine Foreign Ministry will say in the meeting that 
the search for oil will need cooperation between Argentina and 
the kelpers. This is what the government has been saying since 
the British went ahead with the seismic survey without 
consultation, which is the first, and most simple, and less 
costly step of the process. 
  The result of the survey involving a study of the terrain 
through probes was "optimistic." The survey said there may be 
oil in the islands. And the only way to prove it is to go ahead 
with the second stage: the exploration that involves drilling 
in territory claimed by Argentina and Great Britain. 
  Meanwhile, David Camp, the island's attorney general, is 
going ahead in drawing up legislation for issuing exploration 
and exploitation licenses. What happens is that because of the 
investment required in drilling exploration wells, the licenses 
that will be attractive to the oil companies are those that 
guarantee -- if oil is found -- their indisputable rights for 20 
or 30 years for the third and last stage: exploitation. 
  The current subject of conversation among the kelpers is the 
possibility of finding oil in the islands. Their main concern is 
that the oil companies may damage the islands' ecological 
balance and cause massive immigration, changing the life style 
of their small community. 
  To answer this type of question, the islands government has 
recently contracted the services of the company Environment 
Resources Management (ERM), which within three months will 
deliver a report on the impact the discovery of oil would have 
on the islands. It also sent a delegation to the North Sea and 
began paying the salary of Alex Camp, an internationally known 
oil tax expert. 
  The possibility of discussing the oil issue with Argentina 
is 
not yet in the kelpers' plans. The only thing they are sure of 
is that YPF bought the survey studies, and that they will be 
absent in the discussions if the meeting on hydrocarbons between 
Argentina and Britain is held in Buenos Aires. 

