BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bruno Bartholoni] </F>
  [Text] Vatican City, June 21 (AFP) -- The Vatican on 
Tuesday [21 June] urged world governments and arms manufacturers 
to rein in the escalating trade in deadly weaponry, saying 
traditional arguments in favour of arms sales were morally 
unjustifiable. 
  In a 36-page document on conventional weaponry, experts from 
the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace chaired by Cardinal 
Roger Etchegaray firmly rejected the argument that "if one state 
refuses to provide arms another will." 
  Such a stance was "without any moral foundation." 
  The Vatican recognised the right of states to legitimate 
defence, but "the fact that a state can legitimately possess 
arms and hence implicitly transfer or receive them brings with 
it serious obligations." 
  "Arms can never in any way be treated like other goods 
exchanged on world or internal market," the council said in the 
report entitled "The international arms trade, an ethical 
reflection," calling on governments to resist economic pressures 
to increase arms sales. 
  Acknowledging the economic disruption that could be caused 
by 
job losses in the arms sector, such difficulties "cannot 
legitimate the maintenance of an arms industry simply because of 
the risks involved in readjustment or in order to preserve jobs." 
  It insisted that governments had a duty to ensure the 
retraining of workers affected by military conversion. 
  The document denounced illegal arms sales which notably led 
to the re-arming of Iraq, condemning the use of false documents 
and the violation of arms embargoes. 
  "This same severe judgement also applies to companies that 
transfer components or dual-use products when they are well 
aware of the probability of their being used for hostile 
purposes." 
  The council warned that selling arms to all-comers could 
expose countries to war on their own territories, and said that 
the "arbitrary" sale of weapons to poor countries posed the most 
serious threat to peace. 
  ``In some developing countries, military expenditures are 
higher than those for health and education combined. 
  ``This is particularly tragic in those countries where 
people 
are unable to meet their basic needs because war is destroying 
their very means of subsistence,'' the report said. 
  Without waiting for completion of a code of conduct being 
worked on by the five permanent nations of the UN Security 
Council -- Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States 
-- the council recommended that competent bodies negotiate 
limits or a ban on certain categories of weaponry. 
  It suggested that landmines, "which cause unacceptable 
damage 
to civilian populations long after the cessation of 
hostilities," and other "excessively injurious" weapons could be 
subject to such restrictions. 
  It also called for international norms and sanctions to 
curtail the activities of arms traders who were "always ready to 
offer their services." 

