CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andrei Vavilov, first deputy minister of </F>
finace of the Russian Federation, by MOSCOW NEWS analyst 
Lyudmila Telen: "Russia Reaches Understanding with Creditors"] 
  [Text] The questions put by MOSCOW NEWS analyst Lyudmila 
Telen are answered by Andrei Vavilov, first deputy minister of 
finance of the Russian Federation, who participated in the 
latest negotiations with the IMF and members of the Paris Club. 
  Not long ago most experts agreed with the sad forecast that 
with the resignation of Yegor Gaydar and Boris Fyodorov the 
hopes for a tough financial policy had collapsed for good. But 
quite unexpectedly the draft budget for 1994, submitted by the 
Finance Ministry and backed by the premier, refuted these 
forecasts. Moreover, after the visit of Michel Camdessus, the 
International Monetary Fund will most likely agree to provide 
Russia with the second part of the promised credits, and the 
Paris Club will refrain from tough sanctions. 
  [Telen] You have been in the post of deputy finaance 
minister 
for three years now and these are not your first talks with the 
IMF. But this time they were particularly complicated. It was 
unclear till the last moment whether the IMF would agree to 
grant the second part of credits or would refrain from it. Isn't 
our partners' hesitation connected, above all, with the 
resignation of Gaydar and Fyodorov from the government? 
  [Vavilov] I think that the main reason for the IMF's 
cautiousness lies in something else. The thing is that until now 
we have only promised to achieve certain economic goals -- a low 
inflation level, an acceptable budget deficit, and so on. But 
for a number of objective and subjective reasons not all the 
promises were fulfilled. Therefore, it became much more 
complicated to hold negotiations with the IMF representatives. 
Nevertheless, I am sure that the main credit -- credit of 
confidence -- we have not exhausted at all. This is evidenced by 
the fact that after the negotiations the IMF and the Paris Club 
have eased their positions. 
  [Telen] Isn't it because the Russian side managed to scare 
off the West with threats such as: If you don't give money, 
social unrest will break out in Russia and who knows what 
consequences that would hold for Europe. 
  [Vavilov] We tried to use other arguments -- purely 
economic. 
It was important to convince our partners that the Russian 
government intends to maintain a tough financial policy. This 
year we have chosen a fundamentally new form of cooperation with 
the representatives of the IMF. Before, we presented to them the 
draft budget,then they evaluated how closely it corresponded to 
the aims of financial stabilization and only after that 
suggested that we make corrections which they deemed necessary. 
The program coordinated with the IMF, never before corresponded 
to the approved budget. Now consultations with the IMF proceeded 
simultaneously with the work on the draft budget, and it became 
possible to avoid differences. 
  [Telen] How did the negotiations with the Paris Club 
proceed? 
  [Vavilov] First of all, it must be pointed out that a number 
of meetings with its representatives were of an unofficial 
(although decisive in many respects) character. Certain people 
expected a scandal to break out on our visit to Paris. It was 
believed that the stand of the Paris Club would prove to be 
irreconilable: no deferments, the closure of credit lines, 
tougher conditions on payments for 1994. But there was no 
scandal. On the contrary, an understanding was reached to the 
effect that the agreements for this year on the payment 
conditions would be brought as close as possible to last year's 
agreements. This will make it possible to considerably simplify 
and speed up the procedure of coordination. The four-month 
deferment remains in force, and the credit lines won't be 
blocked. And there were no particularly heated arguments. True, 
from the start we told our creditors the following: "We can 
fulfil our commitments on payments to the Paris Cloub, but the 
amount of these payments will be determined after the end of 
negotiations with the IMF. But if the IMF does not approve our 
proposals, we will nevertheless start carrying out our program 
of financial stabilization." 
  [Telen] If the Paris Club had not cooperated, would this 
have 
dealt a blow to the Russian economy? 
  [Vavilov] First of all, as to our reputation, we would look 
like debtors incapable of fulfilling their commitments. To count 
after this on an influx of investments in our economy would be 
impossible. 
  [Telen] From what you said it follows that Russia is not 
only 
capable of carrying out the tough financial policy, but also 
convinced the West of the firmness of its intentions. Who in the 
present government, in the absence of Boris Fyodorov, can say 
"No" to the sectoral lobbyists? 
  [Vavilov] The government and, in the first place, the prime 
minister. For the time being the cabinet of ministers has not 
yielded to the pressure of the agrarians and the military. It 
may be recalled that the draft budget has limited the deficit to 
62.4 trillion rubles, the expected inflation level by December 
is 7 percent. 
  [Telen] Did the Finance Ministry manage to reach an 
agreement 
with the Central Bank? 
  [Vavilov] I think it did. the time of political battles 
between the financiers has passed. Today the Central Bank 
insists on a rather tough policy. 
  [Telen] But, perhaps the IMF understates our parliament. As 
is known, the Duma is just going to discuss the budget. Are you 
sure that the credit and monetary policy, worked out by the 
Finance Ministry, won't be called into question? 
  [Vavilov] At any rate, many MPs have already expressed their 
opinion on the score. Chairman of the State Duma Ivan Rybkin, 
Chairman of the Budget Committee Mikhail Zadornov, Chairman of 
the Committee for Economic Reform Sergei Glazyev are convinced 
that the Duma won't agree to increase budget outlays. Buy Yegor 
Gaydar and Boris Fyodorov doubt it. 

