and   R&amp;D in Progress 
<H4>  High Level Waste Policy and Activities in Japan </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0362A Tokyo GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO in Japanese Dec 93 pp 4-14 
--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0362A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo GENSHIRYOKU KOGYO </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shinichi Kawarada, Director, Nuclear Power Back </F>
End Promotion Office, Science and Technology Agency] 
  [Excerpt] 
<H5>  1. Foreword </H5>
  In this article, I will discuss policy trends and future 
developments concerning disposal of high level radioactive waste 
(HLW), which is of particular interest recently to the nation. 
My own personal opinions have been incorporated into this 
presentation. 
<H5>  2. Characteristics of HLW and Amount Generated </H5>
  In Japan, HLW refers to waste liquid that has been separated 
in the process of extracting uranium and plutonium in the 
reprocessing of spent fuel. In other countries, however, HLW may 
refer to the spent fuel itself. That is, in Japan and France, 
nuclear fuel is recycled to make the most effective use of 
resources, but in countries such as the United States, Canada 
and Sweden, HLW refers to the spent fuel itself. 
  In comparing the two, it is found that after processing, the 
former type of HLW is more compact and contains less 
radioactivity. Also, in terms of the period of continuing 
radioactivity, which depends mainly on the amount of TRU 
(transuranic) nuclides in the HLW, the former type of HLW allows 
more rational control of radioactive waste and is more 
appropriate from the viewpoint of environmental protection. 
  The amount of HLW generated is extremely small compared to 
other non-specific waste (if half of the electricity one 
Japanese uses in a lifetime (80 years) is generated by nuclear 
energy, the amount of HLW created in the process is about the 
size of three golf balls). On the other hand, HLW is extremely 
radioactive because it contains a large amount of fission 
products, and it generates heat. Also, while small in volume, it 
includes TRU nuclides with very long half-life. 
  At present, the only HLW generated in Japan is at the Tokai 
Reprocessing Plant of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel 
Development Corporation (PNC); and 516 cubic meters had been 
generated as of the end of March 1993. This is stored safely in 
tanks at the plant. Furthermore, Japan Nuclear Fuel is building 
a commercial reprocessing plant in Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori 
Prefecture, and from the year 2000, HLW is expected to be 
generated from operation of that plant. Also, the electric power 
companies currently have contracted with Great Britain and 
France for spent fuel reprocessing services and the uranium and 
plutonium recovered from the reprocessing, along with the HLW, 
is to be returned to Japan. 
  The forecasted volume of HLW that will be generated in the 
future takes all of these factors into consideration and will be 
changed substantially by the reprocessing plans and the scale of 
nuclear power generation in the future, but it is thought that 
the volume will be 40,000 to 50,000 vitrified units of HLW in 
the 2030s to 2040s, when disposal sites are expected to be in 
operation. 
  Consequently, measures that deal with these characteristics 
must be taken to dispose of this volume of HLW. This means 
solidifying HLW, which is generated in the form of waste liquid, 
into a safe form; cooling the solidified HLW until it is in a 
disposable state; and disposing of the HLW in a form that can be 
isolated for a long time so that it does not affect the human 
living environment. 
<H5>  3. Basic HLW Disposal Policy </H5>

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-025L-32A>      Figure 1:  HLW Storage </FIG>

  Japan's basic measures to deal with HLW liquid generated in 
spent fuel reprocessing includes (a) solidifying HLW into a 
stable form (glass), (b) storing it for 30 to 50 years for 
cooling and (3) disposing of it in deep strata several hundred 
meters underground (geologic disposal). Many foreign countries 
use the same disposal method. 
  The following are the general steps to be taken to implement 
the basic measures: 
  (a) Establish the technology to vitrify the HLW liquid; 
  (b) decide on a storage facility site and build a facility 
where the vitrified HLW can be stored; 
  (c) carry out R&amp;D to establish technologies needed for 
disposal, and along with this, decide on a disposal site and 
safely dispose of the HLW. 
  First, vitrification technology is in actual use in France 
and Great Britain. In Japan, cold test operation is underway at 
the vitrification technology development facility (TVF) in PNC's 
Tokai Works, and hot test operation using real liquid waste is 
scheduled for FY94. Thus vitrification technology can be 
considered as established for all intents and purposes. 
  Two storage facilities are being planned. One is for storage 
of vitrified HLW generated at PNC's Tokai Reprocessing Plant. 
This will be one of the functions of the ``Storage Engineering 
Center'' that PNC plans to build in Horonobe-Machi, Hokkaido, at 
the invitation of that town. However, the siting has not gone 
smoothly, due to opposition to the town's invitation by the 
Hokkaido governor and legislature. 
  The second storage facility is for vitrified HLW that will 
be 
returned from Great Britain and France, as mentioned earlier. 
This facility already is under construction at the Japan Nuclear 
Fuel site in Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori Prefecture. 
  As for HLW disposal, on 28 August 1992, the experts' group 
on 
radioactive waste of the Japan Atomic Energy Commission (JAEC) 
released a report entitled ``Concerning HLW Countermeasures'' 
that described a concrete vision of how to proceed with HLW 
countermeasures, which had not necessarily been clear until that 
point. In particular, the report made clear the steps, timetable 
and each organization's role and share of responsibility for 
disposal as a whole. As head of the office that served as the 
secretariat that compiled the report, I was most keenly aware 
that the report had to unveil before the Japanese people and 
gain their understanding and cooperation for HLW disposal. To do 
so, the report had to be highly transparent and include in 
concrete terms the policies that should be taken and the 
timetable that should be followed to achieve appropriate and 
safe disposal of HLW in the future. 


<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-025L-34A>      HLW Disposal Flow </FIG>



  In accordance with the long-term plan for development and 
use 
of nuclear energy, which was set forth by the JAEC (in June 
1987), the steps prior to implementation of geologic disposal of 
HLW are to proceed in four phases: ``Selection of effective 
strata (phase 1);'' ``selection of prospective disposal site 
(phase 2);'' ``demonstration of disposal technology at the 
prospective disposal site (phase 3);'' and ``construction, 
operation and shutdown of the disposal facility (phase 4).'' 
  At present we are in phase 2. Scheduled for this phase are: 
R&amp;D aimed at establishing disposal technology; and on the 
other 
hand, selection of the prospective disposal site by the disposal 
project's primary implementer (to be formed at an appropriate 
date), based on overall consideration of such factors as the 
results of R&amp;D, social conditions and regional conditions. 
  However, the way phase 2 was set up gave the mistaken 
impression that the results of R&amp;D will be directly linked to 
the process of selecting the prospective disposal site, and it 
is believed that this was one hindrance to the siting of the 
R&amp;D 
facility, which is not really directly related to the disposal 
site selection process. For this reason, the two were described 
separately in the report, to make it clear that disposal and 
R&amp;D 
are to be advanced concurrently. 
  In the future, instead of explaining things in a conceptual 
manner in terms of the four phases, we want to explain things 
concretely by showing individual processes. This will ensure 
that there will be no misunderstanding. 
<H5>  4. HLW Disposal Implementation </H5>

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-025L-36A>      Figure 3: Steps in HLW Geologic Disposal </FIG>


  What must be considered when carrying out the disposal is 
when, where and how to carry out the disposal project. 
  ``Industrial waste'' generated during industrial activity 
normally is processed and and disposed of by the parties that 
create the waste in accordance with the ``law concerning waste 
processing and cleanup,'' which states the principle that the 
waste creator is responsible for disposal. In the case of HLW, 
however, due to the length of time needed for disposal and the 
safety requirements, the national government must play a certain 
role in addition to the electric power companies (the waste 
creators). This is clearly a more active government 
responsibility regarding ``industrial waste'' than set forth in 
the abovementioned law. 
  To implement the disposal project smoothly and without 
confusion, the first thing to do is clarify the work shares of 
the government and the private sector. 
  The following is the disposal project framework, in the 
order 
given in the report. 
<H5>  (1) Government and Private Sector Workshares </H5>
  Certainly, the government and private sector must work as 
one 
in carrying out the necessary measures for disposal, but this 
will not be effective if responsibilities and roles are not 
clear. 
  The national government, the electric power companies and 
PNC 
are the three parties involved, and the report separates their 
roles as follows: 
  (a) The national government is responsible for appropriate 
and complete disposal, and it also will draw up the policies 
needed to advance the disposal project smoothly. 
  (b) The electric power companies are called upon to cover 
the 
cost of disposal and also to carry out a role in the R&amp;D 
stage 
that fully reflects their responsibility as the HLW creator. 
  (c) For the present, PNC will be called upon to implement 
steadily surveys of the geological environment and R&amp;D. 
  PNC's role is easy to understand because it involves R&amp;D 
without direct involvement in the disposal itself. There may be 
those who are not quite sure about the relationship between the 
government and the electric power companies, however, and I want 
to supplement the above with some of my own observations. 
  The electric power companies naturally must take 
responsibility as the waste creators, but as stated earlier, in 
view of the work involved in HLW disposal, the long-term nature 
of the disposal and other circumstances, the relationship was 
set up in this way because it was desirable that, in addition to 
the responsibility of the electric power companies as the waste 
creators, the government also bear responsibility for 
``appropriate'' and ``complete'' disposal and for drawing up 
measures such as new legal measures and regional promotion 
measures if needed to proceed smoothly with the disposal project. 
  You may be wondering exactly what ``appropriate'' and 
``complete'' involve. I believe that they include the following: 
  ``Appropriate'' probably involves ensuring that the form and 
method of disposal are appropriate and safe. Thus in terms of 
form, ``geologic disposal'' is stated as government policy and 
in terms of method, the government has indicated that its policy 
is to carry out R&amp;D to ensure that the methods used for 
geologic 
disposal are appropriate and safe, and has designated PNC and 
the primary research organization that will take the lead in 
carrying out the R&amp;D. Incidentally, final assurance of safety 
probably will be through safety inspections by the government. 
  ``Complete'' means that the disposal will be carried out 
thoroughly over what is expected to be a long period of time. 
That is why the government must be responsible for guaranteeing 
the permanence of the primary implementer of the disposal and 
for providing the systems needed to carry out disposal 
thoroughly, with cooperation and understanding from the people. 
<H5>  (2) Timing and Form of Primary Disposal Implementer </H5>
  It has been customary for the waste creator itself to 
dispose 
of the waste (this is actually the case for ``industrial 
waste''), or for the waste creator to contract a waste expert to 
do it. However, things are not that simple in the case of HLW. 
There certainly are no nuclear waste disposal firms, nor will 
there be in the near future. 
  Thus an appropriate primary implementer must be formed based 
on the shared roles of the government and the electric power 
companies, as pointed out in Part (1) above. 
  Although there are some who believe that this primary 
implementer should be formed immediately, the report takes the 
view that right now, time should be used to make steady advances 
in R&amp;D on geologic disposal and in gaining the understanding 
of 
the Japanese people. It maintains that, taking various 
circumstances into consideration, the primary implementer should 
be formed around the year 2000. 
  The report maintains that further study is needed regarding 
the form of the primary implementer. The study should consider 
such requirements as guaranteeing permanent disposal, 
responsibility of the waste creators and application of the 
results of R&amp;D. 
  The report also expresses the thinking that the time has 
come 
to begin to really address disposal measures, and points out 
that it is desirable for the consultative committee on HLW 
measures promotion (formed in October 1992; composed of three 
members: the government (director-general of the Science and 
Technology Agency's Atomic Energy Bureau and the 
director-general of MITI's Agency of Natural Resources and 
Energy), the chairman of the Federation of Electric Power 
Companies, and the president of PNC) to begin a study 
immediately on the composition of the primary implementer, and 
for a preparatory organization to be formed as soon as possible. 
<H5>  (3) Establishment of High Level Project Promotion </H5>
Preparatory Committee 
  Based on the above recommendation, the consultative 
committee 
on HLW measures promotion carried out intense studies aimed at 
immediate formation of a preparatory body, then established a 
high level project promotion preparatory committee on 29 May 
1993. The preparatory committee is subordinate to the 
consultative committee, and has its own secretariat. 
  The preparatory committee will not become the primary 
implementer automatically. JAEC will review the results of the 
preparatory committee's studies from a comprehensive viewpoint 
and based on that, the primary implementer will be established. 
  As for the administrative composition of the preparatory 
committee, JAEC member Hayashi was appointed the committee 
chairman and there are nine other members, including a secretary 
general (as of 1 July 1993). 
<H5>  (4) Steps Leading to Disposal </H5>
&lt;graphic&gt; &lt;/graphic&gt; 

  Of the series of steps and procedures leading to disposal, 
the most important and difficult probably is selection of the 
disposal site. Selection is to be done by the primary 
implementer, then approved by the government. 
  The Japanese people probably are most concerned about three 
points: When will the primary implementer make the selection and 
where will it be; how will the decision be made; and how will 
the people be involved in the selection process. 
  The report naturally does not give the name of the site, 
which is completely undecided. It does not give a selection date 
because there are undetermined factors. Regarding the selection 
procedures, however, the report states that the primary 
implementer will explain the disposal project to the local 
government of the area around the prospective site and get its 
approval. Emphasis is given to getting prior approval from the 
local residents. In other words, the the step of government 
approval of the disposal site will not be taken if local 
approval has not been received. Underlying this thinking is the 
hope that this will dispel the suspicions of the local 
residents, which arose when the deep strata research facility 
(to be discussed later) was sited, that the facility would 
gradually be converted into the disposal site. 
  The report states that once the site is set, the primary 
implementer will survey the features of the site to determine 
its appropriateness and also will validate the disposal 
technology. The report also gives a rough timetable for the 
disposal project, with the aim of beginning operation of the 
disposal site from the 2030s, or the mid-2040s at the latest. 
  The operation commencement date was set by assuming that the 
primary implementer will be formed around the year 2000, and 
then considering factors such as the time needed for steady 
implementation of the disposal steps, future reprocessing 
programs and other nuclear energy development, and the fact that 
the vitrified HLW returning from Great Britain and France will 
be stored 30 to 50 years for cooling. 
  When will the disposal site be selected? There are various 
undetermined factors, but around 2010 to 2015 was presumed in 
terms of the schedule given in the report. 
<H5>  5. Disposal Site Control </H5>
  Japan has chosen geologic disposal as the method for 
disposing of HLW, as have other countries that are proceeding 
with nuclear energy development. The reason is that the geologic 
disposal concept is based on safe disposal that does not rely on 
future generations to be responsible for maintaining the 
soundness of the disposal system. In other words, geologic 
disposal is a concept that does not rely on international, 
systematic control to ensure safety after the site is shut down 
(i.e., the hole that has been dug is filled back up and returned 
to its original state). 
  On the other hand, the people are very uneasy about the fact 
that geologic disposal removes the HLW from human control. 
  Recognizing this, the report maintains that introducing the 
idea of a control system for monitoring and maintaining records 
after shutdown of the disposal site would be one effective way 
to gain the understanding of the Japanese people. That is why 
studies from a technological viewpoint should continue on the 
significance, content and timeframe of a control system. 
  The word ``control'' has various meanings when referring to 
HLW. This has caused some confusion, which needs to be 
straightened out. 
  One case is when ``control'' is used in the sense of 
permanent storage, either above or below ground, of vitrified 
HLW. Some people think that this is good from the viewpoint of 
getting the understanding and concurrence of the people, but the 
policy has been not to use that method because it is not 
desirable to burden future generations and because geologic 
disposal, which even goes as far as refilling the disposal site, 
is more appropriate from the viewpoint of ensuring safety for an 
extremely long time. 
  A second meaning is ``control'' from the time that a site 
for 
geologic disposal is opened to the time it is refilled. The 
period of this control is estimated to be from 10 to 100 years. 
The effect on the surrounding environment by the HLW that has 
been firmly fixed into underground strata can be checked 
adequately during that period, and if there is any problem, it 
is even possible to withdraw the HLW. Moreover, since shutdown 
of the disposal site is done after a full check on whether 
safety can be assured for an extremely long time, it is 
inconceivable that trouble would arise after shutdown. 
  A third meaning is ``control'' after shutdown of the 
disposal 
site. This is the ``control'' that is mentioned in the report. 
The concept of geologic disposal is that safety after shutdown 
of the disposal site will not depend on a control system after 
the shutdown. Thus control after shutdown is not required to 
ensure safety. However, because there probably are those who 
feel uneasy about not having any controls after the shutdown, it 
has been maintained that future study is needed on what sort of 
control system would be appropriate in terms of gaining the 
people's understanding. At that time, it will be necessary to 
consider the will and the attitude of the people, and 
thereafter, a sociological approach will be important. Thus one 
possible approach would be to carry out a question-and-answer 
survey. 
<H5>  6. R&amp;D Implementation </H5>
  Progress in R&amp;D creates a foundation for disposal 
implementation, and steady implementation of R&amp;D and wide 
knowledge about its progress is extremely important in order to 
gain the people's understanding and cooperation for geologic 
disposal. Furthermore, since R&amp;D extends over a long period 
of 
time, the government must render judgments on the adequacy of 
R&amp;D at every stage of new discovery. 
  PNC has been the primary research institution conducting 
R&amp;D 
related to geologic disposal, and last September, it compiled 
and published its R&amp;D achievements in the ``technical report 
of 
HLW geologic disposal R&amp;D'' (first report). The majority 
reaction of the parties involved was that progress so far has 
been good in that the R&amp;D results have clarified the 
technological base for work to be done to ensure the safety of 
geologic disposal, and that henceforth, emphasis should be on 
investigative research on conditions in the geological 
environment and, if possible, data should be provided concerning 
actual deep underground strata in specific locations. 
  JAEC confirmed the progress achieved in each of three 
research areas --investigative research on conditions in the 
geological environment, R&amp;D on disposal technology and 
performance assessment research -- and it expressed praise for 
the overall soundness of the research. This was provided in a 
report entitled `` concerning the state of progress of HLW 
disposal R&amp;D.'' 
  The conclusion, in a nutshell, was that the R&amp;D 
described in 
this technological report was advancing in an appropriate, 
steady manner and that it could be concluded at this stage to be 
generally sound. JAEC also listed the geologic disposal R&amp;D 
issues to be addressed in the future in each of the 
abovementioned three research areas and further pointed out the 
importance of a deep strata research facility as a matter shared 
by the three disciplines. 
  The second report is scheduled to be compiled before the 
year 
2000. Even the timing of this report is considered very 
significant, and JAEC will set up an evaluation committee to 
assess it. 
  A matter of interest to many of the concerned parties is 
whether the results of research at the deep strata research 
facility can be included in the second report. No definite 
outlook can be given at this time because it greatly depends on 
progress in the siting of the ``storage engineering center'' 
project. PNC has been working on this after getting an 
invitation from Horonobe-Machi in Hokkaido. Even if substantial 
progress was to be made soon on the siting and the decision to 
build the deep strata research facility were to be made, a 
preliminary survey requiring about two years would be necessary. 
Considering such time restraints, it is doubtful that much 
significant data could be contributed to the report. 
  Nevertheless, even if that data will not be ready, the plan 
is to have measurements of the artificial barrier virtually 
completed by that time. Data also can be expected from on-site 
testing being conducted in Kamaishi City, Iwate Prefecture, and 
the ``geologic disposal basic research facility'' in PNC's Tokai 
Works that has been operating on a full scale since October 
1993. Thus the report will have fairly substantive content. 
<H5>  7. Deep Strata Research Facility </H5>
  The most important and urgent task that needs to be carried 
out in R&amp;D concerning geologic disposal, from the viewpoint 
of 
disposal of vitrified HLW, is to acquire physical and chemical 
data on what sort of environment actually exists in the deep 
underground strata, especially the characteristics of base rock 
and the nature and flow of ground water. To do this, a deep 
strata research facility needs to be established as soon as 
possible. 
  Advance consideration also should be given to opening up the 
facility to all who are interested and making it possible for 
people to observe the actual deep strata. 
  PNC is supposed to establish this research facility, but as 
stated earlier, the ``storage engineering center'' project which 
includes the deep strata research facility and is slated to be 
built in Horonobe-Machi, Hokkaido, is opposed by the governor 
and legislature of Hokkaido. 
  The main reason for the opposition is the suspicion that 
once 
the siting of the ``storage engineering center'' is approved, 
the surrounding area automatically will become the final 
disposal site. 
  To dispel this suspicion, the report states clearly the 
government's policy that ``planning of the deep strata research 
facility and the disposal site will be clearly separate.'' I.e., 
the deep strata research facility will not automatically become 
the disposal site. Also, as mentioned earlier, the primary 
implementer must get prior approval from the local residents 
when selecting the disposal site. Thus if the primary 
implementer should at some point in time approach the local 
residents about converting the deep strata research facility 
into a disposal site, and if this was rejected, it would be 
impossible to establish the disposal site there. I therefore am 
confident that this suspicion can be laid to rest. 
  The report also states that the geological features of Japan 
make it desirable to have multiple deep strata research 
facilities. The geological features of Japan can be divided into 
two broad categories: sedimentary rock base and crystalline rock 
base. Since the actual disposal site has not be decided, at 
least one research for each of these types of rock base must be 
established. The Horonobe area has sedimentary rock-based 
strata, so another research facility must be established in 
another area for crystalline rock-based deep strata. 
<H5>  8. Covering Disposal Cost and Regional Co-Existence </H5>
  The report states that in terms of the principle that the 
waste creators should bear a fair share of the disposal cost, 
ensuring funds to cover the cost should begin at an early date. 
It also points out that the time has come to estimate the 
rational cost as soon as possible and, based on that estimate, 
draw up concrete plans for ensuring funds to cover the cost. 
Total cost of disposal, based on estimates by other countries 
for their disposal projects, probably will be around several 
trillion yen at current prices. 
  When the concrete cost becomes clear, an image of the 
disposal site will be formed, and this will contribute to 
increasing the people's awareness of the necessity of the 
disposal undertaking. 
  When addressing regional co-existence, the report separates 
the disposal site from the deep strata research facility. 
  First, with regard to the prospective disposal site, the 
report says that the various surveys will take a long time and 
will be followed by a long period of construction and operation 
of the disposal site, and it therefore would be desirable to 
conduct studies on how to proceed with regional promotion in 
accordance with the actual state of the disposal site, including 
system improvements. The report then points out that the studies 
should cover the creation of a new regional promotion system, 
not just improvement of the existing system, which is based on 
the three principles of power resources. 
  The report also says that a study of a regional promotion 
plan for the deep strata research facility is needed as well, 
and that from the viewpoint of effective use of underground 
space, multiple use of the facility should be studied as well. 
<H5>  9. [omitted] </H5>
<H5>  10. Future Topics </H5>
  The government has worked actively on the development and 
use 
of nuclear energy, but it is a fact that it has encountered all 
sorts of criticism in the course of doing so. Regardless of this 
criticism, a record of safe operation of nuclear power plants 
has been built, and this has become a part of our lives. 
  Until now, there was a great deal of criticism about the 
safety of nuclear power generation, but criticism recently has 
focused on the nuclear fuel recycling policy and the radioactive 
waste disposal policy. It is believed that there are two main 
reasons for this. One is the domestic reason: the emphasis of 
nuclear energy related undertakings is shifting from nuclear 
power generation to the nuclear fuel cycle. The other is the 
international reason: with the breakdown of the cold war 
structure, attention has focused on the issue of dismantling of 
nuclear weapons and the extraction of plutonium, which has 
arisen because of reduction of U.S. and Russian nuclear 
arsenals, and on the related issue of pollution by nuclear 
weapon manufacturing facilities. 
  Plutonium use is not the subject of this article, so I will 
not go into it in detail. Nevertheless, as long as nuclear power 
generation is carried out, plutonium and other actinides 
inevitably will be generated in the reactors, nuclear fission of 
some of the plutonium takes place in the reactors and, as part 
of fuel, constantly contributes to the generation of electric 
power. The plutonium problem cannot be ignored so long as 
nuclear power generation is promoted. It is important to accept 
this fact and consider how to deal with this problem in the 
future. 
  Much of the recent criticism about radioactive waste is on 
HLW disposal, which has become the focus of interest with 
progress on the nuclear fuel cycle undertaking in Rokkasho-Mura, 
Aomori Prefecture. The criticism is that we should not proceed 
with the nuclear fuel cycle undertaking when there are no clear 
prospects for the final HLW disposal site. While it is true that 
the final disposal site is totally undecided, not one country in 
the world that is pursuing nuclear energy development and use 
has set up or started building a final disposal site. However, 
it is essential, naturally, to clearly establish a plan of the 
processes and steps leading to construction and operation of a 
final site. 
  Aware of the above, the report sets forth a future path, 
based on the progress made so far on HLW countermeasures and 
points that have been reconsidered. 
  Consequently, henceforth it is crucial that policies 
following this path be implemented steadily. Specific policies 
that should be taken first of all are: 
  (a) The high level project promotion preparatory committee 
should carry out full-scale public relations activities 
concerning the soundness and safety of HLW disposal; 
  (b) steady progress should be made on R&amp;D to ensure that 
geologic disposal will be sound and safe. 
  It is especially important to put maximum effort into 
establishing the deep strata research facility at an early date 
because it can contribute greatly not only to advancement of 
R&amp;D 
but also to public relations activities. In this connection, the 
``storage engineering center'' must be realized at an early date. 
  The contents of the project can be divided into the 
functions 
of temporary storage of the vitrified HLW units and the 
functions of the deep strata research facility, but since these 
two are packaged together, there is concern that the center 
automatically will become the disposal site in the future. There 
also is suspicion based on a variety of past circumstances. 
  That is why a proposal by the local government of 
Horonobe-Machi is considered one way to deal with the situation. 
  That is, go ahead and build the deep strata research 
facility 
because it will be a cold plant that will not handle radioactive 
materials, but hold storage related facilities as a matter for 
further deliberation. Once even a part of the research begins, 
many researchers and technicians will be assigned to the area, 
there will be a greater relationship of trust with the local 
residents, and emotional opposition arising from distrust will 
disappear gradually. Once that happens, I think that the 
people's understanding can be attained regarding storage related 
facilities as well. 
  Incidentally, another deep strata research facility must be 
set up in a crystalline rock-based area. Efforts must be made to 
realize this quickly as well. 
  Also, legal measures needed when implementing the disposal 
project must be considered as a medium to long-term issue. New 
legal measures have not been drawn up in order to proceed with 
individual projects such as the reprocessing enterprise and 
low-level radioactive waste burial. In the case of HLW disposal, 
however, considering not only its uniqueness and difficulties 
but also the situation in France, the perception of most of the 
parties concerned is that new legal measures are needed. 
  Consideration must be given to the fact there there is a 
difference in attitude and awareness about laws between the 
Japanese and the people of France and other western countries, 
and careful consideration must be given to whether the so-called 
method of procedural laws, in which siting procedures are 
prescribed by law, would be suitable in Japan. Nevertheless, 
legal status should be given at least to such things as the 
primary implementer and regional promotion policies, and legal 
measures in some form need to be studied. 
<H5>  11. In Conclusion </H5>
  Needless to say, a stable supply of energy is essential to 
realizing, maintaining and developing comfortable living 
conditions for the people. From the viewpoint of a stable 
supply, realizing that goal must be premised on reducing as much 
as possible dependence on oil and increasing energy demand [as 
in text] in the future. The only way to achieve this is to 
endeavor to conserve energy and actively advance the development 
and use of reliable alternatives to oil. It is not realistic to 
expect substantial amounts of energy from solar and other new 
forms of energy. That is why development and use of nuclear 
energy as an alternative to oil is being promoted as a realistic 
policy. 
  However, it is a fact that the image of nuclear energy, 
which 
was so bright in the early stages of research, has faded and 
holds little attraction for the young scientists that will be 
responsible for R&amp;D in the future. 
  Burnishing that image by ensuring that a high level of 
technological development has been perfected in the field of 
nuclear energy is a task for those of us who are promoting 
development and use of nuclear energy. I believe that the 
following should be carried out simultaneously to carry out that 
task. 
  First, We should steadily carry out the measures needed for 
appropriate disposal of HLW so that the burden is not left to 
future generations. 
  Second, We should promote R&amp;D on (a) technologies aimed 
at 
making resources out of useful substances in HLW and (b) 
technologies to reduce the half-life or convert TRU elements 
into non-radioactive nuclides by using nuclear reactors or 
accelerators. In the latter category, the Japan Atomic Energy 
Research Institute (JAERI) and PNC are conducting R&amp;D on 
``nuclide separation/annihilation processing.'' Japan has 
advocated this in the OECD/NEA, and is proceeding with 
international cooperation and exchange of information. 
  Parties involved in nuclear energy must address these issues 
actively and work to gain greater trust in the development and 
use of nuclear energy by finding and enhancing the benefits it 
offers. 

