BFN 

<F P=106> ["Liaowang Forum" by staff commentator: "The Fundamental </F>
Way Out is To Increase Effective Supply--More on the Issue of 
Commodity Prices"] 
  [Text] Price is the barometer of the market. It touches 
on the interests of numerous households and has a bearing on 
economic and social stability. The fundamental way to stabilize 
prices and the market is to do a solid job of agriculture, in 
particular, the building of the "shopping basket" project, and 
increase effective supply in society while launching a mass 
price survey and improving and strengthening macroregulation and 
control. 
  Developments in the last 40 years or so since the founding 
of 
the PRC and especially in the last 15 years since the drive of 
reform and opening up to the outside world was launched have 
shown that instability in agricultural production is bound to 
lead to fluctuations in economic development. On the contrary, 
if agriculture progresses smoothly, the rural economic 
environment is fine, and the whole society enjoys relative 
stability, reform and development will advance comparatively 
smoothly. This is where the significance lies for the party 
Central Committee and the State Council to always attach great 
importance to agriculture and rural work and for the central 
authorities to stress once again at a rural work conference, 
which was held this year, that unremitting efforts should be 
made to place rural work before work in other fields. Prominence 
should be given to the production of grain, cotton, and edible 
oil, and the "shopping basket" project, and the effective supply 
of agricultural and sideline products should be increased. 
  A relatively great number of reform measures are to be 
promulgated this year, and a readjustment of people's interest 
relations and society's interest pattern and the resulting 
frictions will thus intensify. Smoothly carrying on reforms in 
various fields of endeavor requires the maintenance of social 
stability and setting people's minds at rest. One of the 
sources which most directly and sensitively reflects people's 
sense of security and stability, their support for reform, and 
their confidence in the future, is market supply. Whether there 
are plenty of goods or not in the "shopping basket" has a direct 
bearing on the people's sentiments and enthusiasm for production 
and work. Therefore, we must pay close attention to the "rice 
bag" and "shopping basket" projects and do a good job of the 
production and supply of grain, cotton, edible oil, and other 
agricultural and sideline products to ensure the basic 
livelihood of the people throughout the nation and proceed to 
continuously improve their standard of living. With their lives 
stable, the masses of the people will support reform and plunge 
themselves into reform and construction with greater enthusiasm. 
To make sure that residents have an ample supply of non-staple 
foods whose prices are stable and rich in variety, we should 
advocate taking the interests of the whole into account, 
guaranteeing selected projects, and correctly handling the 
relationship between the "shopping basket" project and work in 
other fields. We maintain that a modern city is inseparable 
from good municipal administrative service facilities and a 
complete industrial production layout. If blind efforts are 
made to build more factories and office buildings and run 
economic development zoners of various types to the neglect or 
weakening of the construction of non-staple food production 
bases, which guarantee supplies of residents' basic daily 
necessities, there will not be enough food in residents' 
"shopping baskets," commodity shortages will occur, and total 
supply and demand will be imbalanced. In the final analysis, 
economic development would hardly last long. In this sense, 
that the party Central Committee and the State Council have 
stressed doing a good job in the construction of the "shopping 
basket" is a strategic move taken to meet the needs of urban 
economic development, rather than just building a stable 
"logistic supply base." 
  Doing a good job in the construction of the "shopping 
basket" 
project and improving the quantity and quality of agricultural 
and sideline projects is also a way out of readjusting the 
agricultural production structure and increasing peasants' 
incomes. As a big country where agriculture is predominant, 
China has a population of close to 1.2 billion people, of which 
900 million live in the countryside. This is China's most 
important national condition. In the past 15 years of reform, 
there has been a very significant increase in peasants' incomes. 
Nevertheless, the increase is still far below the growth in 
urban per-capita incomes. Now, to raise peasants' incomes, 
major efforts should be made to develop second and tertiary 
industries in rural areas. Concentrating efforts on readjusting 
the structure of agricultural production, developing more 
industrial crops, in particular, products relating to the 
"shopping basket" project, will have a very effective and direct 
bearing on increasing peasants' incomes. Here we cite a case in 
point. In 1991, Taian City, Shandong, invested 18 million yuan 
in running a "Shopping Basket Science and Technology Park." It 
developed vegetable production according to international 
standards and sold its products to 156 countries and regions. 
In the January- May period last year alone, the city earned 
$11.6 million in foreign exchange through exporting its 
products. Taian's way of doing things shows that carefully 
designing and implementing the "shopping basket" project is also 
an important way of increasing peasants' incomes and achieving a 
well-off standard of living in rural areas. 
  Developing the production of agricultural and sideline 
products, including vegetables, is a business promising 
relatively high efficiency, for which the peasants are willing 
to work with enthusiasm. However, the business is highly risky. 
Particularly at a time when the peasants have very limited 
means to obtain market information and a limited ability to take 
the market well in hand and have difficulties in transportation, 
storage, and fund raising, for producers to appropriately decide 
the scope of production and variety in accordance with accurate 
and comprehensive market information, ensure supply and demand 
are balanced, the production structure is rational, peasants' 
incomes rise steadily, and market swings are reduced or avoided, 
it is necessary to establish a reserve system and risk 
regulating funds for meat, vegetables, and other major 
agricultural and sideline products, perfect the information 
network, form a management and regulation and control mechanism 
based on economic and legal means, and protect the interests of 
producers and consumers. This is also necessary and proper 
government behavior in a market economy. 
  As production expands, it is necessary to closely integrate 
producing and marketing areas as well as vegetable growers and 
consumers; form operational mechanisms for total quantity 
balance, the smooth circulation of commodities, and operational 
flexibility; and establish a market system for agricultural and 
sideline products centering on wholesale markets. At present, 
China has many wholesale markets, which have played a positive 
role in promoting the shipping of vegetables from the South to 
the North, grain from the North to the South, and grain from the 
Center to the West. However, because of the lack of a number of 
large-scale, multifunctional and comprehensive trans-regional 
backbone markets, the circulation of agricultural and sideline 
products in different regions has been hamstrung to a certain 
extent. To genuinely achieve a free flow of commodities across 
the country; promote the structural readjustment of non-staple 
foods in terms of producing areas, seasons, and variety; and the 
improvement of their commercialization levels, it is still 
necessary to further establish and improve central, regional, 
and local multilayer wholesale networks, promote the formation 
of a single national market, and at the same time, standardize 
market order, reduce the number of operational links, remove 
circulation barriers and improper trading behaviors, and enable 
the "shopping basket" project to play an important role in 
harmonizing the relationship between production, circulation, 
and consumption as market mechanisms and macroregulation and 
control play their own part. 

