Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Rafael Loret de Mola: "The Narcos and Marcos"] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] At first, the explanation of 
the rebellion's [editorial note: `rebellion's' refers to the 
revolt in Chiapas] social nature and the pictures of 
impoverished peasants carrying wooden rifles sufficed to shock 
the public and place the blame on the institutional abandonment 
of ethnic groups. Later, certain heated issues, such as that of 
the military equipment, began to be explained, putting the 
conflict on a different plane. 
  The notorious Sub-Commander Marcos recently revealed (in a 
newspaper on Sunday, 6 February) that many of the weapons in his 
possession come from the Mexican Army. According to the account 
given by the neo-Zapatista leader, the officers do not turn over 
all the submachineguns, rifles, and grenades seized from drug 
traffickers to their superiors. The bulk of the weapons is put 
up for sale, overtly and brazenly, creating an endless circular 
structure: from the "narcos" to the Army, from the latter to the 
"narcos," and so on, indefinitely. Based on the explanation 
given, the "guerrilla fighters" modified the pace. 
  For the foregoing to occur, there must have been some 
specific circumstances, including the complicity of the military 
and the complacency of the drug traffickers. This requirement is 
due to the natural difficulty in gaining access to the select 
core of clandestine clients among the military personnel, whose 
preeminent mission is to incapacitate (and, of course, not 
rearm) criminals and potential adversaries of the government of 
the republic. The tragic aspect of the story lies in the fact 
that those offering military merchandise could become the next 
mortal victims of the purchasers. 
  This shady relationship jeopardizes the national security 
and, of itself, explains several of the original statements made 
about the scope of the clandestine neo-Zapatista army, its 
financing, and the authorities' unspeakable negligence. Despite 
the dimensions of the surveillance in an agitated region, the 
authorities failed to take timely action to prevent the New 
Year's uprising, even though many warnings were given, and there 
was evidence of paramilitary exercises at various "barracks" in 
the Lacandona sierra region. 
  Regardless of the persistent statements by government 
sources, the incredible apathy of the military is irrational, 
when it was obvious that high-powered weapons were being 
accumulated and thousands of (supposedly monolingual) villagers 
were being trained. They were called upon to decide, through a 
less tainted vote than usual, whether or not to give the war cry 
as a last resort for easing their ancestral humiliation and 
increasingly underprivileged status, as well as the pangs of 
hunger, poverty, and disease. 
  Although it may seem strange, the leaders of the so-called 
Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) were always in 
control: first, when they recruited the impoverished Indians, 
and subsequently, upon becoming accomplices of bad members of 
the military. The latter quite shamelessly put in the "rebels'" 
hands the shrapnel required to start a revolution of alarming 
proportions (they were fully aware of the potential of the 
weapons confiscated and later sold) and obviously dangerous to 
the Mexican political system. [passage omitted] 
  The "narcos," for their part, have their own perspective. 
Would they perhaps benefit from the rise of an armed force other 
than their own, to pave the way for a war with social aspects, 
unrelated to the drug traffic? Since 1 January, has anyone paid 
attention to the activities of the "capos" and cartels? By 
connecting the two questions, surprising conclusions could be 
reached, especially if we start with a free, spontaneous 
confession of the original ownership of the weapons now 
supporting the rebels in the Lacandona sierra. Despite the 
meager exchange of lead (only a few days of tension before the 
unilateral cease-fire, scrupulously observed by the 
neo-Zapatistas thereafter), the weapons have served to modify 
the Salinist regime's plans, to discredit its achievements 
(especially on the international scene), and to display its 
baggage, compounded by neoliberalist arrogance and government 
blindness. 
  The undercurrent of tension is becoming turbulent. 
Determining the connections between Marcos, the "narcos," and 
certain unethical officials (who presumably marketed the 
weapons) would help to explain the real motive for the uprising. 
There is evidence for doing so. 

