CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Future of ESA With New Direction"--first </F>
paragraph is LUFT- UND RAUMFAHRT introduction] 
  [Text] The ESA's [European Space Agency] plans to 
participate in the international space station were called into 
question last year. It was not until January 1994 that they got 
around to restructuring the ESA space program. It was, to be 
sure, clearly reduced, but it at least affords industry new 
security in planning. 
  The decisions reached by the conference of ESA ministers in 
Granada at the end of 1992 concerning the major European space 
programs wound up in the wastepaper basket only a few months 
later. The mounting budget problems of the governments 
concerned, but also the first bilateral agreement between the 
United States and Russia on cooperation, had forced the ESA to 
basically restructure its plans. 
  After lengthy negotiations, in Paris on 15 February the ESA 
Council was able to reach agreement on new plans. On this basis, 
the MSTP (Manned Space Transportation Program) and Columbus 
programs can now be tackled as European contributions to the 
international space station. The program now includes a crew 
transfer vehicle (CTV), a manned, automated transfer vehicle 
(ATV), and an orbital Columbus element, all of which are to be 
launched with the new Ariane 5 carrier rocket. In addition, 
joint space flights with Russia (Euromir) and the United States 
are planned. How cooperation with the United States and Russia 
on the development, construction, and operation of a common 
international space station will look in detail cannot yet be 
foreseen. The ESA Council has only confirmed its determination 
to take part in negotiations with all the parties to the venture. 
  There were lengthy discussions as to whether the hitherto 
separate Columbus and MSTP programs should be combined. It has 
now been decided that a single management structure will be 
responsible for the execution of this program as of March 1994. 
For 1994 and 1995, 203 million RE (1 RE = 1 ECU) were released 
to finance the MSTP and 267 million RE for Columbus. But only 
studies and advance developments are to be implemented with 
these funds initially until the decision is made at a conference 
of ESA ministers in 1995 as to whether these elements will 
actually be built. 
  The extent of the financing for these is about 60-percent 
less than the amounts planned for them in Granada in 1992. This 
means about 120 million German marks [DM] for 1994 and about 
DM140 million for 1995 for the German contribution to manned 
space transport. By and large, the Ministry for Research and 
Technology's (BMFT) ESA budget was slightly reduced for the 
first time in 1994. The BMFT informed us that, after the high 
growth rates of the past few years, which had led to a doubling 
[of the ESA budget], the ESA contribution of more than DM1.092 
billion originally planned for 1994 could no longer be 
justified. Additional cuts are probably no longer planned, but 
upward adjustments are just as little expected. 
  At any rate, a certain security as concerns planning has set 
in with this restructuring. The ESA believes that the new 
program not only takes into account the financial obligations of 
the participating states, but also contains elements that are 
consistent among themselves and which can be adapted to altered 
basic conditions. The ESA thinks that these elements are unique 
in a framework of cooperation, will be utilizable very early on, 
and are compatible with a long-term view of the situation. 
  The now combined MSTP program for manned space transport 
makes it possible to transport persons to and from space 
stations, to keep them supplied and remove their waste products, 
for humans and robots to perform outboard repairs and 
maintenance on space vehicles and stations, as well as to later 
organize program elements in terms of long-term objectives like, 
for example, moon missions. 
  The CTV is a transport vehicle designed to be used as a 
return capsule which can be launched with Ariane 5. With a total 
mass of 18 tons, four passengers and 400 kg of payload can be 
transported into orbit and back in addition to a payload of 1 
ton from earth into space. The design permits a certain amount 
of aerodynamic maneuverability (lateral range), from 200 to 500 
km. It can be landed with parachute with a maximal degree of 
accuracy of 9 km. Water landings are also possible. According to 
ESA plans, a first demonstration flight (manned or unmanned) 
could be made by 2001, a second (manned) flight by 2002, and 
regular operation after that. At any rate, some technologies 
that have already been developed for the Hermes program would be 
usable for the CTV. Among these are problems involving 
aerothermodynamics, flight path calculations, thermal balance, 
materials, onboard systems, and testing procedures. But 
navigation problems must be studied again since the CTV is 
supposed to fly automatically; that is, none of the passengers 
need be trained as pilots. 
  The ATV is also supposed to be launched with Ariane 5 and to 
convey space station elements, or payload modules with a mass of 
up to 14 tons, to space stations in a lower orbit as well as 
serving to remove waste from space stations. The ATV will carry 
out an automatic rendezvous and docking maneuver and can remain 
docked at the space station for up to six months. Since the ATV 
will serve to remove spent fuel waste from space stations and 
burn out during reentry, the possibility of landing it has not 
been allowed for. The first flight could be made in 1999 with 
regular operation as of the year 2000. 
  Along with both of these vehicles, the CTV and the ATV, a 
European robot arm is expected to be developed within the 
framework of the MSTP. It should be ready for use as of 1999 as 
well as a space suit for outboard use, as already provided for 
in the earlier plans. A demonstration flight is planned for 1998. 
  The BMFT believes that a new basis for manned space flight 
could be created in Europe with these elements. From today's 
standpoint, these in their time "overly ambitious programs" are 
now grounded on a viable financial basis, technological 
continuity is ensured, and the opportunity to participate in 
global cooperation is preserved. The BMFT says that Europe has 
now attained freedom of design in view of our point in time and 
organization of its contribution to the space station. 
  But it is also important for us now to achieve closer 
European solidarity. The earlier ESA Hermes and Columbus 
programs were marked by a clash of interests between France and 
Germany. Now the European contribution to the global space 
station will be "decisively stabilized" by the merger of 
transport and station programs. 
  Above all, this merger did not go undisputed during the 
final 
phase of the negotiations. But, alongside the decisions on 
manned spaceflight, the ESA Council made a few more important 
decisions that contribute to the safeguarding of industrial 
capacities. Thus for the user programs such as, for example, for 
earth observation, telecommunications, and MIR [Russian Space 
Station] missions, we Germans are to contribute about DM1.3 
billion, about DM1 billion of which will be available by the 
year 2000. The ESA Council has confirmed that the earth 
observation programs, Envisat and Polar Platform, will also be 
combined into a single management structure. 

