Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Elza Oliveira] </F>
  [Text] Foz do Iguacu, Parana -- In the Upper Paraguay River 
(which includes the Mato Grosso marshlands) deforestation and 
mercury are destroying the local fauna and flora; in Rio Grande 
do Sul 4 million hectares are in the process of desertification; 
in the Pilcomayo Basin -- encompassing Bolivia, Argentina, and 
Paraguay -- the flow of 98 million metric tons of sediments a 
year causes silting and flooding. 
  Those are some of the most critical problems discussed by 
participants in the First International Symposium on River Plate 
Basin Environmental Problems, which gathered more than 100 
experts from Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Bolivia 
in Foz do Iguacu during the last four days. 
  The meeting was sponsored by the Institudo Acqua and 
attended 
by French and U.S. experts as well as OAS and UNESCO 
representatives. 
  The River Plate Basin -- the third largest on the planet -- 
presents problems everywhere. The exploitation of natural 
resources without appropriate guidelines endangers unique 
ecosystems such as the Pantanal [Mato Grosso's marshlands], the 
Mata Atlantica [strip of forests along the Atlantic coast], and 
the Cerrado [central plateau region]. Besides all this, the 
River Plate basin is the only one whose rivers flow from a 
tropical to a temperate region. 
  In the River Plate Basin live 116 million Argentines, 
Brazilians, Paraguayans, Uruguayans, and Bolivians whose 
contribution to their country's GDP's is considerable. With the 
exception of Bolivia, in January 1995 the other four nations 
will begin a process aimed at integrating their economies 
through the Common Market of the South (Mercosur). Rivers will 
be used as large avenues. Their economic importance also can be 
measured by their energy-producing capacity: 42,000 megawatts. 
  Newton Cordeiro, coordinator for South America of the OAS' 
Regional Environment Department, said: "Changes provoked by 
agriculture and industry, the existence of numerous dams, and 
future transportation projects combined with the rain system and 
the soil quality create risks of flooding, mud slides, and 
prolonged droughts." 

