Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Control Mechanism Is Needed in Dealing With </F>
the Policy Toward North Korea"] 
  [Text] In his New Year's address, asserting that "the 
nuclear issue should be solved only through DPRK-U.S. talks," 
North Korean President Kim Il-song denounced President Kim 
Yong-sam's civilian government by saying it is "a puppet regime 
which is no different from the previous military dictatorial 
regimes." 
  All North Korean mass media, including NODONG SINMUN as 
well, 
have been denouncing the Kim Yong-sam government, calling it "a 
puppet clique." This shows that Kim Il-song and his regime still 
do not recognize our legitimate civilian-led government as a 
party of dialogue while still adhering to the Cold War theory. 
  This notwithstanding, our side tends to assess North Korea 
with good-intended words by saying "We cannot say North Korea 
possesses nuclear weapons," "It is an urgent task to solve the 
North Korean nuclear issue in the first half of this year," and 
"It is possible to hold North-South summit talks this year." 
Thus, a series of encouraging words that pin hopes on North 
Korea as being one party of the North-South dialogue have been 
successively uttered recently. 
  What a contradictory phenomenon this is! It results from the 
fact that confronting views in approaching the North-South 
Korean issue have long existed in our society, and even today a 
view which synthetically grasps the North-South Korean issue has 
not been yet established among our people. Furthermore, such a 
series of words may have been uttered after being perplexed by 
the fact that an agreement is imminent in the negotiations 
between the United States and North Korea. 
  Although such conflicting views on North-South relations 
among our government officials have been rectified to some 
extent following the recent cabinet reshuffle, many of those who 
deal with the North-South relations question still only reveal a 
"good opinion" regarding their personal stance or the stance of 
the organization they belong to. 
  Anyway, in dealing with the issue of North-South relations 
we 
tends to overlook the essence of the issue and, instead, only 
cling to procedures, giving priority to them. For example, we 
have even come to believe that if North Korea accepts nuclear 
inspections and agrees to exchange special envoys, the issue of 
North-South relations can be completely settled. The nuclear 
inspections are nothing but a process to guarantee North Korea's 
transparency, which can prove that it is not developing nuclear 
weapons. North Korea's nuclear transparency is not guaranteed to 
the extent where we can promise to suspend the Team Spirit 
exercise as soon as the International Atomic Energy Agency's 
inspection team arrives in North Korea. 
  Speaking of the issue of exchanging special envoys, 
exchanging special envoys itself is not important. What is 
important is the contents of the messages the special envoys 
deliver. The contents of the messages exchanged between the 
North and the South may differ. It will require much time and 
effort before the North and the South reach an agreement in view 
on the contents included in the messages. 
  We should examine if we have been entangled in North Korea's 
strategy intended to overshadow the essence of North-South 
relations. At the same time, we should establish a sort of 
mechanism which can deal with the issue of North-South relations 
by giving emphasis to its essence. We should develop a policy 
toward North Korea which has principles and continuity. A policy 
toward North Korea should be such that it does not change even 
if a regime or ministers concerned change. It should transcend 
the regime. Such a policy is possible only when it is 
implemented with the spirit that the issue of North-South 
relations should be dealt with by the ROK, not by specific 
ministries or regimes. 

