BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Jimin (1728 4949 3046)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 30 Mar (XINHUA) -- Science and technology 
personnel at the Beijing Laboratory of Vacuum Physics, an 
affiliate of the Chinese Academy of Sciences [CAS], made an 
outstanding achievement after only months of effort: They 
succeeded in removing and implanting silicon atoms with relative 
ease, thus enabling our country to penetrate the world's front 
line of high technology research conducted in the nanometer 
range. 
  The good news won words of praise from inside and outside 
China. State Councillor Song Jian asked relevant departments to 
relay congratulations from the State Council to the researchers. 
CAS President Zhou Guangzhou was deeply gratified at the 
achievement. Nobel Laureate Binnig and Doctor Ke-er-dun [2688 
1422 7319], a world-renowned expert in the nanometer field, 
separately sent letters highly estimating the achievements with 
such praise as "a world-level achievement" and "a very beautiful 
experimental result." 
  Shifting a single atom was once a dream of mankind. Atoms 
are so small that if we arrange 100 million of them in a row, 
their collective length will amount to only about 1 cm, and we 
will still have difficulty picking them up. Starting in the 
1990's, a few countries, including the United States, startled 
the world by succeeding in shifting an atom in the low 
temperature range of 269 degrees Celsius below zero. The 
technique involved, which is extremely attractive due to its 
potential applications and commercial value, can push mankind's 
ability to reorder the world from the micrometer to the 
nanometer range (one nanometer is equal to one billionth of a 
meter), and foretells a revolutionary leap in future production 
methods. 
  Initially, our scientific and technological circles, which 
lacked the means to conduct experiments, could only watch 
impatiently as others scored successes. In August 1993, the 
Beijing Laboratory of Vacuum Physics imported an ultravacuum 
tunnel scanning microscope [chao gao zhen kong sao miao sui dao 
xian wei jing 6389 7559 4176 4500 2217 4178 7143 6670 7359 1792 
6975], which is used for observing the surface topography of 
substances. To modify equipment for atomic manipulation, the 
laboratory added a special microcontroller, and even used 
aluminium lunch boxes to form a series of shields along the 
scanning path. Led by Professor Pang Shijin, researchers worked 
day and night and successively made significant progress in 
experiments conducted under normal temperatures: 
  They wrote the smallest possible characters. Other countries 
have displayed their abilities to manipulate atoms by utilizing 
a shape similar to the Chinese character "xie [write 1400]." 
How good is the vacuum laboratory when it comes to "writing?" 
The laboratory removed atoms from the crystal lattice of the 
silicon surface with a probe attached to the ultravacuum tunnel 
scanning microscope, and purposely traced out the Roman letters 
"PRC" and the Chinese characters "zhong guo [China 0022 0948]" 
on the surface. Each stroke of the Chinese characters has an 
average width of two nanometers, and was produced by removing 
three to four silicon atoms that were arranged side by side. It 
is believed that these characters are the smallest in the world. 
  Atomic insertion is regarded as being more significant than 
removal. For example, when in the future we wish to fine-tune 
an apparatus at the nanometer level to change or enhance its 
performance, we have to implant foreign atoms to form an alloy 
with the existing substance. Photographs produced by 
researchers at the vacuum laboratory indicated that the 
researchers were successful. White spots on the photographs 
showing that the inserted atoms are the result of a pile-up -- 
an increase in the atomic radius which results in a clear atomic 
lattice being obscured. The researchers claimed that the 
process of atom insertion has not yet been reported inside or 
outside the country. 
  The researchers more or less figured out the patterns of 
atomic arrangements pertaining to the bounded domains [chou jie 
3985 3954] of atoms on a silicon surface. They discovered that 
basically two kinds of defects can occur in the geometric 
patterns of atomic lattices: "Z-shape" and "ladle-shape" 
defects. Using these findings, the physics vacuum laboratory 
has introduced over 30 types of possible patterns of atomic 
arrangements on a silicon surface. It is believed that the 
laboratory has scored a first in the world in this respect. 

