BFN 

  [Text] Ten active Opposition MP's and seven former MP's 
have been suspected by the United States of involvement in the 
narcotics trade and three have been denied entry visas to the 
U.S., Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri told the Cabinet 
yesterday. 
  A Cabinet source said Sqn Ldr [Squadron Leader] Prasong said 
the three MP's denied visas still sat in the House. He named 
one of them as Chat Phatthana Party MP for Chiang Rai Mongkhon 
Chongsuthamani. 
  Mr Mongkhon could not be reached yesterday for a statement. 
  The U.S. Embassy refused comment on the allegation against 
Mr 
Mongkhon. 
  Sqn Ldr Prasong's revelations came as the Cabinet discussed 
at length the drug allegations against Chat Thai MP for Nakhon 
Phanom Thanong Siriprichaphong. 
  An Interior Ministry source said the U.S. suspicions that Mr 
Mongkhon was involved in the drugs trade and the refusal to 
grant him an entry visa was also mentioned in a letter sent from 
the Foreign Ministry to the Interior Ministry yesterday. 
  The Foreign Ministry said in the letter that the U.S. had 
asked Thailand to arrest Mr Thanong and send him to that country 
for trial. 
  The ministry said the U.S. had also informed it it had 
denied 
an entry visa to Mr Mongkhon on suspicions he had been involved 
in the narcotics trade in the U.S. under similar circumstances 
to Mr Thanong. 
  Mr Mongkhon's visa request was denied in March. 
  The U.S. said some people had sought information about Mr 
Mongkhon, but its only reply had been "no comment", the Foreign 
Ministry stated in its letter. 
  The U.S. Embassy in Bangkok, when asked about this matter 
yesterday, declined comment. 
  Mr Mongkhon is known widely in his home province as "Sia 
Lek". 
  He is a former close aide to Narong Wongwan, former leader 
of 
the now-defunct Samakkhi Tham Party, who was also denied an 
entry visa by the United States for similar reasons. 
  An elder brother of Mr Mongkhon is now serving time in jail 
after being sentenced to death on drug charges in April 1992. 
  Mr Mongkhon, 48, was elected to represent Chiang Rai in 
1983, 
1986, 1988 and 1992. He served as secretary to the agriculture 
and cooperatives minister in 1990. 
  Sqn Ldr Prasong also told the Cabinet he was ready to 
testify 
before the House Committee on Parliamentary Affairs concerning 
this matter tomorrow. 
  The Cabinet yesterday considered legal points to decide 
whether Mr Thanong could be sent to the United States for trial. 
  Four laws were taken into consideration--the Extradition Act 
of 1929, the International Cooperation on Crime Act of 1992, the 
Thai- U.S. extradition treaty of 1990 and the Narcotics 
Suppression Act of 1979. 
  According to the U.S. indictment, Mr Thanong was involved in 
smuggling marijuana between 1977 and 1987. 
  This means Mr Thanong cannot be sent for trial in the U.S. 
under the extradition treaty. 
  According to the Narcotics Suppression Act of 1979, crimes 
which took place abroad cannot be tried in Thailand. The 
Narcotics Suppression Act, which was amended in 1992, also 
cannot be enforced retroactively. 
  Prime Minister Chuan Likphai said after the Cabinet meeting 
it was still unclear whether Mr Thanong could be sent to the U.S. 
  He said the Juridical Council had been asked to make 
recommendations. The council will also study the possibility of 
having Mr Thanong undergo trial in Thailand. 
  The source said Interior Minister Chawalit Yongchaiyut told 
the Cabinet the evidence against Mr Thanong lacked weight if he 
was tried in Thailand. 
  He said consideration must be given to whether the U.S. 
indictment against Mr Thanong could be used as evidence. 
  Sqn Ldr Prasong also admitted the local evidence against the 
MP was insubstantial. 
  The Interior Ministry has decided it cannot arrest Mr 
Thanong 
and send him to the U.S. because the alleged crimes were not 
committed in Thailand. 
  The decision follows a meeting yesterday between Permanent 
Secretary Ari Wong-araya and his deputies, Chaiwat Hutacharoen 
and Chaloem Promloet, said the source. 
  The source said Thailand had been asked to send Mr Thanong 
to 
the U.S. under an extradition treaty between the two countries 
signed in 1990. 
  An alternative was to send him to a third country which has 
an extradition treaty with the U.S. as Washington realizes the 
extradition of Mr Thanong is not possible under the Extradition 
Act of 1929. The Interior Ministry based its decision on this 
act. 
  The Foreign Ministry also informed the Interior Ministry in 
its letter that 10 Americans suspected of conspiracy with Mr 
Thanong had been sentenced to jail. 

