Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following review of the 22 February 
issue of Cairo AL-SHA'B summarizes articles that are Islamic in 
nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Regime Said To Collapse 
  2. Government at Odds With Correspondents 
  3. Corruption, Anti-Islamic Policy Viewed 
  4. Normalization With Israel Slammed 
  5. Satellite Dish Invasion 
  6. Preachers Banned From Television 
  7. West's Anti-Islamic Views Refuted 
<H5>  REGIME SAID TO COLLAPSE </H5>
  In its 22 February edition, Cairo AL-SHA'B, the mouthpiece 
of 
the opposition Labor Party, publishes an unattributed 400-word 
report on page 1 citing Britain's THE SUNDAY TIMES' 20 February 
issue saying that the regime in Egypt is threatened with 
collapse at the hands of Islamists. The report says that "a 
confidential U.S. intelligence report being drafted in light of 
reports by the central, foreign, and military intelligence 
services warns against the dangers facing the regime in Egypt 
and its possible collapse in the face of onslaughts by the 
Islamic groups and the consequences this could have for the 
entire Middle East." THE SUNDAY TIMES' report notes: The 
"Islamic fundamentalists will continue to make gains throughout 
the country, which will practically lead to the collapse of the 
Egyptian Government, which is a geopolitical mainstay for U.S. 
policy in the Arab world." The report refers to "the Americans' 
frustration at the security campaigns, torture of suspects, 
military trials, executions, and the government's refusal to 
deal with any of the social problems that give the 
fundamentalists a political advantage." The report claims that 
while the U.S. State Department and U.S. intelligence are urging 
the Egyptian regime to introduce political and economic reforms, 
the regime has refused to change its "hardline attitude." 
<H5>  GOVERNMENT AT ODDS WITH CORRESPONDENTS </H5>
  An approximately 400-word unattributed report on pages 1 and 
7 notes that "dissatisfaction" prevails among foreign 
correspondents in Egypt over the "increasing harassment" to 
which they have recently been subjected by the Egyptian 
authorities for reporting on the situation in Egypt. The 
government is not happy about it. The report notes that the AFP 
bureau chief in Cairo was summoned to the Interior Ministry and 
was "kept waiting" for hours before being "strongly reprimanded" 
by Major General Ra'uf al-Manawi, public relations director at 
the Interior Ministry, for filing a report on an explosion in 
Tanta. 
<H5>  CORRUPTION, ANTI-ISLAMIC POLICY VIEWED </H5>
  Two reports on page 4 feature antigovernment remarks by 
Labor 
Party leaders. One, an approximately 2,000-word report by Salah 
al-Nahif, reviews a speech by party leader Ibrahim Shukri at a 
rally in al-Gharbiyah Governorate. Shukri spoke about various 
political issues, noting the party's campaign against 
"corruption," and in defense of the people's aspirations for 
freedom and political and economic reforms. Shukri said: 
"Under Islam, it is the people's right, rather, their duty, to 
advise and correct the ruler." He added: "I told King Faruq: 
`All those around you are gangsters and thieves.' Today, I 
tell Mubarak: `Many of those around you have become corrupt 
gangs that threaten the very existence of the nation. You must 
rid the country of them.'" Noting that the country is passing 
through a crisis, Shukri added: "It is a tough and extremely 
violent crisis that Egypt is enduring. We still insist that 
political reform is the key to any reform. Political reforms 
begin by amending the law on practicing political rights to 
provide guarantees for fair elections that reflect the will of 
the people." 
  The Labor Party secretary in al-Gharbiyah, Salah al-Qafas, 
also addressed the rally. He reviewed the challenges facing the 
nation and added: "We know that the colonialist forces are not 
looking for friends, but agents. Whoever says he is a friend of 
the United States or others is an agent. There is no such thing 
as a new world order, but rather a domination of the world by 
the United States, which lives by violating the freedoms of 
peoples and plundering their wealth, using Israel as its stick." 
  Labor Party Executive Committee member Muhammad Badr 
referred 
to a "criminal plot to strike at Islam." He said that events in 
Egypt are an attempt to undermine Islam and "weed out the 
Islamic awakening." He added: "Anybody who follows the 
Egyptian media will notice that they act as a spearhead against 
an Islamic inclination by removing moral and religious 
censorship of programs." 
  On the same page, the paper publishes an approximately 
1,500-word unattributed report on two speeches given by Labor 
Party Secretary General 'Adil Husayn at a village in 
al-Daqahliyah Governorate. Husayn reviewed the "Western and 
Zionist plots to control our region through the so-called Middle 
East market" and called for the "need for the country to be 
governed by heavenly law." He added: "This nation will 
continue to memorize God's book. It will uphold it as a 
shari'ah to be implemented to provide progress and establish 
justice among the people." He noted that Prophet Muhammad and 
his companions "struggled, persevered, and fought when fighting 
was necessary" to accomplish their mission, because God "does 
not give victory to a people who give up easily or who believe 
that God will give them victory without a struggle against 
themselves, the devil, and the enemies of religion." 
Concluding, Husayn is quoted as pointing out that the Labor 
Party program seeks to "set up a homeland for Islam that could 
ensure dignity and prosperity, provide jobs for the jobless, and 
food and medicine for the needy." The paper cites him adding 
that his party seeks to "restore shari'ah as the law of the 
land" and have "rulers who are opposed to Zionism and the 
enemies of religion; rulers who seek reforms, not cover up the 
corrupt." 

<H5>    NORMALIZATION WITH ISRAEL SLAMMED </H5>
  Labor Party deputy leader Muhammad Hilmi Murad writes an 
approximately 2,000-word article on page 5 demanding a "popular 
trial" of Deputy Prime Minister Yusuf Wali for his remarks in 
the People's Assembly in which he "glorified Israel, praised its 
scientific and technological advances in agriculture, and 
defended it for its role in cooperating with Egypt in this 
regard." He says Israel's technological and research advantage 
in this regard is nothing but the "fruit of the efforts of the 
scientific centers in the United States and Europe that 
cooperate with Israel." He states that Wali's outspoken remarks 
on normalization with Israel represent a "new era in his role in 
establishing the Middle East market" after years of "diffident" 
calls for courting Israel. Concluding, Murad declares: 
"National duty dictates that we follow what organized and 
conscientious people in some advanced states do and hold a 
popular trial of officials by a selected panel made up of 
specialists and former members of the judiciary." 
  Muslim Brotherhood writer Ahmad al-Malat echoes Murad's 
sentiments in an approximately 1,500-word article on the same 
page. He lashes out at AL-AHRAM Chief Editor Ibrahim Nafi' for 
his calls for better relations with Israel. Admonishing Nafi' 
for saying that there is no permanent enemy or friend, al-Malt 
suggests: "You have forgotten or ignored that the Jews' enmity 
toward Islam is the strongest." Commenting on remarks by Nafi' 
that several Arab businessmen are flocking to Israel to conclude 
business deals with it despite the boycott, al-Malat writes: 
"What is this shame? Isn't it enough that you have surrendered 
the future of your countries to Uncle Sam through the agreements 
you have concluded with him according to which you trust him 
with your necks and in return he guarantees you safety from any 
aggressor?" He adds: "Manhood, chivalry, and jihad have become 
meaningless words in your dictionary. To you they mean nothing 
but extremism and terrorism." 
  Al-Malat states that Nafi' was "shameless" enough to call 
for 
giving priority to joint ventures with Israel. He asks: "Who 
gave you the right, honorable writer, to chart Egypt's policy as 
you please and do so contrary to the desire of its noble Muslim 
people, who refuse to sell their gas to their enemies and who 
continue to break the bones of our children and slaughter our 
youth in the holy land?" He adds: "O enthusiastic writer, I 
tell you and the rulers who follow you that this is not your 
cause, but the cause of Islam." He adds: "If you are short of 
nerve in defending the usurped right, declare it for history's 
sake and admit publicly that you are not up to jihad, yet don't 
close the door on the abluted hands that seek, through 
legitimate jihad, to regain as much as possible of the land and 
dignity that you have wasted. Call these mujahidin by the real 
names that God almighty has given them. Don't say that they are 
advocates of violence and terrorism, for violence and terrorism 
are the qualities of those who have usurped the land from its 
real owners." He adds: "Do not sing the praises of the glory 
expected from this satanic openness, which you covertly worked 
to achieve not too long ago and on which you are working 
publicly and insolently today. You imagine that after muffling 
the sincere mouths, breaking the honest pens, and keeping only 
the hypocrites, you have every right to speak in the name of the 
vanquished peoples who cannot afford to tell the truth in their 
own country." 
<H5>  SATELLITE DISH INVASION </H5>
  Muhammad Abu-al-Futuh, in an approximately 1,000-word 
article 
on page 9, comments on an article by writer Sa'd-al-Din Wahbah 
in AL-AHRAM on 22 January rejecting calls for prohibiting 
satellite dishes. Abu-al-Futuh argues that dishes bring more 
"poison, immorality, and decadence" than benefits, which makes 
them a "ferocious threat that must be resisted." He points out 
that the Egyptian people's traditions have withstood numerous 
military invasions and occupations, but that the "cultural 
invasion and occupation is a malignant enemy" that brainwashes 
people and is, therefore, more serious. He adds: "The obscene 
and homosexual programs that the dish will bring us are more 
dangerous than cancer and AIDS. It is the intellectual and 
cultural AIDS." 
<H5>  PREACHERS BANNED FROM TELEVISION </H5>
  Muslim Brotherhood writer Muhammad 'Abd-al-Quddus, in an 
approximately 600-word article on page 12, criticizes Egyptian 
television for its superficial programming and for banning some 
Islamic preachers from appearing on television. 
<H5>  WEST'S ANTI-ISLAMIC VIEWS REFUTED </H5>
  In a 400-word column on page 12, Islamic Preacher Muhammad 
al-Ghazali slams the West's accusations against Islam. 

