Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  ANC Unwilling To Make Negotiations Concessions--"The African 
National Congress [ANC] does not want the White Right to launch 
a campaign of violence, still less civil war, but it rejects the 
idea of a volkstaat [Afrikaner homeland] and apparently cannot 
offer any alternative that will satisfy the Right," points out 
the page-6 editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 
31 January. President de Klerk "wants an inclusive settlement, 
but the ANC, scenting victory at the polls, is not prepared to 
make the concessions that would bring such a settlement into 
being." THE CITIZEN urges a "peaceful solution even now, at the 
11th hour." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  Call To Accommodate White Right--"On Saturday the 
bigger-mouthed segment of a right-wing rally howled down words 
of moderation from General Constand Viljoen," notes a page-14 
editorial in Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 1 February. 
"The shouts and cat-calls of the swastika brigade do not 
represent the bulk of the white Right." Yet, the political 
process "must give them as much accommodation as it can. So 
far, it has not been enough." "Unless the conservatives -- 
black and white -- take part, the election will be fraught. We 
repeat our suggestion that separate national and regional polls 
be considered. This would go a long way to meeting the concerns 
of conservatives -- as well as other important parties like the 
PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress] and the DP [Democratic Party]." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  ANC's Election Manifesto `Consciously 
Populist'--Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 1 February in a page-6 editorial says 
the ANC's election manifesto and its reconstruction and program 
"are consciously populist in nature, underpinned by a 
justifiable fear of increased social instability if a new 
government fails to `deliver.'" However, the ANC recognizes the 
importance of local and foreign business confidence, so "it 
promises to carry out is programme without increasing individual 
and corporate tax rates or imposing punitive wealth taxes, while 
maintaining a Budget deficit of no more than 6 percent of GDP -- 
better than the NP [National Party] has managed over the past 
two years. In combination, this is heartwarming and reassuring. 
The problem, already pointed out here and elsewhere, is that 
the arithmetic does not add up. Taken at face value, it raises 
the spectre of hyperinflation and a debt trap. This explains 
the panic and hysteria that have marked some commentaries." 
BUSINESS DAY notes that the ANC and the Congress of South 
African Trade Unions, "confronted with harsh economic realities 
and skilled negotiators, have shown a preparedness to recognise 
what is possible and what is not. Business and economic 
commentators, before they panic, should do the same." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  Postpone Elections as Last Resort Settlement -- Johannesburg 
SOWETAN in English on 1 February in a page 6 editorial asks 
whether "more substantial negotiations" to ensure a peaceful 
transition to democracy in South Africa are necessary. If there 
is not an all-inclusive settlement there is the "very real 
possibility" that the 27 April elections could be disrupted. 
SOWETAN urges all parties involved in bilateral, trilateral and 
multiparty talks to "return to the drawing board once more. The 
postponement of the election by a month or two should also not 
be ruled out as a last resort." 

