BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Col. Gen. Kostyantyn Morozov, UKRAYINSKA HAZETA </F>
military columnist: "We Had and Still Have Security Guarantees 
in Our Hands. The Crimean Tension in Relations With Russia Is a 
Consequence of Ukraine's Nonnuclear and Nonaligned Status"] 
  [Text] From the first days of its existence as a state, 
Ukraine has been resolving the so-called Crimean problem on a 
daily basis. Even before the world felt this, it was already 
known in Ukraine that the Crimean issue would perhaps be a 
decisive one in the political relations between Ukraine and 
Russia. Due to the irresponsible steps taken by the Simferopol 
leadership, which adopted the course toward secession from 
Ukraine and rapprochement with Russia, especially at the 
beginning of May [1994], the world finally perceived a threat to 
peace in Ukraine, and in Europe, in these relations. Ukraine 
must now determine its attitude toward these issues. The 
history of the problem took shape right before our own eyes, and 
everybody remembers it. No matter how bitter one might feel 
about it, our Ukrainian mistakes and indecisiveness are largely 
responsible for the intensification of Russia's influence over 
the Black Sea Fleet and, through it, in Sevastopol and the 
entire peninsula. 
  In January 1992, the fleet commander [Admiral Kasatonov], 
who 
clearly occupied anti-Ukrainian positions, was not removed from 
his post. His presence in Sevastopol made it impossible for 
officers of the fleet to adopt a stand with regard to loyalty to 
Ukraine. Still, by the end of March 1992, the majority of the 
officer corps anticipated Ukraine's governmental decisions 
regarding the subordination to Ukraine's Defense Ministry. 
  Both the Ukrainian president and the government realized 
that 
special conditions for shaping public opinion in Sevastopol (the 
majority of its residents are former sailors and their families 
that arrived there from other Russian fleets; a great number of 
enterprises there depend upon the fleet; there are social 
problems for families of veterans and servicemen) also required 
special approaches, in contrast to the situation with the 
subordination of three military districts in Ukraine. 
  In April 1992, there was yet another attempt to subordinate 
the fleet to Ukraine. However, again, due to its 
indecisiveness, the government did not go beyond the creation of 
a parallel structure (the headquarters of the Naval Forces). 
Unfortunately, the headquarters was immediately discredited and 
its influence upon Black Sea Fleet officers who were supporters 
of Ukraine was insignificant. 
  Fearing complications, Kuchma's government even canceled the 
decisions -- first steps of Ukraine's Ministry of Defense -- in 
the organization of the Black Sea Fleet financing through our 
Naval Forces. However, even then everybody understood that, 
soon, there would be even more problems. That was exactly what 
happened. 
  The unsuccessful provocative officers assembly held in 
Moscow 
at the beginning of 1992 demonstrated that, in Ukraine, the 
majority of officers had made up their minds. That is why 
efforts were concentrated mainly on the fleet. 
  As far back as in May 1992, active work, with the help of 
certain Russian forces, began in the fleet. The work was aimed 
at strengthening anti-Ukrainian sentiment among officers. The 
first step involved a considerable increase in personnel 
salaries. The activity of the officers' assembly resumed and an 
assembly coordination council was created. Active 
politicization of the officers' corps began. The 
intensification of Russia's influence on the Black Sea Fleet 
proceeded "on a legal basis" after signing the Yalta accord 
(August 1992). Since that time, the fleet, subordinated to the 
two presidents, has been taken away from the control of 
Ukraine's Ministry of Defense, and the fleet activity of 
Russia's Ministry of Defense and the main staff of Russia's 
Naval Fleet was practically legalized. 
  Russia, implementing its financial expansion in the Crimea, 
artificially created for itself a priority in providing for the 
fleet. 
  At the same time, assistance to Sevastopol civilians (the 
majority of them are former servicemen) in the creation of 
public organizations and political parties of anti-Ukrainian 
orientation intensified. 
  A combination of intentions on the part of those parties and 
politicized officers over 1992-93 led to an intensification of 
anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Sevastopol and on the peninsula. 
  This situation was repeatedly discussed by a corresponding 
Supreme Council Commission, by the Defense Ministry's board, and 
by Ukraine's Security Council. Unfortunately, the commission 
was incapable of giving a proper evaluation of the events, the 
Defense Ministry's decisions did not find the government's 
support, and the Security Council took into account the position 
of the Crimean leadership. Both Bagrov, then chairman of the 
Crimean Supreme Council, and Yermakov, then presidential 
representative in Sevastopol, did everything to hamper any of 
our initiatives and intimidated the government and President 
Leonid Kravchuk by claiming that "it would lead to an explosion 
in the Crimea." 
That was precisely the reason for the July 1993 decision to 
suspend the formation in Sevastopol of the Ukrainian Armed 
Forces Marines subdivisions. 
  Today, all of this is attributed to the president's 
indecisiveness. I find it necessary to throw light on the 
situation and include everybody. In the majority of cases, the 
president remained unassisted in looking for decisions that 
would not lead to an armed conflict. 
  Such a situation prevailed until the meeting in Massandra: 
The Supreme Council did not adopt decisions, and the government 
(of both Fokin and Kuchma) dealt with no military problems 
whatsoever. In the two years that I held the ministerial post, 
the military issue was discussed only once (in November 1991, 
the legislative bill "On Ukraine's Armed Forces"). 
  Under those conditions, Russia's influence on the Crimean 
problem intensified to the extent that virtually unprecedented 
territorial claimed were made upon Ukraine (the Russian Supreme 
Council decree of 9 July 1993 on the status of the Ukrainian 
city of Sevastopol) and pressure was put on it at the 
negotiations (Massandra, 3 September 1993). 
  We heard a lot about Ukraine's position with regard to the 
presidential elections in the Crimea, but no significant 
decisions have been adopted by Ukraine's Supreme Council nor 
actions by the government. Crimean separatists took advantage 
of the crisis situation in the country and, instead of looking 
for ways to overcome it, started manipulating it. The political 
forces and now also the leadership, artificially creating an 
impression that the Crimean population has the worst standard of 
living and deceiving the people, are, in fact, satisfying their 
own ambitions. 
  More than once I heard about an ethnic source of Ukrainian 
tension. Few people even in Ukraine speak of the political 
aspect of the tension or its artificial nature. In this 
context, the assessment of the situation by chairman of 
Ukraine's Security Service Yevhen Marchuk (KIYEVSKIYE VEDOMOSTI 
of 26 May 1994) seems to be not only authentic and patriotic, 
but also timely: "...the whipping up of panic among the 
population, the intimidation of the Crimean leadership, the 
shaping of an enemy image (naturally personified by Kiev), the 
selfless assistance by experts, the commissioning of groups for 
propaganda support, and many other things...." I agree with 
Yevhen Marchuk's conclusion to the effect that all of this will 
have a counter effect, against the Russian plans to split 
Ukraine, and that this force "...will become a consolidating one 
for Ukraine." 
  All of this has been said about our Ukraine -- our own 
fathers' home. External forces are shaking it loose, and we 
must rescue it and not moan that life is bad under these 
conditions. 
  Ukraine is an active participant in the European and world 
political process, which is establishing peace and harmony among 
countries. Many, if not all acts in this process tend to unite 
us with Russia. However, today, neither Ukraine's membership in 
the CIS nor bilateral interstate agreements guarantee security 
for Ukraine. 
  The fact that the program "Partnership for Peace" does not 
unite us with Russia is a serious warning. Russia is seeking a 
priority status in its relations with NATO. The formula "16 
Plus One" suits Russia better. It is clear to everybody that 
this bargaining is not to Ukraine's advantage. Perhaps we are 
expecting guarantees for our security in vain. Or maybe those 
guarantees are still in our hands? 
  Why don't we also do some bargaining, now that Russia does 
not restrict itself by obligations to politically guarantee 
Ukraine's security? If, after the withdrawal of nuclear 
weapons, Ukraine becomes an arena for armed conflicts, maybe it 
is now time to halt the transfer of warheads and adopt a state 
program for political and technical measures to maintain them on 
our own? 
  At any rate, this will strengthen the Ukrainian position at 
the negotiations. 
  It is becoming obvious already that Ukraine's nonaligned 
status does not guarantee its security or noninterference into 
its affairs by other states. We see how Russia is increasingly 
exacerbating the Crimean problem in Ukraine. 
  Perhaps we should revise our striving for nonalignment and 
neutrality? Maybe a declaration of our intentions to gain 
membership of NATO would better guarantee Ukraine's security at 
least in the future? At any rate, it might strengthen our 
position at the negotiations. The United States must be invited 
as an intermediary and an authoritative monitor of the 
fulfillment of the accords. 
  In April 1994, the Ukrainian Academy of Original Ideas 
supported my initiative on the creation of an independent Center 
for Strategic Studies of Military and Political Problems in the 
National and Regional Security. On 28 May, the Ukrainian World 
Coordination Council, at its meeting, approved the idea and the 
draft concept of the center and thereby okayed the creation of a 
special non-governmental fund. 
  I believe that the issues raised by me urgently require an 
independent investigation. The conclusions of such a 
investigation, in the case of the creation of the center at an 
advisory level, might be used by state structures for promoting 
Ukraine's interests. 
  The Russian Federation is our geopolitical neighbor, an 
ethnic homeland to large numbers of our citizens, and our 
potential genuine friend and brother. It is our strong desire 
that it be realized by it that not only Ukraine, but also Russia 
are "doomed" to maintain and strengthen this friendship by all 
possible means. Once again referring to the chairman of 
Ukraine's Security Service, I want to support his important 
conclusion: "There will be no split of Ukraine. We are not the 
Caucasus or Yugoslavia." 

