BFN 

  [Text] Pietersburg, May 5, SAPA -- He struggled for 
recognition as a poet, but instead students hailed him as a 
political figure. Now he is to become the premier of the 
Northern Transvaal region after the ANC victory in the general 
elections. 
  One of six children, Ngoako Abel Ramathlodi was born in 
Tauetswala near Potgietersrus on August 21, 1955. 
  Ramathlodi matriculated at the Tembisa High School and chose 
law as a career. 
  His tertiary educational years were troubled. 
  He enrolled for a BJuris degree at the University of the 
North in 1976, and after two expulsions finally completed a 
masters degree in law in Zimbabwe in 1988. 
  His introduction to politics came through the Marimba Arts - 
a poetry and drama society. While Ramathlodi was writing poetry 
about his life the rest of the group was writing political 
poetry. The move from art and poetry to politics proved to be a 
shorter step than expected. Students worshipped him for his 
poetry and without realising it he became a political figure and 
not just a poet. 
  In 1977 he was expelled from the University of the North for 
political reasons, but allowed back in 1978. 
  During this time he joined the ANC during a trip to 
Botswana. 
  In 1979 he was again expelled for political upheaval and 
took 
the university to court for unlawful expulsion. He won the 
case, but failed his examinations. In 1980 he was refused 
admission to the university. 
  He went into exile in Lesotho on July 17, 1980 where he 
enrolled for a BA law degree at the University of Lesotho. He 
graduated in 1984. 
  In this time he was prominent within the ANC and on campus 
in 
the Committee for Action and Solidarity for South African 
Students. 
  He enrolled for a LLB degree at the University in 1985, but 
his two-year course was cut short with the 1986 coup which 
deposed President Leabua Jonathan. 
  Ramathlodi was then sent to Zimbabwe via Zambia where he 
joined the University in Harare in 1986 and wrote his final 
exam. By 1988 he had a masters degree in law. 
  During his studies he served the ANC as head of the regional 
political military council. On his return to Zambia he worked 
as a speech writer for Oliver Tambo. 
  He married Ouma Mathuding in 1983. They have a son, 
Setlhodiane. 
  He is currently deputy registrar and executive assistant to 
the principal at the University of the North near Pietersburg. 
He also teaches public international law. 
  The Northern Transvaal region, where he is to be inaugurated 
as premier, is one the largest and poorest regions in the 
country with extensive socio-economic problems. Mostly rural 
the region includes Lebowa, Venda and Gazankulu. Pietersburg is 
the largest urban centre in the region. 

