BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by J.B.L.: "Rosati in Several Months"] </F>
  [Text] The leaders of the Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] 
and the Polish Peasant Party [PSL] still believe that, in direct 
negotiations, they will be able to persuade the president to 
change his mind about the nomination of Dariusz Rosati for 
deputy prime minister and finance minister. Lech Walesa's 
spokesman says that a meeting with the coalition will be 
possible if it submits a new candidate. 
  SLD Spokesman Zbigniew Siemiatkowski said that the coalition 
insists on the candidacy of Professor Rosati because Poland 
cannot afford to lose such a competent man. Asked about the 
arguments Waldemar Pawlak and Aleksander Kwasniewski may use in 
their meeting with Walesa, he said that it may concern 
constitutional law and political custom. He would not, however, 
answer the question of whether the president might be threatened 
with amending the Small Constitution, so that the coalition 
would be able to neutralize the presidential veto--for example, 
by rejecting it in a vote by the Sejm, as happens in the case of 
other laws. 
  Aleksander Kwasniewski stated: "We will tell the president 
that he is a very good candidate, that his behavior in recent 
days has shown that he is a responsible and serious man. I 
think we will have to think about how the traps of the Small 
Constitution can be avoided; however, this is only one of the 
subjects of the meeting. We will not avoid a discussion on 
amending the Small Constitution because this is also required by 
the proposed change in the formula of the National Security 
Council." The SLD leader also said that he and Prime Minister 
Pawlak are waiting for a meeting with the president and that 
they are hoping that it will be held within the next few days. 
  It is possible that what the coalition wants is not to amend 
the Small Constitution, which would take several months, but 
only to use this argument in the meeting with Lech Walesa. 
However, if this argument does not yield any effect, the 
nomination of Rosati might be possible following the period that 
is needed to amend Article 68 of the Small Constitution. This 
would explain his statement that the issue may become topical 
again in a few months' time. 
  The suggestion by yesterday's GAZETA WYBORCZA that Marek 
Borowski may return to the post of deputy prime minister does 
not seem very likely. The Belweder would perhaps be prepared to 
accept this candidacy; however, it is very unlikely that 
Borowski would be able to cooperate harmoniously with Prime 
Minister Pawlak. Their cooperation was not very good the last 
time, all the more so because the former deputy prime minister 
criticized the head of the government after his resignation, 
saying that he had only one face. His comeback, though not 
entirely impossible, seems very unlikely today. 
  If the guess is right that the coalition is trying to force 
the president to accept the nomination of Rosati, the statement 
by Leszek Miller that there is a new candidate would be merely a 
smokescreen. Perhaps the SLD and the PSL want to wait for the 
president to sign the budget law and only then decide on a 
serious, as it seems, war with the Belweder concerning the 
limitation of presidential powers. Another solution is also 
possible: Having "softened" the president with Rosati, the 
coalition will propose someone else. 
  Presidential Spokesman Andrzej Drzycimski told a PAP 
journalist yesterday that a meeting of coalition leaders with 
the president would be possible only when it submits a new 
candidate for deputy prime minister and finance minister. He 
added that the coalition should exhibit "a new look at things, a 
new approach." 
  Drzycimski stated that Walesa had not yet decided whether or 
not to sign the budget law because "he still has the time 
allowed by the Constitution; he is thinking about it." The 
president should sign the law within 30 days of 28 March. 

