Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Martin Winter report: "Kinkel Looks to Asia"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn, 26 Jan -- German foreign policy wants to 
concentrate on the Asian-Pacific region in the future. At the 
end of a three-day conference of the German ambassadors to Asia 
in Bonn on Wednesday [26 January], Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel 
(Free Democratic Party of Germany, FDP) called on politicians 
and economic representatives "not to leave" the economy "to the 
United States alone." He complained that above all the world 
economy has not taken this "most dynamic world region as 
seriously as it would have been necessary." For example, only 8 
percent of Germany's foreign trade is transacted with Asia, 
although half of the human race lives there. 
  Some time ago, Kinkel instructed the embassies in Asia to 
help German enterprises in every conceivable and possible way in 
negotiations on business transactions and the establishment of 
businesses. One must not only intensify exports, but also 
invest in Asia. According to Kinkel's estimate, economic 
commitment in time could have created 400,000 additional jobs in 
Germany. "Then we would have had fewer employment problems 
today," he said. 
  On the one hand, Bonn wants to procure better business deals 
for the German economy. On the other hand, "poverty" in Asia, 
which accompanies the economic upswing in some Asian countries, 
is to be combated by focusing on it in the field of development 
aid. To integrate the Asian economies "fully" into the world 
economy, the Federal Government wants to advocate the admission 
of China and Taiwan to the world trade agreement (GATT) and to 
support the "policy of reform and opening up in India, as well 
as in China and Vietnam." 
  Kinkel commented cautiously on the question of human rights. 
The Europeans must not "impose" their cultural principles on 
the Asian countries. He warned against a policy of "wagging an 
admonishing finger." Although human rights violations have to 
be "clearly" addressed in principle, "dignity," which is so 
important in Asia, has to be respected. It is better "to be 
secretly active" to help in concrete cases of human rights 
violations. 
  The Federal Government wants to use its presidency of the 
European Union (EU) from July to secure and implement its policy 
toward Asia at a Community level. For example, a conference 
between the EU and the organizations of Asian and Pacific states 
in Germany is planned. According to Kinkel, Bonn also wants to 
attach importance to cultural exchanges and cooperation in the 
media sector. 

