Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. Vandana Shiva by Pramod Kumar: "Dump </F>
Dunkel Proposals"] 
  [Text] Dr. Vandana Shiva is a particle physicist, who 
is internationally acclaimed more as a feminist-ecologist and 
has been actively involved in the Chipko and World Rainforest 
movements. She has been a Consultant to the United Nations 
University, Tokyo. Currently, she is Director, Research 
Foundation for Science, Technology and Natural Resource Policy 
at Dehra Dun and Ecology Adviser to the Third World Network. In 
1982, Dr. Shiva left a prestigious job at the Indian Institute 
of Management, Bangalore, to set up an independent research 
institute called the Research Foundation for Science, Technology 
and Natural Resource Policy, in order to contribute more 
effectively to movements like Chipko. The Tehri Dam controversy 
has brought to the fore Dr. Shiva's contribution to human rights 
when she successfully challenged the illegal arrests of Chipko 
activists including women and children. She has initiated a 
national people's programme, Navdhanya, for conserving natural 
resources and conducting people-based research in agriculture. 
The bookCultivating Diversity,was born out of this 
project. Dr. Shiva has authored several books 
includingEcological Audit of Eucalyptus Cultivation; 
Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Survival in India; Violence of 
the Green Revolution; Third World Agriculture, Ecology and 
Politics;andMonocultures of the Mind: Biodiversity, 
Biotechnology and the Third World. Dr. Shiva is a 
recipient of several awards including the Order of the Golden 
Ark, Earth Day International Award, Global 500 Award and Right 
Livelihood Award also known as the alternate of Nobel Prize. 
  Environmentalist Dr. Vandana Shiva refuses to accept 
the Dunkel Proposals at any cost. She is fighting against it. 
Excerpts from her conversation with ORGANISER on the 
impact of the Dunkel Proposals on the seeds, agricultural 
research and environment. 
  Q: In spite of stiff opposition to the Dunkel Proposals 
Central government appears to have made up its mind to ratify 
it. Your comments? 
  A: This government is going neither with the support of the 
people nor with the conviction that winning the support of the 
people is its duty. When governments think that they come into 
power only with the help of multinational companies and foreign 
agencies they assume that they will not be dismissed as long as 
they can keep the later happy. At the same time they seem to 
forget that they are sovereign governments of an independent 
country and not servants of the World Bank, IMF or GATT. 
  In a democracy if a people make a government they can also 
dismiss it. When a government starts getting monetary help from 
foreign countries to stay in power they stop giving importance 
to national interest. In India it started with the Bofors case. 
I can say with confidence that multinational companies, World 
Bank and IMF have increased corruption in our country. 
  Q: Do you think that the policy adopted by the Central 
government on the Dunkel Proposals is in national interest? 
  A: No, it is absolutely an anti-national policy. Only those 
policies are in national interest which give prime importance to 
our own people's interest. 
  Q: Indian farmers love their seeds as their children. 
They would rather starve than destroy the seeds. In times of 
famine one witnesses people dying of hunger but they would not 
consume their seeds. If the Dunkel Proposals are accepted what 
will be its impact on the indigenous seeds? 
  A: According to an advisor to the World Bank a country in 
which many farmers live is backward. But our country too has 
many farmers because our culture is connected with our soil. We 
have a farming culture which is based on forest culture. "First 
of all the seeds, later our life." This view is fully imbibed by 
our farmers. That is why Indian farmers love their seeds as 
their children. Indian farmers know very well that their freedom 
is connected with their seeds. The day their seeds will be taken 
over by the multinational companies they will become slaves. 
  When the new seeds come into the market, the World Bank 
starts offering grants to the farmers for purchasing seeds. Now 
the World Bank is discontinuing the practice. Having patented 
the seeds it will be compulsory for every farmer to purchase 
seeds only from the multinational companies. If they are not 
able to purchase the seeds, World Bank will give them loans (not 
grants). We will continue to get loans and after ten years the 
pressure of World Bank will increase. Again western countries 
are pressurising us to accept Intellectual Property Rights and 
Patent Rights. Altogether it is a conspiracy to enslave us. 
  Q: The East India Company came to India for business 
and after some time it ruled the country. Is it not a similar 
conspiracy hatched by western countries? 
  A: It is the same situation again. There are only two things 
different now. Then it was only the East India Company; now 
there are 18-20 companies. Secondly the East India Company had 
recourse to gunpowder. Now they do not need gunpower. They want 
to have their man in the finance ministry. Their economics works 
like gunpowder and our finance ministry has been doing the job 
of the gunpowder. I think we are faced with three world 
criminals, World Bank, IMF and GATT. 
  Q: What will be the impact of the Dunkel Proposals on 
our agricultural research? 
  A: The very basis of our agricultural research will be 
destroyed. In my opinion there are two types of agricultural 
research in India. Firstly, that which is done by the farmer 
himself and secondly the scientist's. No farmer in India engages 
in farming without thinking, without understanding and without 
the basic traditional knowledge. Now the Indian government is 
cutting down the funds for the agriculture universities under 
pressure of the World Bank. It is a suicidal step. 
  If the Dunkel Proposals are accepted, the agriculture sector 
will cease to be under our own government. For whom will the 
agricultural scientist then do the research? Multinational 
companies will not do the research themselves. Our Ph.Ds, M.A.s 
and scientists in their research universities will be exploited 
and their talent misused to fool our farmers. In this situation 
indigenous agricultural research will suffer and our farmers 
will have to grow only that which the multinational companies 
provide. 
  Q: At present there are more than 1,800 multinational 
companies in India. More than 300 multinational companies 
entered India after the government implemented the new economic 
policy. These companies have occupied every production field in 
India, which has severely affected our traditional industries. 
Many nationalist organisations and political parties have 
appealed to the countrymen that they should use only indigenous 
goods and boycott the multinational companies' products. Do you 
think it would be right? 
  A: As far as I think what provides jobs and food for people 
is swadeshi. As long as our weavers will not have work, how will 
they subsist? Patronising Pepsi chips will be like taking steps 
against our farmers as our farmers will then be removed from 
production. So I start the swadeshi movement from the people, 
not the products. We should not see what production comes from 
which company. We should see which hands make it. If the hands 
are swadeshi, the product will be swadeshi. 
  Q: Several movements have been launched for the boycott 
of multinational products. Do you think it will affect the 
production of those companies? 
  A: If we continue the movement for the boycott of 
multinational companies, it will destroy the monsters like 
Cargil and Pepsi. I say it without hesitation that an Indian 
attack on these companies will surely affect their production. 
  Q: India has an independent outlook and approach on 
environment. If view of our approach there should be no problem 
of imbalance in ecology and environment. Do you think we can 
preserve our environment without foreign help? 
  A: There is no need for foreign help. Once we start getting 
foreign help for environment, it will not be useful for our 
country. Because the philosophy of the western countries is 
business oriented. Even parent-child relationship is 
materialistic. Their outlook on and approach to life is 
different from ours. They exploit nature; we are only milking it. 
  Q: What role can women play in maintaining ecological 
balance? 
  A: Women have been playing a very effective role in India 
since yore. In our Chipko movement women themselves come 
forward, chiefly very simple village women. Every Indian woman 
has a great philosophy about environment. We should take their 
thinking seriously and also include them in every movement. 
  Q: Basically you are a physicist. How did you come to 
interest yourself in environment and agriculture? 
  A: There are two reasons. The reason for which I had gone 
into the field of physics is the same for my coming into the 
field of agriculture and environment. I am a human being before 
being a scientist. My humanity has brought me into this field. 
  Q: In the past two years you won four international 
awards. How do you feel about it? 
  A: It makes no difference. 
  Q: Whom will you give the credit for this? 
  A: To my parents and my family. With their help I have 
reached this stage. Usually many restrictions are put on the 
woman in our society. But my parents did not confine me to any 
conventions. They helped me at every step. 
  Q: Indian politics has undergone great changes. Old 
parties have lost the support of the people and new parties and 
leaders are coming into power. What do you expect from the new 
parties and the new leaders at this transitional stage? 
  A: There is no worthwhile political leadership in our 
country. Apart from the political parties there are some honest 
and true leaders in social movements. I hope that they would 
lead the fight against fraud and corruption. 
  Q: Although large-scale industries create ecological 
imbalance but in preference to rural industries they are 
necessary for development. Do you see any utility for the rural 
sector? 
  A: We should give due importance to the rural industries 
wherever they can be more useful than the large-scale 
industries. Abolishing the rural industries will never be in the 
interest of Indian economy. 

