BFN 

<F P=106> [Essay by Unidentified Station Editor] </F>
  [Text] The U.S.-owned Crestone energy company issued a 
press release on 18 April 1994, announcing that it is conducting 
a seismologial survey and preparing for exploratory drilling to 
evaluate the latent oil and gas potential of the so-called 
WANANBEI-21 Contract area. The public is expressing indignation 
over the attitude of the Crestone energy company and its actions 
because of the following reasons: 
  First, the sea area where Crestone is conducting the 
seismologial survey is precisely the Tu Chinh coral reef of 
Vietnam. This area lies within Vietnam's sacred terrorial sea. 
By arrogantly conducting a survey in this area, Crestone has 
brazenly and gravely violated Vietnamese sovereignty, thus 
tramping on international justice and law, provoking public 
opinion, and running counter to the trend of our time which, 
promoted by the world community, calls for the respect of the 
independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of every 
country. 
  Second, the U.S.-owned Crestone company deliberately 
distorted the truth and the history to cover up its wrongdoing. 
It claimed that its action is a continuation of China's history 
of research and exploration in that sea area, which allegedly 
began since time immemorial as far back as 200 years B.C. 
  In view of the wrongful attitude and action of Crestone, we 
express our great indignation over the company's action and 
denounce it before the public. 
  Right from the time when the company signed an oil 
exploration and exploitation contract with the Offshore Oil 
Company of China in May 1992, the SRV Foreign Ministry had 
issued a statement declaring that this contract is invalid and 
that it constitutes a grave violation against Vietnam's 
sovereignty over its continental shelf and economic zone as well 
as against international law. 
  We assert that according to international law, Vietnam has 
long exercised its sovereignty over the Tu Chinh area. As early 
as before 1975, this area was divided into bid lots for oil and 
gas exploration and exploitation. The then Provisional 
Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam also issued a 
statement asserting its sovereignty. After the unification of 
the country, the SRV Government issued its statements dated 12 
May 1977 and 12 November 1982, asserting Vietnam's sovereignty 
over its territorial seas and continental shelves. In 1988, the 
Vietnamese side made public a chart of concession lots divided 
for oil exploration and exploitation purposes. Vietnam has 
since conducted exploration and exploitation of its oil and gas 
resources in that area, including its cooperation with many 
foreign companies. As decided by the SRV Government, an 
economic, scientific, and service zone has been established 
there since 1989 with the presence of a system of Vietnamese 
lighthouses and a hydro-meteorological station. 
  On 20 April 1994, a spokesman for the SRV Government again 
clearly pointed out that the seismological survey by the 
Crestone company and its arrogant declaration of a planned 
exploration and exploitation of national resources in the area 
within Vietnam's exclusive economic zone and continental shelf 
-- an area which is, both legally and practically, totally under 
Vietnamese sovereignty -- constitutes a new, very grave step of 
escalation; and that the Crestone company must bear full 
responsibility for the consequences arising from its actions. 
  Once again, we asserted that the contract of the Crestone 
company is invalid and that its actions are illegal. No 
countries or companies will be allowed to conduct any 
exploration or exploitation of natural resources within 
Vietnam's continental shelf and exclusive economic zone without 
permission from the Vietnamese Government. 

