Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Brasilia -- After surviving several crises and 
threats to leave the government, Justice Minister Correa is 
again enduring pressures. Because of the several glasses of 
whiskey he had at his box at the Sambodromo carnival parade 
ground in Rio de Janeiro, Correa ended up annoying the military, 
the church, and Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso 
himself, who was also irritated by the behavior of his party 
colleague. Planalto Palace advisers find the behavior of Correa 
-- who had to be carried from the Sambodromo box by aides and 
security personnel -- to be way out of line with his ministerial 
rank. 
  According to the above advisers, it will be incumbent upon 
Henrique Hargreaves -- chief of the president's civil household 
-- to talk with Correa to ask him to resign. In light of the 
fact that Franco himself has had his image tarnished by the 
scandal provoked by model Lilian Ramos, the presidential 
advisers would like to spare him the embarrassment of having to 
fire a minister who had had a drink too many in a public place. 
  In military circles, where Correa has fallen from grace 
since 
January when in an interview he said that Franco had resisted a 
coup attempt by retired officers, his getting drunk at the 
Sambodromo was the last straw. The military dissatisfaction 
with Correa was at the center of a meeting held last week by 
General Fernando Cardoso, chief of the president's military 
household, with the president of the Republic. 
  Correa has not done too well in other government areas 
either. In the P.C. Farias case, he had several head-on 
collisions with the Federal Police [PF] and ended up by being 
forced to accept Colonel Wilson Romao as the PF director. 
  Both in Congress and at the PF, Correa's weekend drinking 
had 
become common knowledge long before the Sambodromo scandal. 
Politicians said that Correa used to arrive at meetings smelling 
of whisky when he was vice president of the Congressional 
Investigating Committee in the P.C. Farias case. 

