BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by General Humberto Ortega, chief of the </F>
Sandinist People's Army, with unidentified correpondents; place 
not given -- live] 
  [Text] [Ortega] Taking into consideration that Mrs. Violeta 
Barrios de Chamorro, president of the Republic, will send to the 
National Assembly -- as she previously stated -- the bill on the 
new Military Organization Law, I have decided to reveal the 
following document to the nation in the presence of the 
Sandinist People's Army [EPS] chain of command. 
  So Nicaraguans, particularly the leading players in the 
national political life, may better understand the issue of 
civilian and military relations under the current circumstances 
which prevail in Nicaragua, I consider it necessary --before all 
else -- to review in an overall way certain important issues 
[two-minute break in reception] civilian-military 
(?dictatorship) to exercise its domination over the Nicaraguan 
people. It is undeniable that relations among Nicaraguan people 
were quite deteriorated at the time. It is, therefore, 
difficult to talk about adequate civilian and military relations 
at that time in our history, above all, when a power like the 
United States, the biggest power at the time, clearly supported 
the dictatorship that oppressed the majority of Nicaraguans and 
prevented the exercise of true democracy in Nicaragua. 
  Since the assassination of General August Cesar Sandino in 
1934, and until 19 July 1979, civilian and military relations 
earned the rejection of Nicaraguan civilian society given the 
domination exercised by and through the Somozist National Guard. 
As a result of President Anastasio Somoza's downfall, a 
transition process toward democracy began in Nicaragua and we 
must recognize that the course of its consolidation was 
reasserted and clearly marked despite all the difficulties. The 
revolution established the groundwork that granted the 
opportunities to exercise the rights Nicaragua now has. 
  Without that revolution we would not be celebrating the 
current administration's fourth anniversary or the historical 
changes that it generated, and local political groups would not 
be participating in the broad Nicaraguan political debate 
without restrictions or threats. Quite the contrary, the debate 
is held with a tolerance that frequently clashes with the 
nation's constitutional and legal framework. That is something 
else, however, because the important thing in any case is to 
guarantee the liberty and democracy for which our people have 
struggled since the last century. 
  Between 1979 and the February 1990 elections, civilian and 
military relations in our country were marked by the U.S. 
enforcement of an unfair policy that financed a war and imposed 
an economic blockade that immersed Nicaragua in the most abject 
poverty. It was precisely this erroneous U.S. policy that was 
condemned by the highest International Court of Justice at The 
Hague and the policy that U.S. President William Clinton is now 
trying to leave behind so we may begin the new century with a 
new type of relation based on the principle of mutual respect. 
  The end of an alliance between different groups of the 
Nicaraguan society who united to defeat the Somozist 
dictatorship through the first government junta of national 
reconstruction; a radicalization of the revolution given U.S. 
aggression; and an increasing political polarization among 
Nicaraguans represent some of the main elements that prevented 
an adequate relationship among Nicaraguans within the search for 
a much-sought democratic system in the historical chapter that 
was written during the last decade. 
  Peace is essential to the consolidation of the democratic 
system we are building. I would like to remind you of the 
efforts of our brothers: in Latin America, the Contadora Group; 
in Central America, the Esquipulas Agreements; and in Nicaragua, 
the Sandinists and counterrevolutionaries in Sapoa, who 
established fundamental factors to achieve the strategic defeat 
of foreign aggression. 
  I must tell you that the strategic defeat of the Reagan plan 
was but the revolution's military triumph, without which for 
example, instead of a Sandinist military command today we would 
have a Somozist command or the counterrevolution of past years. 
  Within the framework of the Sapoa Agreements and the Central 
American agreements, however, President Violeta Barrios 
decidedly and assertively culminated this peace effort, which 
definitely buried the war, opened a chapter of national 
reconciliation, and created a broader climate of political 
freedoms which today, despite many difficulties, all Nicaraguans 
are enjoying and are obliged to protect. 
  Although the reactionaries failed to impose the Army they 
wanted, it is no less true that Nicaragua was destroyed by a 
foreign debt of approximately $12 billion, largely due to the 
war, which will take us a long time to settle. These are a few 
of the basic elements that explain the backwardness we are 
experiencing today, added to which are the mistaken policies 
which, according to analysts, were implemented by the previous 
government. 
  Another important element was the 1990 elections. You must 
understand that it was a victory that was quite far from being a 
peaceful and rancor-free process. Precisely in response to this 
political polarization, it was a highly polarized and vengeful 
electoral victory. In March 1990, a transition agreement was 
signed by the revolution and the government-elect. This 
agreement prevented Nicaragua from entering a course of chaos 
and anarchy that would lead to another civil war which, 
unquestionably, would have been bloodier than the previous one. 
  At that time, it would have been very difficult to view 
civilian-military relations in the light which we are beginning 
to view them now. Nicaragua is currently in the process of 
legitimizing the Army despite those people who still believe it 
is possible to alter the course of this historic trend in 
Nicaragua. We cannot ignore the fact that some people cannot or 
do not want to understand that to change this situation in any 
way would be to set Nicaragua, once again, on the path to the 
profoundest instability. 
  Therefore, the Army's legitimacy should be the gradual 
result 
of a broad consensus and its maturity should be the result of 
the efforts by all forces of the nation to ensure that the Army 
truly is a national Army that represents all Nicaraguans. 
  It must be understood that the Army is no longer the 
expression of a political party, the Sandinist Front, as it was 
in the past. It is no longer such a thing, and it is also 
imperative to admit that it will not be the armed wing of any 
political party or a certain class or an economic sector. 
  It is precisely because of this failure to acknowledge 
these new circumstances that even some economic analysts have 
made serious mistakes. One of them recently pointed out that 
Nicaragua's problem was the Army because it has sought to block 
the government's economic program at any cost. I am convinced 
that a country's economic and social problem must not be 
perceived from a repressive point of view. Much less must one 
adhere to the reasoning that in order to implement a specific 
plan, be it neoliberal or not, it is first necessary to crush 
the people's protest by force. 
  In Nicaragua, the Army [word indistinct] to ensure peace. We 
have been able to remove more than 130,000 assorted weapons from 
circulation. These weapons were in the hands of Sandinists and 
non-Sandinist civilians. Obviously, these weapons created a 
situation of risk and insecurity for the entire population. In 
addition, no one can deny that we have responsibly concluded the 
reduction process despite the fact that none of the Central 
American armies adopted the regional reduction and safety plan 
proposed by the Nicaraguan Government. These plans were 
unquestionably supported by our Army. 
  Most of all, I would like to clearly point out, especially 
to 
those friends who are willing to help us, that Nicaragua's main 
problem is not between civilians and the military leaders. The 
main problem afflicting us in Nicaragua is poverty, economic 
backwardness, and the underdevelopment of a nation that lacks 
democratic experience and urgently needs a solid material basis 
in order to advance toward a truly democratic culture. 
  From another perspective, the main problem lies with those 
of 
us who want democracy and those who are against it. It is not 
between military and civilian leaders. Just as during the past 
administration, the Army has been respectful of every political, 
economic, diplomatic, financial, and social activity carried out 
by the current administration. This has been the case 
regardless of whether or not some sectors may have described 
these activities as good or bad, or whether or not these sectors 
were right or wrong. This Army has never interfered in any of 
the decisions adopted by this government in exercising its 
rights which were won in the 1990 elections. We have never 
interfered in the National Assembly. 
  We have never gone to parliament to impose any particular 
political line. We have never gone to the Supreme Court of 
Justice to tell magistrates how justice must be imparted or to 
point out to them the problems of the legal or judicial system, 
a system criticized by various sectors of society that want a 
true de jure state and solemn respect for human rights, 
something that is necessary to consolidate the democratic 
process while having economic progress and social justice. 
  The Army has never kept the electoral authorities from 
fulfilling the law. On the contrary, during the 1990 elections 
process, for example, hundreds of brother soldiers and officers 
died while fighting the last offensives that the reactionaries 
launched from Honduran territory to try to frustrate the 
election process to justify the warmongering policy they wanted 
to impose on President George Bush after the Reagan plan failed. 
  Hundreds of brothers died fulfilling their duty, securing 
the 
necessary public order for carrying out those elections, which 
served as a unique example for America and perhaps for the whole 
world, the example of a revolution that wins power the armed way 
and surrenders it peacefully and democratically showing respect 
for the will of the people as expressed at the polls. 
  We have not interfered with the Higher Council of Private 
Enterprise or with labor unions, or with other important 
Nicaraguan sectors. 
  I believe that civilian-military relations have notably 
improved in the past four years in spite of difficulties and 
people who may not be aware of this fact yet. The EPS has been 
an stabilizing factor. Without the Army, Nicaragua would live 
in chaos, instability, and total anarchy. 
  To those who say the Army should not exist, I say that if 
the 
Army were to disappear today, tomorrow various armed groups 
would appear claiming to represent the various antagonistic and 
polarized political forces that still have excluding stands in 
the country's political and economic fields. 
  I want to mention our perspectives for the immediate future. 
Nicaragua is still experiencing a polarized situation. There 
are sectors that believe that democracy can be achieved only if 
the historic changes that were made here as a result of the 
revolution are erased. 
  There are others who think that democracy has to be based 
only on the revolutionary past, which was necessary at a given 
moment, but which now is behind us. 
  These are essential contradictions that must be overcome to 
reach basic national unity. To achieve this, it is necessary to 
objectively take into account the correlation of forces, the 
real strength of the sectors in contradiction. 
  I will mention some of the important elements necessary to 
reach this goal: 
  Reforms to the Constitution -- It is necessary to reach a 
basic political agreement that is based on the correlation of 
forces in the country. The Constitution must be our fundamental 
framework in the future. Nicaragua must have a constitutional 
regime with clear laws to which all of us must be subordinate. 
  The Constitution of 1987, born in the framework of the 
Revolution, has kept us on track, out of chaos. 
  This Constitution, however, is no longer effective and must 
be amended. 
  Property -- This is a very important issue, closely linked 
to 
the titanic efforts that Nicaragua must earnestly make to try to 
solve the dilemma of poverty. In clear judicial and political 
agreements on the issue of property pertaining to beneficiaries 
as well as to claimants, quite rightly, we will hardly reach the 
much needed stability to begin implementing and consolidating a 
plan, regardless of its political and ideological orientation, 
because there will be no reference points even for domestic 
consumption efforts or for the much needed foreign investment to 
make the country prosper. 
  National crusade against violence -- This is another vital 
issue because although the war was left behind as a political 
expression to alter the correlation among existing efforts, 
social decadence, and violence in its many forms, violence will 
completely undermine and destroy the Nicaraguan State we want to 
have and need to modernize. From our viewpoint, it is 
imperative to face violence with a spirit of national crusade to 
ensure that protected by the laws and with ample civilian 
support, we will reinforce the order and safety of mainly 
producers, peasants, townsfolk, and tradesmen, who are the 
constant victims of gangs of street criminals and wrongdoers. 
  Minimum consensus to face the socioeconomic crisis -- This 
is 
a general issue. The government recently joined the ESAF 
[Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility], which in fact, the 
current administration has already recognized and is addressing. 
To that effect, I believe the important thing to do is to find 
the way to overcome those hard times and tough policies carried 
out to fashion harsh realities into positive results. I think 
the country's stability to expand production and to make the 
economy thrive must be the main result, ensuring that every 
sacrifice imposed on the people due to those very painful 
economic policies must benefit not only a minority; they must 
also benefit the middle and poorest classes of this country. 
  We are convinced it is difficult, almost impossible, to 
jointly solve those economic and social problems that are 
present in every situation. I also believe, however, it is 
essential to make efforts to at least help ease the dramatic 
effects that these measures have on society. 
  Finally, I wish to say it is equally vital for the executive 
branch, the Army, and the National Assembly to reach a clear, 
conscientious, and enthusiastic consensus on the Military 
Organization Law. The subordination and respect that the Army 
has shown to civilian power amid all difficulties must be 
clearly stated in the juridical and legal order. 
  This law is 
essential to guarantee we will now have a small Army that 
adequately fulfills our society's needs and to support the 
process for the Army's professionalization. The legal mechanisms 
to achieve a rapprochement between civilian and military power 
should be clearly established. It is not a matter of 
establishing, as some people want, a law that dismantles the 
Army to leave it diminished and humiliated. These are, among 
other things, the issues I consider vital and necessary to 
settle in Nicaragua now so we may build the democratic system we 
all hope for. It is clear that Nicaragua is involved in a new 
democratic process and we all have the right to participate in 
the process, regardless of each one's political ideology. I 
want to state today that the Army will fulfill its role in the 
construction of this democratic regime we need so much. We will 
now answer questions. 
  [Correspondent] Excuse us for repeating the question we 
asked 
you yesterday. It deals with a meeting of high-ranking Army 
commanders, National Assembly deputies, and the government 
minister. Following the meeting, one of the participants told 
BARRICADA your retirement was scheduled for 21 February 1995. We 
would all like to know when this will happen. We are waiting 
for an official statement on such an important issue. 
  [Ortega] The most important thing here is that we have been 
working in a dedicated, serious manner with various groups -- in 
this case the National Assembly, the executive branch, and the 
Army. The most important thing is that we are reaching a 
consensus on what we so dearly need in Nicaragua concerning many 
contradictory issues. In other words, considerable progress has 
been achieved, compared to previous months, when our views were 
not so similar. 
  It is true that meetings have been held to seek a consensus 
on the Military Law. This will enable us to concentrate on the 
great historical step, when the country will have, for the first 
time, a law that will enable Nicaragua to quickly and safely 
consolidate a national Army. That is the most important thing. 
Within the framework of this project, which has been carried 
out constructively, we have managed to overcome some differences 
we had since 2 December -- between the executive branch and the 
Army, and between myself and President Violeta Barrios [name as 
heard]. 
  I think we should be happy about this. I think every 
agreement, every constructive step should encourage us to 
support them. That is why I said the most important thing at 
this point is to have a satisfactory agreement concerning the 
law, which is the most important issue because it will give 
Nicaragua more juridical and legal guarantees for the Army. 
There is also a satisfactory, correct, and adequate agreement 
concerning the retirement of the current EPS chief, Humberto 
Ortega. This is the most important thing. Referring to the day 
that we intend to make an announcement about the bill that will 
be sent to the National Assembly and about myself, as chief of 
the EPS, this will happen soon. 
  I believe it will be sometime next week. I do not want to 
say anything ahead of time because I would be jumping ahead of 
something that must follow normal procedures. I do believe, 
however, the most important issue is that there is an agreement, 
and that we work in a more mature and responsible manner which 
is more in line with national interests and not any other type 
of interests. Basically, once we have approved all the details 
and have made it public, the 2 September situation will have 
been overcome. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] Most likely it will be made public sometime next 
week. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] [words indistinct] The day and date are secondary. 
The important issue here is that we have been working more than 
two years for an adequate, responsible, and modern law. We can 
even say this is going to be one of the most modern laws 
approved during the past years in Latin America. Most of all, 
it draws the civilian and military branch closer together in a 
modern and constructive manner. In addition, the most important 
issue is that the military will be subordinated to the civilian 
branch. 
  [Correspondent] Gen. Ortega, [words indistinct] your entire 
high command if there is really nothing new? 
  [Ortega] Well, I believe that the most important issue is 
that we have ratified decisions of principle for this Army in 
light of the situation in the country. When you go over it, you 
will notice that there are issues that are worthwhile [words 
indistinct]. Every day there are going to be those alarmists or 
headlines grabbers who simply want to satisfy the media. The 
most important point here is that we are demonstrating what the 
Army's historical process is all about. We are also 
demonstrating what the civilian-military relation is about 
because we are about to enter a [words indistinct]. Once the 
law arrives before the assembly, I am quite sure there will be 
much debate surrounding it. What we have done is to provide 
people with a general framework of our outlook with respect to 
the civilian-military relationship so that when discussions 
surrounding the law takes place, the people will know how we 
think. This bill is very important to us because it expresses 
our position and our conviction. 
  [Correspondent] You have always spoken about [words 
indistinct] as relates to the military law [words indistinct] 
and the differences. Yet, you have never specified what these 
differences with the executive branch are. Why not explain 
[words indistinct]. Why not ratify once and for all [words 
indistinct], and I reiterate my question with respect to the 
differences. 
  [Ortega] Yes, of course. The differences have been related 
to the lack of a civilian-military relationship. We have slowly 
been discussing and understanding one another on issues such as 
subordination -- for instance, how it should be -- and on the 
authority, functions, and kind of fundamental structure the Army 
must have. On the matter of the Army's jurisdiction, we made 
major progress on some [word indistinct] the civilian sector 
had. In sum, [words indistinct] the law will be announced. I 
think this will happen no later than next week, as I have been 
in touch with the Presidency. Next week, within the appropriate 
framework, the matters dealing with my retirement as Army Chief 
will be announced. Both issues will take place soon, maybe by 
next week. 
  [Correspondent] I understand the Army High Command is 
responsible for recommending your successor as Army Chief to the 
President of the Republic. Since expectations have been growing 
about your retirement, the name of Major General Joaquin Cuadra 
has been mentioned constantly. First of all, I would like to 
know if you can confirm if Maj. Gen. Joaquin Cuadra is the only 
candidate to occupy the position. Secondly, if you say that 
your retirement is secondary and not the main issue, then why 
wait until the last minute? 
  [Ortega] Mainly because we have to respect several 
procedures 
we have agreed upon. I do not want [words indistinct] things 
which we have already agreed on, the procedures of how we would 
go about it. With respect to the mechanisms used in the Army, 
in addition to obeying the law, we have an obligation to the 
hierarchy within the institution. In addition, we have an 
obligation to evaluate merits since the triumph of the 
revolution as well as during the revolution. Throughout these 
difficult times the Army was called upon to play a key role 
[words indistinct] of Maj. Gen. Joaquin Cuadra. Therefore, as 
[words indistinct] we have no inconvenience. In due time, we 
plan to formalize it in the military council. As I said, we can 
find no inconveniences to that type of [word indistinct]. 
  [Correspondent] General, Joaquin Cuadra is the principal 
candidate to replace you? 
  [Ortega] That is correct. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] In general terms, We say the Army does not 
interfere 
in the country's normal civilian life. What happens is that 
there are very extremist sectors that still talk about 
eliminating the Army or turning it into an insignificant body. 
  We have not come to discuss that. We have not come to accept 
that kind of message but to discuss matters of interest. We 
simply want to retake [words indistinct]. We want to correctly 
focus on [two-second break in reception] alter the current 
correlation. There are people who believe the Army should 
disappear. Those who advocate that policy are creating 
instability. 
  Work has been made toward a consensus. Important forces in 
the assembly, such as the [words indistinct], should be there 
once the bill gets there to have a richer and more productive 
debate. Let us hope that deputies from other currents see the 
good points of this bill for the nation, and do not look at me 
antagonistically. This is the idea. 
  We do not interfere with COSEP [Higher Council of Private 
Enterprise]. We do not carry out any activity that goes against 
the Nicaraguan private enterprise and we have never considered 
that kind of policy. So far we have not done it. 
  [Correspondent] General, will this be a law or a military 
code? 
  [Ortega] It is a code because it contains several laws. This 
will be a code of military urbanization, jurisdiction, and 
social assistance. That is going to be its title. 
  [Correspondent] [passage indistinct] did you present the 
candidate or [words indistinct]? 
  [Ortega] This is something that will not meet great 
difficulties [words indistinct] due to the [words indistinct] we 
have. The succession in the EPS is therefore very clear. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] was held a seminar on 
civilian-military relations. Some proposals or recommendations 
were presented on the need to create a defense ministry in 
Nicaragua. Would the EPS agree to create a defense ministry? 
Could you comment if this has a [12-second break in reception] 
  [Ortega] ...in that event, this has been analyzed 
thoroughly. 
The problem is those who would have to take over these tasks 
are not currently prepared. These people would have to be 
prepared and educated so they can understand and contribute, in 
this case, to the military-government relationship. I believe 
this problem [words indistinct] when everything is ready, then 
action can be taken through presidential decision to create a 
defense ministry. I believe this [words indistinct] causes 
delays. But we have no [word indistinct]. On the contrary, we 
believe that a defense ministry would harmonize a series of 
political tasks, of national defense, coordination, that through 
the state, the military and the government should carry out. 
  Currently, the state is being reduced. When there is 
unemployment, when people from the government sector are being 
left unemployed, it would be absurd to propose the creation of a 
bureaucratic mechanism right now. I believe it would go against 
ESAF policies. Perhaps, later on, when the [word indistinct] 
has been tested with another government, better solutions might 
be available. 
  [Correspondent] What guarantees [words indistinct] the Army 
[words indistinct] on the part of parliamentary factions and the 
National Assembly will be given to guarantee the implementation 
of [words indistinct] will be continued. [Words indistinct] 
have committed, at least in a general framework. Second, I would 
like to know what you have planned after your retirement [words 
indistinct], any electoral plans vis-a-vis the 1996 elections? 
  [Ortega] It has been scheduled for the 21st and was chosen 
in 
accordance with [words indistinct]. This is a very significant 
date for the party. 
  [Correspondent] Will you devote yourself to business or 
politics? 
  [Ortega] We are positive that [words indistinct] will be the 
economic development [words indistinct]. 
  We really do not want to be tied to anything. We are 
certain of this proposal. When we use logic, even though it may 
not be understood at the very beginning, it naturally comes out 
during the debate. We have great trust in this. We believe this 
is quite fair and that it will be understood. 
  As for the 21 February thing [words indistinct] we are quite 
sure that next week it will be made known in a proper manner. 
As for myself, I do not have to look for something to do. I 
am a revolutionary. I will continue to be a revolutionary. I 
am a man concerned about the fate of Nicaragua and I will try to 
contribute as much as I can, including in the historic judicial 
case. We are committed to a task that has not been finished 
yet. It is a task that all Nicaraguans must continue to work on. 
  I do not have to look for something to do. I am here doing 
my patriotic work in the Army. I am contributing by giving the 
country a national Army that is purged, that is not involved in 
politics, and that fundamentally responds to the Constitution 
and the law. It is not a repressive force that is at the 
service as we said in the document. [sentence as heard] That is 
why it is good to remember history. The Army is not at the 
service of any class or political party. It is an army that is 
really at the service of all Nicaraguans. Therefore, I do not 
have to look for something to do. I am doing my work now, and I 
am going to do this work in the future. 
  [Correspondent] Have you ruled out any participation in the 
next election campaign? 
  [Ortega] Up until now, no one has asked me to be a 
candidate. 
If you asked me to be a candidate, we would think about it. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] The problem the Nicaraguan people have is that we 
are all immersed in the search for clear-cut distinctiveness in 
one way or the other. Forces of all types in the country are 
facing divisions. If you observe the country's situation, you 
are going to find there are divisions and problems everywhere. 
I believe the unity of the Nicaraguan people is vital. I 
believe we have to look for a way out of the crisis. We must 
find a nationalist solution for all Nicaraguans regardless of 
their race, religion, or political affiliation. This is vital 
in saving Nicaragua. That is what I could tell you in this 
regard. I really do not want to get involved in the internal 
problems of the Sandinist National Liberation Front. I believe 
that all Nicaraguans must unite around a program to save 
Nicaragua. We said this in the document we released today. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] What is important here is not my departure. Rather, 
the important issue here is the law. This is what we are giving 
Nicaragua. I have not heard the statements made by the 
president, but we had already agreed on how to announce this 
kind of thing. I want to honor that commitment. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] No, no I have not heard anything. I do not know if 
she said that. We had agreed to make a joint announcement. 
  [Correspondent] [words indistinct] 
  [Ortega] Yesterday, we met with [word indistinct] and with 
the cardinal, and you all witnessed this. There, we talked 
about the need to make great efforts to convince the people to 
help the authorities face this problem. Actually, the [word 
indistinct] are increased in various parts of the country. The 
efforts we are making in the Army, the police, and in other 
organizations in the cities is to prevent this phenomenon from 
spreading to the cities. We want to build a type of barrier to 
prevent this evil from becoming somewhat common here as well. 
This thing would be awful for the country's image and for the 
tranquility of the country's citizens. We are going to start 
working against the problems of extortion, kidnappings, and 
robberies in the countryside, and we want to say that, in spite 
of everything, the results of the past three months have been 
quite positive, and we believe the results will be even more 
positive. 
  [Correspondent] Gen. Ortega, [words indistinct] one of the 
most important points said society [words indistinct] U.S. 
Congress approved a law some people view as an ultimatum for 
Nicaragua. And the association of people whose property has 
been confiscated stated several of its properties are in the 
hands of Army military officers. Will the Army cooperate in 
trying to resolve this problem by returning some of these 
properties? 
  [Ortega] We have been working within the framework of law 
and 
order to resolve, once and for all, the property issue. We have 
provided all the assistance required. We think this is a 
problem, not only for those whose properties were arbitrarily 
and unjustly confiscated, but we believe it is a fundamental 
problem for a majority of Nicaraguan citizens who benefited from 
the law, within the framework of a very complex revolution. 
This has generated a misunderstanding. 
  We must adhere to the law and ethics, as well as our deeper 
moral commitments and conduct. We have never accepted the 
abuses [words indistinct] of the law to benefit some people, 
which was granted by the revolution in the last few months of 
its mandate. We never supported this and we have always 
expected [words indistinct] pinata-like giveaway. But no list 
has ever been presented on who profited from the pinata-like 
giveaway so that they may be brought to justice. I was reading 
in a newspaper that there are even Sandinists who know about 
fellow Sandinists who illegally occupied properties. They 
should be brought to court. To say that the pinata-like 
giveaway occurred and not to say who they are would be like 
covering up criminals. 
  We believe there were cases in which the law was violated 
and 
there was corruption. We have always agreed these cases must be 
uncovered. We never had these problems in the Army. We always 
clearly stated our position to the executive. We asked if it 
had any complaint against the Army, and there was none. There 
are cases of homes which belonged to U.S. citizens and we are 
trying to find a solution to that. This will not be done in a 
hasty manner. Thank you. 
  [Announcer] This has been the message to the nation and news 
conference by Gen. Humberto Ortega. 

