Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] It looks as if the world's nuclear power engineers 
will soon have a safe reactor for power stations. The new 
reactor design has been put forward by Russian scientists. I 
interviewed Academician Nikolay Basov, scientific head of 
research and a Nobel prizewinner. [begin recording] 
  Basov: At present we have nuclear power 
engineering, and work is under way to create thermonuclear power 
engineering. There has been great success in this respect with 
laser thermonuclear fusion, which was proposed by our institute. 
Today we are on the verge of the so-called break-even, that is, 
when the energy of laser light will be equal to the energy of a 
thermonuclear explosion. This is the first stage in the 
development of thermonuclear energy. In order to obtain energy, 
we have to have a positive yield of energy, that is the reactor 
must have an amplification factor greater than one. We estimate 
it at a hundred or several hundred times more than the laser 
energy. When that is the case we succeed in closing the cycle 
and we have a thermonuclear reactor. 
  Why do we need a thermonuclear reactor? Well, oil and gas 
are running out, but thermonuclear power engineering -- lithium, 
from which one can obtain tritium and deuterium, is in effect an 
infinite sea of energy. We believe that there is enough energy 
here to last tens of thousands of years at least. 
  Announcer: The new reactor is called a hybrid 
reactor, since its system unites nuclear and thermonuclear 
subsystems. The times have compelled physicists to use this 
combination in their work. As a result of disarmament and the 
decline in research connected with the nuclear energy program 
large quantities of uranium and plutonium have accumulated, and 
these can be used successfully in the new reactor. In this 
system, a laser will act as a source of high intensity neutrons. 
  Basov: In this case, the energy of the laser is 
approximately 100 times less than the energy needed for a 
thermonuclear reactor. With the help of neutrons obtained from a 
thermonuclear explosion, we can try to ignite normal uranium -- 
not uranium 235 -- natural uranium, or compound uranium. In 
that case we obtain a very beneficial reactor because it can be 
kept in a subcritical state, in which thermonuclear explosions 
of the Chernobyl type are impossible, and that is an extremely 
attractive prospect. The other attractive thing is that in this 
instance there is also a significant burnup of uranium. Whereas 
in normal reactors this is 0.5 percent, here one can expect a 
burnup of up to 5 percent, that is what we expect from the 
initial stations, and perhaps in subsequent ones it will reach 
50 percent. That is, radioactive chemistry will clearly not be 
required. 
  That is the principle of this hybrid reactor. There is a 
great deal of natural compound uranium 238. Today's power 
engineers already have enough to last for a thousand years, or 
it can be obtained. In that sense one is getting a very 
attractive form of power engineering. It is the first step, if 
you like, of thermonuclear power engineering, and that is what 
we are doing. 
  Announcer: What stage is the work at now? 
  Basov: A program has been created. It has been 
approved by Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin, and it will be examined 
by top official circles in the near future. It has been 
approved by the Presidium of the Academy of Sciences and by the 
institute. It has been approved by the international community. 
I gave a report at Livermore; I also gave a report in Japan and 
in a whole range of other countries, and it looks as if we will 
be cooperating with America, France, Japan, and maybe with other 
countries. We think that in some time we will manage to hold a 
conference of the Geneva type to resolve the issue of how to 
develop this kind of power engineering on an international 
scale. [end recording] 

