Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Police Major General Pramot Pansakun, the commander 
of the Region 2 Border Patrol Police (BPP), Khon Kaen, and Thai 
and American narcotics suppression officials accompanied by 
reporters, spent more than 2 hours climbing a high mountain to 
destroy a Hmong poppy field located along the border between Dan 
Sai District in Loei Province, Nakhon Thai District in 
Phitsanulok Province, and Lomsak District in Phetchabun Province. 
  At approximately 1000 hours on 17 November, officials took 
two helicopters to this area. But when they arrived, the 
helicopters couldn't land and had to land about 10 km from the 
area planted in poppies. The officials and reporters spent about 
2 hours climbing the mountain to reach the poppy field located 
along the side of the mountain. The poppies were in full bloom. 
  The Hmong tribesmen had interplanted the poppies with 
bananas 
and corn in order to conceal the poppies from officials 
searching the area by helicopter. They had planted a short 
variety of poppy that reaches a height of only 50 centimeters. 
The officials all helped cut down the poppy plants. By 1600 
hours, they had destroyed only about 30 rai of plants, valued 
about 720,000 baht. That left at least 100 rai of poppies. But 
the officials were all very tired and so they stopped for the 
moment. 
  The commander of the Region 2 BPP said that he had received 
good cooperation from all sides. Those Hmong tribesmen had 
planted a large number of poppy plants. That area could be 
called the ``Golden Triangle of the Northeast.'' When the 
poppies mature, the opium sap is removed and sold to dealers who 
then refine it into heroin. One rai of poppies can produce about 
two kg of raw opium. It takes seven kg of raw opium to produce 1 
kg of heroin. Or one kg of opium can produce enough heroin to 
supply at least 20,000 heroin addicts. 
  Police Major General Pramot said that even though officials 
managed to destroy a large number of poppy plants, he ordered 
Police Colonel Suraphong Khemasingkhi, the superintendent of BPP 
Unit 24, to mobilize a team of BPP officials and asked for the 
cooperation of the units concerned to destroy the rest. No one 
will be arrested this time, because that could damage relations 
with these people. Officials will try to explain things to the 
hill tribes and encourage them to plant other crops. 

