BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 14 April. 
  Argentina 
  Police personnel on 7 April seized 12 kg of very pure 
cocaine 
and arrested Carlos Alberto Olariaga, 40, Angela Moreno, 35, and 
Beatriz Gomez, 25 in the township of San Lorenzo, Santa Fe 
Province. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 2217 GMT 
8 Apr 94) 
  Federal Police agents seized 5 kg of very pure cocaine and 
arrested a man at the border checkpoint of the Bolivian township 
of Pocitos. He is at the disposal of the Salta Province federal 
judge. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1949 GMT 11 
Apr 94) 
  The Buenos Aires Police arrested four drug traffickers and 
seized 1.3 kg of very pure cocaine over the past few hours in 
Villa Pineral and Pablo Nogues Villages in General San Martin 
Department. The detainees are Jorge Rojas, 30, Ricardo 
Santillan, 31, Ines Chavez, 63, and Gustavo Souco, 27. (Buenos 
Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1314 GMT 12 Apr 94) 
  Bolivia 
  The Special Antinarcotics Force arrested Adela Beatriz Pena 
Calero and Dardo Moncarda Pardo at Viru Viru airport as they 
boarded a plane for Buenos Aires. They had 80 and 25 cocaine 
capsules respectively in their stomachs. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in 
Spanish 25 Mar 94 p 14) 
  The Social Defense Secretariat on 28 March reported that an 
operation to evaluate all goods seized from drug traffickers has 
begun in Santa Cruz Department. The operation will continue in 
Cochabamba, La Paz, and other departments. (Cochabamba LOS 
TIEMPOS in Spanish 29 Mar 94 p A6) 
  Brazil 
  Within the framework of the Blockade Operation, Amazonas 
Federal Police agents have arrested a 25-year-old Dutch drug 
trafficker with 4 kg of cocaine taped to his body. The cocaine 
had been purchased in Leticia, Colombia. It is worth about 15.7 
million real cruzeiros and was being taken to Amsterdam. 
(Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in Portuguese 2200 GMT 8 Apr 94) 
  The Nigerian drug trafficking connection is one of the main 
route to send cocaine from Latin America to Europe and the 
United States. So far this year 18 Nigerians carrying cocaine 
were arrested at Cumbica international airport as they boarded 
the weekly flight to Nigeria. Federal Police Delegate Roberto 
Precioso Junior said Nigerian organized crime has expanded and 
is also using other airports. (Rio de Janeiro O GLOBO in 
Portuguese 11 Apr 94 p 5) 
  The police have learned that drug traffickers are training 
gangs to assault bullion shipments. The police invaded Jacari 
slum in Rio de Janeiro. They confiscated an arsenal of 
submachine guns and grenades, and seized 7 kg of cocaine and 10 
kg of marijuana. They arrested 40 individuals, 5 of whom 
confessed to bullion robbery. The police say the bullion thieves 
are financed by drug trafficker Jorge Luiz, who controls drug 
trafficking in Acari, and Robertinho de Lucas, from the Parada 
de Lucas slum. Traffickers supply the weapons for the thieves, 
and even lend them trained thieves from the Red Command, most of 
whom are under 18 years of age. After a robbing, the 
traffickers hide the thieves inside the slum for 30 percent of 
the haul. (Rio de Janeiro Rede Globo Television in Portuguese 
2300 GMT 13 Apr 94) 
  Paraguay 
  Personnel from the Special Force Command, National Narcotics 
Directorate, and Capitan Bado-based Border Unit No. 2 destroyed 
more than 127 metric tonnes of marijuana and arrested seven 
people during Operation Via Crucis in Amambay Department. 
(Asuncion NOTICIAS in Spanish 8 Apr 94 p 49) 
  The Antidrug Police have reported that the Ecuadoran Police 
have offered a 50-million guaranies ransom to anyone reporting 
the whereabouts of three Ecuadoran drug kingpins who reportedly 
sought refugee in Paraguay. They are Victor Raul Torres Reyes, 
Omar A. Hidrovo Velez and Genia Piedad Torres Cuevas. (Asuncion 
ABC COLOR in Spanish 9 Apr 94 p 71) 
  Peru 
  The Inka Front Army Command has installed an antinarcotics 
base near the Inapari airport, Tahuamanu Province. The towns of 
Inapari and Santa Rosa de Fatima are the new drug centers for 
Peruvian and foreign ``firms'' that send washed cocaine paste to 
Colombia. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 30 Mar 94 p A13) 
  Army personnel on 30 Mar destroyed a clandestine airstrip 
near the township of Quempire in Satipo Province. It was used 
by Colombian drug traffickers to transport cocaine bought in 
this zone to Colombia. (Lima EL PERUANO in Spanish 31 Mar 94 p 
A3) 
  Antidrug Division personnel on 26 March seized sophisticated 
equipment and more than 150 kg of cocaine paste, and destroyed 
two cocaine processing laboratories and chemicals in Tingo 
Maria, Huallaga Province, San Martin Department. (Lima EXPRESO 
in Spanish 31 Mar 94 p A14) 
  Antidrug Police personnel on 30 March arrested former 
National Police Captain Luis Arce Santillan, retired, and Iris 
Mendoza Porras, and seized 3.6 kg of very pure cocaine paste 
during a raid in Chilca District, Huancayo Province. (Lima LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 1 Apr 94 p 12) 
  Army personnel have arrested nine drug traffickers and 
destroyed a clandestine airstrip and two cocaine processing 
laboratories in the townships of Cajonari and Lorencillo, in the 
jungle province of Oxapampa. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 2147 GMT 10 
Apr 94) 

