BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Bureaucrats, Stay Away From Politics; Perform </F>
Role as Think Tanks"; part one of two-part editorial entitled 
"Let Us Think About Politics and Governance at This Time of 
Transition"] 
  [Text] It was the day the Hata cabinet set sail. Newly 
named cabinet ministers came into the news conference room next 
to the Prime Minister's Residence, one after another. Some were 
shy and flushed, stammering: "this came so suddenly... I would 
like to begin learning," and some simply read statements written 
by government officials who anticipated certain questions. 
  Moriyoshi Sato of Shinseito, who was named director general 
of the Hokkaido Development Agency and the Okinawa Development 
Agency, is a veteran politician elected to the Diet for the 
ninth time, but was one of those who simply read the written 
response provided. A reporter chided him, saying: "I thought 
it was the policy of the new cabinet to lead the government on 
its own; is reading something written by bureaucrats not 
synonymous with being led by bureaucrats?" Sato was unable to 
reply immediately, and finally said, "I read them (the written 
answers) because they were similar to my own thoughts." 
  The relationship between "our ministers" and the bureaucrats 
is one of give and take. The bureaucrats among themselves look 
down on the politicians, but at least superficially handle them 
in a courteous manner, calling them "ministers -- our 
ministers," and are also quick to turn them into government 
office spokesmen. The cabinet ministers who are not equipped 
with specialists' knowledge and thus are afraid they will 
stumble when answering questions in the Diet have no choice but 
to rely on the bureaucrats to help them. 
<H5>  "Bureaucrats Standing Above Politicians" Under the Coalition </H5>
Government 
  Even after the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] government, 
which lasted nearly 40 years, stepped down and the coalition 
government took the LDP's place, the relationship between 
politicians and the administration as symbolized in the 
expression "our ministers" has not changed. It appears that the 
self-conceited thinking of the bureaucrats that they are the 
ones who really run the government is in fact more pronounced 
than before. The chaotic conditions and insecurity that come 
with the coalition government are now here, without doubt. 
Expressed another way, it may be that the bureaucrats are 
feeling they are performing services [for the country] in a 
difficult time. 
  But even though the bureaucrats may be enjoying the 
coalition 
era of "the bureaucrats standing above politicians," they are 
perplexed as well. However strong they relive that they are the 
ones who are running the government, the persons who make final 
decisions on policy matters are politicians. As long as 
policymaking is accompanied by the need to appropriate budget 
funds -- which means a that bills need to be passed by the Diet 
-- the bureaucrats have no choice but to depend on the political 
world, which lies beyond their ability to control. 
  To do their work and to keep themselves secure, the 
bureaucrats are keen to know where real political power resides. 
During the latter part of the LDP's long rule, the bureaucrats 
made daily visits to members of the Tanaka faction, the LDP's 
largest faction, and thereafter to the power brokers -- men like 
Takeshita, Kanemaru, and Ozawa. Government policies were made 
through the group efforts of the government offices concerned 
and the bosses of the zoku-giin [Dietmen representing government 
and business interests]. 
  In order to be accepted by the power brokers and the 
zoku-giin, the bureaucrats made subsidies available on a 
priority basis and assigned public works projects as the former 
desired. The bureaucrats introduced them to the businesses and 
the business organizations which could become sources of funds. 
In fact, the bureaucrats even bought the politicians' party 
tickets and provided vote-collecting services. 
  Such actions were possible only because the government 
offices had the rights to issue licenses and permits and to 
exercise administrative guidance. In other words, this simply 
meant that the bureaucrats used administrative authority--which 
is supposed to be exercised in the public interest--in the 
interests of the ministries to which they belong or even for the 
purpose of protecting and promoting the interests of individual 
bureaucrats themselves. 
  Thus was born the collusive structure of politicians, 
bureaucrats, and businessmen collaborating with each other in 
appropriating whatever they want--the root cause of political 
corruption. In this process, bureaucrats play a central role. 
  When the LDP's rule ended, we thought a big crack opened 
in the iron triangle of the alliance of politicians, 
bureaucrats, and businessmen. Initially, the bureaucrats and 
the industries seemed baffled by the collapse of the powerful 
ruling party and the fluid political environment. But once 
Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] took over the leadership of the 
coalition of so many family members, the bureaucrats lost no 
time in meeting with the Shinseito politicians. In the 
beginning, according to a bureaucrat of the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry, "we met with them secretly, as 
we were conscious of the eyes of the LDP people." Now there is 
no need even for that. 
<H5>  `New' Zoku-Giin and Single-Seat District System </H5>
  In fact, there has been no change at all. All that happened 
was that the party to be dealt with changed from the LDP to 
Shinseito. The habits of clinging to those in power remain the 
same. Shinseito played an active role as a link between 
industries and government offices when the 1994 budget was 
formulated. The party now has departments in charge of 
individual government offices and councils for review of 
individual issues. It has parliamentary unions through which to 
exercise influence on government offices and industries. 
Indeed, these people are nothing but new zoku-giin. 
  The political reorganization strategy of Shinseito Secretary 
General Ozawa, who in fact owns that party, lies in collecting a 
new conservative force to replace the LDP and adopting the 
single-seat district system, while scheming to agitate and split 
up the LDP and the SDPJ at every available opportunity. 
Shinseito, which is an offspring of the old Tanaka faction of 
the LDP, understands well how to collect votes and tap sources 
of funds through the government offices. In preparation for the 
House of Councillors election next year--as well as for a 
possible general election, the likelihood of which is increasing 
due to rising tensions in the political circles--the party has 
started to actively work with government offices and industries. 
  The adoption of the single-seat district system in the House 
of Representatives election means that the political parties 
will become central bases for political activity hereafter. The 
system of single-seat districts will help create a ruling party 
which holds a majority in Parliament, in turn helping to form a 
strong government. Suppose that the bureaucracy ties up with a 
political party in which all political power is concentrated. 
An omnipotent political regime [yokusan taisei] will then 
emerge. 
  Under the single-seat district system which will force 
political parties to fight on a one-to-one basis, there is no 
other choice but for bureaucratic circles, business circles, and 
local people of influence to take sides with certain parties. 
Shinseito is hinting at an idea of sending party officials into 
central government offices (by using the parliamentary minister 
system). The United States changes all of its the 
senior-ranking officials when a new president comes to power, 
but Japan is different from the United States. As such, it is 
doubtful whether such a system will work and can take root in 
Japan. But there is no denying that the single-seat district 
system will bring about major changes in the ways politicians 
and bureaucrats think and act. 
  Now that we are in a period of political transition, people 
are once again thinking about how the nation should be governed 
and administered. The government needs to return to the 
original starting point of being the servant of the people of 
the nation and to distance itself to a certain degree from 
political affairs. In order for the politicians to make 
informed decisions and exercise leadership in stabilizing and 
improving people's lives however, they may need to use the data 
and expertise of bureaucratic organizations. What the 
bureaucratic organizations should do is to act as good advisors 
to politicians and act as think tanks for them -- for instance, 
presenting alternatives when making suggestions for political 
consideration. By all means, it is the politicians' 
responsibility to decide on the policies of the country and on 
the courses the country should take. 

