Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Klaus-Peter Schoeppner, managing director of the </F>
Emnid opinion research institute in Bielefeld: "Worries About 
Money and Jobs"] 
  [Text] The Emnid opinion research institute compiles 
important trends and topical data of opinion research for 
BERLINER ZEITUNG. This time the issue are political topics and 
events that affected the German citizens most in 1993. 
  The civil war in the former Yugoslavia is the clear loser 
among the topics and events that were discussed most heatedly by 
the German citizens in 1993. 
  While at the beginning of the year the horror in the Balkans 
was still considered to be the most pressing problem by 36 
percent of those polled, today only 12 percent are still 
interested in the war. Despite Christmas and the steadily 
increasing misery, hunger, and suffering there, the constant 
presence of the conflict in the media has left Germans 
shockingly unaffected by the war in the course of 1993. 
  Now we prefer to think of ourselves again. The more negative 
the reports about economic development, working short hours, and 
a mood of crisis became in the course of the year, the more 
frequent fear of one's own unemployment and somber financial 
prospects characterized everyday discussions. 
  At the moment, one out of three German citizens think that 
there is nothing more important to report. The specter of 
unemployment has thus become the top issue in 1993. 
  In mid-1993 it looked as if foreigners and asylum seekers 
would become the dominant issues. Following Solingen, the 
deportation or integration of foreigners was primarily discussed 
in 38 percent of the German living rooms. This was the highest 
monthly ratio measured in 1993 in the Emnid analyses of the most 
important public event, comparatively. However, the new asylum 
law and the drastic reduction in the number of applications of 
asylum since mid-1993 quickly removed the problem from Germans' 
minds. However, this was almost the only success by the 
Christian Democratic Union [CDU] in an annual political balance 
sheet, which gives the CDU an image of losers, failures, and 
cheats. This might have irreversible consequences not only for 
the FRG Government but for our entire political system. In 
1993, the year before the elections, political Germany turned 
into a different republic: Parties that achieve 45 percent of 
the votes may be a thing of the past. The big ones are getting 
small, the small ones are getting big: The CDU/Christian Social 
Union [CSU] and the Social Democratic Party of Germany [SPD] 
together get hardly more than 70 percent of the votes right now. 
The coalitions of two parties, which have determined our 
political life for decades, will be a thing of the past, at 
least at the national level. 
  For the first time it seems possible that six parties will 
enter the next Bundestag. In 1993 political Germany has become 
a bit more unpredictable. 
  This is so primarily also because the politicians had to 
accept an unprecedented loss in their image due to mistakes, 
obscure machinations, and nepotism. While at the beginning of 
the year 65 percent of the voters believed that the political 
parties could solve the most important problems, now this is 
believed by only about 40 percent. In 1993 the politicians 
gambled away their claim of representing the people. 
  The voters are united only by the desire for more democracy 
at the grass roots and this provided clear majorities. More 
than four out of five voters want to be directly involved, 
regardless of which political decision has to be made. 
  The Federal Government also failed in its goal to bring 
Germans in the east and west closer together -- if not 
economically then at least psychologically. At the threshold to 
the ominous fourth year after Kohl's prediction of flourishing 
landscapes, the Germans have barely come closer to each other. 
  Two out of three west Germans still see the new German 
citizens as equals, for whom enough has already been done. A 
total of 85 percent of east Germans, on the other hand, still 
think that they are "second class" citizens. And concern rather 
than joy about the nation's unity is still the dominant feeling 
everywhere. 
  Has the 1994 Bundestag election already been decided? Is 
Kohl entering the last year of his chancellorship? After a 
minor upswing in summer, the political mood indicators indicate 
a seemingly clear result: Two-thirds of Germans expect the 
opposition to win and [SPD Chairman] Scharping to become 
chancellor. 
  Only 18 percent think that the CDU is ahead, but 40 percent 
think that the SPD is. And at the moment the SPD is increasing 
its share in the votes to 38 percent, compared with 35 percent 
for the CDU. 
  However, the SPD still does not have any reason for more 
than 
secret anticipatory joy, because evidence that the political 
constellations may change completely within only 10 months is 
remembered all too well by the government and the opposition: 
Ten months -- the exact time until the next Bundestag elections 
-- coincides with the period between March and December 1989, 
which the Federal Government of CDU/CSU and Free Democratic 
Party of Germany needed in the last legislative period to turn 
an absolute low in public opinion into the euphoria of victory. 
  In March 1989 only 20 percent (today 23 percent) of voters 
agreed with Chancellor Kohl's policy, 10 months later that 
number was 41 percent! And at that time even fewer voters -- 
namely 32 percent -- expected the CDU to win the elections. In 
December 1993 this was expected by 35 percent. 
  In the past Kohl has managed an unflagging advance to his 
clear reelection as the "chancellor of all Germans" within only 
10 months. 
  However, there is a small difference compared to that time 
now: Unification will not be available again next year. 

