BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with President Carlos Menem by Andrew </F>
Graham-Yooll in Buenos Aires; date not given] 
  [Text] President Carlos Menem of Argentina is a gambling 
man. He enjoys the image, and he is unabashedly delighted when 
he wins. On Sunday he will be playing for his future. 
  A parliamentary election will decide his proposals for 
constitutional reform that would enable him to stand for 
re-election. 
  The man who has transformed Argentina from a country prone 
to 
military coups and inflation that reached 20,000 per cent into 
what investment fund managers call the boom region of the 1990s, 
is confident of victory. 
  "The people want stability, and I give them that," he said 
in 
an interview at the presidential palace, the Casa Rosada in 
Buenos Aires. 
  His government, which has brought inflation down to 10 per 
cent since he took office in July 1989, is renowned, however, 
for condoning widespread corruption, an accusation he brushes 
aside. 
  He has also given Argentina's stuffy officialdom a sense of 
humour. He has made Argentinians laugh at themselves by 
laughing at himself. "Sense of humour? Some of us have it. 
Churchill could laugh at himself," he says. 
  For laughs, he has played basketball with the Globe 
Trotters, 
football against Diego Maradona and tennis against Gabriela 
Sabatini. 
  At 64, his pursuit of youth, fitness and personal grooming 
are approached like a national emergency. His hairdresser and 
tennis coach have priority on all presidential travel. 
  He appears terrified of ageing, anxious to show that he is 
still young and able to govern. 
  "The man is without shame," a cabinet minister's wife 
remarked. She said Senor Menem was not troubled by mistakes and 
was not affected by adverse comment. 
  He loves good suits, fast cars and blondes, which he 
explains 
away as due to his Arab ancestry. He is first generation 
Argentinian. His father emigrated from Yabrud in Syria. 
  Asked about allegations that his infidelity drove his former 
wife, Zulema, out of the presidential home, and has been the 
subject of scandal, Senor Menem replied: "I am not a 
philanderer, I'm a seducer." 
  When he took office in 1989 he promised to end corruption, 
but the privatisation programme that has pumped money into the 
economy has also produced personal fortunes overnight, and with 
no questions asked. 
  He said: "There is a problem. But no worse than it ever was. 
You hear about some things now because there is absolute freedom 
of speech. Under previous regimes (the military) you were 
killed if you breathed a word." 
  The wave of corruption has touched the President. He has 
sacked relatives of his ex-wife from government jobs, when their 
get-rich-quick deals became scandalous. One relative organised 
an Argentine passport for Monzer al-Kassar, an arms dealer under 
arrest in Spain. 
  Amira Yoma, Senor Menem's sister-in-law, has been charged 
with laundering drug money. She was accused of organising her 
own sting against Colombian drug barons, and presidential aides 
had to dissuade a hit squad sent to kill her. 
  The election takes place as the fourth Argentine-British 
Conference, held every two years to build bilateral 
understanding, ends in the Andean province of Mendoza. 
  British politicians and businessmen, led by Viscount 
Montgomery, are in Argentina this week to discuss trade and 
build bridges broken by the Falklands conflict, which started 12 
years ago this month. 
  It was Senor Menem, in search of trade with Britain and 
Europe, who made the first move towards restoring diplomatic 
relations within weeks of entering office. 
  "I don't know why Britain wants those islands. Really, I ask 
you?" 
  His ambition, which he sees as natural after restoration of 
diplomatic relations, is to be officially invited to Britain. 
  "They don't want to invite me," he laughed, "which in the 
present circumstances between our two countries is not easy to 
understand. In fact, the two countries that haven't invited me 
are the UK and Syria." 
  Since Britain and Argentina renewed links under Senor Menem, 
bilateral trade has grown. 
  British Gas landed a share in a four-way contract with 
America to build a gas supply pipeline from Argentina to Chile. 
  Senor Menem was born in 1930 in La Rioja, one of Argentina's 
poorest provinces, and he joined the followers of the late Juan 
Peron in the mid-1950s, just after the general had been 
overthrown in a military coup. 
  But whereas Peron nationalised the mostly-British utilities 
in 1947, Senor Menem, within days of reaching office, announced 
mass privatisation. 
  He ordered the sale of all viable state enterprises and the 
closure of others, leaving himself open to charges that his 
policies were Thatcherite. 
  But he sees no conflict with his youthful Peronism. "There 
is no contradiction. General Peron would eventually have had 
the same policy. 
  "He had started calling for international investors into oil 
exploration when he was overthrown in 1955. They (the coup 
leaders) did not let him do what needed to be done." 
  He said he was confident that the public would continue to 
support his privatisation and stabilisation policies. 
  The election has to give him enough members in the chamber 
of deputies and the senate to be able to vote for a constituent 
assembly that will amend the constitution to allow Senor Menem 
to seek re-election in 1995. 
  Senor Menem also plans to abolish the condition that a 
president must be Catholic (Senor Menem was a Muslim but 
converted). 
  He is said to have told his aides, when he was running for 
his first six-year term: "I'm not coming in for six years and 
then going home. I am going to stay." 
  Then he softened the statement, saying: "We Arabs live a 
hundred years." Now he is in a hurry to secure a second term, 
as he feels time is running out. 
  In spite of his confidence, he is afraid of the ravages of 
time. 
  According to Gabriela Cerruti, the author of El 
Jefe (The Chief), he has succeeded against most challenges. 
  "For 20 years he invented the date of his birth to claim a 
youth that was unavoidably deserting him." she said. "He is 
horrified by the fact that his power cannot stop the clock." 

