CSO 

<F P=106> [Article, based on interview with Kondrat Yevtushenko, </F>
Khabarovsk presidential representative, by Igor Shkolnikov: "One 
Hundred Days After the Edict"] 
  [Text] Now, it is true, a little more has already happened. 
Since the time when the former Amur physician and then RSFSR 
people's deputy and mayor of Amursk, Kondrat Yevtushenko, by 
order of the president of Russia, replaced the not unknown 
Vladimir Desyatov in the post of representative in Khabarovsk 
Kray. But we talked already not in the "White House", but in the 
new residence on 19 Muravyev-Amurskiy, when the presidential 
representative had completed exactly 100 days in office. This, 
by tradition, is the time for the first results. And our readers 
in their letters put the question more simply: What is the, in 
memory, second representative of Yeltsin doing? 
  Yevtushenko began his activity in his new walk of life with, 
as he puts it, "especially prosaic things." However, he had to 
set aside three weeks for them. He dismissed Mr. Che--the 
assistant deputy of the former presidential 
representative--since such a post is not provided for by the 
staff list. He abolished the branch of the representation in 
Komsomolsk-na-Amure: "It is also incomprehensible on what 
grounds it was formed by my predecessor." And in general he 
brought the number of the apparatus of the representation to the 
established norm--under Desyatov there were 17 persons; now 
there are six. 
  Well, but then, Yevtushenko spreads his hands in a gesture 
of 
helplessness, the usual work began, prescribed by the statute on 
the presidential representation in the krays and oblasts. In the 
main, this is the promotion of the implementation of the edicts 
of the state leader and the decrees and directives of the 
government. 
  How? And are not those really right who suggest that his 
basic task is to keep an eye on how the edicts, decrees, 
directives, and so on are carried out by the administration of 
the kray? And after that, how lawful are the decisions of the 
local authorities themselves? No, he says. That is, not that 
they are not correct, but....they understand the situation 
incorrectly. 
  Yes, the interlocutor agrees. Remember when the institution 
of presidential representatives was created? When in many 
regions the soviets and their executive committees were either 
in clear opposition to Yeltsin or took part in the famous 
"parade of sovereignties," taking the decision of greater 
political direction. Then, really, not the shadowing, of course, 
but the monitoring by presidential representatives was regarded 
as the paramount task. 
  Now the statute, too, has been changed, and Boris 
Nikolayevich himself has publicly declared that "he will not 
tolerate two bears in a den," that is to say, governors and 
their representatives at odds with one another. And for this 
reason Ishayev and Yevtushenko are not at odds. On the contrary, 
following in the channel of "promoting implementation," they 
make the rounds together through the offices of the government 
in order to protect the interests of the kray, to speed up 
decisions at the central level pertaining to the kray. Of, for 
example, the fine-sounding decree on measures to stabilize the 
socioeconomic situation of the region during 1993-1995. And 
further negotiations were conducted in Moscow not without 
Yevtushenko's participation regarding tariffs on electric power 
and the payment of debts to the "defense sector".... 
  In short, for the sake of the fulfillment of his chief 
function, Yevtushenko estimates, of the first 100 days, he spent 
at least 30 in the capital, in meetings with ministers, state 
committee chairmen, etc. At the same time, once a month he flies 
here for a general meeting of presidential representatives, 
where experience is shared. Only there is no need, he 
emphasizes, to think that he "reads the governor's lips." But 
then rumors circulate--they say, because Ishayev recommended him 
for the post, he first of all will not "come forward," and, 
secondly, he will serve as an additional "expediter" [tolkach]. 
No, Yevtushenko's position is the following: Not to have 
conflicts over trifles, but through joint efforts to work for 
the good of the inhabitants of the kray. In this very work there 
may be disputes, but over business. 
  Incidentally, he has the right to make representations over 
local leaders, including the governor. In other words, to 
propose, if there is a reason, to punish them. Up to now he has 
not done this; there are no reasons. But to the governor 
himself, he will, possibly, submit a representation over some of 
the political figures subordinated to him. But, again, not for 
the sake of a battle with individual officials--in the name of 
the cause. 
  This springs already from his second function--from the 
reception of citizens and the sorting out of collective appeals. 
People come both on the official reception day (once a month) 
and at any other time, since to get to him is not difficult. 
Very often, alas, they turn to the wrong quarter. Regarding a 
leaking roof or worn-out plumbing. Those must be politely sent 
to the proper departments. But he tries to help those in regard 
to whom officials have violated the law. Let us say, they have 
dismissed a person without reason, and he, no matter how hard he 
tries, cannot find justice. Well, most of all, 
"petition-bearers" regarding the land question: Red tape with 
the registration of documents, difficulties in trying to get 
ownership rights.... In an amicable way, all questions connected 
with violations of laws must be decided through a court, but 
many have not yet become used to--Yevtushenko understands them. 
  All in all, not counting the collective complaints, during 
his 100 days Yevtushenko has examined fifty odd such, private, 
ones. Some he has solved, some are being solved. How? Basically 
through direct intercourse with various people, thus much more 
effectively. Then and there he saw a lot of them, and about some 
he drew conclusions. 
  Complaints about Ishayev? There are. They say, he made a 
decision, but it is not carried out. But this is already, excuse 
me, the competence of the supervisory department of the 
administration. Otherwise why does it exist? What is more, the 
kray has enough other supervisory organs. 
  Here, strictly speaking, is everything for the first 100 
days. Yevtushenko nevertheless still lives in a hotel and is 
eating in the cafeteria. However, as he himself indicates, he 
cannot get used to it--when he was a deputy, he lived for two 
years in a hotel room. 

