Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Mikhail Berger commentary: "Gaydar Sees No Circumstances </F>
in Which He Would Retract His Resignation Statement"] 
  [Text] Yegor Gaydar stated to IZVESTIYA Monday morning [17 
January] that he will remain in his post until the new 
government is announced, and sees no circumstances in which he 
would retract his resignation statement. Thus it is neither 
blackmail, nor an ultimatum. Gaydar also said that he does not 
aspire to any parliamentary committee and does not harbor any 
special illusions concerning his possibilities of influencing 
the Duma's work. He will remain only as faction leader, and the 
maximum which he can expect to do is to block, in conjunction 
with the president's veto, the most destructive decisions of the 
lower house. Gaydar believes that, together with some 
affiliated associations and deputies, his faction could muster 
up to 34 percent and prevent the Duma from overturning a 
presidential veto by the necessary two-thirds of the vote. 
  Gaydar's resignation was unexpected, but no less unexpected 
than an earthquake in a seismic zone. It is possible to differ 
about the actual policy proposed by Gaydar two years ago and to 
assess the results of these efforts differently, but the 
liberalization of prices, the appearance of a certain freedom of 
consumer choice, privatization -- all this is directly linked 
to Gaydar and his team. As are also, however, the fall in the 
living standards of a significant number of people, the shutdown 
of production units, and the other serious problems connected 
with attempts to cure chronic, inveterate totalitarianism by the 
use of shock therapy. 
  Even when in late 1992 Yeltsin was forced under heavy 
pressure from the Supreme Soviet to dismiss Gaydar, Viktor 
Chernomyrdin -- at least initially -- continued the Gaydar line. 
This is why Gaydar's second arrival in the cabinet last 
September was seen as an entirely logical development. 
  But in the months that followed Gaydar's return the 
disposition of forces in the country and in the structures of 
power themselves changed substantially. The government and the 
president have shown increasing readiness to soften economic 
policy and support individual sectors and enterprises; that is, 
to save inefficient state enterprises with the aid of the 
morphine of inflation. 
  In this time Chernomyrdin himself, and his political weight, 
have also changed substantially. He has not only formally 
become the state's number two, but he has also managed to 
strengthen his personal influence on the policy being carried 
out. The premier, who a year ago was viewed as a transitional, 
temporary figure, has proved an unusually robust and firm 
politician. And whereas some time ago key economic decisions 
were, as a rule, not adopted without coordination or discussion 
with Gaydar, in recent weeks -- especially following the 
elections -- the first vice premier's influence has been reduced 
virtually to zero. 
  The point is not even that decisions on unaffordable 
expenditure on a new parliamentary center or on terms for the 
unification of monetary systems with Belarus that are 
unfavorable for Russia were adopted without any participation 
whatsoever by Gaydar. It has become obvious that the time of 
the apparatus is coming, when fundamental decisions both on 
economic policy and on personnel are adopted under the influence 
of closest aides, and not first deputies. 
  In addition, the powerful duo of the premier and the 
chairman 
of the Bank of Russia, based, apart from anything else, on the 
personal empathy of Chernomyrdin and Gerashchenko, has made 
possible the adoption of all decisions in financial policy 
directly, so to speak, without discussions in government or 
anywhere else. 
  In these conditions Gaydar had increasingly become a 
"front" for reassuring the Russian authorities' Western fans. 
Moreover, the impression was arising that Gaydar himself agreed 
to such a role. Then last Sunday he declared himself unwilling 
to play this role and to link his name with the economic policy 
being carried out. A considerably bold, but at the same time 
also pragmatic, move for a man concerned about his political 
future. 
  As for the government, in the present circumstances Boris 
Fedorov's decision to go or stay takes on crucial significance. 
If the finance minister goes also, it will be very hard for 
Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin to convince anyone that the policy of 
market reforms is being maintained. In conversation with 
IZVESTIYA Boris Fedorov himself did not say that he would follow 
Gaydar's example. By midday on Monday, when this commentary was 
being prepared, neither the president nor the premier had made 
any proposals on this score. At the same time there are no 
reports that Fedorov has changed his terms for continuing work 
in the government. As we know, he stated earlier that he would 
not work with Aleksandr Zaveryukha. 
  Be that as it may, with the departure of Gaydar the romantic 
period of market economy reform, in which a group of young 
academics tried to complete an economic revolution without 
having sufficient political support or a firm social base, comes 
to an end. 
  Now begins the period of industrial romanticism, in which a 
group of experienced managers, drawing on the support of a 
powerful economic lobby, will try to overcome the crisis with 
the aid of the economic inflation pump. This period, in 
Gaydar's opinion, cannot in any way be a long one. 

