BFN 

  [Text] The US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has 
asked the Thai Government to freeze the assets of a Chat Thai MP 
which were suspected to have been acquired through illicit drug 
trafficking, a senior official of the Office of Narcotics 
Control Board (ONCB) disclosed yesterday. 
  The source said the DEA made the request last year. It also 
supplied the ONCB with evidence allegedly linking Nakhon Phanom 
MP Thanong Siriprichaphong with several marijuana seizures in 
the United States. 
  US officials maintained that the MP's assets could be 
sequestrated according to the US-Thai Mutual Legal Assistance 
Treaty (MLAT) agreement in 1992 and the instruments of 
ratification. 
  The source said Mr Thanong's assets in the United States, 
including a house on the East Coast, had been seized a few years 
ago. 
  The official said Mr Thanong had been notified of the US 
action and asked to travel to the United States to defend 
himself, but he had yet to do so. 
  The Nakhon Phanom MP was not available for comment yesterday 
and attempts to contact him were not successful. 
  The DEA request and evidence were passed on to the Office of 
the Supreme Attorney-General about two months ago for 
consideration to determine if they were substantial enough to 
warrant the sequestration of the MP's assets. 
  If this is approved, it will be the first sequestration in 
Thai history of assets suspected to have been acquired through 
narcotics trafficking. 
  The senior ONCB official said Mr Thanong had been kept under 
close watch by undercover anti-narcotics agents for a long time 
after some arrested drugs traffickers had implicated him. 
  However, he said there had been no hard evidence to show the 
MP was directly involved in the illicit drugs trade. 
  When asked about the DEA request, Interior Minister Chawalit 
Yongchaiyut said yesterday he had not yet been informed about 
the US action. 
  He said the Thai Government was ready to cooperate fully 
with 
Washington. But he noted that the suspect must be treated 
fairly and Thai officials should not listen only to the US side 
of the story. 
  Chat Thai Party leader Praman Adireksan and 
secretary-general 
Banhan Sinlapa-acha declined to comment yesterday, saying they 
had not yet been formally informed about the DEA request. 
  But Chat Thai MP Samphan Loetnuwat dismissed the report as a 
"mere rumor" aimed at discrediting the party. 
  Chat Thai deputy leader Thawit Klinprathum said the case was 
a personal affair and had nothing to do with the party. 
  Foreign Minister Prasong Sunsiri said he had no details 
about 
the charges and did not know enough facts to comment on the case. 
  But he added that Mr Thanong had not yet been arrested and 
formally charged, and therefore the evidence had to be shown 
first before Thailand could decide whether or not to go ahead 
with legal proceedings. 
  Sqn Ldr [Squadron Leader] Prasong said there would have to 
be 
specific plaintiffs and witnesses in the case, but at the moment 
Mr Thanong was considered innocent until proven guilty. 
  New Aspiration Party deputy secretary-general Prasong 
Bunphong who lost to Mr Thanong in the last election, yesterday 
urged the MP to show up and clear himself. 
  Mr Prasong, a former Nakhon Phanom MP, also called on 
Parliament President Marut Bunnak to investigate the case. 
  Deputy Interior Minister Den Tomina, however, said he would 
find out about the case from US officials when he visits the 
United States tomorrow. 
  As chairman of the Interior Ministry's Drug Suppression 
Committee, Mr Den said he would visit the DEA office and make 
enquiries about the case. 
  He said that if the DEA had sufficient evidence against the 
suspect, it should ask Thai officials to make the arrest. 
  Some Thai legislators have been on the DEA's watchlist for 
suspected involvement in drug trafficking. In 1976, three 
former MPs, Chumphon Maninet, Nisit Wetsiriyanan and Manit 
Phrommanon were arrested in Hong Kong with one kilogram of 
heroin. Mr Nisit was acquitted but the two other politicians 
together with another Thai, Pricha Liyarak, were sentenced to 
ten years in prison. 

