Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taba, 12 Jan (MENA)--Hasan 'Asfur, head of the 
Security Committee at the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations in 
Taba, has said that the agreement that will be reached after 
Taba talks on the implementation of the Declaration of 
Principles is divided into four sections: the general principles 
section--which will define terms in general--a security annex, a 
civilian annex, and an economic annex. 
  In an exclusive statement, he said that the agreement 
reached 
by the Economic Committee in Paris will help conclude the civil 
agreement. 
  'Asfur said differences over the three main issues of 
Jericho's size, the border crossings, and the security of 
settlements still exist. He said all issues will be discussed 
regardless of the Israeli claims that these issues were decided 
at the Cairo meeting. 
  The Palestinian official said that an agreement has been 
reached to place the Musa al-'Alami project under Palestinian 
supervision and to keep the 3-km-deep security region containing 
land mines between Jordan and Jericho under Israeli supervision. 
The two sides also agreed to establish "a safe passage" between 
Gaza and Jericho by using an already existing road under Israeli 
security supervision and Palestinian protection, he said. There 
will be no need to build a new road or tunnel as proposed 
earlier, he added. 
  'Asfur explained that the issue of the border crossings has 
not been settled yet. He said the Palestinians want the King 
Husayn Bridge with Jordan to be under Palestinian administrative 
authority and for it to be connected with Jericho by a special 
road under full Palestinian supervision. He said the same 
measures will be applied to the Rafah crossing in Gaza. 
  Concerning Gaza, 'Asfur said, the Palestinian delegation is 
not asking for a complete Israeli withdrawal from the strip at 
this stage, but is demanding that the area of the settlements be 
reduced to no more than 6 percent of the strip's overall area, 
not 10 percent as the Israelis are demanding. It is more 
important, he said, that the Israeli military presence in Gaza 
be reduced, that the geographic and political unity of the strip 
remain untouched, and that the strip not be divided by Israeli 
roads to protect the settlements, as this would divide Gaza into 
a form of Palestinian settlement and undermine its geographic 
unity. He said the Gaza Strip must be a security, geographic, 
and political unit under the self-rule authority. 
  The Palestinian official stressed the importance of the 
Israelis respecting the set three-week period for the talks and 
withdrawing fully from Gaza and Jericho before 13 April in 
accordance with the Declaration of Principles signed in 
Washington on 13 September. 

