Electoral   Statement 

<F P=102> PA2705161494 Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 
1 in Spanish 0100 GMT 27 May 94 </F>

<F P=103> PA2705161494 </F>
<F P=104>  Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 
1 </F>

<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Andres Pastrana, presidential candidate for </F>
the Colombian Conservative Party; place and date not 
given--recorded] 
  [Text] Friends: This has been an extraordinary campaign 
for all of us. It has been a trip to the future, a trip of our 
hearts and souls. 
  All over the country, amid both problems and hopes, I have 
sensed a strong desire for change. I can tell you the time has 
come. I have seen it in the faces of Colombians, men and women, 
children, youths, and elderly people, from La Guajira to Narino 
and from the Pacific to the Amazon. They have said it: 
Colombia's time is here. I have sensed that desire for change 
in the hands I have shaken and in the people's embrace. They 
have said it; you say it; and I say it: Colombia's time is here. 
  This has not been simply a candidate's campaign. This 
campaign has been inspired by one cause: Making Colombia a 
country of opportunities, putting an end to the vices of the old 
policy and starting a head-on struggle against poverty, whose 
shadow has been following us for some time. [passage omitted] 
  Perhaps the most complex part of my job as mayor was the 
handling of narcoterrorism, which not only hit political leaders 
and the powerful who find protection more easily, but common 
citizens who at any time could become the next victim of 
uncontrolled violence. Today, violence and insecurity still 
prevail throughout the country, claiming lives every day and 
building fear among Colombians. It is difficult to convince 
investors to risk their opportunities in a virtual war zone. 
  We have made some progress in the last few years. However, a 
Colombia under the stigma and threat of violence will always be 
a nation that will not be able to develop fully its economic and 
human potential. As president, I will spare no effort, and I 
pledge to do everything within my reach to ensure that peace and 
harmony will blossom again in all the corners of the country, 
because our families, our parents, and our children are the 
foundations of society. We must live again free from threats of 
violence, drug trafficking, and drugs. 
  We need more strength and perseverance in the fight against 
fear and violence. We must not fear fear itself. The 
guerrillas and terrorists struck a diabolical alliance. As 
president, I will not hesitate to enforce the law. I already 
told the country that the government does not choose between war 
and peace; the government's responsibility is to respect the 
institutions and to defend the lives of Colombians. This 
responsibility leaves no room for arguments and focuses the 
government's unavoidable attitude on fighting subversion. 
  Should the guerrillas want peace, they must prove it with 
facts rather than with empty remarks and simple rhetorical 
speeches. Should they be willing to do this, I will be glad to 
personally negotiate with those who have taken up arms, with a 
positive attitude and without shirking my duties. This is the 
broadest hope a ruler can offer. However, should the guerrillas 
maintain their current attitude, I will exert authority without 
hesitation, because it is my duty. I am a friend of peace, yet 
I refuse to engage in fruitless talks, as previous presidents 
did. As they became frustrated, our fellow countrymen lost 
faith and confidence. 
  I will reinforce the Armed Forces and the Police to make 
them 
into a professional army. I will end the compulsory draft, and 
I will invest in military intelligence to effectively combat 
those who insist on destabilizing the institutions and making 
attempts on the lives and patrimony of Colombians. I am 
determined to strongly repress drug trafficking, dirty money, 
and corruption, with the moral authority our liberator once 
dreamed of. I will try to make Colombia the moral country the 
immense majority wants. At the same time, I will fight the 
socioeconomic causes that triggered the spread of these scourges 
and drug consumption in Colombia. You can be sure of one thing: 
I will support neither the legalization of drugs, nor its 
production, commercialization, or consumption. This flat-out 
defiance was and will always be my position. This position is 
not new for me; I have always thought like this, because I 
believe that drugs consumed 15 years ago were as harmful for our 
youths as the ones currently consumed. 
  We must all commit ourselves to rescue our countryside, 
cities, streets, and thoroughfares from criminal hands in order 
to reestablish harmony among the citizenry. We will create 
specialized groups to rid the country of mafias made up of 
apartment thieves [apartamenteros], car thieves [jaladores], and 
all types of thugs, starting in large cities. 
  To close my speech, which is being televised for the benefit 
of the Colombian people, I will speak from my heart: a long 
battle is about to end, and I hope that everything that 
previously divided us is left behind and that we work together 
to achieve a united fatherland. I have tried not to focus on my 
contenders' mistakes. If they hurt me, the wounds are already 
healed. I sincerely extend my friendly hand to all those who 
sought to be democratically elected by recognizing that their 
messages were impregnated with love for Colombia, a Colombia we 
all agree must be better and fairer. 
  Someday when this campaign is long forgotten, I want it to 
be 
said that we embarked on it full of love for Colombia, trusting 
that our efforts would help it progress. Moreover, I want it to 
be said that we did not alter the faith in and the loyalty to 
our principles and that we attempted to display the best 
feelings of our population in my actions and words. We hurt no 
fellow countrymen; our unalterable objective was to join efforts 
toward accomplishing a common national goal. We were determined 
to make our presidential term the crusade to ready our country 
for entering the threshold of progress and reconciliation as we 
approach the new century. 
  I believe a president's mission is to fight to ensure that 
each one of us has a job and an income. I believe the struggle 
for the well-being of all of us within the framework of peace 
must constitute a president's daily struggles. I also believe 
the next president's efforts will focus on fighting for a 
Colombia full of opportunities. This is why I am currently 
seeking your mandate. Your needs and expectations will become 
the yardstick for my decisions. I will strive to build a 
country, a government, and an economy that will reflect the 
kindness, honesty, and strength of our people. I cannot promise 
you everything, but I can promise you one thing: Should you 
decide to give me an opportunity, with God's blessings and help, 
I will not fail you. With our vote, let's make Sunday [29 May] 
the day to forge the Colombia we all dream of. Good evening. 

