Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by A. Polutov] </F>
  [Text] Vladivostok, 10 Mar -- TOKYO SHIMBUN is the first 
foreign news organization to be allowed to report on a 
dismantling plant for nuclear-powered submarines in the Russian 
Far East. This plant is known to be the source of radioactive 
waste dumped into the Japan Sea last October, and we were 
allowed to take photos of submarines being dismantled. The 
plant was filled with about 300 containers of solid nuclear 
waste, and it was obvious the plant's storage capacity was 
reaching its limits. 
  Last month, Russia refused to accept the new London 
Convention, which prohibits the dumping of any radioactive waste 
into the sea. The submarine dismantling plant is facing 
difficulties in continuing its operations due to a surplus of 
radioactive waste. Therefore, the plant is calling for the 
resumption of dumping of radioactive waste. 
  "Zvezda (Star)" plant is located in Borshoy-Kamen Bay, 120 
kilometers east of Vladivostok. The plant was founded in 1954 
as a dock for warships and submarines, but is currently 
dismantling superannuated nuclear-powered submarines which were 
scrapped one after another during the past several years. 
  Unauthorized entry to the plant is strictly forbidden, and 
the gate is guarded by security authorities. The plant is 
divided into A and B zones, and when this correspondent visited 
the facility, a "Delta-1" class (displacement: 9,000 tons) was 
being disassembled in A zone. Both the bow and the stern of the 
Delta-1 were sliced off, and the body was placed in a dock as if 
it were a huge sausage. Its missile launcher used to be a great 
threat to the Western nations, but it has now been reduced to a 
pile of scrap iron. Compared to the beautifully streamlined 
shapes of Russian submarines, of which this correspondent is 
familiar, the heap of scrap iron looked miserable. 
  Director Maslakov said that the Zvezda plant had already 
dismantled five nuclear submarines. He added that the plant 
currently has four submarines to dismantle, but two of them are 
still untouched. 
  Since the Russian Pacific Fleet has discontinued its dumping 
of solid nuclear waste from 1990, about 300 containers (with a 
capacity of 1.5 cubic meters each) of solid nuclear waste have 
been stored in the plant. The dumping of liquid nuclear waste 
was also suspended last fall due to criticism from the 
international community. The liquid waste tankers "TNT-5" and 
"TNT-27" were moored at a pier near the plant, but they were 
said to be full of liquid waste. 
  Explaining the seriousness of the current situation, 
Director 
Maslakov stated: "This plant is just like a man without a 
kidney. The dismantling of nuclear submarines cannot continue 
without the disposal of nuclear waste. If the plant stops its 
operations, the Pacific Fleet would become unable to carry on 
its normal duties, which may cause social unrest." 
  To say nothing of the budget to build new disposal 
facilities, the plant cannot afford to pay wages to its 
employees. Director Maslakov said "the resumption of nuclear 
waste dumping is inevitable unless Japan and other Western 
nations offer funds for constructing (nuclear waste disposal 
facilities)." 

