BFN 

<F P=106> [By Silvio J. Nendiandua] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 9 Jun (PL) -- A high-ranking Foreign 
Ministry official said here today Mexican President Carlos 
Salinas de Gortari's upcoming visit to Cuba exhibits his 
country's political resolve to strengthen bilateral relations 
and project them toward the future. 
  In an interview granted to PRENSA LATINA, Deputy Foreign 
Minister Jorge Bolanos said Salinas' visit will focus on 
political issues, especially during the talks he will hold with 
Cuban President Fidel Castro to analyze the broad range of 
historical ties between the two nations. 
  Citing the importance of the visit by the Mexican head of 
state, Bolanos emphasized this meeting will take place amid a 
U.S. effort to toughen policies of siege against Cuba, policies 
which recall previous administrations. 
  U.S. Representative Robert Torricelli's recent visit to 
Mexico and Washington's fruitless efforts to direct the latest 
OAS meeting in Brazil against Cuba are some of these policies. 
  The high-ranking official, who has been a diplomat for more 
than 30 years, also said the White House is planning to hold a 
hemispheric summit in Miami in December, a summit that excludes 
Cuba, making it, therefore, an anti-Cuban summit. 
  Bolanos said the delegations of the two governments will 
discuss the wide assortment of political, economic, commercial, 
and cultural relations and scientific and technical 
collaboration during the high profile talks they will hold. 
  He believes new ideas and initiatives that will help broaden 
bilateral ties and project them toward the future will emerge 
from the talks between the Mexican and Cuban presidents. 
  The deputy foreign minister also said the two chiefs of 
state 
will have the opportunity to exchange opinions on the agenda and 
role of the Ibero-American Summit to be held in Cartagena de 
Indias, Colombia, on 14 and 15 June. 
  President Salinas will arrive in this capital on 13 June at 
1500 GMT (Universal Time Coordinator) and will leave for 
Colombia the same day at 2130 GMT. 

