Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report] </F>
  [Text] It has been announced that the Turkish Armed Forces 
is determined to preserve its deterrent and defense powers and 
to continue its support of the security forces in their struggle 
against separatist terror. 
  A statement issued by the Chief of the General Staff's 
Office 
recalls that discharges from the Armed Forces have been stopped 
temporarily. Noting that the Armed Forces have mobilization and 
peace cadres, the statement adds: The mobilization cadre is 
implemented in times of war or the possibility of war. The 
peace cadre is one that is implemented during peace time in a 
bid to carry out training and administrative activities. It is 
designed in a way that will facilitate a speedy transition to a 
mobilization cadre if need be. The end of the cold war period 
-- as a result of the developments that occurred in the new 
world order -- and the reduction of forces following the CSCE 
agreements and the European Conventional Arms Reduction Treaty 
have necessitated the restructuring of the Turkish Armed Forces. 
Within the framework of this restructuring, peace cadres have 
been reduced and compulsory military service has been reduced 
from 18 to 15 months. An annual shortage of 110,000 persons is 
felt in these cadres, because of an increase in the number of 
unregistered persons and draft evaders due to the lack of 
deterrent criminal sanctions and because of the unlawful 
suspension of military service in the open university and other 
educational institutions. 
  The statement notes that the Armed Forces are authorized to 
perform their duties in accordance with the Constitution and the 
laws, adding that the issue has been taken to the National 
Security Council in a bid to eliminate the current shortage. 
Pointing out that urgent and significant points have been 
proposed to the government in a bid to solve the problem 
quickly, the statement continues: Although draft bills have been 
prepared in line with these proposals, it will take a long time 
for the results to be attained, even if the bills are 
immediately enacted. The risk and the threat, however, are 
continuing. Therefore, deferring discharges temporarily -- as a 
measure that can be taken in the shortest possible time -- has 
been put forward to the government as a significant request and 
a decision has been adopted for its implementation. This move, 
whose reasons have been cited above, is directed toward 
completing the peace cadres and is not linked to mobilization. 
This is a normal move to complete peace cadres. 

