BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Housing Minister Joe Slovo by SABC </F>
announcer John Bishop on the "Agenda" program -- live] 
  [Text] [Bishop] With me, Mr. Joe Slovo, the minister of 
national housing. Before the election the ANC/SACP [South 
African Communist Party] alliance promised one million houses 
over the next five years. There are, it seems, between five and 
seven million people desperately waiting to be housed, as we've 
just seen from the report from "Canaan" [an informal squatter 
settlement]. What would you say to the people there? 
  [Slovo] All I can say is that what we've seen on this very 
moving film is the measure of the desperate housing situation 
which our government has inherited. When you consider the needs 
of the people in this country against the background for example 
of what's been done in the last five years where only an average 
of 25,000 houses were built, you are not going to be able to 
answer people like this unless you heed the call which the 
gentleman made toward the end, and that is that we must move 
with speed. 
  [Bishop] Now you've only been four days in office. You're 
doing a lot; you were telling me just before the program. How 
is it going and what's the plan? 
  [Slovo] The plan is to use this initial period to create the 
conditions in which the housing program can be launched in 
earnest. In the meanwhile, of course, there are ongoing projects 
like the subsidy scheme, which we will push with greater 
intensity, but fundamentally we cannot address the housing 
question without an effective partnership between the state, the 
private sector, and the communities. And what we've been doing 
in these four days is that we have covered in this brief span of 
time, consultations with virtually the whole sector of the 
industrial, financial, and construction field in the housing 
sector, and the impression that we have got from these 
discussions is that we are ready -- with the collaboration of 
the people who have got the means and the resources, to make a 
reality out of the objective which we have set ourselves of 
building these one million houses within the first five years. 
  [Bishop] That sounds promising, and it centers on money, 
doesn't it? 
  [Slovo] It centers on money. 
  [Bishop] How immediately will you raise that money, Mr. 
Slovo? 
  [Slovo] Our estimate is -- it's a rough estimate at this 
stage -- that to build those million houses in five years will 
require something like 30 billion rands. Now before you 
collapse and the stock exchange collapses, let me say this that 
this is not necessarily government input. The government will 
have to make an input, but it will also depend upon the extent 
to which the private sector is prepared to talk with its money 
in trying to solve this problem, and that in turn depends on 
whether we in government can in this early period create the 
kind of market conditions which will give private sector 
confidence that their investments will not go down the drain, 
which is what happened in the previous period, and which 
resulted in a lockout on the black housing section by private 
business. 
  [Bishop] Without wanting to be cruel, do you think the mass 
of those people -- the poorest of the poor -- will understand 
that probably if they are going to be housed, they will have to 
pay for it, but probably they won't have jobs. How do you get 
that message through? 
  [Slovo] Let me say this: It's a bit of a chicken and egg 
situation. We believe that the spurt in housing construction is 
the single most important factor in making a kick start to the 
economy and particularly in job creation. You know the 
statistic is that for every million rands invested in housing, 
you get a 120 jobs created directly, and 80 jobs indirectly, and 
if you compare that, for instance, to the textile sector with a 
similar amount, all you get is 30 jobs; the chemical sector 225 
jobs. You will see that the housing industry is one of the most 
important elements in socio- economic development because it's 
not just housing. It's electricity, it's water, it's sewerage, 
it's roads, and it's also all the things that go with housing 
because if you've got a house, it's not just four walls and a 
roof and the floor. It's got to have equipment; it's got to 
have furniture. It creates a consumer boom and therefore the 
momentum which the housing program can create is the single most 
important factor in the thrust which we're trying to get in the 
economy. 
  [Bishop] Mr. Slovo, you mentioned incentives for the 
private sector. What incentives are you putting out for them? 
  [Slovo] Well, briefly, we are at the moment discussing a 
mortgage indemnity scheme which will protect private sectors 
from non-commercial risks. 
  [Bishop] Backed by government? 
  [Slovo] Backed by government, yes. Also the creation of a 
wholesale national housing bank which will be able to cheapen 
the housing costs, the housing money which flows into the 
market. In brief, those are the two key areas. Also getting 
the subsidy scheme off the ground. We've got money at the 
moment to continue upgrading hostels, which we are going to 
intensify in the coming period, and as I say, with these 
institutions that will be created, we believe that we are going 
to create what the private sector wants, and that's a degree of 
market certainty, and they are a vital element in this. 
  [Bishop] Talking of certainties, some of the haves have been 
rather worried that your government might, what they say, steal 
from them to give to the poor -- higher taxes, punishing budget. 
Comment? 
  [Slovo] Even if we steal from them, and punish them a little 
-- which we don't want to do, we neither want to steal or punish 
-- that won't solve the housing problem. The scale of the 
problem is such that we've got to find the kind of ways that 
I've tried to describe. We got to get international capital 
involved, and we've got to get, I believe as housing minister, a 
bigger share of the budget for the housing program. 
  [Bishop] Any big money coming from overseas specifically for 
housing? 
  [Slovo] Not in the four days that I have been there, but 
there have been very, very positive noises that we've heard, and 
we are going to follow them up. 
  [Bishop] The question of the kind of houses you would build: 
would they be those monstrous high-rise blocks that have been 
tested, city after city in Europe after the last war. They 
ended up as sort of ghettos; really, there is no other word for 
it. 
  [Slovo] For the low-cost housing market, obviously we are 
not 
going to be able to build mansions, but within the limitations 
of the resources we are very conscious of the need not to create 
regimented people who live in regimented houses; and we are not 
in favor of these high-rise blocks. But at the same time we are 
also considering rental accommodation, blocks of three, four, 
five stories of the sort which I think will be acceptable. And 
the point I want to make about this is that all the major 
housing projects that we have in mind will be determined in 
consultation with the people who are going to live in them -- 
the community. 
  [Bishop] That's what I wanted to get to next. The people who 
are occupying land, whether it be government land or what we 
used to call squatter settlements, private land. How are you 
going to approach that delicate problem? I mean, you might 
have to get them out of there. 
  [Slovo] Only today we had discussions with SANCO [South 
African National Civic Organization] on this very question. The 
point they made is that there's no way of appealing to people 
who do this kind of thing to get off the land, or to leave 
unless they are convinced that there are alternatives, and at 
the root of solving this problem is to act with such dispatch 
and such speed in this sector that people are going to realize 
that although there might be a bit of a delay, there are going 
to be deliveries. 
  [Bishop] When do you expect the first delivery? 
  [Slovo] It must start virtually immediately. With the 
resources that we've got in the Housing Ministry budget at the 
moment for new projects, we've only got close to one billion 
rand. But we're hoping that as soon as these other institutions 
get off the ground, the pace will be stepped up. We're trying 
to have one million houses in five years; this means -- if you 
take out your calculator -- it means building every single 
working day 850 houses. Now we are not going to be able to start 
next Monday doing that, but we are going to be able to reach 
that kind of average within a pretty short time, and although in 
the first year there might be less, it will be stepped up in the 
second year, and our target will be reached. 
  [Bishop] Now we have Mr. Tokyo Sexwale in the main news 
talking about ambitious plans for the PWV [Pretoria, 
Witwatersrand, Vereeniging], which leads me on to this: You are 
the national housing minister. There are now nine regions. 
They will have responsibility for housing. Are you going to be 
able to interlock successfully and not fight against one another? 
  [Slovo] That's the key. There won't be conflict between the 
center and the regions on this question. I have organized for 
next Thursday in Cape Town a meeting with all those responsible 
for housing in the provinces, and we are going to discuss how to 
approach the question together. 
  [Bishop] Last question before we close: Why did you say 
goodbye to Mr. Louis Koch, DG [Director General] of your 
department of housing and replace him with Mr. Billy Cobbett, 
spokesman for the ANC? 
  [Slovo] First of all it was a mutual arrangement between 
myself and Mr. Koch. 
  [Bishop] No discrimination? 
  [Slovo] Without any discrimination, I admire Mr. Koch. He's 
a highly professional civil servant. He accepted the fact that 
with the new government the key political position at the 
administrative level of the ministry must be somebody who is 
steeped in our RDP [Reconstruction and Development Program]. 
But let me say something, John, about what I found at the 
ministry. I was absolutely overwhelmed by the talent, the 
experience, the loyalty, the dedication of the 300-odd people 
that I met in the ministry, and if that a microcosm of what is 
happening in South Africa, in the rest of the country, I think 
we're going to make all of us together. 
  [Bishop] Your departmental people will be glowing with 
health 
hearing those remarks. Thank you very much. 
  [Slovo] Thank you. 

