Language: <F P=105> Macedonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by E. Geroski: "Why Does the Parliamentary </F>
Commission for Control Over the Activities of the SDB (State 
Security Service) Focus the Public's Attention on Itself? 
Hide-and-Seek Instead of Control?"] 
  [Text] The Parliamentary Commission for Control Over the 
Activities of the State Security Service spent the day once 
again trying to focus the public's attention on itself. The 
reason is clear, understandable, and explicable: The members of 
this parliamentary body from the opposition parties were trying 
to promote yet another public attack on the incumbent chief of 
police. And, in the name of democracy, one has to wish them luck 
in their endeavor. Why else should there be an opposition? 
  The funny story is that the opposition makes the mistake of 
feigning skill and confidence. This latest attempt is devoid of 
such attributes. Let us take, for example, the debate about the 
abolition of the Department of Security. The work was pushed to 
the forefront in a strange way. It would have been natural and 
logical for the opposition to contrive the abolition of the 
institution in whose sphere of action the personnel in favor of 
expanding the police behemoth would defend themselves (maybe the 
members of the opposition agree with this characterization). 
Unfortunately, the opposition and their rivals are running in 
entirely opposite directions. 
<H5>  Media Bomb </H5>
  But, it is not even necessary for us to penetrate the 
essentials of the debate on this question. Simply, by what logic 
and with what explanation can the "competency" of this 
commission be defended? What connection does this question have 
with the control over the activity of the SDB? To whom did it 
occur that this commission should concern itself with such a 
dilemma now when it should deal with the key mission of the 
body: the preparation of the annual report on the activity of 
the SDB?! 
  And precisely when we are approaching the task, the 
commission launches yet another little "bomb" for the media. 
[Minister of Internal Affairs] Frckovski does not want to 
receive members of the commission or enable them to look at the 
SDB's documents. By the way, three members of this commission 
from the government's side disassociated themselves from that 
announcement. That is, in spite of the fact that in this case 
the parliamentarians from that commission appeared to come 
forward with a demand: now or never! More revealing is what the 
commission implies in its protest statement, suggesting to the 
public this kind of inference: there is no report by the 
commission on the activities of the SDB just because Frckovski 
has locked the MVR [Ministry of Internal Affairs] gate against 
the members of the commission. 
<H5>  Fame and Glory </H5>
  And logically, the opposite inference can be held: If the 
parliamentarians succeed in getting into the SDB, we would get 
good quality parliamentary control (the report implies) over 
that service. This is a thesis that is difficult to swallow. We 
all remember well the time when the same commission was holding 
such meetings about the "irreparable" Frckovski and then [with 
permission] of the SDB it was looking through an account in 
which only compliments were apportioned to the service. 
  The truth lies under another bush: that parliamentary body 
does not have at its disposal either a suitable procedure or the 
instruments, or indeed the quality personnel support to conduct 
a relevant appraisal of the work of the SDB. so that afterwards 
the public would say calmly: Well, that's that! And instead, the 
parliamentarians, especially those from the opposition, instead 
of solving the real problems, played hide-and-seek games and 
created celebrity and a martyr's halo above their own heads. 
  Out of this entire confusion, only one overwhelming fact 
will 
remain: Macedonia is left without effective parliamentary 
control over the intelligence-defense structure in the 
government! 

