Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ivan Besyada: "The United States and Russia Are </F>
Interested in Ukraine Being Weak: This Was Confirmed Yet Again 
by Bill Clinton's Visit to Kiev and Moscow"] 
  [Text] The election of Bill Clinton as President of the 
United States of America was generally received with approval by 
national-democratic circles of Ukraine. This was a victory of 
American democratic forces over the forces of world capital that 
wish to lay their hands on everything and anything. However, 
having embarked on reforms within the country, the new U.S. 
President has continued in its entirety the foreign policy 
course of his predecessors--to intervene in the affairs of 
others and dictate their will under the guise of "protecting 
national interests." By now, many a country has had an 
opportunity to perceive firsthand the genuine essence of this 
superpower. Ukraine has also happened to end up in the sphere of 
Uncle Sam's interests. 
  It was absolutely no accident that Bill Clinton's first trip 
to Europe began with visits to Kiev and Moscow. The appearance 
of Ukraine as an independent state in the world arena does not 
at all serve the interests of the United States. After all, our 
state, with the third largest potential of nuclear weapons in 
the world, may become a weighty factor in the continuous 
confrontation between Europe and America and the latter's 
attempts to retain a superpower image, which has begun to 
decline. For this reason, Uncle Sam immediately began to ponder 
how to deprive the Ukrainians of the missiles deployed 
(incidentally, not by their will) on their soil. It would be 
best to do this with someone else's hands, as always; in this 
case--the hands of Russia, of which Ukraine was a colonial 
dependency for 300 years. That is to say, elementary robbery is 
at issue here. 
  It is precisely from this standpoint that the sojourn of 
Bill 
Clinton in Kiev and Moscow should be viewed. 
  This is why President Kravchuk's promises to meet the 
demands 
of his American colleague concerning the destruction of 
intercontinental ballistic missiles and the transfer of warheads 
to Russia appear very strange. 
  After all, this means Ukraine will be left in the lurch in 
the face of an economic crisis (some experts estimate that 
liquidation of the missiles will cost more than $3 billion) and 
encroachments on our statehood by synthetic Zhirinovskiys (in 
the form of direct aggression) or the no less synthetic 
potentates of world capital (in the form of transforming our 
country into the object of their superenrichment). 
  There are simply no guarantees that this would not happen in 
the event that Ukraine loses its nuclear weapons. The less than 
modest assurances of assistance in the event we are obedient 
cannot be such guarantees. The bitter experience of trusting 
Ukrainians which has been gained during the current century 
alone should have taught us something. Let us recall how the 
so-called free world turned away from the Ukrainian People's 
Republic and how it turned a blind eye to the extermination of 7 
million of our people by Stalin. 
  Bill Clinton's negotiations with Leonid Kravchuk and Boris 
Yeltsin bear out our apprehensions rather than dispel them. A 
mere two-hour stopover at the Boryspil airport with a hastily 
conducted press conference and a two-day visit to Moscow with 
dinners within a narrow circle, a didactic tone with regard to 
Ukraine, and assurances of complete support for Russia--such are 
the two facets of the U.S. President's visit. 
  So, it was quite natural that the actions of President L. 
Kravchuk caused severe criticism from healthy Ukrainian forces, 
including a segment of the members of parliament which was not 
informed about the intentions of its president until the last 
moment. For example, representatives of Rukh and two student 
organizations responded to the Boryspil negotiations by shouting 
the slogans "Kravchuk, retire" and "Kravchuk is a political 
impotent!" 
  Opposition representative Vyacheslav Chornovil described the 
position of Leonid Kravchuk as a betrayal of national interests. 
To his mind, this is a shameful capitulation because Ukraine 
will receive neither guarantees of its security nor major 
compensation. 
  There also is another point of view which characterizes the 
Ukrainian position as maneuvering aimed at averting an economic 
catastrophe. However, the president is not the supreme echelon 
for resolving the momentous issues of the state. There is also 
the parliament, whose position, as is known, is different. There 
also are the Ukrainian people. In particular, People's Deputy 
Larysa Skoryk came out in defense of the actions of the 
president. But our president happens to need defending very 
often; it is time to hold him accountable. 

