Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Circular of former Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations </F>
and Trade (MOFERT) on Formalities for the Export of Equipment 
and Materials Related to Contract Projects Abroad -- Released by 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation on 5 
October 1993"] 
  [Text] In the wake of the development of contracted 
project business and cooperation in terms of labor services run 
by Chinese companies abroad, many projects run by Chinese 
contractors, especially those with Chinese companies as 
principal contractors, may involve procurement of equipment, raw 
materials and supplies, component parts, as well as machinery 
and tools from China proper. Hence the contracted project 
business will give an impetus to the export of China-produced 
equipment and materials. This will not only help increase the 
country's foreign exchange earnings, but also will reduce 
project construction costs substantially. In order to ensure 
the smooth development of this type of business, some concrete 
operational procedures and methods have been formulated, based 
on practical experience gained over recent years, and a notice 
is hereby served as follows: 
  1. Any company running an international economic and 
technological cooperation project, as a contractor or 
sub-contractor abroad, which needs to procure necessary 
equipment, materials and supplies, as well as machinery and 
tools from the home country, can lodge an application directly 
to and go through export procedures as required with this 
ministry. If the equipment and goods to be exported are subject 
to export license control, the company is to apply to this 
ministry for an export license, by presenting the project 
contract it has signed with the foreign party. 
  2. The company applying for the export of 
China-produced equipment and goods is to submit a photocopy of 
the contract concerned, as well as the application form, in 
duplicate, for the export of equipment and good with relation to 
a contracted project (see Appendix 1), and two copies of the 
detailed list of project- related equipment and goods that are 
to be exported (see Appendix 2). Both the application form and 
the detailed list must be printed on A4-sized paper, as 
prescribed by the appendices. 
  3. The equipment and goods for the export of which an 
international operation company has applied are to be used only 
by the company itself to meet practical needs in the contracted 
works, as declared, and they are never to be used for any other 
purpose, nor are they to be resold. In order to prevent 
overstocks, the equipment and goods needed to run a contracted 
project can be exported in batches and stages so as to keep pace 
with the progress of the project. 
  Appendices: 1. Application form for the export 
of equipment and goods with relation to contracted projects 
  2. Detailed list of project-related equipment and goods to 
be exported 
  [Signed] Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and 
Trade 
  28 February 1990 
Appendix 1 
Application Form for the Export of Equipment and Goods 
With Relation to Contracted Projects 
Foreign Economic Cooperation Department Ministry of Foreign 
Economic Relations and Trade: 
  Our company is the contractor/sub-contractor for the project 
of......in (name of country or area). To complete the project 
works as prescribed by the contract, we need to export some 
China-produced equipment and goods. Attached is a copy of the 
contract concerned and a list of the items to be exported. 
Please examine and approve this application for export. 
  Name of the company (with official seal) 
  Date 
Contract number: Site of project: Name of project: Major 
project items: Categories of goods (detailed list as attached): 
Total weight of goods: Total monetary value in yuan: Port of 
exit: Monetary value converted into U.S. dollars: Remarks of the 
Foreign Economic Cooperation Department: 
Appendix 2 
Detailed List of Contract Project-Related Equipment and 
Goods To Be Exported 
Serial number: Name of goods: Specifications: Quantity: Unit: 
Unit price: Total price converted into U.S. dollars: 
Grand total: 

