Dash  to the South" 

                           SUMMARY 

   In his book, Last Dash to the South (FBIS-SOV-94-022-5, hereafter 
LDTTS), published during the fall 1993 Russian legislative 
campaign, Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) leader 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy lays out his vision of Russia as it is 
today--a humiliated nation whose achievements have been 
denegrated and people impoverished--and his strategy for 
restoring Russia to what he sees as its rightful place among the 
world's great powers.  He sees Russia moving, under his 
leadership, from its current stage of humiliation, through a 
stage of national, economic, and military regeneration, and 
ultimately to a stage he calls the end of Russian history, a 
millennium.  The Russian millennium will be achieved when Russia 
consolidates control over its southern sphere of influence, 
stretching south to the Indian Ocean and in so doing puts an end 
to military threats from the region and ushers in an era of peace 
and prosperity for the Russian people.  In Zhirinovskiy's view, 
Russia's regeneration, the prosperity of the Russian people, and 
his own rise to achieve his destiny are interlinked in this three 
stage process.  While The Last Dash to the South presents these 
views in their most focused form, Zhirinovskiy has been 
consistently articulating the elements of this vision in campaign 
appearances, interviews, and other statements at least since his 
emergence on the national political scene as a candidate in 
Russia's 1991 presidential election. 

                           END SUMMARY 

Table of Contents 

Analytical Synopsis 

Appendix of Quotations 

  Humiliation 

     Humiliation of Russia and Russians 

     Humiliation of the army 

     The West as an agent of Russia's humiliation 

     Linking Russia's humiliation to his own 
     On the humiliations of growing up as a Russian in Kazakhstan 

  Regeneration 

     Zhirinovskiy campaigns for the presidency:  A blatant appeal 
to special interests, especially the military 

     Beginning Russia's regeneration 

     Restoring Russia to its former glory under Tsarist and 
Soviet rule, recreating Russia within the borders of the former 
USSR 

     Restoring Russia's economy and military might 

  Bringing the Millennium 

     Russia and the other great powers divide the world into 
spheres of influence 

     Russia consolidates its sphere of influence in the South 

   Analytical Synopsis 

   The three-stage historical process of Russia's regeneration that 
Zhirinovskiy describes in the autobiographical "Last Dash to the 
South" is a comprehensive statement of a vision that he has been 
developing and articulating since the 1991 presidential campaign. 
He sees the vision being fulfilled in a three-stage process, a 
linear and progressive movement from humiliation through 
regeneration to the Russian millennium.  Since he does not regard 
economics, politics, or social issues as separate problems to be 
addressed through separate policies and sees himself a thinker on 
a grand scale rather than an ordinary politician who focuses on 
nuts-and-bolts policy, Zhirinovskiy often makes contradictory 
statements on specific policy issues.  As he sees it, the most 
important thing is to lead Russia to regeneration and the 
millennium; once that is done, the lesser problems will all be 
solved.  While inconsistent on matters of specific policy, his 
statements are consistent in the broad terms of his three-stage 
vision:  Russia's present state of humiliation, Russia's 
regeneration in the near term, and achievement of the Russian 
millennium in the longer term. 

   Zhirinovskiy's vision of Russia's humiliation is national, 
ethnic, and personal, and particularly emphasizes Russia's 
military as prime victims of humiliation.  As a nation, Russia is 
a victim of the tragic disintegration of a great and good empire. 
Russia has been the world's savior on numerous occasions, but the 
world is not grateful.  External enemies, with help from internal 
collaborators, have brought Russia down, destroying its economic 
and military might.  The Russian people, a hard-working and noble 
people, are humiliated and impoverished at home, exploited and 
oppressed by corrupt new rulers.  Russians have been turned into 
second class citizens in the states of the former USSR.  Russia's 
soldiers have been humiliated at home and abroad and the terms 
soldier and officer have become almost curse words.  Zhirinovskiy 
often parallels his own personal humiliation and poverty (The 
Last Dash highlights his personal struggle against hide-bound 
bureaucracy and crushing poverty, casting him as the under- 
appreciated and oppressed underdog) with the Russian people's 
daily struggles.  He sees humiliation as pervasive (he is 
constantly reminding his audience of its, and his own, 
humiliation) but also as a stimulus to taking action to begin the 
regeneration. 

   Again linking his own fate to Russia's, Zhirinovskiy implies, 
particularly in his campaign rhetoric during the fall 1993 
legislative elections, that Russia's restoration to its past 
glories and the revitalization of its military and economic 
strength will begin almost as soon as the voters bring the LDPR 
to power.  Trying to persuade voters to do so, Zhirinovskiy makes 
grand promises to improve the lot of groups who have suffered 
under reform.  He promises that, once elected, he will restore 
Russia to the borders of the former USSR, while eliminating 
internal borders drawn on ethnic lines.  He will revive Russia's 
economy, chiefly by reconverting plants to military production 
and selling their products on the world arms market.  Russia will 
be restored to the greatness it enjoyed under the tsars and the 
Communists. 

   In the longer term, LDPR rule will-bring Russia to the 
millennium, an era that Zhirinovskiy sees as the end point of 
Russian history, the ''resolution of a global task,'' Russia's last 
great historical mission," which will usher in a period of world 
peace and stability.  Russia and the other great powers--the 
United States, Germany, and Japan--will agree to divide the world 
into spheres of influence.  This agreement will enable Russia to 
turn its attention from East-West relations to its agreed sphere- 
-the area from its present southern border to the Indian Ocean. 
Zhirinovskiy envisions that the consolidation of Russian 
domination over this region will end the threat to Russia from 
the conflicts now taking place on Russia's southern borders in 
the Caucasus and Afghanistan, save Russia from the pan-Turkic 
designs of Central Asians, and free the world from the Islamic 
radical threat.  This move to push its dominance southward will 
free Russia, which has been pushed "into the tundra," where 
nothing can live and develop," (i.e., the northern latitudes to 
which a truncated Russia would be confined) and will gain it a 
warm water "platform" and access to the world's markets.  Russia 
will ally itself with India and Iraq, who will guard Russia's 
flanks.  The drive to the south will simultaneously fulfill 
Russia's historic fate and accomplish the "task of saving the 
Russian nation" from destruction. 

   Similarities with Other Russian Nationalists 

   Although Zhirinovskiy's prescriptions for the future differ from 
those of other extreme Russian nationalists, his view of Russia's 
present difficulties is essentially the same as theirs.  For 
example, the now infamous open letter "Word to the People," 
printed in the pro-communist and nationalist newspaper, 
Sovetskaya Rossiya in July 1991, spoke of "greedy and 
pompous.. .apostates," who, in league with foreign "money 
grubbers," were plotting the "slavery and subordination" of 
Russia to "our all-powerful neighbors."  The letter called the 
Soviet Army the savior of Europe, saying it had "won the respect 
of mankind" for the "selfless deed" of saving civilization from 
Hitler and called "the homeland and the state" the "supreme and 
most sacred object of life" (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 23 July 1991). 
The letter, commonly believed to have been a call to arms for the 
upcoming August 1991 coup attempt, was signed by Gennadiy 
Zyuganov, presently chairman of the Russian Communist Party, 
Aleksandr Prokhanov, then chief editor of the ultranationalist 
newspaper Den, nationalist writer Valentin Rasputin, and 
Sovetskaya Rossiya journalist Eduard Volodin, among others, all 
of whom would emerge in the post-coup period as prominent 
oppositionists.  Two years later, Zyuganov authored another 
article in Sovetskaya Rossyia, "The Russian Question," which 
accused the West of plotting the "enslaving of Russia,"  as part 
of the efforts of "secret political societies [and] religious 
sects" to "eliminate Russia."  The article viewed the current 
plots as merely the latest attempt by these dark forces to 
destroy Russia, efforts which began "more than a thousand years" 
ago (Sovetskaya Rossiya, 3 July 1993). 

   Appendix of Quotations 

   This appendix contains reports about and statements made by 
Zhirinovskiy on the themes he has stressed in outlining his 
strategy for the regeneration of Russia.  They are arranged in 
chronological order of publication or broadcast within each 
section. 

   HUMILIATION 

   Humiliation of Russia and Russians 

   So, as a possible future president of Russia I want to raise the 
Russian issue, not because I want the Russian nation to lord it 
again, but because we have raised all the ethnic issues as they 
relate to all regions but have forgotten about the Russian 
people; ; 155 million Russians that nobody needs!  They find 
themselves in a particularly sorry plight in the national 
republics; 25 million Russians there have become second class 
citizens. . . . In a word, the words Russian and Communist have 
now become almost an insult.  This cannot be allowed. 
everything is permitted and we have bacchanalia, anarchy, and 
nobody knows anything. . . . Today they [the union republics] 
recoil from us.  We [Russians] are people who are not needed by 
anyone, down with you!  Get out!. . . When 100 or 200 years ago 
the Georgian tsar sent his delegation [to Russia], Georgia was 
perishing, awash with blood spilt by alien invaders.  This treaty 
says: with Russia, for eternity.  This was Georgia that was 
asking, but today it rejects us, and today the Transcaucasus 
Military District troops are occupiers. . . . There then is the 
gratitude of our very close brothers.  To begin with, they threw 
us out of Eastern Europe. . . . This is a blow one must not 
endure any longer.  (Speech to the Russian Congress of People's 
Deputies, Russian TV, 22 May 1991) 

   For decades you have been deceived, made fools of, and stuffed 
full of various dogmas. . . . I shall represent you,. . . those 
who received, and still receive in these terrible years, only 200 
rubles and live in two room apartments. . . . You are made to do 
nothing but work; work so that those at the top get rich. . 
If I do not win the elections, I will not be the loser.  You, the 
inhabitants of Russia, will be the losers.  (Address by 
Zhirinovskiy on Russian TV, 6 June 1991) 

   A leadership crisis really does exist.  The August events 
exacerbated it.  Today many republics are flowing with blood. 
Attempts at peacemaking are not bringing results. . . . In Tver 
you are rationed to 300 grams of bread.  There is also strict 
rationing in Moscow.  And what will be happening by spring?. . 
. We expected a normal life.  The new democratic forces have 
been. . . unable to guarantee this normal life.  Because again 
there has been incompetence at all levels. . . . Now more and 
more ordinary, simple people are joining us."  (Sovetskaya 
Rossiya, 2 October 1991) 

   Vladimir Zhirinovskiy has spoken for sending Russian volunteers 
"to lands where Russian blood is shed, where the honor and 
dignity of Great Russians are trampled on." . . . As an example 
he named the developments in Moldova where large scale dismissals 
of Russians are conducted. . . . "Employees are fired on various 
pretexts, but there is only one reason: that they are Russians." 
(INTERFAX, 2 October 1991) 
   When the monologue [Zhirinovskiy's] starts to deal with the 
injustice done to the Russian people, he begins to scale the 
heights.  He gesticulates with his hands and his words come like 
bullets from a machine gun. . .  "In the spring Boris Yeltsin's 
regime will collapse.  Tens of millions of hungry and unemployed 
Russians will sweep him aside. . . . Russia is moving toward a 
total economic collapse."  (Report on an interview with 
Zhirinovskiy, Oslo Aftenposten, 4 November 1991) 

   "The goals of the Commonwealth of Independent States will mean 
the death of Russia," Zhirinovskiy said, adding that many other 
national groups would be better off at the expense of the Russian 
people.  "Russia will simply perish.  Not right away, but 
gradually, over the next 20 to 30 years, as new groups decide to 
'secede,'" Zhirinovskiy said.  "The only remaining Russians will 
be street cleaners, sanitation workers, truck drivers; everyone 
else will have broken away."  (Comment on Zhirinovskiy press 
conference, TASS, 18 December 1991) 

   For some reason Russians are not supposed to have their own state 
where they were born, where they live, where their forebears 
died, and where they founded cities.  (LDTTS, p 1) 

   Russia once saved the world from the Ottoman Empire by sending 
its troops to the south . . . and seven centuries ago we stopped 
the Mongols. . . . We have saved it [Europe] several times: from 
the south, from the east, from the north, and from the center of 
Europe itself. . . . The world should be grateful to Russia for 
its role as savior.  (LDTTS, pp. 32; 33) 

   Humiliation of the army 

   "Officer" likewise has become an insult.  (Speech to the Russian 
Congress of People's Deputies, Russian TV, 22 May 1991) 

   I think that an officer should be.proud of his rank. . . . Alas, 
in this country today the titles "soldier" and "officer" have 
almost become swear words. . . . It is absolutely necessary to 
save the Army from indiscriminate criticism, to create the best 
material conditions for servicemen.  (Interview on military 
issues, Krasnaya Zvezda, 30 May 1991) 

   Why did they [Soviet troops] enter Prague on 9 May [1945]?  Why 
did millions shed their blood?  Today they insult us there. . 
[Our veterans] are spat upon today.  Why did they shed their 
blood?  (Interview with Zhirinovskiy, Russian TV, 31 May 1991) 

   I am in favor of nobody ever being able to insult servicemen. 
  Russians are the most humiliated and insulted nation.  (Moscow 
radio, 11 June 1991) 

   The West as an agent of Russia's humiliation 

   Zhirinovskiy also claimed that the CIA is in the process of 
waging a weaponless "third world war" against Russia.  Instead of 
sending the technology Russia needs to overcome its current 
economic crisis, the U.S. is trying to poison the Russian people 
with "vodka, Pepsi, and propaganda."  (Comment on Zhirinovskiy 
press conference, TASS, 18 December 1991) 

   The leader of the Liberal Democratic Party, Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy, has said that after robbing Africa and Latin 
America the West has started robbing Russia. . . . He claimed 
that the West is supported by Democratic Russia and the 
government who are "fulfilling Western orders and embezzling, not 
so much because of an inclination to corruption, but because they 
realize they will not remain in power long."  (Comment on 
Zhirinovskiy speech, INTERFAX, 7 May 1992) 

   It [the Russian Foreign Ministry] is engaged in servicing 
American diplomacy, and uses its veto at the UN in the interests 
of America. . . . Russia will be driven to the northern swamps. 
(Interview with Zhirinovskiy, INTERFAX, 24 November 1992) 

   But nobody will help Russia itself. . . . Gorbachev and Yeltsin 
made all kinds of concessions to the West, the United States, the 
CIA, Israel.  And what did they get for it? Nothing.  (LDTTS, pp. 
36; 37) 

   Linking Russia's humiliation to his own 

   I know, I myself am an ordinary citizen, I myself represent the 
middle strata, which get 200 rubles and live in a two-room 
apartment.  I am just like you, and I understand that these awful 
prices in commercial and cooperative stores are beyond our 
pocket. . . . Women of Russia! . . . I know things have been hard 
for you.  This I know from my own mother. . . . A few days before 
she died she said: Volodya, there is nothing to remember.  In all 
her 73 years, she had not lived a single day of joy. . . . I know 
all of your anxieties: the eternal lines, the shortages,.... 
eternal thoughts about how to feed the family properly. . . . I 
would like to address the older generation, who are also finding 
that people are blackening them. . . . You must be provided for. 
(Moscow radio, 11 June 1991) 

   Zhirinovskiy on his mother: [After his father's death] Mom was 
left without a livelihood. . . . She would grovelingly beg the 
cook [at the cafeteria where she worked] for some soup. . . . I 
never had enough to eat.  (LDTTS, p.2) 

   On his childhood:  It was a joyless childhood.  All 18 years. 
.Even my bed was not my own.  I slept on a trunk. . . . Mom never 
had any time, she was working. . . . Sometimes I would not see 
her for days on end.  (LDTTS, p 2) 

   I had absolutely nowhere to play; either in the room or in the 
corridor.  You always had to wait in line to use the toilet and 
it always stank. . . . I was the smallest.  Then there was the 
"hazing" you get in a communal apartment; people pick on the 
smallest person. . . . Who will defend him?  No brother, no 
father.  (LDTTS, p. 3) 

   This [humiliation] was clearly the lot of our entire people.  My 
mother and my father were born under the Russian Empire, my 
father in 1907 and my mother in 1912.  They were in torment 
throughout their lifetime. . . . perpetual removals. 
passports, registrations. . . . We put the whole nation on the 
move. . . . We got into space, we smashed the Germans.  But we 
destroyed every family.  (LDTTS, p. 5) 

   In the seventh grade I began to make something of an impression, 
and I was elected chairman of the detachment council.  Our class 
teacher was Vera Yevgenyeva Chebotova, a mathematics teacher.  By 
eighth grade we had a different class teacher.  They often 
changed, our class had no luck.  In ninth grade our class teacher 
was Yelena Mikhaylovna Blinder.  I later learned that her real 
name was Esterna Moiseyevna [a Jewish name]. . . . At first she 
picked me out and helped my election as Komsomol organizer for 
class nine.  But after a few months she became disappointed with 
me, realizing that I was. . . not a "tame" Komosomol organizer. 
Then she used her authority in the opposite direction . . . There 
were some toadies who began to make accusations against me. 
(LDTTS, p. 5) 

   On the humiliations of growing up as a Russian in Kazakhstan 

   I would ask Mom:  Why do we have such bad housing conditions? 
Why can't we get an individual apartment?  Mom replied: "We 
aren't Kazakhs. . . . Kazakhs get.priority.  (LDTTS, p. 6) 

   Mom worked in an institute cafeteria, and the lecturers would 
often tell her about the examinations and about how they felt 
sorry for the Russian kids.  A Russian would give an answer and 
get a "2," and a Kazakh would give just the same answer and get a 
"4."  (LDTTS, p. 6) 

   REGENERATION 

   Zhirinovskiy campaigns for the presidency:  A blatant appeal to 
special interests, particularly the military 

   In return for the support of the military, Zhirinovskiy is 
promising to take special care of them. . . . Every officer who 
supports Zhirinovskiy can buy a Soviet made car of any model. 
(Comment on Zhirinovskiy stump speech, INTERFAX, 9 December 1991) 

   Zhirinovskiy promised to quickly provide everyone with everything 
necessary, to allow Russian people to take a trip to Paris. 
.Maybe then people will believe V. Zhirinovskiy, who is promising 
to feed the people in 72 hours?  (Comment on Zhirinovskiy stump 
speech, Izvestiya, 9 December 1991) 

   Zhirinovskiy predicted that he would be elected president by next 
April.  (Comment on Zhirinovskiy speech, TASS, 18 December 1991) 

   Khrushchev . . . had absolutely no education in the humanities. 
. .  Andropov too was an uneducated person. . . . So all of 
Russia's rulers have lacked a classical education . . . even 
Ulyanov [Lenin]. . . . I realized that these dull-witted, 
sometimes simply stupid people reached the heights merely thanks 
to the system that allowed them to do so. . . . But even in early 
childhood something dawned on me.  It was a kind of ultimate idea 
which was like the intellect governing the world.  Even when I 
was a small boy walking along the quiet street from home toward 
the Nikolskaya church and Nikolskiy market, there was something; 
even then, as a barefoot boy, thoughts of something great were 
hovering in my head. . . . But even then I saw I was obviously 
destined for big-league politics.  And this came to pass.  This 
was no accident. . . . An educated man with two university 
degrees who speaks European languages; where did he pop up from, 
this throwback to the prosperous Russia of the last century? 
(LDTTS, pp. 13-14) 

   Beginning Russia's regeneration 

   "The LDP's [Liberal Democratic Party] most important task is to 
secure a proper living standard for all members of society. . . 
The Baltics are Russian land". . . . He [Zhirinovskiy] would 
restore the 1977 Soviet Constitution, under which there were no 
sovereign formations and no need for any.  He would return all 
these republics to the way they originally were.  (Excerpts from 
LDPR party documents and comments on Zhirinovskiy policy 
positions, Izvestiya, 25 September 1991) 

   The leader of Russia's ultranationalists, Vladimir Volfovich 
Zhirinovskiy, makes no secret of his ambitions: Boris Yeltsin and 
Mikhail Gorbachev will be pensioned off. . . . Zhirinovskiy 
himself will take power in Russia, restore the former borders 
from the czarist era, and get the country on its feet again. 
. . "When I take power, law and order will be restored. . . . Every 
week the mafia from the Caucasus republics  kill taxi drivers in 
Moscow.  In Volgograd people of the southern nationalities are 
running amok and are killing young Russian men. . . . I will 
introduce an economic blockade to force the Baltic region to 
return to Russia.  I would use military means to solve the 
problem of Kazakhstan.  Against the Ukraine I would use some 
military means and some economic measures."  (Interview and 
comment on interview with Zhirinovskiy, Oslo Aftenposten, 4 
November 1991) 

   The path to victory is the implementation of ideas via the 
victory of the party and its leader.  This is all interconnected. 
(LDTTS, p. 22) 

   Russians, proud people, the 21st century will belong to us 
despite everything.  In the next seven years we will finally stop 
all the revolutions, all the perestroykas. . . . We will put an 
end to Yeltsinism and Burbulisism. . . . And we will enter the 
21st century changed and pure.  (LDTTS, p. 31) 

   Restoring Russia to its former glory under Tsarist and Soviet 
rule, recreating Russia within the borders of the former USSR 

   He goes on to describe how, under his presidency, Russia would be 
restored to its former glory as an integral state in which the 
army would not have to shed blood within the country.  He says 
the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic is an artificial 
creation, and that the new Russia will encompass the whole of the 
present USSR.  (Comment on a Zhirinovskiy TV address, Russian TV, 
6 June 1991) 

   The future prospect which I envision is the gradual abandonment 
of the national-territorial division, which will help us solve 
the nationality issue.. . . Order needs to be restored. 
(Zhirinovskiy campaign statement, Trud, 11 June 1991) 

   Lithuania will understand this [the strength of the Union] 
through economics.  Give them an opportunity to separate, but 
only in the 1940 borders.  But who in Europe will buy Lithuanian 
cheese? We need it, but there no one does. . . . The other way: 
back to the union. . . Who, for example, will reconcile the 
Chechen and the Ingush? Only a Russian governor.  (Interview with 
Zhirinovskiy, Leningradskaya Pravda, 25 June 1991) 

   Under Stalin's regime we were a closed country.  That was 
positive to some extent.  For instance, with respect to the fact 
that we were almost completely free of venereal diseases.  And 
morality in general was at a high level.  (LDTTS, p. 24) 

   There was something good in czarist Russia.  There were 
merchants, there were courtiers, workers, civil servants. . 
All this should have been perfected.  (LDTTS, p. 24) 

   A covert civil war is in progress and in some regions it has 
become open.  Like a disease. . . . It saps the living organism. 
. . . Our Motherland must no longer be tormented, she is tired 
and we have worn her out with all these name changes.  The 
artificial name USSR, the still more artificial CIS.  The state 
has its own name:  Russia.  This is a historical name, it is a 
geographical concept. . . . It is the Eurasian continent. . 
Only a single state with the name of Russia can exist.  But 
without suppressing other ideas or particular population groups. 
. . . Pluralism, multiplicity in everything, diversity in 
everything.  (LDTTS, p. 25) 
   Restoring Russia's economy and military might 

   When there, on the foreign market, there is no longer a customer 
for the output of our military factories, that is the time they 
should begin a gradual switch to civilian production.  Instead, 
ideology gets in the way again here and we ask ourselves why we 
are selling tanks.  We must sell everything there!  (Speech to 
Russian Congress of People's Deputies, Russian TV, 22 May 1991) 

   I have a whole concept [for improving living conditions of 
soldiers]: in the plan for training, and in the plan for creating 
everyday living conditions, and in the use of armies abroad.. 
soldiers under contract for hard currency could serve and perform 
tasks assigned by the world community.  You will ask, but where 
will you get the resources to implement such grandiose plans? 
What about the sale of weapons abroad?! . . . Why destroy our 
tanks and weapons and, in the process, become poorer and poorer. 
(Interview with Zhirinovskiy, Krasnaya Zvezda, 30 May 1991) 

   We are in favor of a market economy, but one which would not 
strike a blow at a majority of our citizens, the state sector, 
and the military-industrial complex. . . . Let military plants. 
. . turn out market products, let.them continue to sell.  These 
plants should be switched over gradually to peaceful production 
when the foreign market is saturated and they stop buying 
weapons. . . . The foreign market demands weapons; sell them, 
obtain billions of dollars, and purchase foodstuffs, clothing, 
and so on.  (Zhirinovskiy campaign statement, Trud, 11 June 1991) 

   What is wrong with the administrative economy?  It has its 
drawbacks, but why destroy it?  A huge number of plants and 
kolkhozes are working and producing output which we all need. 
(LDTTS, p. 24) 

   I think the pensioner will support us, he will be at peace.  He 
will have a roof over his head, he will always have something to 
eat, something to wear. . . . And it [Zhirinovskiy's ascension to 
power] means that some of the population will live very well, 
because people will have the opportunity to work honestly, and 
after that, a secure old age.  Because there will be no more 
revolutions and perestroykas in our country, we must put an end 
to all that.  (LDTTS, p. 27) 

   How do I see Russia?  I do not see Russia weeping. . . . I see a 
proud Russia, a Russia wherein the glorious traditions of its 
army will once again be realized, where talented Russian 
engineers and industrialists will create examples of the latest 
technology. . . . We have a huge number of inventors, 
rationalizers. . . . Russian mercantile traditions must be 
restored. . . . This is how I see Russia.  It will have the 
world's strongest army, strategic forces, our missiles with 
multiple launchers. Our space combat platforms, our "Buran" 
spaceship and "Energiya" rockets.  This is the country's rocket 
shield. . . . We have no rival.  (LDTTS, p. 29) 

   BRINGING THE MILLENNIUM 

   Russia and the other great powers divide the world into spheres 
of influence 

   At the same time he criticized the foreign policy of the current 
leadership of the country, stating that because of its lack of 
foresight the Soviet Union was losing influence in the world 
arena and in various regions of the world.  Vladimir Zhirinovskiy 
came out in favor of "a division of the world into spheres of 
influence between the USSR, the United States, Europe, and 
Japan."  (Comment on statement by Zhirinovskiy, TASS, 29 March 
1991) 

   We should reach agreement with them [the West] on disputed points 
and switch [our attention] to the south.  That is where our 
vitally important interests are.  (Interview with Zhirinovskiy, 
Russian TV, 31 May 1991) 

   But if we switch to another foreign policy formula and abandon 
East-West relations we will gain significantly in the moral, the 
political, and the economic sense. . . . We will be able to 
gradually reach the shores of the Indian Ocean and the 
Mediterranean, and in this southern region there is a great deal 
of food and raw materials for light industry.  (Zhirinovskiy 
election speech, Moscow radio, 11 June 1991) 

   Again and again Zhirinovskiy returned to what he will do when- 
-and, according to Zhirinovskiy himself, this will be fairly 
soon--he takes over power in Russia.  New spheres of influence 
must be established, and according to the nationalist leader, 
Russia's natural route of expansion is to the south. . . . He 
ended with the following salvo: "A year ago I was in Turkey.  On 
Turkey's beautiful beaches I saw thousands of German and Italian 
tourists.  These beaches should instead be recreational areas for 
Russian workers!"  (Comment on interview with Zhirinovskiy, Oslo 
Aftenposten, 4 November 1991) 

   For North America there will be Latin America, for Western Europe 
there will be Africa, for China, Japan, there will be South East 
Asia, . . . for Russia, only three states:  Turkey, Iran, 
Afghanistan.  It is a region of vitally important interests for 
Russia. . . . And farther to the south, the warm Indian Ocean. . 
. . If we unite the Russian north (with its heavy industry) with 
the south, where there is basic food stuffs and raw materials for 
light industry, then YES, we will have a market economy. 
(Zhirinovskiy article published in LDPR newspaper, Liberal, No.2, 
1993) 

   The division of spheres of influence is better [for managing 
world affairs]. . . . The Japanese and Chinese can go south into 
Southeast Asia. . . . Russia can go south. . . . West Europe can 
go south into the African continent.  Finally, Canada and the 
United States can go south--the whole of Latin America. . . . So 
allocation according to this geopolitical formula would be very 
favorable for all mankind. . .. Both world order in general and 
economic order--via external ties--would be established.  We 
would also save the planet environmentally.  (LDTTS, p.19) 

   Russia consolidates its sphere of influence in the South 

   In foreign policy, one must move from the East-West relationship 
to the North-South relationship. . . . We will . . . come to an 
accommodation with Germany.  A strong Turkey and Iran are in the 
South but Russian soldiers will no longer shed their blood in the 
Transcaucasus.  We will reach accord with the Turks and with Iran 
all the sooner.  (Speech to Russian Congress of People's 
Deputies, Russian TV, 22 May 1991) 

   Mr. Zhirinovskiy promised that if he comes to power, he will 
restore order in Europe by forming an alliance with Germany. . . 
. "Let the Germans move east to the new Soviet-German border 
while we move south," Mr. Zhirinovskiy said.  He also voiced the 
need to support the liberation struggle of the Kurds with the 
help of "Cuban mercenaries and Russian weapons" and "explode 
Turkey and Iran" with their hands.  (Comment on Zhirinovskiy 
stump speech, INTERFAX, 7 May 1992) 
   According to Zhirinovskiy, Russia is losing its positions in the 
Middle East, where "Iraq is its most reliable ally." . . . V. 
Zhirinovskiy said that in the eastern and southern directions 
Russia ought to bank on building allied relationships with Japan, 
China, and India. . . . He added "As for the allied relationship 
with India, it will depend largely on whether Russia helps it 
repulse the Muslim threat.  . . . Zhirinovskiy believes that 
access to the Indian Ocean should become a goal of Russia's 
foreign policy in the southern direction.  In this case 
Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey will have to be "neutralized," 
which, according to him, "will be applauded in Europe." 
(Commentary on Zhirinovskiy statement to the press, INTERFAX, 24 
November 1992) 

   My two years in the army [1970-72] were very useful to me. 
First, I got to know the army itself. . . . I had quite a good 
knowledge of the nationalities problems even previously, but the 
Transcaucasus region was different from Central Asia. . . . All 
Russia's problems are in the south.  So until we resolve our 
southern problem we will never extricate ourselves from the 
protracted crisis, which will periodically worsen.  (LDTTS, p. 
12) 

   I had already begun to develop my own geopolitical concept. . . 
The last "dash to the south" and Russia's outlet to the shores of 
the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean Sea are really the task of 
saving the Russian nation.  For when other parties talk about 
cutting off Kazakhstan, Kirghizia, and Central Asia, they do not 
realize that we are pushing Russia into the tundra, where mineral 
resources are all that can exist, where nothing can live and 
develop.  The development of civilization has always begun in the 
south. . . . We may quite unnecessarily drive ourselves into 
unviable regions and destroy the nation once and for all. 
(LDTTS, p. 17) 

   So the idea emerged of the last "dash"--last because it will 
probably be the last repartition of the world and it must be 
carried out in a state of shock therapy, suddenly, swiftly, and 
effectively.  This immediately solves all the problems, because 
we gain tranquillity. . .. we also gain tranquil neighbors. 
Friendly India.  Enmity will cease forever.  ( LDTTS, p. 17) 

   The principle of division [within the new empire] will be purely 
territorial inside the country--guberniyas, oblasts, provinces. . 
. The blending of peoples as a result of the economy, the 
dominance of the Russian language and the Russian ruble, and the 
dominant position of the Russian Army as the most combat capable; 
this is an historical fact.  We must ensure stability throughout 
our region for Russia and for the world community as a whole. 
(LDTTS, p. 17) 

   I dream of Russian soldiers washing their boots in the warm 
waters of the Indian Ocean and switching to summer uniform 
forever. . . . We must pacify the region forever.  So that there 
are vacation centers, youth camps, sanatoriums, and preventative 
treatment centers there on the shores of the Indian Ocean and the 
Mediterranean Sea. . . . The single economy and single legal and 
political space would create favorable conditions for the 
development of all trades and for culture, education, life, and 
the family structure, as everyone wants.  (LDTTS, pp. 17-18) 

   New armed forces can be reborn only as the result of a combat 
operation.  The Army cannot grow stronger in military 
commissariats and barracks.  It needs a goal, a task. . . . All 
this provides a stimulus for the development of the economy, 
transport, and communications and for obtaining raw materials for 
food and light industry. . . . Russia will grow rich.  Our plants 
will always have enough manpower in the north . . . because the 
population will migrate from south to north in a quest for work. 
Unfortunately, some of the population will die because the south 
does not currently have sufficient medicines. . . . Natural 
survival, assimilation, and adaptation will take place.  (LDTTS, 
p. 19) 

   Russia will only do what is foreordained and will fulfill the 
great historical mission--liberate the world from wars, which 
always begin in the south. . . . It [the drive to the south] is a 
purely Russian variant. . . . Otherwise Russia will be unable to 
develop and will perish and we will be crammed with nuclear 
stations and nuclear weapons which will destroy the whole planet. 
(LDTTS, p. 20) 

   Russia's move to the south is primarily a defensive measure, a 
countermeasure, because today there is a threat from the south . 
. from the direction of Tehran, which is building plans for the 
pan-Islamic seizure of vast territories, from the direction of 
Ankara, where plans for a greater Turkic state were prepared long 
ago. . . Nothing would happen to the world even if the entire 
Turkish nation perishes, although I do not wish that upon it. 
(LDTTS, p. 34) 

(AUTHOR:  ALLENSWORTH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL 
CHIEF, ANALYSIS BRANCH, RUSSIA DIVISION, (703) 733-6070.) 

ENEAG/BLOUGH/jf 16/0151Z FEB 

