BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Maryukha under the "Events and </F>
Commentaries" rubric: "From a `Little Fleet' to a `Little 
Creek' in Russia. Such Are the Various Wishes Expressed by 
Ukrainian Politicians 'Milking' the Dividing up of the Black Sea 
Fleet for Everything They Can Get out of It"] 
  [Text] According to an RIA report, Ivan Plyushch, 
contender for the office of Ukrainian president, has voiced a 
desire to "add" to Ukraine a "little creek" to Ukraine 
"somewhere in Kaliningrad Oblast or the Far East," through 
dividing up all the fleets of the former Union. Contrary to all 
agreements reached earlier, in the home straight of this 
election campaign Plyushch is again using the "zero option" of 
dividing up the Black Sea Fleet to put the cat among the 
pigeons: He is saying that everything stationed in Ukraine is 
Ukrainian, and this represents a new spiral of confrontation 
between Russia and Ukraine! 
  President Leonid Kravchuk is being more consistent in his 
plans. Speaking on Ukrainian radio, he announced his intention 
after resolving the Black Sea Fleet problem to sign a 
wide-ranging agreement between Russia and Ukraine which, in his 
opinion, "will put Ukrainian-Russian relations on a 
qualitatively new footing." Nevertheless, this and the definite 
progress which has been achieved in Kiev at talks to divide up 
the fleet have not prevented the Ukrainian leader from sending 
his defense minister, Army General Vitaliy Radetskyy, on a 
"mission" to the United States, where one of the issues under 
discussion will be consultations on the problems of the Black 
Sea Fleet. 
  Meanwhile, the situation in the fleet itself is not changing 
for the better. Yesterday at about 0500 hours at one of the 
units of the Black Sea Fleet's shore-based forces near 
Simferopol there was an armed attack on a sentry guarding a 
military storage facility. The sentry sustained a flesh wound to 
the chest from a small caliber weapon. His life is not in 
danger, and an investigation is under way. 
  But it is the mythical withdrawal of materiel rather than 
the 
threat to the sailor's life which alarms the Ukrainian military. 
The Ukrainian Naval Forces Military Council is protesting about 
the alleged withdrawal of fleet materiel from the Crimean Naval 
Base, the Ochakov Division, and other places. The thought 
occures that we have not yet had time to forget how similar 
"protests" in Odessa ended up -- beginning with an attempt to 
detain the Cheleken, Ukrainian special purpose troops used force 
to "nationalize" a whole division of Black Sea Fleet ships. 

