BFN 

  [Text] Alioune Beye believes that peace is closer for 
Angola. Speaking in Luanda today at the end of a meeting with 
the chairman of the National Assembly, the UN secretary 
general's representative said it is necessary, now more than 
ever before, to be more cautions because the enemies of peace 
may hinder the Lusaka peace talks. He did not elaborate. 
  The meeting, which lasted for more than an hour, was held 
behind closed doors at the Palace of Congresses. Afterwards, 
Beye told journalists that the news blackout [preceding word in 
English] imposed on the Lusaka talks will continue because 
secrecy is the name of the game. The UN envoy declined to 
elaborate on the meetings he held with the UN secretary general 
and the president of the republic. Beye criticized several 
Angola and foreign news media organs for disseminating gossip, 
thereby hindering the pace of the negotiations. Beye, however, 
could not hide one of his trump cards -- peace is closer. As in 
the past, (?Beye preferred not to elaborate). 
  [Begin recording] [Beye, in French fading into Portuguese 
translation] The Angolan people know very well that we are still 
in Lusaka because there is still hope. 
  [Unidentifed correspondent] Do you confirm that yesterday 
you 
spoke on the phone with Dr. Jonas Savimbi. 
  [Beye] I can neither confirm nor deny it. I want to work for 
peace. I also know that Angolans want peace. 
  [Correspondent] Will there be a limit for the duration of 
the 
Lusaka talks? 
  [Beye] I have already said it would be showing lack of 
seriousness to set a limit on an exercise like the Lusaka talks. 
  [Correspondent] Will it be possible to tell Angolans that 
peace is still a distant dream or will we have pleasant news 
over the next few days? 
  [Beye] I know very well that Angolans feel desperate and do 
not want war. It is for that reason that we are in Lusaka. We 
have scored successes because we have not negotiated in public. 
  [Correspondent] Do you not think that by giving more details 
to the news media you would scale down the desperation of 
Angolans? 
  [Beye] I do not think Angolans are completely desperate. We 
have seen that in disputes as severe as the one in the Middle 
East, the Oslo secret talks were successful. So, we would like 
to adopt the same method in the Lusaka peace talks. I would 
like to add that there are enemies of peace in Angola and 
elsewhere. If the news media undermines the hope and morale of 
the people, it would be serving the interests of the enemies of 
peace. Now that we are closer to peace, the enemies of peace 
are getting restless. They want to prevent us from achieving 
peace. But we will achieve peace. 
  [Correspondent] You have said that because peace is closer, 
the enemies of peace are at work. So, you are saying that peace 
is closer. 
  [Beye] Precisely. We are closer to peace and for that reason 
we are still in Lusaka. It is not very pleasant to stay in a 
hotel for five months and the international community would not 
have gone along with it if we had not scored results. [end 
recording] 
  The news blackout [preceding word in English] imposed on the 
Lusaka talks is now stricter than ever. There have been 
suggestions that the Lusaka talks could enter a decisive stage. 
It has been over three months now since the talks started. The 
meetings Beye had with UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali in 
Geneva and with President Jose Eduardo dos Santos in Luanda on 
10 April, as well as the telephone conversation with Dr. Jonas 
Savimbi on 11 April, have made many observers predict 
developments in Lusaka. We will have to wait and see. 

