Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kuwait City, March 5 (AFP)--A key defendant in the 
trial of 11 Iraqis and three Kuwaitis accused of trying to 
assassinate former US President George Bush retracted his 
confession on Saturday [5 March], pleading not guilty as the 
trial resumed at Kuwait's state security court. 
  Wali 'Abd-al-Hadi al-Ghazali, a 36-year-old Iraqi, denied 
working for the Iraqi intelligence service, reversing his stand 
when the trial opened on June 5. 
  At the request of lawyers for the two main 
defendants--al-Ghazali and another Iraqi, Ra'd 'Abd-al-Amir 
al-'Assadi--the court adjourned the trial until April 2. 
  "I did myself wrong by my confessions," said al-Ghazali, 
denying that the Iraqi intelligence service employed him to 
assassinate Bush in a suicide mission in Kuwait in April 1993, 
using a car bomb or explosives strapped to his body. 
  Earlier al-Ghazali and al-'Assadi, 33, regarded as the 
ringleader of the group, said the Iraqi authorities had "forced" 
them to carry out the mission. 
  Another defendant confessed to having transported explosives 
into Kuwaiti territory, but said he did not know about any plot 
to assassinate Bush. 
  Iraqi Ahmad Jabbar Habib, 21, repeated his denial Saturday. 
  The other defendants also denied any involvement in the plot 
or links with Iraq. 
  The verdict in the trial was due to have been issued at the 
December session after having already been postponed from the 
end of October. 
  The human rights group Amnesty International alleged the 
trial was unfair, accusing the court of not meeting 
international standards. 
  Three defendants have said confessions were extracted by 
police beatings. 
  After a US investigation into the plot, Washington launched 
a 
cruise missile attack on the Iraqi intelligence headquarters in 
Baghdad on June 27, 1993. Iraq said six people were killed in 
the attack. 
  During the Bush administration U.S.-led multinational 
coalition forces drove Iraqi troops out of Kuwait in February 
1991, ending their seven-month occupation of the emirate. 

